Title
Review for Feeling Minnesota (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Vince D'Onofrio, Cameron Diaz, Dan Aykroyd, Delroy
Lindo, Tuesday Weld, Michael Rispoli, Courtney Love Director: Steven
Baigleman Screenplay: Steven Baigleman
I'm trying to think of a saving, good point to make about this movie,
but unfortunately I can't. Keanu Reeves choice of movies seems to be
getting from bad to worse.
Think of all the bad things in life like petrol station hold ups,
murdering family members, blackmail, corrupt police, and dysfunctional
relationships - this is the ugly feeling that 'Feeling Minnesota' leaves
you with.
The older brother (D'Onofrio) forces a young girl to marry him. The
younger brother (Reeves) arrives on the wedding day, sleeps with his
newly-wed sister-in-law (Diaz) and runs away with her. She instigates
the younger brother to steal from the older brother, who then shoots her
in a jealous rage. She survives, sleeps with the corrupt policeman
(Ackroyd) investigating the crime, before escaping to Las Vegas with the
money.
Some people will say, well that's life. Sure, but it's also meant to be
a movie, and it's not even entertaining.
Comment: This movie only serves to give Minnesota a bad name.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        In FEELING MINNESOTA, a lot of likeable stars say and 
do a lot of stupid, incomprehensible things. It's the kind of movie 
that, with every plot development, makes you ask yourself, "What 
ninth grade English class short story was this movie adapted from?" 
I blame the script, which seems to promise a plot that will take off, 
revealing some kind of cleverness or insight into the characters. It 
never does, falling back on half-thought out blackmail schemes and 
mistaken murders instead. There's dialogue like "Life is like this 
orange. It's round, it comes back to repeat itself." There are a 
hundred other lines like that, delivered straight by the likes of 
geniune talents who are apparently bound by contract to say 
whatever the director tells them to.
        FEELING MINNESOTA stars Keanu Reeves and Vincent 
D'Onofrio (the alien-inhabited farmer in MEN IN BLACK) as a pair 
of lowlife brothers, one who spends most of his time locked up and 
one who should be. D'Onofrio is an accountant for organized crime 
man Delroy Lindo who is given, as a reward, Cameron Diaz. It's a 
damn good reward, as any heterosexual man can tell you, and 
D'Onofrio puts it to good use, dragging her immediately and 
reluctantly to the altar. That's when Reeves shows up, invited by 
his mother (Tuesday Weld, about 40 years past "Dobie Gillis").
        This being a movie, not an hour passes from the vows to 
Diaz, still in her wedding dress, humping Reeves' brains out on the 
bathroom floor. It's the start of what Prince would call a strange 
relationship that leads to Diaz begging Reeves to take her with him, 
Reeves refusing, Diaz humping his brains out in the front seat of the 
car, Reeves taking her, Diaz insisting they go back to get some 
money D'Onofrio stole from Lindo, Reeves going back, D'Onofrio 
biting his ear off, and so on. 
        It's after that point that FEELING MINNESOTA really 
starts to get bad. The plot keeps, like that orange, going around and 
around, shifting from similar locale to similar locale, making turns 
we can see miles away and spewing that horrible dialogue like 
regurgitated bile... really disgusting regurgitated bile. We meet 
corrupt cop Dan Aykroyd and diner waitress Courtney Love, who 
never quite figures out why repeat customer D'Onofrio has blood all 
over him and a wad of money in a garbage bag.
        All the time, you're wondering why those poor actors are 
putting up with it. Keanu, sure, he's cut out for this kind of crap 
(playing a character named, no kidding, "Jjaks"), but people like 
D'Onofrio, Diaz and Lindo should know better. Trust me, after 
watching this movie, Minnesota is something you _don't_ want 
to be feeling.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After reading a bunch of bad reviews about FEELING MINNESOTA, but
hearing that Siskel and Ebert gave it two thumbs, I went wondering what
they liked about it.  I've now seen it, and I'm still wondering.
     FEELING MINNESOTA is a would be romantic comedy, but actually is
about as tasty as bowl of cold mush on a winter morning.  This is a
mean spirited show, that will probably make you wish you had never
wasted your time.  It also serves as further proof, if any is needed,
that Keanu Reeves has a proclivity for choosing bad material as if his
agent gets him a bonus for doing them.
     In one of the first scenes, a woman named Freddie (Cameron Diaz)
is being chased by some hoods through a remote Industrial district.
When a man finally grabs her and pins her down with a big gun in her
face, it looks like we are about to have a gang rape scene.  Instead we
find the man demanding that she live up to her bargain and marry Sam
Clayton (Vincent D'Onofrio).
     Soon we switch to their wedding where she meets Sam's brother
Jjaks (Keanu Reeves) for the first time.  [No this is not a typo, his
name is "Jjaks."]  She quickly gets Jjaks in a bathroom and rapes him.
I supposed you could label it surprise sex instead if you prefer, but
certainly there is no seduction or even a hint that she likes him
before she starts pulling his clothes off.
     At the wedding is Sam's mother Norma played embarrassingly bad by
Tuesday Weld.  Here is an actress who once could charm the bark off the
trees.  Today she looks bloated and lifeless.  Other than show up, she
does nothing for the picture.
     Dan Aykroyd repeats his bumbling character routine in the show.
He plays a caricature of an incompetent cop by the name of Ben
Costikyan.  Aykroyd makes a mess of every scene he appears in, but then
to be fair, so does everyone else.
     I kept think about poor Minnesota.  In films great (FARGO) and
worthless (FEELING MINNESOTA), it is shown as a bleak and forgotten
place populated by crooks and lowlifes.  Granted I have only been there
twice, but I liked the state.  Oh well, perhaps there is a producer
right now working on a picture that show the state in a better light.
     Speaking of light, the cinematography by Walt Lloyd is on the dark
side of depressing.  He uses dull grays and blues to accentuate the
saturnine tone of the writing and the directing, both by first time
writer and director Steven Baigleman.  Well, at least Baigleman's next
film now can only be better.
     The saddest part for me was watching talented and attractive
Cameron Diaz give the first bad performance I had seen her give.  I
loved her in the great low budget film THE LAST SUPPER and thought she
was good too in SHE'S THE ONE.  Here her work is totally unconvincing.
She gives an unsympathetic performance that makes you yearn for the
real Diaz.  She even has the word "slut" tattooed on her arm to make
sure you get the point.  Subtle this script is not.
     After lots more sex between Jjaks and Freddie, included the
cliched scene of them doing it in a car and then making the car roll
into the traffic by hitting the gear shift lever, Jjaks decides to
leave her because "it feels too good."  He comes back, surprise, and
they leave together.  There is a subplot about Jjaks going back to get
money out of his brother's house for her.  Also, there is a fair of
petty thievery and random violence.  One gory scenes includes an ear
being partially cut off and then carried around.  From here, you can
write the script yourself and probably guess most of it.  Not that
you'd want to bother of course.
     Before closing, I want to share a couple of little "gems" from the
script.  Freddie philosophizes that, "Time is like an orange.  It's
round.  It repeats itself.  Everything happens for a reason."  Probably
want to put that on your wall at work.  In a scene at the pool of a
cheap motel that is a take off on the motel scene from LEAVING LAS
VEGAS, Freddie tells Jjaks that, "I dream of being in a Las Vegas hotel
where all of the towels smell like Downy Fabric Softener."  Gosh, what
imagery.
     FEELING MINNESOTA runs 1:35.  It is rated R for gory violence, a
lot of sex and bad language.  It is probably acceptable for mature
teenagers.  I did not like and do not recommend the picture.  The film
left me feeling much worse that when I walked in, and there was not a
performance worth viewing, but I generously give it a single star for
reasons that escape me.  Perhaps it is self-doubt.  How could a movie
with stars as talented as Diaz and Reeves be this awful?  Maybe I
missed something, but I don't think so.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 23, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Bryant Frazer
There's a word I'm sure was on the tongues of Fine Line execs
and publicists alike, talking up this unlikely comedy from
first-time writer/director Steven Baigleman. They must have
seen the potential for another "quirky" comedy from an
idiosyncratic director, one who would follow in the footsteps
of, if not Quentin Tarantino, then at least David O. Russell
or the Coen brothers.
FEELING MINNESOTA tries real hard to be "quirky." And part of
the problem is that its quirks are part of an impossibly
contrived plot. The slapdash storyline is pure surface -- you
can't see any of the twists coming, but they don't exactly
surprise you because the story has no interior logic. Like so
many films in the Age of Tarantino, this one coasts into
theaters on the strength of insincere characters and glib
violence.
Your guess is as good as mine why a romantic comedy featuring
stars like Keanu Reeves and Cameron Diaz is allowed to
degenerate into generic gunplay and chaos. The opening scenes
are almost sweet, with Jjak (Reeves) arriving back at the
family home outside of St. Paul for the marriage of his
brother Sam (Vincent D'Onofrio). Jjak left home when he was
just 8 years old, but mother Norma (Tuesday Weld) welcomes
him to the ceremony with open arms, at least until she learns
that he had the poor manners to arrive without a present.
>From that point on, sibling relations grow a little more
strained -- reluctant newlywed Freddie (Diaz) screws Jjak on
the bathroom floor minutes after she takes her vows with Sam;
Mother drops dead of a heart attack after Jjak makes a scene;
Jjak takes the bride with him when he leaves town four days
later.
Sounds like a pretty terrific set-up, right? Hell, I was
hooked. Reeves plays a charming loser whose best romantic
idea is to loot a pet store on the way out of town, breaking
the window to steal a dog and a bag of puppy chow. Diaz is,
finally, a starlet who performs as advertised. She's sulky,
seductive and beautiful, and she and Reeves seem made for
each other. As the two of them cruise down the highway with
their dog, singing along with The Replacements' "I Will Dare"
thumping from the stereo of their stolen car, the goofiness
really clicks. Anything, it seems, could happen.
Too bad, because it's here that the movie makes a U-turn.
Almost immediately, Freddie convinces Jjak to go back to the
family spread and steal the money Sam has embezzled from his
small-time gangster boss, Red (Delroy Lindo). Naturally, Sam
catches him in the act and points a gun at his head. If Sam
actually shot Jjak at this point, FEELING MINNESOTA would be
a really short movie. So instead, we have to endure another
hour or so of Jjak and Sam shouting, pointing guns, and
beating the hell out of one another. This idiosyncratic
romance has suddenly become a guy movie with "black comedy"
aspirations, but to no real effect.
Freddie is the film's lone female catalyst, but no matter --
she disappears at the end of the first act, victim of a
nonsensical plot twist. Courtney Love is billed fairly
prominently, but she winds up looking good doing remarkably
little. She plays a waitress, pouring coffee and making small
talk with D'Onofrio. D'Onofrio is an irritating putz, which
is the role he was hired to play, so good for him. Dan
Aykroyd is better than you would think as a local cop who
gets involved as the sibling rivalry turns nasty. The
performances are all quite good, and I can't really fault the
direction per se. But the script, I think, needed a thumping.
Movies these days have a new amoral fascination with guns.
It's easy to blame Tarantino for this, but he's so far made
pretty good movies about criminals, movies that try hard to
honestly exploit, if not understand, the relationships
between men and how they involve violence, loyalty, and
power. FEELING MINNESOTA, though, hands out the loaded
handguns so early on that they become just props. Everyone in
this movie has the power to kill everyone else at some point,
so when murder is committed, it doesn't come as a shock.
It would have helped to have a little more in the character
department, as well. Sam, it turns out, cooked Red's books to
make it look like Freddie was stealing money from him;
Freddie was forced to marry Sam as her punishment and his
reward. Even so, there's little else in the movie to
distinguish loathesome loser Sam from loveable loser Jjak --
good thing Keanu's the cute one, or we might not know who to
root for. Freddie's cut from the same cloth. Her idea of
success is the kind of part in a Vegas floor show that set
SHOWGIRLS in motion. These characters are truly morose, and
their dialogue is even worse. Freddie on life: "Time is like
an orange." Jjak on his own misery: "I've never felt ...
whatever that word is. Happy."
I kept thinking about Jonathan Demme's SOMETHING WILD, a
similarly "quirky" comedy that took a sudden, startling left
turn into nightmare territory and hit a jackpot. FEELING
MINNESOTA isn't nearly as ambitious as that movie, and maybe
that's the problem. Mucking about in low-key gloom, Baigleman
can't find the energy or exuberance that would make us care
at all whether his characters live, die, or join a Vegas
floor show. FEELING MINNESOTA is low-rent filmmaking that
feels slugglishly, disastrously low-rent.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FEELING MINNESOTA **  Written and directed by Steven 
Baigelman. Photography, Walt Lloyd. Editing, Martin Walsh. 
Music supervision, Karyn Rachtman. Production design, 
Naomi Shohan.  Producers, Danny DeVito, Michael 
Shamberg,  Stacey Sher.  Cast : Keanu Reeves (Jjaks), 
Vincent D'Onofrio (Sam), Cameron Diaz (Freddie), Delroy 
Lindo (Red), Courtney Love (Waitress), Tuesday Weld 
(Nora), Dan Aykroyd (Ben),Levon Helm (Bible Salesman) A 
Fine Line release. 100 min. Rated R (language, sex, 
violence) 
There goes again this pesky rating by stars. Got to do it, 
but you don't have to consider it like a grade from 
Consumer Reports. Fact is that "Feeling Minnesota" can be 
so bad that it can get good, and so very dumb that it can 
become funny. Miss it, and you save time and money. See 
it, and you won't feel like sueing the theater.
This very motion-full motion pictureis one of those 
independent films that, contrary to their label, are very 
dependent. Dependent on trendiness, from Tarantinoisms 
to modish grunge. Dependent scene by scene 
improvisations: the writer-director, in his first 
feature,seems to have not the vaguest about what must 
come next. 
Dependent on neo-clicheism. Just as in hippie days the 
reaction to the bourgeois dress code led to jeans --torn 
at the knee if possible, --long hair and other 
accoutrements which became the new uniforms of the new 
conformism of revolt; just as today back to front baseball 
caps express reverse individualism, in certain movies 
studio cliches are often countered by new sets of 
statements, preferably absurd, and repeated from picture 
to picture. I won't give you specific examples. Glance, and 
you'll see them.
"FM" is, sort of, about a kind of sex-and-money trio, sort 
of, a Cain-Abel thing closer to a Cain-Cain, sort of, a 
sickish All in the Family.  A blondie,  Freddie (Diaz), in a 
sort of wedding dress, is pursued by a car. Red (Lindo), 
drags her violently to her own wedding to creepy Sam 
(D'Onofrio). Seems that Red (who is black) runs a 
strip-joint plus a drug operation. He accuses Sam, his 
accountant, of stealing money. He punishes him with that 
marriage. (Go figure). 
Sam's younger brother is Jjack, so named after a typo on 
his birth certificate --but really in one of the many 
efforts of a script straining for cuteness and novelty.  
Sam was always lording it over Jjack, as seen in the 
opening flashback of the two in their childhood. 
Jjack (Reeves) is a smalltime hood who can't stay out of 
jail. He surfaces at his brother's wedding, one that 
breathes low-class taste through every pore, assuming 
weddings have pores. This is nicely done, from 
outrageously ugly clothes to the kind of music that Martin 
Scorsese's Mafiosi love).
The brotherly antagonism has not abated. Jjack meets the 
new missus, he looks at her, she looks at him and, in a 
flash,  they rush to vigorous sex in the john. (Oddly, the 
film "Maybe, Maybe Not" has a similar scene early on). ) 
A the party, the boys' Mom keels over dead, is buried 
pronto. Immediately after the ceremony, Jjack and the 
bride re-engage in sex, boucing and unsafe since it is 
inside a car that rolls down, like Jack and Jill Went Down 
the Hill.
Up to now matters are kookily, sporadically amusing. 
These are followed by Jjack and Freddie sort of eloping 
and Sam going after them. The menu includes stealing 
stolen money, fights, beatings,a corpse that may not be 
corpse, other niceties.  Weirdly, much of the action takes 
place in contiguous places, a motel out of "It Happened 
One Night," a restaurant, etc. 
Things get exponentially looser and more unplanned. 
Freddie, an ecdysiast, dreams of joining the chorus girls in 
Nirvana, which for her is Las Vegas with its four-dollar 
steaks and other goodies. As funny a line as any comes 
when she vocalizes her desires.  Sitting with Jjack by the 
dirtier-than-in-"Diabolique," empty pool of a third-rate 
Minnesotan motel,  she yearns for the Vegas pools "with 
water in them." 
Later, in the midst of troubles, mayhem and confusion, 
Jjack returns to his and Freddie's room with a jovial "Hi, 
honey, I'm home!" which, given its usual Family Values 
context, also becomes funny. 
The main performers are good, but handicapped by all 
being idiots. Dan Aykroyd is miscast against type as a 
dishonest cop. Still,  somewhere in this salad there's the 
kernel of a possibly good idea, but it gets lost in the 
nonsense, sketchiness, incoherence and other Achilles' 
heels of the story. Many heels. Just count the characters 
and multiply by two.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Keanu Reeves, Vincent D'Onofrio, Cameron Diaz, Dan Aykroyd,
Delroy Lindo.
Screenplay:  Steven Baigelman.
Director:  Steven Baigelman.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I can't recall a previous film experience where the fairly good time
I was having turned as sour as quickly as it did during FEELING MINNESOTA.
For forty minutes or so, I was lured into a loopy if occasionally
over-wrought romantic comedy, and I was even giving Keanu Reeves the
benefit of the doubt.  Then, rather suddenly, I was clubbed over the head
with a nasty bit of violence; shortly thereafter, I was whacked in the gut
by another.  FEELING MINNESOTA is a film that made me feel violated, as
though I had trusted writer-director Steven Baigelman to bring me a cool
glass of water and instead he threw acid in my face.
     FEELING MINNESOTA tells the story of a topless dancer named Freddie
(Cameron Diaz) who finds herself in deep trouble when her boss Red (Delroy
Lindo) suspects her of stealing from him.  Red's punishment is to force
Freddie to marry his bookkeeper, Sam Clayton (Vincent D'Onofrio), who is
far from the man of Freddie's dreams.  Enter Jjaks (Keanu Reeves), Sam's
estranged younger brother, who arrives at the wedding just in time to
catch Freddie's eye and have sex with her in the bathroom.  United in
their mutual attraction and their mutual loathing of Sam, Jjaks and
Freddie take off together, but Sam isn't ready to let them go without a
fight.  Freddie, meanwhile, isn't ready to let Sam's money go without a
fight, and thus begins a series of violent confrontations.
     There is both style and substance to the beginning of FEELING
MINNESOTA, as Baigelman opens with an effective montage showing Jjaks and
Sam's intense sibling rivalry as boys, and their mother (Tuesday Weld)
sending Jjaks away to live with his father.  It does a great job of
setting up Jjaks' unstable life, a life which has landed him in trouble
for petty crimes and always trying to please his family; Reeves' wounded
look is just right for Jjaks.  The wedding sequence includes a number of
nice moments, most notably the aforementioned bathroom scene in which a
simple question is given a very funny spin.  Most important, Baigelman
begins to establish the connection between Freddie and Jjaks with humor
and economy, as in a scene where they both spontaneously begin singing
along to the Replacements' "I Will Dare" on the car radio.  You would have
every reason to expect that relationships -- both familial and romantic --
would be the focal point of FEELING MINNESOTA.  Unfortunately, you would
be dead wrong.
     I suppose I should have expected daisies and valentines after an
early scene in which Red threatens Freddie as she tries to avoid the
wedding, but I certainly didn't expect what I got.  What I got was yet
another in a long line of recent films trying to ride the Tarantino wave
by mixing gags and brutality, or rather creating gags about brutality.
Suddenly, the story of romantic entanglements and family conflict becomes
a story about a corpse, and everything which had come before degenerates
so completely that virtually nothing is recognizable.  The sibling rivalry
not only becomes little more than an excuse for one round of beatings
after another, but there is no consistency to the characterizations.
Vincent D'Onofrio turns in a manic performance as Sam, whose jealousy,
competitiveness and apparent sense of inferiority seem far more in keeping
with what we know about Jjaks, while Reeves turns into a framed hero too
reminiscent of CHAIN REACTION, and both of them spend most of the second
half of the film screaming and covered in blood.
     There are films which have managed to employ a radical shift in tone
successfully (Jonathan Demme's SOMETHING WILD and Neil Jordan's THE CRYING
GAME come to mind), but they didn't try to draw an audience with the
promise of relatively innocuous entertainment.  I don't want to dismiss
Baigelman's successes out of hand -- he gets a fun performance out of Dan
Aykroyd as a crooked cop, and some well-crafted comic moments -- and it is
not his fault that Fine Line has chosen to promote FEELING MINNESOTA as a
light-hearted caper.  It _is_ his fault that he violates his own
characters for the sake of shock value, and that he can't make his two
halves into a whole.  FEELING MINNESOTA left me feeling used, and there's
not much funny about that.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Vince D'Onofrio, Cameron Diaz, Dan Aykroyd, 
      Delroy Lindo, Tuesday Weld, Michael Rispoli, Courtney Love
Director: Steven Baigleman
Producers: Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher
Screenplay: Steven Baigleman
Cinematography: Walt Lloyd
Music: Los Lobos
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     The Soundgarden song goes, "I'm looking California and feeling 
Minnesota."  In Steven Baigleman's FEELING MINNESOTA, the characters may 
be looking to Las Vegas, but they're still feeling Minnesota, which is 
where most of the movie takes place.
     I think my most frequent complaint about movies is that they're not 
original enough.  That's one accusation I won't be leveling at FEELING 
MINNESOTA, for, while this twisted romantic comedy is far from an 
example of perfect film making, it is quirky, offbeat, and highly 
original.  Take a modern-day Bonnie and Clyde, set them down in a 
universe that feels like it was created by pop-culture wannabe-god 
Quentin Tarantino, and throw in dashes of THE STING, Dostoevsky, and the 
absurdist humor of MONTY PYTHON, and you still haven't quite got what 
FEELING MINNESOTA is offering.
     Writer/director Baigleman has cheerfully thrown all the formulas 
out the window.  I suppose it's possible to guess at the outcome of 
certain events, but, in general, this movie defies prediction.  Some of 
the twists are decidedly bizarre, but it's precisely because this movie 
is willing to take chances that I'm giving it a marginal recommendation.  
I'll admit that I didn't always feel comfortable watching FEELING 
MINNESOTA -- it's a gritty, grungy film with thoroughly dislikeable 
characters -- but I admired what Baigleman was trying to do, even when 
his attempts went astray.
     The opening of FEELING MINNESOTA introduces us to Freddie (Cameron 
Diaz), who, dressed in a wedding gown, is fleeing from her former boss, 
Red (Delroy Lindo), an underworld-type.  Red has plans to punish 
Freddie, who he believes stole $10,000 from him.  He's going to force 
her to marry his most loyal employee, Sam Clayton (Vincent D'Onofrio), 
because, in his words, "It's the worst thing I could think to do to 
you."  Despite the bride's reluctance, the ceremony takes place.  In 
attendance is Sam's younger brother, Jjaks (Keanu Reeves), a repeat 
offender criminal who despises all of his blood relations.  There is 
immediate electricity between Jjaks and Freddie, and, while the 
reception is going on outside Sam's house, the pair retires inside for 
some quick sex.  Afterwards, when Jjaks announces his intention to hit 
the road again, Freddie begs him to take both her and Sam's private 
stock of cash with him.  Then, together, they can head to Las Vegas, her 
vision of paradise-on-Earth.
     I'm reasonably sure that Baigleman intended for FEELING MINNESOTA 
to be a comedy, but, primarily because the tone is so grim (people are 
always dying unexpectedly), it's difficult to find much that's funny.  
Anyone expecting to laugh their head off is in for a bummer.  FEELING 
MINNESOTA's sense of humor is bleak -- this picture is a prime example 
of a black comedy.  I mean, two guys sitting on opposite sides of a 
road, pelting each other with rocks is ludicrous, but hardly likely to 
cause waves of uncontrollable laughter.  And, as was the case in TRUE 
ROMANCE, the love affair between the man and woman is far less important 
than the one between the men and their guns.  On top of that, it's 
impossible to sympathize with the characters -- they're all a bunch of 
intellectually dim, lowlife criminals for whom betrayal and backstabbing 
are second nature.  
     For the most part, I'm not a big Keanu Reeves fan.  But, despite 
his limited range, he's right for Jjaks.  His performance in FEELING 
MINNESOTA never caused me to wince.  Cameron Diaz, who has been 
appearing in a number of independent productions (including THE LAST 
SUPPER and SHE'S THE ONE) continues to show great promise.  Even under 
all the grime of FEELING MINNESOTA, her charisma shines through.  
Vincent D'Onofrio, who usually plays inoffensive supporting roles, is 
effective here as Sam the bully.  Dan Aykroyd has a sometimes-amusing, 
sometimes-irritating part as a crooked police officer infatuated with 
Freddie (his fake accent makes him sound like he wandered over from 
FARGO).
     Ultimately, I probably liked the idea of FEELING MINNESOTA more 
than I enjoyed the execution.  Nevertheless, when the end credits 
rolled, I was reasonably satisfied because I had just experienced 
something a little different.  FEELING MINNESOTA certainly isn't 
everyone's cup of tea, and, despite the drawing power of Keanu Reeves, 
I'm not sure it was wise to expose the film to such a wide distribution 
(it invites disappointment).  But, if you're tired of routine, "feel 
good", Hollywood fare and are looking for something a little Tarantino-
ish and a lot unusual, FEELING MINNESOTA will leave you feeling 
pleasantly surprised.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
