Title
Review for Santitos (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Alejandro Springall's SANTITOS, Esperanza's 12-year-old daughter,
Blanca (Maya Zapata), has died.  Or has she?  The doctor, who refuses to
show the mother the body, claims that Blanca passed away because of a
freak virus, which she got while having her tonsils removed.
Esperanza, played with a resourceful but gentle spirit by Dolores
Heredia, would probably have accepted the doctor's explanation if her
oven hadn't been dirty.  St. Jude, who, improbably, only appears in her
oven when it's in need of cleaning, tells Esperanza from inside the oven
that her daughter is alive somewhere.  He sends Esperanza off to locate
her.
When the doctor disappears, Esperanza and her local priest decide that
the doctor must have sold the girl to a brothel somewhere in Mexico,
where the story is set.  Acting like an undercover detective, Esperanza
takes jobs in various brothels in an attempt to come across her
daughter.
The whimsical picture shows us colorful whorehouses decorated with
kitsch.  The prostitutes, who never seem to take off their underwear,
wrestle with the clients in something approaching swing dancing.  The
quirky owners include an unusual gay couple -- the older one is a
transvestite who keeps a secret heifer, and the younger one is a
flamboyantly dressed fellow who carries a large white rabbit straight
out of "Alice in Wonderland."
The imaginative happenings cannot make up for the lack of a compelling
story.  And when the writer, María Amparo Escandón, runs out of gas in
the last act, she tacks on a love affair with a masked wrestler named
the Angel of Justice (Alberto Estrella).  His schtick is that he comes
flying into the ring on a pulley.  Although he takes off his large angel
wings to wrestle, he never removes his mask so that not even his own
mother knows what he does for a living.
The eclectic show ends without a satisfactory resolution.  The actors
are pleasant enough, but the imminently forgettable tale doesn't have
much to recommend it.
SANTITOS runs 1:35.  The film is in Spanish with English subtitles.  It
is rated R for sexual content and language and would be acceptable for
most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Watching Santitos is an uncomfortable experience because it is actually two 
radically different movies melded together. On one hand, it plays as a weepy 
drama about a mother losing her child, and her eventual recuperation. On the 
other, it is a Spanish Ealing comedy that comes complete with wrestling and 
prostitution elements. The big coincidence is that both films feature the 
same actors, and the screenplays written by the same writer. The director is 
identical as well. Separately, the duo might make for interesting shorts, but 
together they are a clunky mess that lumbers from start to finish.
Esperanza (Heredia) loses her only daughter, Blanca, to an unusual fatal 
virus. Doctors demand the teenage girl's body be sealed forever so the 
disease doesn't spread. After Blanca's death, Esperanza goes into a state of 
shock. She believes that her child isn't dead at all because Saint Jude 
appears to her in a dirty oven window and tells her so. This leads her to 
wonder, what if the doctors are lying? She never did see the body. Some way 
or another, this incoming information leads Esperanza into believing her 
daughter got kidnapped by men, who sold Blanca into prostitution in Tijuana. 
So she follows the supposed path of her daughter's travels. In desperation, 
Esperanza becomes a prostitute herself while continuing her adventure of 
hope. By the time she reaches Los Angeles to search, the film's ending 
becomes quite apparent. 
Although made in 1997, the plot for this movie sounds suspiciously like that 
of Nurse Betty's. A woman's only loved one dies, and her shock leads her to 
do outrageous things. It recalls major portions of several movies from the 
past few months. That this film was the inspiration for all of them is highly 
doubtful.
The unevenness starts with the script. A bunch of great, but unrelated story 
ideas make up the screenplay, and many of the scenes are very funny. It's not 
so much the dialogue that's the problem. It's more like the sequence of 
events. Character development is too sporadic, which is the same problem with 
the cinematography. Too many elements just appear to move the movie along. 
Esperanza just happens to pass by a wall with a colorful mural of the Virgin 
Mary on it. The benches of her hometown are, naturally, always perfectly 
color-coordinated. Late into the film, we also discover that Esperanza has a 
passion for wrestling. Who knew?
Editing is the next problem. This film is in Spanish, yet director Alejandro 
Springall choose an editor that didn't speak a word of the language. Not a 
good idea because this movie relies on moving from location to location with 
ease. Instead, the journey between locales is rocky. 
All of this is really a shame since Dolores Heredia gives such a good lead 
performance. She runs between every base the script requires her to cover 
with grace and skill. The fish out of water stuff that's common in small 
British comedies doesn't work for this movie, but she almost makes it work. 
Screenwriter Maria Amparo Escandon just can't stop. She has to ruin her main 
character, and the movie's sweetness by placing Esperanza in highly sexual 
and violent situations. An old brothel owner, whose gender is unidentifiable, 
is supposedly prime comic fodder. Just wait and see what he or she does in 
the room he or she forbids everyone in the joint from visiting. 
The final moments reveal a truly horrifying portion of this movie. Male 
guests can watch Esperanza changing and preparing herself through a camera in 
a Los Angeles brothel. The owner claims the invasion of privacy turns 
customers on. The Big Brother-esque moment gives the only truly genuine 
feeling in the film. 
This is a rare foreign movie in that you can tune it out easily, with little 
confusion about what's happening when you return. A sometimes hilarious film 
that's too disjointed for actual enjoyment, Santitos sours with an aftertaste 
of falsity and silliness. 
See more of my reviews at http://homestead.com/cinemaparadise/mainpage.html
