Title
Review for Blood and Wine (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     These days crime films seem to have spectacular gun-fights, big
explosions, crazed madmen, and, of course, tense car chases though
metropolitan centers.  The films go for the spectacular, roller-coaster
experience.  And the characters are bigger than life.  You cannot get
much better a feel for what has happened to the crime film than to
compare the original CAPE FEAR with its high-tech remake.  Explosive
film-making has replaced gritty little crime films.  One misses the
low-key crime dramas like the original CAPE FEAR.  Occasionally there
is a throwback like THE GRIFTERS, but they are all too few.  BLOOD AND
WINE has the feel of a John D. MacDonald novel from the 50s.  The
characters are smallish and petty, but they are believable and except
for perhaps its complexity, the story is believable also.
     Alex Gates (played by Jack Nicholson) runs a Southern Florida wine
store and in his spare time cheats on his wife Suzanne (Judy Davis).
Both Suzanne and his son Jason (Stephen Dorff) have had their fill of
him and the marriage is in its last stages.  Alex is fooling around
with the Gabrielle (Jennifer Lopez) the nanny of a rich customer, but
he also has his eye on that same customer's safe where he believes
there to be a diamond necklace worth over a million dollars.  To get
the necklace Alex has to go into partnership with Victor (Michael
Caine), a tubercular safecracker who might well just be using Alex.
This is not a very tightly-knit little group at the best of times and
add to the mixture a necklace with "diamonds the size of chocolates"
and the bonds of family and friendship may be totally forgotten.
     The film revolves around five characters, but the heart is
Nicholson and Caine, of course.  In a sense they are playing much the
same character, suddenly-violent, constantly-vile.  Caine plays the
British version of the character, Nicholson the American.  Bob Rafelson
has directed Nicholson before, in fact he was largely responsible for
Nicholson becoming a respected actor with FIVE EASY PIECES (1970) and
THE KING OF MARVIN GARDENS (1972).  It has been suggested that the
three films form a pattern with Nicholson playing a son in the first, a
brother in the second, and now playing a father.  There does not seem
to be a whole lot of connection beyond that.  To Nicholson's and
Caine's characters the greasy lowlife life-style comes naturally, but
Judy Davis seems to be someone who was once decent, but in self-defense
has been pushed to become the same sort of violent person her husband
is.  Significantly even after she has escaped the control of her
husband she is attracted to another man with many of the same
characteristics.  Her performance could easily be overlooked playing
against the two scheming greaseballs, but she does a nice job at
playing a no longer very nice person.  Jennifer Lopez is attractive and
reasonably convincing, but her thick Cuban accent obscures some of her
lines.  Stephen Dorff is nominally the main character.  But his
performance is the least textured of the five major characters.
     As films go today, this was probably a fairly low-budget one.  In
the realistic crime story style the characters use golf clubs against
each other rather than dynamite.  If there are explosions they are ones
of sudden anger.  This was a good role for Nicholson and a better one
for Caine.  The production values are decent, though I would swear
Nicholson's black eye comes and goes from scene to scene.  Other
continuity errors have been reported also, though I did not catch them.
This is a small film and one that works not on photography or
pyrotechnics, but in acting and script.  As such it may be a sort of
nostalgic reminder of the days when that went without saying.  This is
not a major film but it is watchable and at times tense.  I would give
it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BLOOD AND WINE is an atmospheric thriller by director Bob
Rafelson.  In the press information, Rafelson describes the film as the
third part of a trilogy with the first two parts being FIVE EASY PIECES
and THE KING OF MARVIN GARDENS.  Although each of the pictures stars
Jack Nickolson, I see few other similarities.
     In BLOOD AND WINE, Nickolson plays Alex Gates.  Alex, a wine
merchant to the rich and famous, has a dwindling business bordering on
bankruptcy.  He has an attractive, middle-aged wife Suzanne (Judy
Davis), but he reserves his passions for a hot young Cuban woman
Gabriella (Jennifer Lopez), who works as a nanny for one of his
customers.  He also has a nice grown stepson, Jason (Stephen Dorff),
who is about Gabriella's age.
     In order to turn his life around, Alex hooks up with a wheezing
old cat burglar named Victor (Michael Caine).  Alex and Victor have a
foolproof scheme whereby Gabriella lets them in to steal a million
dollar plus diamond necklace when her employer is gone.  As soon as
they have the necklace, Victor takes a picture of Alex and the jewels.
The photograph ensures that Alex cannot deny his involvement.  "There's
no such thing as honor among thieves," explains Victor.  "It's a myth."
     At first, the marriage troubles between Alex and Suzanne appear
little more than a plot diversion.  "I've got an idea," he tells her
during one heated discussion.  "Why don't you sit down at your desk and
write down all your complaints, and when I come back, we can have one
of those long arguments you like so much."
     About a third of the way into the movie the two stories, burglary
and marriage difficulties, collide.  After that, the film takes several
surprising turns and evolves into a decent thriller.  Still, the script
by Alison Cross and Nick Villiers too often gets mired in its own
material.  The languid direction does not help.  The picture becomes a
film noir on slow speed.  Tom Sigel's shadowy cinematography and
Michael Lorenc's sad music contribute to the film noir impression.
     The acting talent saves the picture.  Caine gives a sympathetic
portrayal of his character.  Victor has the finesse of a pit bull, but
he coughs blood and may die before he ever gets his hands on the loot.
Even in questionable films, THE EVENING STAR being a recent example,
Nickolson manages to shine.  Here, his once hotshot salesman has
vitality and pathos.  Only the Cuban nanny figure lacks interest.  Her
character exists mainly for the men to desire and has little depth.
     Although costumes and sets establish the tone of a movie, so can
the choice of cars.  Ever confident salesman Alex drives a new, red BMW
convertible with countless coats of wax.  His sensible wife, has a
capacious and safe Volvo station wagon.  So what kind of car does
Victor have?  A land yacht -- a Lincoln Towncar -- that looks as tired
as its owner.
     BLOOD AND WINE runs 1:38.  It is rated R for violence and
language.  It would be fine for older teenagers.  I give the film
thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There is a scene about half way through BLOOD AND WINE which, for the
briefest of moments, inspires the giddy sense that you may be seeing
something quite different.  In that scene, wine merchant Alex Gates (Jack
Nicholson) is preparing to take a little trip with some very special
cargo.  Thousands of dollars in debt, Alex has stolen a diamond necklace
from one of his clients with the help of jewel thief Victor Spansky
(Michael Caine), and is about to fly to New York with his mistress
Gabriela (Jennifer Lopez) to fence the necklace.  Unfortunately, Alex's
wife Suzanne (Judy Davis) comes home unexpectedly, discovers the airline
tickets for two, and confronts Alex about what she believes is a simple
case of philandering.  The confrontation turns violent, and when Suzanne
gives Alex a couple of smacks in the head with a fireplace poker and
flees with her son son Jason (Stephen Dorff), you wonder whether you are
watching a movie with the guts to kill off Jack Nicholson in the third
reel.
     Seconds later, you realize you aren't; within a few minutes, you
realize you're watching a movie with an inordinate fondness for inflicting
punishment on its characters, and Nicholson just happened to be first in
line.  With all the consternation over violence in the movies, you could
easily forget that the kind of violence you tend to see in movies is
fairly distant and antiseptic:  gunfights in which people fall over like
kids on a playground, comic book hand-to-hand combat where the winner
walks away with a split lip and a smudged forehead.  BLOOD AND WINE may be
the most brutal film ever made in which a gun is never fired.  In addition
to the aforementioned fireplace poker incident, characters in BLOOD AND
WINE are injured by golf clubs, tree trunks, spear guns and the strategic
application of a fishing boat to the back of someone's legs.  Add a slow
death after a car accident and a scene of Nicholson suturing his own
eyebrow, and you have a thriller strictly for the strong of stomach.
     With all the unpleasantness BLOOD AND WINE asks its viewers to
tolerate, you'd think it would offer a more satisfying pay-off for all the
time spent shifting in their seats.  Instead, director Bob Rafelson (who
also co-created the story) serves up a fairly conventional set of film
noir character relationships:  lovers who are using each other, family
members who hate each other, partners who are ready to stab each other in
the back at the drop of a hat.  That certainly creates an appropriately
dark tone, but there is scarcely a drop of wit to lighten the relentless
gloom.  After recent films like BOUND have found a way to make you giggle
at the tough talk even as you are engrossed in the story, BLOOD AND WINE
comes off as something to be endured rather than enjoyed.
     It might have helped a bit if there had been a hero worth rooting
for.  Stephen Dorff's Jason is ostensibly the protagonist, a simple lad
with simple dreams of owning his own fishing boat, but his character is
too much like a moody teenager.  He sneers defiant insults at stepfather
Alex and falls in lust at first sight with Gabriela, all the while acting
like a 14-year-old rather than a 24-year-old.  His refusal to get a life
of his own might have made sense if the script had really followed up on a
whisper of Oedipal sub-text between Jason and Suzanne; instead, you just
want him to stop pouting and find an apartment.  Gabriela's motives are
kept secret, but she is a pale shadow of the great noir temptresses, and
Davis has too little to do.  Alex, meanwhile, is never even given a chance
to earn our sympathy, not that Nicholson tries very hard.  If he had
played FARGO's Jerry Lundegaard, this is what he would have looked like:
a selfish jerk who thinks the world owes him something.
     The only genuinely interesting think in BLOOD AND WINE -- and it is a
very interesting thing -- is Michael Caine's performance as Victor.  A
wheezing wretch in the final stages of emphysema, Victor is chillingly
pathetic in his attempts at playing the slick con man as he repeatedly
attempts to stifle his bloody coughs.  He is the most desperate of the
desperate characters in BLOOD AND WINE, a career criminal counting on this
one big, final score to allow him to die in comfort; when Suzanne
unwittingly takes the necklace with her after her fight with Alex, Victor
is willing to do anything necessary to get it back.  Caine gives Victor
the weight of a Shakespearean villain, his rotting body a reflection of
his rotted morality, but his actions always seem born of fear rather than
spite.  Only Caine keeps you watching when your better judgment recommends
turning away from BLOOD AND WINE, a film where you find yourself ducking
to avoid the psychic shrapnel as characters inflict pain on each other as
though it were their job.

Author
Marty Mapes
BLOOD AND WINE reminded me of last fall's CAUGHT. Both were hyped as
solid, non-mainstream films. Both took place in Florida with main
characters working the sea. Both involve a family with a two-timing
spouse and one adult son. And, unfortunately, both came across as rather
bland movies.
Jack Nicholson plays Alex Gates, a shady wine salesman who is having an
affair with a respected client's nanny. He steals some jewelry from the
client, and even seems to get away with it, but as he's leaving for the
airport to sell the jewels, his wife Suzanne (Judy Davis) confronts him
about the affair. A fight ensues and she gets the upper hand. She knocks
him out cold. Meantime, she unpacks his suitcase (not noticing the
jewelry in the hidden lining), and repacks it with her stuff. She
leaves, taking her son Jason (Stephen Dorff) and, unbeknownst to her,
the jewels with her to a friend's house in Key Largo. Alex and his
partner Victor (Michael Caine) chase after them.
 Nobody in this movie is very smart. For example, Alex steals the
diamonds even when two security guards have seen him enter the house.
When the diamonds are found missing, surely he will be a prime suspect,
but this doesn't occur to him. When Suzanne is being chased by Alex and
Victor in her car, she makes the mistake of panicking before she is any
immediate danger. When Jason confronts Alex at the end, he acts out of
anger and hatred toward his father, when just getting away would have
gotten him everything he wanted.
In Roger Ebert's review, he pointed out that the characters seemed to
have driven the story, and not vice-versa. The result is that the
characters are more believable and they have to pay for their actions
more so than in a standard Hollywood movie, but the drawback is that the
plot lacks a sense of reward and accomplishment. To borrow a phrase from
the Simpsons, it's just a bunch of stuff that happened.
 If the lack of a traditional story is not important to you, then you
might want to see the movie for other reasons. The music was used well.
It is dark and somber -- more sad for the characters than a violent
reflection of them. The overall tone of the movie is handled very well.
When cruel things happen, the movie is dark and closed, and when
characters are talking about escaping to a better way of life, the movie
is sunny and open. I don't think I've mentioned costumes in a
current-setting movie review yet, but Jack Nicholson was a well dressed
wine merchant. Every shirt he wore seemed to be the color of a different
wine.
It is details like these (plus the glowing review from Ebert) that make
me think maybe I missed something. The same thing happened with CAUGHT
last fall -- it got excellent reviews from the critics and it showed
signs of being well made, but it just wasn't satisfying as a movie
experience.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Chris Webb
        Rage.  Integrity.  Intensity.  Passion.  Disillusionment.  Pain.  
Charm.  Jack Nicholson can incorporate all these contradictions into 
whatever role he plays.  Such is the case in Blood and Wine, his latest 
collaboration with director Bob Rafelson (Five Easy Pieces, King of 
Marvin Gardens).  Over the past few years, we have seen him in the 
two-dimensional role, no matter how compelling, in A Few Good Men, as a 
cartoon in Batman, and as a compassionate and angered man in The Crossing 
Guard.  But nothing can exercise Nicholson's talents as good as when 
he displays absolute paranoia and irrational psychosis as we've seen in 
Five Easy Pieces and Carnal Knowledge, which was a subtle, but calculated 
performance of mental deterioration.
        To watch Nicholson in a frenzy, the gritted teeth, the extended 
facial expressions is to face the devil.  Much as is seen in Blood and 
Wine.  We are presented with Alex Gates (Nicholson), who is 
married to Suzanne (Judy Davis), and step-father to Jason (Stephen 
Dorff).  The verbal abuse begins immediately in the family's first scene, 
and relationships have already been fractured when we enter their lives.  
Jason can do no right in wine merchant Alex's eyes.  He doesn't dress 
right, he doesn't have many friends, and he sticks up for his mother.  
They simply don't like each other, never had, and we must take that at 
face value.
        On top of his wine business, Alex is into some small time jewelry 
heisting.  In his second life, he is close associate to Victor (Michael 
Caine), who is an expert safe-cracker on probation.  Meanwhile, Alex is 
having an affair with Gabrielle (Jennifer Lopez), the nanny for a rich 
Miami family.  Alex has been using her to get at a necklace which could 
bring him in more than a million dollars.
        In a slow-developing format, we begin to see motivations of each 
character.  Jason wants to leave home, and hopes his abused mother leaves 
too.  A loner, Jason's dream is to ride the seas on a fixed-up boat.  He 
wants peace in his life.  Gabrielle loves Alex.  Unfortunately, Alex is 
selfish and relentless in his pursuit for riches.  Despite his business, 
he feels unsuccessful and needs money to live the lavish lifestyle he 
feels he missed out on.
        When Suzanne discovers he has two tickets to New York, she 
refuses to let Alex leave the house.  The Nicholson rage emerges for the 
first time.  In a fight which leaves you sympathizing for both 
characters, both parties are beaten pretty badly.  Suzanne leaves home 
and takes Jason with her.  In the process, they wind up with the jewels.  
        Alex and Victor need the jewels, as this game has suddenly gone 
terribly wrong.  At this time, Jason has also fallen for Gabrielle, who 
leads them both down different paths.  Nicholson has landed in the love 
triangles he has had in his earlier movies.  This leads to more rage as 
he descends deeper into his self-created psychosis.  At one point, he 
does the unforgiveable asking his hurt wife to tell him where the jewels 
out.  That sentence does not give the scene justice, but I don't want to 
ruin the film.
        Caine is superb as a man who has nown only crime his whole life 
and will stop at nothing and hurt anyone who stands in his way.  But 
Rafelson is not content in that.  Doublecrossing abounds on the parts of 
Steven, Victor, Alex, and Gabrielle, and we are led deeper and deeper 
into this tragic tapestry.  All characters at one point in time are the 
bad guy and all become victims.  
        This is one of the best films I've seen this year, hands down.  
It brought back the Nicholson of the past, which is the best Nicholson.  
He wasn't becoming complaicent, I don't think.  These types of roles just 
weren't around.  But, he's returned to form, and Dorff is quite the 
discovery, in this transition from the indie circuit to more mainstream 
fare.  
        Rafelson seems to have Nicholson's number when it comes to 
tapping into his irrational side, and its nice to see them teaming up 
again.  There is no diner scene here likei n Five Easy Pieces, but 
Nicholson can sneer and Rafelson can pull this mesmerizing picture 
together without the need to prove anything to the audience.  They need 
not our approval anymore, they've mastered that.  Now, its time to just 
watch this film, and enjoy Blood and Wine for the thrilling, though 
depressing, drama it is.  This picture is about contradictions, even the 
title suggests one.

Author
Walter Frith
'Blood and Wine' has all the makings of classic 'film noir'.  It has two
legendary leading actors, a fortune, a beautiful woman and complications
arising from a robbery gone wrong.  Add that against the steamy backdrop of
beautiful Miami, photographed at times with obtusely graphic violence,
gorgeous sunsets and darkly inventive human conflict and you couldn't ask for
anything more.  
Jack Nicholson stars as a wine proprietor servicing a large sector of wealthy
Miami and its suburbs.  His wife (Judy Davis) is a character most ordinary;
lacking the strength of will but soon finds what she needs to survive.  Her
son and Nicholson's stepson (Stephen Dorff) earns his living as a fisherman
striving for more in life.  Nicholson becomes embroiled in mistrust and
suspicion with a crafty and sleazy jewel thief (Michael Caine) after the two
of them steal a million dollar necklace from the home of one of Nicholson's
clients.  They are aided in their crime by the beautiful Jennifer Lopez who
plays the nanny of the wealthy couple's child.  A heated argument which turns
violent one evening between two of the film's character's (I'm not saying
which ones) leads to a loss of the valuable necklace and vile determination
to reclaim it involving all the film's main characters.
Director Bob Rafelson ('Five Easy Pieces', 'The King of Marvin Gardens', '
The Postman Always Rings Twice', 'Man Trouble'), all of which star Nicholson,
has made a stark, gritty and hardboiled film mixing elements of suspense,
violence and sex all in good taste with unpredictable results. It's a film
embodied with style striving for originality and while it doesn't quite find
it at times and doesn't always hit the mark, it still has the
characrteristics of emotional drama and the ingredients to sustain a perfect
running time of 97 minutes.  It's not an ambitious film, just an odyssey of
clever film making and it knows its limits.  It's not too long and not too
short.  It's just perfect.
Nicholson and Caine are perfectly casted as two criminal adversaries out to
get rich quick and despite the cliche that 'crime doesn't pay', the movie
strives to enforce the unwritten rule that there is no honour among thieves.
 Stephen Dorff is effectively on target as the man caught in the middle and
plays his role with poetic ease with moments of heightened tension and this
could be a very important breakthrough film for him in his young career.
Dorff was most impressive as the little known real life character Stu
Sutcliffe who almost made it as a member of The Beatles in 1994's 'Backbeat'.
 He is one of Hollywood's rising stars.  Watch for him.  Davis gives a good
performance as Nicholson's wife, a woman with integrity and Jennifer Lopez is
interesting to watch as the 'other woman'.  She will soon be seen in a
biography of Mexican singing sensation Selena.  It's the story of the rising
rock star gunned down by her fan club manager.  
'Blood and Wine' is not playing in wide release but if you are lucky enough
to be living in a location featuring it, check it out.  It's a must see for
fans of Jack Nicholson and fans of 'film noir'.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jack Nicholson, Stephen Dorff, Michael Caine, Judy Davis, 
      Jennifer Lopez, Harold Perrineau Jr.
Director: Bob Rafelson
Producer: Jeremy Thomas
Screenplay: Nick Villiers and Alison Cross
Cinematography: Newton Thomas Sigel
Music: Michael Lorenc
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     It's quite possible to argue that Jack Nicholson is among the ten 
best actors working today.  Some of his performances, like those in 
CHINATOWN and THE SHINING (for example), are classics.  So it's a little 
discouraging to note the alarming number of duds that Nicholson has 
recently participated in.  The star's latest, BLOOD AND WINE, continues 
this unfortunate trend -- Nicholson is good, but the movie isn't.
     Analyzed purely from a plot perspective, there's nothing terribly 
wrong with BLOOD AND WINE.  It's an unremarkable noir thriller with a 
few twists that, despite being telegraphed too early, keep the story 
moving.  Nicholson plays Alex Gates, the proprietor of a wine store.  
Alex is broke because he spends too much money lavishing gifts on his 
mistresses.  His latest is the stunning Gabriela (Jennifer Lopez), a 
mini-skirted nanny for a rich family.  Alex's solution to his financial 
insolvency is to steal a necklace from Gabriela's employers.  To help 
him with the burglary, he has brought in Victor (Michael Caine), a 
lowlife British thief with a consumptive cough and a taste for the finer 
things.  Things start to go wrong, however, when Gabriela becomes 
attracted to her lover's sullen stepson, Jason (Stephen Dorff), and 
Alex's wife (Judy Davis) finds out about his latest indiscretion. 
     As involved as that all sounds, there are two reasons why it 
doesn't make for interesting drama.  In the first place, huge chunks of 
BLOOD AND WINE seem recycled.  We have stolen jewels, an attractive 
woman torn between an older and younger man, and a thick layer of 
mistrust between criminals.  BLOOD AND WINE has rare, isolated bursts of 
energy, but, for the most part, it comes down to fist fights, 
predictable betrayals, and car chases.  
     The second flaw is more detrimental, however.  One key to a good 
thriller is fashioning interesting characters.  They don't have to be 
likable -- RESERVOIR DOGS was populated by a bunch of no-good thugs and 
killers -- but they have to grab and hold the audience's attention.  No 
one in BLOOD AND WINE is able to do that.  This film contains a group of 
unappealing, banal personalities.  The more we watch them, the more 
apathetic we become towards their plight.  
     Even Nicholson, who displays all of his usual charming, cynical 
mannerisms, can't redeem Alex -- there's not enough there for the actor 
to work with.  Michael Caine has fun playing the amoral Victor, savoring 
one of his most interesting roles in some time.  Victor's motto, which 
adequately describes his personality, is that "there's no such thing as 
honor among thieves.  It's a myth."  Judy Davis is underused in a scanty 
part as Alex's wife.  Would that the same could be said of Stephen 
Dorff, whose sour, one-note performance becomes wearisome before the end 
of the first reel.  Jennifer Lopez, soon to star in SELENA, adds sex 
appeal, but little else.
     BLOOD AND WINE's director, Bob Rafelson, has previously made five 
movies with Nicholson, including 1970's memorable FIVE EASY PIECES.  
Their last collaboration prior to this one, 1992's MAN TROUBLE, was an 
unmitigated disaster, and BLOOD AND WINE isn't much of a step upwards.  
As an attempt to recapture past glory, this picture falls considerably 
short of the mark.
     There are instances when fully-realized characters can save a tired 
plot, and times when a snappy, well-executed storyline can cover up for 
ill-developed personalities.  Unfortunately, BLOOD AND WINE has neither.  
To give the film credit, it does possess a certain, dark style, but all 
the atmosphere in the world can't fill the holes left by the screenplay.  
BLOOD AND WINE develops a lot less than we expect from it, and leaves us 
wondering when Jack Nicholson will next tackle a role worthy of his 
reputation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
