Title
Review for Hideous Kinky (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Brundage
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "HIDEOUS KINKY" (Stratosphere Entertainment)
        For her follow-up film to "Titanic," Kate Winslet has chosen a
decidedly un-glamorous role in this modest British film, based on
Esther Freud semi-autobiographical novel about her own exotic
childhood experiences. Winslet plays a restless, penniless single
mother from London who takes her two bewildered young daughters - a
skeptical eight year-old and an enthusiastic six year-old - to
Marrakech in the early '70s in the wake of her divorce from an
unreliable British poet. Playing the precocious older daughter, Bella
Riza, is the actress who scores in this film, squirming over her
mother's selfish irresponsibility and shallow, bohemian pretentions as
the mother-daughter tension is sharply observed. Winslet's romance
with an acrobat/hustler (Said Taghmaoui, the French-Moroccan actor
from "La Haine") doesn't contribute much to the episodic story - and
the bizarre, unappealing title is derived from a funny-sounding word
game devised by the sisters whose fondest wish is to be "normal."
Screenwriter Billy MacKinnon and his brother, director Gillies
MacKinnon ("The Playboys"), have created a hybrid: part
travelogue/part nostalgic quest for metaphysical
salvation. Unfortunately, the characters - and John de Borman, the
cinematographer - spend too much time wandering aimlessly in the sun,
indulging in the pungent flavors of the time and place. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hideous Kinky" is a pretty but parched 5 as
it slowly labors to re-capture the soul-searching hippie spirit.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Congratulations to Kate Winslet for defying the odds, by choosing to
play the lead role in the small, but beautiful HIDEOUS KINKY as a
follow-up to her Oscar nominated turn in TITANIC, the highest grossing
and most expensive film of all time. But was this really such a
surprise? Not at all, once you look at the wide range of films that
the British actress appeared in before TITANIC. She showed incredible
talent at a young age in such films as JUDE, HEAVENLY CREATURES and
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY(for which she recieved her first Oscar
nomination).  Her latest, HIDEOUS KINKY, is an exotic odyssey that is
much more than a star vehicle.
HIDEOUS KINKY is not a plot driven movie, but it tells the tale of a
hippie named Julia(Kate Winslet) who has brought her two young
girls(Bella Riza and Carrie Mullan) to Morocco to find peace, love,
and faith in the early 70's. While in London, the children's father
thrives as a poet, Julia has no money.
It is then that she meets Bilal(Said Taghmaoui), a Moroccan ex-con who
is hiding from his past. He wins the affection of Julia and her
children and he becomes like a father to them. Bilal seems to be a
nice man, but he often vanishes at times when he is needed.
For all the wonder of HIDEOUS KINKY, the real pleasure comes from
watching the two little girls onscreen. They both run around screaming
wild phrases like "hideous kinky!"  and each character is a presence
on her own. It is rare for children to dominate a film, especially
when matched up against Kate Winslet, who gives one of her better
performances.
HIDEOUS KINKY reminded me a little of this year's A WALK ON THE MOON,
because both are similar tales of a woman trying to find herself
during the same time period. HIDEOUS KINKY's wondrous soundtrack
combines Moroccan music with 60's hits, and John de Borman's luscious
cinematography makes the film what it is.
Director Gillies MacKinnon(REGENERATION, A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE) has
crafted a spritual gem, scripted by brother Billy. MacKinnon lets Kate
Winslet show depth unseen in TITANIC, and he shows a talent for
working with young actors. As for the film's title; it's a bit
misleading, and I still haven't figured out what it means. But HIDEOUS
KINKY is an independent film that takes us to places we've never been.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Stratosphere Entertainment
 Director:  Gillies Mackinnon
 Writer:  Gillies Mackinnon, novel by Esther Freud
 Cast: Kate Winslet, Said Taghmaoui, Bella Riza, Carrie
Mullan, Pierre Clementi, Sira Stampe, Abigail Cruttenden,
Ahmed Boulane, Michelle Fairley, Kevin McKidd
   Listen to Julia (Kate Winslet), the gorgeous 25-year-old
character in Gillies MacKinnon's movie "Hideous Kinky," and
you'll wonder how London ever got to be one of the world's
most populated cities.  Cold, damp, and dreary, the British
capital--in her mind--would hardly justify that ad slogan, "If
you're tired of London, you're tired of living."  But then, not
everyone lives in a frosty, one-room flat in the south end of
the town like Julia and you've got to suspend a great deal of
belief to accept the particular that one so attractive, so
adventurous, so absolutely engaging should have to put up
with living in a warren.  We don't get to see any part of
London in this picture: not Big Ben, not Kiwi Court, not Julia's
pad, but photographer John de Borman needn't worry: his
canvas is filled with the sights and sounds of Morocco from
its exotic principal city of Marrakesh to the barren desert
sands to the south.  The film takes place in 1972, in the
midst of the hippie era which saw hundreds of thousands,
perhaps millions of Americans and western Europeans toking
on weed, tripping on acid and generally dropping out even as
the Vietnam War was drawing to a close.  Though hashish
and the stronger drugs were illegal in the picturesque North
African country just as they were in the States and in
England, somehow nobody hassled the flowers of western
civilization that camped out from the northern tip of Tangier
just across the Straits of Gibraltar to the lightly populated
southern end of Tarfaya.
   "Hideous Kinky" does a wonderful bit of product placement
for the Moroccan Tourist Bureau in a country that many other
producers have found amenable for capturing biblical
ambiance, but this is the one of the few British-made films
actually meant to take place in that locale.  Esther Freud,
whose late 1960's novel with the same name is based on 
memories of her own journey which she took in the company
of her mother and sister, relates her tale strictly from a child's
point of view.  The book possesses ruminations which do not
translate to the screen, particularly since "Hideous Kinky"
lacks the sort of narrative that we either loved or hated about
"The Thin Red Line."  The unfortunate result is that while the
movie works just fine as a travelogue, one which may well
encourage Americans to travel to a country no farther in
distance than Paris, as a story it miscarries.  Books, like
plays, are often by nature uncinematic, and translate best
when they are freighted with action, not philosophy.
   The story centers on Julia who is fed up with her near-slum
existence in London as well as with her poet-husband's
philandering, and believes she can learn to discover inner
knowledge by meeting a famous Sufi in Algeria.  But first to
Morocco to give her girls, the eight-year-old Bea (Bella Riza)
and the six-year-old Lucy (Carrie Mullan) a global
perspective.  Despite her limited funds, she has gone to
Marrakesh on three one-way tickets hoping that her
husband's checks would see them through.  When the money
does not arrive, she becomes increasingly desperate, even to
the point of selling dolls on the street and thereby acquiring
the hostility of the native women.  She has, however, found a
fulfilling relationship with a scamp, Bilal (Said Taghmaoui),
who genuinely cares for her but who is a shady character
making a living partly from unnamed criminal activity, doing
heavy work, performing acrobatics for tourist dollars in
Marrakesh's main square, and telling fortunes to cynical
young women on holiday.  While little Lucy bonds to the
young Moroccan man whom she accepts as a father-
substitute, the more detached and, yes, somewhat obnoxious
sister Bea wants out.  
   Winslet's acting is a wonder to behold, but despite her half-
hearted attempts at going native, she makes suspending
belief a difficult task.  She does not fit in as a hippie,
eschewing both drugs and drink.  For a woman who hasn't a
dirham to her name she looks awfully well appointed with a
healthy face and a robust figure--which she shows off just a
tantalizing bit while fooling around with Bilal in the unflustered
presence of her daughters.  Nor is Bilal quite credible, a man
not likely to have had much formal education who
nonetheless speaks a fluent English and who is aware--while
doing backbreaking labor that would put him in good stead
with the prisoners in Angola, Louisiana--that "Morocco is not
England."  As Julia--naive and irresponsible enough to have
given birth to her first daughter at the end of seventeen--
learns some homespun truths the hard way, we in the
audience may not help feeling that "Hideous Kinky" is a
disjointed voyage that leaves us intellectually more informed
but emotionally as arid as the Sahara desert which forms its
backdrop.  

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HIDEOUS KINKY (director: Gillies MacKinnon; screenwriter: Billy
MacKinnon, based on the novel by Esther Freud; cinematographer: John de
Borman; cast: Kate Winslet (Julia), Said Taghmaoui (Bilal), Bella Riza
(Bea),Carrie Mullan (Lucy), Pierre Clémenti (Santoni), Abigail
Cruttenden (Charlotte), Ahmed Boulane (Ben Said), Sira Stampe (Eva),
Amidou (Sufi Sheikh), Michelle Fairley (Patricia), 1998-UK)
There must be some unwritten rule that states, one gets enlightenment
not in the way one expects to get enlightenment but in the commitment
given to seeking wisdom, even if it is a foolish road one is on and it
seems to be leading nowhere. In the exotic Morocco of 1972, a
25-year-old English hippie mother, Julia (Winslet), of two sweet young
girls, the 6-year-old Lucy (Carrie) and the 8-year-old Bea (Bella), has
arrived for a year's stay, with the self-absorbed mother oblivious to
how her daughters might be adjusting to this foreign experience while
she is searching for a change of life from her unfaithful poet husband
(she is not officially married to him) and her cold one-room London
flat, and is sort of looking for the eternal truth in the sunny climate
of Marrakech. At least she says she is, as she is making some attempt to
contact a Sufi sheikh there who has all the answers. She has not planned
things out too carefully, having no money, and the trip doesn't seem
like it's much fun, more like a misadventure, with some romance with a
local Moroccan thrown in.
Drugs, a world-wide youthful phenomena during this period, where many
Westerners came to Morocco to smoke the good hashish found there and to
live the 'good life' cheaply, and to be in a spot where they did not
have to worry about being hassled by the local authorities, even though
drugs are illegal there. But this is not shown as one of her reasons for
being here. In this film, the subject of drugs is never broached, only
hinted at in an off-handed but slurring way, as the hippie commune is
shown in a negative light, strumming on their guitars and bragging about
the hits of acid they have taken. Even the ones coming here for
spiritual reasons, to follow the mystical Sufis, seem lost following a
culture that is far different from where they were coming from.
The film is based on the novel that contained the autobiographical
experiences of Sigmund Freud's grand-daughter, Esther Freud, who
traveled here in the 1960s with her mother and sister. It is written by
the director's brother, who has previously directed Regeneration, The
Playboys, and Trojan Eddie.
The title of the film comes from the squealing giggles that saying
hideous kinky gives the little girls.
With Julia strapped for cash and not receiving a needed check her
husband often forgets to send her, she is prevented from seeing the
greatest living Sufi who is located in Algeria; so instead, she meets an
acrobat street performer in the bazaar, Bilal (Said Taghmaoui). He
becomes her lover, taking the place of her husband as a father figure
for the girls. The girls readily accept him, and there is no big-to-do
made about their openly sexual relationship, but the girls really don't
know what to make of the relationship. It especially bothers Bea, who is
embarrassed by her mother's loose attitude and wants to go home. Things
go surprisingly sour when Bilal takes them to stay in his small village.
It seems only that Bilal's charm is matched by his shiftlessness, as he
has a wife who still lives there. This scene didn't make too much sense
as to why he would take them there knowing the situation, unless the
uneducated man was totally uneducated in the customs of his people,
also. But I doubt that.
The family is now stuck without money in a backward area trying to
decide what to do next, as they hitch a ride away from there with a
truck driver who nearly kills them when he falls asleep by the wheel.
Lucy takes it all in stride and has a good disposition for travel, while
Bea just wants to go to a school and learn something and be a 'normal'
girl.
The beauty of Marrakech is matched by the terrific performance of Kate
Winslet, as the film accurately encapsulates the timeless city and its
bustling street scenes, expansive views, illustrious mosques, and grand
sunsets. Kate enacts the feel of what it was like to be a Westerner,
living out the countercultural experiences while awaiting to gather her
sensibilities again and was fortunate enough to be able to go home the
better off for her experiences, as many a drop-out reluctantly had to do
after their stay ran out of money and purpose.
The background music from groups like America and Jefferson Airplane,
provided further nostalgia for this easy to look at and easy to grasp
film. The only hope was that the two innocent girls would not be
permanently harmed while on this sojourn, a venture that should be
reserved only for those of college age or older who choose to go there
for themselves.
The family's travel, which is on the edge, has Julia waking up screaming
from dreams that are bleakly haunting; but, when she gets up, all there
is, is this splendid emptiness all around her and a vacuous life that is
starting to bother her. That Marrakech is disarmingly gorgeous and that
London is old hat to her, is starting to wear thin in her thoughts. It
will dawn on her, when Bea takes ill, as she reflects on what the Sufi
guru tells her, whom she finally meets and is driven to tears in his
presence. He is the guru who replaced the one she wanted to see but who
died before she got a chance to see him. The new guru is grounded in
reality, something she is not grounded in, and seems to tell her what
she couldn't comprehend from anyone else, even comforting her, by
telling her that her tears are memories- a gift from God.
The film's weakness was the empty feeling I got from watching the story
unfold in its risk free tenor (she was there basically to be just
escaping from her situation) and how unappealing the love affair seemed
between Bilal and Julia. The storyline about a helpless single parent,
detracted from the vibrant experiences many others of her same baby-boom
generation had during their trip to Morocco, who were taken in by the
mystical culture of Sufism, a teaching that has a lot to offer its
followers, contrary to the impression the film might give, seemed to
pass her by. Her knowledge of that trip is only surface deep, at best.
She perhaps would have been better off not taking the kids along,
smoking some hashish, and have been less assured of herself but to have
behaved more like a hippie and she wouldn't have been so uptight all the
time and had some fun on her journey. After all, the mystical trip is
the journey.
The film's strength is in how all the characters are shown for what they
are, and no one is that good or that bad, or judged too harshly for
their shortcomings. Bilal is unreliable but is capable of generosity.
The little girls are precocious but they are lovable. Julia, the
cornerstone the film is built on, is a mother who cares about the
children but doesn't know how to take care of them without
unintentionally harming them. She was trying to escape from reality and
that by returning to London, she has another chance to see if she can
find the key to this world or whatever world she is looking for and
should no longer have nightmares about where she's at. This is a very
Freudian way to look at things, as this sudden realization, that things
are not right puts an an end to her Eastern hippie odyssey, at least,
for the time being. And, after all is said and done, who's to say if the
children are also not better off for surviving their experiences, just
like she probably was!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1999 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Hideous Kinky gave me the same kind of feeling I always get when it
seems the setting is more important than the characters:  emptiness. 
That's not to say the film is lifeless; on the contrary, Kate Winslet
gives a fantastic performance as Julia, an English mother trying to
raise her two daughters (Bella Riza, Carrie Mullan) in Morocco.  The
central story is a good one, but the plot feels needlessly thickened by
various intrusive elements, including Julia's not-so-moving love affair
with a Moroccan man (Said Taghmaoui) and Julia's underdeveloped
commitment to the local religion.  Winslet, as I said, is a truly
affecting actress, and I was also very impressed with young Carrie
Mullan.  Director Gillies MacKinnon does a nice job with atmosphere, and
the film always feels authentic.  But I got the strange sensation that
the setting and the characters are part of two entirely different
stories, and the movie just isn't very engaging because of this.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Gillies MacKinnon's handsomely shot HIDEOUS KINKY contains enough lush
visuals to serve as a Moroccan travelogue, albeit one with a time warp.
Set in the middle of the hippie age, it brings us back to the free
spirited times of the flower children.  Kate Winslet, the chief hippie
in residence, plays a 25-year-old mother of two young girls, ages 6 and
8.
Although the images are sometimes quite compelling, the threadbare story
never is.  Billy MacKinnon's thin script is based on a novel by Esther
Freud.   She grew up in the same time and place (Marrakech) as the girls
in the story.   Her life may have been exciting, but almost nothing
happens in this movie.
Without much information, the viewers are left to piece together for
themselves what the director is trying to say.  The girls complain about
the lack of money, and Julia (Winslet) spends a lot of time going to the
post office, looking for the missing check from her husband back in
England.  This might lead us to believe that we are to feel compassion
for a single parent coping with poverty, but the effects of being
destitute are never made obvious.  Julia doesn't appear to be lacking
much since her needs and desires are so modest.
Perhaps the movie is about the effects of bad parenting since Julia does
a better job of loving her children than caring for them.  She makes
some dubious choices in raising them -- letting her 8-year-old go to
live with questionable strangers being at the top of the list.
The characters are all written so superficially that one can never be
sure what the filmmakers' intentions are.   Winslet tries hard to put
some life into her underwritten role, but she seems miscast.   Bella
Riza and Carrie Mullan do respectable jobs as her two girls, who are
sometimes more mature than their mother.
The film's title is completely misleading.  There are no hideous, kinky
sex scenes in the movie.  The title comes from the name of a game that
the girls play briefly.  A different title would have helped in
marketing the film correctly, but perhaps the current one will prove
more lucrative.
After a reasonable amount of time has elapsed, the picture comes to a
completely predictable conclusion.  As we leave the theater, we remember
the sights and sounds of Marrakech.  Nothing more of the story lingers.
None of the characters were interesting enough to care about when the
movie was on.  Now that it's off, they are quickly forgotten.  Still, if
you've been considering Morocco for your next vacation, this might be
just the movie for you.
HIDEOUS KINKY runs 1:38.  It is rated R for a little nudity, profanity,
and sexuality and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
