Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
bob bloom
Return to Me (2000) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring David Duchovny,
Minnie Driver, Carroll O'Connor, Robert Loggia, David Alan Grier, Bonnie
Hunt, James Belushi and Joely Richardson. Written by Hunt and Don Lake.
Directed by Hunt
 He's a successful young architect madly in love with his wife.
 She's a waitress, lying in a hospital bed awaiting the heart that will
give her a second chance at life.
 This is the setup for 'Return to Me,' a romantic feather in which you
know everything that is going to happen within the first five minutes.
There are no surprises, no sudden twists or deviations.
 Yet, like dining at your favorite restaurant, you still enjoy the
experience even though you've done it hundreds of times.
 I must confess that under this cynical exterior beats the heart of a
romantic, thus "Return to Me" was most appealing.
 It has a quaint, old-fashioned quality to it. The characters are good
people, even though they are recognizable types. Nevertheless, you root
for these vulnerable protagonists  as they overcome their misfortunes
and rediscover happiness.
 He's the still-in-mourning husband driven by work to battle the pain of
loss.
 She's the chipper, warm-hearted young woman thankful for her good
fortune.
 They meet cute when she serves him, his obnoxious and rude blind date
and some friends at her grandfather's tavern - O'Reilly's Italian
Restaurant.
 They are attracted to each other and begin dating. Bob (David Duchovny)
begins to smile again. Grace (Minnie Driver) finds what she never
thought she would experience - love.
 Together they make a handsome couple.
 The only drawback is her reluctance to tell him about her transplant,
especially after she learns about the donor.
 I don't believe I am giving anything away. Anyone with a rudimentary
knowledge of the genre can forecast what is going to happen with more
accuracy than a meteorologist predicting rain in April.
 Duchovny and Driver make a sweet pair. You want to see their
relationship succeed. Both are charming, and both perform admirably.
Driver, especially, is a lovely actress, easy on the eyes.
 Duchovny easily fits into the leading man persona, showing flashes of
wit, determination, pain and vulnerability.
 The real star of "Return to Me" is Bonnie Hunt, who co-wrote the script
and directs, as well as plays a supporting role as Driver's best friend.
 Her dry wit and observations are punctuated throughout the film.
 An enticing supporting cast, including Carroll O'Connor, Robert Loggia,
Joely Richardson, David Alan Grier and James Belushi, add to the
enjoyment.
"Return to Me" is not a ground-breaking movie. It is a formulaic, but
its charm compensates for its minor flaws.
 At about 115 minutes, "Return to Me" is a fine date movie.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. A member of the Online Film Critics Society, he can be reached at
bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net. 
For more reviews by Bob Bloom, go to www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Christian Pyle
Because no one demanded it:  David Duchovny in a romantic comedy!  At last,
both his romantic magnetism and his comedic brilliance are mined for all their
resources!  The choice of Duchovny may have something to do with the plot,
which could be fodder for a Valentine's Day episode of "The X-Files."  Bob
Rueland (David Duchovny) loses his wife Elizabeth (Joely Richardson) in a car
accident.  At the same time, Grace Briggs (Minnie Driver) is in the hospital,
waiting for a heart transplant.  Grace gets Elizabeth's heart, and it leads her
to Bob.  It's the romantic equivalent of all those horror films where someone
gets a transplant from a serial killer and then is driven to slaughter people.
Four writers are credited with contributing to the story.  That doesn't seem
possible.  Despite being a solid two hours long, "Return to Me" adds little to
the "boy meets girl / boy loses girl" formula and, as a result, is terribly
tedious and slow-moving.  Duchovny and Driver seem unable to generate any
sparks, and I kept wishing for a fast-forward button to move their scenes
along.  Since Driver has managed to work well in romantic roles before, I blame
Duchovny.  He's out of his element without the manufactured and static sexual
tension of his TV series (and I've always thought that the relationship between
Mulder and Scully on "The X-Files" comes off more sibling-like than
hot-and-bothered).  There's something about Duchovny that makes me uneasy. 
Regardless of the role he's playing, he comes off as a weirdo.
The only redeeming quality of "Return to Me" is its hilarious supporting cast. 
The circle of friends and relatives around Bob and Grace is constantly playing
matchmaker, and they generate the only laughs in the movie.  Carroll O'Connor
is Grace's grandfather Marty O'Reilly.  When Bob comes into Marty's restaurant
after hours, Marty immediately begins quizzing Bob about his marital status. 
When Marty discovers that Bob is a widower, he invites Bob to join his poker
game and introduces him with the declaration, "This is Bob!  His wife is dead!"
 The poker buddies are just as desperate to find a mate for Grace and greet Bob
enthusiastically when they hear the news.
Also funny: Bonnie Hunt as Grace's best friend Megan and James Belushi as
Megan's husband Joe.  Married with children, Megan and Joe provide a useful
counterpoint by showing the mundane results of romance.  Although it's rare to
see him in a movie that premieres in a theater, Belushi delivers his lines with
great comic skill.  Rounding out the impressive supporting cast are David Alan
Grier as Bob's best friend and Robert Loggia as Marty's brother-in-law Angelo. 
In only the lead actors lived up to the standards set by the rest of the cast.
Bottom line:  If you are compelled to see this movie, watch it on video so you
can fast-forward to scenes with Carroll O'Connor and James Belushi.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Return to Me (2000)
David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Carroll O'Connor, Robert Loggia, Bonnie
Hunt, David Alan Grier, James Belushi. Screenplay by Bonnie Hunt and Don
Lake. Directed by Bonnie Hunt. 116 minutes.
PG, 3 stars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
''Return to Me'' is the kind of film I normally shred with the
enthusiasm of a puppy that just snagged your favorite slipper. The
romantic comedy is unabashedly sentimental, with plot contrivances
galore, stereotypical supporting players, overdone accents, nuns on
bicycles and an adorable gorilla. As if all that wasn't enough, it even
features Jim Belushi, whose very presence is enough to cause most
productions to implode. But from beginning to end, I found the film
utterly charming. Hell, I even liked Belushi.
Oh, what an awkward position for a jaded critic to be in.
First time director Bonnie Hunt (who also co-wrote the script and plays
a key role) casts David Duchovny and Minnie Driver in her fairy tale.
Duchovny plays Bob, a Chicago architect who loses his zoologist wife
Elizabeth (Joely Richardson) in a car wreck. Minnie Driver is Grace, a
barmaid on the waiting list for a healthy heart who receives a second
lease on life thanks to Elizabeth.
Months later, Bob wanders into the funky little restaurant run by
Grace's Irish grandfather (Carroll O'Connor) and Italian great-uncle
(Robert Loggia). The old boys play matchmaker, leading to the inevitable
pairing of Bob and Grace. Of course, the road to romance is rocky. Bob
still grieves the loss of Elizabeth and Grace is so painfully
self-conscious of her surgical scar that she's afraid to get intimate
with anyone. Cautiously, they begin the courtship ritual.
This may read like typical cutesy-poo fare, but that's only because it
is. And there's more. When O'Connor (who uses an Irish accent straight
out of a ''Lucky Charms'' commercial), Loggia and company aren't
hovering over the couple like mother hens, they spend their time
exchanging good-natured insults and debating the merits of vintage
singers. Going into sugar shock, yet? Well, try this on for size. The
ape Elizabeth worked with had a special gesture he used only with her.
When Grace visits the zoo, he cozies up to her right away. How cosmic.
The film has a fair share of chunky shtick as well. Bob's best pal
(David Alan Grier) fixes him up for an evening out, leading to some
extreme overacting from Bob's boorish date. There's also a running gag
over Jim Belushi's efforts to stop swearing in front of his kids. And we
have the aforementioned encounter with a perky bicycle-riding nun.
I could go on, but you get the idea. There's enough sweetness here for a
dozen Meg Ryan movies, but the damned thing still got to me.
Part of the reason is Minnie Driver and David Duchovny. Driver projects
a disarming vulnerability and, at long last, Duchovny drops his
''X-Files'' ironic cool and plays a guy who smiles and laughs and cries
like an actual human being. Together, they made me care about the
well-being of their characters.
Another reason is Bonnie Hunt and Jim Belushi. As Grace's closest
friends, they make a dandy couple. Hunt's tongue is as sharp as ever,
but nicely tempered by her nurturing qualities. As for Belushi, after
screwing up a long series of leading man roles, he is very likable in a
supporting turn, playing an affable lug quite comfortable in his skin. A
scene where he does an impromptu belly dance for Grace and his wife is
funny and appealing. Few other actors could successfully pull that off.
But the biggest reason is Bonnie Hunt's direction. She establishes and
maintains a fairy tale sensibility that makes the convoluted plotting
easy to tolerate. Hunt obviously conveyed her storybook approach to the
supporting cast, convincing them to go for magic over credibility.
The magic worked for me. I enjoyed spending a couple of hours in a world
where loving relatives dote over your every move, where caring friends
are there when you need them, and where romance triumphs over all.
There you have it. ''Return to Me'' is a cavalcade of corn, but I had a
ball. So sue me. Incidentally, I plan to keep this review handy from now
on. Whenever anyone fires off an irate letter accusing me of being a
cold-hearted bastard because I ragged on the latest mawkish offering
from Robin Williams, I'll send them a copy of this and let them choke on
it.

Author
Zachary McGhee
RETURN TO ME [Hunt] -- I learned many, many of David Duchovny's weak
points in this film: (1) I cannot, under almost any circumstances, truly
picture him -- or believe him -- as an architect; (2) He looks horrible
in a tuxedo, but, somehow, manages realism in a bloodied one; (3) A dog
can cry better than he can; (4) At the onset of dancing, he appears
resolutely feminine; (5) None of it matters: He shares great chemistry
with the lovely Minnie Driver, and the premise is too contrived to be
accidental (movies like this, so long as they maintain their charm, are
allowed a free pass for their plot -- even Pleasantville relied on a
preposterous plot device in order to "leap into" its subject matter),
and Bonnie Hunt, though I suppose she could use a few more directing
lessons, maintains her title as Hollywood's best gal pal (her acting
ability is not in doubt, but I fear her in a lead) and seems a fairly
skilled screenwriter as well. If, however, the parallel introduction to
both characters had been reduced merely to Driver's entrance, the
film would've benefited as a whole, but instead I have mild
reservations. B-

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/04be3ea01433c70a882568ab005bf52c?OpenDocument
Director:  Bonnie Hunt
Producers:  Jennie Lew Tugend, C.O. (Doc) Erickson, Melanie Greene
Screenwriters:  Bonnie Hunt, Don Lake
Stars: David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Carrol O'Connor, Robert Loggia,
Bonnie Hunt, David Alan Grier, Joely Richardson, Jim Belushi
MPAA Rating: PG
Year of Release: 2000
Let's cut to the chase; the Weekly World News could have given us a
better story about a man and a woman united by a heart transplant.  It's
not for lack of talent, either, that this flick stumbles.  If anything,
Return to Me hosts almost as overqualified a cast as Brian De Palma's
lame duck blockbuster, Mission to Mars.  The real problem here seems to
be lack of directorial focus.  After a career of feature film supporting
roles, television walk-ons and cartoon voiceovers, Bonnie Hunt somehow
convinced MGM to let her sit in the folding chair.  The result is a
charming romantic comedy tragically bogged down by the uncomfortable
avoidance of its central plot point.
The drama of this film is the elephant in the room that everyone
pretends to ignore.  Bob Rueland (David Duchovny-The X-Files) is a
successful Chicago architectural engineer who is emotionally crushed
when his gorilla-training wife (a role apparently inspired by real-life
Gorilla Foundation president Dr. Penny Patterson), Elizabeth (Joely
Richardson-101 Dalmatians), dies in some unspecified accident that we
never really see.  I guess they thought it might bring us down.
Fortunately, Elizabeth filled out her organ donor card, affording local
waitress Grace Briggs (Minnie Driver-Good Will Hunting) a second chance
to live.
The wacky bonus, of course, is that the uncanny Hand of Fate brings
Grace and Bob together.  From this point forward, the unrealized drama
of Elizabeth's death is completely overshadowed by about ninety minutes
of schticky banter in which Archie Bunker, er Carrol O'Connor, runs
through a non-stop routine of Sinatra references and boob-job jokes.
And Bob and Grace fall in love.
The romance of this picture is fun and believable.  Duchovny and Driver
have a chemistry that's heartwarming and funny to watch.  This movie
would have gone a lot further if they'd either dropped the heart
transplant all together or taken it more seriously.  It's never really
justified anyway and only winds up distracting us from the film's
central relationship.  Performances from Robert Loggia and Jim Belushi
are endearing and enjoyable, and director Bonnie Hunt gives a strong
performance as Grace's supportive friend, Megan.  David Alan Grier could
have made a valuable contribution in his rare dramatic role as Bob's
comforting buddy, if the character's relevance hadn't been undercut by
the removal of all drama from the film.  Whoops!
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Actress Bonnie Hunt's first venture behind the camera is a cute romantic
comedy that is surprisingly light on the romance and heavy on the
comedy.  Hunt, who created her own hysterical but short-loved network
sitcom (called The Bonnie Hunt Show) several years ago, shows a natural
flair for comedic set-up and timing, but Return to Me isn't as
well-executed as it could have been.
The somewhat intriguing script, co-written with three other novices,
focuses on Bob and Elizabeth Rueland, a happily married Chicago couple
played by David Duchovny (The X-Files) and Joely Richardson (101
Dalmatians).  He's a successful building contractor and she works with
gorillas at the Lincoln Park Zoo.  The picture-perfect duo comes
complete with a big house, a pair of big noses and a big dog.  One
night, after a zoo fundraiser, the Ruelands are the apparent victims of
a car crash (it's not shown on screen).  Bob escapes with a few bumps
and bruises, but Elizabeth doesn't make it.
Meanwhile, far away, in another part of town, a young, single woman
named Grace Briggs (Minnie Driver, An Ideal Husband) lays on her
deathbed, desperately hoping to find a donor heart to extend her time
limit on this mortal coil.  Her best friend Megan (Hunt, The Green Mile)
watches over her in the hospital, while her grandfather Marty (Carroll
O'Connor, In the Heat of the Night) and his cronies keep good thoughts
for her as they run a business called O'Reilly's Italian Restaurant (the
funniest screen eatery since `The La Trattoria' from Mickey Blue Eyes).
Of course, Grace receives Elizabeth's heart and, over a year later, she
meets and falls in love with Bob.  Their romance is sweet and
predictable, but the lovebirds aren't on the screen as much as you might
expect.  Instead, Return seems to spend only about one-third of its
ample two-hour running time on Bob and Grace.  The remaining time is
divided between Hunt's Megan and her crazy family (including a loudmouth
husband played by James Belushi), and Grandpa Marty and his elderly
friends.
I kind of got the impression that Return's romance angle didn't play
well with test audiences, who clamored for more scenes with Megan's
family and the old coots.  Don't get me wrong; these two aspects of the
film are the best it has to offer, but I'm from the school of thought
that the two main characters should actually be on the screen more than
anybody else.  I'm guessing that nobody is going to see this movie with
the intention of hearing two Irishmen (O'Connor and Eddie Jones), an
Italian (Robert Loggia) and a Pole (Wally Jatczak) argue about who the
greatest crooner of all-time is  Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra or Bobby
Vinton.  It kind of smacks of the opening scene in Reservoir Dogs.
Duchovny does a pretty good job trying to ditch the stiff persona of his
television character but  c'mon  is he ever going to be anyone but Fox
Mulder?  Driver is very likeable as Grace, perpetually embarrassed of
the giant surgical scar that runs down her chest (and to think that some
men pay handsome subscription rates to `Scarred Skanks' magazine).  She
legitimately seems like she's in love, while Duchovny looks like he just
lost control of his bowels.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Tinged with traces of "Love Story," "Ghost" and "Moonstruck,"
this romantic comedy has its moments - but, unfortunately, most of
them turn out to be sappy. David Duchovny doffs his "X-Files" Fox
Mulder persona to play a successful Chicago architectural engineer
whose wife (Joely Richardson), an ardent zoologist who works with
primates, dies in an automobile accident in one of the early scenes of
the picture. While he's still blood-stained and grief-stricken, his
wife's heart is transplanted into Minnie Driver, who's a shy, naive
waitress working in her family's Irish-Italian restaurant. Despite the
bizarre circumstances, you know that these two are eventually gonna
meet and fall in love. Predictability and foreshadowing weigh heavily
on the script written by Bonnie Hunt and Don Lake. Perhaps a more
experienced director could have quickened the pace, trimmed some
scenes, and meshed the elements better - but inexperienced Bonnie Hunt
helms her own material. In addition, she co-stars, as Driver's
confidante and wife of Jim Belushi, and she's cast at least four
relatives named Hunt in supporting parts. It's like a congenial family
movie under a big studio banner. Despite its lack of focus, it is
amusing to watch it unfold, particularly when senior pros like Robert
Loggia and Carroll O'Connor are bantering about old singers, old
songs, etc., since the title song comes from a vintage Dean Martin
ballad. David Duchovny and Minnie Driver are charming to watch; one
just wishes they had wittier, more sophisticated material to work
with. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Return to Me" is a sweet
but stumbling 5. Ah, the fickle finger of fate!

Author
Jonathan F Richards
     This is Bonnie Hunt's "Citizen Kane".  The talented second banana
comedienne wrote the story and the screenplay, starred, and directed.
In case you think the Welles connection slipped by Bonnie, the first
line uttered by her heroine is "Rosebud."
I've seen "Citizen Kane", Ms. Hunt, and "Return to Me" is no
"Citizen Kane".  On the other hand, it's a lot funnier and a lot more
romantic than "Citizen Kane".
A good bit of the action takes place at O'Reilly's Italian
Restaurant in Chicago, where Grace (Minnie Driver) works when she has
the heart for it.  She gets the heart for it when a zoologist (Joely
Richardson) dies in a car crash and her ticker is transplanted into
the expiring Grace.
The grieving widower (David Duchovny) shows up at O'Reilly's one
night a year or so later, and it's love at first sight.  Theirs is a
sweet, totally PG romance - he's the jacket-sharing, hand-holding
type, she's a winsome virgin whose dating career has been curtailed by
her bad heart.  She knows she should tell him about her heart
transplant, but can't seem to work up the nerve.  Then she discovers
whose heart it is she has.
The premise is a tad unlikely, but Hunt and her company play it
with such sweetness and good humor that it hardly matters.  There's
even a lovable dog and gorilla in case things aren't cute enough
already.  Duchovny files away Fox Muldur and learns to enjoy life.  He
and and Driver are appealing lovebirds, and when things threaten to
falter Hunt steps in with her unfailing charm, and brings along James
Belushi for some likable vulgarity.  And if that's not enough, there's
the gang in the back of O' Reilly's, an over-the-hill Irish-Italian
Rat Pack led by Robert Loggia and the wonderful Carroll O'Connor as
Grace's doting grandfather.  This isn't an Oscar-breeding kind of
movie, but worse performances than O'Connor's have grabbed the gold.
Hunt keeps the hankies popping out of the pocket pack with her
hearts-and-flowers story, but she never lets herself wallow too long
in sentiment before nudging things back onto the laugh track.  She
directs with the same pure timing she shows as an actress, and it
makes for a lovely movie.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bonnie Hunt.
Cast: David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Carroll O'Connor, Bonnie Hunt, James 
Belushi, Robert Loggia, David Alan Grier, Joely Richardson.
2000 - 115 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 10, 2000.
One could say that romantic comedies are a dime a dozen, and yet, they never 
truly grow old, even when the workings of the plot, and the machinations of 
the romance, are fairly run-of-the-mill. Most people, male and female, 
whether they will admit it or not, gain a certain pleasure by watching 
characters fall in love on the silver screen. There are certain ingredients, 
however, that are vital to the making of a winning romance: the couple must 
be charming and have chemistry together, the writing sharp, the love story 
believable, and the film must create an urge among the audience to see the 
inevitable happen. 
"Return to Me," comedian-actress Bonnie Hunt's directorial debut (she also 
stars), has most of these assets--its two central stars, David Duchovny and 
Minnie Driver, are delightful here; the screenplay has quite a few very funny 
moments; and the whole package has such an innocence about it that to say it 
isn't a good movie, I fear, may cause me to appear to be a grump. But the 
picture does, unfortunately, have several problems that often shields its 
central romance from being in the forefront of the action onscreen, and 
somehow amidst it all, the magic is lost by the final fifteen minutes. Oh, 
yeah; if there's one thing a romance needs to have, it's a satisfying, 
entertaining conclusion, and "Return to Me" is absent of such a quality that 
might have boasted it over into the category of a surefire success.
Set in Chicago, the film begins as Bob and Liz Rueland (David Duchovny, Joely 
Richardson), a happily married couple, are attending a fundraising event for 
the Lincoln Park Zoo, where Liz, who has a great love and compassion for 
animals, works. On the way home, there is an automobile accident and Liz 
passes away, to the absolute devastation of Bob. Meanwhile, also at the 
hospital, is Grace (Minnie Driver), a young woman who is on her death 
bed--either she finds a heart and has a transplant to save her life, or she 
will die. She gets one at the last minute, and one year later, has fully 
recovered to go about her life like any other healthy person, but with a 
noticeable scar running down her chest that forever reminds her of how 
thankful she always should be to be alive.
One evening, after Bob is convinced into getting out of his house and joining 
his friend (David Alan Grier) on a double date to "O'Reilly's Italian 
Restaurant," he is absolutely smitten with their lovely waitress, who happens 
to be Grace, and whose caring grandfather (Carroll O'Connor) owns the place. 
After returning later that evening to pick up his cell phone, which he 
accidentally left there, he runs into Grace again, and after talking, Bob 
takes the next step into getting on with his life--he asks her out on a date. 
Grace joyfully accepts (she hasn't had too many dates in her life, and is 
insecure about how her possible suitors will react when she tells them she 
has had a heart transplant). From there, a relationship blossoms, with 
neither knowing about their true fateful connection. Through a series of 
circumstances, Grace makes the discovery, but fears that if she tells Bob 
about his deceased wife's heart beating within her body, she may lose him 
forever.
The premise of "Return to Me" may be farfetched (how likely do you really 
think it would be that a donor's husband would unexpectedly run into the 
patient whose life was saved?), and the developments in the story easily 
telegraphed from beginning to end, but one shouldn't go to a film of this 
type looking for such things. As long as you believe in the characters, it 
shouldn't be a problem. In the case of Bob and Grace, both are likable, 
realistically drawn people who clearly deserve their happiness. While they do 
not meet until the second half of the first hour, their scenes together are 
nicely done, and credit director Bonnie Hunt for being an assured filmmaker. 
"Return to Me" is fluffy--perhaps too fluffy--and it certainly won't be 
mistaken as the work of someone who has been in the directing business for 
long, but Hunt gets the job done.
Since her first role in 1995's "Circle of Friends," Minnie Driver has done 
nothing but impress with each of her film appearances, so her work here is 
not so much of a shock. Like Grace, she is absolutely enchanting. What does 
surprise is David Duchovny's standout performance. Viewed almost solely as 
Mulder on TV's "The X-Files," Duchovny takes the role of Bob, someone clearly 
different from his small screen persona, and proves that he very well has 
what it takes to be a perfectly respectable leading man. In the early scenes, 
after Liz has died, Duchovny heartbreakingly brings across the true loss of a 
loved one, and in the second half, proves that he also has nice comic timing, 
as does everyone else here. Bonnie Hunt, especially, as Grace's best friend 
Megan, is hysterically funny with her on-target delivery of her lines. James 
Belushi ably supports Hunt as her nice-guy lug of a husband.
Where "Return to Me" falters is in a few of its technical choices, such as 
the old-fashioned, self-titled song, by Dean Martin, annoyingly placed in 
several scenes, including a key dramatic moment, and in its handling of the 
supporting characters in relation to the romance. Hunt has littered her film 
with so many attention-getting inhabitants that their quirkiness threatens to 
drown out the central storyline. While the entire cast is very good, it is 
Bob and Grace who should be the focus, but so much attention is made to 
everyone else that they occasionally take away precious screen time in which 
the romantic developments between the two could be strengthened.
While "Return to Me" plays out, you are not bored, but you also are not as 
satisfied as you could be, because its presentation, aside from the 
aforementioned dealing of the death of Bob's wife, is so soft-focused and 
lacks urgency. And just when you think the movie is over, things come to a 
sudden halt and the epilogue drags on for another fifteen minutes, leading up 
to very little that couldn't have been solved with some tighter editing. As a 
romance, "Return to Me" is mildly engaging, but severely uneven. Some parts 
practically scream for the cutting room floor, while the love story seems 
undernourished. There is a lot of promise with what there is of it, but not 
enough to support the needless excess that revolves around them.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Long have I sung the praises of Bonnie Hunt, one of cinema's most
effortlessly entertaining comic actresses. For years Hunt has brought a
spark of devilish intelligence to roles that would vanish in other
hands; she's the living embodiment of the cliche that there are no small
parts, only small actors. It also always seems to be the case that her
small parts have been in bad films (with the occasional notable exception
like JERRY MAGUIRE), a phenomenon that has baffled me to no end. I ask the
gods of cinema: Why can't someone who brings so much to her every role
find scripts that do her talents justice? Too often, I have been left
unanswered.
     Hunt, however, now appears to have taken a proactive approach to this
dilemma -- if no one's going to offer her good scripts, she'll just have
to write and direct them herself. She also shows herself so tuned into to
her fellow supporting performers that she almost buries the leads. In
RETURN TO ME, Hunt tells the story of Bob Rueland (David Duchovny), a
Chicago construction designer blissfully married to zoologist Elizabeth
Rueland (Joely Richardson). But their happy marriage is cut short by a car
accident that claims Elizabeth's life, leaving Bob despondent and
introverted. The accident also provides a second chance for Grace Briggs
(Minnie Driver), a woman with a congenital heart defect. She receives a
donor heart from Elizabeth, and survives to begin a new life. One year
later, Bob and Grace find their paths crossing, though neither party knows
the connection that may be drawing them together.
     The premise almost sounds like one of those semi-supernatural
romantic comedies where a beloved spouse is somehow transformed into a
member of the same sex, or a daughter's boyfriend, or a houseplant. Such
business actually plays no part in RETURN TO ME, which downplays the
otherworldly element in Bob and Grace's relationship. In fact, Hunt
downplays the relationship itself, taking her time bringing the two
together, then playing up the reactions of their friends and family when
they finally do come together. Duchovny is surprisingly effective as a
romantic lead, and Driver is growing more luminous by the day, but their
romance doesn't always feel like the central point of the film. Where many
romantic comedies set up the protagonists in a vacuum, RETURN TO ME comes
dangerously close to making the protagonists themselves the vacuum.
     If that's the case, it's only because there's so much wonderful
business going on on the periphery. The sensational supporting ensemble
begins with Hunt herself, who delights once again as Grace's best friend
Megan, a married mother of five. She's nearly matched by James Belushi as
her bearish, irresponsible husband, whose propensity for swearing in front
of the children is good for laughs that should feel cheap, but somehow
don't. There's also an Irish/Italian/Polish chorus of matchmakers in
Grace's grandfather (Carroll O'Connor), her great-uncle (Robert Loggia) 
and their card-playing buddies, who debate the great dead singers between
hands of poker. Hunt and co-writer Don Lake craft rich, funny situations
so appealing that you wish every writer took half as much care developing
supporting characters.
     Of course, many writers take more care developing main characters. 
With a bit of hindsight, RETURN TO ME feels more hollow than it should
given all the laughs it generates. Hunt doesn't even seem entirely
comfortable with how to build to her big payoff, following up a reunion
between Bob and Grace with a coda that really should have preceded it. 
Still, I'm not sure I can recall the last time I responded to a scene as
shamelessly romantic as Bob's timid request to hold Grace's hand. I
certainly don't recall the last time a writer seemed so willing to share
the wealth with the punch lines. RETURN TO ME is a bit ragged, a bit
sloppy, a bit overly concerned with the people surrounding its
heart-linked lovers. It is, however, undeniably charming in its way. I'd
expect nothing less from Bonnie Hunt, whose own undeniable charm has gone
into a love story for underappreciated comic supporting performers
everywhere.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Major wetworks from an incredibly well written, very funny
script
I feel like I should be in one of the old Irish Spring soap commercials
saying "but I like it too!..."
So here we have architectural engineer Bob Rueland (David Duchovny), a
year beyond the death of his wife Elizabeth (Joely Richardson), working
at a feverish pace to finish construction of a habitat for the great
apes of Chicago's Lincoln Park Zoo. Her dream. His best friend, zoo vet
Charlie Johnson (David Alan Grier) is doing the best he can to get Bob
back into the swing of things but Bob, like his dog Mel, misses
Elizabeth mightily. On one of these blind date fix-ups leads Bob to a
table at O'Reilly's Italian Restaurant. [insert rimshot here]
Waiting tables at O'Reilly's is the equally shy of the world Grace
(Minnie Driver). Grace's backstory is just as mournful. She'd been
bed-ridden since age 14 with a heart condition and, literally at death's
door, received a life-saving heart transplant. A year ago. At the
prodding of best friends Megan (Bonnie Hunt) and Megan's husband Joe
(James Belushi), Grace is only beginning to think about getting out into
the dating world. She's just as happy serving in her grandpa's
restaurant, which brings us back to Bob and a meeting that comes and
goes in the blink of an eye.
But Grace has this unusual feeling . . . Put two and two together. I'll
wait . . .
Now that all the teenboys have finished cursing and left us, and the
rest of you have figured out the what but not the how, we will point out
that there are strict rules keeping donor and donee apart in these
matters and that Grace and [Marty] have absolutely no idea of what's in
store. Grace is incredibly self-conscious about the ten inch scar
running down her chest. Marty is still pining for his lost love. It's a
perfectly serious relationship with no emphasis on sex until close to
the endgame, perfectly in keeping with the film soundtrack of songs by
Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra and Tony Bennett and its supporting cast
of old geezers led by Grace's grandpa (Carroll O'Connor).
As a nod to a long ago television series, O'Connor and pals get stuck in
a doorway. Nothing subtle about that gag but it's great background to an
intelligent, funny and heart-wrenching script that gets where you know
it's supposed to, but doesn't do what you expect it to. I know the
script is also incredibly funny, 'cuz I cracked a couple of smiles while
everyone else was rolling (this before, during and after the tears). I
don't which of the writers (which includes actor/director Hunt) knew
that those of us that are broken (see the History of Cranky for more) refer to ourselves
that way -- no one with any sense of decorum or manners that isn't would
do so -- and when Minnie Driver's character uses the phrase, well, I was
thrown.
But not enough that I didn't laugh at the jokes. Nope. When the
inevitable comes, and this story is inevitable from the get-go, let's
just applaud the fact that it doesn't happen the way you'd guess and
neither of the characters reacts the way you'd expect. What took it's
time as a standard old fashioned romance all of a sudden shifts into
wetworks mode. A femme friend of mine was gushing (my ex would have
drowned in her own tears) and even ol' Cranky got misty.
Driver and Duchovny aren't all that funny, despite the commercials, but
there is chemistry. The best gags come from the supporting cast,
particularly from O'Connor, from a way out of shape (and proud of it)
Belushi and his interplay with "wife" Hunt.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Return To Me, he would have paid...
Substantial laughs on top of a superior chick flick. Something for
everyone in this one.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 MGM
 Director: Bonnie Hunt
 Writer:  Bonnie Hunt, Don Lake
 Cast: David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Carroll O'Connor,
Robert Loggia, Bonnie Hunt, David Alan Grier, Joely
Richardson, James Belushi, Peter B. Spector, Holly Wortell
   Contrary to the anticipation of some, "Return to Me" is not
the sequel to James Whale's 1935 movie "Bride of
Frankenstein--which Leonard Maltin praises as a film with
"rich veins of dry wit running through the chills."  In that film
Ernest Thesiger forces Dr. Frankenstein into making a mate
for his creation.  Bonnie Hunt's new movie does deal (yeah
it's a stretch) with a nice-looking regular guy whose dead
wife's heart gives new life to a dying patient waiting
despondently for a new ticker. That's about where the
comparison ends. Remove the heart of the victim of a fatal
car accident, place it gently into the chest of an ebbing
shut-in, Grace Briggs (Minnie Driver) and voila--a new woman
friend for a disconsolate widower, Bob Rueland (David
Duchovny).  Since the names of heart donors are not made
known to the lucky recipients, the odds that Bob and Grace
would coincidentally meet are about the same as the chances
of being struck by lightning on a clear day But OK, we can
overlook the credibility in a romantic comedy.  What we
cannot disregard is the top-to-bottom banality of the
enterprise, a story without edge, a group of elderly characters
who are for the most part patronized by director and co-writer
Hunt, and an entirely formulaic piece of comedy-melodrama
with scarcely a moment of real drama and featuring repartee
engaged in by codgers without a genuine dab of wit.
   The most basic convention of romantic comedies is that the
pair of lovers must be kept apart throughout the story,
predictably getting together in the concluding scenes after
they find one excuse following another to leave each other's
company.  In "Return To Me" Bob and Grace do not meet at
all until at least one-third of the tale has unfolded, but no
matter: their encounter does not speed the pulse of this
monotonous action in which even a fatal auto crash takes
place off screen to avoid offending the targeted PG crowd.
   Bonnie Hunt appears to think that the demographics for
this movie are folks who watch five hours of TV daily and
can't get enough of the stuff, so she feeds them more of the =
glop hoping to evoke the customary word-of-mouth, "I
laughed, I cried, I ate popcorn."  "Return to Me" at least
substitutes an environmental cause for product placement,
opening on a big ape named Sydney who is kept in a zoo
home with at least 2/3 less space than he requires.  Elizabeth
Rueland (Joely Richardson) as the principal caregiver of the
animal (who has taught him sign language) delivers a
heartfelt address to potential donors at a black-tie affair
attended by her husband, Bob, an architect who soon
thereafter winds up in a car accident that kills his wife. =
Elizabeth's heart is transplanted into Grace's chest, allowing
Grace to emerge from the hospital and resume life with her
extended family--two of whose antiquated members own an
Italian-Irish restaurant.
   The subplot involving an extended card game that engages
a circle of friends including Marty O'Reilly (Carroll O'Connor)
and Angelo Pardipillo (Robert Loggia) is patronizing.  Hunt
treats these elderly men as cutesy, harmless individuals
whose great joy in life when they are not bowling or shuffling
the deck is playing Cupid to Grace--who seems never to have
had a date in her life.  When the camera is not on Grace and
Bob who shyly test the waters of romance with each other,
we see increasing scenes from the lives of the codgers and
also from the overpopulated household of Megan Dayton
(Bonnie Hunt) who is married to the graceless Joy (James
Belushi).
   Nevertheless, this could be your kind of comedy if you 1)
think that a nun riding a bicycle in Rome is amusing, 2) want
to watch James Belushi do a bellydance, 3) enjoy a
repetitious gag about people comparing themselves to the
ape Sydney, 4) like to see a working man's wife's face
contort whenever her husband says "hell" or "damn" in front
of the kids, 5) consider Grace amusing when she dumps
bottled water into the sink of the Irish-Italian restaurant and
fills it with tap water to get back at a whining customer, 6)
think that David Duchovny should play any role but the one
he was born for--Mulder on the X-Files.  
Rated PG.  Running time: 116 minutes.  (C) 2000 by Harvey
Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Fontaine Lien
After having heard so many critics describe "Return to Me" as an
old-fashioned Hollywood romance, I kept asking myself going into this
movie: What exactly is an old-fashioned Hollywood romance?  What made
"Return to Me" old-fashioned and old-Hollywood?  Was it the tunes from
Sinatra, etc., legendary singers the senior citizens in the film
constantly harp on?  Was it the glamorous, sophisticated feel?  The
charisma of the two leads?  Even now I can't say that I have gotten
any closer to the real answer, because I haven't see that many
old-fashioned Hollywood romances.  I don't think any of the romances
I've seen have been classified as such.  Which leaves me the option of
vaguely agreeing with my fellow critics -- "Return to Me" was
old-fashioned in the sense that it reminded me of the way the younger
generation perceive venerated old Hollywood magic, the way I perceive
cinnamon spice and apple cider.  It was traditional, magical.  We knew
it couldn't be too daring, or have any surprising plot twists that
many cynical modern romances are apt to throw in.  It was a romance
told with such endearing simplicity, tenderness, and love (from
director Bonnie Hunt) that it couldn't help but sparkle with charm
despite its shortcomings.
The film owes a lot of what it has to Bonnie Hunt's direction.  From
the very first bird's eye view of Chicago, zooming in slowly toward
the insignificant Bob Rueland (David Duchovny), accompanied by the
"Return to Me" ballad (by whom?), we can tell we're in for something
sweet.  The scenes between the characters are endearing, truthful,
with just a hint of fantasy.  Real people don't act that way; real
people aren't that nice.  We know all this, and yet we want to believe
in these folks' existence.  The premise itself seems to have sprung
out of a fairytale, but Hunt's rooting the fairytale in common Chicago
folk simultaneously lends credit to the scenario and tinges everyday
urban life with a hint of the ethereal.  Everything is ordinary--yet
beautiful--in this film.  >From the festive little family restaurant
to Grace (Minnie Driver) and Bob's wardrobes.  From the eloquent,
not-in-a-hurry to progress storyline to the dainty watercolors that
Grace paints.  From the animal stars to the way all the characters
interact on screen -- the most beautiful part.  "Return to Me" has
done an excellent job of assembling together a group of actors who
blend in effortlessly as a family: the audience has no trouble at all
believing that this rambunctious family actually does exist.  We care
for them, laugh with them, cry with them; we're concerned that the
little boy will pick up cursing from his father. Whatever Hunt did,
she brought out the naturalism in all of the actors.
Disappointingly, David Alan Grier's Charlie, however much I like him,
was the most flatly-written.  Duchovny here does a laudable job of
shaking off his Fox Mulder persona -- with the help of his fellow
co-stars rarely do we see any hint of Special Agent Fox Mulder.
Instead we have a normal guy who when he falls in love shows more
delight than Fox Mulder will show over the span of an entire season of
"The X-Files." Duchovny, who is excellent at understatement and
self-deprecation as an actor showcases his considerable comedic talent
on screen.  Minnie Driver is engaging as always as the sweet, innocent
Grace with nothing but a good heart to offer.  Though an unlikely
pair, Duchovny and Driver gradually warm up to each other as the movie
progresses.
While "Return to Me" functions remarkably as a laugh-out-loud comedy,
a romantic scenic tour through Chicago, and a tearjerker, the story is
set up so the film ends up having nowhere to develop.  The entire
climax of the film hinges on when and how Grace is going to tell Bob
that she actually was the recipient of his wife's heart.  We already
know that there's going to be a happy ending; we feel like we spend
the entire film, however enjoyably, in a straight line going towards
that point.  As a result Bob and Grace click almost too quickly--yes,
I know she's supposed to have his ex-wife's heart and everything--it
seems too effortless.  The main subject is a love story, and the
family scenes I love so much unfortunately are overused and distract
from the turmoil of the two main characters (whose story might not
have that much meat after all).  However, in the spirit of "Return to
Me," it won't do to be too picky about how "old" Hollywood tells its
stories.  I loved knowing that this was a labor of love for Bonnie
Hunt.  It shows.  The bottom line: "Return to Me" is nothing
remarkable, and yet its sweetness, sincerity, and charm might touch
your heart in ways that you hadn't imagined.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Tinged with traces of "Love Story," "Ghost" and "Moonstruck," this romantic comedy has its moments - but, unfortunately, most of them turn out to be sappy. David Duchovny doffs his "X-Files" Fox Mulder persona to play a successful Chicago architectural engineer whose wife (Joely Richardson), an ardent zoologist who works with primates, dies in an automobile accident in one of the early scenes of the picture. While he's still blood-stained and grief-stricken, his wife's heart is transplanted into Minnie Driver, who's a shy, naive waitress working in her family's Irish-Italian restaurant. Despite the bizarre circumstances, you know that these two are eventually gonna meet and fall in love. Predictability and foreshadowing weigh heavily on the script written by Bonnie Hunt and Don Lake. Perhaps a more experienced director could have quickened the pace, trimmed some scenes, and meshed the elements better - but inexperienced Bonnie Hunt helms her own material. In addition,!
 she co-stars, as Driver's confidante and wife of Jim Belushi, and she's cast at least four relatives named Hunt in supporting parts. It's like a congenial family movie under a big studio banner. Despite its lack of focus, it is amusing to watch it unfold, particularly when senior pros like Robert Loggia and Carroll O'Connor are bantering about old singers, old songs, etc., since the title song comes from a vintage Dean Martin ballad. David Duchovny and Minnie Driver are charming to watch; one just wishes they had wittier, more sophisticated material to work with. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Return to Me" is a sweet but stumbling 5. Ah, the fickle finger of fate!

Author
Steve Rhodes
As you sit watching Bonnie Hunt's adult fairy tale, RETURN TO ME, it's
easy to convince yourself that this old-fashioned romance must be a
remake of some 1940's movie. With its sweetly sappy scenes of love and
courtship, it tells a delightful story that is a throwback to a simpler
time at the cinema.
Then it hits you. This can't be remake of something that you saw decades
ago because the kickoff point for the plot concerns a medical procedure
(heart transplant) that hasn't been around very long.
Bob Rueland's (David Duchovny) wife, Elizabeth (Joely Richardson), dies
in a car accident. She is a zoologist whose big ambition of building
Sydney and her other apes a bigger habitat is finally about to come to
fruition. After her death, Bob supervises the building of the habitat,
but without Elizabeth he's terminally unhappy. His friends try, without
much success, to fix him up with dates, including a disastrous one with
a woman (Holly Wortell) who has a water obsession. She can only drink
bottled water from certain countries.
Meanwhile, Grace Briggs (Minnie Driver), who was near death, is saved by
an anonymous heart transplant donor (Elizabeth). This is where the magic
in the plot comes in. When Bob first lays eyes on Grace, both smile and
feel like they've met before. Even Sydney recognizes Grace. Hunt,
however, is wise enough to downplay these incidents. Basically, Bob and
Grace just fall in love slowly and naturally, which isn't easy given how
hard their respective friends are trying to match them up with everyone
they know.
Grace's best friend, Megan (Bonnie Hunt), and her husband, Joe (James
Belushi), are always trying to arrange dates for Grace, who is extremely
sensitive about the 10 inch scar on her chest from the operation. "I've
already told him [Grace's latest blind date] that she's had some work
done," Joe tells Megan. "She's not a Buick!" Megan admonishes Joe.
Filmed on location, the movie is a valentine to Chicago. From the
intimate scenes set in the Irish-Italian restaurant of Grace's family to
the sweeping skyscraper vistas, the city looks gorgeous and inviting.
A veritable senior citizen's home worth of older actors (Carroll
O'Connor, Robert Loggia, Eddie Jones, William Bronder and Marianne
Muellerleile) support these the 30something leads, Driver and Duchovny.
The chemistry between the lovers is genuine and never rushed. The parts
of the script that challenge the PG rating are the intensity of the
early tragedy. Sex isn't part of the storyline.
It isn't until the last act that Grace and Bob realize the heart
connection. The result of the discovery is predictable, but who cares.
This heart-warming movie (pun intended) is an unabashedly sentimental
love story, not a mystery.
RETURN TO ME runs 1:53. It is rated PG for language and thematic
elements and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, almost 11, liked all of the movie except for the initial
tragedy. Giving it ***, he said that he found the movie hilarious and
that he especially liked seeing Carroll O'Connor.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
You gotta admire David Duchovny on several levels. First of all, he sues his
bosses over at FOX for allegedly screwing him out of certain moneys.
Secondly, he makes use of his time off to do films different than his role
as Mulder on the X-Files. And last but certainly not least, he marries a
sweet, li'l honey-bunny named Tea Leoni, a decision not many other men would
hold against him. Then again, I can't honestly admire him for choosing to
take on this sappy, predictable and ultimately, boring role. And that is the
truth, Mulder.
PLOT:
A happily married man becomes despondent after his wife dies in a car
accident. After some time, the man decides to get back into the "dating"
circuit, only to find himself falling for another woman, who may or may not
have the transplanted heart of his dead wife.
CRITIQUE:
Overly dramatic, monotonous, lagging comedy (?) featuring a decent
against-type performance by Mulder aka David Duchovny, a so-so showing by
Minnie Driver (who managed not to make me hate her as much as usual in this
role), and an interesting premise which ultimately travels straight down the
path of utter predictability. The sad part about it all is that this movie
seems to mean well deep down on the inside, but unfortunately for the
viewer, there's just not enough of anything to get excited about on the
outside. There are a couple of small laughs, but not much more. A few
dramatic moments, but nothing that succeeds in truly grabbing hold of the
ol' heart strings. Just a lot of grade "A" sap. There are also a couple of
shots at romance, but once again, the target is high and the corresponding
tosses are low. Not a horrible movie, but not a good one either. Perhaps if
the large supporting cast had been better utilized, instead of the endless
parade of dull conversations which we are forced to endure, the film
might've enjoyed a success on some other peripheral level. The old men crew
was especially annoying with their uninteresting card games, exaggerated
accents and attempts at being cute and charming. All of which gave my eyes
ample time to practice rolling around in their sockets.
Of course, I do not doubt that others out there might find some of their
idle banter to be funny and interesting, but I personally did not find any
of it amusing. Oh, an Irish/Italian restaurant...how clever. Yawn. And let's
get Archie Bunker to pretend that he's the "Lucky Charms" leprechaun. Well,
he ain't magically delicious! Boring. I don't know, maybe this is just a
film for people with a higher maturity level than myself, or those who don't
mind a simple story with a couple of easy jokes, a safe romance and a touch
of faux-dramatics. Not sure. Maybe predictability and a safety net works for
some people in movies. All I know is that James Belushi had a few good
lines, David Alan Grier always cracks me up, and that's about all the movie
had to offer me, comedy-wise. Add that to the fact that the film started off
reaaaaal slow and dramatic, added barely anything original or charming or
compelling to the tale, and ended off with just about the most obvious
ending this side of the Pamela & Tommy Lee reconciliation, and that's about
all she wrote, people. Duchovny fans may stomach it to see their man in a
role atypical from his others, Minnie Driver fans may like it because of
what she does which apparently is interesting to some people, and lovers of
the standard no fun, no fantasy, no surprise romance "comedies" might also
get their money's worth.
To anyone else, might I suggest renting the always-wonderful-to-watch
romantic classic, WHEN HARRY MET SALLY for the umpteenth time. Trust me,
that is one movie that does make you want to return year after year after
year.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Who knew that David Duchovny had an accident while playing basketball in
high school and is now blind in his right eye? He apparently uses dye to
keep the color right and to keep his pupil from dilating too much. David is
also known to have dated a few starlets before his days as a married man,
including such rumored flames as singer Lisa Loeb, actress Perry Reeves,
Sheryl Lee and Winona Ryder. And to top all that off, David apparently tried
out for the role of Batman in BATMAN & ROBIN, and even holds a degree from
Princeton University, as well as a graduate degree in English from Yale.
Nepotism anyone? Bonnie Hunt, the woman who co-wrote, directed and starred
in this film, graciously inserted four other members of her Hunt clan into
this film's cast (Her directorial debut...taking lessons from the Coppollas,
I see). In fact, her brother, who is physician at Michael Reese Hospital in
Chicago, arranged for the hospital to be used as a setting in the film.
Bonnie's own initial foray in a major motion picture was 1988's RAIN MAN.
Later on, she co-starred once again with Tom Cruise in 1997's JERRY MAGUIRE.
This film was originally titled DISTANCE CALLS.

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/return_to_me.htm ---
Comparisons between Return to Me, the directorial debut of actress Bonnie
Hunt, and Keeping the Faith, the directorial debut of actor Edward Norton,
are bound to be drawn. This is a problem for Return to Me given that
although it is a cute and oftentimes enjoyable date film, it lacks the
intellectual breadth of Keeping the Faith. Hunt is an obviously freshman
director afraid of taking the risks necessary to transform her film from the
hardly-average date fare that it is to the bold, intellectual and far
funnier movie that Norton created.
Return to Me opens with a shot reminiscent of that introducing Federico
Fellini's La Dolce vita: the camera pans in from a wide view of downtown
Chicago to a close-up of Bob Rueland (a solid David Duchovny). Read: he is
free in a limitless world. Then we meet Grace Briggs (a very cute Minnie
Driver who's smile is second only to the $20 million Julia Roberts'),
pail-faced and confined to a hospital bed with a tube under her nose, via a
tight face-shot. Read: it will take an amazing grace to save this dying
young woman.
That grace comes in the form of Bob's wife. She dies suddenly one evening
and soon her main artery is in Grace's chest. After a year of Bob mourning
his wife who was as much married to her job as him, and Grace recovering,
the destined couple meet and commence dating without either knowing the
incredible coincidence that they share. This is a mistake of the film's as
seeing the subject dodged is annoying and oftentimes requires over-silly
techniques. The picture would be far more interesting had a scenario where
the couple knew about this early on been created. This would allow the film
to deal with some of the more philosophical issues of organ-donating and not
be forced to skirt the matter in the name of a cuteness that quite frankly
isn't that cute.
Grace's closest people to a family are the four elderly men, including her
grandfather, who run the family-style Irish-Italian restaurant where she
works. The motley crew has a nightly beer and poker fest very much
reminiscent of the old Saturday Night Live `Da' Bears!' sketches, only
substituting The Rat Pack for Chicago football. It is unfortunate that these
characters are the most entertaining part of the film as they do little to
further the plot or add depth to the main characters.
Bob's closest friend is Charlie Johnson (an excellent David Alan Grier), an
African-American veterinarian who was equally close with Bob's wife when she
was alive. A relatively sensible and conservative man by day, Charlie
transforms into a rude social animal come sun down. His character serves as
the confidant that Bob needs for everything except Bob's all-important
ventures into dating.
As Return to Me grows even more confused towards the end, the film takes on
some elements not dissimilar to As Good As It Gets in terms of plot. But the
quality of romance and humor never nears that of the 1997 film. Grace's
first line is `Rosebud.' The intellect never nears that legendary film
either. But for that matter, not much even nears the price of admission.

Author
Gary Jones
Thank goodness for Return To Me. My mother came to visit and this was
the only film showing on any of the sixty screens in Bristol that I
thought my mother would enjoy. The film choice is restricted to avoid
anything remotely scary or exciting, as she's easily overwhelmed by a
big screen and a good sound system - I thought she was going to pass out
during the trailer for The Perfect Storm.
On reading the review in Empire magazine, I discovered that Return To Me
concerns a widowed man who falls for a young woman without realising
that she's the recipient of his dead wife's heart. My eyes rolled.
Sheesh... give me break... there must be something else I can take her
to see. Gladiator? U-571? Final Destination? Hmmm... maybe this heart
thing doesn't sound so bad... actually it's not at all far-fetched... it
could happen...
The guy - Bob (David Duchovny) and the girl - Grace (Minnie Driver) are
perfectly sweet and nice, as is virtually everyone in this film, and
even the bad stuff that happens to the characters is only there so they
can come out the other side even sweeter and nicer. Grace lives with her
father (Carroll O'Connor) and works in his restaurant. She also hangs
around with his gang of elderly friends, and much of the warmth and
humour in the film comes from the loveable old folk trying to help
romance blossom between Bob and Grace. (Did I mention that these good-
naturedly meddling senior citizens are very sweet? And nice?)
In Return To Me, director and co-writer Bonnie Hunt (who also appears in
the film as Grace's friend) has produced an unashamedly old-fashioned
weepy romantic comedy, and Duchovny and Driver are appealing enough to
just about pull off this unfeasible confection. It pushes the right
buttons, but occasionally the button-pushing is just a bit too obvious.
The film is also let down its bland cinematography - a point only worth
mentioning because the film was shot by the usually-reliable veteran
lensman Laszlo Kovacs. 
Despite a lack of publicity for the film, it attracted a good crowd, so
such lightweight feel-good movies seem to have a sizeable audience who
are not currently being well served. (If anyone wants to fly me or my
mother out to Hollywood for consultancy services, they can e-mail me.)

Author
Ross Anthony
"It's a shame we gotta put roofs on 'em," architect, builder, handsome, rich
successful, eternally nice guy, David Duchovny utters the film's opening
line as he stands atop a partially constructed building. His sentence ends a
gentle, patiently tightening aerial shot from a blimp high above Chicago.
It's a sweet introduction, but here's a better one: close shot on Duchovny
donning a bloodstained white tuxedo standing disengaged and expressionless
as he peers through a hospital's emergency ward doors. Flashback: Duchovny
as teen on first date with future wife, first kiss, first marriage, wife at
her job with great ape at the zoo, at a zoo fund-raiser supporting wife's
projects, at night in the car afterwards - headlights jump the double yellow
and approach full speed. Back to present day: Duchovny gets the bad news as
a group of organ donor personnel jog past toting a full thermos. Roll
opening credits. Return to Duchovny, one year later, trying to re-start his
life while grieving the death of his wife.
That necessary background info could be filmed creatively in three minutes
(okay, maybe five). Instead, "Return to Me" spends what seems like 25
minutes just to establish Duchovny's love of his wife. This still isn't a
great sin, the problem is that it lacks life. Feeling more like a necessary
burden for the filmmakers than entertainment; moviegoers deserve better. If
we're going to spend a good fraction of the film on "prerequisite
information" it should at least be compelling. This one's tragically typical
littered with the trite, example: "There's my husband with Sidney the ape;
my husband's the one on the right." However, I quite enjoyed the conclusion
of this sequence (which ends visually as my suggestion begins); Duchovny,
bloodstained, peers blankly into surgery ward while soundtrack continues the
song "Return to Me" but minus the music, simply acappella. It's a chillingly
lonely affect.
The real story (which is quite interesting) starts when a sickly and dying
Minnie Driver receives David's dead wife's heart (via transplant - not the
US post) restoring her to health, much to the delight of her loving
grandfather Carol O'Connor. Driver is an excellent actress, Duchovny is also
charming with his subtle emotionalism, and director/actress/writer Bonnie
Hunt delivers a strong performance as Minnie's best friend. But it's
O'Connor's big heart and loving charisma that anchors the film (despite his
goofy Irish accent).
Mostly a love story (David soon enough meets Minnie), with comic relief,
(James Belushi is a lot of fun as beer-bellied, Joe Average, dad), the
picture also relies on suspense. What will happen when Minnie tells David
about her operation? Will they realize whose heart is where? If and when
they do, will it prompt a change of heart?
The family sequences are so warm and full, they'll leave you sure that these
writers have kids of their own. Aside from the pale intro sequence, the film
has heart and humor.
Return to Me. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Carrol O'Connor, Robert Loggia,
Bonnie Hunt, David Alan Grier, Joely Richardson, Eddie Jones, James Belushi.
Directed by Bonnie Hunt.
Written by Bonnie Hunt & Don Lake.
Produced by Jennie Lew Tugend at MGM/JTL.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
RETURN TO ME (2000) *** Directed by Bonnie Hunt. Written by Hunt &
Don Lake. Story by Hunt, Lake, Andrew Stern, Samantha Goodman.
Photography, Liszl Kovics. Editing, Garth Craven. Production design,=
Brent Thomas. Music, Nicholas Pike. Cast : David Duchovny ( Bob
Rueland), Minnie Driver (Grace Briggs), Carroll O'Connor (Marty
O'Reilly), Robert Loggia (Angelo Pardipillo), Bonnie Hunt (Megan
Dayton), David Alan Grier  (Charlie Johnson), Joely Richardson
(Elizabeth Rueland), Eddie Jones ( Emmett McFadden), James Belushi
(Joe Dayton), et al. Produced by C.O. Erickson,  Melanie Greene,
Jennie Lew Tugend. An MGM release. 114 minutes. PG
Is Chicago thriving? More and more movies are shot there. In the real
city, not "Chicago-in-Toronto," "Chicago-in-the-Studio," and all
that. New releases include "High Fidelity" (a good title) and "Return
to Me,"  (a sappy title) which make good use of their location. They
could not be more different in content and style.
"Return to Me" is an old-style romantic comedy, the kind that a lot
of adults who may pass up action-violence-sex films, experimental
techniques, complicated stories, visual pyrotechnics, etc. would most
likely enjoy. Of course, I am not talking here about film-fanatics,
viewers likely to see a great deal of pictures in almost any genre.
It does not take a card-carrying movie nut to figure out "RTM." All
you need to know is that its stars are David Duchovny (Bob) and
Minnie Driver (Grace). The film starts by stressing unhurriedly how
very happily married a couple is. Bob owns a construction company.
Elizabeth ( played by Joely Richardson) is the Lincoln Park  Zoo's
specialist on big apes.
But since the film's female lead is Ms. Driver and not Ms.
Richardson, you may  guess right away that Elizabeth will have to die
in an accident. That's just what happens.
Cut to chronic bad heart sufferer Grace in a hospital bed, in a
life-threatening state. In crucial need of a transplant, she waits
almost hopelessly for a heart to become available. One does, at the
last moment. Yes, the heart is Elizabeth's.
A year goes by. Grace and Bob do not know each other. She is in fine
physical shape. He is inconsolable and almost reclusive outside his
work. Grace, of mixed Irish-Italian ancestry, is a charmer. She is
the apple of the eye of her grandfather Marty O'Reilly (Carroll
O'Connor) who has brought her up. Marty is the co-owner of O'Reilly's
Irish-Italian Restaurant (sic), along with his partner, friend and
chief cook Angelo Pardipillo (Robert Loggia). Grace waitresses there.
The partners dote on Grace, but then everyone around loves her.
In earlier times, Grace was presumably held back from boyfriends by
her formerly bad heart. Though healthy now she is haunted by the fear
that any future man in her life will stay away when he discovers the
scars on her chest.
Charlie, a colleague of Elizabeth's and a great friend of the couple,
has been trying in vain to get Bob out of his house. He finally
convinces him to meet Charlie and two girls (one a blind date for the
widower) at a restaurant. Guess which eatery it turns out to be?
An amusing chain of events brings Bob and Grace together. It's
attraction at first sight for both, with love not far behind.
Grace and grandpa live above the restaurant. After closing time,
Marty, Angelo and two old cronies invariably get around a table to
play cards and such and hold lively arguments about pop singers,
baseball and other matters. Now they also become matchmakers for
Grace. Egged on, the new twosome meet again and again. The
relationship blooms, not sexually however. Grace says nothing about
her new heart. Chest makes chaste.
The developments which will lead to the inevitable happy ending are
interesting and well concocted. Comedic actress Bonnie Hunt, in the
first movie she directs, does a very nice job of avoiding blatancy or
supercharged scenes. She also co-scripted. And also has a major
supporting role as Megan, Grace's best friend and confidante.
Megan, who has five kids, is married to burly Joe. James Belushi
plays him with perfect working-class realism. The small details of
life, tasks and duties in such a family come through convincingly,
and amusingly. As Joe attempts to get all his children to sleep
before he can make love with Megan, he exclaims "I'm trying to put
you to bed. And I want to get Mother to bed too!."
"Return to Me" is appealing. It also has a plot that hangs from a
thin thread, like Grace's life at the hospital, but the characters
are simpatico, believable and well-played. There are several funny
tidbits: a major "anonymous" donor to the zoo who keeps advertising
his anonymity;  Grandpa's having Grace meet a fellow "who also had a
transplant" which turns out to be a hair transplant about which the
man rambles on comically; an insufferable but comical blind date; and
other lighthearted scenes.
I could have done without a small number of setups. The film is not
free from clich=E9s. Hollywood has a thing about  " hyphenated
Americans, mainly Italian-Americans, Irish-Americans and
Jewish-Americans. One wonders where colorfulness ends and caricature
starts. On the other hand, give the movie credit for picturing
Charlie, the African-American friend, with no "minoritisms"
whatsoever.
Some details might have been skipped. Before meeting Bob, Grace had
sent him a "thank you for my heart" letter. But what revolves around
this is murky.  The matchmakers' eagerness is overdone. The music
track has a corny bit a la "Ave Maria" and a sudden phrase, just a
Hallelujah, from Haendel's "The Messiah.". It reminds me of the
saying that whenever a movie-maker does not know what to do next,
he/she can throw in a Hallelujah.
In Rome, Grace tells her story to a most unlikely waiter. She also
schleps from Chicago Bob's gift of a heavy bicycle -- this to a land
of sleek, racing bikes. Its only function, combined with some overly
cute nuns, is to be an artificial prop for the denouement.
But then, credit the movie for the subtle use of Bob's beautiful dog.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Bonnie Hunt, James Belushi,
Robert Loggia, Carroll O'Connor, David Alan Grier. Directed by Bonnie
Hunt. Rated PG.
A new meaning is given to the expression "matters of the heart" in the
farfetched, graceful new romantic comedy Return to Me. It stars
David "Agent Mulder" Duchovny, in his second non-X-Files lead role (his
first came in 1997, in the gigantic flop Playing God), who impresses
with his charisma and comic timing, and Minnie Driver, whose smile is
simply contagious. This is an exuberant but non-manipulative fairy tale
about love prevailing over the most bizarre of circumstances.
The wife of architect/construction worker Bob Rueland (Duchovny) dies
in a tragic car accident. We don't see it happen because director
Bonnie Hunt wanted to preserve the gentle PG rating and because it
doesn't really matter how it happened, only that it did. She was an
organ donor. Her heart was healthy; it is given to Grace Briggs
(Driver), a woman who has lost almost all hope for getting one. The
transplant goes well, and although Grace is destined to live with a
visible scar on her chest, her prognosis is excellent.
Things aren't so hunky-dory with Bob, however. He hasn't stopped
grieving. He doesn't go out. His veterinarian friend (David Alan Grier)
is desperately trying to get him to live again, but it doesn't seem to
be working. The one time Bob does go out on a date, it's a disaster.
Even his dog hasn't gotten over its master's demise; every day when Bob
enters the house, the dog remains at the door, waiting for Mrs. Rueland
to come in after him.
Bob and Grace meet, of course. They both have the feeling that they've
seen each other before, which they really haven't. They fall in love.
Neither have any idea how they are related to each other. For once,
it's a relationship based not on a mood swing or a passionate desire
based on appearances. Instead it's two people who genuinely like each
other -- that is, each thinks the other is a nice person who is fun to
be around. It's genuine: we really feel that these two people may have
a future together.
The idea at the movie's core is farfetched, even ludicrous. The chances
that these two people would actually meet and fall in love without
realizing the situation are negligible. But it doesn't matter. First-
time director Bonnie Hunt, who also stars as Grace's wise-cracking
girlfriend doesn't linger on the specifics. The heart-transplant
subplot is a means to an end rather than an end in itself. After the
first 20 minutes, when the plot is set in motion, Return to Me is about
its characters rather than the situation they are in. The result is a
sweet love story, far more affecting than the average romantic drivel
because it's so much less phony.
The surprise here is David Duchovny. Until now, the X-Files star has
failed miserably on the big screen (except, obviously, in the X-Files
movie) and I was ready to consider him incapable of playing anyone
other than the obsessed Agent Mulder. In Return to Me, we discover his
penchant for comedy. I wouldn't star him in a slapstick extravaganza
but his everyday Joe appeal turns out to be perfect for the sort of
sentimental shtick that abounds here.
Here's the ultimate pitch for Return to Me: you'll laugh, you'll cry,
you won't have the temptation to puke. The biggest problem with movie
love stories, perhaps, is that some of them are sappy and fake, their
emotions exaggerated to the point where we cringe, not believing a
frame of what we're seeing. Granted, a man probably wouldn't fall in
love with a woman who has his dead wife's heart. But the emotions here
are true.
