Title
Review for Ghost and the Darkness, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The story is basically true.  At the turn of the century the
British were anxious to consolidate their holdings in Africa and
connect Kenya and Uganda together strategically with a railway that
would allow them to move freight, probably ivory, and perhaps even
troops easily.  The rail was intended to get permanent lines of
communication into Uganda and get it there ahead of the German rail
line moving up north from the south.  This was to be the Uganda Railway
and Britain was racing with Germany and to a lesser extent France to
complete it.  In 1896, 32,000 workers were brought to Africa from
India, principally from Gujarat and the Punjab, just to work on the
railroad.  In Kenya one river that blocked the way and that the British
rail would have to cross was the Tsavo.  Col. John Henry Patterson was
selected to build the Tsavo Bridge.  His experience told him that it
would be a difficult task, but he did not know how difficult.
     Patterson's biggest problem turned out to be not from workers but
from the animal population.  There were frequent attacks of at least
two lions who would come at night and drag workers out of their tents.
It fell to Patterson to kill the lions, and he had a hard time of it.
Between understandable problems with his workers and the efforts to
hunt the lions, building the bridge turned into something of a fiasco.
However, Patterson was able to collect in his diaries information never
available before on just how lions attack and even how they eat humans
in the wild.  (The sensitive may want to skip to the next paragraph at
this point.)  The screams and the crunching of bones frequently could
be heard from the camps. The victim would be dragged off by the head,
often mercifully breaking the neck in the process.  The clothing and
skin would be licked off by the lion's rough tongue and the blood
sucked out.  The trunk and legs, being meaty, were eaten next, and then
the arms.  The head and feet are not thought by lions to be worth the
effort to eat.
     Unarmed humans are extremely vulnerable to lions, but are usually
safe from such attacks.  That is because lions just do not want to
bother with this unfamiliar prey that walks on two legs and behaves in
ways unpredictable to lions.  The Tsavo attacks could have been just an
incident of elderly lions forced to attack easy prey in spite of the
unfamiliarity.  Or perhaps it may have been that the railroad workers
had hunted out the lions' usual prey.  While this film makes the lions
out to be extremely large and powerful, doing the killing for the pure
enjoyment, it is unlikely that they would have chosen human prey as
anything but an act of desperation and a last resort.  The lion attacks
in the region lasted for ten months, though by some accounts there were
several lions involved.  Twenty-eight of the workers were killed and it
is estimated that over a hundred other people were also killed.  One
lion even got so bold as to pull human victims off of trains.  The
lions were eventually killed in ambush and the Tsavo Bridge was finally
completed under Patterson's direction.  His later book about his
experiences, THE MAN EATERS OF TSAVO, was a best- seller.  (I have not
read the book, incidentally and know only very little of its content
from another reference.  It is, however, still in print.)  Now a
somewhat fictionalized version of Patterson's adventures has been made
into a movie.  Early in the film Patterson, played by Val Kilmer, is
given five months to complete the bridge.  His employer is John
Beaumont (Tom Wilkinson), characterized here as the world's worst
manager.  Patterson is experienced with what appear to be similar tasks
in India, but has never been to Africa.  He has, however, always
dreamed of a job that would take him to that mysterious continent, so
he takes the position.  He and the audience are treated to the breath-
taking East African landscape and animals as he travels to the Tsavo.
Almost immediately there is a crisis with a man-eating lion.
Patterson, however, makes short work of the lion and makes himself a
hero in the eyes of the workers.  But there are more lion problems to
come.  Also to come is Charles Remington, a Great White Hunter in the
classic tradition, played by Michael Douglas.  Remington will be hired
to solve the lion problem.  The screenplay for the story is by William
Goldman who certainly knows how to write action from films like
MARATHON MAN.
     This is Val Kilmer's second role this year with intelligent
animals.  His performance is slightly more restrained than the one in
THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU.  It is an odd piece of casting, but one that
works reasonably well.  Not so successful is Michael Douglas whose
American Southern accent seems to come and go.  He seems to take to his
acting a little more casually than the role really called for.  The
producers clearly were going for something of a horror film feel for
this historical film as director Stephen Hopkins is known for horror
films like NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET 5 and PREDATOR 2 and action films
like JUDGMENT NIGHT and BLOWN AWAY.  Vilmos Zsigmond does as much for
the film as any of the actors with his beautiful images of Kenya.
Though the photography is generally straightforward, it is not really
clear why he uses repeated images of brambles.  Also slightly cliched
is the use of a distorting lens to show the lions' point of view.
There are a few other little cliches that the film could have done
without, but to mention them would be spoiler.  Jerry Goldsmith's score
is decent, though one tends to expect more from his scores.
     In general this is a good, old-fashioned African adventure with a
fair amount of suspense.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     I've heard it called "JAWS with claws" and that's a fair summation
of the plot, though that tag line does little to quantify quality.
Director Stephen Hopkins (BLOWN AWAY, PREDATOR 2) and screenwriter
William Goldman (MAVERICK, MISERY) would have you believe that this is
an epic historical drama about man against nature, based on what really
happened in Africa to the railroad workers trying to build a bridge to
the 20th Century.  They've stacked the deck with two big stars (Val
Kilmer, Michael Douglas), a bigger production design, beautiful
photography (by Academy Award winner Vilmos Zsigmond), and a score so
overblown that it makes THE LION KING soundtrack sound like chamber
music.  The movie doesn't make a lick of sense, though, either as an
epic or as your basic boo-fest.  In fact, some of the bits are so
laughably ludicrous that you may think you've stumbled into the sequel
to MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER 3000: THE MOVIE.  How about the three guys
with rifles, who trap a lion and then can't even hit the damned thing?
Or the ham-on-wry acting of Michael Douglas, who chews more scenery than
the animals ever do??  Or, my favorite, lions so agile that they can
even climb onto rooftops?!?  
Mike Legeros
Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@pagesz.net (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>"Orange whip?  Orange whip?  Three orange whips." [and do gesture]

Author
Rick Pali
Supposedly based on a true story in which the British drive to build a rail
bridge deep in Africa grinds to a halt after a pair of lions start killing
off the workers in 1898. John Patterson (Val Kilmer), the bridge building
expert set to oversee the operation, tried to rid his operation of the
lions, but fails. A world renound hunter, Remington (Michael Douglas), is
called in and the battle, man against lion, begins. 
This film has a great soundtrack, and wonderful scenery. The acting is not
too bad except the characters are all so thin. We only see one side of each
character. Kilmer is a bridge builder and that's all we see him as. These
lions kill dozens of his men and he doesn't even appear to be too upset
about it.
And the plot? It's Jaws, but with lions. Again we're presented with an
animal that behaves not at all as it should. It appears to kill men because
it just likes too. Why? Who knows. I guess there wouldn't be much of a
story if it didn't. The problem is that there isn't much of a story even
though it does.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     A community is being terrorized by a brutal, almost supernaturally
vicious man-eater, frightening the residents into a state of panic.  The
local authority figure wants to do something to stop the killing, but his
supervisor is more interested in economic concerns, and does not heed the
warnings.  Then one attack becomes the last straw, and an eccentric killer
of the man-eaters is brought in to eliminate the menace.  Together, the
local authority figure and the eccentric hunter set out alone on a quest
that becomes almost personal.
     PAWS.  CLAWS.  GAPING MAWS.  Pick your favorite (or least obnoxious)
analogy-inspiring epithet, because no matter how stridently the makers of
THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS insist that it is "based on a true story," it
owes at least as much to JAWS as it does to real life.  The place is
Africa and the year is 1898, but it could just as easily by Amity Island
in 1975; engineer John Henry Patterson (Val Kilmer), supervising the
building of a bridge for a railroad line, is our Sheriff Brody, great
white hunter Charles Remington (Michael Douglas) is Quint, and Patterson's
boss Beaumont (Tom Wilkinson) is the mayor.  And of course, one impossibly
large and single-minded great white shark is replaced by two impossibly
large and single-minded lions.  All right, so there isn't a Matt Hooper to
be found, but don't try to tell me this comparison is a reach, especially
when there is a scene in which Patterson and Remington attempt to attract
their prey by laying down what amounts to a chum line around a building
where they are lying in wait.
     Ordinarily, it is be a remarkably bad idea for a film in any genre
to make such obvious references to the classics of its genre, because they
only serve to emphasize that you are not watching a much better movie of
the same kind.  Yet there is something fairly satisfying about THE GHOST
AND THE DARKNESS, because it is a kind of suspense film you just don't see
very often.  A force of nature in its own element can be a truly
frightening thing; give that force of nature a vaguely unnatural
personality, and you've got the ingredients for one scary piece of work.
Screenwriter William Goldman knows what works in this kind of film, and
when the lions are on the prowl in THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS, it is
surprisingly gripping.  Director Stephen Hopkins (BLOWN AWAY) directs his
action scenes with efficiency and a sense of barely-controlled chaos, and
he is able to make the lions' every appearance a time to scoot to the edge
of your seat.  He may be no Spielberg, but that's even true of Spielberg
sometimes.
     The reason THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS never approaches JAWS in
overall quality is what happens between the attacks.  The performances are
almost uniformly under-stated, with Val Kilmer doing solid work as the
confident Patterson, and John Kani and Brian McCardie are appealing as two
of Patterson's colleagues on the bridge project.  However, they all find
themselves saddled with characterizations which hover somewhere between
spare and insufficient.  That is even more true of Douglas' Remington than
it is of the other characters -- he is a hunter with a tortured past whose
one moment of introspection is supposed to define his entire personality.
Douglas is an actor given to playing characters broadly, and even though
he is relatively restrained he still appears to be camping it up compared
to his co-stars.  You never care nearly as much about the individual
humans in THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS as you should, because you don't
really know who they are.
     Still, at least there _are_ characters in THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS,
and at least their confrontations with their adversaries get your
adrenaline pumping.  There is a tremendous primal appeal to the battle
between man and beast, and with cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond providing
glorious photography and Jerry Goldsmith turning in one of his most
effective recent scores, THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS turns it into solid,
suspenseful film-making.  Perhaps there is less inherent claustrophobic
tension when you take the men out of a boat and put them on dry land, but
THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS makes sure you understand who has the home
field advantage here.  You may feel as though you have seen some of this
before, but you haven't seen it in a long time, and you might realize that
you have been missing it.  Classics are few and far between; THE GHOST AND
THE DARKNESS just puts Patterson in a tree, the tree on the savannah,
lions on the savannah.  Farewell and adieu to you fair Spanish ladies...

Author
Christopher Null
     Or, as Meryl Streep might say, "I had a bridge in Africa..."  Only
a couple of wicked lions ate half my workers and the rest ran away.
     That's THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS in a nutshell.  And while it may
be, as the press materials say, "one of the most thrilling true stories
ever told," it has somehow turned into one of the most boring movies of
the year, owing to a downright dull directorial job by Stephen Hopkins
and a surprisingly flat script by double Oscar-winner William Goldman.
     Set during the rush to colonialize Africa in 1898, Val Kilmer stars
as John Patterson, a bridge-builder working for the British railroad. 
Down in the belly of the country on assignment, two lions suddenly show
up and begin decimating the crew, and no one is able to stop them.  Even
renowned hunter Charles Remington (Michael Douglas) is brought in, but
the lions seem unstoppable.  Hundreds are killed by these "man-eaters,"
and the natives eventually give them the monikers, the Ghost and the
Darkness -- devils.
     I'll admit, I think there's a story there, it's just not a movie,
mainly because of the simplistic direction the film takes (no lions -
lions - no lions).  Everything is earnest in trying to convince the
viewer that this is a True Story, I guess so you'll have a little more
sympathy for the limp plotline.  But like I said, THE GHOST AND THE
DARKNESS keeps you waiting, and waiting, and waiting... and it just
never revs up.
     Combine this arrow-straight plot with a whole lot of gore (more
than many people in the audience at my screening wanted -- as some of
them left and never returned) and you get a picture that resembles a
slasher movie much more than it does an action/drama.
     That's not an altogether bad thing, but it's certainly not what I
was expecting.  (Points only for cinematography, fine acting, and cool
supporting characters.)
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Critics disagree.  When I see a movie at the press screening, I
have no idea how other critics will react other than listening to their
laughter or noticing their body language.  Usually I can guess the
reaction of the reviewers at large.  For some shows I can sense that I
will agree with the majority and others that I will not, but with THE
GHOST AND THE DARKNESS, which I saw after it opened to the public, I
was quite pleasantly surprised.  Other than Gene Siskel, the other
critics absolutely detested the film.  Not only did I like it, I
frankly can not understand why they didn't too.  Oh well, as I said,
critics disagree.
     THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS is a true story that happened in 1898.
The narrator tells us, "This is the most famous African adventure."  He
goes on to explain, "Remember this.  Even the most impossible parts of
the story really happened."
     Playing a sinister boss that comic strip character Dilbert would
love to skewer, Tom Wilkinson is railroad magnate John Beaumont.
Beaumont hires John Patterson (Val Kilmer) to build a bridge in Africa
over the Tsavo river and gives him a strict five month deadline.
Beaumont warns him that, "I am a monster.  My only pleasure is
tormenting those who work for me."
     Val Kilmer, who gave an embarrassingly self-indulgent and bizarre
performance in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU, redeems himself here.  Back to
his previous self, he carefully approaches the role of John Patterson
and imbues him with a resoluteness that is never cocky.  His
performance, and the quite different but equally effective one by
Michael Douglas as legendary big game hunter Charles Remington, are
compelling and complex.  The audience becomes one with both of them and
shares their fears and their obsessions.
     When John arrives in Africa, he drinks in its beauty.  He has
always wanted to go there and feels as if he has gone to heaven upon
his arrival.  His aide there, Samuel (John Kani), acquaints him with
reality by telling him that the construction project "is the worse
place on earth."  It turns out that the Indian and African workers hate
each other, and there is a man eating lion to boot.  John quickly kills
the lion and becomes a hero to the men.
     Soon, however, the real troubles begin.  Two new lions show up
whom the men name The Ghost and The Darkness since they kill for the
sheer pleasure and since the workers view them more as evil spirits
than mere animals.  Night after night, men are dragged from their tents
and eaten alive.  Panic ensues and work grinds to a sudden halt.
     Beaumont makes a visit and is not pleased.  He informs John that,
"I don't care about the thirty dead.  I care about my knighthood."  He
dismisses John's futile attempts to kill the lions with gadgets and
guns.  He summons the almost mythical hunter Remington as the project's
salvation.  When Remington arrives, he tells the leader of the workers,
"You are right.  The devil has come to Tsavo.  I am the devil."
     From there it becomes a taut thriller as John and Remington join
forces to kill the lions.  I found it refreshing that director Stephen
Hopkins and writer William Goldman could fashion a terrifying tale out
of nothing more than a couple of lions.  In a year of fifteen mile wide
flying saucers, I like seeing filmmakers going back to first principles
and using basic ingredients to craft real tension.
     Besides the two leads, whom I thoroughly enjoyed watching, one
serious (Kilmer) and the other funny (Douglas), the rest of the cast
was quite good, and Goldman gave each character his own little story.
When John talks with longing rapture about his wife, Helena (Emily
Mortimer), back in England, Samuel tells us he has four wives and
doesn't like any of them.  Beside the actors previously mentioned,
there is also Bernard Hill as Dr. Hawthorne, Brian McCardie as Angus
Starling, Henry Cele as Mahina, and Om Puri as Abdullah.
     The cinematography by Vilmos Zsigmond (MAVERICK, THE RIVER, and
CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND) is stunning.  The atmospheric
images are a contrast of ones of fog, mist, and haze followed by ones
of the great and bright African sun.  Atmosphere is easy, terror is
harder.  When a worker is dragged from the tent it is done is with a
fast blur that sends goose bumps up your arm watching it.  Best of all
is the blowing fields of brush where the evil lurks - somewhere.
     The music by Academy Award winner Jerry Goldsmith is great.  If
you like movie music, it might be worth buying the CD.  It has lots of
French horns and kettle drums to get your adrenaline pumping.  It is
full of low rumbling rhythms best heard in a theater with a high
quality sound system.
     There is gore in the film, but it is never gratuitous.  When a
lion attacks a human, it is not a pretty sight, but I thought Hopkins
stuck correctly to the thriller aspects and away from the pure shock
value.  As the ending credits were rolling I found myself with my mouth
open thinking "wow."
     THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS runs a fast 1:49, and the editors
(Robert Brown and Steve Mirkovich) really know how to keep your
attention.  The film is rated R for the animal violence.  There is no
sex or nudity and the language is pretty mild.  The film would be fine
for any teenager and those younger who can handle the fear.  I had a
great time at THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS, and I suspect you will too so
I recommend it and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
          Michael Douglas, who with Steven Reuther, is one of the
producers of the film, said: "It's an incredible thriller based on
events that actually took place.  It recounts the struggle of a man
attempting to control the environment and the dangers of a culture
trying to impose itself on another.  In many ways it is a reflection
of what is going on today."
          East Africa, about 1886.  The British are trying to build a
bridge to carry their rains.  The product they and other countries are
trying to get is ivory.  Putting a large crimp in their plans are two
seemingly uncanny lions who attack the workers wherever they may be
and despite the traps that are laid to catch them.  To the natives it
seems very strange that the lions seem to know the plans of those who
would kill them and they strike different areas.  This is why the
workers have dubbed the lions "The Ghost" and The Darkness."
          The film's best asset is that it sticks as much as possible
to what really happened back in 1886,  Knowing this is a true account
adds greatly to the enjoyment of the film as we watch bridge- builder
engineer John Patterson (Val Kilmer) and wild game hunter, Remington
(Michael Douglas) set out to kill the lions and get on with the job of
building the bridge.
          Here we have an exciting story with the kings of the animal
world vs. Man, set in Africa with one hair-raising scene after
another.  Nothing like those two eerie lions has happened before or
since according to writer William Goldman.   Samuel, (John Kani, who
is an actor, director and playwright) is the African contact who
assists  Patterson and Remington as they try to seek out the lions and
destroy them.
         The film is well-acted, the music (Jerry Goldsmith), is
excellent and the scenes of the wildlife of Africa are beautiful.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Funny how your expectations can be defeated, and not in good ways. THE
GHOST AND THE DARKNESS promised (at least, it seemed to me to promise) a
Hemingwayesque showdown between men and nature. What it delivered was
MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER 3000-level material -- an inadvertently hilarious
story that made me scream advice at the characters. "Get new jobs!" was one
line, if I remember correctly.
At the end of the 19th century, Col. Patterson (Val Kilmer, whose Irish
accent comes and goes like an African zephyr) is an engineer who has been
hired to build a British railway bridge across the Tsavo River in Uganda.
He is having immensely stereotypical problems: the natives are restless,
his boss is a jerk, and now two man-eating lions are stalking the work camp
and killing people off. Patterson tries to handle the situation himself,
incompetently, and then turns to Charles Remington (Michael Douglas), a
hunter of world reknown (or something like that).
The movie stacks the deck so heavily in favor of the lions, they should
have gotten top billing and co-starred with Siegfried and Roy. They are
nigh-invulnerable, as one comic book put it, and this is of course just the
excuse the movie needs to have one native after another stepping forth to
solmenly recite lines about the Power of Nature. Give me a break. The movie
hasn't got the wherewithal to even begin to exploit such ideas; it's just
trying to find convenient ways to stall us.
Even the lion hunts themselves are idiotic. Get this: Remington's big plan
is to build a large scaffold-like structure in the middle of the savannah,
sit on it, and wait for the lion to show up. He does this, and then gets
knocked off by a BIRD. By the end of the movie, the blood vessels in my
palm were all broken open from me pounding my forehead with my hand.
The acting is forgettable. Douglas does a good job of portraying a
relatively cracked fellow, but it's nothing he hasn't done before. Kilmer
looks like he wishes he were someone else, somewhere else, and the rest
vanish into the cinematography. The camera, by the way, sometimes behaves
so stupidly all by itself that most of the lion attacks are incoherent.
What did I expect from this movie? I dunno. Some real excitement, I
suppose. A sense that there were formidable forces on both sides of this
equation. No such luck. I dug out my tattered copy of Hemingway's "The
Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber" and read that to get the taste of
this movie out of my mind.

Author
Michael Redman
In a film based on a true story, Val Kilmer and Michael Douglas team up
to hunt down ghostly man-eating lions and build a bridge in turn of the
century Africa. Now there's a high concept.
Bridge-builder John Patterson (Kilmer) is sent to darkest Africa in 1898
to help the British empire win the race to colonize the continent. His
project is going along well until the Indian and African workers start
getting eaten by large cats. And not just ordinary cats. The two deadly
and massive male lions hunt together, drag off full grown men from the
compound, attack in broad daylight and frighten the workers so badly
that they name them the Ghost and the Darkness. 
Patterson is unable to "sort out" the problem so his bosses call in
famed hunter Charles Remington (Douglas), a Confederate States Of
America expatriate. Together the two attempt to put an end to the
devastation only to discover that the killers seem to be something more
than just animals. Plans fall apart, traps fail and the lions appear to
be killing for the pleasure of it.
There's blood wherever you look in the film. Every couple of minutes the
lions are ripping someone apart. People with an aversion to gore might
want to skip this: theres more internal organs here than in a "Friday
The 13th" film.
Patterson and Remington are a study in contrasts. The Englishman is prim
and proper even in the bush country while the southerner dances with the
Masai warriors. Kilmer holds back while Douglas tries to let it all out.
Even with all of his experiences, Patterson is a little too stiff to
even have high tea with. Remington is the unpredictable loud drunken
obnoxious guy that you shy away from at late night parties.
Unfortunately Douglas cant quite pull it off. An admirable actor, he
has the Great White Hunter bit down pat, but doesn't do Wild Man as
well. When dancing with the African lion hunters, he looks like one of
the whitest men in the hemisphere.
Neither of the stars are tremendously likable or believable. Much more
interesting is the supporting cast and, of course, the magnificent
scenery. As dramatic as the story is, it rarely catches fire.
Supernatural lions, death and destruction, midnight hunts, majestic
locale and yet it all just sits there waiting for something to happen.
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
10/17/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Val Kilmer, Michael Douglas, John Kani, Tom Wilkinson, Bernard
Hill, Brian McCardi, Om Puri, Emily Mortimer Director: Stephen Hopkins
Screenplay: William Goldman Cinematography: Vilmos Zsigmond
'The Ghost' and 'The Darkness' are two man eating lions who share
everything. They have a cool lions' den where they collect human skulls;
they like feasting on railway workers; they watch the other's behind for
snipers; and their attacks are both co-ordinated and organised. Any Lion
psychologist will tell you that the behaviour of these lions is
aberrant. Man eating lions usually hunt alone; they don't go around
killing for pleasure; and they don't collect human trophies of their
victims. So we are left with the scenario of serial killer lions,
terrorising the subjects of the British Empire in late 19th century,
outback Africa. Sounds like a promising documentary-thriller when it's
all based on fact.
One begins to wonder half way through the movie, why two male lions
share such intriguing intimacy, and an unexplainable understanding of
each other. Is there perhaps something more 'sexual' behind this
'buddy-killer' relationship than meets the eye? I guess we'll never
know, now that their heads are mounted in some British museum; but an
interesting National Geographic thesis may have been 'The Mating Habits
of Two Male Lions - The Ghost and The Darkness.'
Things heat up in Africa when the lions go on a killing spree on the
tracks. Precious minutes tick away in the race to trans-rail the African
continent. Kernel John Patterson (Val Kilmer), the British supervisor
assigned to complete building a bridge in this race, becomes
increasingly annoyed and baffled by these lions. The pressure mounts as
co-workers, doctors and surveyors all wait to be feasted on.
Enter Mr Charles Remington (Michael Douglas), lion hunter extraordinare.
Sent to stop the blood bath caused by Lion Fever. He becomes good
buddies with Patterson; the result is an amazing on screen parallel
drawn between the two hunters vs the two lions. However, the
relationship between Patterson and Remington remains purely platonic,
but the same can't be said about these two intriguing, raunchy lions.
GROWWWWWL!

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Val Kilmer, Michael Douglas, John Kani, Tom Wilkinson, 
      Bernard Hill, Brian McCardi, Om Puri, Emily Mortimer
Director: Stephen Hopkins
Producers: Gale Ann Hurd, Paul Radin, and A. Kitman Ho
Screenplay: William Goldman
Cinematography: Vilmos Zsigmond
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     If it does nothing else, THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS will make you 
realize just how brilliant Steven Spielberg's execution of JAWS is.  
Using a similar (albeit land-bound) premise -- hunting down bloodthirsty 
predators -- this movie devolves into a silly series of animal attacks 
and chases.  The camerawork is frenetic and confusing, and the big 
confrontations are as likely to provoke unintentional laughter as edge-
of-the-seat excitement.  
     "Evil lions terrorize workers building a turn-of-the-century 
railroad in Africa" doesn't sound all that promising, but, then again, 
neither does "Giant shark terrorizes vacationers at a quiet seaside 
resort."  In his 1975 thriller, Spielberg proved that the man-against-
beast struggle, if done properly, can make for a compelling motion 
picture.  With THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS, director Stephen Hopkins 
tries unsuccessfully to generate the same level of tension.  While 
Hopkins' film making skills aren't of the same caliber as Spielberg's 
(one man made A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET 5; the other, SCHINDLER'S LIST), 
the lion's share of the blame for this movie's failure can be laid 
squarely on the shoulders of veteran screenwriter William Goldman, whose 
script is contrived and inadequate.  In JAWS, it was thrilling to watch 
the failed attempts to kill the enemy; here, it's just frustrating.
     THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS takes place during the waning years of 
the nineteenth century, when England, France, and Germany were racing to 
complete the first cross-Africa railroad to facilitate the ivory trade.  
Colonel John Patterson (Val Kilmer), an Irishman with an inconsistent 
accent, is the engineer employed to build England's bridge across 
Uganda's Tsavo River.  As if he doesn't have enough problems with 
feuding, stereotyped workers and a bombastic boss named Beaumont (Tom 
Wilkinson), two man-eating lions begin stalking Patterson's camp.  More 
than one-hundred die, often horribly, including the camp's resident 
evangelist (Brian McCardi), and when Patterson's attempts to kill the 
lions fail, Beaumont calls in an expert hunter, Charles Remington 
(Michael Douglas), to resolve the situation.
     Actually, taken as high camp, it's possible to enjoy THE GHOST AND 
THE DARKNESS on a reasonably consistent basis.  In addition to giving 
Kilmer and Douglas some wonderfully loony lines of dialogue, the script 
spends a lot of time on unnecessarily convoluted schemes to kill the 
beasts.  Then there's Patterson's "ultimate solution" -- take his gun, 
climb on top of a rickety platform, wait for the lion, then, when the 
beast is charging, get knocked off the platform by an aggressive bird.  
Somehow, I don't think Hopkins intended this scene to be as funny as it 
is.
     There is a promising, although largely unexplored, story buried 
within THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS.  Building a railroad bridge across 
the Tsavo River has the potential to generate some potent drama.  Of 
course, THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS is only interested in this material 
as background, so no attempt is made to examine the pressures and 
difficulties of railroad construction.  We're told that the Africans 
don't get along with the Indians, and the Muslims fight with the Hindus, 
but the ramifications of these internal struggles are left unexplored.  
And, man-eating animals aside, what about the inherent difficulties of 
raising such an imposing structure under stringent time and 
environmental constraints?
     The lions in THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS, like the shark in JAWS, 
are invested with near-mythical powers.  At first, I thought the film 
makers' reluctance to give us a good, clear view of them was to build 
suspense.  Unfortunately, it becomes clear that the real reason has more 
to do with poor special effects than a desire to tease the audience.  
The animatronic lions look terrible.  (Remember the apes in CONGO?)  One 
wonders why, with all the impressive twisters and spaceships that were 
zipping around on screens this summer, THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS can't 
come up with a pair of credible lions.
     Val Kilmer is either badly miscast, bored, or a combination of the 
two.  His Patterson is dull and largely unsympathetic.  As a hero, he 
leaves a lot to be desired.  Michael Douglas is the exact opposite, 
drawing the camera like a magnet with his over-the-top portrayal of the 
big game hunter, THE GHOST IN THE DARKNESS' answer to Robert Shaw's JAWS 
character.  Unfortunately, Douglas doesn't show up until the film is 
half over, so it's necessary to struggle through the first forty-five 
minutes without his energetic boost.  
     For those who are interested in observing the habits of real lions 
and viewing genuine life-and-death struggles in Africa, I direct your 
attention to THE LEOPARD SON, which is still in theatrical release.  
That well-constructed documentary has stronger drama, tension, and 
cinematography than the supposedly-real story told in THE GHOST AND THE 
DARKNESS.  True, it's missing Tom Wilkinson sneering, Michael Douglas 
smirking, and Val Kilmer looking bored, but no movie can boast 
everything.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
