Title
Review for Nosferatu a Venezia (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
The greatest vampire film I have ever seen was Werner Herzog's masterful remake
of F.W. Murnau's 1922 classic "Nosferatu," which starred the grandly theatric
Klaus Kinski as the ratlike Dracula (the silent film starred the creepy menace
of Max Shreck). The remake was a triumph of atmospheric decay and melancholy
mood, a tragic tale of a Dracula who wanted to end his suffering of living
century after century. "Nosferatu in Venice" is a sequel I have heard of before
though it is not currently available on video in the United States - I managed
to secure a copy through the Chiller Theatre convention in New Jersey since I
was anxiously curious to see it. The end result is a beautiful bore, an utterly
senseless sequel with no significant purpose for its existence. The late Klaus
Kinski was the sort of actor who would appear in almost any kind of film no
matter how awful - he was not exactly selective and probably needed the money
to finance his dream project "Paganini," which I have still not seen.
Kinski returns as Nosferatu, though actually referred to as Dracula in the 1979
original (Nosferatu really means the "undead" so why is he referred to as
Nosferatu?) This vampire is no longer rat-like or venomous looking - instead he
resembles a lost hippie from a Grateful Dead concert with long white hair and
threatening black eyes. There is some story involving Christopher Plummer as an
expert on vampires who takes part in a seance to bring back Nosferatu from the
dead! Why??? Not sure. Donald Pleasance appears occasionally as some bickering
holy priest, and there are lots of terrific, nocturnal shots of the streets of
Venice (seemingly unoccupied) and some gypsies who hail the name of Nosferatu,
not to mention a ballroom full of people dancing with Venetian masks. Oh, we
also see a tomb that is locked by iron straps where some creature resides,
ready to pounce.
Nothing in "Nosferatu in Venice" makes much sense, though the central theme
seems to be that the vampire wants the blood of a virgin so he can remain dead
forever - he is still in desperation to die but continues to torment female
victims on the streets of Venice. And there are some briefly erotic, almost
softly pornographic sex scenes between Kinski and the virgin and some other
woman who may be the reincarnation of a lost love. Maybe...who knows since
there is no real clarification of who any of these people are. 
For gore fans, there are two scenes of impalement on a courtyard fence, and
some fang work on female necks with blood gushing from their wounds. For those
who favored the atmosphere of the original, there are some murky shots of
Venice and a final scene of the vampire carrying a naked woman in long shot
while birds fly through the air. Other than that, this film is silly, hardly
terrifying, and contains distracting synthesizer music - Plummer is the sole
saving grace with his wonderful, commanding voice. "Nosferatu in Venice" is
hardly the worst of the vampire flicks, but it serves little purpose as a
sequel or as a vampire flick. Just another cheaply-made horror flick out for a
fast buck.
Footnote: The video version I saw contained Japanese subtitles, which are a
distraction, and the voices of the Italian actors seemed to have been dubbed
whereas Plummer and Pleasance are obviously speaking in their native tongue.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
