Title
Review for White Heat (1949)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
In 1949, James Cagney revitalized his career by
returning to the stereotype that first made him
a star.  Cagney's pugnacious, tough-guy onscreen
persona was ideally suited for playing gangsters.
In "White Heat", pathos is added to his character,
giving him even more opportunity to dominate
scenes and demonstrate his talents.  It also
helps that the direction is tight,  the story is
filled with action, the script has the right mix
of colorful slang and one-liners, and the
supporting cast (except for O'Brien) is excellent.
Cody Jarrett (Cagney) is the unstable, murderous
leader of a gang that specializes in robberies.
Verna (Virginia Mayo) is his selfish, unfaithful
wife.  Big Ed (Steve Cochran) harbors schemes to
kill Cody, steal his wife, and take over the gang.
Cody is devoted to his mother (Margaret Wycherly),
a no-nonsense elderly woman who is part of the gang
and lends Cody needed emotional support.
To avoid 'taking the fall' for a 'train job', Cody
'cops a rap' in another state.  The 'Feds' plant
'copper' Hank Fallon (Edmond O'Brien) as Cody's
cellmate.  Fallon works his way into Cody's gang,
which busts out of prison.  Cody deals with Big Ed,
but soon the police are on the trail, leading to a
finale shootout.
"White Heat" has two Cagney scenes which have become
famous in film circles.  He has a nervous breakdown
in the prison cafeteria, complete with kicking,
screaming, crawling on tables, and punching multiple
guards.  The film's ending involves an industrial
plant that suffers massive explosions, and has
Cagney shouting 'Top of the World, Ma!' as the
fireballs swell.
Cagney, Mayo and Wycherly are particularly good.
O'Brien is competent, but curiously dislikable,
perhaps because his pedestrian good-guy/hero
role compares poorly with Cagney's charisma.
His character has one of the crummiest jobs in
filmdom: who would want to be an undercover prison
inmate?
The script does has some psychobabble, and the
revealing of the Trader's identity seems unlikely.
Still, any minor problems that "White Heat" may
have do not interfere with its status as an
entertaining, intense crime drama.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
