Title
Review for Remains of the Day, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In director James Ivory's The REMAINS OF THE DAY, Anthony Hopkins
plays James Stevens, the head of the household staff in a large English
country home before and after WW II.  Stevens has a religious
dedication to his job that is awe inspiring.  You might want to
question at times why he is so dedicated, nevertheless, you have to be
impressed at someone who would give himself over body and soul to his
job.  His private life was of no importance.  Serving his master,  Lord
Darlington (James Fox), was all important.  This was true every minute
of every day.
     Emma Thompson played Sally Kenton, the head housekeeper.  Kenton
was Stevens's peer in the hierarchy of the household.  She also grew to
love Stevens.  Stevens, on the other hand, was already married - to his
job.
     I thought Anthony Hopkins gave an academy award winning
performance and Emma Thompson's performance was not far behind.  The
other actors and actresses in the show were fine, but nothing special.
To put my review in context, I saw HOWARDS END, where these two great
stars last appeared together, and found it only mildly interesting.
Here, their every scene was compelling.
     I found the movie very peaceful and extremely serene.  I am sure
others will see the movie and think it depressing or get angry that
Stevens was unable to break the chains that bound him.  I found it a
fascinating portrait of a person who made a commitment in life and
stuck to it without (almost any) question forever.  I suspect many
monks are not even this dedicated.
     THE REMAINS OF THE DAY runs a well edited (Andrew Marcus) 2:18.
It is rated PG and would be fine for anyone old enough for a movie
about serious themes.  Overall, it is an absolute gem of a movie and an
absolute must see in my book.  I award it *** 1/2 and almost gave it
more.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the most common complaints against producer Ismail
Merchant and director James Ivory is that their films look
the same. Actually, phrase "Merchant-Ivory film" began to
enter dictionaries as description for "adaptation of
Victorian or Edwardian novel about socially repressed
stiff-upper-lip middle or upper class Englishmen". However,
every now and then Merchant and Ivory make the film that
strays from that formula. One of such occasions was THE
REMAINS OF THE DAY, 1993 adaptation of novel by Japanese
writer Kazuo Ishiguro, set in England during the last
decades of British Empire.
The screenplay was written by Merchant-Ivory's long time
associate Ruth Prawer Jabhvala. Film begins in 1958 when
luxurious country manour called Darlington Hall gets sold to
American congressman Lewis (played by Christopher Reeve).
Lewis has spent some time in the manour before WW2, so he
wants to gather as many of the original staff as possible.
One members of the staff is long-time butler Stevens (played
by Anthony Hopkins), who begins travelling England in search
of his former co-workers. During the travel he remembers
pre-war days in Darlington Hall, when he was employed by the
Lord Darlington (played by James Fox), politically
well-connected aristocrat with pro-German sympathies which
grew stronger with incoming world conflict. Stevens, same as
his old father (played by Peter Vaughn) was the man
completely dedicated to his duty towards his master, and
nothing outside his small world mattered to him, not even
the increasing numbers of men in black shirt who began
arriving to the estate. When new housekeeper Miss Kenton
(played by Emma Thompson) arrived in Darlington, her rather
different temperament and worldview caused initial friction
with Stevens. But two of them gradually develop love for
each other, but Stevens was bound by tradition and unable to
express his feelings.
According to the old saying, the best love stories are those
about unrequited, impossible or unhappy love. THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY, one of the most melancholic films made recently,
perfectly fits this description. To make the tragedy even
less bearable, the love in this film was present but never
consumed. However, Jhabvala and Ivory weren't satisfied by
making this film as simple melodrama about love squashed by
societal pressures. They actually took great pains in order
to describe and represent such pressures, making THE REMAINS
OF THE DAY into film which is both melodrama and
sociological study. Ivory paints both fascinating and
utterly bleak picture of men who are trained all their life
to supress their feelings and most natural desires for the
utterly pointless and worthless ideal of "duty". In doing
so, Ivory employs same subtlety and stiff-upper-lip
philosophy of his protagonists. So, the inner life of the
protagonists is never explicitly portrayed and instead we
receive only hints in order to reconstruct the drama
afterwards. This slow approach turns very effective in few
scenes that feature protagonists who allow feelings to
manifest through simple but powerful gestures.
This approach was perfect for Anthony Hopkins, whose role of
emotionally repressed butler shares some resemblance with
his best known performance in SILENCE OF THE LAMBS. Hopkins
plays Stevens as a character who almost never changes the
expression of his face or the tone of his voice, but small
gestures instead can speak volumes. Such strong performance
is also given by Emma Thompson as a woman who looks like his
emotional opposite yet nevertheless succumbs to the same
societal pressures. Two of them managed to overshadow
everyone, including James Fox as their pompous aristocratic
master, alienated from the outside world.
Nostalgic and melancholic feeling of the film is somewhat
compromised with the filmmaker's need to put this powerful
intimate drama into historical background. So, THE REMAINS
OF THE DAY receive another, political dimension. Through the
character of Lord Darlington, British aristocrat alienated
from real world, Ishiguro, Jhabvala and Ivory try to explain
reasons which led Britain to pre-WW2 appeasament policy
towards Hitler. In their opinion, government was dominated
by aristocrats, conservative and totally alienated from the
real world and thus more than willing to accept any option
that would guarantee their rigid class privileges - and
Nazism was exactly such option. Lord Darlington is presented
as one of such fools, whose initially innocent Germanophilia
later develops into full-blown Nazism, including racial
purification of his staff. Naturally, such people wouldn't
have anything against Hitler taking over Europe and their
influence on British government explains betrayal of
Czehoslovakia in Munich 1938 - diplomatic disaster which
practically made WW2 inevitable one year later. This view,
although rather popular among amateur historians, is not
quite correct. British appeasament of Hitler in late 1930s
was motivated more with pragmatic than ideological reasons -
British and French governments were impressed with the speed
and scope of German pre-war re-armament and with their
militaries lagging behind, appeasement was seen as buying
time for re-armament of their own. Also, appeasament wasn't
only advocated by aristocrats - majority of population of
Western democracies prefered to sacrifice some unknown
countries in Eastern Europe in order to avoid going back to
trenches.
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY perhaps owe this political dimension
to the times when they were made. In 1993 world's media was
still bombarded with images of war-torn Bosnia and many
comentators criticised British and French policy of
appeasing Milosevic, drawing parallels to 1930s and Hitler.
Jhabvala and Ivory offer alternative to this suicidal and
morally bankrupt policy in the form of American congressman
who, same as his country in 1990s, favours tough
uncompromising line against world thugs. This is probably
the weakest part of the film, since it is not historically
accurate. USA in 1930s were more concerned with problems of
Great Depression and increasingly isolationistic, with
government and public even less likely to meddle into
European affairs. Without that uncessary excursion into
pre-WW2 politics and with authors completely concentrated on
more down-to-earth drama, THE REMAINS OF THE DAY could have
became true masterpiece. However, even this less than
perfect film might be more than satisfying to the fans of
period melodramas.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Jean Krevor
     Once again, your non-critical previewer has seen something so
worthwhile that she felt compelled to tell y'all about it.  This time
the film is THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  I'm not sure when it opens, but
when it does, *see it*!!!
     It stars Anthony Hopkins as Stevens, the "perfect English Butler";
Emma Thompson as Miss Kenton, the housekeeper; Christopher Reeve as
Senator Lewis, the new owner of the estate where Stevens "buttles"; Peter
Vaughan as Stevens Sr.; and James Fox as Lord Darlington, the original
(during Stevens' time there) Lord of the Estate.
     The film opens in 1958, and Stevens is embarking in a journey
across England.  He is the "perfect English Butler," now employed by
Mr. Lewis, the new American owner of Darlington Hall, where Stevens
has spent the best part of his working life.  In the course of his trip,
through many breathtaking flashback sequences, Stevens reviews his life
in service to Lord Darlington, the former owner of Darlington Hall, and
what it was like to be in the middle of political intrigue,
relationships, and day to day life in the 1930s, while being completely
in blinders.
     That's all I can really say about the plot without spoiling the
film for you.  I assure you that it is quite worthwhile, and should be
in the running for Best Picture this year.  It was written by Kazuo
Ishiguro (! surprised me too!), and the novel THE REMAINS OF THE DAY
won the 1989 Booker Prize.
     Most of the other crew on this film are also known for their
work on such films as A ROOM WITH A VIEW, MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE, and
HOWARDS END.
     The costumes are lovely.  Being circa 1930s, they are not too far
off from what we'd see today in formal wear, and are absolutely
exquisite.
     Oh, the director is James Ivory, known for the above mentioned
films, as well as THE BOSTONIANS (also with Christopher Reeve),
MAURICE, and SLAVES OF NEW YORK.  He is currently working on a film
about Thomas Jefferson's Paris years as American Ambassador, starring
Nick Nolte and Greta Scacchi.  Filming begins in March 1994.
     In writing about this film I would be remiss if I didn't mention
the absolutely spectacular location work.  While the film was about one
location, many different British estates were used in the filming.
     The exteriors were shot at Dyrham Park; built around the turn of
the 18th century for a minister of William III, the mansion stands in a
valley, with fields and gardens and winding roads as far as the eye can
see.
     Many of the interior shots were filmed at Powderham Castle, near
Exeter.  This castle has been the seat of the Courtenays, Earls of
Devon, for over 600 years.  Here, they used the staircase hall (I wish
my *apartment* was as large and luxurious as this "hall"!), the Music
room, the Library (pant, pant, pant, ...) the "Ante room," and the State
bedroom, a place where I'm sure I could spend many a dreamy night....
     Other locations included Corsham Court in Wiltshire, today the
home of Lord Methuen.  Here they filmed the picture gallery, another
lust-worthy library, and the dining room--oh wow ... but I digress!
     The scenes in the servants' quarters were shot at Badminton House
in Gloucestershire, the seat of the Dukes of Beaufort.  As much of the
film takes place "below stairs," this location was quite important.  It
was difficult to find, as the lifestyle required in these manor houses
has become quite impossible to maintain for all but the most affluent
nobility.  Many of the "Backstairs" sections of English country houses
have been converted to restaurants, museum shops, flats for the
custodians.  Badminton is still a "living" house, however, the present
Duke and his family do live far more simply than their predecessors.
The servants' quarters remain as they were, although are largely
unoccupied.  It is interesting to note that it was much more difficult
to find these locations--kitchen, servants hall, Butler's pantry,
scullery, etc.---than to find the magnificent state rooms.
     Anthony Hopkins delivers a sterling performance, and if he doesn't
at least get nominated for the Oscar, I'll be quite surprised.  Emma
Thompson is lovely as usual, and considering that her role spans 30
years, is quite believable both as a 20 year old and a 50 year old.
Kudos to the makeup people, the aging is done both believably and
tastefully.
     Regards to all---this is your non-critical critic signing off..
     Oh, yes, I nearly forgot--disclaimer time: I'm not a
professional critic (could you tell? :-) and I do not receive any
remuneration for my commentary.  These opinions are mine and mine
alone, although you are quite welcome to share them!

Author
Alex Lopez-Ortiz
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Emma Thompson, James Fox, Christopher Reeve
Screenplay:  Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on the novel by Kazuo Ishiguro
Director:  James Ivory
     THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is a movie about rhythm. The plot, the
performances, the photography, the characters are all about rhythm.
     Do you remember all those action flicks that keep you at the edge
of your seat, with your heart pounding in your chest, hoping that the
hero triumphs over the karate-expert heavily-armed villain?
     Those movies are based in their fast paced action or as I call it,
on their fast rhythm. The plot is minimal, they have mostly no
character development--beyond the fact that the hero is good and the
villains are bad, that is--and almost no message, again, excluding the
traditional "good always wins."
     Well-paced, soft, musical, Anthony Hopkins sets, with his
presence, the cadences in this film.
     Miss Kenton, Lord Darlington, and Mr Lewis are all musical
instruments, playing to the tempo set by the director of the Orchestra,
Mr Stevens.  The musicality of the movie is magnificent and thoroughly
enjoyable.
     As with action movies, the plot is tangential, even superficial.
Anybody who thinks of Great Britain's version of Plato's educated elite
as a bunch of amateurs, needs to review its junior high history
lessons.
     The rest of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY's "insights" on English society
are not much deeper than this. Even the central premise of the movie is
vacuous.  Englishmen would be a race long extinct if their
stiff-upper-lipness were an impediment for establishing relationships.
The criticisms of Mr Stevens' extreme devotion to his work cannot be
anything but self-criticisms of Japanese's own devotion to work.
(Recall that the author of the novel, upon which the movie is based,
was written by Kazuo Ishiguro from Japan).
     Nevertheless, the absence of a plot did not stop me from
recommending TERMINATOR 2, and it certainly won't either with THE
REMAINS OF THE DAY.
     All to the contrary, THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is an excellent movie,
and Anthony Hopkins performance is superb. Casting choices were most
appropriate.  Little can be criticized in this movie. THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY is definitely in my short list for best movie of the year.

Author
Duncan Stevens
The fortunes of the Merchant-Ivory producer-director team have suffered
somewhat in recent years; efforts like Jefferson in Paris and Surviving
Picasso have garnered mixed reviews and little box-office interest. There
was a time, though, when the duo's trademark period pieces were virtually
guaranteed critical approval; among their best efforts were 1986's Room
With a View and 1992's Howards End, both of which gave the team something
of a reputation for sumptuous costume dramas with melodramatic plotlines.
Perhaps their finest effort, however, came in 1993 with Remains of the
Day--which, though it fits the customary period-piece mold in some
respects, succeeds on a wholly different level.
The setting is southern England, and the time flashes back and forth
between the late 1950s and the 1930s. Darlington Hall, once a bustling
mansion and estate, has fallen on hard times, owned now by an American and
run by a skeleton staff. Mr. Stevens, the butler, perceives the need for a
"revised staff plan" and sets off across England in hopes of rehiring a
woman who had once served as housekeeper. The trip serves as an occasion
for Stevens to reflect on his life of service and on the decisions he has
made in his service to Lord Darlington, a well-meaning fellow who
developed both sympathies and close contacts with Nazi Germany as the
Second World War approached. Stevens, for his part, professed loyalty to
his employer, but the course of the film brings out doubts about both the
wisdom of that loyalty and its consequences.
Remains is an adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro's book, a novel acclaimed in
its own right but hardly, at first glance, suitable for film treatment.
The novel is set down in the form of Stevens's thoughts and writings: the
reader often detects his doubts under a veneer of excuses and
justifications for his own and for others' conduct. As such, it plays with
tensions between the subjective and objective: to determine what happened,
it is now and again necessary to discount the narrator's words as
self-serving deception, or look askance at thoughts or feelings that the
narrator imputes to himself in memory. Filtering the audience's viewpoint
through a subjective account in this way would be a difficult task for a
film, and this one doesn't really try: instead, it relies on the story
itself, and its themes of loyalty and self-denial. There is accordingly
not quite so much to chew on here as in the novel, and certain scenes
documenting Stevens's struggling conscience don't work quite as well--but
the acting more than makes up for it.
It is sometimes said that Anthony Hopkins plays a limited range of roles,
that many of his parts are reprises of the same repressed or inexpressive
type. If nothing else, his performance as Stevens in Remains is evidence
to the contrary: though he inhabits a role and a persona that require
permanent composure, he nonetheless manages to convey a wide range of
feelings. Hopkins is a master of nuance: a blink, a set of the jaw, a
voice inflection often must suffice to express his character's conflicts
or longings. Particularly compelling in that respect are those moments
when he is off his guard or unsure: there is a hilarious moment early in
the film when he is called on to explain the "birds and the bees" to Lord
Darlington's godson. (The scene is all the funnier now, since the godson
is played by none other than Hugh Grant, who turned out to have some
knowledge of the subject.) Hopkins plays a man struggling to fill a role,
and it is in the moments where he cannot quite fill it--the moments that
strain his powers of composure--that his talents really shine. Few actors
could do as much with this role as Hopkins does here; he was nominated for
Best Actor for this role, and it is arguable that he should have won.
Equally compelling is Emma Thompson as Miss Kenton, the housekeeper who
shakes up Stevens's carefully ordered world: much of her part is given
over to testing his limits and trying to draw him out. Though the role is
thereby limited, she has her moments, notably in a scene where she mocks
his mannerisms ("the way you pinch your nose when you put pepper on your
food"). A particularly memorable scene shows her backing him into a corner
to wrest a book from his grasp; the book plays it mostly for laughs ("I
judged it best to look away, but...this could only be achieved by my
twisted my head away at a somewhat unnatural angle"), but the film brings
out the sudden intimacy of the moment. James Fox is convincingly
well-intentioned as the naive Lord Darlington, and Peter Vaughan is
suitably gruff as Stevens's father, but the film's power derives from the
performa of the leads--and the emotional impact of its last third is
considerable.
There is a tremendous amount going on in Remains, enough that it bears
repeated viewing (seven times over for me); there are two fully developed
plotlines that intertwine to some extent, and several subplots deriving
from them. The Nazi-appeasement angle, even if its main function is to
cast in harsh light Stevens's devotion to duty (and, through his
employer's flirting with fascism, to put a disturbing spin on that
devotion), takes up a considerable part of the story: the flashbacks chart
the increasing depth of Darlington's involvement with Germany. In the
book, the tension between Stevens's claim to be proud of his association
with Darlington and his evasiveness (and outright lying) when asked about
his connection to the Nazi appeaser is a major insight into the truths
that he would rather not confront, and serves as a catalyst for some
unwilling reflection. In the film, though some of the same scenes appear,
they are not as obviously significant (or their significance is couched
differently). The second plotline, that of Stevens himself (and, most
obviously, his relationship with Miss Kenton), is the more compelling of
the two--Darlington, the tragic figure of the first plot, doesn't really
get enough attention to command the audience's sympathy in the way that
Stevens does. Accordingly, the first storyline gets pushed to the
background toward the end, to the point that an important development in
the Nazi- connection angle that occurs near the end feels rather
unexpected. One of the subplots highlighting Stevens' character involves
Stevens's father's illness and death, which Stevens manages to turn into a
test on his "dignity" rather than a time of personal loss; again, the book
brings out these tensions somewhat better, in that his final word on the
memory is to proclaim it a personal "triumph," but the film does show the
constricted exchanges between father and son in a way that feels, again,
compelling. The impressive part is that the script makes develops
Stevens's character--and, again, his relationship with Miss Kenton--mostly
through indirection; never does he give a soul-baring speech, never do the
two actually voice their feelings. So nuanced is the acting that
apparently ordinary moments feel emotionally charged simply because they
violate the confines of the central relationship, and the audience does
not need to be told explicitly what is on a given character's mind.
As might be expected from Merchant-Ivory, the film looks remarkable: the
interiors of Darlington Hall are elaborate, both in their prewar splendor
and their latter-day emptiness. Visually, there are many effective
moments, both on the large scale--a fox hunt, an opening tracking shot
that moves up a twisting driveway--and small: both Hopkins and Thompson
are plausible as twenty-years-older versions. Especially effective are the
early scenes, where ghosts of bygone years seem to appear to Stevens
around every corner, and Miss Kenton appears, walking in a back corridor,
before fading and dissolving into mist. There is some disagreement on the
last shot--some critics consider its imagery too obvious--but for simple
emotional impact, it works to perfection. Richard Robbins's score, for its
part, captures the repetitiveness of a servant's life, and the contrasting
emotional drama, fairly well, though at times it seems oddly placed.
As a film, Remains stands or falls on the effectiveness of Hopkins, both
in conveying the essentials of the character and in making him
sympathetic. And by and large, he succeeds on both counts: he makes those
moments where Stevens must deny himself and take up his cross feel genuine
and painful, rather than simply depictions of a repressed butler who has
become accustomed to repression. Rather than simply playing an inhibited
character, Hopkins plays a character who feels that his vocation demands
that he mask his feelings (a "dignity in keeping with his position"), and
when the mask slips slightly at key moments--the one small scene in
private where he loses his composure entirely works all the better for his
icy calm when back in public again--the effect is riveting. With a lead
less skilled than Hopkins, this could have been dreary and dull; as it is,
it packs quite a punch. Though not exactly uplifting, Remains deserves
consideration among the decade's best films. 
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Emma Thompson, James Fox, Christopher Reeve
Director:  James Ivory
Producers:  Mike Nichols, John Calley, and Ismail Merchant
Screenplay:  Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on the novel by Kazuo Ishiguro
Music:  Richard Robbins
Released by Columbia Pictures
     The cream always rises to the top, and such is the indisputable
case with Anthony Hopkins' deeply moving portrayal of the stilted
butler of Darlington Hall in the newest offering from Merchant Ivory.
Reuniting HOWARDS END co-stars Hopkins and Emma Thompson, this offering
is at once both better and not as impressive as last year's best
picture contender.  Few will deny, however, that this is a movie well
worth a trip to a theater.
     Most of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is told as a series of flashbacks,
with a 1950s James Stevens (Anthony Hopkins) recalling his days of
service under the late Lord Darlington (James Fox), especially during
the years leading up to the second world war.  Of special note is
Stevens' never-defined relationship with the head housekeeper, Sally
Kenton (Emma Thompson).  They loved each other, but that love remained
unvoiced, for no matter how hard Miss Kenton tried to draw him out,
Mr. Stevens could not admit his feelings, not even to himself.
     The relationship between the two principals is played out under
the shadow of the Nazis' rise to power in Germany.  Lord Darlington, a
German sympathizer who believes that the Treaty of Versailles was
cruelly unfair, is determined to fight for peace, no matter what the
cost.  Some of those that he invites to stay under his roof are not as
enthusiastic, including U. S. Congressman Lewis (Christopher Reeve), a
man who warns Darlington that he is an amateur playing at a game best
left to professionals.  The warning is prophetic, but its consequences
are not explored as fully as they might have been.
     Nevertheless, we care far more about the interaction between Miss
Kenton and Mr. Stevens than we do Lord Darlington's attempts to curtail
war.  We follow these two across more than twenty years, always hoping
that something will crack Stevens' perfect veneer of emotional dearth.
In the end, it is movie's unwillingness to provide some sort of
resolution that keeps the emotional power marginally below than that of
a film like THE AGE OF INNOCENCE.  Tragedy without catharsis can be a
bitter pill for any movie-goer to swallow.
     The method of storytelling is also somewhat suspect.  By
recounting the bulk of events from a time when most of the tale is
done, THE REMAINS OF THE DAY creates an expectation of a future
occurrence which never happens.  While this movie is too good for us to
complain about being cheated, it's hard not to acknowledge a sense of
incompleteness.
     Anthony Hopkins has the central role, and he portrays Stevens to
perfection.  Having viewed this interpretation, it is unthinkable that
anyone could have replaced him.  This monumental acting job--surely
one of the best of the year, if not the best--is all the more
impressive because of the lack of external emotional range in the
butler.  Mr.  Hopkins is forced to employ a great deal of subtlety to
bring out the turmoil beneath the surface.  That, after all, is the
mark of a master.
     Revel in the presentation of Stevens, and the complexity of his
personality.  It's a rare film that successfully creates a character
this compelling, fascinating, and real.  Despite being such a cold
fish, the butler captures our sympathies and holds them, and we find
ourselves desperately wishing for the impossible.  THE CRYING GAME may
have said that a man cannot go against his nature, but THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY ruthelessly drives home that truth.  Tears will doubtless be
shed by some members of the audience, and this film is far more
deserving of them than any of numerous manipulative melodramas.
Genuine emotional impact--that's the key to the success of THE REMAINS
OF THE DAY.
     Emma Thompson does her usual good job with her part, but the role
of Ms. Kenton lacks the substance of her character in HOWARDS END (and
even MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, if you're looking for a comparison from
this year).  That's not to say that Ms. Thompson has been saddled with
a featherweight; nothing could be further from the truth.  But this is
Stevens' story, and ultimately Sally Kenton enjoys no more than a
supporting role.
     Most disappointing of all the characters is that of James Fox's
Darlington.  We're constantly told how "good" and "noble" Darlington
is, but rarely shown more than glimpses of the inner man.  He remains
an icon, and the inability or unwillingness of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY
to humanize him impacts on how we view everyone else.  It is, for
example, more difficult to understand Stevens' unquestioning devotion
to his employer.
     Christopher Reeve is a perfect choice to play the "typical
American."  No one would confuse Congressman Lewis with a real
character, but it doesn't seem that James Ivory was interested in
presenting more than a stereotype.  Lewis is involved for two reasons,
and once both aims are accomplished, there's no real reason for him to
be in the story at all.  He serves his purpose, and that's good
enough.
     The symbolism is the last scene is best described as cryptic.
While almost any interpretation could be considered valid, the overall
impression is that the final moments of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY are
largely superfluous.
     Lest the tone of portions of this review seem too negative, let me
reiterate that this is an engaging and powerful motion picture, every
bit the rival of HOWARDS END, and perhaps in many ways more emotionally
wrenching (this film is probably better paced, as well).  Merchant
Ivory with flaws is superior to near-perfection from most other
producer/director teams, and THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is certainly among
the better productions of the year.  Tragic love stories often hit home
with the hardest impact, and few are better-crafted and more
intelligently presented than that of Mr. Stevens and Miss Kenton.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
The best the English have to offer, is not always a technical piece, but one
can never, ever, fault the outstanding performances that one gets when one
see an Ivory & Merchant piece of work.  They just have the
innate ability, perhaps it is novelist Ruth Prawler Jhabala's talent, to
come up with some pieces that just tear your heart into watching something,
even if it is the downfall of an anthill.
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is just such a piece. One realizes that there isn't
much that is going to happen, except the end of the old fashioned standards,
and yet, we see the valiant servant and butler do his very
best, despite the most unfortunate odds, and pressing of situations.
In the process the butler, and the leader of all the servants hires a woman
that has a bit of the independent spirit, but is capable nonetheless.  And
she proceeds to help make the house run a bit more efficiently, so Stephens
can concentrate on his duties.  In the middle of it, we see him show what
makes him so special to any lord that owns the mansion.  He is the mansion.
Be it a politically sensitive situation, or just serving yet another drink
to a guest on a fox hunt, the ever faithful servant who never loses sight of
his job, manages to maintain his position, and those of his master.
But he has a failing.  His job is so important to him, that he never has the
time to check into the chances he has to meet Mrs. Kenton, whom he has come
to like, but his position will not allow him to do anything with.  It just
isn't his priority, it seems.  And in the end, with a new tenant, he takes a
trip, and tries to lure Mrs. Kenton back to the fold, but she is married,
has come to appreciate her situation, and now her daughter is on the way to
have a child, which prevents her from joining the lonely Stephens, and help
once again to make the mansion run as smoothly and efficiently as ever.
Anthony Hopkins, once again, shows why he is such a master actor. His
portrayal of the aging butler, who is very much in control of his faculties,
is a pleasure to watch.  Even when in the midst of very sensitive political
discussions he manages to keep his opinions to himself, and show himself a
truly exceptional servant in every
way.  His lord seems to have some affiliations to the Nazis in a business
sense it seems, and although it is becoming a fast, and harsh fact, he still
manages to pour yet another cup of tea, and not discuss anything of a
political nature.
Later, a brash American business politician retires to the same household.
Earlier, in a meeting of the minds, the senator had made comments that
displaying his unpopularity in this very formal group of upper crustaceans.
But he had an idea of what the future might bring, rather than accept the
norm of the present at the time.  His brashness may have made him unpopular
with the other guests, but it signaled the change of the guard as well.
Stephens has it all, like they all do, but he has no sense of personal
living, or appreciation for life as a normal man would. This is the part
that the subtle Mrs. Kenton provides, although never passes past the point
of asking Stephens why he does not display his feelings.  by the time he
does, he can no longer connect with the woman he might have loved as
faithfully as he does his master.
It's hard not to enjoy this VERY SMOOTH film, and fail to appreciate the
nature of the acting.  It is blended smoothly with very gentle angles, and
never uses the camera as an intrusive detail of the story.  It stands aside
and shows us how live moves, and lives, and in Stephens' case, how it is
served.
Beautifully conceived, with exceptional dialogue, and very well written
exchanges that never reach a boiling point in the most extreme, and
sensitive of situations.  Few films will ever stand up as well as this one
does.  Pure, and true literature of film, if there ever was anything of the
kind.  They should teach things like this to film makers.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Stevens (Anthony Hopkins) is Lord Darlington's loyal butler.  And that
is all that Stevens allows himself to be.  Very old values tell Stevens that
every fiber of his being should be devoted to his vocation.  So he has
strangled off every emotion and inclination but those of loyalty and
integrity as a butler.  Lord Darlington (played by James Fox) is, after all,
a very important man.  As a diplomat he entertains other diplomats from all
over Europe.  As Germany re-arms under Hitler, Darlington has strong
sympathies for the German people and he holds international conferences in
Darlington Manor to convince other countries that Germany under Hitler does
not constitute a threat.  Stevens does not so much submerge his feelings
about his master's politics as actually deny himself the right to even hold
any feeling or opinion but loyalty.
     Into this house comes a new housekeeper, Miss Kenton, played by Emma
Thompson.  At first there is friction between Stevens and Miss Kenton,
particularly over Stevens' father, who has come to work in the same house.
Eventually they learn to work together and to some degree understand each
other.  Miss Kenton is even startled one day to discover Stevens actually
respects her.  She responds by developing affection for Stevens and is
frustrated to realize that Stevens does not allow himself the emotion to
reciprocate her feelings.
     Stevens' loyalty is made all the more tragic by the shallowness of the
diplomats and friends of Darlington who feel they are the saviors of Europe
while steering it toward inevitable war.
     Yet the story is a bit of a tear-jerker and seems to do less with more
than this year's similarly themed UN COEUR EN HIVER.  The screenplay is by
Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on the novel by Kazuo Ishiguro.  And there is
something else here that is unexpected from a British-born writer.  European
films often show Americans as being brash dilettantes.  While Christopher
Reeve, as an American congressman attending a conference, is an idealist, he
also is perhaps the only one of Darlington's guests to understand the issues
involved at the conference.
     THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is impeccably directed by James Ivory and
Hopkins' acting is a joy to behold as he walks around the Manor giving
bulldog looks and overseeing his master's house.  Hopkins is always able to
find something physical to do with a scene that seems to go beyond the
script.  In one scene Thompson is trying to pry an object from his hands.
Hopkins resists, then relents.  Most actors would simply let go of the
object cradled in their arms.  Hopkins flattens his hand giving an
unexpected gesture of surrender.  Thompson is engaging also, but with much
less of a flair for the unexpected.
     This is a solid film that may remind some of the TV series UPSTAIRS,
DOWNSTAIRS.  The characters are well portrayed but it is just a bit obvious
in theme.  I would give it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Louis Butler
     The only thing I can say in detraction from THE REMAINS OF THE DAY
is that the rather stilted style of the film itself, a series of
flashbacks, detracts from the overall effect of what must be viewed as
a tragic tale.  It would be my guess that the film would have been much
more powerful had we not began the film with James Stevens (Anthony
Hopkins) as an old man, alone.  Hopkins performance is a wonder to
watch.  He plays the stoic butler with such ferocity one can barely
resist the urge to vault up and strangle the man.  Each trace of
emotion is so carefully and wholly hidden that no one in the film has
the foggiest notion Mr. Stevens might actually have feelings.  The
story revolves around Miss Kenton and Mr. Stevens.  Miss Kenton is the
house-keeper hired for a large English manor, Darlington Hall.  Mr.
Stevens is the butler, head of the household.  Master of all the
servants.  The ultimate servant.  Mr. Stevens and Miss Kenton fall in
love, but the requirements of their duty prevent either from
acknowledging their feelings.  Despite Mr.  Steven's one Freudian slip
that he would be lost without her, he is never able to admit his
feelings.  Not for Miss Kenton, not for his father, not even for his
employers.  When one character tries to talk to Mr. Stevens as a
friend, we see a person very uncomfortable with the idea, and unable to
relinquish the stoicism of his position.
     Emma Thompson is Miss Kenton, and she brings her usual charm to
the role.  She finds herself in love with Mr. Stevens, but is unable to
coax him into any sort of reaction except that of the good and proper
servant.  Ms. Thompson's performance is exactly what Hopkins needed;
it allows Steven's character to be softened just a tad.  As the
audience we are not so irritated with Stevens that we loose interest in
his life, because we see what he means to Miss Kenton.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Emma Thompson, James Fox, Christopher Reeve.
Screenplay:  Ruth Prawer Jhabvala.
Director:  James Ivory.
     I was not among those who considered HOWARDS END one of the top
ten films of 1992.  As beautiful and well-acted as it was, I felt it
offered a fragmented and somewhat unsatisfying treatment of E. M.
Forster's novel.  Therefore I did not approach THE REMAINS OF THE DAY,
the new film from the Merchant/Ivory production stable, as a blessing
dropped directly from heaven.  It appears I should have.  THE REMAINS
OF THE DAY will draw much the same audience as HOWARDS END and THE AGE
OF INNOCENCE, but it corrects nearly every flaw in each of those films,
focusing on one character played to near perfection by Anthony
Hopkins.
     Hopkins stars as Mr. Stevens, the head butler of Darlington Hall,
who reflects in flashback on a few pivotal years in his service to Lord
Darlington (James Fox).  In 1935, Stevens welcomes a new housekeeper,
Miss Kenton (Emma Thompson) as Darlington prepares to welcome some
important guests.  These guests include several English gentlemen,
representatives from Germany and France, and an outspoken American
congressman (Christopher Reeve), all gathered to discuss the rearming
of Germany.  All this, however, is irrelevant to Stevens, whose entire
life is focused on being the best possible servant.  His focus is so
complete that he is unaware of the growing affections of Miss Kenton,
and unable to express his own emotions.  Stevens' relfection,
interspersed through the flashbacks, becomes an attempt to justify his
life as loyal servant to a man of sometimes questionable character.
     THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is an exceptional adaptation of the
award-winning novel by Kazuo Ishiguro.  Rather than inflate the romance
between Stevens and Miss Kenton out of proportion, screenwriter Ruth
Prawer Jhabvala wisely keeps the focus on Stevens' universe as a
butler.  He is a character committed to a fault to his ideals of
servanthood, expressed in one pithy line:  "I don't believe a man can
conisder himself fully content until he has done all he can to be of
service to his employer."  So deeply does Stevens' belief in the innate
superiority of his social betters run that he blinds himself completely
to Lord Darlington's politics and his behavior towards a pair of Jewish
maids.  There is also a crucial relationship between Stevens and his
elderly father, himself a veteran butler whom Stevens respects so
devoutly that he ignores signs that the elder Stevens is losing his
faculties.  It is only because these relationships with Darlington and
his father are so fully developed that the relationship between Stevens
and Miss Kenton can be convincingly poignant.
     It also doesn't hurt that Anthony Hopkins turns in the single best
male performance of the year as Stevens.  His career has experienced an
astonishing surge in the last three years, and REMAINS shows why.  It
is not so much his ability to deliver a line which raises him above the
pack, although he is brilliant there as well; rather, it is his precise
command of shrugs, turns of the head and almost imperceptible eye
movements that is incomparable.  The scenes where he is in command,
such as a lecture to Miss Kenton for referring to his father by his
first name, are fine.  Those where he is uneasy are masterful.  In one
such scene, he attempts to fulfill Lord Darlington's request that he
explain the facts of life to his newly engaged godson.  It's
wonderfully funny because Stevens is trying so desperately to maintain
his dignity in an inherently undignified situation.  This is one of the
finest physical performances in many years, beginning with one of the
first moments he appears on screen, walking with stooped shoulders
through an empty parlor.
     The technical end of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is, as expected,
glorious as well.  Director James Ivory creates some marvelous shots,
many framed through windows to lend a sense of voyeurism.  The
photography is sharp, capturing the vastness of Darlington Hall
expertly, and a beautiful score by Richard Robbins lends the perfect
air of gentility.  THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is just as visually striking
as HOWARDS END, and the performances are just as solid.  What gives
REMAINS an edge over its much-lauded cousin is a more focused narrative
which is riveting where HOWARDS END wandered.  The world of Stevens the
butler is one well worth visiting for a thoroughly magnificent film
experience.
