Title
Review for Only the Brave (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Wong Shee
     ONLY THE BRAVE a "rites-of-passage" film which follows the
fortunes and in misfortunes of two girls set in the contemporary urban
wasteland of the Western suburbs of Melbourne.  The fundamental problem
for the girls is that there does not seem anywhere for them to go.
Their prospects both economically and socially appear despairingly
bleak.
     The themes of betrayal of trust and abandonment run through the
film at the level of their disrupted families, their tenuous though
highly charged peer relationships, and on a wider scale, the context of
urban decay and social disintegration within which their lives unfold.
The two girls in the film crave on one hand the security that most take
for granted throughout their childhoods and, on the other independence
and self-determination.  Their experiences of parental abandonment
and/or abuse leads them to yearn for stable supportive relationships
with others while also making them extremely wary and suspicious of
others and at other times completely dismissive of any need for someone
else.
     Fire is a key motif throughout, suggestive of an all consuming
destructive rage born of dispair and frustration; directed both
outwards, towards "society," and inwards attacking the developing
personalities and the emergent sexuality of the protagonists.
     The film is a distillation of Australian underclass adolescent
angst fermented by dysfunctional families and future's that promise
only long-term unemployment and poverty.  That Australia, a country
with an average standard of living comparable to any of the best in the
world, should have the highest adolescent suicide rate indicates at the
very least a failure of efforts to pursue social justice however you
define it.
     ONLY THE BRAVE makes no attempt to offer solutions to the
psychosocial traumas of its characters, this is perhaps because it is a
task for the the film's audience rather than its makers.  The film
brings to the attention of those who live comfortably in the lap of our
modern consumer society that there are many who do not share such good
fortune.
Directed by Ana Kokkinos.
Cast in credits order: Elena Mandalis (Alex); Dora Kaskanis (Vicki);
Moudo Davey (Kate); Bob Bright (Rog); Helen Athanasiadis (Maria); Tina
Zerella (Sylvie); Mary Sifarenos (Athena); Peta Brady (Tammy).
Cinematography by James Grant.
Music by Philip Brophy.
Written by Ana Kokkinos and Mira Robertson.
Costume design by Margot McCartney.
Edited by Mark Atkin.
Produced by Fiona Eagger, Rina Reiss (associate).
Also: Georgina Campbell (art director; Craig Carter
(sound); Richard Clendinnen (assistant director); Jock Healy (sound).
