Title
Review for Unstrung Heroes (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Andie MacDowell, John Turturro, Nathan Watt, Michael Richards,
      Maury Chaykin, Kendra Krull
Director: Diane Keaton
Producers: Susan Arnold, Donna Roth, and Bill Badalato
Screenplay: Richard LaGravenese based on the book by Franz Lidz
Cinematography: Phedon Papamichael
Music: Thomas Newman
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     For Andie MacDowell, it's been a while since sEX, LIES, AND
VIDEOTAPE--the last time her work was worthy of positive notice.
Despite being wooed by a host of notable directors, including Robert
Altman (who cast her in SHORT CUTS) and Krzysztof Kieslowski (who wanted
her for the title role in THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE), MacDowell's
acting has been largely lackluster since her appearance in Steven
Soderbergh's debut feature.  In fact, FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL
succeeded almost in spite of her.  With UNSTRUNG HEROES, however, the
actress delivers a strong performance likely to impress (and perhaps
surprise) both fans and detractors.
     MacDowell, playing dying wife/mother Selma Lidz, isn't the only one
who does a solid job.  John Turturro, whose only career misstep was
BRAIN DONORS, fills the role of Selma's husband, scientist/experimenter
Sid Lidz, with his usual aptitude.  As Selma fades away, Turturro's face
expresses Sid's unspeakable loss with heart-breaking poignancy.  Also
effective is young Nathan Watt as Steven, the Lidz' young son, who is
forced to cope with death before he really understands what living is.
On hand to teach him life's lessons are two eccentric, "black sheep"
uncles:  paranoid Danny (Michael Richards) and packrat Arthur (Mary
Chaykin).  As Steven's home life becomes increasingly unstable, Danny
and Arthur are there for him, dispensing their own variety of wisdom,
which includes advice never to throw away memories--like dreams,
they're easily lost, and an effort must be made to preserve them.
     UNSTRUNG HEROES opens as another coming of age story set in the
early sixties.  Steven and his sister Sandy (Kendra Krull) are the
children of a happily married, if somewhat unusual, non-practicing
Jewish couple.  It's not long, however, before we learn that Selma is
terminally ill.  Sid doesn't handle the situation well, so when Steven
asks to spend the summer with his two oddball uncles, there are only
token objections.  While living with Danny and Arthur, Steven changes
his name to Franz and learns the importance of his Jewish
faith--something Sid has always dismissed as "a crutch."
     Director Diane Keaton is on certain ground chronicling the tragedy
of Selma's illness and its inevitable conclusion.  While the emotional
impact of UNSTRUNG HEROES isn't as potent as that of Richard
Attenborough's similarly-themed SHADOWLANDS, the scenes showing Selma,
Sid, and their children coping with impending death are well-written and
effectively conveyed.  Thankfully, most of this is handled with
refreshing subtlety--there is no obvious audience manipulation.
     Less successful is the presentation of Uncles Danny and Arthur.
There's a sense that these two exist simply to populate UNSTRUNG HEROES
with a pair of eccentrics, and they seem more like scripted characters
than real people.  Their ultimate function within the context of the
story--life's castoffs teaching an impressionable boy secrets of how
to stay afloat--is more than a little cliched.  It's in the sequences
where Steven is cloistered with his uncles that the film wanders off-
track.  Fortunately, this is only a short detour.  Most of the movie
remains firmly focused on its stronger elements.
     There's nothing especially original about UNSTRUNG HEROES, but the
story is told with intelligence and sensitivity.  In a time when so many
movies are botching promising premises, it's refreshing to see something
appealing done with a retreaded subject.  This film isn't a masterpiece,
but it offers another view of what makes family so important, and does
so with an emotional honesty that many other movies don't approach.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     UNSTRUNG HEROES is the second theatrical movie that Diane Keaton
has directed.  Her long association with the great director Woody Allen
shows in the movie as does her work as a black and white photographer,
but UNSTRUNG HEROES has the Keaton's unique cinematographic stamp on
it.  Unfortunately I did not like it for reasons I will get into later,
but at least she was not afraid to take risks and have characters that
were constantly on the fringe.
     UNSTRUNG HEROES is the story of Steven Lidz (Nathan Watt) and his
crazy family.  Some of his family is seriously mentally ill whereas
others are merely quirky.  On a zaniness scale, the movie is off the
chart.  Steven's dad, Sid (John Turturro), is a scientist and inventor
a la Doctor Emmett Brown in BACK TO THE FUTURE.  He invents one bizarre
homemade device after another without any visible interest in
commercializing any of them.
     In fact the major problem of the show is that it is not founded in
reality.  Craziness works best when it comes from a plausible base.  I
am a big fan of oddball characters in movies from HAROLD AND MAUDE to
PULP FICTION, but they work because the characters were believable.
Writers Elizabeth Barton and Richard LaGravenese craft characters whose
only interest comes in the unbelievably ridiculous things they do.
Moreover, although some lines are funny, most fall flat.  They give Sid
such unfunny lines as "Everything can be broken down to numbers.
Science will be earth's salvation."
     Steven's mother Selma (Andie MacDowell) is dying, but Sid tries to
hide it from the Steven and his sister Sandy (Kendra Krull).  When
Steven finds out, he escapes the pain of seeing his mother die and goes
to live with his mentally ill uncles, Uncle Danny (Michael Richards)
and Uncle Arthur (Maury Chaykin).  His uncles live in an apartment with
old newspapers stacked to the ceiling so they can barely get around.
Their closets are filled with balls of all sizes which they bounce off
of each other's heads during meals.  Uncle Arthur believes that Nazis
are spying on him all of the time.  He says that the slogan "I like Ike
is a secret gentile code for I hate kikes." He runs into rooms shutting
all of the windows because people in gray coats are chasing him.  The
two uncles grated on my nerves so much that I want to scream every time
they were on the screen, which regrettably is a lot.  The uncles tell
Steven such wisdom as "There are only eight trustworthy people in the
entire world.  There were twelve, but four were assassinated."
     For me the saving grace of the movie was the impressive acting by
twelve year old Nathan Watt.  His ability to look so forlorn and to
deliver deep feelings without speaking was the only outstanding part of
the movie.  He was so good that I would not be surprised to see him get
some supporting actor award nominations.  Too bad he was in such a mess
of a movie.
     There is one other memorable aspect of Unstrung Heroes - the
cinematography by Phedon Papamichael.  The movie is set in the early
60s, and the colors made you believe that they shot it with the old
over saturated film of that era.  I found the sets by Garreth Stover
depressing, but they were imaginative especially the outlandish
furnishing of the Uncles' apartment.
     John Turturro is one of those actors who suffers from terminal
overacting unless the director keeps him in constant check.  Here he
goes overboard as usual.  Andie MacDowell is an inconsistent actress.
Sometimes, as in SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE, GROUNDHOG DAY, and FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, she is terrific.  In other movies, she stays on
autopilot.  Here she was essentially forgettable.
     UNSTRUNG HEROES runs only 1:33, but I still wish Lisa Churgin had
edited out the Uncles in their entirety.  The movie is correctly rated
PG.  It would not harm anyone, but I can not imagine anyone under 10
having any interest in the movie.  I found UNSTRUNG HEROES to be a big
disappointment and a movie that grated on my nerves way too often so I
can not recommend it.  I award it * for Nathan Watt's performance.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 19, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Diane Keaton's directorial debut is a very impressive one.  UNSTRUNG
HEROES is a smart, bittersweet drama about a boy growing up in postwar
suburbia.  Twelve-year old Steven Lidz (Nathan Watt) is surrounded by his
inventor father (John Turturro) and nearly-insane uncles Danny and Arthur
(SEINFELD's Michael Richards and Maury Chaykin).  When his mother Selma
(Andie McDowell) develops cancer from her chain smoking, Steven's life
begins to slowly unravel.
     The pressures of Selma's illness take their toll on everyone, and
Steven becomes lost in the cyclone of anger and sorrow that accompanies
any tragedy like this.  To find peace, Steven runs away to stay with his
uncles, where he finds a new world of self-realization, living on his own
terms instead of the indifferent rules set down by his father and by
society.
     Along the way, the antics of Steven's uncles and the outrageous
inventions that his father develops are hilarious, and the trio play off
of each other like a seasoned comedy troupe.  Watching Steven's
metamorphasis from introvert to extrovert is similarly funny.
     This film is worth seeing if for no other reason than to see
Richards's Oscar-caliber performance, but UNSTRUNG HEROES offers so much
more.  The story of loss and rebirth is genuinely touching, and while the
plot meanders and seems to break down in places, it somehow seems
appropriate, almost mimicking the characters' lives.  Ultimately, the
picture is a truly memorable look at dealing with pain while maintaining
your sanity.
     On a personal level, I also enjoyed the general contempt that the
medical profession receives in the film, especially regarding the doctors'
constant inability to act or even offer explanations for Selma's illness. 
It's a frightening metaphor that's just as relevant today.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Acting in Woody Allen films and her friendship with him have
influenced and enhanced her many talents.  UNSTRUNG HEROES is not a
Woody Allen type movie nor story.   It is totally Keaton.  However, the
perfection and intelligence she displays in making the film are
something Allen has always attempted and usually succeeded in
accomplishing.   There the resemblance ends.
     UNSTRUNG HEROES is a gripping tragic-comedy.   The tragedy is that
Selma Lidz (Andie MacDowell) early on in the film  becomes ill with
what appears to be a malignant brain tumor.    Selma is the wife of Sid
(John Turturro).  They have two children, Steven (Nathan Watt) and his
younger sister Sandy (Kendra Krull).
     Sid, the father of the family, is an eccentric inventor who has
yet to come up with something salable.   He is very bright but he talks
to his children (Danny is twelve and his sister is seven) as if they
were adults.   Nevertheless, Danny, who has a high I.Q., understands
much of what Dad is spouting.   This is a wonderful loving family that
is suddenly hit hard when the housemaid angrily blurts out that "You
know your mother is dying!"
     Others in the family are Dad's brothers, even more eccentric than
Dad.  There is Danny (Michael Richards) and Arthur (Maury Chaykin.
They provide the much needed comedy breaks.  Uncle Danny wants Steven
to be called Franz so he would be Franz Lidz (which happens to be the
real name of the author of the book on which the film is based)   Uncle
Arthur and Uncle Danny live together.  There are hundreds of stacks of
newspapers which they expect, one day, to read.  Because Steven cannot
bear to watch his mother's illness he gets permission to live with the
two uncles for the summer.
     The film has Oscar written all over it.   Its direction is so well
balanced, its photography of the 1960s and all the attention paid to
every detail, with a great cast doing fine work make this a great film
such as few others that have been released this year.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Diane Keaton
Writers: Elizabeth S. Barton and Richard LaGravenese (based on the
autobiography of Franz Lidz)
Starring: Nathan Watt, Andie MacDowell, John Turturro, Michael Richards,
Maury Chaykin, Anne De Salvo, Celia Weston
There's a scene late in "Unstrung Heroes" when the father (John Turturo)
and his son (Nathan Watt) sit in a giant darkened room, watching film
reels of their wife/mother (Andie MacDowell), who had recently died of
cancer, and for the first time in the film, bond.  Maybe it was because
I was a tad depressed when I watched this, but I cried hysterically.
Now, I usually don't cry at films, so to me, if a movie strikes an
emotional nerve that isn't triggered solely for superficial reasons,
it's an excellent film.  But this is more than just a tear-jerker.  This
is a film with a true heart, which tells of real people, and their
realistic troubles.
The film tells the auto-biographical (I guess) story of writer Franz
Lidz, born Steven (Nathan Watt), who had a very unusual late childhood.
His father, an eccentric inventor (John Turturro), barely speaks on a
human level to him, but treats him as an adult, raising him to believe
that religion is a "crutch," all while inventing bizarre things he
doesn't need.  Then there's his chain-smoking, loving mother (Andie
MacDowell), who, in the beginning of the film, is diagnosed with cancer.
On the other side of his family, as well as the dimension, are his
bizarre-as-hell uncles (Michael Richards and Maury Chaykin), who make
Steven's father look average compared to their eccentric quirks.  They
live in a run-down apartment building, hiding from the landlord, and
stacking all the newspapers they never read all over their apartment.
Seeing this apartment is one of the great sequences of the nineties.
After a little bit of pain in seeing his mother dying, as well as his
father becoming more and more intolerable, Steven runs away from home,
and finds himself at his uncles' apartment building.  He decides he will
shack up with them until his mother is fine (um...), much to the
immeadiate dismay of his parents, who don't want him being raised by his
paranoid uncles, but at the same time, not wanting him to remain unhappy
and in the emotional hell that he was in at home.
"Unstrung Heroes" is a simple film: just showing us little human quirks,
and painting a wonderfully realistic story in a surreal way.  Director
Diane Keaton's humor is not like that of friend Woody Allen's: her humor
is more like the Coens, and is very off-beat.  While I prefer the
Woodster's humor to hers, she shows that she has a great sense of humor,
that stands alone from that of Woody's.
In a lesser film, the humor and pathos that comes in this film would
feel uncomfortable, like that of, say, "Liar, Liar" (well, I couldn't
think of another example off the top of my head).  But Keaton perfectly
mixes sadness and comedy into this film, giving it a truly human
feeling.  The scenes where Turturro narrates his experiments, only to
see them go ineptly wrong are hysterical, but then the scenes where
Turturro lays his head on his dying wife's belly is one of the most
poignant and beautifully sad images I've ever seen.  Just thinking of
the former makes me laugh; thinking of the latter brings a tear to my
eye...well, maybe not a whole tear, but it makes me kind of sad in that
good way.
The acting is excellent.  Nathan Watt makes a wonderful protagonist:
someone we can associate with in this kind of situation, even if we
never felt nearly as kafkaesque as he did.  Turturro gives one of his
best performances, showing us a man who is complicated, all while
sometimes seeming overly-mean.  But when he sees his wife in the old
reels, we feel his pain.  Andie MacDowell, who is usually criticized for
her acting, gives the best performance she has since "sex, lies, and
videotape," presenting a woman who is strong although she is dying, and
is loving towards her children.  And Michael Richards and Maury Chaykin
are priceless as the overly-eccentric uncles.  Who else could have
played these roles?  I think the production would have had to shut down
if either of these two would have denied the roles.
Diane Keaton's direction is beautiful, the acting is incredible, and the
script by Richard LaGravanese (of "The Fisher King" fame) and Elizabeth
S. Barton is poignant, and full of great dialogue.  While it didn't do
much at the box office, this is a fantastic film, and is definitely
worth a viewing, especially for that scene at the end.  Never
underestimate the power of a film that can actually make someone as
unemotional as me cry.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is a lesson we tend to see a lot in the media.  Road Runner
cartoons tell us that technology does not work.  In STAR TREK we learn
that being logical like Spock can be useful but, it is better to be
emotional.  Data teaches us that being human is the ultimate to whicha
machine can aspire.  LITTLE MAN TATE, directed by Jodie Foster, showed
us that child prodigies turn into twisted monsters who concoct
experiments involving "lasers, sulphuric acid, and butterflies."  Now
another actress-turned-director, Diane Keaton, tells us a story of how
in the face of family tragedy, two uncles, even ones with obvious
mental problems, who are emotional are more comforting than a genius
father who insists on being strictly rational.
     In 1962 Steven Lidz (played by Nathan Watt) is the twelve-year-old
product of a loving but strange family.  His father, Sid (John
Turturro), is an inventor and an eccentric genius constantly involving
the children in fanciful creations that never seem to work out.  The
kids at school claim that Steven's father is an alien from another
planet, an idea that Selma Lidz (Andie MacDowell), Steven's mother,
does not completely discount.  But Sid and Selma are so much in love
that Selma overlooks the outright weirdness of her husband.  She is not
quite so willing to overlook the eccentricities of Sid's two very
strange brothers, Danny (Michael Richards) and Arthur (Maury Chaykin).
One is a super-paranoid; the other is just an adult with the mind of a
child.  In day-to-day family life Sid's cold, atheistic rationality is
made bearable for the children by Selma's warm, loving care and
attention.  But when Selma becomes sick and cannot provide that warmth,
the stress of the household becomes too much for young Steven and he
runs away to live with uncles Danny and Arthur.  There he discovers his
uncles were stranger than he ever realized, but also finds them
lovable.
     Just why the craziness of the uncles is so wonderful or why it
transforms Steven is never explained.  And that is an important
weakness of the film.  The anti-rationality of the film would be onlya
minor irritation, but for the film failing to make a case for its side
yet still smugly declaring victory.
     The acting is really not bad, particularly in the performances of
Turturro and Richards as brothers.  And while both performances seem a
little exaggerated, Keaton does manage to suggest common threads in the
two brothers' manias.  Curiously, the male roles are better drawn and
acted than the one major female role.  MacDowell's character is just a
bit too wonderful in a mistaken attempt to make her sickness a little
more tragic.
     But the big mistake of the film is to make so clear that contact
with the crazy uncles was terrific for young Steven without giving the
viewer much reason to understand why it was so good.  Without filling
in that blank the film has no chance to resonate.  The only conclusion
the viewer can draw is that rationality is a cold dead end.  And that
is a theme we see all too often already.  I give this one a high 0 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chad Polenz
Unstrung Heroes
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
[lighthearted drama/comedy]
Starring: Nathan Watt (Steven/Franz Lidz), John Turturro (Sidney Lidz), Andie
McDowell (Selma Lidz), Michael Richards (Uncle Danny), Maury Chaykin (Uncle
Arthur), produced by Susan Arnold, Donna Roth, Bill Badalato, written by
Richard LaGravenese, directed by Diane Keaton, based on the novel by Franz
Lidz.
"Unstrung Heroes" is another one of those coming-of-age films that are
intended to touch your heart and make you feel good, and films does that
without becoming sappy or contrived (well... maybe a little bit). It's a
interesting story about characters we don't usually get to see, yet they seem
very recognizable.
Everyone thinks their family is strange, but Steven Lidz (Watt) may actually
have the claim to that fame. His father, Sidney (Turturro), is a strange
inventor who believes science can solve any problem. His mother, Selma
(McDowell), is a beautiful, chain-smoking housewife who is slowly dying of
cancer. But these elements are not played upon too heavily, which allows us
to get closer to the characters without being distracted by the tense
situation and their basic eccentricity.
Steven's uncles are even more bizarre than his immediate family. Uncle Danny
(Richards) believes someone is constantly following him, especially
anti-Semites. There is also Uncle Arthur (Chaykin) who lives with Danny and
is just as strange because he has the mindset of a child. He is amused by
simple things such as balls, old newspapers, and garbage. He's a fascinating
character because of his sense of innocence.
Steven ends up staying a summer with his two uncles because his home has
become such a cold place. He has no bond with his father, and he cannot see
his mother because of her condition. He learns about the outside world
through his uncles, who don't even live in the "real world" themselves. He
accepts their strangeness as truth since it seems to make more sense than the
complicated, scientific rhetoric his father constantly spews. 
There is also a sub-plot involving a philosophical battle of faith versus
science. Steven starts to learn about his Jewish roots, as he was denied them
by his atheist father. He is renamed Franz and refuses to go by his old name.
I'm not really sure who the "unstrung heroes" of this movie are supposed to
be. Maybe the uncles because of their innocence, or perhaps Steven/Franz
because of his exposure to so many different aspects of life. Maybe even Mr.
and Mrs. Lidz who love Steven and care for him, but just don't know how to
express their love. 
Although there isn't much to "Unstrung Heroes," thankfully, it doesn't make
the mistake of becoming too sappy like most other stories of the sort. It's
want you're looking for in a disposable drama - but I'm not sure if that's
good or bad.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
