Title
Review for Yi ge dou bu neng shao (1999)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 NOT ONE LESS (Yi ge dou bu neng shao) (director: Zhang Yimou;
 screenwriter: Shi Xiangsheng, based on his novel "There Is a Sun in
 the Sky"; cinematographer: Hou Yong; editor: Zhai Ru; cast: Wei Minzhi
 (Herself), Zhang Huike (Himself), Tian Zhenda (Mayor Tian), Gao Enman
 (Teacher Gao), Sun Zhimei (Sun Zhimei), Feng Yuying (Television
 Station Receptionist), Li Fanfan (Television Host), Wu Wanlu (Station
 Manager); Runtime: 106; Columbia/Sony Pictures Classics; 1999-China)
Zhang Yimou ("Raise the Red Lantern") has securely grounded a "feel
good" film with characters who have greatly touched me, even though the
film is bogged down with much communist propaganda and it ends like a
typical Hollywood "feel good" movie, in this case with too much good
cheer over nothing much accomplished to make it so proud about itself.
Nevertheless, this is a brilliantly directed austere film for the most
part, telling about ordinary people in a very poor, rural village in
China's Hebei Province. It held my interest as I observed the classroom
dynamics taking place in a broken down one-room schoolhouse and in the
contrasting lifestyle shown in the modern Chinese city. These are human
interest stories I have not seen before about the new China, presented
here in such an informal way. The cast of mostly nonprofessional actors,
playing themselves, acquitted their task with a spirited performance,
giving power to the story about the problems with rural education for
the poor people of that region.
"Not One Less" tells about the duplicitous mayor (Tian Zhenda) of the
rural village forced to bring a 13-year-old girl from a farm family, Wei
Minzhi, to be a substitute teacher in the Shuixian Primary School
(grades one through four) when the regular teacher, an elderly man, Gao
Enman, has to leave the area for a month to be with his ailing mother
and there is no one else available. In her chat with the regular
teacher, we see that she not only doesn't look like a teacher but more
like the students she is about to teach and, that, she also lacks the
proper educational skills to function as a teacher. Her only gift is
that she knows a few lines of one patriotic song to teach the children,
which she sings in an off key voice. To compensate for her inadequacies,
Teacher Gao, a dedicated teacher, leaves her 26 lessons she is to write
on the board for the month he is gone and 26 precious pieces of chalk,
as she will have the students copy her boardwork in their notebooks. He
admonishes her not to write the characters too large, because the chalk
will run out. The characters should be about the size of a donkey turd.
The chalk is in such short-supply, that the classroom monitor tells her,
he scrapes pieces of it off the floor to use.
Worried about receiving the 50 yuan pay she is promised, she is told
that she will receive it when he returns if she keeps the 28 pupils she
has, not one less. Teacher Gao says he keeps losing these primary grade
students who drop-out to work, as he has already lost 10 pupils this
year, and even though he hasn't been paid in 6 months, he will give her
a small bonus of 10 yuan from his own pocket if she keeps the class
intact.
Teacher Wei has difficulty getting her class to respect her and call her
teacher, she also can't handle the class troublemaker, an always smiling
11-year-old bully named Zhang Huike. But she can be bossy when she has
to, and looks upon her main role as keeping the same number of students
she was given. Her first major problem arises when a girl who is spotted
as a fast runner, is taken away by a city school recruiting her for her
athletic ability, as this upsets Teacher Wei who is only interested in
keeping her pupil and getting her bonus at the end of the month. Not
able to keep her, the mayor tells her to stop worrying, it's good for
the girl and Teacher Gao will understand that he lost a pupil who wants
to better herself and not one who dropped-out.
The teacher's idea of teaching, is to sit outside in front of the
classroom door and make sure no one leaves, never mind what mischief or
learning goes on inside the classroom. The film is based on the novel by
Shi Xiangsheng, who was a teacher in a rural school and should therefore
know how shoddy education could be in such places.
When Zhang Huike is missing from school and Teacher Wei goes to his
house and speaks to his sick mother and finds that the family has debts,
that the father is dead, and that Zhang went into the city to get work,
she can only think of getting the address of his workplace in the city
and going there herself to bring him back. But the mayor will not give
her transportation to the city and shrugs his shoulder, saying that's
just the way it is with poor people around here. The resolute girl tries
to shake down her class for bus fare to the city, but the class is too
poor to come up with the money needed. But when a student says you can
get money by carrying bricks, the teacher brings the children there and
gets some of the money needed to get her to the city by the class doing
labor work. This leads to the only lesson she ever thought, as she has
the children do the math for this real-life problem, of trying to figure
out how many bricks it would take to move before she has enough for
round-trip bus fare. It's a communal effort, since her math is not much
better than her student's.
The selfish teacher finds herself bewildered in the big city of
Jiangjiakou and is further disappointed that Zhang never showed up to
work, but ran away from the girl he came with, as he left her to go for
a pee in the train station and never returned. In this
government-sanctioned pic, the story was really absorbing up to this
point, but it now takes a radical turn for the worst, as the teacher
decides to find Zhang and bring him back to school no matter what
suffering it takes on her part to do it. Supposedly, she is no longer
doing it out of her own selfishness, but in her inarticulate and
resolute way she has learned what it is to be a teacher and care about
her pupils, all she's still missing are the skills.
After spending all her money to write messages about the lost boy and
finding out it is useless to go to the police, they're just too busy for
this kind of job (which struck me as either strange or very revealing
about modern China), she ends up listening to a stranger in the train
station who tells her to go to the TV station. After unsuccessfully
trying to see the TV station manager, she ends up sleeping on the street
and does this for a day and a half, until the manager, who turns out to
be sensitive to her plight, gets her onto a popular Oprah-like show, and
she tearfully connects again with Zhang, who was seen wandering the
streets and begging for food in a restaurant. This looked so unreal,
that I thought the last reel got mixed in with one of those typical
Hollywood films of this kind. Though, what was interesting about this
part of the film, was taking a gander at the city and how clean and
boring and crowded it looked. Unfortunately, the film never recovered
from this artificial twist to the story and concluded with Chinese TV
donors sending in money to pay off Zhang's family debts and the school
is given many school supplies to take care of its scarcity and enough
money to build a new schoolhouse to replace this broken down one. The
message of the film was unnecessarily delivered in a heavy-handed
manner, about the poor conditions of China's rural schools.
The film was so adeptly done and looked and felt so good, and the parts
of all the people were played by those playing themselves in such a
natural way, that I didn't see its downfall coming until it was too late
and, anyway, by that time I was really getting off on the film and was
amazed by the simple daily life rhythms of the schoolchildren and the
common villagers, that I was already hooked on liking the film. I
especially found the performance of Wei Minzhi to be impactful. I was
taken in by the simplicity of who she was and the truth in her
character, and the way she was still an innocent child, who because of
her cultural background was obedient and took on the responsibilities of
being a substitute teacher, something that she knew she had no ability
for but reluctantly had to do, even if she couldn't explain why. This
fictional story was better than the message delivered, and the film is
much better than it sounds, given the aforementioned flaws it has, it
still shows the power of human love over all the coldness in the world.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Zhang Yimou
 Writer: Shi Xiangsheng (based on novel)
 Cast: Wei Minzhi, Zhang Huike, Ian Zhenda, Gao Enman,
Sun Zhimei, Feng Yuying, Li Fanfan, Tian Zhenda
   Teachers' salaries are so low that the authorities have to
dig deeply into the barrel just to find uncertified substitutes. 
Regular teachers take too much time off, using their sick
leave: in one case an instructor takes a whole month to visit
his dying mother.  The kids are pretty wild.  Teacher turns
her back on the class and mayhem ensues.  Kids sneak out
during the day to such an extent that it's necessary to post a
guard at the door just to keep them inside the building.  While
the brighter kids can read the alphabet, some can't read at
all, yet all are tracked into the same class.  The dropout rate
is scandalously high.  Many of the youngsters are dirt poor
and need to find work just to keep their families afloat.  The
mayor promises more supplies and better pay but cannot be
trusted to keep his word.  
   What school system are we talking about?  If you guessed
Shuiquan Village in China's Hebai province, you're on the
money.  That wasn't hard, was it?
    "Not One Less" is an adorable fable which can draw tears
from those in the audience who are not yet enveloped by
hardness and cynicism.  Made by one of China's great
directors, the fifty-year-old Zhang Yimao ("Red Sorghum,"
"The Story of Qiu Ju," "Raise the Red Lantern"), Shi
Xiangsheng's story is of a small village school not too distant
from Beijing but light-years away from that country's capital in
sophistication.  "Not One Less" is not one of those thinly-
veiled allegories of its country's politics but is, rather, a
straightforward, heart-wrenching and frequently comic tale of
the difference one teacher can make on her students.  Since
Zhang was himself a farm hand and unskilled laborer during
the Cultural Revolution from 1968 to 1978, he constructs his
scenes from what he knows.  Yet this time around he has no
interest in exploiting China's great actors like Gong Li (who is
sold into a loveless marriage in "Red Sorghum" and is sent to
a feudal manor to become the new wife of a nobleman in
"Raise the Red Lantern").  In this case he employs the
talents of non-professionals, with most characters performing
in the precise roles they follow in real life.  The mayor of little
Shuiquan village, Tian Zhenda, is in fact the mayor of
Shuiquan village. The students at the Zhongxin primary
school are students at that very school.  Even the TV station
manager at the broadcasting station of the city of Jiangjiakou
is the TV station manager at Jiangjiakou's TV outlet.  While
watching these people perform with gusto and above all
without pretense, you can't help wondering why people need
to go to acting school at all.
   The story turns on an unusual plot device.  The sole
teacher of the rural school (Gao Enman) is called away from
his job for a month to visit his dying mother and, because it's
not easy to find a replacement willing to work for such low
pay in such a dirt-poor village, the mayor hires a 13-year-old,
Wei Minzhi (Wei Minzhi) as a substitute, promising her 50
yuan for her labor.  (The yuan is the same as the renminbi,
so each would be worth twelve cents.  Six dollars a month. 
Hear that Sandra Feldman?  You have some organizing to
do.)  But the $6 will not come to her that easily.  Because of
the high attrition rate at the school, she will get paid only if by
the end of the month, her roster shows the same number of
students--not one less.  When one kid--the class clown--
drops out because his sick mother needs him to find work in
the big city of Jiangjiakou--Wei's dignity is on the line and her
conscience is challenged.  Though the kid has made life
unpleasant for her in the classroom, she will spare no effort
in getting him back to school.  The latter part of the film deals
with Wei's adventures roaming the city with virtually no
money, trying despairingly to find the boy.  Your reaction to
the movie's climax--Wei's pleas to a TV audience in that city--
is a good barometer of the story's effect on your emotions.
   In supervising a cast of characters who are principally
below the age of fourteen, including some as youthful as six,
Zhang proves that he is as much a master at his trade as he
is when overseeing the performance of the wonderful Gong Li
in his more sophisticated dramas.  Mixing light moments with
inspiring melodrama, Zhang graphically illustrates the plight of
millions upon millions of kids in his Third World country who
must drop out of school yearly simply to locate jobs paying
the equivalent of sixty dollars a year.  Most of the population
in the city get around on bicycles, but let's not romanticize
the circumstances.  The relative absence of cars does little to
ameliorate China's problems with pollution: in fact of the ten
most pollutes cities in the world, I believe China has four.  
   During the closing credits, Zhang informs the audience that
inadequate schooling will continue to keep the rural
population as poor as those of the previous generation.  Yet
"Not One Less" is not meant to propagandize the country's
plight, to embarrass the current government, or to evoke
worldwide cries of sympathy and financial support.  Zhang is
surely smart enough to know that the audience for his art-
house fare is a small one.  In western nations where
American movies are more popular than the local fare, the
crowds go for plot-driven stories: what happens next? 
Whodunit? But in this touching road movie, the journey, not
the destination, is the essence.  The roads are rocky and
rough and the excursion long and slow, but the trip is ever so
worthwhile.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 106 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It's a terrible habit of mine that I often find myself watching
non-English language films throught he lens of "how would Hollywood screw
this up." Aside from the implied inherent superiority of all things
sub-titled, there's the strange problem of comparing a film I'm watching
to a film that hasn't even been made, but which in my head is a dire
experience indeed. A film can't help but seem glorious under such
conditions, though it doesn't help the discussion of the film on its own
merits. I was doing a pretty good job of avoiding the hypothetical
comparison in Zhang Yimou's NOT ONE LESS, until a curious thing happened: 
In its final fifteen minutes, it started to turn into its own Hollywood
incarnation. Thank heaven it's so good for so long that the strange twist
can't spoil the experience.
     Using actors whose own names become the names of his characters,
Zhang tells the story of the rural Chinese village of Shuixian and its
unique educational problems. Shuixian's only teacher, Gao Enman, is
leaving on a month-long sabbatical to care for his ill mother, obliging
mayor Tian Zhenda to bring in a substitute from a neighboring village. 
The new teacher is Wei Minzhi, a 13-year-old who's the only person willing
to take the job. Wei is only in it for the 50 yuan she's been promised,
and is eager for the 10 yuan bonus Gao promises her if he returns to find
the same 28 students in his rapidly dwindling class. Then class
troublemaker Zhang Huike leaves for Beijing to help his family pay off its
debts, sending Wei on her own quest to bring Huike back to the village.
     The impressive thing about both Zhang's direction and Shi
Xiangsheng's script (based on his account of his experience as a rural
teacher) is how gradually and unobtrusively Wei's character develops.
She's pretty unsympathetic at the outset -- utterly unqualified for her
post, effective primarily at playing goalkeeper at the schoolroom door, 
but not at all troubled about demanding her money. When Huike leaves,
she's so single-minded about getting him back to guarantee her bonus that
she takes her class on a field trip that essentially amounts to slave
labor, moving bricks to earn the money for bus fare. The cleverly handled
scenes of Wei leading the class in math problems with very real-world
implications make for a solid foundation, but it's only when Wei heads
into the city that her quest becomes more selfless. The amount of time she
devotes to ensuring the welfare of one student -- although initially for
selfish reasons -- turns her into a real teacher.
     Wei's quest and the growing she does along the way make for a
thoroughly compelling narrative, but Zhang has socio-political fish to fry
as well. As NOT ONE LESS draws to a close, the story becomes a statement
about the plight of China's rural poor, including the deteriorating
conditions of schools and the flight of students to help support their
families. There's a funny bit in which a thoroughly terrified Wei goes on
television to help the search for Huike, but it leads to a sentimentalized
ending in which the troubles of the Shuixian school become a media 
sensation. A film crew rolls into town, accompanied by plenty of donated
school supplies, and the children end up gathered around Wei in an 
uplifting "to her, with love" climax while a scrolling message dutifully
informs us about the real-life conditions in rural Chinese schools. It's
still a satisfying resolution, but it's excessively underlined. It's the
way Hollywood films too often try to convince an audience they've not just
watched an enjoyable film, but also become more compassionate,
better-informed citizens of the world.
     The frustrating part is that it's so unnecessary. Virtually from the
outset, the financial conditions of the school become an effective part of
the drama; you'd never expect a film to wring such tension from a student
stepping on the school's more-precious-than-gold chalk supply. The rookie
actors are raw, but do a more than serviceable job of performing their own
lives. In short, NOT ONE LESS does everything a film needs to do to draw
you into its world, and into the characters inhabiting that world. When it
resorts to a message-heavy happy ending, it suddenly feels like another
sort of film entirely. For a thankfully brief moment, I saw a glimpse of
the mass-market crowd-pleaser that might have been. It's a reminder of how
much more pleasing a film can be when it sticks to simpler truths.

Author
Louis Proyect
13-year old Wei (Wei Minzhi) has just shown up at a poor, remote and
barren Chinese farming village on the foothills of a mountain. She is
there to substitute teach in the local primary school for one month.
Nobody--including us, the audience of "Not One Less"--expects much.
Our expectations are diminished on two levels. We consider it unlikely
that an untrained youngster could educate a roomful of unruly students
just a few years younger than herself. Also, we consider it unlikely
that a feature film based on such a situation and using a
non-professional cast can entertain. Director Zhang Yimou, best known
for ambitious period dramas like "Raise the Red Lantern," takes such
modest material and transforms it into a powerful neo-realist story
that evokes the larger drama unfolding in Chinese society. 
"Not One Less," second cousin to other recent neo-realist works such
as the Brazilian "Central Station" and the American "La Ciudad," is an
advocate for the victims of the global economic transformation some
call "neoliberalism." Poor rural folk, who are losers in the
free-market lottery society, have to eke out a living on the margins
of bustling urban centers. Their only hope is to find a way to crack
into the successful inner circle of the city folk. The neo-realist
genre of today questions whether such a pursuit is really worth it.
The movie's title derives from an informal contract between the
school's regular teacher and Wei. After he returns from his one month
leave of absence, she will be paid 57 yuan. But only if every student
is still in attendance. Not only is he parsimonious with the wage
contract, he also doles out supplies with an eye-dropper. He counts
out 26 pieces of chalk, one for each day of the month excluding
Sundays. Since the one room school is falling apart at the seams, we
understand that the teacher has no alternative. As we might expect, a
form of "TINA" has found its way into the nooks and crannies of
Chinese socialist society. If a poor farming village can not provide
commodities for the world market, why would we expect a classroom to
reflect anything different from the surrounding poverty?
As he spells out her duties, it is clear that she is barely up to the
task. Since she doesn't know the first thing about teaching, the best
she can do is copy lessons from the teacher's textbook on the
blackboard--making sure not to exceed her chalk ration for that day.
After she has finished transcribing the words, the students will then
dutifully enter them into their composition books. He reminds her that
since the chalk is so precious, she should be careful not to waste it.
She should write large enough so that the students can see the
characters on the board, but not too large. Pointing to the barnyard
outside the schoolroom, he says that the size of a donkey turd is just
about right. Wei asks the teacher when she should dismiss the students
each day. Since there is no clock in the schoolroom, he explains that
the day ends when the setting sun falls upon a pole at one end of the
room. What if it is overcast? Then send them home early.
For the first few days, as we might expect, chaos rules in the
classroom. After Wei has finished transcribing a lesson on the board,
she closes the door on the students like a jailer and sits on the
front stoop playing with her fingers. Only when they begin to run
wild, she goes back into the schoolroom and tries to restore order.
The most disruptive student is Zhang (Zhang Huike), a boy who enjoys
being the class clown and defying Wei. What he does not realize is
that Wei is as strong-willed as him and will not allow him to have his
way. The relationship between these two characters shapes the
narrative of the film, especially when Zhang is forced to leave school
and go to the city to find work. Although he has made things rough for
her in the classroom, she needs to track him down in the city and
bring him back to the school because of the "not one less" contract.
But it is not just money that motivates her. She understands that a
young child on his own has little chance of survival in the city.
Getting to the city is no easy task since she lacks the money for bus
fare. Her students have now begun to rally around her and pledge to
help raise the necessary funds. Accompanied by them like the Pied
Piper, she marches off to a nearby brick factory where they hope to
make some money moving bricks from one place to another. The wages, as
you would expect, are meager. This scene evokes the scene in "La
Ciudad," where Latino workers spend an entire day in the rubble of
demolished buildings cleaning bricks. As in "La Ciudad" there is a
struggle to get a sufficient wage. Wei and the students bicker with
the factory owner after their job is done--done without his knowledge
or permission in fact--to get him to fork over the yuans necessary to
pay her bus fare.
Haggling over money is a persistent theme throughout the film and the
director Zhang leaves no doubt as to his disgust with the cash nexus
overtaking China. It is difficult to think of another film in recent
history which features so many scenes involving struggles over fees,
wages, prices and debts. It is reminiscent in some ways of a Balzac
novel, which inevitably depicts the denizens of Paris involved in
similar haggling. 19th century Paris, like the cities being
transformed in China today, are battlegrounds over the most universal
of commodities: money.
When Wei arrives in the city, she begins her search in the railroad
station. Like the "Central Station" in the Brazilian film, this
central station is filled with the poor and the displaced. It is used
as a bedroom and bathroom for people who have no other place to go. It
is also a magnet for youngsters who are either begging or stealing to
survive. Wei's search begins here but she soon ends up walking up and
down the streets of the city, appearing as forlorn and as displaced as
the Latinos in "La Ciudad." Her encounters with the impatient and
money-driven urban dwellers do not deter her, however. This young
woman who will not cry uncle symbolizes the peasant roots of the
Chinese revolution, which the director Zhang has not lost sight of.
Even when she forgets the words to the militant Maoist Chinese
national anthem, there is no question as to her class instincts.
Reviewers of "Not One Less" have dwelled on what is considered an
artificial happy ending, which they view as a token to government
pressure. To make a film that was uncompromisingly bleak, they argue,
is impossible in today's China where the hostile economic forces being
depicted in the film have official government sanction.
This is a facile view as one might expect from critics in an
imperialist country that is responsible for the economic
contradictions that forced China to retreat from socialism in the
first place. When a major Hollywood studio bankrolls a film like "La
Ciudad," then these critics might have stronger grounds for such
sanctimonious criticisms. In the meantime, there is much that
socialists can take heart from in "Not One Less." It is a sign that
the embers of social justice have not been extinguished in China. For
as long as directors like Zhang Yimou are given a platform in China,
there is evidence that the revolutionary spirit has not been
vanquished.

Author
Ross Anthony
When Mr. Gao, Shuiquan Village's only elementary teacher, tends to his
ailing mother across China, the mayor hires thirteen-year old Wei Minzhi to
substitute. Who else would want to come out to this shabby little town to
teach for a mayor who is more full of promises than cash, but a naďve
primary school graduate? Wei Minzhi is delightfully unprepared for her role.
Mr. Gao innocently asks, "What can you do?"
"I can sing," WEI MINZHI offers as she teeters her head from side to side.
A student herself, she begins by dispassionately, yet loyally, following
teacher Gao's instructions to write the lesson on the board, have the
students copy it, then dismiss them only when the sunlight hits a certain
nail on the pole. Meanwhile, she waits disinterested at the doorstep as her
students battle it out inside.
But the rule Mr. Gao made most clear (backing it up with more promises of
payment) was to maintain class size, "When I return I want to see all 28
students - not one less." So when a student is forced to go to the uncaring
city in order to earn money for his family, a hardheaded Wei Minzhi runs
after.
Though we're never quite sure if her motive is the money, loyalty, sympathy
or pure stubbornness; Wei Minzhi's plain-faced boldness, strength and
relentlessness win us over.
Overwhelmingly charming in its seductive grit, director Zhang Yimou takes
great pains to make the picture real and should be applauded for strictly
avoiding the melodramatic -- bringing images and circumstances to the screen
that are so real they are at times, boring. In his attempt to emphasize the
endurance of this one girl and the reality of her plight, he occasionally
over-emphasizes it. Several minutes could have easily been shaven from
various endurance sequences. And though I respect his discipline, the
wonderful payoff of the climax could have been drawn out just a bit -
audiences deserve it for surviving along with Wei Minzhi! Bring some
tissues, it's sure to clear your sinuses.
Lastly, the people are wonderfully true! Actual teachers, students, mayors,
etc. bring this script to life and sweeten its sincerity. Zhang Huike
portrays, with genuine honesty, the smugly grinning kid that learns a hard
lesson. Wei Minzhi also nails her tenacious role earning it over thousands
of other candidates in part by yelling apathetically into a crowded street
corner.
Not One Less. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G. 106 minutes.
In Mandarin with English Subtitles.
Starring Wei Minzhi, Zhang Huike, Tian Zhenda, Gao Enman, Sun Zhimei
Directed by Zhang Yimou.
Written by Shi Xiangsheng.
Produced by Zhao Yu at Guangxi Film/Beijing New Picture/Columbia Pictures
Asia.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
NOT ONE LESS ( Yi ge dou bu neng  shao) ( China, 1999) *** Directed 
by Zhang Yimou. Written  by Shi Xiangsheng, from his novel. 
Photography, Hou Yong. Editing, Zhai Ru. Art director, Cao Jiuping.
Music, San Bao. Cast: Wei Minzhi (Herself), Zhang Huike (Himself), 
Tian Zhenda (Mayor Tian), Gao Enman (Teacher Gao), Sun Zhimei (Sun 
Zhimei), Feng Yuying (Television Station Receptionist), Li Fanfan 
(Television Host). Produced by Zhao Yu. A Sony Pictures Classics 
release. In Mandarin (with English subtitles).  106 minutes.
The American director Joseph Von Sternberg (1894-1969) comes to mind 
as I think of the Chinese director Zhang Yimou (b.1951). Sternberg 
"created" Marlene Dietrich in the "Blue Angel" and six additional 
films (1930-35), the high point of his career. Their relationship 
went beyond cinema. Zhang Yimou's feature debut "Red Sorghum"  was 
also that of actress Gong Li. The two were an "item" for about 8 
years as he directed her in the highly successful, "Ju Dou," " Raise 
the Red Lantern,"
"The Story of Qiu Ju," and "To Live" for a total of 7, including the 
unfamiliar (to me) "Codename Cougar." Their last collaboration, 
"ShanghaiTriad" (Yao a yao yao dao wai pei qiao) had mixed reviews. 
Zhang-ites hope that now Pygmalion minus Galatea will not, as in 
Sternberg's case, result in declining popularity.
"Not One Less" may put those fears to rest, although Zhang changed 
style and content so radically that comparisons are not valid. His 
early career was as a cinematographer. All his films until now have 
powerful, creative visuals. But  here, the customary, delicate 
bravura (not an oxymoron) of  often saturated colors, their 
orchestrated, eye-arresting scenes, give way  to utter simplicity. 
Made almost like a documentary, the pictures is  a cousin of 
cinema-verite and Italian neorealism.
The village of Shuiquan seems to be in the middle of nowhere, but as 
it turns out, is 3-4 hours by bus from Beijing. What makes one think 
"boondocks," is generalized poverty and the fact that we see very 
little of the place. The images are predominantly of a run-down, 
one-classroom, one-teacher schoolhouse and of dusty dirt roads around 
it.
Teacher Gao is leaving for a month to attend his ailing mother. Wei, 
age 13, an elementary school graduate, has been hired as substitute 
teacher. She's not much older than her pupils. And she does not know 
much more than they do. The idea is to band-aid the emergency.. Wei 
will receive 50 yuan at some point (which keeps eluding her) for a 
month's work. It's essentially a kind of baby-sitting, just keep the 
kids in class.
According to today's exchange rates, one yuan equals 12 US cents. At 
the village, once can of Coca-Cola is either one or two yuans. Wei's 
50 yuans come to $6.
Given the dire shape of the place, students who need to work for 
their families or elsewhere drop school alarmingly fast --from 40 to 
28 since the school year began. This menaces the subsidies to the 
school (such as they are!). Teacher Gao warns Wei to hold the line. 
He sweetens this by promising a bonus (10 yuan) if all 28 kids 
remain. "Not One Less!"
The conditions at the school, and, surely, in the village, are 
dismal. Wei and some kids (who is not clear) sleep in a horrid room. 
Where their food comes from is also unclear. Chalk is rationed: one 
per day. When some chalk trampled on , it is a catastrophe. There are 
no books. Wei copies the lessons on the blackboard. She admonishes a 
child  not to write too large or press too much since it uses up too 
much chalk.
In Part Two of the film, a 10-year old boy, Zhang Huike, smart, 
lively and prone to trouble-making (pitifully mild by American 
standards) stops coming to school. His widowed mother is in debt. 
Zhang went to the big, unnamed city to find work. Through 
brick-moving the class collects   minuscule sum for Wei to go to the 
city and search for the boy. It is unclear whether she does it to 
keep the students at the 28 level, or to get her bonus --For a Few 
Yuan More.
Her small adventures follow, there is a rather unlikely happy ending. 
As Wei reaches the end of her rope, she is told to take her case to 
almighty TV. The stumbling block is an autocratic, 
bureaucratic-to-the-letter receptionist. But a manager ex machina 
saves the day. Wei goes on a telecast, with a typically chatty, 
elegant anchorwoman. The newness of it all literally dumbfounds Wei. 
She freezes, says nothing.
The boy is found, he returns to the village with Wei and a camera 
crew. But TV micro-celebrity and a gift of tons of chalks solve 
nothing. End-titles tell us that a million children a year drop 
school for work. It's a false figure. Reality is ten times higher. 
But since this is a criticism of China's system, and since director 
Zhang Yimou has often had troubles with the government and censors, 
he lowered the figure to what authorities would deem acceptable.
In Italian neorealism the movies did not hesitate to show or denounce 
evils by individuals as well as the state. Matters are much more 
careful and balanced here, a bit as in old Soviet movies. The TV 
station bureaucrat receptionist is scolded, and it another bureaucrat 
who is helpful. The kindness of strangers gets some credit as a 
restaurant helps hungry Zhan, although this is done primarily to 
avoid his bothering the customers. You may glimpse a chic woman or 
two but contrasts are kept down. No discotheques, no pricey stores. 
You sense the movie's political prudence.
What's new and interesting is that almost all the characters are 
non-actors who use their real names ands who do in real life what 
they do on the screen --starting with Wei who was chosen from an 
enormous field of candidates. What is most successful is how well, 
starting again with Wei, all those non-professionals fit their roles 
and situations. Were that the movie could give a big boost to the 
casting of amateurs. If this escalates the multi-million-dollar 
salaries of stars could go the way of the walls of Jericho. Fat 
chance.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Edwin Jahiel
NOT ONE LESS ( Yi ge dou bu neng shao) ( China, 1999) *** Directed by 
Zhang Yimou. Written  by Shi Xiangsheng, from his novel. Photography, 
Hou Yong. Editing, Zhai Ru. Art director, Cao Jiuping. Music, San 
Bao. Cast: Wei Minzhi (Herself), Zhang Huike (Himself), Tian Zhenda 
(Mayor Tian), Gao Enman (Teacher Gao), Sun Zhimei (Sun Zhimei), Feng 
Yuying (Television Station Receptionist), Li Fanfan (Television 
Host). Produced by Zhao Yu. A Sony Pictures Classics release. In 
Mandarin (with English subtitles).  106 minutes.
The American director Joseph Von Sternberg (1894-1969) comes to mind 
as I think of the Chinese director Zhang Yimou (b.1951). Sternberg 
"created" Marlene Dietrich in the "Blue Angel" and six additional 
films (1930-35), the high point of his career. Their relationship 
went beyond cinema. Zhang Yimou's feature debut "Red Sorghum" was 
also that of the beautiful actress Gong Li. The two were "an item" 
for about 8 years as he directed her in the highly successful, "Ju 
Dou," " Raise the Red Lantern," "The Story of Qiu Ju," and "To Live" 
for a total of 7, including the unfamiliar (to me) "Codename Cougar." 
Their last collaboration, "Shanghai Triad" (Yao a yao yao dao wai pei 
qiao) had mixed reviews. Zhang-ites hope that now Pygmalion minus 
Galatea will not, as in Sternberg's case, result in declining 
popularity.
"Not One Less" may put those fears to rest, although Zhang changed 
style and content so radically that comparisons are not valid. His 
early career was as a cinematographer. All his films until now have 
powerful, creative visuals. But  here, the customary, delicate 
bravura (not an oxymoron) of often saturated colors, their 
orchestrated, eye-arresting scenes, give way to utter simplicity. 
Made almost like a documentary, the pictures is  a cousin of 
cinema-verite and Italian neorealism.
The village of Shuiquan seems to be in the middle of nowhere, but as 
it turns out, is 3-4 hours by bus from Beijing. What makes one think 
"boondocks," is generalized poverty and the fact that we see very 
little of the place. The images are predominantly of a run-down, 
one-classroom, one-teacher schoolhouse and of dusty dirt roads around 
it.
Teacher Gao is leaving for a month to attend his ailing mother. Wei, 
age 13, an elementary school graduate, has been hired as substitute 
teacher. She's not much older than her pupils. And she does not know 
much more than they do. The idea is to band-aid the emergency.. Wei 
will receive 50 yuan at some point (which keeps eluding her) for a 
month's work. It's essentially a kind of baby-sitting, just keep the 
kids in class.
According to today's exchange rates, one yuan equals 12 US cents. At 
the village, once can of Coca-Cola is either one or two yuans. Wei's 
50 yuans come to $6.
Given the dire shape of the place, students who need to work for 
their families or elsewhere drop school alarmingly fast --from 40 to 
28 since the school year began. This menaces the subsidies to the 
school (such as they are!). Teacher Gao warns Wei to hold the line. 
He sweetens this by promising a bonus (10 yuan) if all 28 kids 
remain. "Not One Less!"
The conditions at the school, and, surely, in the village, are 
dismal. Wei and some kids (who is not clear) sleep in a horrid room. 
Where their food comes from is also unclear. Chalk is rationed: one 
per day. When some chalk trampled on , it is a catastrophe. There are 
no books. Wei copies the lessons on the blackboard. She admonishes a 
child  not to write too large or press too much since it uses up too 
much chalk.
In Part Two of the film, a 10-year old boy, Zhang Huike, smart, 
lively and prone to trouble-making (pitifully mild by American 
standards) stops coming to school. His widowed mother is in debt. 
Zhang went to the big, unnamed city to find work. Through 
brick-moving the class collects a minuscule sum for Wei to go to the 
city and search for the boy. It is unclear whether she does it to 
keep the students at the 28 level, or to get her bonus --For a Few 
Yuan More.
Her small adventures follow, there is a rather unlikely happy ending. 
As Wei reaches the end of her rope, she is told to take her case to 
almighty TV. The stumbling block is an autocratic, 
bureaucratic-to-the-letter receptionist. But a manager ex machina 
saves the day. Wei goes on a telecast, with a typically chatty, 
elegant anchorwoman. The newness of it all literally dumbfounds Wei. 
She freezes, says nothing.
The boy is found, he returns to the village with Wei and a camera 
crew. But TV micro-celebrity and a gift of tons of chalks solve 
nothing. End-titles tell us that a million children a year drop 
school for work. It's a false figure. Reality is ten times higher. 
But since this is a criticism of China's system, and since director 
Zhang Yimou has often had troubles with the government and censors, 
he lowered the figure to what authorities would deem acceptable.
In Italian neorealism the movies did not hesitate to show or denounce 
evils by individuals as well as the state. Matters are much more 
careful and balanced here, a bit as in old Soviet movies. The TV 
station bureaucrat receptionist is scolded, and it another bureaucrat 
who is helpful. The kindness of strangers gets some credit as a 
restaurant helps hungry Zhan, although this is done primarily to 
avoid his bothering the customers. You may glimpse a chic woman or 
two but contrasts are kept down. No discotheques, no pricey stores. 
You sense the movie's political prudence.
What's new and interesting is that almost all the characters are 
non-actors who use their real names and who do in real life what they 
do on the screen --starting with Wei who was chosen from an enormous 
field of candidates. What is most successful is how well, starting 
again with Wei, all those non-professionals fit their roles and 
situations. Were that the movie could give a big boost to the casting 
of amateurs. If this escalates the multi-million-dollar salaries of 
stars could go the way of the walls of Jericho. Fat chance.

Author
Greg King
In criticising the failures of contemporary Chinese society,
director Zhang Yimou (Raise The Red Lantern, etc) prefers to use an
iron fist enclosed in a velvet glove.
Although his films have been widely acclaimed internationally,
they have been less than favourably received at home by his political
masters, who have banned them in China.  His latest film is also bound
to earn the wrath of Chinese authorities, wary of any overt criticism
or hint of failure of their great social revolution.
Based on a true story, Not One Less depicts the very real
problems facing China's education system.  Much of the film is set in
the primary school of the rural village of Shuiguan.  The school
itself is run down and under-resourced, and the teacher is badly paid.
The teacher even has to carefully ration chalk and other supplies to
make them last.  Thirty students are crammed into one dilapidated
classroom.  Alarming statistics tell us that 1.5 million Chinese
children are forced to leave school every year, many at a young age,
to find work to help their parents pay off their mounting debts.
When the school's regular teacher Gao has to go to the city to
visit his sick mother, the mayor appoints thirteen year old Wei Minzhi
as his replacement.  Because of declining class sizes, Gao promises
her a bonus if no student leaves the school during his absence.
Barely older than her charges, and lacking a university education
herself, Wei has little idea of what to do, and seems unconcerned with
whether the students actually learn anything or not.
Then Zhang Huike, one of her students, is forced to head off
to the city to find work to support his desperately impoverished
family.  Wei heads off to the city to find him and bring him home.
But in the harsh, unfamiliar environment of the sprawling city, Wei's
task is not an easy one.  Initially it is unclear whether Wei is
acting out of genuine concern for the welfare of her charge or out of
personal self interest.
Yimou beautifully draws a sharp contrast between the
prosperity of the modern cities and the abject poverty rife throughout
much of rural China.  Although young Zhang is impressed by the beauty
and prosperity of the city, his most indelible memory is that he had
to beg for food.
This is a simple story, elegantly and beautifully told.  Not
One Less lacks the histrionics of most American films depicting the
decline of the education system (187, The Principal, The Substitute,
etc) and painting American schools as some sort of urban battle zone
in which there are few winners.  Yimou's sense of restraint and
understatement is evident in the deceptively gentle pace and rhythm of
the film.  The film also looks gorgeous, thanks to the cinematography
of Hou Yong.
Yimou deliberately uses non professional actors here, with
many of the performers virtually playing themselves, which adds to the
overall sense of realism.  The young Huike has a natural, appealing
screen presence, while Wei captures the petulance, naivete and
desperation of her character beautifully.  There is often a telling
self consciousness about some of the performances, while others seem
remarkably relaxed, unrehearsed and natural.

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/2d0168c1c1ad76b588256949000fbb3f?OpenDocument
In a small, poverty-stricken Chinese village in the high plains, a
substitute teacher (thirteen year old Wei Minzhi) is placed in charge of
a class of younger, unruly peasant children for one month. She's in over
her head, since she only knows how to sing half of a song and copy
lessons left by old Teacher Gao, who instructed her on how to conserve
chalk by writing big enough for the children to see, but not too big as
to waste it. Considering the state of the crumbling stone hut which
functions as a schoolhouse and the lack of books and reading materials,
chalk is a precious commodity to be prized and respected.
        More importantly, Gao implores her to keep watch over the children and
not let them run away from school to go work in the nearby city. He
wants every student to still be there when he returns. "Not one less,"
he instructs, quietly, and agrees to pay her a little extra out of his
own pocket if need be. Most deals among adults and children are
negotiated in such a way, and even the classroom children understand and
value the power of currency. Such is the life of rags and poverty.
        Wei is not a particularly good teacher, neither patient nor readily
outspoken. She mostly leaves the kids to their own devices. Free rein is
given to the mischievous, ever grinning class clown (Zhang Huike,) who
would be a holy terror were it not for that adorable, toothy smile and a
barely detectable sense of decency underneath the relentless prankster.
        It's a battle of wills between Teacher Wei and Student Zhang, who
actually drives her into action and forces her to take some small touch
of effort and responsibility in the dynamics of class control. However,
after a particularly striking confrontation over another child's diary,
the little Zhang runs away to make a living sweating in cheap
restaurants and laundromats in the city. Teacher Wei has to make good on
her promise to Teacher Gao, following this boy not much younger than she
into a strange city, trying to bring him home. Of course, first she has
to get enough money for bus fare in a poor village, and proceeds to
extorting the kids. "Who has money? Put it on the desk!" she says. The
kids, wise to her, say they don't have any, even if they do.
        In a recent interview, director Zhang Yimou remarked that in his
research for this project, he kept encountering children who had no
access to education, without schoolbooks or teachers with drive or
experience. While not based on a true story, though it seems it could
be, he cast nonprofessional actors who live in such a village.
All the children and some of the adults (the crooked mayor, the old
schoolteacher, the city townspeople) use their real names. This makes
the film feel like a documentary. Zhang Yimou shot it in such a way
(with the cameras kept hidden and unobtrusive) to allow these untrained
performers room to simply behave naturally. It's a wonderful conceit.
        A poem of the rituals of these lives with a keen understanding of the
social and political forces at work, the film and characters received
instant empathy from international audiences. Teacher Wei and the
charismatic Student Zhang may not be perfect - they are kids after all,
with all the good and bad which that implies - but they are genuinely
likeable, even lovable. They're in a situation that you'd have to have a
heart of stone not to care about.
        Though it never teeters into sentimentality, Not One Less inspires
genuine tears and laughter. It serves as a reminder of how much blind,
stubborn courage and resolve can possibly accomplish. It doesn't play
out as phony as the documentary eye keeps the events truthful and
genuine. It manages to make the audience think and feel very much
without playing out as an easy crowd pleaser. It's a great film, one
which set the year of movies in 2000 off to a powerful start.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Chalk.  It's an unimportant and cheap commodity for most.  But, in the
remote Chinese village where 13-year-old Minzhi Wei (Minzhi Wei) is a
substitute teacher, it is as precious as gold.
The primary school's only teacher, Teacher Gao (Enman Gao), who will be
gone for a month, gives Wei strict instructions regarding the proper use
of his small box of chalk.  She may use precisely one piece per day.
She is to write neither too large (wastes chalk) nor too small (hard on
students' eyes).  Since education consists mainly of copying from the
board, the chalk is the sole tool of her trade.
NOT ONE LESS, about the value of persistence, is a simple, slice of life
tale set in modern-day China from director Yimou Zhang (JU DOU and
SHANGHAI TRIAD).  Wei, who looks bored stiff while teaching her
students, has taken the job as a substitute for one reason and one
reason only -- she wants the 50 yuan that the mayor has promised her.
Since Gao hasn't been paid in 6 months, Wei's ability to ever collect
her pay is in question.  In order to keep her on the job and keep his
students there so that he will have a job to come back to, Gao promises
her that he will make sure that the mayor pays her.  Moreover, if, when
he returns, all of the 28 students are still there (he had 40 until
recently), he will give her a 10 yuan bonus.  But, only if all 28 are
still there and "not one less."
No sooner has he gone than one girl is taken away to a sports facility
to become a runner.  And then another, Zhang Huike (Zhang Huike), leaves
to go to the city to work.  11-year-old Zhang wants to get a job to pay
off some of his family's debts.
Wei vows to track Zhang down and bring him back.  This becomes an
exercise in practical mathematics for the class as they calculate how
many bricks (at 1.5 cents per brick), they will have to move to earn
enough for their teacher's bus ticket.  Their math skills are shown to
be lacking -- being off by a factor of 10 turns out to be a common
problem.  Their economic calculus is thrown further off when the owner
of the brickyard points out that they broke most of the bricks, which he
didn't want moved in the first place.
The peoples' attitude toward each other range from indifference to
hostility.  Wei, in particular, never seems to care about her students.
She has an obsession about earning the money and that stays the focus of
her life.  In the final act, she breaks down and cries on television,
saying that she's worried about Zhang.  Although it may be a cynical
view, it isn't clear even then if she really has any aspirations beyond
making some money.  Poverty can be hardening, and most American poverty
would look like abundant luxury compared to what Wei has to endure.
One thing is never considered.  What happened to the other 26 students
after Wei left for days to search in the big city for Zhang? She never
cares and neither does the movie.
NOT ONE LESS runs 1:46.  The film is in Mandarin with English subtitles.
It is not rated but would probably be a G as there is nothing to offend
anyone of any age.
The film has just opened nationwide in the United States.  In the San
Jose area it is showing at the Towne Theatre.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
