Title
Review for Bian Lian (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE KING OF MASKS (Bian Lian, China, 1996)  *** 1/2  Directed by Wu 
Tianming. Written by Wei Minglung. Produced by  Mona Fong & Ho Titus. 
Photography, Mu Dayuan. Original Music, Zhao Jiping. Cast:  Zhu Xu 
(Wang), Zhou Ren-ying (Doggie), Zhao Zhigang (Master Liang), et al. 
A Shaw Brothers production (Hong Kong). A Samuel Goldwyn Co. release. 
In Mandarin, subtitled in English. 101 minutes. Not  rated (if so, G)
Don't blink, or you'll miss something. Something good, beautiful, 
funny, touching , affectionate. King of Masks is first-rate in every 
respect and a joy to watch whether you're a sophisticated cinephile, 
a casual filmgoer, or a child of any age.
The film has received a large number of awards, internationally, 
including, in China, Best Director, Best Child Actor, Best 
Co-Production. The setting is in Sichuan province of the early 1930s. 
(One can tell the period from many clues, including the sole 
automobile shown, and avoid some reviewers' mistaken dating to "the 
turn of the century")
Master Wang is an elderly street performer who does amazing sleight 
of hand. He turns his head around and, in a flash is wearing a mask, 
then another, then yet another... How he does it is a secret. How the 
film does it is no secret: clever editing. It is so quick that you 
may wonder whether such an impressive performance really did exist.
Wang's wife left him long ago. His male child died young.. In his 
less-than-modest houseboat he has been plying the rivers of Sichuan 
(the Yang-Tze and its tributaries)  alone save for "The General," his 
clever monkey who passes the hat around. Wang's performances attract 
crowds of admirers, yet bring in pitifully few coins, especially 
since these are times of floods, economic crises and hunger.
He is a lovable, beautifully mannered man who loves his profession 
passionately. His huge sorrow is that after he's gone, there will be 
no one to take over. A hard-to-find, first-rate pupil is needed. 
Young, suffering girls, flock to him to offer their services, for 
nothing. Mothers try to sell their daughters.  But it won't do. 
Wang's successor, by tradition and by divination has to be male.
A bright-looking boy, about 8, does catch Wang's eye and ear. His 
father (who will turn out to be his tyrannical owner) will sell him 
for ten silver dollars. Wang buys him at a discount, half price., and 
names him "Doggie."
The kid turns out to be the ideal choice. She calls the old man 
"Granpa," and happy Wang feels that the child is his grandson. But 
after a series of events and episodes, all of them intelligently, 
colorfully and appealingly done, Doggie turns out to be a girl. Past 
his initial irritation and disappointment, Wang makes his peace with 
Doggie, a mutual affection keeps growing touchingly. Intelligent, 
fast-learning, able, devoted and charming she becomes an invaluable 
companion, assistant and part of the show.
Of course things cannot keeping coming up roses. Doggie accidentally 
set fire to the boat, feels guilty and vanishes. But she resurfaces, 
sad, hungry, unkempt. Which leads to a series of believable 
complications, a kind of domino theory that results in Wang being 
jailed and accused of crimes -- falsely, and by corrupt  police 
authorities. We yearn for a happy ending and a reunion of the old man 
and the child -- and don't get disappointed.  But it is all done with 
such realism and imagination that we are very far from feel-good 
movie clichés.
There is, from the film's start, a third major character, also a 
performer. Master Liang (a role held by a star of Chinese Opera) who 
plays female roles in opera. (That's where this art form and 
Shakespeare meet, since men play women). He is an immensely admired 
celebrity. Huge audiences attend  over and over the operas he is in. 
Crowds mob him in the streets. Chauffeur-driven Liang is chic, 
wealthy, has a palatial home and fans among the rich, powerful and 
famous.
He is an admirer of Wang, whom he vainly tries to entice to the 
Opera, for sums that Wang has trouble imagining. But intelligently 
and with feeling, Liang accepts Wang's refusal. He also urges him to 
find a successor.
When Chang is facing execution, the coalition of Liang and Doggie 
save him. But not before Liang's initial efforts fail. That's when he 
states that actors (and artists) are adulated, "but don't really 
count"
This wonderful, splendidly acted movie has poignancy, seriousness as 
well as much humor.It is only lightly and discreetly political as it 
shows (in passing) the old days of haves and have-nots as well as the 
sexism which, presumably, is no longer part of today's China.
Above all it is a song of human warmth and dedication to art.  Its 
camera work is beautiful, with striking colors --and colorfulness. 
The sets, a feast for the eye, include temples, gigantic statues 
carved in hillsides, perfectly lit interiors and exteriors, 
fascinating (and exotic to Western eyes) scenes of Opera 
performances. A fine musical score is divided into fine "European" 
style music (strings predominate) and lovely Chinese.sounds
The pristine print I saw has crystal-clear sound and subtitles (fewer 
than usual are needed) which are exceptionally large and easy to read.
KOM's maker is non-conformist Wu Tianming. Already a director, he was 
given the headship of a studio (Xian) in the early 1980s, nurtured 
new talent, and raised his studio's income from last to first place, 
even though some of the films he produced (Red Sorghum, etc.) 
infuriated  conservative authorities.
At the time of the Tienanmen Square disaster (1989), he was visiting 
the United States. There, he strongly disapproved the Chinese 
Government's action. His criticism resulted in his staying, 
prudently,  in this country for close to five years, during which he 
taught film and lectured in several unversities. He also opened a 
video store in Los Angeles. Wu is back home again.

Author
Jonathan Richards
     "King of Masks", an endearing if sentimental Chinese melodrama,
joins the ranks of movies about crusty grownups reluctantly adopting
adorable tykes and growing to love them -- "Central Station", "Kolya",
"Gloria", "Big Daddy"; the list runs back, including such classics as
"Little Miss Marker" and Chaplin's "The Kid".  There are few among
them that do not require that pocket pack of Kleenex.
In this story, Wang (Zhu Xu) actually wants the kid.  He's an
elderly street performer who specializes in lightning-fast changes of
paper masks, but he has no heir to whom to hand down his secrets.
This is provincial China in the 30s, and tradition requires that these
mysteries be passed only from father to son; no girls allowed.  Wang
goes to a shadowy small-town slave market where destitute parents
peddle their children.  Girls are a glut on the market, but healthy
little boys are not to be had, not even for ready money.  To his
surpassing joy, Wang spots a bright 7-year-old and snaps him up.
Doggie (Zhou Ren-ying) is everything a street performer could
want in a son.  Almost.  He's cute, loyal, hardworking, a talented
acrobat, and can find the right spot to scratch a back.  There's only
one thing missing: when circumstances require him to pee on demand, he
lacks the "little teapot spout" that distinguishes the male of the
species.
A girl!  In a culture that held performers in low esteem, girls
were not even esteemed enough to be performers.  The King of Masks
tries to dump the deceitful baggage, but she won't stay dumped;
eventually, he relents.  But no more "Grandpa".  From now on, it's
"Boss".
Zhu Xu is a veteran of the Beijing People's Artistic Theater, and
he brings a craggy warmth and quicksilver dexterity to his title role
as the King of Masks.  Zhou Reng-ying is a big-eyed, round-faced kid
with a remarkable gymnastic talent honed by her background as a
professional acrobat.  Zhou also brings life experience to the role --
she was sold to a circus troupe at the age of 3.  Shanghai opera star
Zhao Zhigang plays Master Liang, a famous female impersonator.  These
three characters all live on society's fringes, and all survive
through the use of masks and deception.
Director Wu Tianming draws us into this old hanky with an exotic
setting, good storytelling, and beautiful cinematography.  There's a
bit too much of the maudlin, a little excess in the weeping and crying
"Grandpa" department, but with three fine actors and even a trained
monkey pulling the strings, it's satisfying sentimentality.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Tian-Ming Wu's delicately touching THE KING OF MASKS, Zhu Xu plays a
humble but popular street performer known as "the King of Masks." Called
Grandpa by one and all, he's had a hard life, but he's not complaining.
A resolute and proud man, he has dedicated himself to his art and has
asked no one for a handout.  His wife left him decades ago for
committing the unforgivable sin of poverty.
His one ambition in life has been to leave his magical art of
"change-mask" to his son.  This goal was long ago thwarted when his only
child, a boy of 10, died.
His unique and magical art form is something well worth preserving.
With a snap, he waves his hand in front of his face to reveal a new,
wildly and intricately colored mask.  When the last mask is off, the
crowd has his beaming, snaggletoothed grin to entertain them.
Set in China in the 1930s, the film has a strong sense of place.  The
narrow alleyways give way to colorful houses encrusted in meandering
bundles of mystical fog.  The basic food staples at the market seems so
real that you'll begin to smell them.  One of the most satisfying, yet
most unusual, aspects of the production is the music.  In this very
Chinese film, Jiping Zhao's richly melancholic music sounds reminiscent
of some of the great American movie music of the 1950s, especially ON
THE WATERFRONT.
It was a poorer time and place, in which children were bought, sold, and
kidnapped.  Sometimes, it was orphans trying to offer themselves up in
return for a reliable source of food.  Other times, it was parents who
could no longer afford to put food on the table and wanted to find
someone who could feed and care for their children.  And sometimes, it
was just a crook making a nefarious living.
In order to be able to pass on his talents to another generation, the
quite elderly Grandpa goes to an underground children's market to buy a
son.  For a couple of dollars, he purchases a sweet 8-year-old, whom he
nicknames Doggie.  In a performance that avoids any hint of cloyingness,
Zhou Ren-ying plays the smart and resourceful Doggie.  The two leads
deliver exquisite performances and demonstrate genuine chemistry between
each other.  It is easy to care as much for them as they do for one
another.
There's only one thing amiss with Doggie.  You guessed it.  She's a
girl.  Although you think you'll figure out how grandpa comes upon this
fact, you haven't got a chance in a million.  Minglun Wei's charming
screenplay pulls the solution out of left field, but it manages to make
sense in context.
Da-Yuan Mu's intimate cinematography works best in its small moments of
revealing honesty.  It is most spectacular, however, in the more
dramatic ones as in the movie's beginning sequence, in which a dragon is
illuminated with sparks like a million fireflies and shaded in the
ensuing clouds of smoke.
The director has a gift for making small things special.  Grandpa has a
pet monkey that's no baboon.  The animal is the most consistently
serious character in the movie, and he takes good care of his master.
No dog has ever been more loyal.  If they ever want to remake Lassie
with a monkey, this is the one to get.
This simple tale, well told, has its share of tragedies.  Your heart
will be in every one of them, but you'll never feel manipulated or
cheated.  A small movie worth seeking out and savoring.
THE KING OF MASKS runs 1:41.  The film is in Mandarin with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would probably be PG for thematic
elements, brief nudity and a couple of mild profanities.  The picture
would be fine for any kid old enough to be interested.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
R. L. Strong
"The King Of Masks"
('Bian Lian')
Shaw Brothers Ltd. presents a Mona Fong production of a
Wu Tian-Ming film  'THE KING OF MASKS'  Zhu Xu
Zhou Ren-ying   Zhang Zhi-gang    Cinematographer: Mu Da-Yuan
Music by Zhao Ji-ping   Produced by Mona Fong & Titus Ho
Written by Wei Ming-lun   Directed by Wu Tian-Ming
Most of us are familiar with the works of Hong Kong filmmakers, such
as John Woo and Jackie Chan but there is so much more to Hong Kong
cinema than the action and Wu-Shu genre that floods the video stores
here in the west. "The King of Masks" is one of those rare films that
embraces it's cultural identity while making it identifiable for
anyone.  Director Wu Tian-ming ('Life' - 1984) has crafted one of the
most moving drama about China that we've ever seen. While not on a
production level of "Farewell, My Concubine", 'The King of Masks' is
solid film making by one of the art forms true masters.
The story is pretty straight forward.  Wang Bian-lian (Zhu Xu) is an
aging street performer trained in the Sichuan opera technique of face
changing, rapidly applying and removing elaborately decorated paper
masks. Un-married and without children Bian-lian is resigned to the
fact that he will not be able to pass his art down as he has no heir.
One evening, after a performance he comes across a destitute man who
is willing to sell his son. The two men barter out a price, and
Bian-lian returns to his houseboat with his new adoptive son, whom he
nick-names 'Doggie' (Zhou Ren-ying). Immediately showing the youngster
the tricks of the trade, the new family start their life
together. After several street performances, Bian-lian gambles at a
street market, showing his ability cutting bamboo. He is tricked by
the head merchant and accidentally cuts his foot. He asks for his new
grandson, 'Doggie' to urinate on the ashes of burnt cloth to help stop
the bleeding. Doggie refuses, finally confessing that he is in reality
a girl.  Bian-lian is heartbroken. It is against tradition to train
women in a family art, as only men can perform. Bian-lian tries to
leave Doggie behind, but his groaning love for the child causes him to
keep her on as hired help and not as family. As the relationship
between these two grows both closer and more distant, Doggie takes it
on herself to kidnap a young boy she finds lost in the streets one
day. She presents the boy to his estranged foster grandfather and then
leaves to fend for herself.  Bian-lian is both overjoyed and
heartbroken. He has now gained an heir that he can pass his art onto,
but he has now lost a child that he truly loved. The story takes a
heart rending turn when, finding the young boy, the local officials
arrest Bian-lian and charge him with child slavery and kidnapping of
several missing children (helping the local officials to close these
unsolved cases and maintain their positions in the
government). Bian-lian is sentenced to death until Doggie returns and
with the help of Opera star Luo Sulan, convinces the corrupt officials
to release the old man.
The above plot breakdown does nothing to express the rich, emotional
depth of this film. "King of Mask" does not become maudlin or
syrupy. It's characters capture you with their believability and
depth. This is a film that will challenge the most hardened of
hearts. The performances of Zhu Xu and Zhou Ren-ying are remarkably
fine tuned. Zhou Ren-ying puts in a performance that belays her mere 8
years of age. Her command of her emotions are absolutely
remarkable. We have never seen a child actor this talented and this
believable. Zhu Xu as the aging performer is also astounding. making
us believe in a magical art, long since vanished from our world and
yet remaining steadfastly human, with all of the encompassing
frailties, insecurities, and hope that we could only aspire to.
The script by Wei Ming-lun is wonderfully constructed. Simplistic in
it's set up and effortlessly delivered. This is a story that traverses
national and cultural boundaries.  This is a story of the heart, and
an indictment against a sexist tradition that still lingers in some
parts of the world.
Director Wu Tian-Ming returns to his beloved China after spending 6
years in exile in America on behalf of his political views. His return
to filmmaking is a triumphant success. Images and sounds of such
emotional power linger throughout this film and it is a shame that it
may not get the wide release here in the U.S. it so richly deserves.
"The King of Mask" is a modern classic. A story that will be
remembered years after it is seen.
On a scale of *****, "BIAN LIAN" (The King of Masks) rates a full *****.
copyright ) 1998 R. L. Strong
Nothing in this review may be copied without the written permission 
of the author.

Author
Ross Anthony
A Chinese film with English subtitles, "The King of Masks" starts out strong
and enduring, but squanders its tender sincerity on dramatics.
A sweet and aging street performer with no male descendants to carry on his
mask-changing art resorts to purchasing an orphan boy. The relationship
between the two outcasts from opposite ends of the life cycle is as warm and
rich to witness as the man's artistry. However, very early on we (the
audience) learn that the boy is really a girl, a promising conflict to this
modest paradise. Soon thereafter, the old man wises up to this fact as well.
A strong animosity between the two develops into a spark which ignites an
unnecessary fire of dramatic events resulting in the old man's
incarceration.
If I could forgive the accidental fire and the pending hanging of the old
man (which I could), then I would have enjoyed the orphan's desperate,
though theatric, act of redemption (which I did). But, it went too far.
Already dangerously teetering on the melodramatic, this powerfully sweet
scene concludes with entirely anticlimactic redundant and plainly putrid
dialogue. Where was the editor?
If my words are harsh on this little film, it's only because the filmmakers
wet my appetite with a wonderful setting to what I'd expected to be a great
film.
Why spill the beans so soon? This unique relationship would have been enough
to keep me interested -- I didn't need the pseudo drama. Why not have the
girl keep her secret well into her teens, only to find out after the old man
dies that he knew her secret all along?
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KING OF MASKS, THE (BIAN LIAN) (director: Wu Tianming; screenwriter:
Minglun Wei; cinematographer: Mu Dayuan; cast: Zhao Zhi Gang (Liang Sao
Lang), Zhou Ren-ying (Doggie), Zhu Xu (Bian Lian Wang-The King of
Masks); Runtime: 101; Samuel Goldwyn Release; 1996-Hong Kong)
Set in the 1930s, in the rural province of China called Sichuan. In
reality that was a time of great poverty and unrest and this film serves
as a humanistic response to that age of intolerance and greed, though
the film does not make a direct political statement. The director Wu
Tianming was one of the founders of 'fifth generation' directors and
left China after the Tiananmen Square uprising, only to return in 1995.
This is his first film in ten years and it is sponsored by the Chinese
government, and one of its chief faults is that the film used bad film
stock, as it seemed out of focus and grainy. On the positive side, it is
a colorful and heart-tugging though highly manipulative melodrama,
filled with obvious reactions against injustices, but whose voice is
always on the side of the artist and those who are disenfranchised in
society.
The story centers around an elderly street performer who is a fast
changer of silk masks. He has no male heir and according to the ancient
customs, he can only pass the art onto a male. To remedy this, concerned
his art will die with him, he adopts an 8-year-old son and is pleased
when he calls him grandpa, but soon realizes that he has been fooled
into taking a girl.
Bian Lian Wang (Zhu Xu), the King of Masks, is a crowd favorite among
those in the streets, who makes his money on donations. Seeing him
perform his speedy changing faces, is a much idolized opera singer of
the time, Liang Sao Lang (Zhao Zhigang), who is a female impersonator.
He shows such tremendous admiration for the King's gifts, that he asks
to learn the old man's tricks, which he is willing to pay him a huge sum
for and put him in his more prestigious show. The poverty-stricken Old
Master turns him down while expressing great appreciation for the offer,
but maintains his artistic secrets can only be passed onto a male heir.
What he takes to heart, is the impersonator's plea for him to find a
male heir. In the next town the Old Master goes to, that is struck with
floods and personal misfortune, he bargains with an unscrupulous man in
the black market and pays $5 for what he is told is a boy. The lonely
man, who lost his only son many years ago, is moved by hearing himself
called grandpa and agrees to the price even though it is too high for
him.
The film will go on to dispel China's ancient notions that a girl is not
as valuable as a boy. Doggie (Zhou Ren-ying) will do everything that she
can to try and please grandpa, but he resists teaching her his gifts
when he learns that he is a girl. Still, he is the only one who has
showed her any kindness in her short life and she offers to call him
boss and work as a cook and cleaner for him, rather than have him kick
her out of his river boathouse. He reluctantly agrees to this
arrangement, and as they live together he can't help feeling strongly
about her, but he just can't show it. When she causes him much grief and
leaves his place, she tries to make things right by taking a kidnapped
boy to him. This will result in him being framed as the kidnapper by the
venal police.
The film becomes predictable, as it shows how they are both shaped by
their experiences of the hard-times they live in and by the traditions.
She is a good-hearted girl and a real sweetie pie, while he shows signs
of being a very generous person, but can't get over his stubborness. As
a result, when the film's last act rolls around, what happens all feels
contrived and overacted, and I felt manipulated, especially when I saw
that the sweet little girl is even willing to die for her grandpa. One
would have to have a heart of stone not to be moved by her actions of
self-sacrifice. Though the viewer is being shamelessly manipulated, the
story feels so strong and right, that it seems easy to get caught up in
the emotions of the moment and the beautifully arranged images that lit
the screen up with magical faces and gorgeous sets and costumes. And, if
the girl wasn't a charmer enough, and the Old Master and opera singer
didn't have expressive enough gestures to steal the scenes they were in,
there is the Old Master's monkey to even steal scenes from them, as he
repays the Old Master for his kindness by remaining completely devoted
to him, even after he is framed and jailed for kidnapping a young boy.
The film got ever so mushy, but it was so cleverly executed and I was
gladly taken in by Zhou Ren-ying and Zhu Xu pulling on my heart strings.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some movies are tearjerkers of the worst sort.  "Message
in a Bottle" is perhaps the most recent example.  Others are
heartbreaking.  "The King of Masks" is an excellent example
of this latter category.  Photographed to resemble a
landscape painting in a Chinese village meant to be part of
that vast country's Sichuan province, director Wu Tianming's
uplifting drama of love shared by two outsiders brings
to mind the affection between the aging Dora and the
orphaned Josue in Walter Salles' Brazilian triumph, "Central
Station."  
   The narrative takes place in the 1930s, during a particularly
bleak period of Chinese history; its people ravaged by civil
conflict among warlords, incursions by Japan, a rising
Communist movement, and natural disasters like floods and
droughts.  As captured skillfully by photographer Mu Dayuan,
scenes render pathetic attempts by poverty-stricken citizens
to sell, even give away their children, whom they are no
longer able to feed.  Male youngsters fare a little better than
girls, often able to secure $2 or $3 for their impoverished
fathers and mothers, while the fair sex--considered next to
worthless in the patriarchal society of its time--are simply
given away to anyone with compassion or the wish to put
them to work as cooks, perhaps even hookers.    
   Wei Minglung's screenplay centers on two desperate
people: a lonely old man who ekes our a meager living by
changing faces, i.e. by managing through sleight of hand to
shed and change up to 14 facial masks in a matter of
seconds--so quickly that the gathering crowds have no idea
how the magic is performed.  Since an old tradition requires
such people to pass on their secrets to male heirs, the titled
king of masks, Bian Lian Wang (Zhu Xu), is despondent: he
is alone and lacks the necessary beneficiary.  His spirits are
raised when the cast-off eight-year-old Doggie (Zhou Ren-
Ying) attaches herself to him, but Doggie--who has concealed
her gender behind a short haircut--is discovered when asked
to urinate into a cloth which is to be used as a poultice.
   "The King of Masks" follows the duo, who have by now
bonded, as they make the rounds of the village.  While Bian,
who is known only as "grandpa" or "boss" by his young
sidekick, fascinates the crowds, young Doggie assists by
announcing each act and, what is more important, serves as
the companion so needed by her adopted grandpa.  When a
series of misfortunes occurs, obliging the king of masks to
throw the young girl out of the boat which they call their
home, Doggie is ultimately called upon to save her
grandfather's life from execution by the authorities--who have
accused the old man of kidnapping.
   The chief virtue of the film is its realistic portrayal of the
growing attachment between two of society's outcasts. 
Avoiding sloppy sentimentality by presenting a vivid,
believable, thoroughly heartfelt drama of unsullied affection
between dependent girl and despondent magician, "The King
of Masks" headlines an astonishing performance by young
Zhou Ren-Ying.  Zhou is anything but robotic.  Mature well
beyond her years (in part, the press notes tell us, because
she had to make her own way early on), Zhou was picked for
the role because of her experience in show business, having
performed from the age of three with an acrobatic troupe in
the city of Xian.  Not only does Zhou shatter our hearts with
her soulful discharge of the role: she does her own stunts.  In
one particular feat she hangs on a steel cable from a twenty-
meter high rooftop, to which she has repaired to get a
government official's attention.  
  In telling the story, director Wu educates film-goers on the
conventions of Chinese opera.  He cuts several times to
performances of a troupe led by the revered diva, Liang Sao
Lang (Zhao Zhigang), leaving us with the impression that this
Chinese art form shares protocol with Greek and Japanese
theater.  Liang, in the role of a man who regularly plays a
female character, shows his audience in the movie seats that
Chinese opera is anything but the bizarre exhibition that
Westerners take it to be.  By the conclusion of this soulful
drama, we are reminded even of King Lear by this king of
masks: a man who for a time discards the daughter who
loves him the most, ultimately redeemed by an insight he
acquires altogether late in the game.  
   Fortunately for Wu--and for the Chinese people
themselves--subjects which would have been taboo under the
Communist regime before 1980 (such as Buddhism) are now
acceptable in a country that has opened its gates even to
controversial American entries.  To no one's surprise, "The
King of Masks" has acquired top awards in festivals around
the world, from Istanbul to Moscow to China itself.  The film is
in Mandarin with English subtitles.
