Title
Review for Matinee (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Shane Burridge
Joe Dante's most personal film is also one of his best.  After a hilarious 
opening sequence featuring a direct copy of the cinema promos made by 
director-producer William Castle in the late 50s/early 60s, Dante settles 
into areas of childhood nostalgia that's only been hinted at in his previous 
work.  He's a good choice of director for this project: it's plain to see 
that he has always loved movies (his films have more movie in-jokes than any 
other director I can think of) and he was lucky enough to see Castle films 
with the gimmicks 'Emergo' (HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL), 'Percepto' (THE TINGLER) 
and 'Illusion-O' (13 GHOSTS) when he was an impressionable young movie buff.
MATINEE is set in Florida during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis and begins 
when teenager Gene (Simon Fenton) witnesses two sober warnings about atomic 
weapons.  The first is from movie producer Lawrence Woolsey (John Goodman) 
in a Saturday matinee trailer, the second is from John F. Kennedy on live 
television.  One is obviously far-fetched, the other deadly serious, but 
what's a boy to think?  Appropriately, Gene's younger brother believes in 
both.   The reality/unreality of these two scenarios reaches a middle ground 
during Gene's third warning, when he is told that his school's nuclear 
attack drill (ever seen those old 'Duck and Cover' educational films?) is a 
sham.  It's just the right climate for Woolsey's new monster movie, and he 
duly arrives in town with his entourage in tow, for who can separate the 
current real-life nuclear horrors from his skilfully orchestrated ones?  
Woolsey's horror show boasts a barrage of audience-participation effects, 
and by the end not even the adults (including theater owner Robert Picardo) 
can differentiate between the gimmicks and the apocalypse.
Dante's agenda with this film  is clear: he wants to show what going to the 
movies *really* used to be like before the shopping malls and the cineplexes 
took over.   Fittingly, MATINEE's  second half is set in and around the 
cinema, cross-cutting between the monster movie (itself a very funny spoof 
of 50s nuclear-mutant horror flicks) and the action behind the scenes.  
Charles Haas' clever script ties up this package so neatly that you'll reach 
the final credits feeling completely satisfied - it even manages to include 
what surely must have been every teenage boy's fantasy during the Cold War, 
i.e. the prospect of being trapped for months in a fallout shelter with a 
would-be girlfriend.  Unfortunately, the script falters during a hackneyed 
'child-in-peril' climax, which is dispensed with so briefly that there's 
almost no justification for its inclusion.  It's a bad move for two reasons: 
firstly, it is the sort of thing you'd expect to find in a kid's movie, 
which MATINEE is not; secondly, it introduces a false note of real danger - 
the underlying theme of MATINEE is to watch how our minds surrender 
voluntarily or instinctively to larger-than-life fears.  Contrast this scene 
to the film's understated final shot, which hints at the war in Vietnam and 
conveys realistic menace a lot more effectively.  What's great about MATINEE 
is how it introduces fantastic elements to an ordinary setting and weaves 
them so invisibly into the story, so it's ironic that the only 'real' 
dangerous moment in the film is also its only unrealistic one.
The era celebrated in this film happened before my time, but I still have 
enough memories of my own journeys to the local cinema (whether it was to 
see old prints of Tarzan or Ray Harryhausen films) to recognize that for a 
while there was a golden age of movie-going for young audiences.  The 
Saturday matinees were full of kids who were only half-interested in the 
show; foodstuffs were routinely thrown; and cheers sometimes punctuated the 
action on screen.  If only I'd seen a skeleton sliding on a wire or been 
given electric shocks in my seat - my childhood would have been made 
complete.   For now, like many other viewers, I'll have to make do with 
Dante's own affectionate, good-humored memoir.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
David Pimmel
-- comedy, rated PG, runs about 1:40
-- starring : John Goodman, Kathy Moriarty, and a bunch of teenagers
-- directed by Joe Dante and written by Charles Hass
-- **** out of *****
SUMMARY:
     Lawrence Woolsley (John Goodman) brings his new horror film MANT!
to premiere in Key West during the height of the Cuban Missile crisis.
He hopes to capitalize on the tense moment by providing an escape for
the town.  We see most of the events through the stories of four
teenagers and how life affects them.
QUICK AND EASY REVIEW: 
     I really enjoyed MATINEE.  The mixture of comedy and tension
blended nicely.  Unlike many comedies this film tries, and succeeds, in
getting past the stage of doing anything for a laugh.  The makers of
the film also cared about telling an intelligent story.  The
performances of all the principals are right on the mark, particularly
John Goodman as the schlock master.  So I would definitely recommend
this film to anyone looking for a light hearted, yet interesting way to
spend a couple of hours.  
LONGER, MORE DETAILED REVIEW: [beware of spoilers]
     The primary reason I enjoyed this film was, that while being a
comedy, the film also had an intelligent story to tell.  Too many
comedies today subscribe to the the notion that a comedy need only make
you laugh.  You watch the movie, laugh a lot, leave the theatre and take
nothing with you.  MATINEE is not like that.  I left the picture
thinking about what I would do faced with the Cuban Missile crisis.  I
found myself wondering what would happen to the characters of the film.
But most importantly, I found myself caring about what would happen to
the characters.  
     The comedy of the film centers around Goodman, his character, and
the film he brings to Key West.  I believe that Goodman is one of the
finest comedic actors in the business today.  He is highly expressive
both physically and vocally.  I felt he at least deserved an Oscar
nomination for his work in  BARTON FINK.  The other characters are often
lost in a scene with him due to his commanding nature, however, while
the star, Goodman is actually not at the center of the film.  
     The movie is really the story of the four teenagers, discovering 
who they are and what they want, against a background where at any
minute it could all end.  I thought the kids reaction were highly
realistic.  They tried to block it out, they tried to escape from the
concerns of their world.   Unfortunately it kept creeping back in,
particularly with the fear, and the chaos of the time.  
     While the comedy centered on Goodman, and the drama on the teens,
there was a great deal of overlap.  Several aspects of the panic are
shown in a humorous light.  One example is a scene where people are
fighting each other for the the last cans and boxes of food in a
grocery store.  If you think about it the threat of nuclear annihilation
seems hardly to be the backdrop for a comedy, but it works here.
     Another reason I like this film is that I like B- science fiction 
movies.  One of my favorite films to go watch is PLAN 9 FROM OUTER
SPACE.  (Note I did not say it was one of my favorite movies, but one of
my favorite to see.)  While MANT! never got made, many films like it
were, and MANT! serves mostly as Dante's homage to the B-films he
loves.
     So again I would like to recommend MATINEE to anybody looking for a
good, humorous story.  This isn't a gag film like many other comedies
but an intelligent, well-thought out, film about real people with real
problems told in an often hilarious way.  Enjoy!

Author
Brian Koller
"Matinee" is a comedy with dramatic elements.  It takes
place in Key West, Florida, in 1962 during the Cuban Missile
Crisis.  John Goodman is perfectly cast as Lawrence Woosley,
a producer of schlocky horror films, who comes to Key West
to promote his latest film, "Mant."  His special other is
the jaded Ruth Corday (Cathy Moriarty) who also is the leading
lady in his films.  She makes frequent vague threats to 
leave him, but Goodman's character is so good-natured 
that he always just laughs.
Meanwhile, Gene Loomis (Simon Fenton) is a teenage boy
living on the Key West Naval base with his parents, his
father having been sent to help blockade the Cubans.
He is a big fan of Goodman's films and, discovering that
Goodman is in town, follows him around to learn the secrets
of the trade.
Gene's love interest is Sandra, a student whose passionate 
and unpopular political opinions are encouraged by her
liberal parents.  Gene becomes friends with Stan, who has
a thing for Shelly (Kellie Martin).  Shelly has strong
sexual desires that Stan doesn't quite understand.  
Unfortunately for Stan, she has has a former boyfriend,
a street punk named Harvey Starkweather.
Harvey's character is the weak link of the film.  The
writers try to do too much with him.  He writes beatnik
poetry, dresses in leather, is unstable and acts like a
punk.  He also is in love with Shelly, and has jealous
rages over her that threaten Stan's health.
Threatended by Harvey, Stan breaks a date with Shelly,
instead going to see "Mant".  Gene is there also, with
his kid brother and new girlfriend Sandra.  Harvey has
been hired by Goodman to run the film's sound controls,
and to dress up in a Mant suit and run around the theatre
at key moments of the film.  Spector, a big movie distributor,
is also at the movie and is being wooed by Goodman.
Gene talks to Shelly and patches things up between Shelly
and Stan, who neck in aisle seats.
"Mant" is a hilarous parody of a fifies/early sixties
horror film.  A man has been exposed to radiation and is
turning into an ant, head and arms first.  There is a silly
love triangle between Mant, his wife, and his dentist.
At other moments during the film there are several parodies
of sixties movies and their previews that are equally funny,
especially a scene from "The Shook Up Shopping Cart" that is
a riot.
Harvey, in the Mant suit, catches Stan and Shelly and goes
beserk, later dragging her off at knifepoint.  In the commotion
Goodman and company leave the theatre. The theatre owner has a bomb
shelter with a bolted time-controlled lock.  Mistaking the
movie for a bombing raid, the owner prepares his bomb shelter,
but accidentally locks Gene and Sandra inside, who believe 
that the world is coming to an end.
Once Harvey has been taken away by the police and Shelly
is safe, Goodman returns to the theatre.  The unsupervised kids 
have been rioting in the balcony, threatening the lives of
the patrons.  Goodman switches films, making the audience
believe that nuclear holocaust has come.  The theatre empties
except for Gene's kid brother, who must be rescued from the
collapsing balcony.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
     Lawrence Woolsey (John Goodman) is an old-time showman trying to
put the magic back into grade-B horror movies.  His latest film, MANT!,
made in "Rumble-Rama" will either make him or break him, but Woolsey
won't let his precarious future ruin his enjoyment of the present.  He's
sure of himself and his audience.  The premier of MANT! forms the
backdrop for a number of smaller human dramas--such as first dates and
first kisses--and one larger, more historical event.
     Joe Dante's latest film is one-third comedy, one-third nostalgia,
and one-third sentiment.  Set during the tense period of the Cuban
Missile Crisis, MATINEE tells the story of a week in the lives of
several teenagers and small-time horror film maker Lawrence Woolsey.
For each of them, these tension-filled days mean something different.
     It's likely that those who have a conscious memory of October 1962
will appreciate MATINEE far more than those who don't.  Although Dante's
film does a good job of conveying the flavor of the time, actual
memories add an irreplaceable enhancement.  Remembering how you reacted
to the Crisis will enable you to empathize that much more with the
characters of this picture.  Much of the nostalgia will be lost on the
younger viewers.  Only those who lived through those troubled days can
fully appreciate some of what MATINEE is trying to do.
     Fortunately, the success and enjoyability of the film do not rest
entirely in this arena.  MATINEE also presents a witty spoof of the
numerous low-budget monster movies that became a common staple for
theaters during the fifties and sixties.  As silly and campy as MANT
looks, it bears a remarkable resemblance to many of the films that can
now be seen at two o'clock in the morning on a local UHF channel.
     Aside from the portion of the story that involves Goodman, almost
everything else centers around four teenagers, ably played by a quartet
of actors.  There's Gene (Simon Fenton), the "Navy brat" who moves from
city to city without ever getting a chance to put down roots.  Stan
(Omri Katz), Gene's lone friend, is hopelessly smitten with Sherry
(Kellie Martin), a girl who is interested in exploring her own
sexuality.  Finally, Lisa Jakub plays the uncertain daughter of a pair
of free-thinking beatniks.
     MATINEE manages to blend its diverse elements together.  Sometimes
the seams aren't as transparent as they should be, but the movie still
manages to be more agreeable than not.  The humor is mostly low-key, and
works as it's intended to.  There are not many belly laughs to be had,
but there are quite a few chuckles.
     Of undeniable importance is the rapport the audience develops with
the characters.  They may not be the most three-dimensional of screen
personalities, but what we see of them seems real, despite the
occasionally bizarre circumstances they find themselves in.  This is,
after all, a movie about movies, and Dante never ceases to remind us of
this with an endless stream of in-jokes.
     John Goodman is tailor-made for his role.  As uncomfortable as he
seemed as THE BABE, he's right at home here, chewing on his part with as
much gusto as he munches on his cigar.  He's a pleasure to watch--the
bigger-than-life showman who does what he does simply because he enjoys
it.
     There's nothing deep or profound in MATINEE and its occasional
comments about the evils of nuclear war fall a little flat in light of
current events.  It's not clear whether the movie is trying to make a
point or simply emphasizing its historical context.  Any message that
MATINEE has doesn't come across clearly or with any force.  This is an
example of pure, unadulterated entertainment.
     The film is far from perfect, but most of the flaws are minor and
will do little (if anything) to impede the enjoyment of the movie.  Wit,
satire, nostalgia, and a few likable characters form a solid mix.  If
there are a few moments when the movie loses its focus, well, as
Lawrence Woolsey would put it, "That's show biz."
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:43, PG, Comedy, 1993
Director: Joe Dante
Cast: John Goodman, Cathy Moriarty, Simon Fenton, Omri Katz,      
      Kellie Martin, Lisa Jakub, Dick Miller, David Clennon,      
      Kevin McCarthy, John Sayles
     In a small Floridian town, the occupants are worried about being
bombed by the Russians from Cuba.  What better a time for Lawrence
Woolsey, John Goodman, to open one of his new B horror films?  Goodman,
with Cathy Moriarty, one of his actresses, comes to the town to
personally unveil his new "Rumble-vision."  Simon Fenton is new to the
town and likes Lisa Jakub.  Omri Katz is in love with Kellie Martin, but
her ex-con ex-boyfriend wants Katz to stay away from her.
     MATINEE is a love story, spoof of old horror films, and a comedy
about people overreacting in a panic situation.  People from around the
time of the Cuban missile crisis (who like comedies) will most likely
love this film.  Also people who were born after that time, but have had
exposure to old B horror movies, will probably also love this film (I
did!).  On a scale of zero to five, I give MATINEE a five.  MATINEE is
rated PG for explicit language and adult situations.
     The cast for this film I feel does an excellent job.  Rising above
the rest of this cast is John Goodman (ARACHNOPHOBIA, "Roseanne").  He
gives his usual excellent performance.  Cathy Moriarty (KINDERGARTEN
COP, NEIGHBORS) does a great job with her role.  The young cast Simon
Fenton, Omri Katz, Kellie Martin ("Life Goes On"), and Lisa Jakub all
give great performances.   The two men against Woolsey's film, John
Sayles and Dick Miller (FAR FROM HOME, AMAZON WOMEN ON THE MOON) I
think, do a great job and are highlights in the film.   Kevin McCarthy
(THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN, INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS [1956 and
1978 versions]) is excellent as an actor in Lawrence Woolsey's film.
     The film shown in this film is great.  It does a wonderful job of
spoofing the horror films from the time (I have seen some from that time
on the late, late, late, late night movies).  The way this film within a
film was done adds a lot to the finished product and especially the end.
The film (both) are very well written and directed, by Joe Dante
(GREMLINS, AMAZON WOMEN ON THE MOON).  The film is photographed
beautifully.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This one is going to be hard for me to be objective about.  I think Joe
Dante may be a couple of years older than I, loved the same films I loved
when I was growing up.  He and I subscribed to the same monster magazines
and probably had the same books in our libraries; we idolized the same
filmmakers; we were both walking encyclopedias about the same films.  Now he
has reached into his past, grabbed it, and put it on film and at the same
time he put a lot of my past forward too.
     It is October 1962 in Key West, Florida, and the second biggest thing
happening in the world is the Cuban Missile Crisis.  People are going crazy
because they might die at any minute.  But right now the big thing happening
is that Lawrence Woolsey is coming to town.  The great William-Castle-like
filmmaker of lousy monster movies is coming to key West to test-market
MANT!, the story of a man turning into a giant ant.  Woolsey is a genius at
promoting his films and uses every trick in the book and some never in any
book to fill the seats with joy buzzers below and frightened kids above.
     MATINEE is a film with a terrific first half.  This is a film that
manages to tie together a teenage love story, a serious anti-war theme, a
satire of science fiction films, and the comic story of Woolsey trying to
have a successful sneak preview.  John Goodman's Woolsey is extremely well-
written, appearing at first to be a stop-at-nothing self-promoter and then
proving to have the char, and natural showmanship of a Will Rogers.  Cathy
Moriarty plays Ruth Corday, a great foil for Woolsey.  She stars in MANT!
and then brazenly has to don a nurse's costume and play the ersatz "nurse in
attendance" at the showing.  All the time she is letting Woolsey know
exactly how stupid the entire proceedings are.  Moriarty is great, but the
role feels as if it was written for Mary Woronov.  Simon Fenton (of THE
POWER OF ONE) plays Gene Loomis, starting in high school and dating for the
first time.  Currently he is coming home to a family terrified of the
missile crisis and worried for the Navy father who is off enforcing the
embargo of Cuba.
     It is a great start, but the screenplay by Charlie Haas falls apart in
the second half.  Much of the logic of the story breaks down with some of
the plot not making sense at all.  No film made in the 1950s ever combined
so many gimmicks to bring in an audience.  But that exaggeration is almost
acceptable compared to the miles-over-the-top lampoon of the 1950s and 1960s
films themselves.  Any film with the budget MANT! required really would have
been better crafted.  The writing might have been dull, but it is unlikely
to have been so melodramatic or vaudevillian.  The distorted style of MANT!
is inconsistent with the rest of the film.
     Part of the fun of MATINEE is picking out all the allusions to 1950s
and 1960s films.  Of course, there are the seat vibrators of THE TINGLER,
the insurance policies of MACABRE, and the monster unveiling of THE FLY, but
see if you can recognize the music borrowed from the 1950s Universal sci-fi
films and even snatches of HOUSE OF FRANKENSTEIN.  Even the "M" in the MANT!
logo is borrowed from THE DEADLY MANTIS.  And the film is peppered with
actors from 1950s films.  Not Kenneth Tobey for once--at least I did not
notice him--but Robert Cornthwaite, Kevin McCarthy (who plays General
Ankrum, a reference to Morris Ankrum who often played upper-rank military
men), and William Schallert.  Also present in nice ironic roles are Dick
Miller and John Sayles.  Sayles, of course, is rarely an actor but he got
his start writing PIRANHA, ALLIGATOR, BATTLE BEYOND THE STARS, and THE
HOWLING, the first and last directed by Dante.
     While I cannot recommend every minute of MATINEE there is enough
pleasure here to make this one well worth seeing.  My rating would be a low
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
