Title
Review for Getting Even with Dad (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     There's one really good scene in GETTING EVEN WITH DAD, the failed
father-and-son frolic starring odd couple Ted Danson and Macaulay
Culkin.  Danson plays Ray, a robber whose son (Culkin) stashed the
stash of dad's last haul.  Timmy will tell, but on one condition: if
father collects then son ain't staying.  (He knows the cops are close
and doesn't want dad to disappear.  He'd rather go back and live with
his aunt.)
     Said scene unfolds at a bus station.  Ray has just placed his boy
on a bus and, walking away, is trying to decide if he *really* wants
the cash over the kid.  The cops are watching, of course, and they'll
round-up Ray the moment he unlocks the locker containing the cache.
     The scene is great:  Danson steps from the bus, stops, and
thinks.  He looks back, pauses, and keeps walking.  Cut to Culkin,
looking sad.  Cut back to Danson, stopped again.  Thinking.  All while
the cops--and the audience--are watching.
     Forget the rest of the film-- this is one of those great, dopey
Hollywood moments when a character comes to life right before our
eyes.  We swoon to these simple emotions, shamelessly holding our
breath as we wait for Ray's decision.  Will he?  Won't he?  It's great
schmaltz and the very reason we go to the movies.
     Too bad that most of the audience will have either *left* or
fallen asleep by this time.
Hardly *anything* is worth watching in the first hour of GETTING EVEN
WITH DAD.  Danson is sincere and that's about it.  His glued-on
ponytail is more interesting than co-star Culkin, though, who
sleepwalks through his scenes.
     Sartain and Rubinek are mildly amusing as Ray's unaccomplished
accomplices. (One inspired moment has Tweedledumb and Tweedledumber
trying to rob a collection box.  Stay awake and hear Sartain yell
"Wow!  Nun!" to great effect.)  Glenne Headly is the strangest find--a
rookie cop who pathetically falls for Danson.  Ugh.
     Forget either the script or the direction.  Here's a film that
features two, count 'em two, musical montages *and* Macaulay Culkin
doing bad lipsynch.  Shudder. (Maybe the title is a secret stab at Kit
Culkin, who must be wondering why he consented to this slop.)
     The saving grace is that GETTING EVEN WITH DAD delivers a
well-intentioned message, as best exemplified in the aforementioned
scene.  Too bad the film sucks.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Macaulay Culkin, Ted Danson, Glenne Headly, Saul Rubinek, 
           Gailard Sartain, Hector Elizando 
Director:  Howard Deutch 
Producers:  Katie Jacobs and Pierce Gardner 
Screenplay:  Tom S. Parker and Jim Jennewein 
Cinematography:  Tim Suhrstedt 
Music:  Miles Goodman 
Released by MGM 
     One of many pervasive societal problems in the United States is
the fracturing of the family unit, which sometimes leads to children
growing up without one of their parents.  More often than not, the
missing adult is the father, and the effect of his absence is rarely
positive, and occasionally profound.  GETTING EVEN WITH DAD would like
potential viewers to believe that it puts a "positive spin" on this
issue.  Actually, the dysfunctional family in this film is little more
than a shameless plot device to introduce a lame father/son bonding
adventure.
     Macaulay Culkin plays Tim, another in a line of precocious boys
portrayed by the young actor.  Tim's mother is dead and his father, an
ex-con named Ray (Ted Danson), is unsuitable as a role model, so he
lives with his aunt--until she gets hitched and drops him off to spend
a week with his dad.  Now, normally Ray can't be bothered with the boy,
but his sister's timing is especially bad on this occasion, because he
and his buddies Bobby (Saul Rubinek) and Carl (Gailard Sartain) are in
the midst of planning a rare coin heist.  When Tim learns about the
robbery, he immediately puts the knowledge to use for maximum personal
gain - a week of uninterrupted fun with dad.
     The premise of GETTING EVEN WITH DAD is vaguely reminiscent of
that of the vastly superior AMERICAN HEART, a 1993 release with Jeff
Bridges in the lead role.  AMERICAN HEART delivers everything that this
film doesn't:  a solid plot, impressive acting, and a hard look at the
complex dynamics of a fragmented father/son relationship - not to
mention the pressures on an ex-con trying to make it outside prison
walls.  GETTING EVEN WITH DAD wouldn't know real sentiment or
believable character development if it stumbled upon either.
     Just to make sure that the audience accepts this film as a
lighthearted (and light-headed) romp, two bumbling crooks--Bobby and
Carl--have been included (sound a little like another Culkin film?).
Most of the time, however, the pair proves to be more annoying than
amusing, with almost every attempt at a gag executed with dubious
aptitude.
     The central focus of GETTING EVEN WITH DAD is supposed to be the
forging of a genuine relationship between Tim and Ray.  The problem is,
with two such flat characters, how can any interaction between them be
meaningful?  Never are we given insight into how the two got along
before Ray's wife threw him out of the house and, more oddly, there's
no hint of resentment in Tim's attitude towards his father.  These are
only some of the issues that the filmmakers didn't want to address.
They apparently felt that all they had to do was put two big names
together.  After all, who cares about "details?"  Have father and son
spend a week going to baseball games, aquariums, amusement parks, and a
fishing pond, and the necessary bond will be formed.
     Need I mention that GETTING EVEN WITH DAD has a happy ending
(guess what happens)?  Anyone who thinks I'm giving something away with
that statement has the wrong idea about the film's nature and intent.
As bereft of intelligence as the movie is, I suppose it's amiable
enough, and likely to be enjoyed by children (many of whom will have no
trouble relating to the actions of 11-year old Tim).
     One curious note:  some of the occasionally-bluesy incidental
music (by composer Miles Goodman) bears an odd resemblance to the
Spencer Davis Group's 1967 tune "I'm a Man."  Every once in a while, I
half-expected to hear the voice of a young Steve Winwood.  That my
attention was so arrested by the less-than-exemplary score should be an
adequate comment about how noteworthy the rest of the production is.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
For many critics Macaulay Culkin symbolised everything that
was bad about early 1990s Hollywood. Following the smashing
success of HOME ALONE, Culkin became the most bankable child
star of those times with most of his later films repeating
the same formula over and over again. Since those usually
films relied on Culkin's pretty face and annoying brat
routine at the expense of everything else, young actor was
not particularly popular among critics, at least those
unwilling to bow to the standards of the lowest common
denominator or accept misanthropic comedies as family
entertainment. They probably greeted Culkin's puberty with a
sigh of relief - with his voice mutating, Culkin simply
couldn't deliver the goods anymore and his movie star career
came to a halt. GETTING EVEN WITH DAD, 1994 comedy by Howard
Deutsch, is one of his last films.
In this film Culkin plays Timmy Gleason, young boy whose
mother has passed away while father Ray (played by Ted
Danson), professional thief, spent most of the time in
prison. Ray is now out of prison and together with his two
accomplices - Bobby (played by Saul Rubinek) and Carl
(played by Gailard Sartain) - prepares great coin heist.
Timmy, however, shows up in the middle of planning and since
he is bright kid, he doesn't need much time to figure out
why Ray ignores his presence. So, in order to finally
attract father's attention, Timmy hides the stolen coins and
demands that Ray spend some time with him before turning
them over. When father and son finally get together, they
are followed by Ray's partners and police.
The script by Jim Jennewein and Tom S. Parker, based on
already bizarre premise, is overcrowded with sentimental
cliches (delinquent man sees the errors of his ways after
being paired with infant against his will) and some
obligatory but nevertheless implausible subplots (romantic
liaison between ex con and female detective, played by
Glenne Headley). This script provides few humorous scenes,
and character actors are doing fine work, whether they have
more complex job like Ted Danson, or play caricatures like
Rubinek and Sartain. However, good production values and
acting talent alone can't save GETTING EVEN WITH DAD to from
sliding in the oblivion reserved for Hollywood mediocrity.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
John Walker
My form of "rating": On the first viewing, I alternated between
     laughter and being pleasantly wired.  (Nothing hyper, mind you,
     just a pleasant "What's gonna happen next!?"  [Let it be noted
     that I get wired easily.])  On the second viewing, the humor
     predominated.  (I almost became the most dreaded theater
     companion--starting to laugh *before* the joke!)
The primary dilemma: This is one flick where reviewers don't have to
     give any opinions of their own.  For many of you, I can simply
     list some data, and I'll convince you that this is a flick you'll
     probably like a lot or probably hate intensely.  Datum: It
     co-stars *Macaulay Culkin*.  Datum: It has echoes (not very
     strong) of the HOME ALONE sagas.  There are other similar datums,
     too, but these two should be enough for now.
     You might already have heard the story, but here it is.  Ray (Ted
Danson) has planned the perfect heist: gold coins to be lifted with the
aid of two partners--Bobby (Saul Rubinek) and Carl (Gailard Sartain).
True, their last escapade got them four years in Folsom, but at least
Ray used the time well--to learn cake decorating, which he now does
for a living in San Francisco.
     Unfortunately, the flaw in the ointment is that Ray's son Timmy
(Culkin) has been dropped on him for a week.  Ray's estranged wife died
a few years ago, and Timmy has been living with Ray's sister Kitty.
Well, she's getting married, and dumps Timmy for a week.  Ray and
company pull off the heist, and merely have to sit on the coins for a
week while their fence gets cash.  Regrettably, Timmy is on to them,
purloins the coins, and holds them for blackmail: a week with Ray
actually acting like a father--taking him to a ball game, the
aquarium, roller coasters, the works.
     Much of the film's comedy will be based on Bobby and Carl tagging
along, trying to second-guess Timmy about the coins and to keep up with
him and Ray on the activities.  (I rather liked a "dramatic",
slow-motion moment--during a game of miniature golf!)
     Oh, by the way, through a fluke, the cops are on to Ray & Co.
They and Timmy will be tailed all week by Terese (Glenne Headly).  Need
we say that Something Will Develop Between Ray and Terese?
     Now, looking at that description, you might feel you can psyche
the story out: very 90s, very single-parent family, very father-son
bonding, very dealing with justifiable resentment.  (With heavy doses
of sentiment--and a little discreet smooching between Ray and
Terese.)
     Well, if that's what you want, you ain't gonna get it.  (Except
for the slight smooching--and the sentiment rush, which is held off
till the climax.)  GETTING EVEN WITH DAD may take place in 1994, but
its heart and soul are a lot earlier.  If I had to give a date, I'd say
1949: It still has some of the sweetness of 30s flicks, before it
became frozen in the 50s, but with a certain 40s realism.
     GETTING EVEN WITH DAD is in two great traditions of 30s and 40s
flicks: the crook with a heart of gold, and the kid out looking for a
parent.  I think it may pass for 90s because it does indeed take place
here.  The 30s and 40s kids were looking for an *additional* parent: a
wife for Dad, or a husband for Mom (or two separate kids conspiring to
get their respective parents married to each other).  That's too
optimistic for today.  Yes, if there's a possibility of getting Dad
hooked up with Terese, Timmy's not going to pass it by--but it's not
really his main goal.  Timmy's expectations are scaled down to 90s
reality.  He'll settle for one *real* parent.  (The guy his aunt Kitty
is marrying is a dork.)
     Timmy is not terribly interested in Working Out His Feelings.  He
knows what they are, they've been painful, and he doesn't deceive
himself about them or put on a show that it was really nothing.  But
Timmy, like his predecessors 50 and 60 years ago, has a very
down-to-earth, survival-motivated way of looking at things.  He and
they are instinctive little conservatives.  Families *ought* to have
breakfast in the morning; they *ought* to do things together; there are
*standards*, thank you; and we (kids) are going to see that things are
done as they ought to be done!
    Those kids were more apt to be concerned about the moral
implications of decent cooking and a clean house than about
"fulfillment".
     Timmy doesn't *need* to "bond" with Ray: Ray is his *father*.
Timmy just needs to wake Ray up to the fact.
     But it's not enough for Timmy just to get a full-time father.
Timmy has a 60-years-ago moral point of view together with 90s (or 40s)
realism.  He loves his father, but not his father's plans.  A) He
thinks stealing is *wrong*.  B) He's convinced that Ray will fail.
     For Ray, of course, the heist is his big chance: to own his own
bakery, to be secure, to make something of himself.  For Timmy, that
just doesn't cut it:
90s cynicism in the service of 30s ethics.
     Now, having noted what I think are GETTING EVEN WITH DAD's obvious
antecedents, I don't think it's any criticism to say that the show's
writers (Tom S. Parker and Jim Jennewein) are making no pretense to
originality.  Any of us who demand originality after meeting Ray & Co.
in the opening are given pretty explicit warning when Culkin first
appears on film.  We get a gentle nod to "Calvin and Hobbes"--as
Timmy voice-overs while he videotapes Kitty and her intended, Wayne:
     Radical originality, it's not.  But if you want to have fun
figuring out what's going to happen next, then GETTING EVEN WITH DAD
will give you ample opportunity.  That scene, for instance, sets up
Timmy's use of the video camera, which will be important later on.  And
this sort of thing happens again and again.
     GETTING EVEN WITH DAD is sort of a mystery in reverse--we know
whodunit, and the film honors the overall expectations we have for a
film like this.  But the writers sprinkle clues for what's going to
happen later.  Some, as in any mystery, are blind alleys; others are
important.  (I suspect that the writers figured they had to please both
kids and adults.  Following the "clues" is an added attraction for the
adults without distracting the kids.)
     Note, though, that this is one of those datums: I figure the
writers were having fun, and I'm glad to be in on it.  Others may think
the writers were telegraphing their punches and were just too lazy to
make everything seem original and unexpected.
     In all this, each member of the cast seems to shine.  True, they
are all playing stock characters in some sense.  But stock characters
are probably closer to life than we wish to admit.  Culkin appears
simply effortless as the bright, calculating 11-year-old.  He's
supposed to be bright--his last Stanford score was in "the 95th
percentile".  (Didn't they used to say "the upper fifth percentile"?)
But he's not SuperKid.  He gives us a whole kid--eager, calculating,
worried, stubborn, cheerful, sad, serious, or wise-ass as needs be.  I
*liked* his character.  (Those with 11-year-olds around might not find
it so so easy!)
     Ted Danson sort of surprised me.  I didn't merely like his
character, I figured there was some *weight* behind this guy Ray.
Timmy may not believe his old man can be an effective criminal, but
Danson makes it perfectly believable.  Even though I *knew* the cops
were dogging his heels every second, he still seemed just to have it
all together.  The cops had nothing but dumb luck in their
favor--maybe Ray *could* pull it off!
     Of course, maybe Timmy merely realized that Ray didn't have the
ultimate ruthlessness or coldness a criminal really needs.  There might
be no conflict between my feeling for Ray's competence and Timmie's
feeling for his incompetence *as a criminal*.
     In fact, the only thing that argued against Ray's criminal
competence was his choice of partners: Rubinek as Bobby makes a lovely
small-time hood: poor workmanship but big ideas ("A *moving* armored
car!  That is great--we need major firepower--a couple of AK-47s--they
got these--these--bazookas, man....")  An echo of the crooks in the
HOME ALONEs, he falls on it when he tries to outwit Timmy.
     On the hand, Sartain as Carl basically *knows* he doesn't know
very much--and does so with good cheer and sweetness.  Bright, he's
not, but he shows an underlying common sense.  A clown maybe, but not a
fool.
     Finally, Headly projects a very nice nerdiness as Terese.  She's
attractive, but just radiates a personality that really *is* more
comfortable "dressed like a meter maid".  When she dresses more sexily,
she seems a little out of place somehow.  It's totally appropriate when
she lies that she's a kindergarten teacher.  She has the brains, the
intellect of a detective, but should cops start falling in love with
suspects?  (Interestingly, it's Timmy that first gets her attention.
Ah, the primacy of the nesting impulse!)
     So, like I said, what I described as good may very well convince
some of you that you'd probably hate GETTING EVEN WITH DAD.
     To finish up on that note, I'll only point out that--from the
reverse-mystery perspective--all the threads are tied up neatly at
the end.  Well, *almost* all.  There are a couple of strands that I
still have questions about.  I don't think there'll be any sequel, but
*I* certainly wouldn't mind!
