Title
Review for Empire of the Sun (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
William Tsun-Yuk Hsu
     Much has been said in this newsgroup about Steven Spielberg and  EMPIRE OF
THE SUN, the film his admirers point to as his masterpiece.  I was not a
Spielberg hater before I saw EMPIRE OF THE SUN (but then I had not seen a
Spielberg movie since E.T., when I was a much more naive movie watcher.)  I
came out of EMPIRE OF THE SUN really detesting Spielberg's idiosyncracies and
excesses.
     I'll only touch on the essentials.  As usual I'll try to steer clear of
politics ("It's a travesty of the word ideologue to call Spielberg one."--
John R.)  I won't make any comparisons with the book, as I have not read it
(though I'm familiar with Ballard's earlier work, which I've been told is quite
different from EMPIRE OF THE SUN).
     There are several scenes in EMPIRE OF THE SUN that I really liked.  The
crowd scenes in the beginning were very effective.  The scene in the junk yard
with the furniture and piano was brilliant.  
     But as a whole, EMPIRE OF THE SUN is a small-minded, blatantly
manipulative movie.  It drips with sentimentality and stock Spielberg/Hollywood
images and situations, and clumsily tramples over its interesting moments with
contrived histrionics.  Several scenes have effective sound devices, but the
movie drowns under a sea of saccharine strings and "transcendental" female
choral music.
     The beginning of the scene with the kamikaze pilots was handled skillfully,
but Spielberg the arch-audience-manipulator takes over when the kid (Jim)
salutes them and starts singing.  Not only does he sing, but the song echoes
through the POW camp, and by the time it becomes a female vocalist I suppose
we're all supposed to be crying.  (And of course Jim has to look like an E.T.
kid, and have a Vienna Boys Choir-type voice.  But that's a matter of taste.)
     Spielberg even sabotages his own clumsy attempt at structure near the end.
Jim is riding his bicycle in the abandoned camp (obvious reflection of an
earlier scene where he was riding his bicycle in an abandoned house.)  Of
course Spielberg cannot resist another typically Spielberg-esque miracle when a
canister of food falls through the roof, and we are treated to the typical
Hollywood radiant "sense of wonder" shot of Jim's face.
     Finally, there is no excuse for this movie to last 2-1/2 hours.  Much of
what happened in the last hour were non-essential action sequences or overlong,
rapt contemplations of not very interesting images.
     Obviously Spielberg is not an inept film maker.  Some scenes in EMPIRE OF
THE SUN are really effective (recall, for example, the scene where Jim tries to
stop his former servants from plundering his house, and one of them
nonchalantly walks over and slaps him).  But it seems Spielberg will never pass
up on the smallest opportunity to tweak at the collective heartstrings of his
audience.  And he doesn't seem willing to break free of the Hollywood
vocabulary of stock images and characters (some of which he has created, it is
true).  Only the memory of several well-executed scenes kept me from walking
out on this movie.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     EMPIRE OF THE SUN is J. G. Ballard's semi-autobiographical novel
recounting his experiences as a boy in China during the Japanese occupation
in World War II.  Tom Stoppard has adapted it for the screen and Steven
Spielberg proves to have the talent of a Kubrick in directing the film.
Spielberg does things nearly impossible in film.  He has combined a
spectacular with a highly personal film, even mixing them in the same scene.
The scene in which Jim gets separated from his parents in a veritable ocean
of fleeing humanity is both emotionally moving and immense.  This is a film
filled with one strange and vivid incident after another, one memorable
scene after another, yet one never feels there is too much frosting and not
enough cake.  This film proves that somewhere underneath the highly
commercial director is a man of great artistic talents that all too rarely
get used.  It is incomprehensible that the director of INDIANA JONES AND THE
TEMPLE OF DOOM also directed a film of the sensitivity of EMPIRE OF THE SUN.
     Jim (played by Christian Bale) is a boy with a very believable
obsession:  flight and airplanes.  It is easy for me to believe this
obsession with flying would strike a responsive chord in Spielberg; I know
it does in me.  His father became wealthy in the textile industry in
Shanghai in a European community incongruously identical to one that one
might find in Britain.  Jim has led a sheltered life.  His big concern is
building airplane models and studying aircraft.  His ambition is to join the
Japanese military, not for political reasons, but because they have planes.
Jim's simple existence is about to come to an end.  The Japanese Imperial
forces are about to seize Shanghai and Jim will have to fight to stay alive.
     This story could have been told prosaically, but there is little
prosaic about EMPIRE OF THE SUN.  With Ballard's, Stoppard's, and
Spielberg's imaginations creating images there is nothing stereotypic about
this film.  It is amazing that such a story could be told of conflict and
suffering, and yet there is not a single villain and every character who
speaks is fresh and new.  There is a sense-of-wonder observation of the
Japanese--bringers of planes to China--and of the Americans who build the
huge "Cadillacs of the sky."
     Just as HOPE AND GLORY--a comparable but less fully realized
autobiographical film--gave us insights into the roots of John Boorman's
love of fantasy, EMPIRE OF THE SUN more than explains why Ballard writes
science-fictional mega-disaster novels in which we see how titanic, world-
crushing events affect common people's lives.  Perhaps the only thing that
cuts against the credibility is that it is difficult to believe so many
beautiful and enigmatic incidents could have happened to one boy.
     EMPIRE OF THE SUN also demonstrates that Spielberg is an intelligent
businessman.  Apparently he had only three weeks to film in China.  But he
took much better advantage of that time than Bertolucci took of a much
longer time in filming THE LAST EMPEROR.  In China the price of an extra is
something like a dollar a day.  Bertolucci uses this advantage in perhaps
one or two scenes--notably Pu Yi's coronation as seen from above.  But
Spielberg puts us in the middle of an ocean of panicking humanity as
Shanghai is evacuated.  Bertolucci tells us about history; Spielberg makes
it happen to us.  Bertolucci distances us from his characters; Spielberg
puts us inside his.
     This is the best film I have seen this year.  Perhaps the best in
several years.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
By making "The Color Purple", Spielberg proved that he was not just giant
sharks and aliens, but a universal director capable of creating serious and
sensual films. With "Empire of the Sun" Spielberg, for the first time in his
life, ventured into the world of war.
The film is based on the novel by J. G. Ballard , describing his own
experiences under World War 2, when he lost his parents and had to survive
under terrible surcomstances in a Japanese camp.
Jim (Christian Bale ) is living a privileged life with his parents in
pre-Pearl Harbor Shanghai. When the war begins, Jim and his parents are
separated, and Jim survives for weeks on his own, living of the food left in
his and his neighbors' abandoned mansions. Most of the film is set in the
Lunghua prison camp, where Jim is forced to grow up under horrible
circumstances. The 10 year-old child is standing on the brink of insanity
and some of the films strongest moments are when Jim tries to explain to
himself the meaningless situation around him, and how the insanity of war
affects him.
The unique thing about "Empire of the Sun" is it's point of view. It shows
us war through eyes of an innocent child, whose life is forever changed and
ruined. This unique perspective allows us to see war differently.
Tom Stoppard's script is deep and emotional, displaying Jim's life through
his own thoughts and feelings. At the same time the historical parts are not
forgotten. There are a lot of philosophical questions and moral dilemmas
that question the essence of war.
"Empire of the Sun" has the largest British cast ever assebled for an
American movie. For Jim, Steven Spielberg deliberately chose an actor that
was totally unfamiliar to the audience - Christian Bale. Bale's performance
in the film brought me to tears. It is not often you see a little boy act
with such power, vulnerability and total understanding of his character.
Bale delivers without a doubt the strongest performance in the film. The
rest of the cast is solid and believable. Involving John Malcowich as Basie,
a survivor, an intelligent crock that pretends to be Jim's friend when he
can gain from it.  John Malcowich manages to create a believable character
that is a bit alike Danny Glover's character in "The Color Purple" - selfish
and unreliable, but never quite evil.
Joe Pentaliano is convincing as Basie's buddy and Nigel Havers is strong and
understanding as Dr.Rowlings, who becomes like a father figure for Jim.
But Spielberg has not forgot the Japaneese. A Japanese boy that becomes
Jim's distant friend on the other side of the fence, is extremely important
to the story. They save each other in several life threatening situations.
This relationship is suddenly ended when the boy is shot by one of Basie's
friends. When Jim cries out: "He was my friend..he gave me a mango", Basie
replays: "He was only a Jap". Spielberg does not show the Japanese as
cold-hearted bastards, but as human beings like Jim and the rest of the
prisoners.
Most of all,  "Empire of the Sun" is an tremendously emotional experience
about childhood lost in the horrors and insanity of war. Some scenes are
directed with such beauty and sadness, that it moved me like few films had
before.
Who will forget the panic in the streets of Shanghai at the beginning of
Japanese invasion. The frightening contrast between Englishmen driving in
their limousines to a party and thousands of Chinese desperately trying to
get out of Shanghai alive. Who will forget Spielberg's artistic and visually
stunning picturisation of the atom bomb. After the bomb goes off, the sky is
filled with blue and white waves, so you can't see where the sea ends and
the heaven begins. And while Jim's face is blinded with the white light, he
whispers: "..like God taking a photograph". In both of these scenes and many
more throughout the movie, Spielberg shows us that he is a master of
contrasts, combining mortal danger with visual beauty.
Combining a serious plot with incredible visuals, including wonderful
cinematography by Allen Daviau , wonderful art direction by Frederick Hole
and incredibly emotional musical score by John Williams, Spielberg has
created one of the most unique and heartbreaking war films.
The only problem with "Empire of the Sun" is that it begins to falter in
the middle, where Jim is in the camp. Where it seems Spielberg lost his
focus for a moment, not knowing what to show first or how to show it.
Although this mistake could have been overseen and forgotten, because of the
overall perfection of the film, "Empire of the Sun" has been underrated,
receiving unfairly criticism for being too pompous.
Finally, the war ends, and Jim is reunited with his parents under the
shadow of nascent Chinese communism. Much of what Jim experiences is
shocking, and Spielberg neither embellishes nor understates Jim's
experiences. Flies, death, and decomposition are everywhere, as are avarice
and (occasionally) kindness. The film has a strong grounding in World War II
and war history. I think that many  people lack such knowledge, and it is my
hope that films like "Empire of the Sun", "Schindler's List" and "Saving
Private Ryan" will make these people understand the meaning of war.

Author
Michael Lounsbery
     Steven Spielberg's EMPIRE OF THE SUN is a masterful movie.  The attention
to details in the composition of each scene is a joy to watch.  From a cliche'd
opening view of water in Shanghai harbor that is suddenly rudely interrupted by
floating coffins that are in turn shoved aside by a Japanese patrol boat to
some of the most frantic and eerie crowd scenes, the film doesn't settle for
casual ways to portray an event.  The effect is a masterpiece.
     The main character in EMPIRE OF THE SUN is an airplane-obsessed British
schoolboy growing up in the British sector of Shanghai, just as World War II is
becoming fierce.  His experiences as he loses his family and is forced to fend
for himself in a Japanese prison camp are wondrously textured.
     Although I liked HOPE AND GLORY, a film with a somewhat similar theme,
EMPIRE OF THE SUN seems vastly superior.  HOPE AND GLORY has to rely on
distracting subplots involving such trivialities as affairs between characters
that have little do with the main point of the film.  In EMPIRE OF THE SUN,
such useless filler is avoided.  Each scene does its bit to influence Jim's
character and to add enlightening detail to the mood of the film.  Perhaps the
full three hours of film is not justified for the plot, and some extra cutting
could have been made, but the rich texture would have suffered.
     Among the more moving scenes in the film, one involving Japanese kamikaze
pilots absolutely astounded me.  The scene arises unexpectedly, and is
masterfully handled to bring across the full tragedy and glory of the event
without trivializing the emotion.  I was wishing that it would be further
dragged out, but the scene that follows arises perfectly and is itself wondrous
as well.
     The final scene in the film, although well done, is of a more typical
style that most directors could have thought of and handled almost as well.
The difficulty in bringing about the proper feelings in the kamikaze scene is
shown even more sharply, when contrasted with the more conventional kind of
scene that ends the movie.  (Details omitted to avoid spoilers.)
     The minute attention to detail that fills each scene was impressive, as
was the historical accuracy.  Such small items as a British silver half-crown
with George VI or the insignia on Jim's school uniform, as well as larger ones
such as each character speaking a believable language, adds an admirable layer
of accuracy and a very fine texture to scenes that are already wonderfully
composed.
     The film at times reaches a dreamlike quality, such as in a scene near the
beginning of the film when the British residents are all being chauffeured to a
costume party through mobs of terrified Chinese fleeing the Japanese, or
another beautiful yet eerie scene of a stadium filled with looted furniture,
statues, and valuables.  Such scenes are not inordinately or pretentiously
dwelt upon (or worse, recalled through flashbacks), and after the film is over
are among the more vivid and lasting images.
     Despite its theme, the film comes across neither as brutally depressing
nor mindlessly uplifting.  The characters are all portrayed believably.  Some
of the Japanese guards are at times brutal, yet none are strictly seen as
villains, and the film could never be seen as an anti-Japanese film.  The
Americans, who send in tremendous amounts of raw materials, either in the form
of B-29 bombers ("the Cadillacs of the sky!") or oversized canisters of food,
complete with Lucky Strikes and Hershey bars (where *do* they find Hershey bars
that big these days?) are portrayed somewhat tongue-in-cheek, and are neither
slandered nor unfairly glorified.
     Although I saw it three days ago, I'm still moved by EMPIRE OF THE SUN.  I
consider it one of the best films I've seen.  The plot is lightly sketched, but
this in no way detracts from the simple joy of watching an amazingly crafted
work.  I admit that I failed to understand much of the hoopla associated with
Spielberg on account of THE COLOR PURPLE, but EMPIRE OF THE SUN can only be a
work of true genius.
