Title
Review for Smile Like Yours, A (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
A SMILE LIKE YOURS
(Paramount)
Starring:  Greg Kinnear, Lauren Holly, Joan Cusack, Jay Thomas, Jill
Hennessy, Christopher McDonald.
Screenplay:  Kevin Meyer and Keith Samples.
Producers:  David Kirkpatrick and Tony Amatullo.
Director:  Keith Samples.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, sexual situations, profanity)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A plot synopsis for A SMILE LIKE YOURS reads like the most generic of
bittersweet romantic comedies.  Danny (Greg Kinnear) and Jennifer
Robertson (Lauren Holly) are a happily married young San Francisco couple
with a bright future, until Jennifer decides that it's time for baby to
make three.  Attempts at conception put a damper on their once-vibrant sex
life; little white lies develop into larger deceptions.  Danny begins to
suspect Jennifer of cheating with a cosmetics executive (Christopher
McDonald), while Jennifer similarly suspects Danny of cheating with a
gorgeous architect (Jill Hennessy).  Eventually, tensions cause a genuine
rift between the two.  Sounds quite a bit like SHE'S HAVING A BABY,
doesn't it?
     Only it's more like SHE'S _NOT_ HAVING A BABY, because A SMILE LIKE
YOURS is a bittersweet romantic comedy about infertility.  That's right,
all the wacky hijinks of masturbating into a cup!  All the side-splitting
humor of spending an hour in stirrups!  All the unbridled hilarity of
small-talk with another pair of clinic patients who reveal their history
with gonorrhea and pelvic inflammatory disease!
     I can understand the temptation to search for humor in a subject as
frustrating, embarrassing and occasionally guilt-inducing as fertility
problems.  Perhaps either writer/director Keith Samples or his co-writer
Kevin Meyer had some personal experience in this area, and felt the need
to share their quest for a smile amidst the tears.  And it might have
worked if they had bothered to include a single honest moment in A SMILE
LIKE YOURS.  There is no attempt to understand how Danny and Jennifer
really feel about their dilemma, no sense of any genuine pain.  Samples
and Meyer have merely grafted a few scenes at a fertility clinic onto a
fluffy and absurdly predictable relationship comedy, forcing you to wonder
why it couldn't just as easily have been about a couple struggling with
financial problems, or an irritating relative, or the heartbreak of
psoriasis.
     It's actually fairly impressive how generic and predictable A SMILE
LIKE YOURS turns out to be.  The casting certainly doesn't help matters,
offering the mundanely attractive Kinnear and Holly as our protagonists
without once stepping inside their heads (we never learn why Jennifer is
so underhanded about trying to get pregnant, considering Danny seems
perfectly comfortable with the idea).  Even the supporting cast -- Jay
Thomas as the acerbic guy pal, Joan Cusack as the daffy gal pal -- appears
to have been generated by a computer program.  The film is so ennervated
for so long that a late cameo by Shirley MacLaine provides virtually the
entire energy quotient in three minutes of screen time.  For an hour and a
half A SMILE LIKE YOURS trudges in the most obvious directions, reaching a
grating climax in a scene where several agonizing seconds pass between the
moment we _know_ Jennifer is going to call Danny's hotel room and find
another woman there, and the moment the phone actually rings.
     Infertility may be a delicate issue, but it's hardly sacrosanct.  A
competent film-making team might have made either an exaggerated black
comedy or a more sensitive comedy-drama about the issue.  It deserves much
better than to become an afterthought in a story which has nothing
creative or insightful to offer on any subject.  You know you're in
trouble when the biggest laugh in a film comes during a scene when a
character is watching a rerun of "I Love Lucy"...and the laugh is actually
_at_ the rerun of "I Love Lucy."  Lucy is still funnier -- and more
inventive -- after 40 years than A SMILE LIKE YOURS is after 40 minutes.

Author
Jamie Peck
Paramount / 1:39 / 1997 / R (language, sex-related material) 
Cast: Greg Kinnear; Lauren Holly; Joan Cusack; Jay Thomas; Jillian
Hennessy; Christopher McDonald; Shirley MacLaine 
Director: Keith Samples 
Screenplay: Kevin Meyer; Keith Samples 
        Romantic comedies centering around fertility aren't made very often,
and it's easy to see why. Gene Wilder's "Funny About Love" was
absolutely excruciating to watch. And anybody remember the Shelly
Long-Corbin Bernsen sperm bank vehicle "Frozen Assets"? You likely
answered in the negative, which proves my point exactly. Keith Samples'
"A Smile Like Yours" isn't a terrible movie, but it's also not a good
one, proving this rarely-filmed subgenre can't do much except shoot
blanks. 
        "A Smile Like Yours" centers around photogenic San Francisco yuppie
couple Danny and Jennifer Robertson (Greg Kinnear and Lauren Holly);
he's a successful building contractor, she's the successful entrepreneur
of an aromatherapy shop. Jennifer's latest concoction is a kind of 
aphrodisiac, called "Seventh Scent," that she's always "testing" on her
husband in extremely inconvenient places (i.e., the freight elevator at
his work). But little does Danny know that she's really using her new
scent for another purpose -- she's also trying to get pregnant, but
their ever-so-frequent intercourse sessions yield little but stiff
joints. 
        After getting it on for the umpteenth time -- and still getting her
period shortly thereafter -- Jennifer has herself checked for
infertility. The doc assures her she's fine. So, she sneaks a semen
sample from Danny (and, for some reason, hides it in their tub of
Country Crock) and has that analyzed at the clinic. Turns out he's got
what they call "lazy swimmers," a condition that his frequent trips to
the Masturbatorium ("You might wanna check out that new video --
'Romancing the Bone,'" taunts the attending specialist) and her
just-as-frequent in-vitro fertilization try to alleviate. 
        There's not much new territory covered in "A Smile Like Yours," but the
movie's lack of originality could have been remedied if the material was
juicy, funny or entertaining. But it's rarely any one of those three,
and thus the film plays out like "Look Who's Talking" with a truckload
of jack-off jokes in place of the gabby newborn. Occasionally, there's a
good scene you'll catch yourself smiling at -- and many of them involve
the Robertson's trips to the clinic and Danny's dealings with a surly
nurse -- but your facial expression fades almost as quickly as it got
there. 
        "A Smile Like Yours" exhibits disaster warnings early on. It's not a
good sign when the main characters visit a kareoke bar and a significant
portion of screen time is devoted to the performances of others, nor
does it bode well that musical montages are employed numerously. The
plot veers off in a silly dramatic direction when it's got about a
half-hour to go, and involves such unbelievably gooey situations as
Danny's explained need to have Jennifer present in the Masturbatorium
while he's making his "deposit." And the ending is an unsatisfyingly
pat, fast resolution that makes a mockery of its own premise. 
        As far as the characters go, Kinnear's Danny is imbued with the star's
effortless charm, but Holly's Jennifer comes across as a whiny wimp.
It's baffling, then, that the subplot devoted to him -- he is tempted by
his "Disclosure"-esque man-eating corporate boss, the only kind of
female overseer that movies seem to use these days -- is far less
interesting than her quest to market her new fragrance along with work
pal/scene-stealer Joan Cusack. But baffle is what "A Smile Like Yours"
appears to do best, placing two appealing stars and a handfull of clever
material in service of a stuffy, synthetic story. 

Author
Walter Frith
I really enjoyed Greg Kinnear's performance as Harrison's Ford's younger
brother in 1995's 'Sabrina'.  Kinnear had a charm that ensured he had the
potential of paving a prosperous career in movies for himself.  Lauren Holly
is a very beautiful woman who has a charming presence of her own on the big
screen and the two of them provide some interesting chemistry in 'A Smile
Like Yours'.
Kinnear and Holly play a young married couple living in the beautiful
surroundings of San Francisco who deal with the joyful prospect of having a
child but suffer from the problems of infertility.  They seek medical
counseling and treatment for the problem which all make for touching and
mildly amusing results.  How can the problems of infertility be touching and
amusing you might ask?  That's the magic of this luke warm love story which
treats its subject matter by making the dialogue and personalities of its
characters both quirky and likable.
There are sub plots involving Kinnear's occupation as a construction
professional who rubs elbows with a seductive and tempting architect (Jill
Hennessy) who tries to snag him.  Holly meanwhile works at developing a line
of perfume with her sister (Joan Cusack) and Kinnear finds male bonding with
his best friend played by Jay Thomas.
The film tinkers with being a straight laced movie formula and pretty much
succeeds at it but it also provides some honest moments of love done with
comedy to stimulate the heart and that is pleasing to say the least.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Greg Kinnear, Lauren Holly, Joan Cusack, Jay Thomas, 
      Jill Hennessy, Christopher McDonald, France Nuyen
Director: Keith Samples
Producers: Tony Amatullo, David Kirkpatrick
Screenplay: Kevin Meyer and Keith Samples
Cinematography: Richard Bowen
Music: William Ross
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Can infertility be funny?  I can think of a few scenarios that 
might cause laughter.  Unfortunately, none of these are present in Keith 
Samples' directorial debut, A SMILE LIKE YOURS, which vacillates 
uncertainly between unfunny farce and ineffectual melodrama.  The co-
writer/director obviously wants this to be an uplifting, feel good 
experience, but, inexplicably, he injects so much pathos into the 
situation (a couple who desperately want, but can't produce, a child) 
that parts of A SMILE LIKE YOURS are downers.  
     I believe there's some kind of hidden rule that any film featuring 
infertility must have the obligatory "man going to fill the cup with 
semen" scene.  Film makers always seem to think this is hilarious; it's 
too bad the audience has seen it so many times that it has long since 
lost whatever residual humor it once possessed.  Worse still, not only 
is this scene in the movie, but it's repeated time after time after 
time.  
     The victim who has to fill all those cups is Danny Robertson (Greg 
Kinnear), a faithful and loving husband who is trying to discover why he 
and his wife, Jennifer (Lauren Holly), can't have a child.  It's not for 
lack of trying:  they have sex at every opportunity, often in very 
public places (such as an elevator at the construction site where Danny 
works).  Alas, Danny's sperm are weak swimmers, and they can't reach 
Jennifer's eggs.  So the couple is faced with a dilemma:  remain 
childless or visit a fertility clinic.  Despite the expense of the 
latter option, the Robertsons choose it, but their continuous, 
unsuccessful attempts to generate an offspring put a strain on their 
marriage.  That strain is exacerbated when a sexy architect (Jill 
Hennessy) makes a play for Danny.
     When paired together in SABRINA, Greg Kinnear and Lauren Holly 
didn't exactly generate sparks.  Then again, they were just supporting 
characters -- the main chemistry was left to Harrison Ford and Julia 
Ormand.  Here, Kinnear and Holly are back together again, and, 
unfortunately, the heat still isn't there.  With the exception of a few 
calculated "cute" moments, these two comprise one of the least 
interesting couples of the year.  Holly's range is severely limited and 
Kinnear, while gradually developing into a polished performer, still has 
trouble with the more serious moments.
     The supporting players are uniformly more interesting than the 
leads.  Jay Thomas, who's always good for a laugh or two, is Danny's 
best friend.  Joan Cusack is a little less ditzy than usual as 
Jennifer's perfume-selling business partner.  Jill Hennessy is suitably 
vampish as the mouthwatering temptation placed in Danny's path.  And 
there's an easily-recognizable "special guest star" who makes an 
uncredited appearance near the end.  
     A SMILE LIKE YOURS tries to be funny, charming, and delightful.  
Except on rare occasions, it is none of the three.  From time-to-time, 
one of the film's farcical elements has satirical value (like the low-
budget flight from hell), and may even generate a laugh or two.  And 
there are a few sly, witty one-liners.  In general, however, A SMILE 
LIKE YOURS comes across as lifeless and bland.  In fact, it's so 
forgettable that, in a couple of months, I'll probably have to refer to 
this review to remember what it was about.
The website is moving!!
ReelViews web site through 8/31: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
ReelViews web site beginning 9/1: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
James Sanford
         There are thousands of terrific ideas to base a movie on.
Infertility, however, is not one of them. But like anxious would-be
parents, Hollywood keeps on trying. Gene Wilder futilely tried to make
light of it in the forgettable ``Funny About Love,'' and now Greg
Kinnear and Lauren Holly struggle to mine impotence for laughs in ``A
Smile Like Yours,'' a tepid attempt at heartwarming comedy.
  Despite its setting in contemporary San Francisco and a few
moments of mild raunchiness, most of ``Smile'' plays like a vintage
Doris Day vehicle.  Jennifer (Holly) and Danny (Kinnear) are
blissfully married, but she wants a child.
  When Jennifer's still not in the family way after hundreds
of attempts, the tensions between the two threaten to send Danny out
of the fertility center and into the waiting arms of man-trap Lindsey
(Jill Hennessy).
  Writers Kevin Meyer and Keith Samples present a cornucopia
of cliches old (the out-of-town business trip that's mistaken for an
affair) and new (another karaoke scene, far inferior to the one in
``My Best Friend's Wedding''). If you hadn't bought a ticket and
weren't sitting in a theater, you'd swear you were watching an
extended TV sitcom.
  Jennifer's quest for motherhood comes off as borderline
maniacal, although it's supposed to be poignant and humorous. There
are moments when the movie threatens to turn into a comic ``Fatal
Attraction,'' which would have put some needed spice into this
pablum. Similarly, a cameo by Shirley MacLaine and a twisted spoof of
bargain-basement airlines near the end of the film are nice touches,
but don't develop into anything.
  Only Joan Cusack rises above the material. Cast as
Jennifer's partner in a perfume shop where people actually say things
like ``Wow, the Elysian sunflower is a nice touch!,'' Cusack has a
miserable part - she's in love with a mortician, setting the stage for
a string of sophomoric dead-guy jokes. But Cusack's played the best
friend so many times now, nobody can do it with more finesse.
  Affable and deep-dimpled Kinnear, forced to do jokes about
masturbation and rectal exams, muddles through as best he can. After a
bright debut in ``Sabrina,'' Kinnear has floundered; hopefully his
juicy role as a troubled artist in director James L. Brooks' upcoming
``Old Friends'' will better serve his talent.
  As for Holly, she's fallen victim to a terminal case of
Shelley Long Syndrome, the misconception that wide-eyed cutesy-poo
acting is adorable.  Jennifer can't just walk across a room - she
minces or scampers, generally with a coy expression on her
oh-so-darling face. Perhaps someone should warn her that once you have
a baby, you can't be the baby.
