Title
Review for Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh, The (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh (1977)
Animated features are often for children only.
I had the misfortune once of seeing part of "The
Chipmunk Story" and I was only impressed by how
incredibly awful that movie was.
But there are exceptions, and "The Many Adventures
of Winnie the Pooh" is definitely among them.
In fact, the film is likely in the top 5% of all
movies, unless it doesn't count.
It many not qualify as a genuine movie since it
is a compilation of three animated shorts, with only
a very small amount of additional footage added to sew
the parts together.  The shorts are "Winnie the Pooh
and the Honey Tree", from 1966, "Winnie the Pooh and
the Blustery Day", from 1968, and "Winnie the Pooh
and Tigger Too!" from 1974.
In "The Honey Tree", Winnie the Pooh is foiled in
an attempt to raid a bee's nest for honey.  He instead
visits Rabbit's burrow, where he eats so much honey
that he is unable to fit through the exit hole.
In "The Blustery Day", which won an Academy Award
for best animated short, Pooh and his friends are
caught in a windstorm, then in a flood.  The ultimate
extravert, Tigger, is also introduced.
There are two versions of this compilation.  Both
have "The Honey Tree" and "The Blustery Day".  They
differ in the third short.  The better short, which
I believe is "Tigger Too", has the following storyline:
Rabbit gets lost in the woods, while Tigger gets stuck
up a tree.  There is a bittersweet ending.
This version is the one that I have graded.
The other version substitutes a good, but still
inferior short.  Eeyore must be rescued from a stream,
and Pooh learns a new game called "Pooh sticks".
While the film is targeted at children, the quality
is so high that anyone should enjoy it.  The voice
characterizations are excellent.  Sebastion Cabot makes
a perfect narrator, and Paul Winchell is an outstanding
Tigger.  Sterling Holloway has become best known as
the voice of "Winnie the Pooh", but had been a voice
in several of Disney's great animated features, notably
as a singing stork in "Dumbo", and the Cheshire Cat in
"Alice in Wonderland".  Even the songs are good,
which is especially important in animated features.
The writing is funny even to adults, who are clued into
how foolish Pooh really is.  The characters (Pooh, Tigger,
Rabbit, Piglet, Christopher Robin, Owl, Kanga, Roo)
are given distinctive and endearing personalities.
Clever games are played with the narrator and text pages
of the book, paying due homage to original author
A. A. Milne.
"Blustery Day" is slightly better than "Honey Tree",
which is better than "Tigger Too".  But all three shorts
are excellent, and much better than most 'serious' films.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
