Title
Review for Fried Green Tomatoes (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Maloney
     FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is a film by Jon Avnet, from a novel by Fannie
Flagg.  The film stars Kathy Bates, Jessica Tandy, Mary-Louise Parker,
Mary Stuart Masterson, with a special appearance by Cicely Tyson.
     FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is more like STEEL MAGNOLIAS than THELMA AND
LOUISE in its setting, intentions, ensemble casting, and effect.  It is
a film about the friendships of women, specifically two women of the
film's now, Kathy Bates and Jessica Tandy, and two women of the film's
post-WW I then, Mary-Louise Parker and Mary Stuart Masterson.  It is
their friendships that allow these women to survive, and flourish in
their own ways, their times and their male-dominated worlds.  But unlike
THELMA & LOUISE, there nothing of the overt rebellion and the final
joyous-violent withdrawal.  These women, these Southern women, mean to
survive and persist, not rebel and die.
     In terms of its effect on this audience of one, FRIED GREEN
TOMATOES is not the radicalizing experience THELMA & LOUISE was last
spring.  FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is basically a comedy of manners that has
nothing new to say about women, the South, or anything else.  Its
message is hackneyed, but may be somewhat empowering to some, and
certainly uplifting for most.  This is a feel-good laugher-weeper.  But
it is not going to threaten men the way THELMA & LOUISE did, and does.
     Like STEEL MAGNOLIAS, the real strength of FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is
not the story, but the cast.  And the cast is wonderful.  Kathy Bates, a
ineffectual, class-going, 40-ish, overweight, unliberated, unsatisfied
Evelyn, thrashing about for ways to refire her nearly hopeless husband
and their moribund marriage, looks and comes across like a Bette Midler
without the hand-waving.  Her life is transformed as she get acquainted
with Jessica Tandy's nursing-home character Ninny Threadgoode and gets
drawn into her stories about Ruth (Mary Stuart Masterson) and her sister
Idgie, the unconventional and free-thinking, pants-wearing, permanent
tomboy.
     Evelyn's story is mostly comedy, whereas the stories of Ruth and
Idgie are high melodrama for the most part.  This creates a certain
dramaturgic schizophrenia, and undermines the importance of Evelyn's
story, relatively unexceptional as it is.  I'm assuming that Ninny is
Idgie's older sister, but the film annoyingly hints time and again that
she might be Idgie herself.  This is one of several vague points that
first-time director Avnet indulges himself in, to no good effect.
     Jessica Tandy is a national treasure and with each performance
becomes even better.  In DRIVING MISS DAISY, she gave a finely tuned
portrait of a Southern Jewish woman over a long and tumultuous period in
history; it is hard to imagine anyone surpassing that performance.  But
she may have done so as Ninny, the ancient rememberer of vanished times,
town, and people, who at first seems a little senile.  But we get to
understand her and love her at exactly the same pace that Evelyn does.
Ninny is an 81-year-old who is not afraid of death and who is still
fascinated by life and the dynamics of friendship.
     Mary-Louise Parker plays Ruth, the good, conventional, nurturing
woman whose life is saved by the friendship of Idgie.  Parker plays Ruth
with an admirable and delicate blend of strength and frailty.  There is
something Parker does with her upper lip and nostrils, something we saw
a little of in GRAND CANYON, that completely conveys pain and
willingness to survive the pain.
     Mary Stuart Masterson is Idgie, who manages to avoid mannish
caricatures even while being a woman who has rejected conventional
femininity.  It seemed pretty obvious to me that Idgie was a lesbian who
loved Ruth, but somehow in the movie Ruth never seems to catch on.  The
latter has occasion several time to suggest that Idgie will be happy
when she "settles down," even though Idgie tells Ruth "I'm as settled
down as I'm ever going to be."  About this and about the Idgie-Ruth
relationship in general, the film seems unnecessarily coy and vague.
     All in all, I think FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is pretty good flick.
It's manipulative and presses all the emotional buttons with a slightly
heavy touch.  It makes mandatory passes at all the Southern Themes --
racism, the Klan, decay, Southern men, the plight of the black people,
corruption, -- but they are strictly for the record and are not
particularly heartfelt.  The value of friendship, of women's
friendships, specifically, is heartfelt and sincere, the sure moral
center of the movie.  FRIED GREEN TOMATOES has its faults, but it does
some have excellences, too, the acting not being the least of them.
     Therefore, I recommend that you see FRIED GREEN TOMATOES at a
bargain matinee.  If it really clicks for you, you can take what you
save on the first ticket and apply it to the next.

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Jon Avnet.  Written by Fannie Flagg, Carol Sobieski, and Jon
Avnet.  Starring Mary Stuart Masterson, Mary-Louise Parker, Kathy Bates, and
Jessica Tandy.  1991, 137 min., Not Rated (See below for details).
     Just to kick this review off, I think this is pertinent info: "Fried Green
Tomatoes" is not a chick flick.  I generally consider so-called chick flicks to
be fluff like "At First Sight."  No, wait, "At First Sight" is just a bad
movie.  Chick flicks are melodramatic tearjerkers that claim to be about
empowerment, you know, that sort of thing.  Movies of the week, and most of
Lifetime TVs movie programming comes to mind.  But "Fried Green Tomatoes" is
just solid entertainment: a good story told by talented artists who have a
visible love for their work.  That is evident not only in the actual movie, but
in the making-of documentary included on the DVD.
     The story, of course, derived from the Fannie Flagg Pulitzer Prize
nominated "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Café."  Ninny Threadgoode
(Jessica Tandy) is an elderly woman in a retirement home whom befriends Evelyn
Couch (Kathy Bates), a middle-aged woman who is unsatisfied with her life. 
With Evelyn, Ninny shares stories about the remarkable friendship between two
women in the 1920s, Idgie Threadgoode and Ruth Jamison, whose lives were
intertwined by tragedy, and who formed a bond that nothing could put a dent in.
 Several versions of the script were worked on by several people.  Carol
Sobieski was brought in originally, Flagg worked on the screenplay for a while,
and then Avnet himself completed it and revised it several times before Flagg
came aboard again.  The finished product was nominated for an Academy Award for
Best Screenplay (adaptation, the only other Oscar nomination was that of Best
Supporting Actress, which Tandy was up for) and film characters that are just
as unforgettable as those in the novel.
     Idgie Threadgoode is a female Huck Finn.  She is a tomboy, something that
her older sister Leona finds embarrassing and that older brother Julian finds
taunt-worthy.  Her best friend is her older brother, Buddy (played by Chris
O'Donnell).  Buddy is a young man trying to romance Ruth (Mary-Louise Parker),
and Idgie tags along as they go for a walk one afternoon.  Buddy, as he tries
to retrieve Ruth's hat, which had flown away and onto train tracks, finds
himself unable to free his foot from the tracks.  He is killed, and Idgie
isolates herself from everyone and everything.
     By the time Idgie is in her late teens and still in self-imposed exile,
her mother brings Ruth back to intervene, as she will be in Whistle Stop for
the summer.  They slowly form a friendship that is fueled by their differences.
 After a fun-filled night of birthday celebration that Idgie had planned for
Ruth, Ruth announces that she is going to be married to a man named Frank
Bennett once the summer is over.  Idgie is crushed and again isolates herself. 
But eventually she can no longer take it, and goes to see Ruth.  A chain of
events (that no one realizes will have the impact it eventually does) occurs
that brings Ruth back to Whistle Stop, where her and Idgie live in a domestic
bliss of sorts, running the Whistle Stop Café.
     From this point forward, as Evelyn gains strength from her newfound
self-confidence, supplied by her friendship with Ninny and the stories of Idgie
and Ruth, the 30s story focuses on the mysterious disappearance of Frank
Bennett.  As was the case when I read the book for the first time, I like the
Idgie/Ruth stories more than I like the Ninny/Evelyn stories.  But it is in the
characterization of the relationship between Idgie and Ruth that the movie most
differs from the book.  The book made things fairly obvious that Idgie and Ruth
were more than friends, or at least shared the mutual feelings of attraction. 
The script's timeline isn't in accordance with that of the book, and overtones
have been subdued in many places because of that.  But director and
co-screenwriter Jon Avnet didn't totally shy away from the subject.  
     There are several scenes that weren't in the book that, for the most part,
served as the hints to the true nature of their relationship.  So while I
wished the movie had been more loyal to the book, I have to give Avnet props
for what he managed to work in.  A part of the book that did remain in the
movie, and is basically the core of the story, is that Idgie and Ruth were
daring in their time for a social reason differing from that just discussed:
They employed Sipsey and Big George, and spent most of their time with them. 
The white folks in town didn't especially appreciate that, as they thought
Sipsey and Big George didn't qualify as good company because of the color of
their skin.  Ruth and Idgie don't care, and against the warnings of Idgie's
friend and once hopeful suitor (who made halfhearted passes at her before
marrying someone else) serve food to black people, and care for and clean up
Smokey Lonesome, an alcoholic drifter.  
     When released in 1992, "Fried Green Tomatoes" was a surprise success at
the box-office.  I didn't see it then, but rather a few years later when it was
first shown on network television (I must have been between ten and twelve
years old), and even then I didn't pay much attention to it.  The only memories
of the film that I carried with me for the next few years were those of Evelyn
repeatedly backing up and slamming into the car of the young women in a parking
lot, and her greeting her husband, Ed, at the front door in a Saran-Wrap, well,
a Saran-Wrap wrap.  About a year ago I caught part of the movie on cable, and
liked it enough that I couldn't wait to see it again in it's entirety.  And
once I owned the DVD, I found that I frequently wanted to watch it again,
because I was so fond of the characters.  
     The only real weaknesses are the scenes that are aimed towards a bit more
than melodrama; trying to jerk tears is one step too far, and attempts to do so
are needless.  And it begins to strain willingness to accept stories that try
too hard to show the parallels between Evelyn's situation and the events in
Whistle Stop.  The story element that bothered me the most was that towards the
end of the movie there is a suggestion that Ninny and Idgie are the same
person, and I didn't like that, as I thought it was rather clear in the book
that they are two different people.  
     Evelyn Couch is a great character, and Kathy Bates is the only actress
that I think could pull off the role, and she did so wonderfully.  As a matter
of fact, all of the four actresses were first-rate choices.  Jessica Tandy
brings an effervescence to Ninny that deservedly won her an Oscar nomination
for Best Supporting Actress.  Mary Stuart Masterson had the mannerisms and
attitude, accent and all, down pat, and Mary-Louise Parker was given the
long-deserved chance to show her talent with her portrayal of complicated Ruth.
 Both Bates & Tandy and Masterson & Parker have great chemistry that made their
respective scenes together magic.  
     The supporting cast is just as impressive.  Cicely Tyson (Sipsey), Stan
Shaw (Big George),  Gary Basaraba (Grady Kilgore), Nick Searcy (Frank Bennett),
Raynor Scheiner (Curtis Smoote) and Tim Scott (Smokey Lonesome) all lend
believability to their characters.  Director Jon Avnet did a wonderful job on
this, his first feature film, and I give him and Sobieski and Flagg much credit
for crafting such a great story.  It is one of the rare stories that has it
all: happiness, sadness, friendship, romance, death, mystery, laughter, tears;
a celebration of life and regular people.  As Sipsey and Ninny would say, "The
secret's in the sauce."  
     DVD Details: A Universal Collector's Edition.  Presented in it's original
theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1; anamorphically enhanced.  The transfer is
terrific, the colors are rich and without flaw.  The soundtrack is presented in
DD 2.0, which suffices, seeing as the film is mostly dialogue.  Trains, glass
shattering, and the lively, atmospheric score all sound great.  The running
commentary of director Jon Avnet,  is informative and elaborates on many of the
things he brought up in "Moments of Discovery," an hour long documentary about
the making of the film.  It features interviews with Avnet, the stars and
support cast members, the composer, author Fannie Flagg, various producers and
the production designer.  Their obvious enthusiasm over the film and their
co-workers is refreshing.  The documentary is entertaining, and features a tour
of the Whistle Stop Café and the town surrounding it, as well as what happened
to that town after the movie became a surprise hit.  It should be noted that
this was made years after the completion of the film, I believe specifically
for the DVD.  Other supplements include production notes, interactive menus,
scene access, French and Spanish subtitles, English captions for the hearing
impaired, cast and filmmaker filmographies and biographies, Jon Avnet's scene
specific notes, production photographs, pictures of the posters used in the
advertising campaign, Sipsey's recipes, the original theatrical trailer and a
trailer for another of Avnet's projects, "The War."  Keepcase with production
booklet.
     Notes: Several video versions are available, with options including
clamshell case, widescreen format, and the extended version.  Originally rated
PG-13 for violence, adult themes (mostly just some tense scenes), and mild
language.  The extended version is seven minutes longer than the PG-13 cut, had
the film been re-submitted to the MPAA, the rating would stand.  
     The Verdict: It's not without minor fault, but give "Fried Green Tomatoes"
a chance.  Winning performances and great characters make this worth seeing,
and those who are left wanting more should definitely read the book.  For fans
of the film, the Universal Collector's Edition DVD is a must-have.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     "Fried Green Tomatoes" is the name for two different recipes.  One
is a Southern dish I have never tried but it is reputedly delicious--it
looks a lot like fried eggplant.  It is also the name for a stew or
goulash made from pieces of old movies about the South, and politically
correct films about women learning to be independent.  It is sweetened
with little bits of comedy thrown in and there is a dash of bittersweet
tragedy.  The recipe apparently calls for two small storylines rather
than one big one.  This dish turns out to be palatable, even enjoyable,
though a little light for my taste.  Its flavor was just a little
over-familiar and it left me hungry for just a bit more.
     The film opens with a truck being dredged from an Alabama river in
the late 1930s.  We then flash forward to what may be the present or
what may be a decade or so back.  (We do eventually find out why the
truck is important, but it is questionable why we open with that scene.)
Evelyn and Ed Couch (played by Kathy Bates and Gailand Sartain) find
themselves passing through the little town of Whistle Stop on the way to
a nursing home to visit Ed's cantankerous aunt.  (The name "Couch" was
chosen, no doubt, because Evelyn and Ed are each a bit over-stuffed.)
At the nursing home Evelyn meets Ninny Threadgoode (played by Jessica
Tandy) and the two begin to talk.  Ninny tells Evelyn a story of the
past in Alabama.  On repeated visits that story becomes much longer and,
in fact, it is the main body of the film.  In flashback we see the story
of the life-long friendship of Idgie Threadgoode (played by Mary Stuart
Masterson) and Ruth Jamison (played by Mary-Louise Parker).  The story
develops as parallel plots.  One plot is that of Evelyn finding her own
identity and getting past her late-mid-life crisis.  The other is the
story of Idgie and Ruth, two liberated women who run the Whistle Stop
Cafe in the small Alabama town of Whistle Stop.  The story is nothing
greatly original.  Not too surprisingly, the issue of racism rears its
pointed, hooded head.  There is a murder subplot and a lot of human
drama in the story of the two close friends.  Meanwhile, Evelyn tries to
find herself through a "Total Womanhood" program, but finally finds
identity through Idgie's and Ruth's liberated example.  The film is a
sort of adult SONG OF THE SOUTH.
     Of course the film is not too adult.  In Fannie Flagg's original
novel, FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, Idgie and Ruth
have a lesbian relationship.  In the screenplay by director Jon Avnet
and Fannie Flagg, the relationship is down-played and left as a matter
for speculation.  The real problem with the screenplay is that *too
much* must have been left out.  Spreading the film's 130 minutes between
two stories does not leave sufficient time to give either a satisfying
telling.  This was a light entertaining novel with humorous vignettes
lampooning the South, much as we would expect from comedian Flagg, but
also with some substance, particularly in the flashbacks.  The vignettes
in Evelyn's story just take too much time from what substance there
might have been in the flashback.  I rate FRIED GREEN TOMATOES a high +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
