Title
Review for Endurance (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
You'll check your watch frequently waiting for something to happen in
Leslie Woodhead's abysmal documentary, ENDURANCE, and you'll still be
checking it when the closing credits roll.  If there were a cinematic
dullness scale, this movie would reside just one notch ahead of the
rating for a blank screen.
The movie attempts to tell the story of Ethiopian long-distance runner
Haile Gebrselassie, whom Runner's World magazine called "the greatest
distance runner of all time." Gebrselassie deserves much better than
this lame attempt at a movie.
The best one can say of the film is that it undoubtedly has good
intentions.  But, regardless of the filmmaker's plans, the result is a
docu-drama that robs the viewers of their time as they stare at a movie
without a single compelling moment.  Almost all of the story concerns
the minutia of Gebrselassie's life on the farm as he grows up.  Even
when, toward the end, we finally get to see him race, the movie saps all
of the life and vitality out of the scenes.  His big victory at the 1996
Olympics in Atlanta is drained of energy by the editing of the film and
the sound.
Most of the movie consists of a badly reenacted story of his life.  The
filmmakers, incorrectly, assume that the film's images as so interesting
that they can get away with having no narration and almost no dialog.
This is a huge mistake.
An even larger error is made in the amount of time allocated to
completely uninteresting activities.  We watch the young Gebrselassie as
he sips an orange soda, flips through pages of an atlas, milks a cow,
plows the fields, reads by the fire and hauls water up from the stream.
The camera dwells on each activity as if we had never seen it before.
We get the point that Gebrselassie grew up in poverty, but do we have to
devote the first 80% of the movie to it?
The filmmakers haven't a clue as to how to tell a coherent story.  The
confusing one they lay before us never draws us in or makes us care.  As
we watch, the people in it are stripped of their humanity by the film's
lackluster and patronizing presentation.
Only the African music breaks up the monotony.  Although it sounds good,
one suspects that they could have played absolutely anything, and it
would have been welcome.
If the American Film Institute ever compiles a list of the worst
documentaries ever made, ENDURANCE would have to be considered a top
contender.
ENDURANCE runs 1:23.  The film is mainly in Ethiopian with English
subtitles.  It is rated G as there is nothing to offend anyone.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, complained that the film was confusing and
contained no plot or point.  He gave it 0 stars and said that he found
nothing interesting in the entire movie.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If you lived in Manhattan and decided to run from West
Fourth Street in Greenwich Village to West 125 Street in
Harlem, how would you negotiate the trip?  Would you go full
speed ahead?  Begin fast, then slow down, finally speed up
to the wire?  An even more important question: would you
even make it to your destination?  This six-mile journey is
more or less the distance that an Olympic runner has to
cover in a long-distance marathon, whose standard length is
10,000 meters.  To cover this tract of land, an athlete needs
both speed and endurance, but running, like any more
complex sport, requires training.  In the movie "Endurance,"
director Leslie Woodhead takes us into the legs, lungs and
mind of Haile Gebrselassie, considered by at least one major
periodical on the sport to be the greatest long-distance racer
of all time.  "Endurance" is a solid work that avoids both the
talking-heads tedium of a documentary and the rah-rah
Hollywood histrionics of an action-packed sports drama like
"Pre."  A docudrama, the film features Haile Gebrselassie as
himself, his real-life father Bekele Gebrselassie and wife
playing themselves, with his sister in the role of his mother,
his nephew as the athlete in his pre-pubescent days, and his
first cousin playing his dad during Gebrselassie's youth.
   The film alternates between Atlanta, the home of the 1966
Olympics, and the Ethiopian village of Asela.  As we in a
Western audience takes in Ivan Strasburg's sharply focused
camerawork, we can't help feeling conflicted as we marvel at
the Spartan beauty of the African countryside while feeling
compassion for the hardscrabble lives of its residents.  Young
Haile could not be blamed for being more interested in
running the six miles to school each day than in doing his
share of the family chores on his farm.  He lives in a one-
room mud hut that houses the twelve human members of his
family and apparently some oxen and goats as well.  To
maintain this questionable life style requires hard work by all. 
One contingent must set out regularly with donkeys to make
the three-hour trip to a source of drinking water while others
till the fields with human and animal labor rather than with the
modern technology so common in the West.  Haile's dad
wants the boy to work in an office as a lawyer or a clerk, an
understandable aspiration given the bodily requirements of
farming, but Haile wants only to run and at the age of 17
disobeys his father by moving to the capital, Addis Ababa, to
take part in a national training program.
   While the film's subject is the sport of long-distance
running, its real star is the African people who perform their
rituals before a camera as though they were professional
actors.  When Haile's mother (Shawanness Gerbrselassie)
falls ill in the field while carrying a heavy pitcher of water, she
is transported to the hospital on a makeshift stretcher and
carried to a rickety public bus for transportation to the
hospital.  At her funeral, her friends and neighbors gather
around the hut to chant "Cry for your mother" and shed
genuine tears as though they were participating in the death
rites of one of their own loved ones.  (When these local
people were asked behind the scenes how they managed to
conjure the tears, they said simply that they imagined the
dead person to be one of their own, dear relatives--an
example of method acting, Ethiopian style.)  
   Thanks to some elegant tracking shots, we see Haile
running like a cheetah across the parched land of his birth,
the only sounds coming from the hyped-up, exciting beats of
the soundtrack featuring ethnic Ethiopian songs of all
varieties.  He seems equally at ease when winning the gold
medal he took at the '96 Olympics in Atlanta, the sounds of
heavy breathing coming from the soundtrack rather than from
his own mouth.  
  The film is framed by the great athletic event with an
unfortunate opening spotlighting the movie's star sitting on a
hill in his native land speaking in halting English rather than
his native Amharic.  Strangely, he uses the annoying verbal
tic "you know" five or six times, unusual when you consider
that he was not brought up in an English-speaking society
that considers this mannerism almost a rite of passage. 
Some of the dialogue comes across as stilted, as when
Haile's dad asks him to remain and seek an office job only to
have the young man respond, in effect, "I am going. 
Goodbye."  But we must remember that this is a docudrama,
not a feature film, and should be grateful that we are not
forced to endure a talking-heads documentary.  "Endurance"
crosses the finish line at an appropriate 83 minutes, a movie
which makes up for its relative deficiency of conflict and
setbacks by its bold, stirring meditation on the lives of people
in one of the world's poorest countries.

Author
Ross Anthony
Though, called a non-fiction feature by it's producer, "Endurance" is
loosely a documentary on Haile Gebrselassie ... Ethiopia's Olympic gold
winner and one of the world's greatest distance runners.
Yonas Zergaw (Haile's real life nephew) plays the young Haile, growing up on
a ranching farm in Ethiopia. The eighth of ten children, the young Haile
must run six miles to school and still get home in time to milk the cows and
harvest the wheat. Some of Haile's real life family are present in the film
(though at times standing in for younger or dead relatives). Their
recreations are surprisingly genuine.
"Endurance" spares us the intrusion of a narrator, preferring to let the
simple images tell the story in their own time. The music ... wonderfully
wide open and rich (like the landscape) in the beginning, thins out during
the breadth of the distance. It embraces elements of the indigenous music,
but certainly not exclusively.
This sweetly simple and honest documentary, shouldn't be confused with a
feature film; but crossing the finish line, Haile's sincerity, will no doubt
choke up a tear in your eye.
Starring Haile Gebrselassie and his family.
Written and directed by Leslie Woodhead.
Produced by Edward R. Pressman, Terrence Malick and Max Palevsky at Disney.
Rated G.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
