Title
Review for Last Days of Disco, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "The environmental movement of our times was sparked by the
re-release of Bambi in the 1950s," is one of many deliciously offbeat
slices of wisdom from writer and director Wilt Stillman's latest film,
THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO.  Full of wry, intelligent humor, Stillman's
pictures (METROPOLITAN and BARCELONA) are perhaps an acquired taste,
and his latest is arguably his best yet.
     We are told that the story is set in "the very early 1980s," and,
although it is being marketed as a nostalgic disco movie, the story
really has little to do with discos or dancing.  The movie is a
talkfest that uses the disco scene and the period merely as a backdrop.
     The large ensemble cast is head by a pair of female buddies,
Charlotte Pingress and Alice Kinnon, who are entry level book
publishers during the day and disco devotees at night.  In the tightly
controlled world of disco, the doorman has gatekeeper powers that St.
Peter would envy, these women are among the elite group regularly
granted admission, albeit more to hang out than to dance.  And when
they do make it onto the floor, they have the more dancing with each
other.  Forget those guys and their hang-ups.
     As filmed by John Thomas, the harsh strobes of the darkly lit
disco contrast strikingly with the warm sunshine flowing into their
office windows during the day.  Their disco has no romantic John
Travolta-style dancing.  (In fact one scene is devoted to mocking
SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER.)  The dancers are made into quasi-buffoons in
their outlandish outfits, the best being a group dressed as characters
from the Wizard of Oz but with masks full of long scowls.
     As the bossy Charlotte, Kate Beckinsale from SHOOTING FISH gives a
winning performance.  She alternates between politely insulting and
instructing the meek Alice, played without much personality by Chloe
Sevigny from PALMETTO.  After learning from Charlotte that the constant
use of the word "sexy" is a turn-on to men, Alice tries it out on her
new date, Tom Platt (Robert Sean Leonard).  Since she knows he collects
first edition Scrooge McDuck comics, she tells him with as much
conviction as she can muster that "there's something sexy about Scrooge
McDuck."  He proceeds to write her off as a nut case.
     The film comes alive with its wonderfully complex, intellectual
humor that is so dense and fast-paced that it might take several
viewings to catch it all.  One long scene has the group deconstructing
the meaning of LADY AND THE TRAMP, contemplating the various dogs'
psychological motivations and envisioning possible epilogues.
     Des McGrath, played with paranoid verve by Christopher Eigeman
from METROPOLITAN and BARCELONA, likes to relate the story of how he
was traumatized by a pair of large female breasts in college and of how
women do not realize "how nuanced" men's feelings are about breasts -
it's more than just sexual.
     The group also ponders the meanings of various lines of
Shakespeare.  "To thine own self be true" can become bad advice if your
"self" isn't all that great in the first place.
     Charlotte, whose mouth always runs several steps ahead of her
brain, argues that having VD is actually a gift, since you get to
reestablish contacts with all of your old sexual partners.  Besides, it
could be worse since VD is easily treatable, unlike herpes.
     Much of their logic has an Escher quality, nicely twisting back on
itself.  One couple, for example, has agreed on a trial separation but
have been caught cheating by seeing each other on the sly.
     And then there is Des, who claims he's gay because two days ago he
saw this guy on the "Wild Kingdom" TV show who caused him to realize
his true sexual orientation.  The women take this as a convoluted
putdown, but he swears he's serious.  Des, who turns out to be the most
interesting character of all, is full of reflections on life.  "Our
bodies are not really designed for group social life," he observes when
their little party breaks up into couples going off for sex.  "We're
really designed for pairing off."  Des admits to being an habitual drug
user, but certainly not an addict, which he is.  "Do you think the
neurological effects of caffeine are similar to those of cocaine?" he
asks Alice during a brief bout of sobriety.  Before she can answer, he
throws his face into a large cup of coffee.
     Just the opposite of the ultra-confident entrepreneurs of the 90s,
these 80s yuppies are depressed and fearful.  "A lot of people won't
take no for an answer," a diffident, would-be boyfriend, Josh Neff
(Matthew Keeslar from WAITING FOR GUFFMAN), tells Alice.  "I wanted you
to know that I'm not one of them.  I can be discouraged."
     THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO runs 1:55.  It is rated R for brief scenes
of sex, nudity, and drug usage and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Whit Stillman
Starring: Chloë Sevigny, Kate Beckinsale, Christopher Eigeman, Matthew
Keeslar, MacKenzie Astin, Matthew Ross, Tara Subkoff, Robert Sean Leonard,
Burr Steers, David Thornton, Jaid Barrymore, Michael Weatherly, Jennifer
Beals, Mark McKinney, Carolyn Farina, Dylan Hundley, Taylor Nichols
>From looking at the title, Whit Stillman's "The Last Days of Disco" could
be seen as a corny confession of his love for the music, arriving just at
the time when everything 70s is suddenly (not to mention finally) suffering
a comeback.  After "Boogie Nights," the rebirth of John Travolta, the
sudden unearthing of the Studio 54 phenomenon, and even another Bee Gees
album, "The Last Days of Disco" comes out at a time when people would just
go to see it to laugh at disco music, not to mention the people who
actually enjoyed listening and dancing to it.  Of course, Whit Stillman's
much better than all that.
"The Last Days of Disco" is not really about the Disco Club phase as it is
about a time in history when the whole reason some people went to these
clubs was to bask in the social part of it all.  The people that are the
portrait of this film, the upper-middle-class soon-to-be-yuppies, may
actually enjoy the music, but they go to the club out of a fear of not
fitting in, and go there more to meet people, hold conversations, and maybe
occasionally go home with one of them.  The only reason they go to these
kinds of clubs is because they're the fad at the time of the film.
Of course, anyone who's seen one of Stillman's films knows this. 
"Metropolitan" and "Barcelona" are (in)famous for being plotless talkfests,
featuring characters that have rarely been filmed before.  In
"Metropolitan," he dubbed his group UHBs: Urban Haute Boreousie...or in
other words, snobs.  They're all well-educated, all read Salinger (as we
all should), only flock in their particular group, but still have many of
the same problems we all have.  But while "Metropolitan" saw them as
growing out of their young age, and "Barcelona" saw them as already
working, "The Last Days of Disco" catches them at that inconvenient time
known as post-graduation (and to make a connection between these films,
Stillman brings back some old cast members for cameos, most notably Taylor
Nichol's dorky Ted from "Barcelona," who makes a speech about, well, going
to Barcelona).
There's nary a plot in this film (unless you count a little subplot that
arises about narcotics and smuggled cash in the club), so we are instead
introduced to a wide variety of characters who inhabit the club every now
and then, most prominently Alice and Charlotte (Chloë Sevigny and Kate
Beckinsale, respectively), two young women both working as book editing
underlings in the same office, who become the film's chief focus as they
hang out in their big clique and occasionally pair off with the male
members who attract them at the moment.  For Charlotte, she somewhat
settles down with the hilariously insecure advertising underling, Jimmy
(MacKenzie Astin, the guy from the latter seasons of "The Facts of
Life"...don't ask me how I know that), who may not be the best partner for
her, but at least it sorta seems that way.
Alice is a lot different from Charlotte, though, and the two are even more
mismatched a pair of friends than the two leads from "Barcelona." 
Charlotte's a bit of a bitch, but one of those bitches who is somewhat hard
to stay mad at because they act like they need to be friends with you.  And
besides, Charlotte's insecure about her future and maps out goals she must
have for life, like getting married and working in television, while Alice
is insecure in general and finds she's wandering a lot more than Charlotte.
 As the film goes on, she goes through a couple boyfriends, starting off
with the suave but at the moment somewhat shallow Tom (Robert Sean
Leonard), and even dating the wonderfully obnoxious club partner, Des
(Christopher Eigeman, who's the main link between this and Stillman's other
two films), all while the kinda off-kilter young DA Josh (Matthew Keeslar,
from "Waiting for Guffman") looks on at her with longing.
The film wanders around with these people, never really sure where it wants
to go because these people aren't either.  One of the many great things
about Stillman, why he's one of the best writer/directors working today is
because he has an intriguing and ingenius knack for drawing character he's
fascinated with, partly because they're probably part of him.  As he's
gotten older (he's in his late 30s, I think), he's been able to look back
to his youth, when he was just like these people, and is able to paint
portraits of them that are simultaneously loving and satirical.  In other
movies, these people would be looked on as mere snobs, but here, they're
still snobs but they're also people.
While "Metropolitan," which dove deep into the lives of members of the
Debutantes and Escorts circuit, had a bit of trouble making a clear
connection between them and the audience (I know people whom I respect that
just can't sit through it because they can't stand the characters), "The
Last Days of Disco" shows that Stillman has finally found out how to make
his characters totally lovable, and surprisingly more sympathetic.  The
characters are basically all of us at that point in our lives where we're
just starting out in real life, struggling to make it in the big city
without financial help from our parents, and struggling to make friends
where the only social happenings are what you have to find for yourself.
And that's where the disco club comes in for these people, and why it's
demise is seen as both tragic and as a relief.  The club is basically all
these people have to really make aquaintances, and where they can discuss
novels, sex, and even the way that Disney films, like "Lady and the Tramp,"
are propaganda by Disney to make children into zombies (this speech is as
funny if not more than anything Quentin Tarantino has ever written, and
much more intelligent).  The characters in this film are as insecure as
everyone, and its this connection that rises "The Last Days of Disco" above
either of the films Stillman has made before.  We care about these
characters because despite their social rank, are really us...or soon to be
us.
"The Last Days of Disco" is the best film Stillman has made so far, not
just because of this great connection he makes, but also because the film
just allows us to live with these characters and watch their lives change
and how they interact with one another.  He has also never been able to
control his actors this well before.  Chloë Sevigny, the only cast member
of "Kids" to do exceptionally well in that film, is simply awesome as
Alice, and in an opposite field, Kate Beckinsale's performance as Charlotte
is as flawless as her accent.  Even MacKenzie Astin shows great promise as
a slightly neurotic future yuppie, something I wouldn't have thought he'd
be.  And Christopher Eigeman has never been this delightfully obnoxious
(his "To Thine Own Self Be True" speech is priceless).
As for Whit Stillman, a script of his has never been this sharp.  He has
such a great ear for the way the people in his film talk that he's up there
with the likes of David Mamet, Quentin Tarantino, and Woody Allen as the
best screenwriters currently working in films, and in this film, we see him
at his most controlled as well as a talented writer for women's roles.  His
films seem to live just for the dialogue, and listening to his characters
interact is as entertaining as anything on celluloid.  But perhaps most
commendable, he gives a voice to a group of people who haven't been
represented since the glorious days of J.D. Salinger, mostly because he's
been there, knows what it's like, and has distanced himself away from them
so that he can write them fairly and with the right amount of humanity. 
"The Last Days of Disco" only furthers his credibility and establishes him
as a very major talent in modern films.  His past two films are amazing,
but just shy of a four-star review, mostly because of a couple little
problems that just didn't get it past the finish line.  "The Last Days of
Disco" does, though, because it's his most balanced, most likable, and
overall most deep without becoming totally pretentious or unentertaining,
and, well, manages to make a film pack a film with wall-to-wall disco tunes
that still lives for the dialogue.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Wilcock
An entertaining 2 hours awaits the audience in this film set in the early
80's. Sevigny and Beckinsale play disco chicks Alice and Charlotte, who are
on the lookout for love. Alice is mousy, shy, intellectual, Charlotte is
bitchy, out-going and fun. We join their adventures as they go through a
variety of adventures, and men, all to the background of the local disco.
Whit Stillman has both written and directed an interesting and believable
story. Alice and Charlotte are both well written characters, and the
actresses who play them aren't bad aswell. Sevigny delivers an honest
performance, and makes the audience feel for her character. Beckinsale plays
extreme bitch personified, yet her character never becomes completely
unlikeable. The huge supporting cast also play a part in making sure this
movie is thoroughly entertaining. The dialogue is sharp and well written,
with many funny set pieces. For example, there's a great discussion about
Lady & The Tramp by the main characters. The disco tunes playing in the
background also make sure that this admittedly long film is good fun.
The direction is good, bringing out the drama and comedy in the scenes. But
their are slight flaws with the movie. Firstly, although it is supposedly
set in the 80's, the characters are very, very 90's. The way they dress and
act have a very 90's feel to them. Although the male hairstyles look
slightly 80's, frankly the 80's atmosphere just wasn't conveyed, which is a
shame. Also, as mentioned above, the film is too long, and some parts do
lag. The charm of the characters do help these moments, but generally the
editing could of been a bit tighter. The plot also side-tracks into a silly
cocaine dealing bust, which seemed out of place in this movie. Finally,
their are almost too many characters in the film, and despite the running
time, the film never really spends enough time on them. Some of the
characters are very slight, which is a shame. The conclusion, while funny,
is also surprisingly weak, and certainly not strong enough.
But despite these qualms, The Last Days of Disco is a funny, warm movie,
which is certainly worth seeing, and is a fitting homage to the disco era of
the 80's. Worth a look.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Matt Williams
It was inevitable that films would take a look back at the disco era.
Whit Stillman's comedy-drama The Last Days of Disco is in the first
nostalgic volley, with more to come later.  However, filled with good
characters, and sharp dialogue, The Last Days of Disco holds promise
that these films may be more enduring than the era itself.
The film centers around a group of yuppies who have latched onto the
tail end of the disco era (in the very early 1980s).  Alice (Chloë
Sevigny) and Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale) work in a publishing house and
have recently become roommates.  Alice is the shyer of the two, and has
latched onto the brash Charlotte as an inappropriate role model.
The men in their lives aren't terribly inspiring. Des (Chris Eigeman) is
the womanizing club manager, who's willing to overlook anything (from
criminal activity to the duties of friendship). Jimmy (Mackenzie Astin)
is a struggling junior ad exec, who's used merely as a tool to get
clients access to the exclusive clubs.  And there's Josh (Matthew
Keeslar) the assistant D.A. who might be creepier than the rest of them
combined.
The film brews an odd mixture of nostalgia and contempt for the era. The
time is depicted as simple and free, and yet shallow and naive. The
characters are brimming with self importance, as if they're on the dawn
of a new era, when actually they're at its dusk.
Alice is easily the most sympathetic character of the film, but by no
means the most interesting.  That honor goes to Charlotte. Kate
Beckinsale (with a flawless American accent) portrays her with an
intoxicating mix of cruelty and seductiveness.
The dialogue is what makes The Last Days of Disco truly stand out from
the crowd.  With comments ranging from the apt to the vapid, Whit
Stillman's script crackles with wit.
The Last Days of Disco is a fascinating film to watch, whether you were
a supporter of "the disco movement", or one who cheered when it died.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Last Days of Disco (1998)
Chloe Sevigny, Kate Beckinsale, Christopher Eigeman , MacKenzie Astin, 
Matthew Keeslar, Robert Sean Leonard, Tara Subkoff, David Thornton, 
Jennifer Beals, Mark McKinney. Written and directed by Whit Stillman. 115 
minutes.
R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
After seeing this film, I think I understand why disco died. Everybody 
was so busy yapping that they simply forgot to dance. At least that's the 
way it seems in "The Last Days of Disco," Whit Stillman's entertaining 
film about a group of dreadful people. While the satire features a 
talented cast maneuvering through a perfunctory storyline and romantic 
subplots, the real star here is the English language. Stillman is 
intoxicated with words and the film overflows with urbane conversations. 
His characters talk about social manners. They talk about the politics of 
dating. They talk about group dynamics, the origins of environmentalism 
and Disney's role in reinforcing stereotypical male and female behavior. 
They talk and talk and talk until you want to scream "For the love of God,
 would you people just shut up and dance!?!" 
With "Metropolitan" and "Barcelona," "The Last Days of Disco" completes a 
trilogy of Stillman films containing many of the same characters. Set 
against the world of disco in the early 80's, the production focuses on a 
handful of horrible young adults. Alice (Chloe Sevigny) and Charlotte 
(Kate Beckinsale) are co-workers at a publishing house. The pair spend 
their evenings at a glittery disco packed with extras dressed in colorful 
outfits. Doormen stand guard at the exclusive club, admitting only people 
with the "right" look and social status. The disco is the center of Alice 
and Charlotte's lives and they never venture to other nightclubs. Perhaps 
that's because this is the only disco on Earth that plays its music 
quietly enough to allow casual conversation.
Charlotte, the consummate bitch, spews an endless stream of offhand 
nasty remarks to her "friend." With a reassuring touch to the forearm, 
she tells Alice "In physical terms I'm cuter than you." In front of a 
group, she mulls over why Alice isn't drinking that evening, sorts it out,
 then cheerfully announces "Oh, I get it. It's because of that medication 
you're taking. You've got gonorrhea!" Later, she apologizes for her 
"compulsive honesty," while opining that getting VD can be a plus, 
because notifying your past partners is a great excuse to renew relations 
with old boyfriends. 
Charlotte isn't the only gem in this tiara of humanity. There's junior 
club manager Des (Christopher Eigeman), who dumps girlfriends by 
"discovering" that he's gay (he explains that his moment of realization 
came when he noticed his unusual attraction to Marlon Perkin's assistant 
in "Wild Kingdom"), advertising executive Jimmy (MacKenzie Astin), who 
ferrets clients into the club by wearing Wizard of Oz costumes, and Tom 
(Robert Sean Leonard), an activist who theorizes that the modern 
environmental movement began when thousands of baby boomers were 
simultaneously traumatized by the death of Bambi's mother. And let's not 
forget Josh (Matthew Keeslar), a manic-depressive assistant DA who, when 
not furtively investigating the club's finances, waxes rhapsodic about 
the disco "movement" ("something this big and important will never really 
die," he says unconvincingly). 
In-between conversations, they...wait, that's wrong, these people are 
never in-between conversations. DURING conversations, they date each 
other, break up and make up, and have periodic ugly confrontations with 
the outside world. Despite the almost total lack of action, the film is 
engaging and often funny. One of the highlights is a deep group 
discussion about Josh's deconstructionist theory that Disney's "Lady and 
the Tramp" was designed to "program women to adore jerks."
Unfortunately, the characters are so incredibly annoying that it becomes 
difficult to appreciate the humor, as the urge to belt these pretentious, 
self-absorbed idiots grows stronger and stronger. These are stagnant 
people. They accomplish nothing, they do nothing except dissect life's 
minutia while celebrating their own mediocrity. While their vapidity may 
be the core of Stillman's satire of the social mores of the period, it 
doesn't make it any easier to watch. Thank goodness for the "Love Train" 
sequence that ends the film. I won't spoil things by describing it here, 
but the scene is both funny and lyrical, breaking the inertia that weighs 
down the rest of the film. How odd that a movie set in a disco suffers 
from lack of movement.
In an ideal world, Whit Stillman would have got together with "Godzilla" 
creators Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich and combined their character-
deficient movie with his. By blending both films into one, they could 
have created a stunning fusion, an event film with brains. Think about it.
 A giant lizard attacks Manhattan during the disco days. While the 
military battles the creature, Whitman's characters wander the New York 
streets prattling endlessly, oblivious to everything except the sound of 
their own voices. Then, just before the final battle scene, Godzilla 
takes a surprise step and squishes the entire cast of "The Last Days of 
Disco." Now that would be a five star movie.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO (1998) *** Written, produced and directed by Whit
Stillman. Photography, John Thomas. Editing, Andrew Hafitz & Jay
Pires.Production design, Ginger Tougas.Costumes, Sarah Edwards.  Music,
Mark Suozzo.Cast: Chloe Sevigny (Alice), Kate Beckinsale (Charlotte), Chris
Eigeman (Des), Mackenzie Astin (Jimmy), Matt Keeslar (Josh), Robert Sean
Leonard (Tom), Jennifer Beals (Nina), Matthew Ross (Dan), Tara Subkoff
(Holly), David Thornton (Bernie) et al. A Castle Rock release. 112 minutes.
R (sex, drugs)
In 1990, first-time director Whit Stillman gave us one of the best films of
the year, Metropolitan. For those who pay attention to the occasional wheat
of independent filmmakers over and above the  regular chaff of Hollywood,
Metropolitan was a revelation. It received one  Oscar nomination, for
writing.(The Best Movie nominees for that year were Awakenings, Ghost, The
Godfather III, Goodfellas, and the winner, Dances With Wolves).
Metropolitan made instantly of Stillman not only a maverick but also an
"auteur."
His film was about Manhattanite preppies and debutantes, a sharp but
affectionate satire whose motor was talk, talk, talk. Then, in his second
movie, Barcelona (1994), took on former preppies and such, older yet still
young, and pursuing careers in Catalonia in the early 1980s. The Last Days
of Disco, set in the Manhattan of the "very early 80s," in time and
characters inserts itself between the two earlier films. Its main people
are preppies turned yuppies-- although someone in the film splits hairs
about that definition and adds that yuppies are always "the other." Not a
silly statement since the focus group correctly see themselves as still
struggling to attain upward mobility.
The motleycrowd centers on Alice and Charlotte, twenty-something Eastern
college graduates working as lowly editorial assistants in a publishing
firm. More companions than real friends, they make a mismatched duo that
labors by day and boogies by night at the same disco. Alice is the
(presumably) sensitive and shy. She is supposed to be brainy, but I was
far from convinced and would trust neither assistant editor with a
manuscript. Charlotte is hard and manipulative. The film's end proves that
there is divine justice as it finds her pairing off with someone she
deserves.
The trendy, unnamed dance club's main Cerberus at the door decides who can
get in and who cannot. We're talking here of inclusion and exclusion that
go beyond the disco and can involve mini-subplots. Acceptance, in the
widest sense is  emblematic  of the characters' lives and mentalities. The
men whom the two girls meet at the club are mostly Harvard graduates. Chief
among them is Des, a sort of assistant manager who snorts coke (he
protests: "I am not an addict, but a habitual user") and pretends that he's
just discovered he is gay whenever he wants to dump a girlfriend.
Admission to the disco is about as hard as entering Fort Knox, yet the
standards, vestimentary to start with, are otherwise vague and capricious.
Some clients are bare-chested, and an older habituee, the Tiger Lady, is
bare-breasted. There are no color- or sexual preference- lines. It's a
strange microcosm of semi-hedonism, mating rituals, and social contacts.
The non-plot's main focus is on Alice. She apparently has no bad hair days,
but did have a bad social life in college, is still self-doubting and
insecure, politely sleeps around and pays the price -- an easily curable
one compared to other aspects of the early 80s. The first year of the
Reagan presidency was when herpes was common and AIDS was identified
Writer-director Stillman has wickedly good eyes and ears for his creatures.
These make up an un-detailable criss-cross of relationships. Males and
females are all Closely Watched Yuppies who talk pretty incessantly --about
anything. Stillman knows those people inside-out. He comes from a
high-caste family, went to Harvard, and before making films he held various
jobs that added to his perceptions of the human comedy. He makes his
characters jump through hoops, feeds them lines, yet this is no artifice
since his movie is like a "fictional documentary" of real-life, a stalking
of people who might as well be wearing lapel mikes.
Jumping from subject to subject  Alice, Charlotte, Des and Co. engage in
conversations -- some can be outlandishly funny-- that overwhelmingly have
in common pretentiousness, false intellectualism, forced wir, smugness,
dumb paradoxes, or analyses that ape the ponderous jargon of a certain
academic criticism. Those people think they're all so smart, but don't
realize that a little learning is not only a dangerous thing but that it
can change literacy into sub-literacy.
The result is that Stillman's devastating reproduction of shallowness and
all-around insecurities may score a perfect 10 but can leave one royally
uninterested in those people, if not downright bored and irritated by them.
The basic mold from which so many of the characters are cast is a good,
anti-Hollywood move by the director, although the several males, unlike the
two girls, can  take some time to sort out.  Add to this that the dialogues
are not always clear to the audience, while, oddly, the characters can make
their interlocutors hear everything over the disco's din. Not to mention
that hardly any dancer sweats.
With his films Whit Stillman has broken new ground but there are limits.
Unlike some genres, Westerns for example, this specialty is not too
repeatable. I hope those are the last days of Stillman's pursuit of
immature pre-thirties types, and that he will come up with his own takes on
thirty-somethings and beyond.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Sanford
THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO
Directed by Whit Stillman
 A younger friend recently told me how jealous he was of the people who were
in college in the early 1980s: "All those great clubs, all that great
music," he gushed. Yeah, I thought, and spiraling inflation, student-loan
cutbacks and the promise of an unfriendly job market when you got out of
school. Happy times, those.
 "The Last Days of Disco," set, according to its opening title in "the very
early 1980s," brings back the P.M. (Pre-Madonna) era in disturbing detail,
recalling the romantic glitziness of the disco years as well as the sleazy
drugginess that ultimately defined and destroyed the party. But rather than
focusing on disco's demise, writer-director Whit Stillman merely uses it as
a backdrop for a group portrait of a handful of young New Yorkers fresh out
of college and anxious for adventure and love. Because this is Stillman
("Barcelona," "Metropolitan") they spend much of their time discussing what
they want to do rather than actually doing it, but their intelligent, often
hilarious conversation turns out to be such a refreshing change from the
usual summer movie dialogue (which generally runs the gamut from "What do
you want from me?" to "Run!") you'll probably be content to let them ramble
on and on.
 The centerpieces of the ensemble are Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale) and Alice
(Chloe Sevigny, looking like a young and streetwise Meryl Streep), former
classmates who now work together as underpaid underlings in a publishing
house and spend their nights in The Club, a Studio 54-style disco. Charlotte
is the more forthright, brassy one, always offering such unsolicited advice
as "whenever you can, try to throw the word 'sexy' into your conversations."
The slightly more demure Alice not only tolerates her slightly overbearing
friend but seems to enjoy her company, at least that is until Charlotte
blurts out in front of Alice's date about the bottle of tetracycline on
Alice's dresser, then tries to smooth things over by telling Alice that
sometimes veneral disease "is not all bad, there are actually positive
aspects."
 Circling Charlotte and Alice are Dez (Christopher Eigemann), an assistant
Club manager who fears both responsibility and his own sexual urges; Jimmy
(Mackenzie Astin), an ad agency lackey whose idea of success is being able
to afford to send his shirts out to the laundry; and Josh (Matt Keeslar), a
genuinely nice guy who's also an assistant district attorney and a manic
depressive. Alice falls fo Josh anyway, prompting Charlotte to snipe, "From
the start, you know he's defective: You usually don't find that out until
much later."
 The performances by the entire ensemble are delightful, with Beckinsale and
Keeslar particularly impressive. Of course, it helps that they get most of
the sharpest lines. Josh's lengthy analysis of Disney's "Lady and the Tramp"
as the type of movie that "programs women to adore jerks" is genuinely
brilliant.
 Stillman also provides a hard-to-resist soundtrack pulsating with such
seductive oldies as Evelyn "Champagne" King's "I Don't Know If It's Right"
and Diana Ross' sizzling "I'm Coming Out" : Do you think she had any idea
what she was singing about back in 1980?. A-

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Chloe Sevigny, Kate Beckinsale, Chris Eigeman, Mackenzie Astin,
Matt Keeslar, Robert Sean Leonard, Matthew Ross, Tara Subkoff.
Screenplay:  Whit Stillman.
Producer:  Whit Stillman.
Director:  Whit Stillman.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, brief nudity, drug use, adult themes)
Running Time:  109 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A funny thing happens when the characters start dancing in Whit
Stillman's THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO:  they stop talking.  Set in the early
1980s, the story follows several young people whose social lives revolve
around a super-trendy Manhattan disco referred to only as "the club."
Among them are Alice (Chloe Sevigny) and Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale),
roommates and co-workers as manuscript readers for a publishing house;
Jimmy (Mackenzie Astin), a junior advertising executive whose job depends
on getting potential clients into the club; Tom (Robert Sean Leonard), a
Harvard man Alice admires from afar; Josh (Matt Keeslar), an assistant
district attorney with a history of manic-depression; and Des (Chris
Eigeman), the club's womanizing assistant manager who ends his flings by
claiming to have discovered that he's gay.
     Most of the time, these characters do what characters in films by
Whit Stillman (METROPOLITAN, BARCELONA) typically do:  they engage in a
whole lot of urbane conversation.  They share views on the value of group
social activities versus "ferocious pairing-off."  They wax philosophical
on contemporary male-female relationship dynamics.  They complain about
being perceived as "yuppies" despite feeling that their career prospects
are limited.  They exchange observations on pop culture phenomena
(including how BAMBI sparked the environmental movement and LADY AND THE
TRAMP indoctrinated young girls into desiring "bad boys") like Tarantino
characters toting highball glasses.  They talk and talk and talk and talk
until amusement at their bon mots gives way to frustration as you begin
wishing you could grab every one of them by the collar and beg someone,
anyone to do something, anything.
     What they eventually do -- all they eventually do, really, besides
talk -- is dance.  For several seconds at a time, Stillman will hold the
camera on a couple doing their clumsy middle-class boogieing to Chic or
Diana Ross or Evelyn "Champagne" King with nary a sound to be heard but
the tunes.  These moments anchor a two-pronged approach by Stillman to the
disco culture.  On the one hand, he clearly appreciates selected songs
from the much-derided genre, and enjoys providing a showcase for some of
the livelier, funkier numbers (including a surreal closing scene with
subway riders jumping up to the O'Jays' "Love Train").  On the other hand,
he doesn't seem to care much for the disco environment, a haven for drugs,
corruption, sexually-transmitted diseases and ultimately disappointing
pairings of convenience, all tarted up to be irresistably hip.  For an
inveterate gab-meister like Stillman, the disco is practically his concept
of hell -- a vacuous place where people fall into bed together after
having shared only token words.
     The social angle is occasionally intriguing, but you have to wade
through an awful lot of tediousness and sloppy plotting to get to it.
It's hard to keep track of the various romantic permutations in THE LAST
DAYS OF DISCO, not because Stillman tears through the narrative at a
breakneck pace but because his characters are so interchangeably earnest
and clever.  The notable exceptions are Eigeman (a veteran of Stillman's
previous features) and Beckinsale, who at least add a bit of self-absorbed
spice to the proceedings.  Otherwise it's not easy to care about who ends
up with whom, or why Stillman muddles through plot devices like an
undercover investigation of the club's finances while abandoning the
repercussions of one of Alice's one-night stands.  The scattered comic
high points are too subdued to overcome the incongruity between the
subject matter and Stillman's approach to it.  For a film about the
flame-out of a flashy era, THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO is just too languid and
verbose.  Only for those few moments when the music starts and the talking
stops does the film feel like it's got to be real.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Now that "Boogie Nights" has made disco respectable again (well,
fashionable at least), we shouldn't be surprised to see more films
glorifying that dubious era.
        The latest art house interpretation is Whit Stillman's "The Last
Days of Disco."  Stillman, who made "Metropolitan" and "Barcelona" using
some of the same actors, uses disco's final hours to highlight what is
another conversation-heavy movie that benefits from typically astute
writing from the director.
        The young, upwardly-mobile professional (don't call them yuppies!)
men and women of "The Last Days of Disco" frequent a prestigious New York
City nightclub pulsating to the bass-pounding rhythms of Earth Wind and
Fire, Amy Grant, and Andrea True Connection.  Here they talk and talk and
talk, intellectualizing about such things as dating, success, and being
liked, accepted, and admired.  If talk is cheap, "The Last Days of Disco"
must surely have been an extremely inexpensive movie to shoot.
        What makes the film so entertaining is that this preppie,
Harvard-educated jet set actually have something to say and say it with
wit, perception, and style (including, at one point, a riotously inventive
deconstruction of "The Lady and the Tramp").
        Naďve Alice (Chloë Sevigny) and sophisticated Charlotte (Kate
Beckinsale) are recent college graduates who work as assistant editors for
a New York publishing house.  Charlotte is confident and outspoken--perhaps
a little too outspoken; Alice is shy and introverted, "like a kindergarten
teacher."  The two friends often doll themselves up and head out to the
nameless nightspot, looking good and looking for excitement (and that Ms.
Beckinsale sure looks good on a dancefloor!).
        Here they meet, or re-meet, a variety of eligible men, many of whom
they knew in college.  Des (played by Stillman favorite Christopher
Eigeman) is one of the club's managers whose job is on the line for
sneaking his ad agency buddies in the back.  Des has reached a crisis point
in his life: he just found out--last Wednesday, in fact--that he's gay.
Whether it's true or not, it makes for a convenient excuse to dump his
latest girlfriend (Jennifer Beals in a small but soul-baring turn).
Charlotte observes cattily that the only gay thing about Des is his mouth.
        Jimmy (MacKenzie Astin) is the advertising exec who, by the end of
the picture, winds up heading for a new job opportunity in Spain (visions
of "Barcelona"?).  Josh (Matt Keeslar) is an assistant district attorney
who dreams of being able to say, just once, "book this clown!"  And Robert
Sean Leonard plays another one of Alice's revolving suitors; the two have
an amusing exchange about the true definition of virginity.  Any film that
can make Robert Sean Leonard palatable is worthy of respect in my book.  In
fact, the entire ensemble is appealing in that well-spoken Stillman way.
        While the eschewing of "ferocious pairing" is a favored topic of
conversation in the film, the protagonists tend to slip in and out of love,
lust, and trouble with each other in an emotional merry-go-round that
cleverly develops its characters through the "preferred" dynamics of social
group interaction.
        More mature than Stillman's previous two films, "The Last Days of
Disco" is as consistently droll as it is stimulating.  It's a movie you
should definitely get on down to.

Author
Andrew Hall
The trailer showing in mainstream theaters for "The Last Days of
Disco" likens it to a Hollywood relationship film set in the disco
era, nostalgic in the spirit of "Boogie Nights" without the porn.  But
Whit Stillman's films are dialogue and character heavy and plot thin,
more appropriate for the art house crowd than for mainstream audiences.
Mainstream moviegoers seeing the trailer for "The Last Days of Disco" in
are probably going to be expecting something else.
The story, such as it is, follows the disco exploits of a bunch of white
ivy league graduates working in Manhattan in the early 80's.  The
focus is on co-workers Alice (Chloe Sevigny) and Charlotte (Kate 
Beckinsale from "Cold Comfort Farm"), who go to the discos together.
Alice and Charlotte get involved with men, talk, sleep with some of
them, and talk some more, as disco is slowly dying around them.  Some
complications set in at their favorite disco, and relationship
entanglements naturally occur among the young people.
The dialogue is above-average and occasionally funny.  The numerous
men are fairly colorful characters, but Stillman gives the women
slightly more attention.  Alice and Charlotte are well-drawn female
characters - a rarity in American film.  Alice is the complex "nice
girl" we identify with and root for;  Charlotte is the self-absorbed
bitch whose flimsy know-it-all philosophies we laugh at. 
The film does kind of drag slightly in parts.  It's hard to keep a
film moving with so many characters.  Other filmmakers might have
focused more attention on Alice, making the film "her story", but here
she is just one of the main characters, and we don't get to know her
quite as well as we want to.  The dialogue is occasionally clever -
the scene with people discussing the philosophical meaning of the
Disney film "The Lady and the Tramp" is almost classic - but it's not
clever often enough, and the film isn't as funny as it begs to be. 
Of course, the disco angle *does* add some nostalgia to the film, so
if anything see it if you like the period music.  If you've never heard
of Whit Stillman, you might rent "Barcelona" first to see if this kind
of dialogue-heavy film appeals to you.
(for more information see
http://us.imdb.com/Title?Last+Days+of+Disco,+The+(1998) )

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chloe Sevigny, Kate Beckinsale, Christopher Eigeman, 
      MacKenzie Astin, Matthew Keeslar, Robert Sean Leonard, 
      Tara Subkoff, David Thornton, Jennifer Beals
Director: Whit Stillman
Producers: Edmon Roch, Cecilia Kate Roque
Screenplay: Whit Stillman
Cinematography: John Thomas
Music: various disco artists
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     As the date on the calendar prepares to switch from the 1990s to 
the 2000s, society's imponderable fascination with things 20 years past 
begins to shift its focus from the 1970s to the 1980s.  Thus far, most 
of the movies to transport audiences to the Reagan era have been 
characterized by nostalgia, Generation X angst, or sophomoric humor.  
With THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO, independent writer/director Whit Stillman 
chooses to view the early '80s through a lens coated by satire.  There's 
also a social message here about how many of the shallow life-views 
adopted during the period continue to plague our culture today.  While 
disco music has gone and returned, many of the ideals that were around 
at the time of its demise have persisted ever since.
     THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO is very different from any of the other 
late-'70s/early-'80s movies.  Sure, there's the requisite disco 
soundtrack loaded with tunes from Sister Sledge, Donna Summer, and 
others, and there are plenty of scenes featuring oddly-attired young 
people dancing under the flashing light of a strobe, but this film is 
packed with Stillman characters, and, more importantly, Stillman 
dialogue.  Only a handful of working film makers are capable of 
presenting the English language with the artistry and rhythm employed 
here (Tarantino and Mamet come to mind), and the director's approach 
makes apparently-banal conversations come alive.  There's not as much 
dialogue in THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO as there is in either of Stillman's 
previous features, METROPOLITAN and BARCELONA, but what there is, is 
done in his inimitable style.  For example, there are discourses about 
whether yuppies really exist, why VDs aren't all bad, how virginity is 
defined, and whether it's a good idea to follow Shakespeare's maxim, "To 
thine own self be true."  Plus, there's a hilarious deconstruction of 
Disney's LADY AND THE TRAMP, where one character claims the movie's 
function is to "program women to adore jerks."
     THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO opens during "the very early 1980s" in 
Manhattan at a packed disco that is obviously inspired by Studio 54.  
There we meet the two main characters, a pair of recent college 
graduates named Alice (Chloe Sevigny) and Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale), 
who are out for a night of dancing.  Since they're young and attractive, 
they're able to get into the club without having to stand in the ever-
growing line.  Inside, they meet some of the other regulars, including 
Jimmy (MacKenzie Astin), an advertising executive; Josh (Matthew 
Keeslar), an assistant D.A.; and Tom (Robert Sean Leonard), an 
environmental activist.  The club's womanizing manager, Des (Christopher 
Eigeman), is also on hand.  Having just dumped his latest girlfriend by 
telling her he's gay, he is on the prowl for a new catch.
     THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO follows this group as they live pointless 
lives, work at unfulfilling jobs, and spend their nights under the 
club's strobe lights.  There are various romantic pairings, few of which 
amount to anything.  In fact, with the exception of Alice, who has 
principles and ambition, no one in this film is especially likable or 
intelligent.  This is obviously intentional, since it allows Stillman to 
make a cynical, satirical point about what's wrong with society, and how 
certain problems have their roots in the disco culture.  The movie's 
only obvious misstep is a subplot that involves money-laundering and 
seems designed to impel the narrative forward toward a resolution it 
might not otherwise achieve.
     Kate Beckinsale (COLD COMFORT FARM, SHOOTING FISH) is impeccable as 
the bitchy Charlotte.  With a perfect American accent and a demeanor 
that recalls Parker Posey, Beckinsale fashions her character as the 
picture of the shallow, vain party girl.  Chloe Sevigny (PALMETTO) makes 
Alice a warm, sympathetic character in the midst of a soulless world. By 
forging an emotional connection with the audience; Sevigny becomes our 
way into the story.  Stillman regular Christopher Eigeman is 
delightfully self-centered as the callous Des, and Robert Sean Leonard 
plays a seemingly-charming guy who turns out to be a cad.  There are 
also welcome cameos from several cast members of METROPOLITAN and 
BARCELONA.  Their presence helps to fold THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO nicely 
into the director's peculiar universe.
     Stillman may have a message to present, but he does it without 
preaching, and in such a way that the audience has a lot of fun along 
the way.  There's nothing inherently brilliant about the movie or its 
theme, but the combination of sharply-realized dialogue and infectiously 
energetic dance sequences keeps THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO from losing 
steam.  And when the "Love Train" rolls through the New York subway at 
the end of the movie, it's almost impossible to keep from smiling.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Kevin W. Welch
The Last Days of Disco is the middle part of Whit Stillmans
yuppie trilogy, bookended by Metropolitan and Barcelona. Though
it is chronologically the earliest of the three, Disco shows what
happens to the characters in Metropolitan once they get out of
college, and it anticipates the Spanish setting of Barcelona.
None of the three movies have characters in common, of course,
but thats just a technicality.
Whit Stillmans films are all of a piece. The characters are
generically the same brainy, well-off Eastern kids living in the
big city, inhabiting a scene, making witty dialog. Its like
Friends with a brain. Dialog is key, and always wonderfully
written. These people talk a lot, they are smart, often too
smart, and they tend to be rather mean to each other. As such
Stillman is an acquired taste. I like him, but I wouldnt force
him on anyone else. 
The time is the very early 80s. Disco covers six months in the
lives of a handful of post-college kids living and working in New
York. Two work in publishing, one in advertising, another is an
assistant District Attorney, and the last is a manager at a club
based loosely on the old Studio 54. They all have a history
dating back years or at least months, and they all hang around
the club, which is run by a tax-evading scumbag. They work during
the day, go clubbing at night, share apartments, have sex and
talk and talk and talk. 
Now I always like two things about a Stillman film.  I like the
crisp, pseudo-intellectual dialog (a deconstruction of Lady and
the Tramp is hilarious) and I like the characters themselves,
their relations with each other, the way they insult each other
and fall in and out of love with each other and bother each other
until whatever it was holding them together falls apart and they
all go their separate ways with a feeling of regret. I shouldnt
like them, because they are all rich (or at least come from
affluent families) and somewhat snobbish and they all have
certain expectations out of life and are at least a little
resentful of outsiders. Stillman was one of them, by the way, and
thats probably why hes able to portray rich kids so
sympathetically. He doesnt take them altogether seriously, of
course, but neither does he treat them like cardboard cutouts in
a class warfare morality play.  Stillman allows his characters
all the dignity that they deserve, which is not to say that he
finds them particularly admirable.  Theyre just people.
The ending is no surprise, of course; everyone knows disco died,
and these people felt it. Felt it hard, actually. They like disco
and the ending explains a little why some people might actually
find such a thing valuable. It was a stage in their lives and
when it ended they all moved on, to another scene or another
stage, with, as I said, regret, and even a little wisdom. Life
has a way of happening like that.  Highly recommended, if you
liked Metropolitan.

Author
Christopher Null
     I've been a fan of Whit Stillman since his first film, METROPOLITAN, in
1990.  It was therefore with no small amount of anticipation that I
journeyed to see his third film, THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO.
     Of course, when I get worked up over a movie, I'm always disappointed. 
Sadly, DISCO was no exception.
     Once again, Stillman focuses his story on the minutiae of the daily
lives of yuppies (and yuppie wannabes) who are generally unlikable.  This
worked quite well in METROPOLITAN and BARCELONA, mainly because in each of
those pictures there was a central character who defied his surroundings and
managed to break free of the mold, or at least put up a good fight.
     In DISCO there is not.  In fact, in Stillman's third picture, there's
not much holding the characters together at all, outside of a love for disco
music.  Even the most promising characters turn out to be shallow and often
hateful, their stories meander interminably, and there's not even much in
the way of overall plot development, except for the final end of that funky
disco music.
     A lot of DISCO, just like its namesake, is played for the kitsch
factor, and maybe I'm just too young to reminisce about 1980.  The film also
suffers without Stillman-regular Taylor Nichols to save the day (although
Nichols appears, along with a dozen other alumni, in a cameo).
     This isn't to say that the film doesn't have its moments of comedic or
thought-provoking power.  The brightest spot, a deconstructionist look at
LADY AND THE TRAMP (remember THE GRADUATE story in BARCELONA?), is almost
worth the $7.50 it cost to see the film.
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Castle Rock Entertainment
 Director:  Walt Stillman
 Writer:  Walt Stillman
 Cast: Chloe Sevigny, Kate Beckinsale, Chris Eigeman, Matt
Keeslar, Mackenzie Astin, Robert Sean Leonard, Jennifer
Beals, David Thornton, Matthew Ross, Tara Subkoff, Jaid
Barrymore
   Would you believe that disco is dead?  The clubs with long
lines of people who had to beg the bouncers to admit them;
the pulsating music that took the hordes of young far from
their daily troubles; the throbbing rhythms that propelled John
Travolta into stardom with his great film "Saturday Night
Fever," now a mere historical curiosity making way for his
darker, more cynical works.  It's gone the way of the cha cha. 
Or has it?  In the final scene of "The Last Days of Disco,"
writer-director Whit Stillman gets a contemporary subway car
to its feet, passenger by passenger rising to boogie, then an
entire station on the New York transit swinging to the beat.  If
the clubs are boarded up or metamorphosed into shopping
centers filled with stores like P.C. Richard and Kmart, the
music in our minds remains, a lasting tribute to the 1980s
phenomenon that captured youthful hearts and minds
throughout the west.
   "The Last Days of Disco" is part chronicle of the era and
part a witty, albeit all-too-precious focus on a group of
privileged kids who had recently graduated from college. 
They now feel their way in glamorous entry-level positions by
day and more gamboling positions by night.  Some are well-
off thanks to the subsidies they receive from their parents
(who make no appearance); others are struggling to pay the
rent and eager to get ahead in their careers.  But financial
worries take a back seat to their social concerns, about which
they seem ready to talk endlessly like characters in an Eric
Rohmer film when they are not bopping to the beat of such
cadences as "Got to Be Real," "I'm Coming Out" and "I Love
the Nightlife."
   Being liberal arts graduates, they love to talk theory, and
the hypothesis about which they speculate most is the merits
of group social life as opposed to what one post-debutante
considers a ferocious need to pair off.  The female side is
represented by Alice (Chloe Sevigny), a attractive blonde who
may have been too nice while in college and thereby seems
to have missed out on the wilder side of undergraduate life.
She is repeatedly criticized by the sophisticated Charlotte
(Kate Beckinsale), with whom she works in a publishing
house and shares a cramped Manhattan apartment. 
Charlotte, who is nothing if not painfully honest, cautions
Chloe that everyone in college hated her for being critical,
and in a purported wish to have her get ahead with young
men advises her to throw the word "sexy" into her
conversations with them.  Holly (Tara Subkoff), the third
roommate, is also quite attractive, and is used as a plot
device simply to create a more crowded atmosphere in the
railroad apartment the three divide.
   On the male side Des (Chris Eigeman) has the role of an
assistant manager of a disco, one who is criticized by the
bouncer for allowing his friends to sneak into the club via a
back door.  Des claims to be gay and believes that he is, but
he is kidding himself.  Jimmy (Mackenzie Astin) is an ad exec,
one of those who must be ushered into the club clandestinely
since the boss, Bernice (David Thornton), has a peculiar
antipathy toward ad people.  Tom (Robert Sean Leonard) has
been dating Alice, who likes him because he is "serious about
the environment" while Josh (Matt Keeslar), an assistant D.A.,
has a conflict of interest problem from his acquaintance with a
man he is investigating.
   While you need not have seen director Stillman's previous
two films to understand this one, it's helpful to know that the
director continues to pursue accounts of upper-crust young
people who, despite their wit and clever repartee are
nonetheless feeling their way through their professional and
social roles in a fog like the rest of us.  Stillman's
"Metropolitan," made eight years ago, focuses on debutantes
who haven't yet come out--they're still preppies with a way of
life others may envy; while his middle offering, "Barcelona,"
centers on a nerdy American businessman living in Spain who
is joined by his Naval officer cousin as they go off to court the
local assortment of women.  
   Offbeat as always, the talk in "The Last Days of Disco" will
be appreciated principally--perhaps only--by those who recall
the mixed joys of their youthful days: the bull sessions in
college, the networking, the complexities of dating and social
hijinx that result from clashes within a tight circle of friends
and associates.  We learn quite a bit about the politics of the
clubs, especially the need for junior execs and sales
consultants to get their clients into the disco clubs just as
companies make sure nowadays to find the best Broadway
seats for their lucrative accounts.  Those who recall the
sophomoric discussions of more academic times will find the
exchange which deconstructs Disney's "The Lady and the
Tramp" especially amusing.  Pseudo-philosophic one-liners
abound such as Des's query, "Shakespeare says 'To thine
own self be true,' by what if your self is not so great?"  Alice's
innocence comes across convincingly when she asks her
current beau whether she can consider herself a virgin if no
segment of her partner penetrated her, and we get collectively
disgusted when this current boy friend, Tom (Robert Sean
Leonard), tells her off for sleeping with him so quickly: "I'm
sick of everyone's having sex on her mind--it lowers the I.Q." 
(This is the very person who pontificates on the rise of the
environmental movement, which "began when Bambi's mother
was shot by hunters.")
   The fun cast and Stillman's clever writing make this
admittedly slow-moving and talky film a pleasure to listen to
and lovely to look at.  In this age of "Godzilla," we should
genuflect to works like this which are smart, witty and incisive,
films which combine insight into social history with humor and
linguistic grace.  What more can you say when you reminisce
about the eighties--or for that matter the seventies and sixties-
-except that those were the days my friend, we thought they'd
never end. Rated R.  Running time: 109 minutes.  (C) Harvey
Karten 1998

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Disco, by nature, is brainless, silly entertainment.  By contrast, _The
Last Days of Disco_ is mature, thought-provoking entertainment, about
smart, young individuals who danced their nights to such brainless,
silly entertainment.  I suppose it may mean something deeper and more
significant, but I have yet to figure out what that may be.
The film chronicles a few weeks in the lives of Alice (_Kids_+ Chloë
Sevigny) and Charlotte (_Cold Comfort Farm_+s Kate Beckinsale).  Alice
is shy, a bit naďve about the new city culture, whereas Charlotte is
saucy, brash and patronizing as she educates Alice.  The two work as
assistants at a publishing house; within time they move in together with
Holly (Tara Subkoff) into a railroad apartment.
The rest of the film is general enough that it could have been written
by a Cliff+s notes text.  Loves come and go, only as an excuse to raise
issues.  One gets a sexually transmitted disease.  The other gets
pregnant, and then suffers a miscarriage.  One of their friends thinks
he is gay, but he may not be.  One fears he may lose his job; actually,
every major character fears this - only a matter of time until there+s a
scene in front of the Unemployment office.  Yawn.
What carries the film from subterranean plot hell is its wonderful
dialogue.  Director/writer Wilt Stillman is supposedly at the top of his
game, pulling no punches with it+s starchy, opinionated, rat-tat-tat
style.  The range of discussions go from G-rated fare (The Lady and the
Tramp sequence is a classic), to more vivid adult waters.  The dialogue
is not for everyone, but is always intriguing and revealing.
Standouts in the cast include the aforementioned Beckinsale, Stillman
regular Christopher Eigeman as Des (who may or may not be gay), and
Matthew Keeslar as Josh, who would spontaneously sing an old hymn if
desired.  Other actors include three individuals from the "Where are
they now" files:  The Facts of Life+s MacKenzie Astin (looking too much
like Michael J. Fox),  _Dead Poets Society_+s Robert Sean Leonard, and
(gasp! Too old!) Jennifer Beals in a terrible, throwaway role.
Unfortunately, the real weak link in the film is Chloë Sevigny+s
character  (I can+t pinpoint whether it is her acting, or the writing).
Of all those in the cast who have strong coherent thoughts and are able
to bring those out at a wonderful pace, Alice is the exception.  She
seemed to waltz in from another, more serious movie, and disrupts the
flow of Stillman-doing-Hawks style.  Maybe she is to be the point of
contrast to everyone else, but it just doesn+t work.
And the music.  There is a huge soundtrack with over twenty classic
tunes.  And there isn+t a single song from the Bee Gees.  Shock!  There
must be _somebody_ out there who+s disappointed.
All in all, I liked much of the film.  But except for a few strains of
dialogue, the film is mostly forgettable.  Just like disco itself.

Author
Michael Redman
All cultures have their mating rituals: a time and place where the eligible
get together to strut their stuff and pick whose stuff they like being
strutted. In many tribal cultures the men drum at a gathering demonstrating
their skills while the women dance for the drummers portraying theirs.
In the urban United States during the late seventies there were few drumming
circles so the twenty-somethings headed to discos to find their mates - even
very temporary ones. Disco music has been often denigrated as mediocre at best
and with good reason. But that's not the point. The music was always only a
means. The scene was the important aspect.
For a group of recent college graduates, the chosen ritual meeting place is a
club never named but obviously modeled after Club 54 where they gather
(assuming that they look cool enough to make it past the doorman) to dance the
night away under flashing lights. Their throbbing rhythms are mechanically
produced but the ritual is still the same.
Alice (Chloe Sevigny) and Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale) attempt to climb the
corporate ladder at a book publisher by day and work the social ladder in the
evenings. At the club they hang with Josh (Matthew Keeslar), an assistant DA;
Jimmy (MacKenzie Astin), a junior advertising executive and Des (Christopher
Eigeman), the club's assistant manager. They make up a fairly tight-knit group
playing together, dancing together and, you guessed it, sleeping together.
Although the film features the expected disco soundtrack, the stars spend
much more time talking than they do dancing. This is no "Saturday Night Live"
featuring stylized gyrations. Here the dancing is decidedly unglamorized
although for a few seconds now and then there is something interesting
happening on the dance floor.
To be blunt, these people lead a shallow existence. Some events in their
lives are exciting (Josh is investigating the club, Jimmy must sneak clients
in, Des has a coke problem and a parade of girlfriends), but they are just
wandering through.
What they mostly do is talk and when they're done, they talk some more.
Although the conversation is witty, the topics are banal. There's a long
discussion deconstructing Lady And The Tramp leading to the conclusion
that the film is why girls go for bad boys. A couple debates the technical
qualifications of virginity reminding me of numerous deliberations I've heard
about sexual activity and which category an evening fell into. "I did this and
he did that. Did we have sex?"
With the arrogance of youth, Charlotte wonders if people really ever danced
in bars before disco. Josh recounts the beginnings of the musical genre with
"Some people don't consider that 'disco' -- because it's good." Being advised
by her critical friend that throwing in the word "sexy" as often as possible
is a good thing, Alice explains to a one-night stand "there's something sexy
about Scrooge McDuck."
They talk about a couple who are cheating on a trial separation by secretly
seeing each other. Charlotte explains how VD isn't all bad because you have to
inform your previous sexual partners leading to renewed possibilities.
Although the conversations are witty and some of the lines priceless, the
intellectualizing about nothing becomes wearing. They are hanging out waiting
for something to happen and eventually the audience is doing the same. One of
the problems with the movie is that when the plot rears its ugly head, there's
not much there. An undercover investigation of the club's finances just gets
in the way of the film.
The actors do a fine job of portraying authentic characters. They're not very
likable people but they are real. Alice is the closest to someone that you'd
want to spend time with but Sevigny's performance is uneven. Occasionally warm
and human, she's so odd and quirky that it's uncomfortable to watch.
The guys are all clones of each other. They look and act so much alike that I
spent half of the film asking my companion which man was which. In fact nearly
everyone on the dance floor looks alike...except the ones that are dressed as
"Wizard Of Oz" characters or in a leopard print outfit or naked.
The only exception is Dan (Matt Ross), a co-worker at the book publisher. A
political activist, he has a distinctive personality. Until, that is, he is
able to get into the club. Then he becomes one more piece of fodder for the scene.
A companion piece to director Whit Stillman's other two films
("Metropolitan", "Barcelona"), the repartee is enjoyable and the look at group
social dynamics is almost enticing, but it would be nice if these people had
something going in their lives. Oh well, they're young and disco is dying so
maybe there's hope.
(Michael Redman has written this column for 23 years and is brave enough to
admit that he actually went to a disco club -- twice. Email your confessions
to redman@bvoice.com)
[The appeared in the 7/2/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana. Michael
Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Seth Bookey
REVIEW OF: Last Days of Disco, The (1998)
Director Whit Stillman is comfortable in the niche he created for himself
with the acclaimed, chatty film Metropolitan and Barcelona, and continues
in this vein, further following the lives of young, bored intellectuals.
This time, he sets it in the very early 1980s, which was basically the
last hurrah of the 1970s, disco, and the sexual revolution as it was
known.
The core group here all know each other from an exclusive school and are
very smart, but still fall prey to the seduction of the nightlife, and
youthful naivete. Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale) and Alice (Chloe Sevigny)
work in a book publishing company. Charlotte is full of what seems like
prescient advice, given in a spirit of knowledge and malice at every turn
possible, which undermines Alice in several ways, and work against herself
as well--though she would never quite realize it. Together they go to an
exclusive disco, where a strict door policy allows them to be among the
descriminate few readily allowed in its doors.
Jimmy (MacKenzie Astin), a junior ad exec, is a friend that keeps getting
allowed into the club by his friend Des (Christopher Eigeman); Josh
(Matthew Keeslar) is the Assistant District Attorney who also knows all of
them from school, where he had a nervous breakdown. He's still a little
odd at this point, also.
Being a young group of twentysomethings, they try to all hang out
together, extend the good times of college, and still talk like they are
in a Western Lit seminar. Meanwhile, what really happens, is real life.
Sexually transmitted diseases that seemed like a fate worse than death
(herpes, before AIDS, meant being doomed) were abounding. Drugs and large
sacks of cash are all over the club, which Josh is investigating while
trying to get his friends spared. This is probably the only part of
the movie that genuinely does not fit in as well as it could.
Whit Stillman excels at showing us these very smart characters chatting
away yet still suffering human frailties. They talk about life but they
miss all the points sometimes. Charlotte rails against everyone
"ferociously pairing off" and extols the virtues of "the group" and
promptly steals her Alice's beau (and Alice is her co-worker, roommate,
and "friend"). Even while trying to evade the justice system, Shakesperean
virtues are argued in the gettaway cab. Perhaps a bit long but enormously
entertaining. Forensic-Club-style arguments about the psychologies of the
dogs in Lady and The Tramp are completely normal here, and very
entertaining.
What makes The Last Days of Disco a bit more accessible is the period
treatment. The Satyricon nature of the disco nightlife is glitteringly
portrayed. Charlotte and Alice look over the dancefloor from a balcony,
ripe with the expectation of sexual freedom and unlimited choices.
Meanwhile, everyone there is pretty much trick or treating. Some
characters actually get into the disco disguised as Wizard of Oz
characters, but this is not Kansas. Even Ildiko Jaid Barrymore is on
hand parodying her former persona--"Tiger Lady."
All the performances are fine, but it's the dialogue that runs the show.
If you want to put this in the context of Stillman's other films, rent
Metropolitan first, see this film, and then Barcelona to follow these
young intellectuals from high school through young adulthood to
professional life. References to Barcelona are made, and some characters
from that movie make cameos as well. 
Jennifer Beals makes an appearance as one of Des's jilted lovers, as
he fobs her off by declaring he thinks he's gay--a fact ascertained by a
sexual yen for Marlon Perkin's assistant Jim on Wild Kingdom.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Michael Dequina
The Last Days of Disco (R) *** (out of ****)
Like writer-director Whit Stillman's previous films, _Metropolitan_ and
_Barcelona_, his latest is all about talk and nothing more--it's just that
the faces and the setting are different (New York City in the "very early
1980s," where the cultural phenomenon of discotheques and their
accompanying musical genre were in their dying days).  But the incessant
barrage of verbiage is forgivable when it is as smartly, wittily written as
it is here.  The main gabbers of this film are the naive blonde Alice
(Chloe Sevigny) and her best "friend" and roommate, bitchy sophisticate
Charlotte (an unrecognizable Kate Beckinsale, sporting a perfect American
accent and looking like a cross between Nicole Kidman and Parker Posey),
both of whom are recent college grads who work in a publishing house by day
and frequent an exclusive dance club at night.
The film is essentially a portrait of their and their friends' lives, but
Stillman shows little concern for any of them.  The emphasis is so strongly
centered on their impossibly verbose conversations that all character and
plot developments seem like throwaways.  For example, when club manager Des
(Chris Eigeman, a Stillman regular) develops a what is supposed to be a
serious drug habit, it comes off as more of a minor step down than a
plunging descent.  In spite of its failings on the dramatic level, _Disco_
is still a very entertaining film, thanks to an appealing cast (which also
includes Beckinsale's _Much_Ado_About_Nothing_ love interest, Robert Sean
Leonard, and a briefly-seen Jennifer Beals) and those wordy discussions.
Even though a number of the characters are Ivy League graduates, I'm not
sure there are real people who talk the way these people do.  But since the
exchanges are as funny as they are (a sociopolitical deconstruction of
Disney's _Lady_and_the_Tramp_ is the highlight), that complaint is moot.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
