Title
Review for Valentine (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A young lad who used to get crapped on by the girls in his junior high
class, is now older and stronger and apparently out to whack each and every
one of them heartbreakers. Or is it someone else just pretending to be the
nerdy ol' kid and slicing and dicing said victims up? Pretty cool premise,
huh? Read on.
CRITIQUE:
Can a movie that starts off with a big-breasted girl in a tight tanktop
performing an autopsy be all that bad? Sadly...yes! And I generally love
watching these kinds of movies, you know, frivolous flicks with cheap
thrills and girls with big cans...but this movie just plain sucks. It's got
zero rhythm, almost no energy, no chemistry between anyone in the cast (were
they all there for the paycheck or what?), no scares (other than your
garden-variety "boo!" stuff), stale dialogue, unoriginal killings and worst
of all...and this hurts the most, boys and girls...no T&A! At least give us
a little T&A, man! Or at least some T!! (and I don't mean Tease, which is
one of the few things that this film does deliver well) Anyway, what else
can I tell you here? Oh yeah, the premise is good, I mean, I think we've all
thought of doing this at one point or another in our lifetimes, but the
execution, aaaaaah, the execution...just awful. Where is the suspense? Where
is the caring for any of the characters? (all of whom chime in on one
dimension) Where is the goddamn intelligence, people?! I mean, I know that
this is a slasher movie and you're supposed to suspend disbelief to a
certain extent, but man-o-man, allow me to share this one scene with you
all. There is a murderer on the loose, right? Everyone is scared witless,
right? Nobody knows who it is or where they'll strike next, right? So what's
the first thing that you would do during a party packed with a bunch of
people? Hmmmmm...now think hard...really? Would you, A) Stay close to others
B) Dance the night away...with others C) Go off to a dark room by yourself
and hang out in a hot tub? Hehehehe. Tough one, eh?
But there were many other problems with this movie as well. The "first
scene" kill, which has now become a custom in all teen slashers, sucked the
big one, and didn't offer anything original. The ending of the movie, which
I won't spoil here, was a little bit of a surprise, but left a million
questions unanswered. That Dorothy girl (Jessica Capshaw) only seemed to act
with her lips and teeth (does that count?), and that bothered me. Actually,
quite a few things bothered me, and when I end up noticing little things
like that in a movie, it can generally only mean one thing. Yeah, who woulda
figured that this movie would be, and I hate to say it... ...boring! It just
lacked. Lacked...lacked...lacked a lot! Sure, we get Denise Richards in a
bathing suit, acting like the ultra-queen-bitch like only she can do, but is
that enough for you to fork over your hard earned buckeroonies? Well, to
some, it might be, but even if you toss in the Katherine Heigl major
cleavage factor, the super "hotties" for the ladies and the ever-perky
Heather Graham look-a-like, the whole thing just doesn't add up to much.
Another wasted opportunity. The film had the potential to become something
interesting but somewhere along the line, it was crapped away entirely.
Marley Shelton and David Boreanaz were good, but they both seemed to belong
in another movie altogether. But are there still some really, really cheap
thrills to be had? Yeah, I guess...but nothing to write to mother about.
I only wish that the fervent intensity that went into successfully marketing
this film on the Internet had been shared with the actual making of the
movie. It might've turned into an entertaining, smart and original thriller,
but all that we're left with now, are pieces of a film that might've been...
Keep it moving, folks...nothing to see here. Oh yeah, and the soundtrack
also sucked!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Urban Legend (5/10) - Urban Legends (4/10) - I Know What You Did Last Summer
(7.5/10) - Wild Things (7/10) - The Bride of Chucky (7.5/10) - Scream (8/10)

Author
Christopher Null
Well, here's something that will make you wish you'd stayed home to
watch Survivor instead of shelling out money at the movies.  Hell,
Valentine, another entry into the yearly, winter horror crapfest, even
makes Temptation Island look good.
What we've got here is your standard grade horror flick in the vein of
Scream and Urban Legend, revolving around a mysterious killer devising a
supposed revenge plot -- a geeky kid who got a Carrie pulled on him in
6th grade.  My how the tables have turned!  The bunch of girls who
refused to dance with him are now getting killed, 13 years later.  Has
this nobody returned from obscurity to exact his revenge for having
punch poured on him?
We'll have one med school coed get pinched during a midnight autopsy. 
And of course she will hide in a body bag in a futile attempt to escape
the man in the Cupid mask -- who's naturally doing his marauding on
Valentine's Day.  We'll see all manner of stabbings, shootings,
beheadings, boilings, and whatnot -- until 90 minutes later the killer
is unmasked.
The film presents us an oh-so-clever puzzler -- is it the 6th grader
come back to haunt the girls?  Is it one of their dates?  Another man
from the past?  The cop?  Or maybe it's the fisherman they ran over and
left for dead on a winding road.  The possibilities are as endless as
they are random.
Valentine is headlined by actresses Denise Richards and Marley Shelton
(who, with this and Sugar & Spice, appears to be on the Molly Ringwald
road to career suicide), plus a gaggle of totally unknown supporting
actresses whose only requirement for appearance appears to have been
having very large breasts.  (And despite this there's no nudity in the
film at all!)
David Boreanaz joins the ladies in a truly pathetic role, stumbling
through his lines like he has a hangover.  No surprise: His character is
a recovering alcoholic.
Prefaced by stern and multiple verbal warnings that Valentine is "very
scary and very intense," sadly, we find the only very that applies to
this film is very stupid.  Simply, thrills are utterly lacking in the
film.  The murders are fully expected, unoriginal, and lacking in even
the most basic sense of horror.  And Cupid makes for a stalker about as
frightening as Mary Poppins.
Maybe the only thing dumber than the film itself is the way it is
credited: four screenwriters appear to have fought over the writing
credit, but the director refused to put his name on the film (Jamie
Blanks is an alias).  Now that's horror.
Director: Jamie Blanks
Producer: Dylan Sellers
Writer: Donna Powers, Wayne Powers, Gretchen J. Berg, Aaron Harberts
Starring: David Boreanaz, Denise Richards, Marley Shelton, Jessica
Capshaw, Jessica Cauffiel, Katherine Heigl, Fulvio Cecere, Daniel
Cosgrove, Johnny Whitworth
http://valentinemovie.warnerbros.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./ Village Roadshow Pictures
 Director: Jamie Blanks
 Writer:  Tom Savage(Novel), Donna Powers & Wayne
powers and Gretchen J. Berg & Aaron Harberts
 Cast: David Boreanaz, Denise Richards, Marley Shelton,
Jessica Capshaw, Jessica Cauffiel, Katherine Heigl, Fulvio,
Cecere, Daniel Cosgrove
   Shakespeare wrote 38 plays by himself but four people
were needed to write the screenplay for "Valentine." I'm not
sure what the moral of that one would be, but looks as
though this says something about the declining quality of
writers between the early 16th Century and our own day. 
What's more, the four scripters even had a novel to use to 
lift their ideas from.  The story is propelled by a handful of morbid
Valentine's Day cards that a killer sends to the victims he or
she has lined up, cards with which even Hallmark could do
better. Take the only one that shows even the slightest intent
to instill humor into a slasher film which unlike the "Scream"
series takes itself with deadly seriousness: "Roses are red/
Violet are blue/They'll need dental records/To identify you."
(Come to think of it that is pretty cute after all.)  Trouble is
that despite one particularly brutal execution that sees the
perpetrator go beyond root canal therapy with an electric
drill, in no case were the lovely people whose heads were
pummeled, shattered against broken glass and in one
particularly ingenious case killed by a combination of water, a
drill and an electric shock that contrary to popular beliefs did
not allow the victim thereafter to read women's minds.
   Director Jamie Blanks opens the tale with what look like the
sequel to Todd Solondz's "Welcome to the Dollhouse."  A
bespectacled, geeky but determined young man is trying
unsuccessfully to get a few girls to dance with him at the
school prom.  Wrongfully accused of attacking the one
wallflower who accepts his offer, he is sent to reform school
presumably to seek revenge later against those who snubbed
him and perjured themselves.  Ten years later, we eavesdrop
on the girlie talk involving Kate (Marley Shelton), Paige
(Denise Richards), and Lily (Jessica Cauffiel), all crazy about
the guys except for Paige, the one obnoxious bit of man bait
who hates the opposite sex enough to tease it
unmercifully.  The scene  that work best despite
its lack of originality involves no knives or guns but deals with 
the young women as they involve themselves in a dating
game in which each young man gets thirty seconds to
impress each woman before moving on to the next table and
repeating the process.   As "Valentine" becomes darker with
the usual false alarms, the bodies pile up, the killer wearing a
mask that has more in common with Bob Smith's Howdy
Doody than with Wes Craven's "Scream."  
   We're introduced to set pieces rather than human beings,
each male characterized by a fatal flaw. To cite two
examples,  Adam (David Boreanaz), who is Kate's boy friend,
is a drinker while Campbell (Daniel Cosgrove), is a two-timer. 
"Valentine" becomes a whodunit as more than one oddball
has a motive for revenge.  
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Jamie Blanks's VALENTINE is as generic a horror movie as you're ever 
likely to find.  Starring a bevy of beauties who are sliced and diced by 
a killer with a big shiny knife and a baby-doll mask, the movie is cast 
with twentysomething stars acting like teenagers.  Between violent 
interludes in the Land of the Rich and Gorgeous, the story titillates us 
as the handsome characters frolic in their mansions.  
"Roses are red," reads one of the threatening valentines that come to 
our lovely lasses, including Paige (Denise Richards), Kate (Marley 
Shelton) and Dorothy (Jessica Capshaw).  "Violets are blue.  They'll 
need dental records to identify you."  So sweet.  Another time they get 
chocolates laced with maggots.  So tasty.
You could write the script yourself and undoubtedly do a better job.  
Still, there are a few parts that aren't bad.  One involves a trophy 
wife who swaps barbs with her stepdaughter of the same age.  Another has 
one of the lovelies rinsing her hair in the toilet when the water goes 
out.  And, finally, there is a Turbo Dating service that gives each guy 
30 seconds to make his pitch before being summarily rejected by our 
catty stars.
One of my favorite ridiculous parts occurs when Dorothy takes a shower 
and washes her hair, an activity popular in this show with exemplary 
hygiene.  Although squeaky clean, she manages to keep on her makeup and 
lipstick.
So devoid of any imagination, VALENTINE makes one yearn for such 
mediocre fare as I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.  It's pretty pathetic 
when you find yourself wishing that you were at a better bad movie.
VALENTINE runs 1:37.  It is rated R for strong horror violence, some 
sexuality and language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jamie Blanks.
Cast: Marley Shelton, Denise Richards, Jessica Capshaw, David Boreanaz,
Jessica Cauffiel, Katherine Heigl, Daniel Cosgrove, Hedy Burress, Johnny
Whitworth, Fulvio Cecere, Benita Ha.
2001 - 95 minutes
Rated R (for strong violence, profanity, and sexuality).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 3, 2001.
Imagine my surprise to find that "Valentine," directed by Jamie Blanks
(1998's "Urban Legend"), has more in common with the slasher films of the
late-'70s/early-'80s, than those of the "oh-so-clever," jokey, post-"Scream"
era of the late-'90s. With everything from "Scream" and its sequels, to "I
Know What You Did Last Summer" and its sequel, to "Urban Legend" and its
sequel, following the same pattern of a mystery killer offing teenage
characters until their identity is exposed and they explain their motive to
the remaining cast members, it was a genuine pleasure to sit back and watch a
group of non-teen actors getting dispatched of in a grisly way, with the
motive of the killer determined within the opening five minutes. Sure, there
is still a whodunit quality to the proceedings, but the payoff is quite
different and surprisingly refreshing from the recent slew of, as Roger Ebert
calls them, Mad Slasher Movies.
"Valentine" also follows in the footsteps of the nostalgic holiday-set
slashers, such as 1978's "Halloween," 1974's "Black Christmas," 1980's "New
Year's Evil," and even 1981's "My Bloody Valentine." The movie makes no bones
about its old-fashioned,
"let-me-go-bathe-in-the-hot-tub-as-a-killer-lurks-in-the-house" horror
conventions, but that is part of the fun. The impressive production values,
however, are very much of a decidedly 2001 nature, as is its healthy budget
that afforded such rising young stars as Denise Richards (1999's "The World
is Not Enough"), David Boreanaz (WB's "Angel"), Katherine Heigl (WB's
"Roswell"), and Marley Shelton (2000's "Sugar & Spice").
In a prologue set at a junior high school dance in 1988, a nerdy,
bespectacled boy is severely traumatized when he asks five classmates to
dance, all of which turn him down except one--a heavyset girl who later
accused him of attacking her in front of other classmates. Switch forward 13
years, four of the now-grown girls reunite at the funeral of the fifth,
Shelley (Katherine Heigl), who is brutally murdered while studying for her
pre-med final. Immediately afterwards, sweet-natured Kate (Marley Shelton),
sexy Paige (Denise Richards), bitchy Lily (Jessica Cauffiel), and the
now-pretty, poor-little-rich-girl Dorothy (Jessica Capshaw), begin receiving
grisly, threatening Valentine cards as the holiday approaches. Could their
former middle school classmate, whom they haven't seen in years, be out to
seek revenge on those that did him wrong? And if so, might he be someone that
is already in their lives?
Loosely based on the acclaimed novel by Tom Savage, "Valentine" stands out
from the recent spate of slasher films because of its simple throwback to the
setup and payoff of the horror movies of old. Aside from natural humor that
surfaces from some of the dialogue, the film takes itself very seriously, and
divulges several good scary moments and more than a couple thrilling,
suspenseful setpieces. While many of the older, lesser slasher flicks relied
on nothing more than gore and exploitative violence, "Valentine" manages to
keep the tension level high, and is actually pretty tame as far as
blood-and-guts goes. There's a bit of that, to be sure, but talented director
Jamie Blanks, whose first film, "Urban Legend," was the best of the
post-"Scream" knockoffs, is more interested in stylish camera movements,
tight editing, and genuinely unsettling sequences of mayhem to create a
distinct atmosphere of dread.
One of the biggest stars of "Valentine" is its gorgeously sleek, threatening
production design by Stephen Geaghan, which becomes a character all its own,
particularly in the climax set at a Valentine's Day party at Dorothy's
family's wooded mansion. The cinematography, by Rick Bota, is also top-notch,
particularly its truly eerie use of red to not only cleverly foreshadow the
holiday, but also the threat of death that grows around the characters as the
story progresses. The makers of "Valentine" have succeeded awesomely in their
challenge to make the title holiday palpably felt, and potentially dangerous.
The characters are a grab-bag of both the likable and spiteful variety, which
actually aids the film more than it hurts it, because, in some strange way,
we are supposed to feel sympathy for the killer. The jury is still out if
director Blanks is successful on this count, but he does allow you to at
least grow to care about three of the characters--Kate; her boyfriend Adam
(David Boreanaz), who is struggling with his alcoholism; and Dorothy, who has
now lost a lot of weight but feels remorse for the way she treated her junior
high classmate when she was really in the same boat as he at the time.
Marley Shelton ably provides the honest center for the film, and is better
here than she was in the recent "Sugar & Spice." Getting to play a more
adult, mature character, Shelton is a beautiful face, and just the sight of
her smile creates an overwhelming feeling of warmth and realism. More
importantly, she is very good as the put-upon Kate, and hopefully this will
be her breakthrough role.
The biggest name in the cast is Denise Richards, whose performances have
ranged from trashily great (1998's "Wild Things") to middling (1999's "Drop
Dead Gorgeous") to downright bad ("The World Is Not Enough"). As the sexually
powerful Paige, who takes almost everything in her life for granted,
including her own attractiveness, Richards respectably creates a well-rounded
character with the material provided, and even gets a few chances to test out
her comedic skills.
In his first feature film since he hit it big on TV's "Buffy, the Vampire
Slayer" and currently its spinoff, "Angel," David Boreanaz does fine work in
a mostly superfluous supporting role, while Kate Capshaw, as Dorothy, turns
in a poignant portrayal of someone who is so insecure with herself that she
doesn't yet know where she fits into the world. Finally, Katherine Heigl is
memorable with only ten minutes of screen time as the first victim of the
creepy Cherub mask-wearing killer.
The purpose of a slasher film is two-fold: it should be entertaining, yet
scary, fun, yet nail-biting. It's fairly safe to say director Blanks and
screenwriters Donna Powers, Wayne Powers, Gretchen J. Berg, and Aaron
Harberts were not attempting to recreate the wheel when they made
"Valentine," so there is no use in even expecting a masterpiece. However,
thanks to Blanks' numerous inspired Hitchcockian elements that he subtly pays
tribute to, as well as the surprising twist ending that, for once, does make
sense, "Valentine" ends up being the next best thing: a modern-day slasher
pic that is a step above most.

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Jamie Blanks
Written by: Tom Savage (novel), Donna Powers, Wayne Powers, Gretchen J. 
Berg, Aaron Harberts
Remember the boy who everyone teased back in elementary school? Well 
thirteen years later he sure remembers all those girls who gave him the cold 
shoulder. Kate Davies (Marley Shelton), Paige Prescott (Denise Richards), 
Dorothy Wheeler (Jessica Capshaw), and Lily Voight (Jessica Cauffiel) have 
just learned that one of their old chums from school has been brutally 
murdered. Said chum had received a threatening valentine signed J.M. only 
moments before the attack. The girls get to thinking, and decide it could 
just be that kid, Jeremy, whom they all (except the kindly Kate of course) 
used to tease. Now suspicions are running rampant as the girls try to decide 
who Jeremy could really be. Is it Kate's drunken boyfriend Adam (David 
Boreanaz)? Or how about Dorothy's latest beau, Campbell (Daniel Cosgrove)? 
Or possibly one of the hundreds of fellows Paige has seduced over the years? 
Whoever it may be, the girls are getting knocked off one by one, and they'd 
better find out soon.
My theory remains sound. There is a direct correlation between the number of 
writers on a movie, and how bad the movie is. One writer, you're in good 
shape; two, you should still be alright; three, things are looking bleak; 
four, don't hold your breath waiting for that Oscar; five, you might as well 
entitle the movie "Bomb." Jamie Blanks' (previously responsible for 
unleashing Urban Legend on unsuspecting audiences) Valentine 
nestles itself nicely between those last two options. It's not a complete 
bomb, but it's about as close as you can get before crossing the line. 
Nearly all the requisite brainless teen slasher movie elements are present: 
talentless actors, talentless director, cardboard characters, predictable 
deaths, painful dialogue. The only things this movie is missing which most 
slasher flicks contain are cheesy gore and cheesier laughs. The latter is 
most confusing, since some modern slasher flicks have a certain amusing, 
self-referential wit; and the others have a certain irritating self 
referential wit. Valentine, on the other hand, is strangely somber 
and laughess. The characters appear dreary and depressed even before the 
murders start, and that tone doesn't let up.
Critiquing the acting "talents" in your average slasher movie is an utterly 
pointless endeavor at best, yet I feel compelled to subject myself to it 
once more. What better place to start than with a quick description of 
Denise Richards' (Wild Things) unique interpretation of acting? 
Actually, in all seriousness, Denise doesn't do too poorly this time around. 
Of course, that could be because the majority of her co-stars are somehow 
even worse than she, but I'll leave that decision up to you. Next up we've 
got Jessica Cauffiel (Urban Legends: Final Cut) in a slight part, and 
I'm happy to report that she gives a slight performance. I won't subject you 
to a description of Jessica Capshaw's (The Love Letter) vain attempts 
at pretending to act, suffice to say she's in desperate need of coaching, 
practice, or a new career. Marley Shelton (Sugar & Spice) is 
adequate.. I suppose.. in her own limited sort of way. I do realize it's 
asking too much for really good performances in a teen slasher flick, but 
what can I say, I'm greedy. I won't bother talking about most of the male 
actors since none of them are given any development beyond "I wanna have 
sex!" The only exception is David Boreanaz (TV's "Angel"), woefully miscast 
but still able to give a pretty fair performance.
You'd think four writers and a novelist would be able to think of something 
resembling an original death scene. Instead we get situations like this 
(warning, minor spoiler): guy goes down to cellar to light pilot light. He 
can't get it lit, and we know the killer is down there. What follows is 
about three minutes of this fool trying to light one match without blowing 
it out while the soundtrack implies a creeping terror is right behind him. 
Then... just when he gets it lit.. the killer hits him in the back with an 
axe and leaves. That's it. Gee guys, how much time did you spend thinking 
that one up? I wish I could say there was one death scene which stands out, 
but they all meld together in one mesh of stupidity. We're treated with four 
or five of these frankly lame murder scenes before the whole thing comes 
together in an ending which is likely to leave you scratching your head for 
about five or ten minutes before you decide you just don't care. Don't 
bother trying to figure out who the killer is, the writers are gracious 
enough to make this more than a little obvious for the mystery impaired.
Being the nice guy I am, I feel compelled to point out the film's 
highpoints, few and far between though they may be. There's a vaguely 
amusing scene between Dorothy and her new step-mother (who it turns out is 
about Dorothy's age); there's a funny little line where Kate, referring to 
Adam, says "Sure, he's no Angel."; and granted, some people will no doubt 
enjoy the death scenes for no other reason than that someone dies in them. 
Otherwise, the film is bland, boring, pointless, and the definition of 
everything I've come to expect from modern Hollywood horror writers. If you 
loved the intellectual challenge of such films as Urban Legend and 
I Know What You Did Last Summer you'll no doubt get a kick out of 
this one, no matter what I might say to try and discourage you. Always 
worthy of mention in a slasher flick is the score, which in this case 
consists of little more than that foolish "Ka-drum!" sound whenever the 
audience is supposed to be startled by something like a person walking 
suddenly in front of the camera. Valentine runs an irritating 96 
minutes. I'd recommend the film to those who, for reasons I will never fully 
comprehend, enjoyed last fall's god awful Urban Legends: Final Cut, 
and give the film a slightly generous two and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Robin Clifford
Valentines Day is usually a holiday of romance and love. But, not this
year, it isn't. When the delivery of a threatening Valentine card is
followed by a brutal murder of a young med student, her friends soon learn
that someone from their past is stalking them all in "Valentine."
Been there. Seen that. This pretty much sums up the 90+ minutes you'll
spend if you decide to waste your hard earned dollars on a ticket for
"Valentine." Director Jamie Blanks ("Urban Legends") and a battery of
writers bring the adaptation of Tom Savage's novel to the screen in a
pretty production that is all good looks and absolutely no substance.
The story rehashes the horror genre in an unoriginal and uninvolving way
that simply marks its time and body count until the muddled and silly
ending. This is a shame since the production values deserve to be in a much
better film. Every horror movie cliché - cheap jump-out-of-the-dark scares,
the mandatory masked/faceless killer,
go-into-the-dark-room-and-see-what-made-that-noise, pretty victims - are
used frequently but to little good effect.
In the movie's prologue, a school dance for teens is marred by an incident
involving the school dork, Jeremy Melton (Joel Palmer), and one of his
female classmates. Jeremy is accused of molesting the girl and is sent to
reform school. Years later, one of the girls who made fun of Jeremy,
Shelley (Katherine Heigl), receives a death threat Valentine's card and is
soon the victim of a brutal murder at the hands of a butcher
knife-wielding, cherub-masked killer.
Soon, Shelley's friends begin to fall victim to more Valentines and
violence as, one by one, they are slain in a variety of ways, from bow and
arrow to electrocution to bludgeoning with a steam iron. The body count
steadily rises as the killer stalks and kills, one by one, each of the
friends until only one, Kate (Marley Shelton), is left to face the
murderer.
Movie slight of hand and the expectation of audience acceptance of any and
all illogic are the fodder that drives "Valentine." The ambiguity of the
killer - the threatening cards are invariably signed "JM" - leads us to
believe that young Jeremy is the culprit. Along the way, misleads and
maguffins prevail as the storytellers try a shell game to keep us guessing
just who the killer is. Unfortunately, they only kept me guessing for the
first 20 minutes. After that, I marked time until proved correct, in the
end. This certainly takes the thrill out of "thriller."
The unfortunate cast is populated with a bevy of pretty young women who
provide the victim pool with candidates for the escalating body count. TV's
"Angel," David Boreanaz, is ostensibly the film's star, what with being top
billed and everything. But, the actor wanders through his role looking as
if he's in the wrong movie. Denise Ricahards, on the heels of being a Bond
girl, seems to have made a very bad career choice as just another slasher
victim. The rest are pretty and bland. Jessica Capshaw gets the most
mileage as the formerly fat girl who bears a grudge against her prettier
friends.
As I said, the production is far superior to the story, with stylish
photography by Rick Bota giving things a slick look. Set design, too, by
Stephen Gaeghan, lends a terrific appearance with some inventive sets,
including a video art gallery that is visual eye candy. Too bad the rest of
the film fails to meet the production standards. Helmer Blanks should
rethink his dedication to the horror genre.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Valentine opens in 1988, where a young, nerdy boy asks several girls to
dance with him at a middle school Valentine's Day party.  They all refuse,
and a psychopath is created.  Flash to 13 years later, where all of the
girls who snubbed the boy have grown up to be serious spanking material and,
for some strange reason, are all still living in San Francisco.  One, a
medical student (Roswell's Katherine Heigl), becomes the jilted lover's
first victim in truly predictable fashion (the only thing unpredictable is
that she's studying for finals in February).  We quickly learn that the
killer intends to eliminate the other girls in a similar fashion.  Oh, and
he wears a cherubic Cupid mask, just like one of his classmates had that
tragic night in the sixth grade.
The girls - three blondes and Denise Richards (The World Is Not Enough) -
are murdered one at a time, and the film's goofy script offers several weak
red herrings to throw you off the trail.  The identity of the killer, which
isn't revealed until the last frame of the film, is so painfully obvious, I'
m surprised they don't just show it in the film's trailer.
It's one thing to make a slasher flick and do something original with it
(like Scream), but Valentine doesn't even attempt to distinguish itself in
any way.  It barely makes sense (one of the girls is killed in public.at a
crowded party.and is never discovered), and I actually saw several people
checking their watches during what were supposed to be the exciting scenes.
Angel's David Boreanaz plays one of the girls' boyfriends, and he can't act
for shit.  The whole hunched over, monotone thing he does on television is,
apparently, the extent of his range (there are two Angel jokes that may have
actually been unintentional).  The girls are all unlikable, and none of them
get naked.  Since nudity is sometimes the only redeeming quality of a horror
film, this is a pretty big thing to omit.
Valentine was directed by Jamie Blanks (Urban Legend) and written by Donna
and Wayne Powers (Deep Blue Sea), and Roswell writer/producers Gretchen J.
Berg and Aaron Harberts.  The story is based on a novel written by Tom
Savage, which, from what I understand, is a pretty good read.  The book
spends a great deal of time developing the killer's character, and has him
off his victims one at a time annually on Valentine's Day.
1:38 - R for strong horror violence, some sexuality and language
