Title
Review for Sugarland Express, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Long Che Chan
The Sugarland Express
directed by Steven Spielberg
starring Goldie Hawn, William Atherton, Michael Sacks
rated PG for violence and language
The Sugarland Express is part of a genre of film that includes Thelma
and Louise and Dog Day Afternoon- the
road-movie-cheer-for-the-celebrity-criminals type of film.  I would
imagine it would be hard to make this type of movie: first you have to
create characters charismatic enough for you to cheer for them, then you
have to find capable and charismatic actors to play the part, then you
have to please the audience with great, fun, mischievous doings
(performed by these characters), then you have to please the critics
with some "hidden" morality tale, some inkling of life that can be found
by analyze-to-the-core critics.  It's a lot to juggle.  The Sugarland
Express, Steven Spielberg's debut theatrical release, pulls it off,
probably not as successfully as Thelma or Dog Day, but in the end, we're
fanatically rooting for the criminal duo and hoping they get what they
seek.
The movie is based on a true Texas occurrence in 1969 and has an at
times saucy and at times dim-witted heroine, Lou Jean (Goldie Hawn), who
visits her husband, the quiet Clovis (William Atherton) at the prison
farm from where he is soon to be released.  Lou Jean is a woman with a
lot of nerve.  Their baby son has been taken away by the authorities-
the couple are petty thieves- and she asks, actually, she commands her
husband to break out of this almost pleasant prison to help her get
their Baby Langston back.  Clovis is in a state of perpetual fright of
his wife- what she says goes.  So, to get his son back and to please Lou
Jean, Clovis goes with her and gets a ride with an elderly couple who
have just visited their son at the prison.  When the elderly man is
pulled over for driving dangerously slow, Lou Jean takes control and
drives away with his car at high speed, summoning the attention of
throngs of police cars.  The movie becomes a car chase and after Lou
Jean crashes the car, she kidnaps a highway-patrol officer, Slide
(Michael Sacks), and the chase resumes.
The screen is bombarded with automobiles- trailers, cars, trucks.  Like
in Spielberg's previous assignment Duel, a made-for-TV movie, the cars
play a significant role - they are the setting.  I don't think there is
one scene after the chase begins where streams of cars aren't present on
the screen.  They shine in the bright sun, are crashing together, and
zooming fast on the crowded, cluttered roads.  Most of the time, Lou
Jean and Clovis are in Slide's police car.  He is, strangely, helping
them- touched by their persistence, perhaps.
Like Thelma and Louise, which is essentially a road movie, The Sugarland
Express is a red-orange experience.  Vilmos Zsigmond, the director of
photography, photographs sunsets and the cars shimmering in the
sunlight.  The film has a certain summer heat that comes off the screen
and builds the excitement as Lou Jean and Clovis make their way to
Sugarland, the town where Langston is living with adoptive parents.
An element seen in Dog Day Afternoon is seen here- Lou Jean and Clovis,
two criminals, are glorified and made celebrities by the public.  Just
like they did for Sonny in Dog Day, the crowds form and rally and
applaud this couple who plan to get their kid back.  The crowds bring
gifts, flags, money.  They surround the police cars until they almost
make a lake of people, until they make the cars into boats crossing this
sea of humanity.  Lou Jean welcomes this popularity and fame with open
arms.  She loves it.  She loves the presents, she loves the recognition,
she loves the attention.  The two men in the front seats roll their eyes
as she receives the gifts and listens to all the admiring and supportive
talk from strangers.
All the while, police cars are following the couple into the horizon.
The Sugarland Express is full of twisting excitement and pleasure, the
pleasure that I felt lacked in the dry husk of a movie sensation known
as Jaws.  The editing is a bit uneven, making the first half of the
movie at times dry and too quick or too slow, but that diminishes in the
light of the almost satiric comedy in which the movie lives. The
Sugarland Express doesn't even have a morality tale, really, and the
critics ate it up, as did I.
