Title
Review for Out-of-Towners, The (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Arhur Hiller
Writer: Neil Simon
Starring: Jack Lemmon, Sandy Dennis, Billy Dee Williams, Carlos
Montalban, Anne Meara, Ron Carey
Films where everything possible goes wrong for the protagonists have to
be carefully constructed, because it can either be really, really funny;
moody; or just plain redundant.  "The Out-of-Towners" luckily lands in
the first spot, since it never stops being funny, especially with a
great script by Neil Simon and two Oscar-winners in the leads (Lemmon
for "Mister Roberts" and "Save the Tiger;" Dennis for "Who's Afraid of
Virginia Woolf?").
Lemmon and Dennis are a slightly neurotic suburban couple with a family,
a stationwagon, and him with a typical desk job.  He, however, has had a
chance to branch out, with an interview for a substantially
better-paying job in the heart of Manhattan, which is a big step for a
suburban family.  Lemmon is so ecstatic that he has planned everything
by hour.  He's built everything up so much that it's bound to falter.
Things go nicely until they're up in the plane and find out the plane
can't land because there has been a sudden transit strike.  Then the
plane is directed to Cincinatti, throwing the two off, and having them
run all over Cincinatti looking for a train.  This is only the beginning
of their problems.  By film's end, they will be robbed, rained on,
witness a robbery, have to spend a night in Central Park, robbed again,
be chased across a plain in Central Park by a cop on horseback, become
near deaf for an hour, and anything else imaginable.  The ending is
predictable, yet somehow satisfying.
The thing that elevates this is the acting and the script.  There are
almost hundreds of speaking parts, since they go all over the place, and
a couple cameos from people who would be somewhat noteworthy (the most
being Lando himself, Billy Dee Williams, as a lost-and-found clerk,
followed by Ricardo Montalban's brother, Carlos, who would star in Woody
Allen's "Bananas").  And every step is just as hilarious if not more
hilarious then the other.  I frequently found myself laughing
hysterically.
The acting is fantastic.  I mean, Lemmon and Dennis, how could either of
them not be fantastic?  Dennis takes what would just be a throwaway part
turned into a whiny part, and makes her likeable.  And Lemmon, king of
making whiners seem tolerable, is near perfect.
This isn't a great film, although it does show the underbelly of
Manhattan (which, if you think about it, IS Manhattan), but if you
really want to laugh hysterically at a film that never stops being
funny, I reccomend you check this one out.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
