Title
Review for War Zone, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Chen Chiou Beng
Tom seems to be living in a seemingly happy family, that is, until he
witnesses what his father and his sister, Jessie, doing something together.
Almost immediately, he becomes a recluse. To makes matter worse, he witness
her sister and father committing sex. Very soon, he can take it no longer
and decides to break the silence, and this leads to a terrifying conclusion
The directorial debut of Tim Roth, The War Zone deals with a theme which no
much film dares to deal with, and that is incest. Right from the point where
Tom witness the scene of both his sister and father in the shower to the
final shot where Tom killed his own father, we are forced to see the film
from a voyeurs point of view, especially the scene where we witness the sex
scene between Jessie and her father.  Also, we are forced to see the film as
a true nature of life itself, bleak and stark naked, devoid of any humour.
Every scene in the film can be as truth as it is. It also raises a problem
for all to solve, whether home is the safest place, and whether your family
can be trusted. For it is now too common in every society that even among
every family, that may be a chance that anyone cannot be trusted, and
especially your closest one.
That is, however, one nudging question in my mind after the show. Is Tom
also interested in Jessie, just as his father? In the scenes where Tom looks
at Jessie, I suspected that. When at the end scene when Tom, alone with
Jessie, closes the bunker door, where Jessie have sex with her father, I
suspect that he wanted to enact what his father did. That is just my humble
opinion. Maybe you can explain it to me.
The War Zone was shown on 15th April 2000 at the 13th Singapore
International Film Festival.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Secrets -- every family has them, but some families' secrets are more
shocking than others.
In the directorial debut of Tim Roth, an actor famous for such
villainous roles as his Oscar nominated performance in ROB ROY, Roth
tackles one of the toughest subjects possible, incest.  The astonishing
film, THE WAR ZONE, isn't as unwatchable as the title or the early buzz
about the picture might suggest.  With his almost reverential respect
for his actors, Roth lets us share the inner strengths as well as the
pain of the teen victims.
Alexander Stuart's sparse script, based on his novel, lets Roth tell the
story through a set of incredibly strong visuals.  The best actors can
do more with their faces than their words, and Roth takes this ensemble
cast to new heights of telling imagery.  Speaking would just distract
from many of the moments anyway.  One look at the faces attempting
bravely to hold back the tears and the explosive anger, and you know all
you need to know.
To an outside observer or even a close neighbor, the patriarchal family
in the movie would appear perfectly normal and happy.  The gregarious
and polite Dad (Ray Winstone) seems kind and gentle and the Mum (Tilda
Swinton) just as sweet.  Their children, 18-year-old Jessie (Lara
Belmont) and 15-year-old Tom (Freddie Cunliffe), might appear a bit
withdrawn but nothing more.  There's even a new baby girl, which would
appear to provide extra joy to their household.  As the story unfolds
and Tom learns the truth about his father and Jessie, the family
dynamics change considerably.
In the movie's most telling scene, Tom finally gets just the evidence he
needs, but it so sickens him that he immediately destroys it.
Roth isn't skittish about detailing the incest.  The scenes are
explicit, not to shock or to titillate but to make clear exactly what is
happening and exactly how painful it is.  Jessie, who spends most of the
time with borderline tears, breaks out into profuse tears during the
sex.  Roth's approach thus strips away any hint of sensuality, exposing
the raw abusive actions of the father.  Roth said that he feels the
material demands this level of frankness.
The normally picturesque northern coast of Devon in England, where the
story is set, is shown at its bleakest.  Filmed by Seamus McGarvey with
a somber blue-gray palate, the land is pounded by rain and beaten by
wind.  With hauntingly sad piano music by Simon Boswell, the picture
literally cries out to us in anguish.
THE WAR ZONE has but one counterpart, Ang Lee's THE ICE STORM.  Both cut
through the false exteriors to show us the inner workings of
dysfunctional families.  Neither is easy viewing, perhaps, but both are
emotionally rewarding.
THE WAR ZONE runs 1:39.  It is not rated but would probably be NC-17 for
explicit sex, nudity, language and some violence.  The film would not be
appropriate for those under 18.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 WAR ZONE, THE (director: Tim Roth; screenwriters: from book by
 Alexander Stuart/Alexander Stuart; cinematographer: Seamus Mcgarvey;
 editor: Trevor Waite; cast: Ray Winstone (Dad), Tilda Swinton (Mum),
 Lara Belmont (Jessie), Freddie Cunliffe (Tom), Aisling O'Sullivan
 (Carol), Colin Farrell (Nick); Runtime: 98;  Lot 47 Films/Portobello
 Pictures; 1999-USA/Ger./UK)
Warning: spoilers to follow throughout. It's not possible to write this
review without revealing the key problematic elements of the film,
though I believe these spoilers will not ruin the viewing of this film;
yet, some might prefer to read the review after seeing the film.
The War Zone is located in an isolated Devon farmhouse, where a family
is undergoing a crisis; it's a family of four, with one on the way, who
have moved here recently from London. There's the very nurturing Earth
Mother (Tilda Swinton); Ray Winstone is the father with both a loving
and a nasty side to him, who can't keep his hands off his 18-year-old
daughter; Jessie (Lara Belmont) is the oldest child who is trapped in an
incestuous relationship; Tom is her 15-year-old, brooding, younger
brother who hates living in the country and confronts his sister that he
knows what's going on and doesn't approve of it.
This makes for a grim drama that is intelligently directed by actor Tim
Roth, in his first directorial effort, as adapted from the novel by
Alexander Stuart, who also did the screenplay; the performances as well
as the photography of the haunting countryside are first-rate, but
nothing particularly insightful materializes about this sexually abusive
situation. Somehow after all the grimness of this story plays out and we
see all the graphic details, the story still doesn't grab us emotionally
as much as we wanted it to.
We are given a hint of the violence that is to come in the early scenes,
when Mum goes into labor and dad packs the family into the car to speed
her to the hospital; but, when his attention is diverted by a family
squabble he overturns the car. This causes scrapes and bruises to all,
but Mum gives birth to baby Alice.
Back home the dramatics are increasingly played out by Tom and Jessie,
with a dismally rainy Devon countryside in the background, as Jessie
denies Tom's charges, perhaps out of shame or maybe that's the way most
victims of abuse react to facing the shameful truth. But Tom follows
them one day to a deserted bunker along the beautiful ocean coastline
and clearly sees dad poking his sis up the ass, in what must be viewed
as a repugnant consensual rape.
The story plays out as the sexually frustrated Tom doesn't know quite
how to drop this bombshell as he flashes silent hatred for dad, growing
contempt for his tormented sis, and pity for his warm-hearted Mum, who
might have an inkling or might not about what is happening to her
daughter. The tension slowly builds in a household that appears
outwardly as a loving one, until it reaches its expected boiling point.
It pits the brutish cunningness of Winstone against the vulnerability of
his devastated children. Unfortunately the story and the
characterizations can't ferret out more to this story except what Tom
despairingly utters to his sis in the end: What are we going to do now?
This doesn't leave the audience much room to do anything but gasp at the
shameful situation presented and the dirty little secret that too many
families find themselves in and can't deal with.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Tim Roth's "The War Zone" implicitly presents one of the
best reasons I can imagine for having a dog instead of
children.  What's more you should bring up the pup in the big
city, not in the sticks.  What is particularly astounding about
this treasure of a movie is that Roth, a superb actor, has not
had previous experience in directing, and the two principal
performers are making their debut as well.  If only
Euripides, Aeschylus and Sophocles were alive today, how
they would enjoy this testament to the strength of their tragic
visions...visions emulated by the great Eugene O'Neill in at
least one of his epic family dramas and to a lesser extent by
Tennessee Williams.  While the movie focuses on a cement
bunker in England's rural Devon area, the story does not take
place on a wide-open battlefield like Steven Spielberg's
monumental "Saving Private Ryan," but in the area in which
all wars really start: the family.
   The movie, which deals with incest in a far more graphic
way than "Spank the Monkey" and with family abuse in a
sparer manner than Gary Oldman's "Nil by Mouth" (which
also featured this movie's Ray Winstone), considers incest so
unspeakable that a good portion of its 98 minutes is taken
with silence.  Nor is incest pushed into the background as in
the wonderful movie by Atom Egoyan, "The Sweet Hereafter,"
in which the family crime comes to the fore only in the
ultimate rebellion by the ambivalent daughter.  The silent
portions are the more telling ones, and Roth takes advantage
of these moments to capture the bleak English countryside,
which is displayed as dark, cloudy, rainy, and altogether
depressing.  There is method to Roth's minimalism.  He
wants the audience to concentrate on the sexual tension
that is omnipresent in the pathetic household headed
by a man called simply Dad (Ray Winsome), his wife (Tilda
Swinton), and their two children, Tom (Freddie Cunliffe) and
Jessie (Lara Belmont).  You can feel the uneasiness as dad
prances about the homey cottage in the buff, while
cinematographer Seamus McGarvey--who generally portrays
the activities at a middle distance--captures a nude mom in
her final stage of pregnancy. 
   The real center of Alexander Stuart's screenplay, which is
based on his novel, is the sullen, acne-botched Tom, a 15-
year-old who resents the family's move from London to a
remote area of Devon--where he has not been able to make
new friends.  Tom vaguely suspects that his sister, Jessie, is
having an incestuous relationship with their father--a situation
that should be all but obvious to Mom save for her total
attention to her newborn third child.  Happening upon the
bunker in which the sordid acts take place, he photographs
the two, as the audience is made privy to the father's grunts
and the daughter's cries of pain.  (Roth wants us in the
audience to guess the young woman's motivation in
consenting to this rape, as nothing in her attitude indicates
that she--unlike Atom Egoyan's Risa Walker--is sanctioning
the deed.)
   Except for a surreal car crash near the opening of the film,
there is little broad physical action and even less talk.  A
Hollywood melodrama would have had Jessie and Tom
shouting from the rooftops, but here every emotion is
minimalized, British style.  Tim Roth has learned the lesson
at the very beginning of his directing career that
understatement often conveys more devastating emotion than
bellowing.  The excellent online film critic James Berardinelli
reports that in one screening of this difficult-to-watch movie,
at the Toronto Film Festival, a man left his seat shouting that
he could not take it any more, headed for an exit intending to
pull the fire alarm, and after twenty minutes was calmed
down by Tim Roth himself.  (Should we suspect that this
individual sees himself in the film?)
   Family dysfunction has come a long way since the sickness
was trivialized in the TV sitcom "Married, With Children," and
while "The War Zone" will not likely be a commercial
blockbuster (in New York it is playing exclusively in a single
theater), the picture is not to be missed by film buffs and by a
mature audience with the luck to be near the right theater.
Rated R.  Running Time: 98 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten (film_critic@compuserve.com)

Author
David Dalgleish
        There is never a moment when we do not suspect something is wrong.
The household is filled with silences and shadows.  Family members talk to
each other, but there is an underlying tension.  The teenaged son and
daughter are sullen and withdrawn--which is perfectly acceptable teenaged
behaviour, but here seems excessive and disturbing.  Outside their solitary
house in Devonshire, the lowering clouds are ominous and oppressive, and
the grey sea crashes against the black rocks of the shore.  All is bleak.
        In sunlight, it would be merely a pretty and peaceful swathe of the
English coast, but there is no sunlight in THE WAR ZONE, Tim Roth's
masterful directorial debut.  The cliché says that all actors really want
to be directors, even though most of them should be content with acting.
Roth, on the other hand, as good an actor as he is, might want to give up
his day job.  He manages one of the trickiest feats in cinema: conveying
through the medium of film the dense emotional complexities that we find in
great novels.  The cumulative power of THE WAR ZONE is frightening.
        The opening scenes set the table for the revelation and anguish
which will follow.  Roth's direction at first seems rather mannered: the
camera is static and holds for a long time on quiet, restrained scenes.
Nothing much happens.  It soon becomes apparent that this is not a
stylistic tic, however, but mere reportage.  This is a household where
nothing much does happen: the silences are not exaggerated, they are a
symptom.  The source of the ambiguous malaise that besets the family is
soon revealed: the daughter, Jessie, is being sexually abused by her
father.  No one knows until the son, Tom, comes home one night and sees his
father and his sister in the bath together through a window.  The family
dynamics are already strained by the arrival of a newborn baby--a
daughter--and Tom's discovery places a burden on him whose impact drives
the film.
        Incest and abuse are terrible subjects for fiction.  Good art
thrives on shades of grey, but sexual abuse is black and white: there is a
victim, and a perpetrator.  Right, and wrong.  To tell us what is right and
what is wrong is redundant.  To offer therapeutic clichés is at best
earnest and at worst trivializing.  To steer between the Scylla of
overwrought sincerity and the Charybdis of glib simplification is
difficult.  It is a testament to the sensitivity of THE WAR ZONE that it
never once strikes the wrong note.  It approaches its subject
unflinchingly, including one graphic and appalling scene, but it is not
exploitative.  It leaves no doubt about the sins being committed by the
father, but it does not preach needlessly.
        Instead, the focus is on what abuse means to those who suffer it.
It is about the psychological fall-out of the trauma.  Both Ray Winstone
(NIL BY MOUTH) as the father and Tilda Swinton as the mother are excellent,
but they are good actors; what is exceptional about THE WAR ZONE are the
performances by the two teenagers, who are reportedly non-actors, and whose
ability to give nuanced expression to such complex pain is astonishing.
        Freddie Cunliffe, as Tom, plays a boy who is taciturn and
undemonstrative, yet we are able to perceive the tumult of conflicting
emotions that surges within him, as he wrestles with his moral crisis.  His
emotions register only in the smallest gestures of his body language, in
subtle modulations of his expression, but there is no mistaking them.  Lara
Belmont, as Jessie, plays the most damaged and the most complex character,
and is even better.  She shows us both the glib facade that Jessie presents
to the world and the wretched humiliation she nurses within her, and these
divergent selves always seem like aspects of the same young woman.  There
is a delicately understated scene involving the brother and sister and a
cigarette lighter and such contradictory and inchoate emotions that few
actors could manage it.  It is a scene which could go wrong in so many
ways, yet Cunliffe and Belmont play it perfectly, generating fierce drama.
        THE WAR ZONE offers no answers.  There are none which would not be
facile.  It simply bears witness, refusing to impose false resolutions.
Tom and Jessie are victims, but they are also imperfect.  Tom at first
thinks his sister is a willing participant, and blames her as well as their
father for what is happening.  He unthinkingly makes cutting remarks which
aggravate her sense of self-loathing.  These scenes are painful, as we
understand the damage being done while Tom does not, but they are honest,
as is the entire movie.
        The title at first seems odd, for there is no war, no zone.  By the
end, once we understand what the movie is about, it could not seem more
appropriate.  The war zone is the place where these people live, and
although there are no guns, tanks, or trenches, there is savage and
unbearable violence of the soul and, for Jess, of the body.  And, as in all
wars, there are survivors who bear wounds so deep they may never heal,
wounds for which there is no justification.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/ec398c1907d09f8f882568d1007599bc?OpenDocument
Produced by Dixie Linder and Sarah Radcylffe
Starring Ray Winstone, Tilda Swinton, Kate Ashfield, Lara Belmont, and
Freddie Cunliffe
 Incest.  Treachery. Betrayal.  Videotape.
 No, I'm not talking about the new version of Hamlet.  I'm talking about
The War Zone, a 21st century Kitchen Sink drama helmed by Brit
actor-who-should-stay-an-actor Tim Roth.
 Tim Roth, who somewhere along the line got tired of being the butt of
European jokes in Quentin Tarantino movies has decided to move along and
become a director.  Rather than use his vast experience in films with
good stories to write his own script, he decided to take Alexander
Stuart's script for The War Zone as his first project.
 The War Zone is the story of a London family who moves out into the
British boondocks.  Soon after moving to said boondocks, the wife (Tilda
Swinton) has a third child, the dad (Ray Winstone) starts getting
restless, and Tom (Freddie Cunliffe) discovers that daddy has been
getting it on with his sister Jessie (Lara Belmont).  Being a pathetic
virgin and having Fruedian issues besides, Tom spends about two hours
debating the `will I / won't I' that you can see done much better in any
rendition of Hamlet, all the while videotaping Dad and Jessie getting it
on in the W.W.II. Bunker nearby and struggling with his own sexual
morals.
 If this sounds interesting in this slightest, I have failed.
 The War Zone is a movie that is so boring that I would have walked out,
were I not a critic.  It wastes minute after minute of time spent in
utter silence as Tom watches the family do some particularly nasty thing
to itself.  This is just bad storytelling.  It's repetitive, unpleasant,
sensationalistic, and only serves as a metaphor for the first five
minutes (the next time Roth want to illustrate how much time has passed,
how about doing a montage instead of the same basic scene five different
times).
 As one would expect from a movie by an actor, the acting is above par.
Swinton is especially good as the mother of a family tearing itself
apart from the inside out, and Lara Belmont's presence as the sexually
abused daughter is probably the only role in which any real dimension is
apparent.
After boring everyone for an hour and forty-five minutes, The War Zone
stops.  Unlike most films that stop and don't really end, I was glad
that The War Zone was over.  I wanted out of the theatre.  Pronto.
Face it, Mr. Roth: The Kitchen Sink drama is dead and it died for a
reason.  Don't try to revive it.

Author
Fontaine Lien
I remember three years ago, after seeing "Toy Story," I came out of
the theater mystified, a believer.  The film had managed to disarm my
natural defense against "animated movies" and capture my heart and
imagination.  Those of you who know me know I often cite Owen
Gleiberman's comment on "Toy Story" when describing a wonderful film:
"[It was] the art of dreaming when you're wild awake," or something like
that.  When I heard that a sequel was being planned, I was doubtful. 
After
all, how many *good* Hollywood sequels can you name?  "Speed II," "The
Lost World," "Lethal Weapon IV" certainly do not make the list.
I am overjoyed to report after three years, a high school diploma,
and numerous changes in life, I enjoyed "Toy Story 2" tremendously, if
not
more than the first one, and I trust that adults everywhere will enjoy
it
too.  An old recipe never fails; this time a good result has come out of
recycling old formats.  "Toy Story 2" features the same characters, the
same hilarity, the same bright picturesque scenery, even a similar
story. 
Tim Allen and Tom Hanks again bring their considerable voice talents to
the characters; Joan Cusack and Wayne Knight (why am I not surprised :)
also join the superb voice cast.  This time it is Buzz Lightyear who
rushes
to the rescue of Woody, the toys are in more danger and they face bigger
obstacles, such as a flyaway airplane instead of a runaway moving truck. 
But basically, the idea remained the same.  Toys should look out for
toys,
and there is nothing more precious than the bond toys share with their
owners.  Most of my favorite characters, including the T-rex, Mr. Potato
Head, Slinky, and the cute little aliens, returned; ingenious new
creations
also surfaced, such as Andy's pet puppy (which we only heard bark in the
original).   The film is eye candy itself, needless to say, and it's
like
putting on 3-D lenses and looking at the world.  Everything takes on
another dimension, bright dazzling colors and textures, and an ethereal
quality.  
I will not bore you with inane details, because anyone who has seen
"Toy Story" will understand how glad I am that the folks at Pixar stuck
to
what they excelled at instead of trying to introduce new gimmicks.  Yes,
I
could have done without the Star Wars references or the stock character
of Stinky Pete, but in general the film delighted and entertained.  
There is
nothing more joyous than being transported to another realm of complete
make-believe, non-stop action adventure, laughs, and artistic wizardry. 
Children love storytelling time, and apparently so do grown-ups like me. 
"Toy Story 3" or "The New Adventures of Buzz and Woody"?  I sure hope
so.
Rating: A- (First viewing, 11/25/99)

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Actor Tim Roth's directorial debut has already garnered incredible
reviews and multiple awards/nominations during its European run.  But as
The War Zone is set to open in North America, it lacks both a major
distributor and the buzz necessary to propel the film through the award
season.  The reason is simple - the theme of the film (incest) is just
too disturbing.  When the director describes his feelings toward the
subject matter as "disgusting and evil," marketers and potential viewers
tend to back away.  The last film that shook me up this much was
Anjelica Huston's Bastard Out of Carolina (ironically, another actor
making a directorial debut), which went straight to cable because of the
premise (child abuse).
The War Zone opens in an isolated part of North Devon, where a family of
four has just moved from London.  They appear to be a happy, cohesive
unit - wisecracking, blue-collar Dad (Ray Winstone, Nil By Mouth),
pregnant Mum (Tilda Swinton, Orlando) and their two teenage children
that miss the bustle of London: 18-year-old Jesse (Lara Belmont) and
15-year-old Tom (Freddie Cunliffe).  Other than being a little open with
nudity, the family seems to be as normal as can be.  But, then again,
the Burhams seemed pretty normal on the surface of American Beauty, too.
After the birth of his baby sister, Tom begins to suspect something
devious is going on between his dad and Jessie.  He thinks they may have
been in the shower together and he finds naked pictures of his older
sister in a dresser.  Tom confronts Jessie, but she denies everything. 
As his suspicion grows, you can almost feel the emptiness in Tom's
stomach when he watches Dad play with the new baby.  Then, one day in an
old military bunker near their home, Tom stumbles onto a situation that
will forever change the family.
The film is brutal to watch, even for a hardened viewer like myself.  At
the screening I attended during the Toronto International Film Festival,
many film fans walked out during the bunker scene.  One man shouted "Is
this really necessary?" at the screen before loudly chastising the
remaining audience for "just sitting there."  His ranting could still be
heard as he stormed through the lobby and out the door.  The scene is
that powerful.  It seems to go on for ages and was uncomfortable enough
before the outburst.
Roth's (Hoodlum) filmmaking debut is as good as they come, purposefully
leaving many questions open after the credits roll.  He refused to
answer many questions during the Q&A session after the screening, often
responding "Well, what do you think?" to queries about characters.  He
appeared visibly nervous, saying that the book (written by Alexander
Stuart) made him weep, while the subject matter "disturbs the f--- out
of him."  Roth, who alluded to the fact that he too was a victim of
similar abuse, said that he tried to be honest and respectful to the
subject matter that obviously hit close to him for him and a surprising
portion of the audience.
During the Q&A, Belmont was standing off in the shadows near the
theatre's exit.  As people began to leave, they would see the amazing
actress, approach her and, unable to vocalize their feelings, touch her
hand before hurrying out the door, their eyes brimming with tears.  Her
performance is beyond incredible and, amazingly, The War Zone is her
first acting gig.  Ditto for Cunliffe, in a portrayal of a young teen at
an age when he should be discovering his own sexuality, but instead
finds a nightmare beyond words.  Roth explained that he cast these roles
with the intention of using unknowns.  In addition to the fine acting
and direction, cinematographer Seamus McGarvey (The Winter Guest) helps
to apply a bleak, cold feel to the film.  Like it wouldn't have been
anyway.
1:38 - Not rated but includes nudity, strong sexual content including
rape and incest, adult language and violence
