Title
Review for Fifty/Fifty (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Peter Weller, Robert Hays, Charles Martin Smith
Director:  Charles Martin Smith
Producers:  Maurice Singer and Raymond Wagner
Screenplay:  Dennis Shryack and Michael Butler
Music:  Peter Bernstein
Released by Cannon Pictures
     Jake (Peter Weller) and Sam (Robert Hays) are ex-CIA buddies who
find themselves on the opposite side of the law in an uprising on a
small South Pacific Island.  When Jake attempts to save Sam's life, both
of them find themselves on the run from the island's dictator.  Their
flight takes them to Singapore, where they encounter Martin Sprue
(Charles Martin Smith), a current CIA operative who "recruits" the two
into going back to the island and banding together a resistance group.
The goal: dethrone the dictator.
     Charles Martin Smith (whose best role still remains that from the
1987 film THE UNTOUCHABLES) joins a long list of directors who have
appeared in their own films.  Current members of this club such as
Kenneth Branagh and Danny DeVito need not worry.  If this is an example
of Mr.  Smith's work, he won't be doing much more directing.
     Until one day before seeing this movie, I had never heard of
FIFTY/FIFTY.  Going into the theater, I had no idea what it was about.
I hadn't seen one preview or TV promo, nor was there anything more in
the newspaper than a three- by-nine ad.  Usually, such lack of publicity
means that the distributor expects a bust and isn't willing to sink any
more money into a film than has already been lost.  In this case, Cannon
made a wise decision, although a direct-to-video release might have been
an even better one.
     FIFTY/FIFTY makes SNIPER look like high art.  This is a bad,
unoriginal movie with two heros running around shooting everything that
moves and dodging bullets left and right.  There are the requisite car
chases, fist-fights, shoot-outs, bomb blasts, and helicopter attacks.
There's even a love interest thrown in for good measure, but who will
she choose - Jake or Sam (who cares)?  Of course, the characters played
by Hays and Weller are about as one- dimensional as they come.  Even
comic-book heros have more personality.
     Admittedly, I'm not a big fan of mindless action films that run on
auto-pilot, but occasionally, if done with flair, these can be fun.
FIFTY/FIFTY is not done with anything remotely resembling style.  Its a
formula piece put together on a limited budget with a novice director
and a bunch of actors who look like they'd rather be anywhere else.  If
you need any more convincing information about how unpleasant this film
is, consider this:  Robert Hays, a man whose only worthwhile role has
been as the wimp in AIRPLANE, plays a macho leading man who, when he's
not blowing things up, spends most of his time quipping one-liners.
Need I say more?
     Of course, for those determined to find something positive to say
about this film, it does have one or two nicely-filmed action scenes,
and some of the lines spoken by the main characters are worthy of a
chuckle or two.  However, you'll probably laugh more at scenes that
weren't intended to be funny.  That is, if you're still sitting in the
theater watching this garbage long enough to get to those moments.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
