Title
Review for Money Movers (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the 1980s the author of this review used to be in love
with the booming and blooming Australian film industry. The
video stores were full of tapes with the latest Australian
films, and the former Yugoslav television aired almost any
miniseries that it could get - all of that usually superior
to the similar Hollywood products. The first crush in that
romance occurred few years earlier, when former Yugoslav
television had been introducing the new Australian cinema in
a weekly series of television premieres. My taste at the
time was too unrefined for to appreciate their quality, so
they mostly slipped out my memory. However, there was one
notable exception - MONEY MOVERS, 1978 crime thriller by
Bruce Beresford, the most commercial and Hollywood-like of
all those movies, but also superior to many similar films
made on the other side of Pacific.
The screenplay is based on the novel by Devon Minchin, yet
the beginning credits tell that the plot was based on the
actual events. In any case, the authenticity of the movie is
quite moot point, because writer and director Bruce
Beresford throws nitty-gritty realism to our face. Security
firm specialised in the transport of money and other
valuables becomes the target of repeated hits by armed
robbers. Its owner, Lionel Darcy (Frank Wilson) is worried
because the failure to secure the transports could mean the
end of his business. His worries multiply when he gets
anonymous tip that the firm is going to get hit from the
inside. That also worries Eric Jackson (Terence Donovan),
one of Darcy's trusted employees who was planning exactly
the same thing for the last five years. Those events
coincide with the appearance of a new, young and seemingly
inexperienced employee Leo Bassett (Tony Bonner). Darcy's
suspicions and some other strange events also bring the
attention of a local crime boss Jack Henderson (Charles
'Bud' Tingwell), who would also like the piece of an action.
Good thing about cinematographies that have a relatively
short pool of actors or cinematic opportunities for them is
the fact that some really good artists don't hesitate
playing the small roles. Here, in MONEY MOVERS, those small
roles are illuminated by the great bunch of more than
capable actors like Ed Deveraux, Terence Donovan or Bryan
Brown. The script and good direction of Bruce Beresford
allows them all to shine in a tiny hour and half of non-stop
action and intrigue. The plot is really intriguing, allowing
some interesting twists and surprise, although Beresford
does reveal most of its cards in the beginning. Also,
despite the huge amounts of pulp material - sex, violence,
bad language, police corruption (in many ways than one) -
its use doesn't seem to be gratuitous. By providing such
naturalistic elements, Beresford draws us into the picture
and allows us to forget any possible flaws of
characterisation. Everything culminates in extremely violent
and cathartic finale, although direction of the action
scenes would be better in the hands of someone like Walter
Hill or George Miller. But, despite all those shortcomings,
MONEY MOVERS should be watched as refreshingly entertaining
piece of underrated cinema.
