Title
Review for Last Action Hero (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Anna G. McDougald
     When a theatre owner assures a film fan that there are far worse
things than movies in this world, and that "Politicians are twice as
bad as any of the rest"--you wonder just who he is really speaking
for.
     John McTiernan's LAST ACTION HERO seems, at times, a furious
manifesto crafted specifically to answer official posturings on "movie
violence." The roster of stars McTiernan has recruited for cameo
appearances in this film would suggest his concerns are fairly
widespread.
     Unfortunately, it debuted at a time when the words ACTION and
HERO, together, were as fondly received as a leper's warning-bell.
(Just how the Tutsis, Yugoslavs and Khmer Rouge learned to commit the
most awful outrages without help from Steven Segal remains a mystery!)
     Danny Madigan (Austin O'Brien) is a young man any parent would
happily claim.  Neat, attentive, and properly respectful toward
policemen and old folks, he finds cheerful solace in the campy "Jack
Slater" movies, one of which his friend Nick (Robert Prosky) graciously
premieres after presenting Danny him with a "magic ticket."
     Danny is a Director's dream as well; corny dialogue and hokey
effects don't bother him at all, if they're carried off with wit and
style.  As the the on-screen action starts to heats up, the ticket
"activates" itself--and Danny is catapulted directly to his hero's
side.
     Unmoved by steadily escalating explosions, artillery barrages, and
music blasts, Danny desperately tries to convince Jack Slater (Arnold
Schwarzenegger, in a lovely bit of self-mockery) that this *is* after
all, "just a movie."  (It's amusing to note just who shows "real"
intelligence here, and who has trouble with the concept!)
     Before Danny can succeed in making Jack aware of the facts, the
ticket activates itself again, this time in reverse, and expels the
two into the "real" world as it falls into the hands of master-criminal
Benedict (Charles Dance).
     We are battered by what approaches cinematic overkill as Jack
finds himself facing his old Nemesis (made corporeal as well with
Benedict's help), and Danny frantically searches Nick's theatre for the
other half of the ticket.  Only by reclaiming it can Danny prevent the
unleashing of even nastier monsters and assure Jack passage back to a
world where the worst of wound is simply an inconvenience.
     Was there a conspiracy in place to discredit this film, and its
Director, from the very start?  Granted, LAST ACTION HERO has plenty of
flaws--length, and excessive self-reference being merely two.  But what
it says about movies of this genre must strike certain people as being
totally unacceptable.
     The notion that children can be quite capable of sorting fact from
fantasy, that our fictional heros may be the only ones who never let us
down, and that every movie ticket is "magic" in that it grants us
access to worlds we could never otherwise visit, where we may view Evil
in any number of guises while retaining the power to leave it exactly
where it is--these, to some, are truly "dangerous" ideas.
     Perhaps McTiernan tried a little too hard to make his point.
Perhaps he let his penchant for irony at times get the upper hand.  But
if this is failure, it counts as a noble one.  For, how else can you
even begin to argue with people who won't believe it's "just a movie"?

Author
David N. Butterworth
     On one of the muggiest days of the year, on the opening weekend of
one of the summer's most eagerly awaited movies, the theater was eerily
empty.  By the time the lights went down, there couldn't have been more
than a dozen people in the auditorium.
     Why was the movie-going public staying away in droves?  Could the
word-of-mouth on LAST ACTION HERO have been that bad?  Two excruciating
hours later the answer was obvious.
     LAST ACTION HERO, this summer's big ticket attraction starring
that pumped-up action star Arnold Schwarzenegger, makes HUDSON HAWK
look like a Bergman classic.  It's a stupefying mess of a movie as big
as the cigar-chewing Schwarzenegger himself.  All the thought, wit and
skill that went into the exhilarating trailer are missing from the
finished product--a parody of action pictures that is neither funny nor
exciting.
     Sadly, the film has potential written all over it, and its premise
is actually quite good. Danny Madigan (Austin O'Brien) is addicted to
Jack Slater (Schwarzenegger) movies.  At a private midnight screening
of JACK SLATER IV, Danny is transported into the film by the power of a
magical ticket.  Here the young cineast grapples with the reality of
living in a fiction, helplessly trying to convince the celluloid Slater
that his charmed existence is all just make-believe.
     Not a bad idea, and certainly one that provides a great
opportunity to lampoon movie-making conventions.  But the treatment is
so poorly handled that self-parody quickly deteriorates into
self-consciousness.  There are some laughs in a video store where Danny
tries to prove to Slater that this is only a movie--everybody's phone
number begins with 555, for example--but for the most part the humor is
labored and uninspired.  Even jokes that should have been funny lose
their impact due to poor timing and delivery.
     The biggest jokes in LAST ACTION HERO are the bad guys.  Charles
Dance plays Benedict, a deranged sharpshooter with a traveling case of
glass eyes.  His performance is embarrassingly over-the-top; witness
the scene in New York when he guns down an auto mechanic just to get
attention.  There's one funny sight gag involving him and his pack of
drooling rottweilers, but as the heavy, he's about as menacing as a box
of cereal.
     Many memorable showdowns are suggested, such as Benedict's threat
to unleash moviedom's powers of darkness (Dracula, Freddy Krueger, et
al), but these never materialize.
     Anthony Quinn appears as a "spaghetti-slurping cretin" called
Vivaldi whose manglings of the English language are played for big yuks
(he says things like "fourth wheel" instead of fifth wheel, or "in
front of the 8-ball" instead of behind it).  The audience isn't likely
to giggle at his sophomoric linguistic butchery to begin with, and
Benedict's endless explications guarantee it.
     These villains aren't odious, they're tedious. 
     It's hard to believe that a solid action director like John
McTiernan (who made the exceptional DIE HARD and THE HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER) could be responsible for this turkey. The editing is choppy,
the effects are surprisingly fake, the stuntwork isn't particularly
spectacular, the music is horrendous, and the writing is mind-numbingly
poor ("If God were a villain, he'd be me" smirks Benedict to the
camera).  Some scenes are completely gratuitous--such as the one in
which Danny's apartment is burglarized--and others flounder desperately
for intent.  LAST ACTION HERO is so sloppily put together you'd swear
it didn't even *have* a director.
     You can tell the movie's in trouble from the very first scene,
which is distinctly lacking in firepower.  Hundreds of squad cars
surround a building atop which a facially-disfigured maniac holds a
bunch of kids hostage.  Enter Jack Slater, from the snake boots up.
Big cigar.  Big frown.  Big problem.  Macho mockery at its cheesiest.
"Focus!" yells Danny, as an image of Slater pumping "The Slasher" full
of lead blurs beyond recognition.  Perhaps he was referring to the
direction.
     In a summer that has already seen disappointing returns on some
potential box office hits, you might be tempted to check out LAST
ACTION HERO.  Big mistake.  There's not even a guarantee that kids will
enjoy it--the two ten-year-olds down front were bored out of their
skulls.  LAST ACTION HERO is a poorly executed in-joke where everyone
in the audience-- Schwarzenegger fans included--feels left out.


Author
Berge Garabedian
This film was received very poorly at the time of its release, but
doesn't have much for which to be ashamed, in my humble opinion.
McTiernan, of DIE HARD (8/10) and PREDATOR (8/10) fame, and
Schwarzenegger from the TOTAL RECALL (8/10) and TERMINATOR (8/10)
films, have teamed up to create a fun and enjoyable movie for young and
old.
PLOT:
Young movie geek (O'Brien) receives a magical movie ticket that
mysteriously transports him into the cinematic world of action-star
Jack Slater (Schwarzenegger). Fun ensues as he tries to convince Slater
that he's really "in a movie", dodge all kinds of bad guys, and return
back to his native New York. 
CRITIQUE:
Fun, enjoyable, action-packed, humorous ride through the world of
movies, action heroes and the fine line that rests between fantasy and
reality. This movie is a joy to watch, always keeping you entertained
with exaggerated action sequences, inside jokes, dozens of cameos by
other movie stars (don't bat an eye or you might miss Robert Patrick in
his full police uniform from TERMINATOR 2 (8/10) or Sharon Stone as
Catherine Tramell from BASIC INSTINCT (8/10)), and a semi-coherent plot
that keeps spilling slick action scenes all over this trigger-happy
movie. 
Schwarzenegger plays his role as it is supposed to be played (a movie
character that can't believe that he's in a movie), and even shows up
as a cameo himself, as Arnold Schwarzenegger (one of the funniest
scenes is when the real Maria Schriver (wife of Arnold) scolds the real
Arnold about over-promoting his Planet Hollywood restaurant at movie
premieres, at the movie premiere of Jack Slater 4). The little kid is
decent, and the bad guys are your obvious hyperbolized nemeses, but
that's okay, because this movie is a complete send-up of all action
films, and if you don't "get the joke", than you'll probably not enjoy
the film very much (also, if you don't like action...skip this film!).
The soundtrack is constantly pumping you up, the action sequences are
extremely well shot, and there are no boring parts in the entire film. 
On the down side, the movie does run a little too long, there are one
too many explosions, and some people may not follow the entire plot
line that has some of the characters moving from one dimension to
another (I had no problem with this), but hey, no movie's perfect
right? Overall, this movie is a great nacho-munching extravaganza,
filled with superb action scenes, a bunch of cool cameos, and a
super-tough-guy action star that does the job to the best of his
ability. Fun stuff !! 
Little Known Facts: 
Young O'Brien's Christian parents objected to all the foul language
used in the script, and asked that they be removed from the script. 
This film contains intentional continuity errors.
The schoolteacher who praises Laurence Olivier's performance was played
by Joan Plowright, who is Olivier's widow.
The video CHRISTMAS IN CONNECTICUT (directed by Schwarzenegger) is
visible in the video store. 
Visit JoBlo's Movie Reviews @ http://www.microtec.net/~drsuess/

Author
Jon A Webb
     I'd heard this film was "Goddard-esque" -- a commentary of
film-making.  But I found it to be a mess.  It is neither a parody of
action films nor an action film itself; it is something in between, and
it fails at making you care about any of the characters, hence making
the movie itself of little interest.
     Schwarzenegger plays a movie character who is idolized by a young
boy.  The boy magically gets transported into the action film itself,
which is a parody of action films with ridiculous coincidences and
cardboard characters.
     The thing is, you're supposed to be laughing at the obviousness of
the action film inside the film while still caring about the
relationship between Schwarzenegger and the young boy.  But you can't
do both.
     The movie also contains a lot of references to other films,
including brief cameos by people from other cop films set in L.A.  (for
example, Sharon Stone), an outrageous L.A. police station with women in
S&M outfits, inside jokes (like having Joan Plowright introduce
Laurence Olivier's HAMLET), and self-directed humor like
Schwarzenegger appear in the film as himself promoting some store he
has a business interest in.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: What must have sounded like a surefire idea on paper somehow falls
flat onscreen. Arnold tries, and has his usual goofy charm, but he can't
redeem this one.
LAST ACTION HERO (that's right, no "the" in the title) has one of the best
premises I could imagine for a movie, and one of the least involving
payoffs. It's about a kid named Danny, who's a fan of a series of Big Man
With An Even Bigger Gun action movies, all named after its hero, Jack
Slater. Jack Slater is played, of course, by Arnold Schwartzenegger.
One night Danny gets a sneak preview to see JACK SLATER IV, and by plot
mechanisms too complicated to relate here, gets sucked into the movie.
Literally. He winds up in the back of Jack Slater's car, ducking bullets,
and pleading for his life ("My name's Danny -- I'm a, a kid!" he shouts).
What happens next has terrific promise. Danny is intimately familiar with
movie conventions, and tries to use his knowledge of same to keep both him
and Jack a step ahead of the bad guys (Charles Dance and Tom Noonan).
However, Jack (not Arnold, but the character Jack!) is a tough nut: for
instance, Danny points out that all the phone numbers in movies have a 555
prefix, using the phone book to support this, and asks Jack how they can do
this when there are millions of people living in Los Angeles alone? "That's
why they have area codes!" Jack retorts. And so on.
There are many individually funny moments. One, which is basically a
throwaway, has Danny re-making HAMLET in his head as a Jack Slater movie.
Another has about a billion cameos walking in and out of a police station,
and a third (possibly the funniest gag in the movie) deals with who plays
The Terminator in Jack Slater's universe. (No, I won't ruin it.)
Strangely, the promise never gets realized. Instead, the movies makes the
critical mistake of taking its ricepaper-thin plot seriously, and gets
gimmicked up with over-the-top action sequences that don't fit. One of the
dangers of making fun of movies like LETHAL WEAPON is that the original
material had a wicked sense of self-knowledge, and could kid itself openly,
so making fun of something like that would be a fool's errand. LAST ACTION
HERO makes that mistake, and as a result the movie gets bogged down in
synthetic confrontations that are not as interesting as the movie's
original leap of wonder.
There's more problems. The movie also fumbles its business with the line
between imagination and reality -- fumbles it so badly that when Jack and
Arnold finally DO meet, NOTHING HAPPENS. Nothing, that is to say, of
interest or substance. We get a couple of pat emotional countercharges
flung back and forth, and that's it. Where's the astonishment or wonder?
And perhaps that's the biggest problem with the movie: it assumes that tons
of cameos and lots of movie in-jokes will take the place of a real,
sustained sense of wonder about what's going on.
Woody Allen, before his downfall, made a wonderful little movie about the
line between cinema fantasy and gritty reality, named THE PURPLE ROSE OF
CAIRO. In its modest way, it did everything that LAST ACTION HERO never
manages to touch.

Author
Alex Siegel
     Shakespeare said, "A tale told by an idiot, full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing."  This description fits LAST ACTION HERO
perfectly.  But first, here is a short synopsis:
     Arnold Schwarzenegger plays Jack Slater, a character in a series
of action movies.  Austin O'Brien plays Danny Madigan, a boy who is
addicted to Jack Slater movies.  Danny leads a miserable, squalid life
in downtown Manhattan.  One night, he is transported into a Jack Slater
movie by a magic movie ticket.  For part of LAST ACTION HERO, he lives
in the movie within the movie.  He spends his time trying to convince
Jack that he is only a movie character, while Jack goes about the
business of cleaning up the bad guys.  After a while, one of the bad
guys, an evil thug named Vivaldi (played by Anthony Quinn) escapes into
the "real world."  Jack chases Vivaldi into the real world, and the
action continues there.
     This movie suffers from some classic problems that seem to plague
big Hollywood productions.  The biggest problem is a lack of focus.  At
the beginning, it seems to be a movie about Danny's horrible life.  The
movie portrays Manhattan as a filthy, crime ridden sewer.  Now, I'm not
a fan of Manhattan, but it's not this bad.  When I saw this part on the
screen, I thought, "Oh, this movie has a social message."  But, I was
wrong.  The bits about Manhattan are meaningless and perfunctory.  They
are there only to give the movie some sort of atmosphere reminiscent of
BLADE RUNNER.
     When Danny enters the movie with the movie, LAST ACTION HERO
enters into comedy/satire mode.  Schwarzenegger tries to satire every
action movie that he has ever made.  I actually thought that this was
the strongest part of LAST ACTION HERO, but it still became quite
tedious.  I think they wanted to create the pace of AIRPLANE, while
keeping the cleverness of THE PLAYER, but it had neither.  All though,
I will admit that I laughed in several spots.  The most annoying part
of this phase of the movie is the kid.  Danny is so damn clever and
intrusive in every scene that the audience quickly grows to hate him.
When will Hollywood learn that cute kids and action movies do not mix.
     When Danny and Jack enter the "real world," LAST ACTION HERO
enters action-movie mode.  This is the strangest part of the movie,
since they do exactly the sorts of things that they spent the previous
hour satirizing.  There are several bits where Jack is "discovering"
the joy and pain of living in the real world, but I found them false.
There is nothing real about the real world in LAST ACTION HERO.  Mr.
Schwarzenegger has been living in the fantasy world of Southern
California for too long to have any clue about living in New York
City.  The sad part is that this is where the plot of LAST ACTION HERO
begins to actually get going.  But, just as quickly, LAST ACTION HERO
returns to pointless violence and an endless stream of Hollywood
in-jokes.
     This movie was frustrating to watch because there was so much
unrealized potential.  The movie-in-a-movie gimmick is fun.  The satire
is quite funny at times.  Vivaldi shows surprising intelligence and
could have made things happen.  I have heard that four different teams
of writers worked on this script, and it shows.  It is full of
unexpected changes of mood and character.  We go from a rape scene to
something out of BUFFY THE VAMPIRE KILLER without even blinking.  A lot
of the action is completely out of place.  The slim premise is simply
not enough to support a full length, big budget picture.  I can't help
but think that they should have scrapped the whole project early on,
and tried again with a brand new script.  Unfortunately, the producers
decided to save it by throwing more money at it.  There is no doubt
that Arnold's king-sized ego had no small part to play in this
debacle.
     I can only hope that Arnold and the Hollywood community as a whole
learn something from this mess, but deep in my heart, I know better.

Author
John Walker
     If you leave your expectations behind, you'll find LAST ACTION
HERO to be an enjoyable film worth recommending to others.  If you like
a movie that explores the fantasy/reality dichotomy, you'll find an
*extremely* enjoyable flick worth at least a second viewing.
     And if you like movies that allow layers of interpretation where
one level unfolds to another, then you may wind up boring your friends
with continued discoveries.  (If, further, you're a movie freak who
enjoys humorous references to other films, watch it with a friend who's
similarly minded.  You can compare notes afterwards.)
     Well, for those of us in the States, this is post mortem.  But
I've heard one too many comment from folks who seem to have seen a
totally different LAST ACTION HERO than I saw.  If nothing else, maybe
some folks in Europe will benefit from a different point of view.
     The story is probably known, but it can be recapped briefly:
     Danny (Austin O'Brien) is a fan of Jack Slater (Arnold
Schwarzenegger) movies.  He gets two gifts from Nick (Robert Prosky), a
theater projectionist: one, being allowed to sneak in on a
pre-screening (at midnight) of the latest Jack Slater flick; and two, a
"magic" ticket given to the projectionist when he was kid by none other
than Houdini.
     The ticket has "a mind of its own" and throws Danny right into the
film.  He and Jack must deal with a gang lord (played by Anthony Quinn)
and his hit man Benedict (Charles Dance) as they plan to pull off a
major slaughter of the competition.  Benedict will get hold of the
ticket and find that our world (Danny's) is a place where "bad guys can
*win*."  Jack and Danny have to defeat him.
     One thing about expectations becomes obvious at the outset: this
ain't an action flick.  And yet it's not *not*-an-action-flick.  It
might better be called an action-flick flick.
     Those who expect a satire of action flicks will be only partially
satisfied.  The spoofing of the genre is coming from people who
basically *like* action flicks.  And Danny is the chief representative
of that crowd.  As he settles down to his first viewing of the new Jack
Slater flick, he *knows the rules*.  Watching the Jack Slater film's
first explosion, Danny practically lists out the body count before we
even see what's really happened.
     If it's all so predictable, some might wonder why he bothers to
go.  It's not novelty of plot; presumably there's *something else*.  We
never get told what *he* thinks the something else is in the Jack
Slater flick.  But LAST ACTION HERO's something else is Danny himself
and his relation to the Slater film (*and* to LAST ACTION HERO).
     As LAST ACTION HERO progresses, there are two quite separate
"lines" going: the first is the plot of the Jack Slater flick that
Danny is trapped in.  The second -- the something else -- is a sort of
dialogue between Danny and Jack.  Danny repeatedly tries to prove to
Jack that they're in a movie.  For instance, he points out that there's
an *animated cat* at police headquarters.  And he points out that all
the telephone numbers begin with 555 -- which allows only 9,999
possible phone numbers for millions of people in Los Angeles alone.
     The interesting thing is that from Jack's perspective, there's a
perfectly plausible reply: he knows the cat is there -- the cat is a
*good cop*.  And they have *area codes*!  Nonetheless, Jack does seem
to recognize that this kid has something.  Danny knows things he should
have no means of knowing.
     An important point is reached when Danny writes something on a
piece of paper, shows it to Jack, and asks him to say the word.  Jack
won't.  Of course, he won't -- he *can't*.  This is rated PG!
     Although nothing is said of this, my own conclusion is that Danny
has hit a weak point in Jack's logical armor: why *can't* he say it?
Jack's expression is one of confusion and consternation.
     For his part, however, Danny is recognizing that the movie is in
some sense *real*.  At one point the villain is escaping in his car;
Danny, on a girl's bike, decides it's the time to play chicken.  After
all, this is a movie: the car will swerve to avoid him, and it'll
crash.  Right?
But as he pedals on, something dawns on him:
He's *expendable*!  So *he* swerves and crashes!
     Danny has recognized this may be a movie, but he's *in* it.  He's
not immortal.  Even if this is a movie, he still doesn't want to get
killed.  He has to *act* as if it's real, because in some sense it
*is*.
     Well, it's fun to have a movie let you think about how fantasy and
reality work together.  But the "dialogue" between Danny and Jack (and
Jack's world) is not all there is.
     First, we may well be learning more about Jack's world than
customarily shows up on the screen.  His apartment is empty and
barren.  He gets a store clerk to call him at headquarters so people
will think his ex-wife is still interested.  She ain't.
     But, if there's a reality behind the fantasy, what about
"reality"?  What about Danny's New York?
     When Benedict gets hold of the ticket, he uses it to go to the
"real world."  From his perspective, it's not the real world, it's
simply a parallel universe.
     Well, if there's a reality behind the fantasy, there's also a
fantasy behind the reality.  Sooner or later, it must dawn on us that
we're *watching a movie*.  The only historical/cinematic analogy I can
think of is the Roy Rogers type of westerns compared to the "Gunsmoke"
type.  Gunsmoke *looked* real, but it was still a fantasy.
     Danny's New York superficially looks real.  And when Jack gets hit
there, it *hurts*.  But there are tell-tale signs all over.  Take only
one example (of many): We get at one point a virtual sea of
*immaculate* cabs!  And they all seem available!  Yeah, this is the New
York I have seen.  Yeah, right away.
     The time in New York apparently disappointed a number of critics
and viewers.  But if you see it as learning about the fantasy behind
the reality, it's one of the most pleasing sections of the film.  It's
where the "dialogue" gets wrapped up.
     As some have noted, LAST ACTION HERO did pretty well -- but *not*
in terms of expectations or dollar investment.  (It remains to be seen
whether European audiences can bring it into the black.)  I think that
the problem is that it's a "niche-breaker."  As I said above, it's not
an action flick, but it's not *not*-an-action-flick.
     Action-flick fans probably saw it once, thought it was okay, but
not TERMINATOR, and didn't see it again.  Or worse still, expecting
TERMINATOR, felt let down.
     People who can't stand action flicks probably stayed away on
principle.
     In the "middle" we have the critics -- people who spend most of
their time bewailing Hollywood's reliance on predictable niches -- and
the rest of the time savaging any film that doesn't fall into a
predictable niche.
     Unfortunately, people who can't stand action flicks are frequently
the sort of people who pay attention to critics.
     My own litmus test of LAST ACTION HERO's potential was a woman who
usually likes relatively "serious" films.  A Schwarzenegger flick would
*not* be on her must-see list.  But, having heard my praise, and being
in a spur-of-the-moment mood, she and her husband saw it.  They both
enjoyed it -- and more than the serious film they'd been looking
forward to (THE FIRM).
     First, I haven't got into all the "references" in LAST ACTION
HERO.  I'll give one that I didn't notice the first time.  Early on,
Danny watches a Roadrunner cartoon, and it includes the requisite
product from ACME, where *everything* comes from in Roadrunner
cartoons.  After Danny's thrown into the flick, villains are throwing
dynamite sticks.  What's the label on the side of the box?  Yup,
"ACME."
     LAST ACTION HERO is packed with these.  If you don't see them, you
don't lose anything.  If you *do* see them, they're freebie extras.
Watch it with a friend; compare notes.
     (For independent research: what's the significance of the title?)
     Next, I have been told that Schwarzenegger cannot act.  What he
has, I'm told, is "presence."  Well, perhaps what that means is that
he's really a character actor, that he has a range into which he fits
comfortably, but the range is not as wide as other, better, actors.
     As far as acting and presence are concerned, I particularly
enjoyed watching "Jack" confront "Arnold" in the the "real" New York.
If Schwarzenegger can't act, he can at least change presence at will.
There were two different people on screen as far as I was concerned.
If that's not acting, it's a good substitute.
     Finally, I do hope that LAST ACTION HERO does well in Europe.
Maybe if the film makes money, however little, more people in Hollywood
will be willing to break niches.  To do that, however, they're going to
have to figure ways to circumvent the critics and the other media, and
to get to those audiences (or audience segments) who are apt to like a
particular flick.
     I can't really blame the TERMINATOR fans who didn't like LAST
ACTION HERO.  People have preferences and that's that.  In music, I
happen to like (among others) Renaissance, late Romantics, the 30s
"sweet" sound, and hard rock.  Statistically, however, folks who like
one are apt to dislike or be bored by *at least* one of the others.
But I get tired when people seem to think that they can only defend
their music by putting down someone else's.
     In film, the jerks are not those who like one genre or another.
The jerks are the critics who get locked into niches while pretending
to be above them all.
     Alas, poor Arnold, you did a flick that was meant to be seen by
people who tend to pay attention to critics!

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 7.6 out of 10 (B, **1/2 out of ****)
Starring:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Austin O'Brien, Charles Dance, 
           Anthony Quinn, F. Murray Abraham, Art Carney, 
           Mercedes Reuhl
Director:  John McTiernan
Producers:  Steve Roth and John McTiernan
Screenplay:  Shane Black and David Arnott based on a story by Zak Penn 
             and Adam Leff
Music:  Michael Kamen
Released by Columbia Pictures
     Danny (Austin O'Brien) is addicted to Jack Slater (Arnold
Schwarzenegger) movies.  He's seen the third one six times and now he's
eagerly awaiting the released of JACK SLATER IV.  When his elderly
friend Nick (Robert Prosky), the projectionist at a run-down theater,
tells Danny that he can sneak him in for an advance screening of the
new flick, the kid is excited.  The next day, when he arrives at the
appointed hour (midnight, when all strange things happen), Nick lets
him in and presents him with a "magic" ticket.  There's a long story
that goes with this, the gist of which is that the ticket purportedly
has the ability to transport its user to other worlds, but it has a
"mind of its own". Soon after Danny sits down to enjoy the movie, he
discovers exactly what Nick meant by that phrase.  The seat in the safe
comfort of the theater suddenly becomes the floor of Jack Slater's
car.  Danny is no longer watching the movie--he's in it.
     The critics have panned LAST ACTION HERO and, given my propensity
for blasting anything that bills Arnold Schwarzenegger as its main
attraction, one might assume that I didn't enjoy it either.  Not so.
While LAST ACTION HERO certainly isn't the banner movie of the summer,
it's not nearly as horrible as most of the radio/TV/print reviewers
would like you to believe.
     Admittedly, this is not a good action film.  Given its billing,
director, and title, that's a surprise.  On the other hand, LAST ACTION
HERO works as an unexpectedly witty comedy.  In fact, I found this
movie to be more amusing (not to mention more watchable) than
Schwarzenegger's two openly billed comic entries, TWINS and
KINDERGARTEN COP.
     The humor ranges from that staple of the action genre--bad
puns--to some pretty incisive satire.  Even though this next
assertion is going to cause a lot of people to cringe, I'll make it
anyway.   I can find a number of similarities between LAST ACTION HERO
and (believe it or not) Robert Altman's THE PLAYER.  No, this isn't
nearly as nasty or intelligent a picture as the Spring 1992 release,
but both movies have a lot of fun blasting Hollywood genre films.
Arnold's production may be more good-natured about it (after all, he's
made his name and most of his fortune out of these kind of
popcorn-and-soda movies), but there's no mistaking the intent.  There's
hardly a plot device of the action film that goes without some kind of
dig.  The car chase, the shoot-out, the exploding vehicles and houses,
the death-defying jumps, the triumph over impossible odds, the
last-second escape--all of these, and more, get lampooned in LAST
ACTION HERO.
     On the other hand, there is fundamental problem in the movie--the
action sequences, which are numerous, are not exciting.  Sure, they're
directed with flair and energy, but the certain knowledge that nothing
remotely bad is going to happen to Arnold or his pint-sized sidekick
takes away any possible suspense.  McTiernan has given us a lot of
flashes and bangs, but, aside from the laughs generated by the
parodies, there isn't much for us to sink our teeth into.  The
pulse-pounding, sizzling pull of a DIE HARD is absent.
     Plot problems abound, but at least the story is more coherent than
CLIFFHANGER.  Since it's a fantasy, a great deal (such as the horrible
plot device of the ticket) can be forgiven, although there are several
instances where LAST ACTION HERO violates its own terms for inner
consistency.  Some of the things that go on in JACK SLATER IV, a
live-action cartoon, are enjoyable.  There's an incredibly over-the-top
car chase (with cars flying off bridges and landing safely far below)
that's a lot of fun (too bad most of the other action scenes aren't as
memorable).   However, before the setting switches to the "real world",
the pacing becomes sluggish.  Once the freshness of the satire has worn
off, everything becomes routine.
Back in New York, things get revitalized for a while.  We get to see Arnold 
play himself as something of a shallow, media hog who is pushed around by 
his wife (Maria Shriver, playing herself).  It's to Schwarzenegger's credit 
that he doesn't shrink away from self-mockery.  In fact, given the 
opportunity, he launches himself whole-heartedly into it.
     The ending of LAST ACTION HERO is pathetic.  By the last fifteen
minutes, the uniqueness and fun have all drained away, and there's
nothing in the climax to liven things up.  Perhaps if the villains (a
one-eyed sharpshooter named Benedict, played by Charles Dance, and a
homicidal lunatic called only "The Slasher", played by Tom Noonan) had
been more charismatic, the usual end-of-the-film heroics would have
been enjoyable, but these are not the kind of bad guys that the
audience can really enjoy hating.  This is especially disappointing,
since McTiernan directed Alan Rickman's standout performance as the
slick-tongued, despicable nasty in DIE HARD.
     There's also an interesting plot thread that's not developed at
all.  Using the magic ticket, it's possible to bring any screen
character to life in the real world.  Imagine what the film could have
been like with Draculas, Terminators, and all sorts of other unworldly
creatures roaming around.  Alas, the device is hardly used.
     As with THE PLAYER (and a number of other recent movies), cameos
abound.  The likes of James Belushi, Sharon Stone, Hammer, and
Jean-Claude Van Damme make appearances.  There are also countless
references and homages to movies both old and new.  The best wedding of
a tribute with a cameo involves Joan Plowright, the widow of the late
Laurence Olivier.  As a school-teacher introducing her class to a clip
from Olivier's HAMLET, the eminent British actress tells the students
that they might recognize Olivier from CLASH OF THE TITANS.
     Also notable in the area of takeoffs is Schwarzenegger's portrayal
of a gun-toting Hamlet, although most of this sequence has been shown
in the previews, so there's little new for theatrical viewing.  There's
also a running gag involving the line "I'll be back" but, again, the
key scene is in the trailers and TV ads.
     As usual, Arnold is far more impressive as a screen presence than
an actor.  He has a certain style that lends itself to action and
comedy.  On those rare occasions when he's forced to do a straight,
semi-dramatic scene (such as when Slater recalls a rooftop tragedy that
happened in his past), Schwarzenegger's performance comes across with a
dull thud.  Please don't let anyone risk putting this man in a serious
movie!
     The musical score by Michael Kamen, which consists primarily of a
lot of loud hard rock combined with a few bars of classical, is far too
intrusive.  For the most part, music, much like camerawork, should be a
background element in a movie.  In LAST ACTION HERO, it's very much in
the foreground.
     Kids will like this movie.  While it's true that there's a lot of
violence in LAST ACTION HERO, none of it is graphic.  The explosions,
gunplay, and killings are no more extreme than anything shown on a
violent television cops-and-robbers show.  Unlike JURASSIC PARK,
there's nothing here that's likely to cause nightmares for anyone over
the age of eight (or thereabouts).
     Maybe LAST ACTION HERO won't be able to top JURASSIC PARK at the
box office, but I don't expect it to be a disaster, either.  For my
money, this movie is one of Arnold's better recent offerings (With the
possible exception of TOTAL RECALL, about which I have mixed feelings,
I haven't been enamored with much of what he's done since the original
TERMINATOR).  Comparisons to HUDSON HAWK are undeserved.  The same
tongue-in-cheek style is evident, but this is a vastly superior
effort.
     LAST ACTION HERO is a fun movie, and most of Arnold's large legion
of fans will be pleased by what he's given them.  The number of people
who hate this film will probably be dwarfed by those who enjoy it, and
critical opinion rarely makes much difference with this sort of
picture.  No one is going to call LAST ACTION HERO a great film, but it
provides a decent two hours worth of entertainment (it's about
ten to fifteen minutes too long), and that's a lot better than many of
1993's offerings.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
