Title
Review for Never Talk to Strangers (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS is one of the least subtle motion pictures
this year.  Although most people could figure out the origin of the
title, when Dr. Sarah Taylor (Rebecca De Mornay) meets Tony Ramirez
(Antonio Banderas), she admonishes him, "Mr. Ramirez, my mother taught
me never to talk to strangers."  To which he retorts, "If you never
talk to strangers, you'll never meet anyone new."  The movie is filled
with such tautological "wisdom."
     Dr. Taylor is a psychiatrist who specializes in criminals with
multiple personalities.  Woven in the body of the show is a series of
interviews she is having with a serial rapist played by Harry Dean
Stanton who may be crazy or may be faking it.  Stanton plays his usual
role as a creep.  His performance is the same as he has given in a
dozen other movies.
     The romantic part of the movie is Dr. Talyor's affair with Tony
who is a mysterious stranger and ex-cop although why he is no longer a
cop is one of the movie's chief conundrums.  Given the title, you could
probably write a lot of the script yourself.  Yes, Dr. Talyor does get
in serious danger with someone stalking her, and yes, Tony may or may
not be doing it.  On the other hand there is the ever present neighbor
Cliff (Dennis Miller) who is another candidate for the stalker.  Her
dad is yet another as certainly is Stanton or one of his friends.
Then, again, maybe I missed a few possibilities.
     Hands down, the worst part of the movie is the music.  Every scene
is so overscored you think a nuclear holocaust is about to ensue.
Every action from dropping a jar of tomato sauce to a cat moving on a
ledge has violins screeching and horns blaring to warn the audience
that this is serious stuff and something awful may happen because of
this minor incident.  The movie was not previewed to the local movie
critics which is always a bad sign that the studio has lost faith in
its product and knows that the critics will pan it.  My guess is that
the audience test screenings were terrible and the music score was
added and the music volume pumped up before the show's release as a way
to make up for the poor directing by Peter Hall, mediocre acting by the
cast, and a ridiculous script by Lewis Green and Jordan Rush.
     On the good side, Banderas will probably make a lot of the women
go wild.  Tony is naked from the waist up in a lot of the scenes and
his clothing is all dramatic shades of black which nicely compliments
his black pony tail and his arms filled with jet black tattoos a la
Hell's Angels.  He tries what might charitably be called innovative sex
with Dr. Taylor.  It doesn't work.  Dr. Taylor, on the other hand, is
dressed prim and proper with serious reading glasses that she glares
over when interviewing her patients.  Give me back that De Mornay from
RISKY BUSINESS since she was great then.
     Ah, that script.  So many lines to take home and ponder.  The
serial rapist enlightens us with, "The Buddhist have a saying.  If you
meet your master on the road, kill him."  The worst part of the script
is how it plays with the audience's emotions.  As far as I am
concerned, the lowest a writer can stoop is to have a script where
small animals or children are killed just for effect.  These writers
commit one of those sins.
     Another problem with the show is the implausibility of so many of
the scenes.  If a killer was stalking you and you got a ransom style
letter in your mail at work telling you to read a certain section of
the newspaper, would you wait all day long to get around to looking at
the newspaper?  If someone was threatening you and you came home to
find your apartment dark and the door forced open, what would you do?
Would you: a) call the police from somewhere outside the apartment, b)
go get a neighbor to go in with you, or c) go in by yourself and take a
long bath?  For every one of you that picked c, you have a lucrative
career in front of you as a Hollywood screenwriter.  Go place your
order that for that new Mercedes now.
     The cinematography, especially the glow of the city lights at
night is lovely.  The movie is set in New York City but filmed in
Toronto and Budapest.
     Compared to the ending, the rest of the movie is great.  The
ending is one of the most ridiculous and off the wall ones I have seen
in a long time.  If you are thinking about walking out on this show, do
yourself a favor and do it before the ending.  You don't want to know.
     NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS runs on and on, but I think it only last
about 1:30.  It feels longer.  It is rated R for male and female
nudity, sex, and gory violence.  It would be acceptable only for mature
teenagers.  On the other hand, I recommend this show to no one; people
of all ages should avoid it.  I give it 1/2 of a star since I have seen
worse.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Justin Felix
NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS (1995)
A "Turkey of the Week" film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1998 Justin Felix.  
Written by Lewis Green and Jordan Rush.  
Directed by Peter Hall.  
Starring Rebecca De Mornay, Antonio Banderas, Dennis Miller.  
Rated R (contains violence, nudity, and profanity)  86 mins.  
Synopsis:  Blond criminal psychologist Sarah chooses to copulate with
greasy Tony the mysterious Puerto Rican rather than bearded Cliff the
wisecracking neighbor upstairs.  In the meantime, someone sends Sarah
rotting flowers, puts her name in the newspaper's obituary column, and
kills her cat.  
Comments:  NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS, a colossal waste of time, moves slower
than molasses in winter to arrive at a conclusion which should be obvious
to the audience 20 minutes into the film.  One wouldn't think that two
genuine movie stars, Antonio Banderas (EVITA) and Rebecca De Mornay (HAND
THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE), and the acerbic comic genius Dennis Miller
("Saturday Night Live") would be involved in such a celluloid backfire as
this turkey.  Not only are they in it, however, but De Mornay executive
produced it.  What was she thinking?  
NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS centers upon Sarah, a psychologist examining the
ill-tempered Max, a murderer soon to stand trial.  She receives a sudden
visit from her father which elicits flashbacks of some tragedy in her early
childhood.  Two men woo her; Tony the "security consultant" wins her over
(so they have passionate sex replete with cheesy saxophone music).  A lot
of psychobabble is thrown around about multiple personality disorder, but
the movie asks its audience not to derive the obvious conclusion between
mpd and Sarah, and instead offers several male characters as red herrings.
86 minutes, the running time of this cinematic mess, thus, seem like 86
hours.  
A good chunk of NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS is spent upon Sarah and Tony.  Why
would the career-minded, professional Sarah feel attracted to the walking
steroid with a black hat called Tony?  That's one of the film's mysteries
which are never answered.  Regardless of motive, De Mornay and Banderas
strip down and have sex several times in what passes for eroticism.  They
also manage to go out before copulating occasionally -- in one of the
stupidest scenes of the film, Tony takes Sarah to a carnival that's *right
outside* his dingy apartment (that way, they can hurry back and have sex
quickly).  Also, apparently, the weather changes quickly in their locale:
they're at this outdoor carnival one day before having sex; the next day,
they're out playing in the snow before having sex.  
The filmmakers attempt to produce a suspenseful plot interspersed with Tony
and Sarah's "character development."  Someone is out to get poor Sarah
(though most of the audience should have figured out who before any of this
starts).  Rotting flowers, a writeup in the obituary, and a beaten neighbor
are just a few of the bad things which happen to her.  Suspense Cliche
Number One also occurs: whenever someone is stalked in thrillers, by any
means, if the stalked has a pet, that pet will die.  Oftentimes, to even
further the cliche, the murdered pet is a cat (suspense filmmakers, for
some reason, just don't like cats).  Sarah, in NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS,
receives a package and, lo and behold, discovers her mutilated cat within.
Suspense at its very derivative!  
As stated before, NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS is a poor excuse for a film whose
sole purpose seems to be exploiting Banderas and De Mornay's bodies as
often as possible.  Comedian Dennis Miller is completely wasted here (he's
not given lines that are suitable for his persona) and doesn't even appear
all that much.  Maybe, in a way, he's lucky for that.  Early on in the
movie, Sarah tells Tony, after meeting him in a supermarket, that she had
been advised to never talk to strangers.  Allow me to advise that you never
watch this stinker.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Rebecca DeMornay, Antonio Banderas, Dennis Miller, Len Cariou,
      Harry Dean Stanton
Director: Peter Hall
Producers: Andras Hamori and Jeffrey R. Neuman & Martin J. Wiley
Screenplay: Lewis Green & Jordan Rush
Cinematography: Elemer Ragalyi
Music: Pino Donaggio
U.S. Distributor: TriStar
     Here's a sure method to guess whodunnit in bad mystery thrillers:
pick the suspect most likely to shock the audience and you have the
killer.  (Note:  "most likely to shock" does not necessarily equate to
"least likely to have done it".)  And, true to form, this is how NEVER
TALK TO STRANGERS gives itself away roughly half an hour early.  A lot
of things about the killer's identity don't make sense, but then, in
this kind of B-grade schlock, coherence isn't a prime requisite.
     It's been a good season for serial killers.  In addition to this
film, they're currently out and about in HALLOWEEN 6, SEVEN, COPYCAT,
and JADE.  I'm not sure if this fascination with mass murder says more
about the average movie-goer or Hollywood's perception of the average
movie-goer.  Regardless, apparently this kind of motion picture sells.
And so does Antonio Banderas.  This is his fourth of five movies this
year (MIAMI RHAPSODY, DESPERADO, ASSASSINS, NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS,
FOUR ROOMS), and his name on the marquee guarantees extra dollars at the
box office.
     Judging by Rebecca DeMornay's over-the-top performance here, it's
not hard to figure out why she's been pigeonholed into this genre.  She
and Sharon Stone have *a lot* in common.  Anyway, in NEVER TALK TO
STRANGERS, DeMornay plays Dr. Sarah Taylor, a psychiatrist charged by
the court to evaluate the sanity of serial killer Max Cheski (Harry Dean
Stanton).  He claims to have Multiple Personality Disorder, but Sarah's
not so sure.  Meanwhile, she has a new boyfriend, Tony Ramirez
(Banderas), a stranger she meets in the grocery store wine department.
However, at about the same time she first goes out with him, someone
begins stalking her.  The question is:  does it have something to do
with Tony or Cheski (who's supposedly safely behind bars), or is the
truth buried deep in the roots of Sarah's own tragic past?
     And the answer is:  Who cares?  This poorly-constructed film has so
many obvious flaws in logic that it's difficult to retain even a
moderate interest in the proceedings.  Normally, this type of movie goes
straight to video, but apparently Banderas' involvement earned it a
theatrical run.  Regardless, it's doubtful that even someone as hot as
this actor can help out something that's so astonishingly dumb.
     There's an unwritten rule that psychiatrists in thrillers are
inevitably more screwed up than their clients.  NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS
succumbs to this and every other bad cliche of the genre.  The story is
about Multiple Personality Disorders, and everyone involved with this
motion picture seems to be afflicted, including the screenwriters and
director.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
1/2 *
Directed by (Sir) Peter Hall.
Written by Lewis Green & Jordan Rush.
Photography, Elemer Ragalyi.
Editing, Roberto Silvi.
Production design, Linda Del Rosario &  Richard Paris.
Music, Pino Donaggio.
Cast: Rebecca De Mornay (Sarah Taylor), Antonio Banderas (Tony Ramirez),
      Dennis Miller (Cliff Raddison),  Len Cariou (Henry Taylor),
      Beau Starr, Tim Kelleher, Eugene Lipinski, Philip Jarrett, and 
      Harry Dean Stanton as "Max Cheski."
Distributed by Tri-Star.
96 minutes.
Rated R (Violence, language, sex)
     The latest Antonio Banderas Movie Of The Week was helmed by
respected stage director Peter Hall (knighted in 1977).  Between 1967
and 1974, Sir Peter also directed six films, mostly adaptations of
plays and mostly unpraised.
     The writers of NEVER TALK TO STRANGERS are not movie celebrities
either, although Jordan Rush must be a favorite son in Carbondale,
Illinois, since he graduated from Southern Illinois University.  There
is also another, more tenuous Illinois connection.  This movie's
Hungarian cinematographer has shot several American films, including
the 1990 JOURNEY OF HOPE (Oscar for Best Foreign Film), which was
co-produced by University of Illinois alumnus Bill Hartman.  All those
tie-ins however do not make a movie worth watching.
     It starts fairly promisingly as bright criminal psychologist Sarah
(Rebecca De Mornay) has another one of her sessions in jail with
accused serial killer Max (Harry Dean Stanton).  Character actor
Stanton is always good and has, in fact, improved a lot of films with
his presence.  Here he claims that he suffers from Multiple Personality
Disorder, so that other selves are guilty.  Ergo, I, Max, am innocent.
     We also meet Sarah's womanizer pal Dennis Miller, with whom she
once slept (she was drunk then).  He then moved into her building, but
now Sarah gently rejects his advances.
     As a stand-up practitioner, actor and talk show host, Miller is
too coarse, questionable and smug.  He is in character here as he
points out to Sarah that he is not after an involvement but only after
sex. (His succinct, explicit phrasing was unprintable in the main paper
I write for.  But for the censorless Internet it was: "I just want to
fuck.")
     Sarah also has somewhere a boy-friend who once day disappeared.
She and Puerto Rican biker Tony (Banderas) meet cute at a liquor store,
where tattooed Tony discourses like a connoisseur of fine wines.  This
is one of the many mistakes of the film, since he looks as though he
should be drinking out of a paper bag.
     In quick succession, Sarah goes to his pad for wine-tasting, which
means immediate, vigorous sex.  Later the two reluctantly exchange
information about themselves.  Tony works in surveillance, electronic
and otherwise.
     Soon the plot thickens to impenetrability.  Sarah is visited by
her estranged and--it's hinted broadly--once abusive father.  Her
off-on relationship with Tony goes with incrementally kinky sex.  It is
uninteresting, even though the bodies are in fine shape and Miss De
Mornay is not siliconed.
     Sarah receives a gift package of dead flowers, then another with
her dead cat.  Later she reads her own obituary in the paper.  The
audience is theoretically supposed to suspect everyone, including Max
who was released for lack of evidence.  But the audience doesn't give a
hoot.
     Intermittently suspecting Tony, Sarah engages a shabby private
investigator.  Now the surveillance man is under surveillance, on the
"set a thief to catch a thief" principle--while Hitchcock is crying
in Movie Heaven.
     Sarah learns that Tony is lying about his trips.  There's an
attempt on her life via an electric heater that is HANGS LOOSELY RIGHT
OVER HER BATHTUB and is magically supposed to fall and electrocute her
at the right moment!
     That's about the only electricity in the film, since there is none
between De Mornay and Banderas.  Instead, this awfully plotted picture
throws our way a shipload of red herrings as it gets exponentially
incoherent, improbable, impossible, unclear, dull, uninvolving and
stupid.  It uses a plethora of flashbacks and/or visions.  The parts
don't join or hold together.  The proverbial "holes so big that you can
drive a truck through" are here fit for locomotives.
     The production values are good, with slick-and-somber camerawork.
There is an overabundance of shots from various angles that stress
enclosed spaces or suggest partitions such as freight elevator bars,
railings and the like, all heavily symbolic of cages, jails and
separations.
     The film is a waste of everything and everyone, especially Old
Reliable Harry Dean Stanton, whom we see too little of.  It was dumb of
the plot to have had him released from jail.  It was even dumber to
have had this movie released.
