Title
Review for Reversal of Fortune (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    Did Claus Von Bulow try to kill his wife Sunny in their Newport 
mansion?  That is the question Reversal of Fortune asks you to consider 
as it opens in a hospital ward, with a comatose Sunny Von Bulow.  She is 
the main narrator of the film, in a narrative trick that was 
extraordinarily risky for Schroeder.  The dramatic trick works, as Sunny 
Von Bulow narrates a compelling story of murder, sex, unhappiness, and a 
lawyer's moral dilemma as he takes a case he thinks he cannot win.
Jeremy Irons is Claus Von Bulow, in what is his finest role, and one 
of the most devastingly evil performances in history.  He is as hated as 
any man alive, as cold as a cucumber.  His remorse for his wife's 
comatose condition is nonexistant, and it is no wonder that even his 
children have difficulty accepting his version of what happened during 
Christmas, 1980.
The background to the case is such.  During Christmas of 1979, Sunny 
Von Bulow fell into a deep coma from which she recovered and awoke.  The 
same situation occured in 1980, only Sunny never woke, and probably 
never will.  When examined, it was found that she had 14 times the 
normal amount of insulin within her blood.  Claus Von Bulow is then 
accused of attempted murder by his stepson, convicted, and freed on 
bail.  He immediately hires Alan Dershowitz, the renowed Harvard Law 
professor, to acquit him.   
Ron Silver is magnificent as a moral lawyer who cannot stand what 
has happened to him.  We follow him through two very different cases; 
the case of the Johnson case, where two innocent kids are standing on 
Death Row for a crime they didn't commit, and von Bulow, who he still 
hasn't figured out.  Dershowitz doesn't know what happened to Sunny, and 
he is extremely hesitant to take the case.  Nevertheless, he does, based 
on certain things which happen during the investigative process that 
deeply upset him.  Together with a group of law students, Dershowitz 
concocts a defense and ultimately get the verdict reversed. 
Silver's performance is one of a handful of solid roles in this deep 
film.  Schroeder directs on many different levels, with multiple plot 
lines which blend in wonderfully in the mind of Alan Dershowitz.  There 
are flaws; at times, the film gets overly theatrical.  Yet, due to Glenn 
Close's troubled and brutally honest performance as Sunny von Bulow, the 
use of her comatose body as a narrator works here fairly well.  The 
flashbacks are good, but at times Schroeder doesn't fill in the blanks.  
The movie could have benefited with the increased attention of certain 
developments during the film, and it could have used a better ending.  
The film progressed wonderfully before ending suddenly, without any 
intelligent conclusion.  The supporting characters are often neglected, 
and Dershowitz's team should have been allowed to grow character wise, 
but Schroeder over-simplifies the story and the characters.
Yet, for all these flaws, the film is deeply engrossing because of 
Irons.  As von Bulow, he is brutally evil.  Anti-Semitic, prejudiced, 
arrogant, protective, he is a rotten, lying monster, whose conviction 
may have been wrong legally, but morally he was to blame.  Irons plays 
him to a cold perfection, with pathetic attempts to gain moral support 
for his claims to innocence.  He is an adulterous liar and a cheat who 
in all likelihood committed the murder. 
However, the genius of Reversal of Fortune comes in its distinction 
between moral culpability and legal responsibility.  There is no doubt 
von Bulow is responsible for his wife's death by years of neglect and 
coldness.  However, legally, did he do the murder?  Schroeder dares the 
viewer to make up his own mind.  With all the character flaws, Reversal 
of Fortune is an engrossing puzzle because it is intelligent; he wants 
the viewer to make up his own mind.  Schroeder taunts the viewer with 
contradictory revelations, and then mentions that the answer to this 
compelling puzzle shall be revealed when we join Sunny von Bulow, in 
death.  For all the failed dramatic theatrics, this is one that works 
beautifully.  We don't know what happened.  That sense of legal 
ambiguousness, along with von Bulow's obvious moral guilt, is why 
Reversalf Fortune works.  In the end, von Bulow is as sadistic as ever.  
Irons is haunting, and that is why Reversal of Fortune is so good.

Author
James Sanford
 "I do," the client replies, through a carnivorous smile.
 The lawyer is Harvard law professor Alan Dershowitz (Ron
Silver). The client is Claus von Bulow (Jeremy Irons), a man who had one
of the very richest, an heiress named Sunny (Glenn Close), who now
lingers in an endless coma. When Dershowitz and von Bulow first meet,
Claus is seeking someone to help him with his appeal after being
convicted of attempted murder. Dershowitz, despite considerable
reservations, takes the case.
 Director Barbet Schroeder's delectable "Reversal of Fortune"
reconstructs the infamous von Bulow scandal and makes it more mystifying
than ever by presenting it as a real-life "Rashomon." As a result,
Claus' defenders may question their position after seeing the film, but
his critics may have some moments of self-doubt as well.
 The marriage of Sunny and Claus is played mostly for
extraordinarily dark comedy, a marathon of extracurricular affairs,
pill-popping and mind games. While Sunny was usually portrayed in
newspaper accounts as a meek, frail romantic taken for a ride by gigolo
Claus, Close's portrait is far deeper and more colorful. On one hand,
she's Sunny the Valium Zombie, a paranoid hypoglycemic whose meals
consist mostly of sundaes and cigarettes and who celebrates Christmas by
washing down various drugs with multiple cups of eggnog. But Close isn't
entirely unsympathetic to the woman; when Sunny begs Claus for love,
then insists she likes to sleep with the window open in mid-winter
because she finds the chill "reassuring" she brings a sad resonance to
the stereotype of the poor little rich girl.
 Speaking of chilliness, it's a credit to Irons that he somehow
manages to make Claus' icy facade alluring and compelling. His frozen
heart is sheathed in a suave, even-tempered exterior that slowly wins
your trust.
 But just when you start to think perhaps Claus was unjustly
accused, pesky details creep into the picture. If Claus wasn't plotting
Sunny's death, why did he show his mistress a legal analysis of Sunny's
will? Why did he lie to the doctor who investigated Sunny's first coma?
And what possible reason could there have been for him to spend five
whole days in a cramped apartment with his mother's corpse before
reporting the death to the authorities. In the eyes of Schroeder and
company, Claus may or may not have tried to kill Sunny but it's certain
he did very little to stop her from destroying herself.
 In any case, it's the sorrowful Sunny whose presence hangs over
everything. "I never came out of this coma," Sunny remarks in her
ethereal narration, adding with a hint of mischief, "and I never will."
We may never learn the truth about what really went on inside the von
Bulow's Newport estate during that black Christmas, but "Reversal of
Fortune" serves up plenty of fascinating theories. James Sanford

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Famous lawyer Alan Dershowitz defends
     Claus von Bulow in this adaptation of Dershowitz's book.
     While none of the characters is anyone you would really want
     to know or even deal with, some of the re-assessment of what
     appears initially to be an "open and shut" case is
     reminiscent of TWELVE ANGRY MEN.  Rating: high +1 (-4 to +4).
     There is an old exchange where one person says, "The rich are different
from us."  And the other person responds, "Yes, they have more money."
REVERSAL OF FORTUNE gives us glimpses into quite a few things but one is the
lifestyles of the very rich.  What we see is less than totally inviting.  In
REVERSAL OF FORTUNE our first impressions of Claus von Bulow play off all
our prejudices against the European aristocracy.  He is cultured, cold,
emotionless, and calculating.  He seems a marble statue that has been
granted the power of speech.  In a sense he is the damsel-in-distress of
this piece.  As the film begins he has already been found guilty of the
attempted murder of his wife Sunny.  To avoid going to prison he gets trial
lawyer and professor of law Alan Dershowitz to defend him.  Of course, as a
matter of record Dershowitz did successfully appeal the conviction and in a
retrial had von Bulow acquitted of the charges.  REVERSAL OF FORTUNE, based
on Dershowitz's own book, is the story of how Alan Dershowitz defended the
impassive Claus von Bulow.
     The film also gives us a view into Dershowitz's unorthodox defense
procedures.  He turns his house into a workshop with teams in each room
researching the legal ramifications of a different piece of evidence against
von Bulow.  The teams even have sweatshirts labeled with the piece of
evidence they are working on.  Dershowitz may be bragging about the
completeness of his approach but, in fact, one may wonder at the fairness of
expending this magnitude of resource in a legal action.  Dershowitz
moralizes why he should take the case even if von Bulow is so likely guilty,
but the audience never works up the respect for him and his methods that it
has for the dramatized Clarence Darrow in INHERIT THE WIND or the dramatized
Louis Nizer in A CASE OF LIBEL.  His causes are not so noble and his fees
are higher.  As unflattering as this film was to Claus, whose only moments
of humanity seem to be when he is having fun with his own ghoulish image in
the press, REVERSAL OF FORTUNE is far less flattering to Sunny.  This
daughter of the idle rich is shown to have been mostly dead already by his
own actions.  She is totally idle and self-indulgent.  Her hours out of bed,
which number only six a day, are a constant struggle to pass through he
system every drug she can lay her shaking hands on.  Regardless of anything
Claus did, we are led to believe that death or near-death was the expected
and logical result of an incredibly self-destructive lifestyle.  If she was
really as portrayed, one wonders how she survived as long as she did.
     In addition to Dershowitz's moralizing, there is one more piece of
moralizing that is irritating in the film.  The film pokes fun at von
Bulow's patronizing, if well-intentioned, attitude toward Dershowitz being
Jewish.  Yet several times the camera takes opportunities to remind us that
Dershowitz is not just a lawyer, he is a JEWISH lawyer.  Camera angles are
chosen to show a painting on a Jewish theme in Dershowitz's office or to
show a menorah in his home.  The camera is just as hung up on religion as is
von Bulow.
     Of the three stars, Glenn Close as Sunny von Bulow has top billing and
got the least screen time.  She does, however, narrate the story in spite of
the fact that it makes little sense to have a narrator who is speaking from
a coma and who was less than a clear thinker even before her coma.  Some
attention has been paid to Jeremy Irons's performance as Claus, though I
have always thought it is easier to be convincingly weird than to be
convincingly normal.
     On the whole, REVERSAL OF FORTUNE panders a bit too much to the fans of
crime "docudramas."  But it is told with wit and subtlety.  I would give it
a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     This movie is based on Alan Dershowitz's book about his defense of
Claus von Bulow, who had been convicted of attempting to kill his rich,
socialite wife Sunny with a large injection of insulin that put her into
a permanent vegetative state.  Dershowitz is a prominent law prof.  at
Harvard who writes a syndicated column on constitutional, legal, and
liberal issues for the New York Times.
     The movie is narrated by Glenn Close, whose character Sunny is
already in the final coma of her life (she is "alive" today).  This is a
permanent stumbling block for the movie.  I'm never very comfortable
with a voice-over; movies ought not to need narrators.  And a
out-of-body narrator is really pushing the limits.
     Jeremy Irons turns in an astonishing performance as the chimeric
von Bulow (Ron Silver as Dershowitz says to Irons: "You're a very weird
man."  And Irons as von Bulow replies: "You have no idea.")  It is the
kind of strange and eerie characterization of an unknowable character
that leaves one gasping in admiration and wondering where in the name of
all that's cinematic did Irons get the clue, the resource, the insight,
the starting point in creating such a very weird man.
     Silvers' Dershowitz is never explained to us.  We get a some
defining scenes and speeches about his role as a man wild about law and
protecting the poor and the innocent; even the defense of von Bulow is
seen as a way of keeping the poor from being victimized by the rich (for
an explanation of this, seek elsewhere), but these are templates of the
standard liberal, Jewish lawyer.  His Jewishness is featured prominently
throughout the movie, by the way.  Not quite a stereotype, however.
     Through the early parts of the movie, I feared that Close, who is
one of my personal faves, was not going to get a chance to act.
However, through the miracle of flashbacks she got a couple of chances
to remind once again how very  good she is.
     The pleasure, and perhaps purpose, of REVERSAL OF FORTUNE is the
wonderful acting.  The problem, other than the narrative, is that the
movie is terribly schizophrenic.  Half of it a legal-procedures movie,
not unlike PRESUMED INNOCENT, for example.  Part of it is a character
study.  Very little is a whodunit.  (Since this is a true story, and
all the principals are real and living, this last aspect had to be
treated, I imagine, with some circumspection.)  
     Oh, yes, and it's rather funny in many places, but the newspapers
ads calling it a comedy are probably a fall-back marketing strategy.  It
ain't a comedy.
