Title
Review for Night Shift (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Director Ron Howard's first pairing with producer Brian Grazer,
features plenty of early appearances by the big stars of today,
alongside a starring role for his buddy Fonzie from the popular TV
sitcom "Happy Days", Henry Winkler. This film was actor Michael
Keaton's cinematic debut.
PLOT:
A shy, timid man works in a morgue during the night shift, and can't
seem to ever stand up for himself. An extraverted "idea man" joins his
crazy hours, and tries to turn him into a real man. The two men join
forces with a pimp-less hooker, and set up shop in their working area.
All together, they attempt to make the business and the lives of the
prostitutes thrive. Love, wisecracks and an '80s soundtrack ensues. 
CRITIQUE:
Dated comedy offers very little in the chuckle department, with even
less in narrative obstruction, but remains interesting only for the
early work of now-famed director Ron Howard, the dynamic screenwriting
duo team of Babaloo Mandel and Lowell Ganz, Batman himself Michael
Keaton, and a lesser known Shelly Long, from TV's "Cheers" fame. This
film might've been humorous in the early 80's, but nowadays, it plays
like a retardedly slow comedic mishap. The one-liners are so-so, the
obstacles in the story are non-existent, and the "love story"
contrived. All in all, this film is a dud, save it for the nostalgia
factor.
The casting is one of the only redeemable qualities of the film, with
Henry Winkler actually pulling off a character that is in no way
related to his Fonzie alter-ego, or the third banana characters that
he's been playing in the 90's (The retro trend sure revived this guy's
flaccid acting career.) He plays his role very well, as does Keaton,
who used this role to staple his acting career as the fast-talking,
wise-cracking hipster. Long is decent as the prostitute, but I couldn't
help but think about the unattractiveness of the rest of the
streetwalkers. I mean, was it an 80's thing, or are most prostitutes
douchebags to begin with? All in all, this film offers a few decent
one-liners, a humdrum plotline, some decent nostalgic acting
performances by its stars, and a few early cameos by some of the bigger
names of showbiz today (see little known facts below.) 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Kevin Costner plays Frat Boy#1 in this film. He is visible only
for a few seconds, but if you play your video on slo-mo, you will make
him out quite clearly during the frat party scene in the morgue. He is
the first guy egging Michael Keaton on in his balancing act.
Actress Shannon Doherty also makes an extremely early appearance in her
career, as the 7-year old girl-scout who shouts "Mugger!" and blows her
whistle, after she catches Henry Winkler going through Shelley Long's
purse in the elevator.
Director Ron Howard also makes a cameo in this film as the annoying
saxophone player. Of course, he is best known for playing the part of
Richie Cunningham in the popular TV sitcom "Happy Days".
This film was also the first pairing of the comedy screenwriters
extraordinaire, Babaloo Mandel and Lowell Ganz, who went on to scribe
such hits as SPLASH (7/10), PARENTHOOD (8/10), CITY SLICKERS (7.5/10)
and many more.
Ron Howard's actor brother, Clint Howard, makes the first of his many
appearances in his brother's movies. 
