Title
Review for Traps (1994/II)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Saskia Reeves, Robert Reynolds, Sami Frey, Jacqueline McKenzie,
      Kiet Lam
Director: Pauline Chan
Producer: Jim McElroy
Screenplay: Robert Carter and Pauline Chan based on characters from
      DREAMHOUSE by Kate Grenville
Cinematography: Kevin Hayward
Music: Douglas Stephen Rae
U.S. Distributor: Filmopolis Pictures
     In TRAPS, a four-character drama is played out against the
turbulent backdrop of 1950 French Indochina.  An Australian man and his
British wife arrive in what will soon be Vietnam to compile a report on
the successes of French plantations there.  Little do they realize that
external pressures are about to rip apart their seemingly-perfect
marriage, and each will have to face the true identity that society's
conventions have buried deep within them.  This fascinating study of how
global events impact on the individual is marred only by occasionally
obvious plotting and subpar performances.
     TRAPS opens with Louise and Michael Duffield (Saskia Reeves and
Robert Reynolds) traveling to the plantation of Daniel Renouard (Sami
Frey).  Michael has come here to research and author a study of the
overseas successes of the French Indochine Rubber Company.  His wife, a
photojournalist, is along to snap pictures to compliment his writing.
However, these are not tranquil times in southeast Asia.  The Viet Minh
are gathering strength and support to overthrow French rule, and it's
not long before everyone becomes involved in the struggle, with Louise,
Michael, Daniel, and Daniel's daughter, Viola (Jacqueline McKenzie),
fighting for their lives.
     Each of the characters has a clearly-defined arc.  Michael,
initially a self-confident, take-charge man, learns that what he really
craves is safety and stability, and he'll do anything, including
compromising his journalistic integrity, to attain those ends.  Louise,
a prim and proper Englishwoman, discovers that she needs a life of
substance, not the hollow sham that her marriage to Michael has become.
She finds a core of strength deep inside that she never suspected was
there.
     As the film progresses, Daniel becomes further entrenched in his
position that Indochina is his country, and no one is going to push him
out.  No matter how apparent the inevitable result becomes, he will not
see it.  Like one of Shakespeare's tragically flawed characters, he
stands his ground to the end.  Viola, initially in thrall to her father,
eventually finds the strength to defy him.  However, hers is the least
developed part, since the character is used primarily as a catalyst for
Louise's transformation.
     Both the political and the personal aspects of TRAPS are
compelling, although there are times when the plot follows a too-
predictable path.  Unfortunately, the acting lets the screenplay down.
The best of the four leads is Saskia Reeves, and she's no better than
mediocre.  Sami Frey, who gave an impressively intense performance in MY
LIFE AND TIMES WITH ANTONIN ARTAUD, doesn't do much to breathe life into
his character.  Robert Reynolds is flat, and Jacqueline McKenzie has the
opposite problem, often going over-the-top.  There are numerous scenes
where these actors can't convey the full impact of a situation, so it's
left to the viewer to interpolate.
     In many ways, TRAPS is similar to this year's BEYOND RANGOON,
about a sheltered outsider who encounters political turmoil in a
distant country and consequently undergoes a life-changing experience.
Considering the universal appeal of these themes, it's not surprising
that they have shown up again.  First time director Pauline Chan (who
was born in Vietnam) has crafted a film with great personal
importance.  More significantly, however, there's resonance in TRAPS
for any viewer--that who we think we are, or pretend to be, often bears
little resemblance to our true personality.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TRAPS is an Australian film by a very promising first time
director, Pauline Chan.  It is set in "1950 French Occupied
Indo-China", a.k.a., Vietnam.  The movie is billed correctly as an
erotic thriller.  Usually when a movie attempts this, it succeeds at
one and fails miserably at the other.  Although audiences may have a
hard time envisioning the Communists as saviors of simple purity and
the French as sadistic Nazis, it is not a major problem since the one
sided political views of the writers (Robert Carter and Pauline Chan
based on the novel "Dreamhouse" by Kate Grenville) are secondary and
easily ignored.  As an erotic thriller, it works.
     Michael Duffield (Robert Reynolds) is a writer for a French rubber
company.  He brings his wife Louise (Saskia Reeves), who is a
photographer, with him on assignment to the company's rubber plantation
in Indo-China.  Upon arrival they are driven to the plantation by the
company's driver Tuan (Kiet Lam).  The couple is a bit concerned about
their safety in this new land since they keep hearing gunfire and bombs
going off somewhere.  On the road to the plantation Louise insists that
she needs to go to the bathroom to which Tuan stops the car and says in
a great line of many meanings, "everywhere toilet."
     When they get to the plantation they are greeted by a creepy
French host, Captain Brochard (Thierry Marquet) and his sickly, strange
daughter Viola (Jacqueline McKenzie).  The plantation is beautiful, but
in semi-decay providing another metaphor for the problems facing them.
The sets by Michael Philips are just the right gothic blend of realism
and surrealism.  The audience never knows whether to soak in the beauty
of the country (thanks to the cinematography by  Kevin Haywar) or be on
its guard for some evil lurking around the corner.  The Viet Minh are
everywhere.
     The Duffields are very naive.  As bombs are going off, they ask
Tuan, "Is it really dangerous around here?  The Viet Minh?"  The wife
forms a simple but genuine rapport and empathy for the locals.  She
seems confused as to why anyone would be fighting anyone there.
     We soon find that there are two parallel plots to the show.  One
involves the repression of Louise by her husband and her desire for
sexual freedom.  The other deals with whether anyone will ever make it
out alive.  Both tales work.  Overall, the picture reminded me of THE
INCREDIBLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING.
     There are many good scenes.  A simple one with a lot of power has
the Captain volunteering to Michael to rub mosquito repellent on
Louise's shoulders - watch carefully the expressions on everyone's
faces, especially Louise's.  Another is Michael's reaction when he
wakes up from a drunken stupor.  For tension, none beats the one when
all of them go in hiding.
     Another reason the tension work so well is that the director
provides such a feeling of normalcy that is broken periodically by cars
running over booby-trapped roads or people shooting at each other in
fields.  It is as if a normal life is covered by a morose scrim of
impending doom.  Only Tuan seems to get it.  He tries to tell them,
explaining, "here underneath, nothing right, nothing safe."
     The acting is all quite good.  My favorite is Saskia Reeves who
has the pent up emotions of a James Woods.  You felt like she was going
to explode at any time and yet she keeps her emotions in check most of
the time.  She is a beautiful actress who excels at both the erotic and
the thriller parts in the movie.  I have never seen her act before, but
I hope to again.
     The tension and the images that Pauline Chan creates in TRAPS made
me ready to see her next motion picture as well.  Although the movie is
uneven in parts and its political logic is dubious at best, it does
well what it set out to do.
     TRAPS runs a fast 1:36 thanks to crisp editing by Nicholas
Beauman.  The movie is in English plus a little French and a little
Vietnamese with English subtitles.  It is correctly rated R for some
violence, some nudity, and very explicit and effective sex scenes.  I
think the movie would be okay for mature teenagers.  I recommend TRAPS
to you, and I give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
