Title
Review for Trial, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let me confess that I have never read much Kafka other than
collecting some of his classic quotes (see appendix).  Based on what I
do know, THE TRIAL appears to be quintessential Kafka.
     THE TRIAL starts with the arrest of what we would call a Senior
Vice President of a large bank, but it is set in Prague before the turn
of the century so he is call a chief clerk (pronounced "clark" in true
British fashion) of the bank.  The clerk is played excellently by Kyle
MacLachlan.  Although arrested, he is free to go and is never told the
charges.
     The clerk is arrogant and tells everyone how ridiculous this all
is.  But in a world of non-Euclidean geometry, everything that seems
right isn't.  Slowly the clerk begins to realizes the trouble he is in.
When he goes to the court he sees long lines of people who are accused.
No one actually goes on trial.  Everyone waits.
     Finally, he gets the court painter to explain to him that he has
only three chances: actual acquittal, ostensible acquittal, and
perpetual postponement.  The first has never happened, the second has
the side effect that you can always be brought up again for the same
charge, and the last means you must spend all of your waking hours
making sure that you case never advances.  From there, his plight gets
worse.
     Other than Kafka's story and MacLachlan's acting, the high point
is the screen play by Harold Pinter.  Pinter has a style most typified
by the movie Betrayal, of a highly verbal almost Shakespearean style
that has the actors taking every word very seriously with constant
ripostes between each other.
     The direction, settings, and especially the dramatic brass
symphonic music are all good.  I give the movie ** 1/2, and recommend
it.
     People become obsessed with the patterns they create.  In a Kafka
story the salesman wakes up one morning and finds he has been
transformed into a huge ugly bug.  What does he do? Does he contemplate
this awful change in himself? Nope.  He worries about how he's going to
turn his clumsy new body over and get out of bed, how he's going to be
late to the office, and what his boss will think.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kyle MacLachlan, Jason Robards, Polly Walker, Alfred Molina,
           Anthony Hopkins, Michael Kitchen, David Thewlis
Director:  David Jones
Producer:  Louis Marks
Screenplay:  Harold Pinter based on the novel by Franz Kafka
Music:  Carl Davis
Released by Angelika Films
     It goes without saying that no one walks into a film adaptation of
a Kafka novel expecting something created for general consumption.  THE
TRIAL, however, takes this a step further, as significant portions of
the narrative are impossible to comprehend without an intimate
knowledge of the author and his works.  The book is strange; the movie,
even stranger.
     One morning, Josef K (Kyle MacLachlan) wakes up to find that he's
been arrested for no apparent reason.  There are no charges or, if
there are, no one is willing to tell him what they are, and his
"hearing" turns into a kangaroo court where a couple tumbles around on
the floor in the throes of sexual abandon while Josef is trying to give
an impassioned speech in his defense.  Later, still trying to figure
out what has gone wrong with the justice system, he seeks advice from
various sources, including a painter (Alfred Molina), a lawyer (Jason
Robards), and a priest (Anthony Hopkins).
     THE TRIAL is a visually impressive motion picture, with many
beautifully framed, gothic-like shots of Prague, where it was filmed.
Equally noteworthy are a number of supporting performances, including
those by Michael Kitchen (the king from TO PLAY THE KING and the owner
of the villa in ENCHANTED APRIL), Polly Walker (also from ENCHANTED
APRIL), Jason Robards, David Thewlis (NAKED), Alfred Molina, and (of
course) Anthony Hopkins.
     Kyle MacLachlan plays the part of Josef K with an icy detachment
that makes the character seem all too like another MacLachlan
personality--that of TWIN PEAKS' agent Cooper (odd how the actor seems
to gravitate to bizarre projects).  Unfortunately, Cooper and Josef
aren't anything alike, and Mr. MacLachlan's aloofness creates a schism
between the audience and Josef--it's difficult, if not impossible, to
identify with THE TRIAL's protagonist.  And what in the world is that
on-and-off accent supposed to be?
     Certain minor themes of the film are easily recognizable--those
of the corruption of justice and the dehumanization of society--but
the overall message of THE TRIAL remains murky.  In a key scene near
the end, Anthony Hopkins delivers a lengthy parable that is supposed to
clear things up, but this sequence is so cryptic that it can easily
leave the viewer even more confused than before.
     Fundamentally, THE TRIAL is unsatisfying.  High production values
and good acting aren't everything.  The film lacks energy, and comes
across as a pedantic, obtuse, two-hour nightmare.  Since the intentions
of this film (and the novel from which it was adapted) do not come
across clearly, "what's the point?" becomes a fair question to ask.
Kafka aficionados will likely find a great deal to chew over, but most
everyone else will be baffled and perhaps even a little annoyed.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
