Title
Review for Ah-Ying (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Leong Heng Cheong
(This review contains a small spoiler at the end, marked by control-L...)
     MING GHOST (Chinese title: AH-YING) is directed by Qiu Kangjian,
and starred Joel Wong (of A CHINESE GHOST STORY fame) in the title role.
Rated PG in Singapore, this film contains explicit language and an adult
theme.  Note that the English subtitles are more explicit than the actual
dialogue used.
     MING GHOST reminds me of JU-DOU, and it is not only because the
Chinese title of both films refers to the lead character's name.  MING
GHOST is also slow-paced, and concentrates a lot on cinematography.  A
friend of mine who watched with me remarked that this looks more like
the usual China production with a slower pace than the usual fast-paced
Hong Kong action film.
     In the film, a Ming minister was killed outside the city, while his
wife, Ah-Ying, might or might not have been raped.  An eyewitness was
found, and he quickly identified the murderer.  However, the accounts of
the eyewitness, the "murderer," and Ah-Ying were all different.  What is
the truth?
     A very standard storyline, but not your standard HK direction
style.  The pace is deliberately slowed down, allowing the viewer to
think, or to enjoy the visual it presents.  Depthwise -- my friend
"claimed" that he knew the solution to the mystery very early during the
movie, and I have to agree that it is not really that difficult to
figure out.  The story is not resolved the way I would have liked it to
be,  but it is not unfit nor tagged on.  (I liked the ending scene
though....)
     However, this film also features some beautiful visuals.  Like
Zhang Yimou (director of JU-DOU), Qiu Kangjian made an effort to create
beautiful visuals.  In some parts of the movie, these efforts seem
overdone to me....  However, there are quite a few scenes that worked
with me.  Many of these scenes are not original in the international
scene, but is quite an achievement for a Hong Kong movie.
     Acting is generally good.  No exaggerations on the part of the
actors -- probably due to the fact that this film doesn't resolve to
using slapstick humour to bring in the crowds.
     And I don't think I should miss mentioning about the soundtrack,
one of the most beautiful element of this film -- it presented a very
haunting effect.  And, unlike in most movies, the music fits into the
movie very well.
     Over all, quite an enjoyable film.  It should interest those
looking for a story, and those looking to be entertained by visuals.
Problem is: can you find the film?  In Singapore, it only played in the
Singapore Film Festival this May.  It is in general release here last
weekend, but the very limited run in several theatres ended a few days
later.  (Very poor box-office).
     The English title of this film is actually a small spoiler to the
ending and the true identity of one of the characters in the film.
