Title
Review for Belle de jour (1967)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
France, 1967 
U.S. Availability: re-release begins 6/95 
Running Length: 1:40 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Discrete nudity, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Catherine Deneuve, Jean Sorel, Michel Piccoli, Genevieve Page, 
      Pierre Clementi 
Director: Luis Bunuel 
Producers: Raymond and Robert Hakim 
Screenplay: Luis Bunuel and Jean-Claude Carriere 
Cinematography: Sacha Vierny 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Zoe 
     It's difficult to view BELLE DU JOUR in 1995 and get a balanced 
historical perspective on the film, which was originally released 
twenty-eight years ago.  Recently, there have been a slew of productions 
probing issues of identity and double lives.  Indeed, this has become a 
favorite province of independent film makers, probably because it's such 
a rich field.  However, back in 1967, the path was less frequently 
trodden, and Luis Bunuel's serious-yet-satirical picture helped pave the 
way for many stories yet to come. 
     Today, BELLE DU JOUR is as effective as ever.  With a ravishing 
Catherine Deneuve in the title role, this film is a study of contrasts.  
The main character is at once glacial yet erotic -- a wife by night and 
prostitute by day.  She is two different people in one body, but Bunuel 
underlines the truth that no person can effectively compartmentalize 
facets of their life.  Crossovers are inevitable, and the harder we try 
to repress one segment of who we are, the more likely it is to assert 
itself -- forcefully. 
     Bunuel also pokes fun at the morals of society by depicting what 
goes on behind closed doors at the brothel where Deneuve's Severine 
spends her afternoons.  An internationally-known gynecologist begs to be 
punished.  A businessman frolics with three girls at one time.  Then 
there are Severine's erotic fantasies, which easily become entangled 
with her surreal secondary life.  In fact, her misguided relationship 
with a gangster (Pierre Clementi) arises out of a hidden desire to flirt 
with danger.   
     All along, Severine's husband Pierre (Jean Sorel) is blissfully 
ignorant of his wife's daytime job.  He loves her, but wishes she would 
be more sexually attentive.  Meanwhile, a friend (Michel Piccoli) 
pursues Severine tirelessly -- until he learns her secret.  At that 
point, the chase loses its allure.  After all, where's the fun if the 
"forbidden fruit" isn't quite so forbidden? 
     Much of the film works because of the capable acting of Deneuve.  
The scenes where she first approaches the brothel, tentative and 
uncertain yet undeniably intrigued, are perfectly realized.  Deneuve's 
performance allows the viewer to feel -- not merely sense -- the strange 
mixture of seduction and repulsion that prostitution holds for a woman 
in her position.  And, as Severine's sexual liberation takes place, 
Deneuve's beauty is transformed from cool and aloof to coy and playful.   
     Because producers Raymond and Robert Hakim were unwilling to re-
release this film in theaters or on video, BELLE DU JOUR has not been 
seen for over a quarter of a century.  Now, with the rights acquired 
from the Hakims' estate, Miramax has chosen to use this classic to 
launch their new subsidiary distributor of French fare, Miramax Zoe.  
Recognizing how greatly admired the film is (directors from Alfred 
Hitchcock to Martin Scorsese have sung Bunuel's praise), Miramax has 
therefore given a new generation this opportunity to see a memorable 
feature from decades past. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BELLE DE JOUR is a classic French film from 1967 that has been out
of release for a couple of decades.  It has recently been rereleased
and distributed.
     BELLE DE JOUR is by the famous director Luis Bunuel and stars the
equally famous Catherine Deneuve as Severine Sevigny.  The dashingly
handsome Jean Sorel plays her husband, Pierre Serizy.  Severine is a
frigid wife.  She and Pierre sleep in separate twin beds in the same
room, but there exists a logical Grand Canyon in her mind between the
beds.  She has horrible nightmares and daydreams of sadomasochism and
other fantasies.
     She gets bored with her rich, extremely handsome husband and the
life they lead.  She turns to prostitution but only between the hours
of 2 and 5, hence her pseudonym, Belle de Jour.  Her bouts of
prostitution again feature S & M which is attempted to be presented as
great fun and very playful.  For anyone wanting a more serious
treatment of prostitution, they should see the excellent, albeit quite
depressing, 1986 movie WORKING GIRLS by Lizzie Borden.
     Surprise - this prostitution makes her marriage start to work as
she starts now getting interested in her husband.  I'll let you find
out the rest of the story by seeing the movie.
     I found the story unbelievable and very dated.  I know the critics
are going gaga over its rerelease.  The party line from them seems to
be that Severine is demonstrating her independence and equality.  I do
not buy it.  She looks pretty degraded and unhappy to me even though
she does start to smile some toward the end of the film.
     I thought the performance of all the actors, most especially that
of Deneuve, was wooden.  It was as if the director wanted more of a
tableaux that a motion picture.  To the fans of this show, I say they
can have it, I want nothing of it.
     BELLE DE JOUR runs 1:40 which, with its loose editing by Louisette
Hautecoeur, keep making me want to shout "okay, lets get this scene
moving." It is in French, but the English subtitles are easy to follow.
It is correctly rated R for sadomasochism.  There is little sex and
almost no nudity.  It would be okay for mature teenagers.  I do not
recommend the show, but I do give it * 1/2 for attempting to be
innovative in its time.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Martin Scorcese has done us all a great service by reviving the
little-seen classic, BELLE DE JOUR, Luis Bunuel's darkly comic and
disturbing 1967 tale of Siverine (Catherine Deneuve), a woman who lives
a double life.  By evening she is the steadfast, almost-frigid wife of
a famed French doctor (Jean Sorel).  By day, she is "Belle de
Jour"--her new "stage name" at an exclusive Parisian brothel.
     Bunuel weaves masterfully through scenes of Siverine's hum-drum
existence with her cold husband, her surreal day job as a wanton
prostitute, flashbacks to her childhood, and bizarre daydreams of her
humiliation, bondage, rape, and torture.  Deneuve is exquisite, playing
one of the most difficult roles imaginable with her characteristic
grace.  I find it incredible that this film has gone unnoticed for so
long.
     At the heart of BELLE is the question of how our selfish actions
affect those around us.  While Siverine's infidelity first seems
incomprehensible, it soon becomes a vital part of her being and,
eventually, degenerates into an inevitable nightmare which brings her
world crashing down.
     The sheer force that builds up behind the film's first scene had
me thunderstruck for its entire 100 minutes.  Deeply compelling, while
remaining tasteful and never approaching pornographic, the film is an
eerie exposi of the haunting desires that lie within us all.  You truly
have to see it for yourself.
     The only problems with the film were some poor post-production
values.  First was the difficulty of a scratchy print with some skipped
frames, especially noticeable during the imagery-filled daydream
sequences.  More troubling were the incomplete subtitles, which often
left out seemingly important snippets of dialogue.  Maybe they weren't
important after all, but it was enough to break the fragile mood.
     Regardless, BELLE DE JOUR tells a story that desperately needs to
be heard and which is even more relevant today than when it was made 28
years ago.  A true classic worthy of its highest praises, I urge you to
see it.
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)

Author
Rian Schmidt
     I have just returned from my fifth viewing of BELLE DE JOUR, and I
am all at once repulsed and disoriented.  My arousal is only outweighed
by my melancholy which is, in turn, in a tumultuous yet jejune
dialectic with my own Oedipal introspection.
     Allow me to digress.  Bunuel's image of a Venusian bourgeoise
masochistic monolith in Deneuve moved me in violent vacillation from
horror to flatulence and back again in a terrifying yet unceasingly
vapid repetition of pseudo-Freudian references to cats and oceans and
lost teeth that was nothing short of brilliant in its nauseating
evocation of intellectual masturbation on a scale not seen since
Tarkovsky.  Even now, I feel woozy.
     The then 66-year-old surrealist director's ambiguous
juxtapositioning of morbidity and sexuality predated 9-1/2 WEEKS by
many years and yet, astoundingly, exhibits the same directorial latent
homosexuality as its filmatic offspring while maintaining a steady
obfuscating flow of neo-intellectual symbolism which is evocative of
collegial debate in which one participant has the teaching note, but
alas the viewer not only lacks the appropriate preparation but is left
feeling as though they might count themselves among the half of
humanity arbitrarily burdened with an IQ less than 100.
     Before the honored reader assumes that the preceding comments are
the harbinger of a condemnation of this erotic classic, this humble
critic must dispel such fallacious (ex post this feeble critic is
self-congratulatory in his avoidance of the Freudian use of
"fellatious" in this context) impressions by pronouncing his
unqualified accolades for Bunuel's work.
     This pinheaded, foul-smelling critic feels comfortable in his
assertion that the exalted, nay holy, viewer shall experience the same
elicitation of childhood incestuous desires for same sex siblings and
parents as did this putrid, moronic, pedophilic, maniacal
postal-employee reject of a film critic.  In the end, it is Deneuve's
experience as Severine that draws one under the metaphoric dinner table
with a broken bottle and packet of seeds to write a letter to one's own
sadistic carriage driver.  "Dear Sir, You may release the cats now.  I
have no death for you today."

Author
Pedro Sena
Although this is considered one of Luis Bunuel's masterpieces, it really
isn't.  But it is, unlike many of his films, one of the easiest films to
follow along, and enjoy, something that some of his earlier films were not
easy to do with, and later, one wondered if we had missed out on a new style
of novel'ing a film....
And there are many reasons for that. It is filmed in glorious color, which
Luis Bunuel had just at the time started working with ( 1966 ) and it is
gloriously, and carefully, photographed for the best effect.  And it is
impeccably designed and written to get the most out of the main character,
though the novel itself is more pointy towards the  class divisions and
their life. The interesting notion, is that this film is one of the best
known of Bunuel's films in America, and was the one chosen to be touched up
and re-released. It is far less important a piece of work, as LOS OLVIDADOS,
or EL ANGEL EXTERMINADOR, or THE DISCREET CHARM OF THE BOURGEOISIE.
In this story, Severine ( Catherine Deneuve ) is the wife of a well to do
man, but their marriage seems to be not inspired.  She is bored.  And in the
process of meeting a friend she finds out that many wives of her  stature
sometimes visit a house or two and participate in some extra curricular
activities outside the marriage.  Severine, decides that she  will try that,
in the hope that it will eventually spark something in her own marriage, it
is presumed, although, it also appears that the whole thing may start out as
a bit of curiosity.
Severine had inquired from her husband wether he had been to one of those
houses and he admits that he had, and his answer is vague, and by all
intents rather vulgar for Severine.  The suggestion is immediately made that
the main reason why they just do not have an active, or interesting,
marriage, is because they just do not seem to enjoy each other's company
very much.  She seems to go along with him, and he is polite enough that he
does not force his wife ( a trend in many Bunuel films ), an unusual bit,
which suggests that he is also participating in some extra curricular
activities of his own.
In the process of being a part of the various customers she comes to meet,
during the afternoons, she ends up liking one man, who is becoming attached
to her, and she to him, despite the fact that he
is a shady character.  And when he realizes that he can not win her over at
all, he decides to take the whole thing in his own hands.  He waits for the
husband and shoots him, and eventually he gets shot by a policeman and
Severine is now taking care of her husband.
The hard part, is how it is filmed, and how Luis Bunuel gets into his
characters' mind.  The film is full of bits and pieces inside Severine's
head ( this is  a famous Bunuel trademark ) and we constantly see how she
sees things, or at least how she feels about them.  All is well here, until
the resolution of the film.  Her husband is better, and finally gets out of
his wheelchair, only to have Severine get distracted by
the sound of a carriage on the road, outside their mansion.  And the film
closes.
Luis Bunuel, through out his career of film making, had always entered into
any of his characters' mind, and show us how they thought.  And then we see
how they react, maybe based on their thinking.  The fact that we see that
these characters rarely do what they feel, is probably Luis Bunuel's
greatest comment in any of his films.  We know how Severine feels, but her
excitement seems to derive from a completely different feeling which her
husband does not provide.  Be it forced, or demanded, she responds.  But
given her chance, she tends to be shy and not take any initiative in her
personal enjoyment.
This style of filming, which is not well used nowadays, has almost  been
forgotten, and considering that this film is now thirty years old, it is
quite amazing how well his style survives today, in a world of fast paced
films, that do not have half the depth that Luis Bunuel comes up with in a
few minutes.  It all appears in front of us, so immediate, and so ready to
show us another feeling inside a character. By comparison, American film
making tends to use exposition, to show us these things, and then pretty
much tells us, with hints, what the most likely result is going to be.  Luis
Bunuel, himself, does not make judgements about what he thinks, or how his
characters will do.... they just do, and the result is always open for us to
figure out what it all means, and most likely -- my feeling -- to come up
with a way that forces an audience to make a judgement and decision for
themselves, rather than preach.... and this from a man who was brought up in
a monastery of Dominican Friars.
If you have never seen a Luis Bunuel film, take a plunge.  While they are
phenomenally well written, they also make for outstanding thinking pieces,
that never let up.  His style is smooth, and specially well thought out.
Never showy, never judgemental.  Just let the characters live, and watch the
details... sometimes they are important. In later years, Luis Bunuel became
a bit more unusual, and one of his last films ( Le Phamtome de Liberte --
The Phantom of Liberty ) appears quite disjointed with the exception of a
theme that repeats itself, in this case, freedom is an illusion, because
someone is always around to ruin it in some way.  I am pretty sure that many
times he felt this way about his films, when they were constantly being
criticized by the catholic church, and other institutions for their endless
attack on the hypocrisy that many of his characters partake in.  But, unlike
many directors, this man has a soft spot for people's errors, and their
decisions.... and he makes the best, and fullest, out of these moments with
a camera... an exceptional film maker, that rarely made a bad film, and they
are all unusual and truly enjoyable to watch....
Should also catch THE DISCREET CHARM OF THE BOURGEOISIE, THAT OBSCURE
OBJECT OF DESIRE, THE EXTERMINATING ANGEL, EL ( THIS SECRET PASSION ),
VIRIDIANA, TRISTANA, and just about anything he did. If you ever get a
chance catch his version of Robinson Crusoe... magnificent. And the early
Mexican comedies are very funny and totaly off the wall confusing stories.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     One of my favorite unanswered questions in all of the movies is
this: What does the Japanese client keep in his box in BELLE DE JOUR?
     A little background is in order, in case you've never seen the
film. Belle de Jour is a definitive statement on eroticism, and a
deeply personal experience.  Catherine Deneuve gives a flat yet
evocative performance as Severine Sevigny, a virginal newlywed whose
everyday life is broken up by masochistic fantasies in which she's
beaten, smeared with filth, and humiliated by a variety of men. Her
husband, Pierre, seems gentle and loving, but Severine remains in
thrall to the idea of less wholesome relationships. When Severine
probes one of her husband's friends for information, he gives her the
address of a Parisian brothel catering to businessmen. Severine dons
black hat, coat, and sunglasses, and wanders through the neighborhood,
finally working up the courage to enter the establishment, where Madame
Anais agrees to let her work as a prostitute (Severine is just the
right type, she says -- fresh and classy). Because Severine is
insistent that she must be free to leave by evening, Anais christens
her Belle de Jour.
     The remainder of the film is broken into episodes, as Severine
confronts new and different clients while living a second life at
home.  For the most part, the customers are vaguely repulsive
caricatures: the fellow who fancies himself a ladies' man, and forces
himself clumsily on her; "the Professor," a mousy gynecologist who
insists on being scolded, whipped, and trod upon. More intriguing is
the Japanese businessman who carries with him a small box. He shows the
contents to one of the other two prostitutes, who snaps "Not for me,
thanks," and turns away in a hurry. When Severine peeks inside, her
eyes grow wide and we hear a soft whirring noise.  "Don't be afraid,"
she is urged.
     When the man leaves, closing the latch once more on his little
box, Severine lies spent, stretched across the bed as the maid tidies
her room. She confides to Severine her understanding of what the
prostitutes go through; even the maid finds men like the Japanese
client somewhat frightening. Severine looks up from the bed with an
expression of exhaustion and bliss. "What do you know?" she spits.
     Director and co-screenwriter Luis Bunuel is one of the most
subversive of filmmakers.  His career began in 1939, with UN CHIEN
ANDALOU (An Andalusian Dog), a classic of Surrealism that he made with
artist Salvador Dali. The first scene featured a razor blade slicing
sideways across a woman's (actually an animal's) eyeball. That most
offensive of all images, which creates an uproar to this day whenever
it's shown to a classroom full of first-year film students, is a
challenge to viewers, renewed with each project in Bunuel's long
career. Here, he seems to be at first challenging us to identify with
Severine and her deviances, convincing us to distance ourselves from
them, and ultimately to examine our own responses to her situation.
     Bunuel is aided and abetted in this perverse venture by Sacha
Vierny, the cinematographer who worked with Alain Resnais on NIOGHT AND
FOG, HIROSHIMA, MON AMOUR, and LAST YEAR AT MARIENBAD, and who has
lately been salvation for British filmmaker Peter Greenaway, whose
films take divine advantage of Vierny's cool, stately image- making. A
good deal of BELLE DE JOUR's quiet power comes from the mannered beauty
of its compositions, as Vierny catches the light on Deneuve's face just
so.
     Eventually, Severine pays a terrible price for pursuing her
aberrant fantasies, and the film could almost be a treatise on the
importance of prudence and fidelity. It's tempting to assume that
Bunuel is blaming Severine for giving in to her own desires and
betraying her husband -- blaming Woman for the ruin of Man. Perhaps he
is, but it's maddening to try and prove it. The movie is quite clearly
Severine's story, not Pierre's. Her status as perpetrator of a misdeed
is undermined by her status as a tragic hero (which is bolstered as
Bunuel goes out of his way to develop Severine's character). What's
important isn't what Deneuve gives away in her low-key performance, but
what she doesn't show -- the essence that the audience itself has to
fill in. Typically, the director gives us something more intriguing and
revealing than a simple narrative. Bunuel plays our own judgmental
tendencies against our desire for erotic satisfaction, and leaves us in
a quandary.
     Which brings us back to one of the great questions of the
cinema.  What's in the Asian client's box is the same thing that's in
Quentin Tarantino's PULP FICTION briefcase. It's the MacGuffin from a
dozen different Hitchcock films. Judging from the look on Deneuve's
face as she recovers from its effects, it may be, like the Maltese
Falcon, the stuff dreams are made of.
     But as far as dreams go, it's the stuff that's outside the
frame that matters. Our own moral scheme, shaped by personal loves,
regrets, and fantasies, surrounds and permeates Bunuel's deliberately
ambiguous value system. Like Greta Garbo's at the climax of QUEEN
CHRISTINA, Deneuve's face is a mask, and also a receptor for our own
emotions. The final truth of this film is that we are forced to do our
own moralizing, if we feel it needs to be done -- no matter how
skillful the intrusion of Bunuel as auteur, Severine's life-changing
experience is unmistakably a function of our own.
