Title
Review for Postman Always Rings Twice, The (1946)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

POSTMAN ALWAYS RINGS TWICE, THE (director:Tay Garnett; screenwriter:
from a novel by James M. Cain/Harry Ruskin/Niven Busch; cinematographer:
Sidney Wagner; cast: Lana Turner (Cora Smith), John Garfield (Frank
Chambers), Cecil Kellaway (Nick Smith), Hume Cronyn (Arthur Keats), Leon
Ames (DA Kyle Sackett), Cameron Grant (Willie), Alan Reed (Ezra Liam
Kennedy), Audrey Totter (Madge Gorland), 1946)
Frank Chambers (John Garfield) is a drifter from San Francisco with
itchy feet, who is given a lift by the local DA Kyle Sackett (Ames). He
comes to a small California town, Twin Oaks, and spots a Man Wanted sign
by a gas-station/diner, which is run by Nick Smith (Cecil Kellaway). The
owner is very eager to have him work there, but Frank is not impressed
with the place, that is, until he gets a load of his much younger wife,
Cora Smith (Lana Turner). She is a knock-out, who appears in tight
shorts. Upon seeing him, she rolls her lipstick on the floor toward him,
this sets the sexual tone of the film. He, thusly, decides to stay as a
station attendant and handyman, working for little money but getting
free room and board.
The sexual tension between the two is there from the beginning, but
builds as the two can't avoid the attraction they have for each other.
Nick seems to be blind to what is going on; he treats her as if she was
his possession and doesn't really listen to what she is saying to him.
He is not the sort of guy that a hot girl like Cora marries, unless she
is running away from something. What she wanted was the respect that
comes from a stable marriage. Soon, she confesses to Frank that she
doesn't love her husband. The two make one attempt to run away together
by hitching, but Cora decides she doesn't want to start life again with
nothing and returns to the diner. By this time, Frank can't get Cora out
of his head.
Cora feels trapped; she can't stand being with her husband anymore, so
she comes up with a plan to kill him in the bathtub, making it look like
an accident. But the two lovers bungle the murder, and Nick is only
severely injured. The two have to contend with a suspicious DA, who
questions them, but doesn't have any evidence to charge them with
anything.
When Nick is in the hospital, the two have the best week they ever had.
But when he comes home from the hospital, Frank can't stand it and heads
for Los Angeles.
But he can't forget her, returning to the diner with Nick, who amazingly
still doesn't have a clue as to what's going on behind his back. In any
case, Nick is delighted that he found a buyer for the place at a huge
profit, and tells Cora that he is taking her to Santa Barbara, where she
can take care of his dying sister. For Cora, this sounds like a death
sentence, and she tells Frank, that he's the bright one, this time he
should come up with a plan to kill Nick.
Frank decides to take advantage that Nick likes to get drunk, as the
three ride together to Santa Barbara, planning to use the excuse that he
killed himself while driving impaired. With Cora behind the wheel, they
go over the side of the road, as she jumps out of the car while Frank
smashes Nick over the head with a bottle. But he gets stuck in the car
and can't jump, going down the hill with the car. Frank somehow
recovers, only to be confronted by the DA Sackett, who tells him that
there was a $10,000 insurance policy on Nick, as he turns the lovers
against each other. He tricks the confused Frank into getting him to
sign a statement against Cora.
Her attorney, Keats (Hume), manages to get her off, thusly winning a
$100 bet with the DA, by having her plead to a manslaughter charge and
receiving only probation. But the fireworks between the lovers is only
beginning, as both feel betrayed and unsure of what to do.
At first, Cora keeps Frank at a distance, as she takes that insurance
money to open the kind of classy diner she always wanted to. When she
goes back to Iowa for her mother's funeral, the frustrated Frank
picks-up another waitress (Totter) and romances her for a week in
Mexico. Cora finds out about this on her return and is fuming.
The only sensible thing the lovers could do, is separate from one
another, but they are trapped by their destiny and fatalistically stay
together. The magic in the film is in the chemical reaction between
Garfield and Lana, their performances are sizzling. The James Cain
hard-boiled novel, about lust, deceit, betrayal, and murder becomes a
classical noir tale of a love that has to go beyond the bounds of
reason, one that can't be resolved in normal terms. The lovers can't let
go of what has always trapped them: the insecurity of Cora, who wants
something in life that can give her dignity, something that has always
eluded her; and Frank, who is caught in his own seduction, too
weak-minded to see how warped his judgment has become. The reason the
film is so provocative, is that it hits below the belt, where the lovers
were most vulnerable. That when they finally do realize that they are in
love, it is too late for it to count anymore. They have messed up their
lives and can't escape from that fate.
John Garfield, as the condemned man, trying to make sense of what
happened to him,  narrates the story, while awaiting execution. He has
gone too far afield to evoke any sympathy for his plight. For both, the
most apparent thing that went wrong, was that their sex was tainted with
violence; that their love was filled with mistrust.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Sanford
         Considered smutty back in the days when novels could still be
"banned in Boston," "The Postman Always Rings Twice" nevertheless became
a best-seller upon publication in 1934. It was still a hot potato over a
decade later when MGM decided to film it, and considerable laundering of
the book's language and sexual content were required before "Postman"
could withstand the scrutiny of the censors.
 Despite the whitewash, the John Garfield/Lana Turner version is
far superior to the 1981 Jack Nicholson/Jessica Lange remake, which,
despite being more faithful to Cain, is a dreary slog with only Lange's
striking performance to recommend it. In contrast, Garfield and Turner
electrify; there's no nudity or on-screen sex in the picture, yet the
erotic charge between these two is incredibly potent. Moving at an
almost breathless pace, "Postman" sends wanderer Frank Chambers
(Garfield) into the orbit of heavenly body Cora Smith (Turner), the
dissatisfied wife of Nick (Cecil Kellaway), owner of the Twin Oaks Lunch
Room. Frank is hired as a jack-of-all-trades and almost instantly sets
about giving Cora a helping hand in her plans to turn the none-too-busy
restaurant into a major attraction. A major attraction also develops
between the two, and it isn't long before they're taking moonlit swims
together and cooking up plans to get rid of congenial lush Nick.
 Despite a ludicrous score that underlines each plot twist with
screaming strings, "Postman" remains an amazing piece of work, certainly
the finest film ever turned out by Tay Garnett, a workman-like director
who made scores of undistinguished pictures during his 40-year career.
Garnett gives Turner one of the most memorable entrances in film
history: She's introduced as the camera pans up from her white shoes to
her magnificent legs to her clinging white outfit, crowned by a white
turban. Platinum blonde Cora's wardrobe becomes the movie's most subtle
joke -- almost everything is white, including her beret and her bathing
suit! Turner, never the most versatile of actresses, is startlingly
alive here; as a star who was celebrated more for her figure than for
her talent, perhaps she could relate to the role of a young woman who
feels her light is being hidden underneath the bushel of a confining
marriage. When Cora becomes infuriated, as in the scene in which Frank
talks about looking for bargains and Cora hisses "you won't find
anything cheap here," that fire shoots out, and Turner's eyes could burn
holes in the screen.
 As the happy-go-lucky Frank, Garfield is equally arresting. He
understood -- as Nicholson did not -- that in order for the audience to
identify with Frank, he must come off as an everyday guy pulled by fate
into an inescapable whirlpool of lust and paranoia. James Sanford
