Title
Review for Sřndagsengler (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Seen at the 21st Portland International Film Festival
THE OTHER SIDE OF SUNDAY, was one of the Final Nominees for the
Foreign Film Oscar. And it made its first Portland appearance in this
21st Portland Film Festival, so others would get a chance to see this
interesting, not really great, but very well written film, that really
wants to make a serious point, despite its opinionated nature.
The subject matter itself, is a tired one, specially for American
standards, and it really leaves one with only one thing left... what
is it like in other places? We know through Ingmar Bergman that these
things are till strong, and that fundamentalists had a very strong
hold on their flocks for many years, in that area, and if this film is
any indication, it is extended into Norway as well.... not that we
really want to mix film and reality, but why would anyone try it,
right? One can guess that the problem still exists, although the film
points to the 50's.
The story is that of Marie, who is growing as a teenager, and is
finding herself in the midst of many pranks by other fellow students,
who pick on her as she is the priest's daughter, and quite naive. She
befriends a Mrs.  Tunheim, who is the caretaker of the church, and
they become friends, where Marie learns a few things here and
there.... like about makeup and a little different hair style, even
some earrings.
As Marie grows, her innocence begins disappearing, and she starts
doing things with a few of the other girls in the school. In one
outing, it appears that the other two friends of hers are ready for
sex, and Marie, is the odd one out. All of this, just adds to Marie's
rebellion, and she begins slowly by comfronting her father, at first
regarding her younger brother's flatulence, and later about lies. In
both cases she gets slapped hard. But one thing is clear, Marie is
beginning to win the battle, and she has not planned to give up, like
some of her friends have already done.
And in the end, Mrs. Tunheim kills herself, apparently she has waited
all her life for Marie's father, and has been a faithful mistress in
all that time, and he has not come through. His own wife's illness has
not helped things much, although it is not clear in the film if this
relationship involves anything beyond some intimacy. This is hard for
Marie, but it is the liberating force she really needed. Her father
has been a bit of a hypocrite in the pulpit, and she now has a chance
to shine on the father, and does so with a really nice of earrings,
that Johannes obviously recognizes. The daughter knows, and he knows
that she knows.
The film ends with the young Marie stepping out on her own... she has
fled the coop. Unlike most other girls, who never got over their guilt
feelings, for whatever they decided to do, and eventually became pure
Christians, Marie never quit on herself, or what he knew to be an
obvious sham, and nothing but a control game.
The best part of this film is the viciousness it attacks Christianity
with, in just a few well placed lines... the film treads quietly until
the moment for each line, and these situations are never set up in a
way that we can expect. Well, sort of. We know that they sit up at the
dinner table every night, we just don't know what is going to happen,
and that's when things tend to get out of hand. But the real loser in
all these confrontations is the Johannes, who is, in the end, noticing
that his own way has broken up what he thought was a happy
family.... one that he does not really love, it seems, although he
claims that it is his duty to do so... once again, ogligated to do
something, rather than wanting to be a part of it. This is what the
film is about, all the way through it, and us, in the audience, as
Americans, can only sit back and applaud that Marie makes it, rather
than fall by wayside like so many others have.  While, from a film
making stand point there is little that makes this film special,
still, in topic and design it is a nice one. The filming, or the
print, seem to be washed out, and there never really is any sunshine
in the film, with the exception of one moment... the ending shot. This
stark feeling permeates the whole film, and does make it a bit dreary
and heavy, and at times rather slow. But it is all from Marie's point
of view, really, which is akin to this feeling... but one need not
take it literally, I don't think.
Enjoyable in all this, is the way that the young girls are
growing. While it appears that a few of them are winning on Marie,
they really are not.  They just had the opportunity which Marie did
not. But, in the end, this opportunity does not amount to a hill of
beans, and all the girls that crossed the line, to find out what the
new world was all about, had pretty much repented and gone back to the
old world of the Christian design. Which is to say, that Marie did it
right, until she knew that she had the freedom to take such a jump,
and not worry about her parents, or anyone else. All the other girls
do not have this intelligence, and come off as dolls, by comparison.
A good film, depending too much on the dialogue to make its point. But
the chances it creates for its venom, are excellent, and really break
through well.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Danish director Lars Von Trier's highly acclaimed film BREAKING
THE WAVES explored its protagonist's conflict between her love and her
god.  Norwegian director Berit Nesheim's THE OTHER SIDE OF SUNDAY
covers similar ground, but rather than a newlywed, its heroine is a
young teenage girl facing the horrors of puberty.  BREAKING THE WAVES
is close to the top of just about every critic's best of the year list
for 1996, and, although Trier's picture is the better of the two films,
I was similarly moved by both.
     American movies are obsessed with violent subject matter, and yet,
luckily, violence rarely affects most of us personally.  On the other
hand, while we are a nation where over half attend church, characters
in our films never pray.  Given all the life threatening situations
movie characters encounter, you would expect to see them resort to
prayer fairly often, but you do not.  This film ignores violence and
focuses its attention on faith and love.
     THE OTHER SIDE OF SUNDAY is set in a small and strict town in
Norway in 1959.  Like the rebellious heroine in WELCOME TO THE
DOLLHOUSE, Maria is a young teen.  Maria is beautifully played with
charming innocence and curiosity by Marie Theisen.  Maria's body is
growing rapidly, albeit not fast enough to suit Maria, and her puberty
is proving taxing.  If she had a single wish, it would probably be
bigger breasts.  To complicate matters, her father is the local priest,
Johannes, played sternly and with precision by Bjoern Sundquist.
     As the film opens, Maria is in a church full of sincere, but
unhappy looking parishioners.  She thinks to herself about her upcoming
and long confirmation training, "By the time I get confirmed, I will
have sat here 640 hours.  On this bench."  Later she laments, "Father
loves his congregation.  We exist so the priest can have a home."  And
so it is, the priest does love his job more than his family.
     Maria prays a lot, not because she has to, but because she
believes in God -- her God.  Her God is the one of the Book of Solomon
whom she points out believed in wine, women, and song.  There is a
beautiful scene where she lies down in a lush field and recites "The
Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in
green pastures"  This pastoral Lord, who is full of life, is her God.
The conflict is that she and her father do not worship the same God.
     Arne Borsheim's handsome cinematography is quietly in evidence,
especially in the outdoor scenes.  The music by Bent Aaserud and Geir
Bohren for this gentle film is suitably lovely and moving, and many of
the pieces have religious overtones.
     Maria even gets into theological arguments with her father on
Jesus's need to go to the bathroom -- just like everyone else.  This
infuriates her father.  "Let us pray," Maria chants to herself.  "Let
us pray.  Let us pray and laugh."
     Much of the film deals with Maria's exploration of her budding
sexuality.  Her friend Birgit (Sylvia Salvesen) runs with a looser
crowd.  They are all good kids, but they hang out together to smoke a
little, drink a couple of beers, dance to the forbidden rock and roll
music, and, yes, sometimes have sex.  Maria wants desperately to be in
this group as much as she is frightened by them.
     This is a rich film and has all of the truth of life.  It is so
easy to empathize with Maria's frustrations and temptations.  A
typical, poignant scene has one of her cotton breasts falls out in
front of her friends.  This deeply wounds her self-esteem.
     Birgit is going through the same traumas.  She wants to get
confirmed, but make-up is forbidden by her church.  "I believe in God,"
she almost weeps.  "I really do.  But I want to be pretty too."
     A powerful film with simple, heartfelt performances by all.  The
script by Lasse Glomm, Berit Nesheim, and Reidun Nortvedt is full of
lines that are naturally provocative and yet ring totally true.  A gem
that, sadly, few will probably ever discover.  I saw it at the press
screening for San Jose's Cinequest film festival.  I hope an American
distributor picks it up.  It deserves the wider audience than it will
ever get.  America knows what it wants.  BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO
AMERICA sells.  This sort of cinema does not.
     THE OTHER SIDE OF SUNDAY runs 1:43.  It is in Norwegian with easy
to follow English subtitles.  It is not rated, but would get an R.
There are nudity, sexual situations, and a few profanities.  The film
would be fine for teenagers.  I recommend this picture to you highly
and give it ***.  I came close to rating it higher.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
