Title
Review for Thunderheart (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
Thunderheart
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1992, R, 118 minutes [1 hour, 58 minutes]
[thriller/mystery]
starring: Val Kilmer (Ray Levoi), Sam Shepard (Frank "Cooch" Coutelle),
Graham Greene (Walter Crow Horse),  Sheila Tousey (Maggie Eagle Bear),
produced by Robert De Niro, Jane Rosenthal, John Fusco, written by John
Fusco, directed by Michael Apted.
For all it has going for it, "Thunderheart" certainly is a disappointment.
It's a film with a serious attitude that tries, with complete logic, to mix
too many genres together to tell a relatively simple story. Thus it gets tied
up in knots and sinks under its own weight.
Val Kilmer stars as Ray Levoi, a young FBI agent who has been assigned to
investigate a murder on an Indian reservation in the badlands of South
Dakota. The homicide supposedly has ties to an Indian militia group the
Aboriginals' Resistance Movement. We also learn Ray has Native American
ancestry but does not know, nor care much about them. When he arrives at the
reservation he denounces his heritage and is prejudice against the people
living there. I predicted by the end of the film he would be completely
"enlightened" with his ancestral ways... and I was right.
Ray is teamed with Frank "Cooch" Coutelle (Shepard), and the first 20
minutes or so is routine cop-buddy/detective material. Cooch does most of the
talking which establishes the story's basic framework, and it seems as if
this will be a straight mystery film, but nothing could be further from the
truth.
Since this is a film about white government officials interacting with
Native Americans the element of prejudice becomes a central theme. When the
local sheriff, Walter Crow Horse (Greene), tries to help Ray and Cooch by
advising them to get in touch with nature, they of course ignore and mock
him. What bothered me was the manner in which this aspect was played upon -
so blatantly that we have no choice but to see the feds as "bad" and the
Native Americans and their lifestyle as innocent and "correct." The Indians'
mystical and supernatural elements are presented so seriously it's quite
distracting.
Eventually, the mystery Ray was sent to solve seems to be completely
forgotten about. The story seems to be told through a series of
misunderstandings and depicts Ray's contrast, lame, soul-searching. We also
see his constant interaction with Crow Horse and a Native American woman,
Maggie Eagle Bear (Tousey), who is the typical, sensitive, intelligent
teacher/environmentalist. Thankfully there is no cheesy romance between the
two, which is one of the few cliches the film does not exploit. 
Most Hollywood thrillers tend to use confusion as a cop-out, and although
this film is confusing at times, it doesn't placate to the viewer until the
final act. Ray suddenly figures out who the killer is, but he doesn't arrest
him even after the killer confesses! What we get is an unbelievable,
unrealistic conspiracy and the "real" killer turns out to be someone that was
under our nose the entire time (nah, that never happens!). The ending itself
plays like a cross between an episode of "Starsky And Hutch" and a bad
western. This was supposedly based on a true story, but Apted tries to blame
the whole situation on corporate greed.
I'm not sure what the point of "Thunderheart" is. It doesn't work as a
commercial thriller, mystery, nor drama because it's too over-the-top to take
seriously. It's a shame. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Awful cliche-ridden script about a
     murder case on the Oglala Sioux Indian Reservation.  Well-
     intentioned film has a good performance by Graham Greene (of
     DANCES WITH WOLVES), but don't trust the film's portrayal of
     Native American culture and don't expect to see a new plot.
     Rating: -1 (-4 to +4).
     Okay, now we all know the rules; let's go over them one more time.  On
one side we've got good guys, on the other we've got bad guys.  All the cute
people with personality on are the good guys' side.  Bad guys get to be
backed by the United States government.  Good guys get all the women and
children.  Bad guys get all the fancy guns.  Good guys get to fight for
their land, their homes, and principle.  Bad guys are fighting for money and
always get to strike first.  Nice looking woman.  Yeah, she's a good guy all
right.  Heck, bad guys are all men anyway.  She's lived here all her life.
No, wait.  She went away to school but she came back to help her people.
Yeah.  She's a doctor or a teacher or something that's got the right tone.
And she's *very politically committed*.  After all, this is the 1990s.  The
old woman who looks like a Cabbage Patch doll?  She's the doctor's mother.
Now you need someone for the audience to identify with.  He's the star, and
he's an American.  So naturally he comes in sort of on the bad guys' side.
But when he sees how nasty the bad guys are and how cute and good the good
guys are, he slowly changes sides.  He's attracted to the teacher.  Or did
we decide she was a doctor?  Anyway, through learning about the good guys by
being around them and through the magic of sexual tension, our hero slowly
figures out who the good guys are and who the bad guys are.  Now who are the
good guys going to be?  Indians?  No, we did them with BROKEN ARROW.
Vietnamese?  THE UGLY AMERICAN!  Chinese?  THE SAND PEBBLES!  Salvadorans?
UNDER FIRE.  We've done Arabs AND Jews and blacks.  It's been done with the
Irish, but then it was the British government supplying the bullets.  Maybe
it's time for Indians again.
     Oh, heck, I know director Michael Apted's heart was in the right place,
but John Fusco's script was just awful.  Twenty-five years ago this would
have been a good script but it has been used, with variations, just too
often.  And the Indians who have been handed so many injustices deserve a
better story.  The motive for the murder that brings FBI man Ray Lavo
(played by Val Kilmer) to the Oglala Sioux reservation is also one that has
been used too many times.  And for one more cheap shot, the film leaves
ambiguous if Indian magic might be working.  I thought that went out with
BILLY JACK.  Native Americans don't have any magic any more than anyone else
does.  I wish they did.  Maybe if they did, they could use it to get some
justice.  But Apted uses trick photography and staged scenes to imply you
really can see ghost dancers who disappear in a flash or to imply that a man
might have turned himself into a deer.  Indians are not great magical people
who live half in a spirit world.  They are just a group of ethnic peoples
who have been cheated and exploited and who desperately need a little bit of
justice.  Throwing them a bone by implying that their magic really breaks
the laws of physics is just not what they need.  If enough people confuse
compassion for American Indians with liking this film, Tri-Star Pictures
could make a bundle of money, almost none of which will go to help the
Indians.
     Some note should be made of Graham Greene's performance as a
reservation policeman.  His laconic performance is the most likable thing on
the screen.  And seeing his special Indian detection skills were certainly
of some interest.  Unfortunately, there is not enough of Greene to keep the
film afloat.  And for those who care, yes, there is a car chase to liven
things up.  I think that it is typical of Americans that after this whole
plot is so thoroughly worn out, they give it to the Indians.  I give
THUNDERHEART a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
