Title
Review for Beautiful People (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/40326da6dc39de82882568c20010c937?OpenDocument
 It seems like eight years after Short Cuts, everyone decided to try to
one-up Robert Altman's slow-moving masterpiece.  In the space of six
months, we have seen the releases of three films that have been Short
Cuts-esque.  First we had Magnolia.  Then we had the beautifully
photographed yet sluggish 1999 Madeleine.  Now we have Beautiful People,
a British film about Bosnia.
 Somehow packing in the stories of about a dozen major characters into a
two-hour running time, Beautiful People has the same bizarre
intertwining of characters that Magnolia and Short Cuts did.  However,
Beautiful People manages to hit harder when all is said and done.
 Beautiful People is the story of Portia (Charlotte Coleman), an upper
crust Brit ER doctor who falls in love with Pero (Edin Dzandzanovic), a
Bosnia immigrant.  Pero ended up in the hospital when he was hit by a
car, and he ends up right next to a Serb and a Croat (Frank Purti and
Dado Jehan) who have duked it out all throughout London.  Next to the
Serb and the Croat is a Welsh firebomber (Nicholas McGaughey) who is in
the ward with a burn wound.  Overseeing those three misanthropes is a
nurse (Linda Bassett).
 In the same hospital, on a different floor, there is an obstetrics
doctor ho oversees a Muslim woman who was raped in Bosnia and now wants
an abortion so that she does not give birth to a child of the enemy.
This doctor is engaged in a custody battle.  His children attend school
with the children of a BBC cameraman who is stationed in Bosnia.  The
headmaster of the school deals with a heroin-addicted son who
accidentally is airdropped into Bosnia when he falls asleep on an
airdrop package.
 Much more jumbled than the last British film to probe the world of
Bosnia (Welcome to Sarajevo), Beautiful People plays itself out so
neatly as to be of absolutely no trouble for the viewer to follow once
you are in the thick of it.  Writer-director Jasmin Dizdar, himself a
Bosnia refugee, manages to add a personal touch to the story that
Welcome to Sarajevo was missing.
 Unlike Short Cuts or Magnolia, Beautiful People never delivers a
monologue.  Instead, it sometimes ends up being peachy and drives its
point home like a shot through the heart.  Which, when dealing with
Bosnia, might not exactly be a bad idea.
Written and Directed by Jasmin Dizdar
Starring Charlotte Coleman, Charles Kay, Rosalind Ayres, Roger Sloman,
Julian Firth, Heather Tobias, Danny Nussbam, Siobhan Redmond, Gilbert
Martin, Steve Sweeney, Linda Bassett, Nicholas Farrell, Frank Purti,
Dado Jehan, Edin Dzandzanovic, Walentine McGuaghey, Radoslav Youroukov,
and Nicholas McGaughey
http://www.beautifulpeoplethefilm.com/
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE (director/writer: Jasmin Dizdar; cinematographer: Barry
Ackroyd; editor: Justin Krish; cast: Charlotte Coleman (Portia
Thornton), Charles Kay (George Thornton), Rosalind Ayres (Nora
Thornton), Roger Sloman (Roger Midge), Heather Tobias (Felicity Midge),
Danny Nussbaum (Griffin Midge), Siobhan Redmond (Kate Higgins), Gilbert
Martin (Jerry Higgins), Steve Sweeney (Jim), Linda Bassett (Nurse),
Nicholas Farrell (Dr. Mouldy), Edin Dzandzanovic (Pero), Dado Jehan
(Serb), Faruk Prutti (Croat), Nicholas McGaughey (Welch Nationalist
Arsonist), 1999-UK)
A farcical political drama, done in the manner of a TV spoof. The
Bosnian born and now naturalized British subject, writer/director Jasmin
Dizdar, aims at taking the Bosnian war into London and examining ethnic
hatred, the darkness of reality, and Britain's false sense of idealism.
An ensemble cast carries off the comedy by making use of irony, as it
shows in a clichéd manner how the British are stand-offish and all the
immigrants are earthy people. What it fails to do is tell a coherent
story, as everything about this exaggerated tale is hopelessly lost in a
sea of silliness.
The main thrust of the film is about the diverse immigrants from the
former Yugoslavia bringing their old battles to England and then
ingratiating themselves into the English system to save England from
becoming too stale and regal. An ensemble cast, which includes an
obstetrician who is depressed, in the middle of a raging battle with his
estranged wife for control of his spoiled children, a Bosnian refugee
couple the physician becomes the guardian angel to, as he talks the
couple into not killing their new born daughter (the wife was raped by
enemy soldiers), a heroin addicted youth living at home, with his
stereotyped cartoonish parents, who suddenly changes his wasteful life
when he is going to a soccer game in Rotterdam and acting like a
hooligan but ends up nodding out in the airport baggage bin and gets
transported to Bosnia, where he becomes a hero and the guardian of a
blind child, a Scottish BBC journalist wracked with guilt for being a
survivor of the war, comes down with the "Bosnian thing," as he wishes
to take the place of the victim he saw lose a leg and wants a British
doctor to saw off his leg; and, finally, a rebellious young lady doctor,
who flaunts her Bosnian immigrant boyfriend in the faces of her stuffy,
conservative, upper-class family and marries him, even though he can't
speak English and she knows nothing about him.
It is also about the need for the Bosnian immigrant to let go of his
past and reinvent himself when living in England. The ones who can't,
will only be reliving the war they left behind them. This is shown as a
Serb and a Croat from the same village in Bosnia, who when they spot
each other on a London bus, get into a fist fight. After beating each
other up, they wind up in the same hospital ward and continue their
fight till death. There is also a nationalist from Wales in the same
ward, who says he can't stand the English because they tried to steal
his language away from Wales and that no one from Wales could afford to
buy a home there, because only the British can afford to. The nurse on
the ward tells the Serb and the Croat "You have the same size slippers.
Isn't that extraordinary?" There was an attempt to show that besides
speaking the same language and looking alike, the two feuding ethnic
groups have a lot in common.
This film, commissioned by the British Film Institute, and made for a
budget of About 1.8 million dollars and shot in 35 days, is rife with
rapid cuts and scenes that seem disjointed and unconnected, it just
seems like an incomplete movie, and one that rubbed me the wrong way
with its pat messages. But, I must say, it did win the Prix Un Certain
Regard for Best Film at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
A Serb and Croat scuffle on a London bus. Britain's gritty melting pot is in
need of a pilot light; writer/director and Bosnian expatriate Jazmin Dizdar
strikes that match from behind a camera.
A young punker follows in the footsteps of hardened junkies, while his
caricature Archie & Edith parents remain out of touch. A physician recently
separated from his wife attempts to hold onto his kids and his sanity, while
a young couple contemplate aborting a child conceived in rape. The black
sheep of British elite falls for an illegal refuge. An ambitious reporter
flies to Bosnia determined to make sure Brits "give a shat about what's
going on out there."
Chunky story lines in this gravy begin to mix as the filmmakers increase the
heat and stir. The overworked doctor stops at the reporter's wife's home.
Her aristocratic artistry is an excellent contrast to his crushing
responsibilities. The Serb and Croat end up in adjacent hospital beds
continuing their spats like two kindergartners while the nurse on duty
appropriately scolds their inappropriate behavior. The most intriguing
blend, an intoxicated punkster crawls onto a convenient crate at the airport
for a snooze. Which just happens to land him smack in the middle of a
Bosnian war zone. Dazed and confused, he awakens pulling a disposable razor
from the supply pack upon which he'd just parachuted to the ground. His is
the most endearing experience. Thick in the heartwarming department, but not
an easy ride by any means. A fine story line with a flavor that anchors the
film.
Plot lines are patchworked nicely through the climax as in "Magnolia," but
run a pinch long and just a little hokey afterward. Save for a theatric
political assistant, all performances work well. A piano score brightly
spices the mainstay creating a filling entrée. And in addition to its other
perspective-gaining merits, the film offers Americans an empathetic glimpse
of the country we revolted against all those years ago.
Beautiful People. Copyright Š 1998.
Starring Charlotte Coleman, Charles Kay, Rosalind Ayres, Roger Sloman,
Heather Tobias, Danny Nussbaum, Siobhan Redmond, Gilbert Martin, Edin
Dzandzanovic, Steve Sweeney, Linda Bassett, Nicholas Farrell.
Written and Directed by Jazmin Dizdar.
Produced by Ben Woolford at Tall/stories & Beautiful Stories. A Trimark
presentation.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
When culture is used as a verb, one definition given
by Webster's Dictionary is `to cultivate'. A few of
their definitions of cultivate are `to promote the
growth of,' `to nurture,' `to form and refine, and to
`make friends with'. Jasmin Dizdar's `Beautiful
People' is a film about culture, yet few of its
characters are nurturing or friendly.
To establish its tone, the film begins with a violent
fight between two strangers on a London bus. One man
is a Croat; the other is a Serb. The two don't even
need to speak in order to know that they are enemies.
Hate is so deeply ingrained in their minds that words
could do little to help. `Beautiful People' is a
bittersweet, ironic look at the lives of a
cross-section of Londoners that can only be redeemed
by their ability to turn hate into love.
For his first film, Dizdar weaves about five different
stories into his tale of love, tolerance and family.
We meet characters of all races from all different
classes of society. A couple stories, in particular,
stand out. One involves a doctor (Nicholas Farrell)
who copes with his recent marital separation by
befriending a young Balkan couple. The other involves
a young heroin addict who unexpectedly finds himself
in the midst of a war zone, and ends up a hero.
Like most first films, `Beautiful People', which won
Best Picture at the Cannes Film Festival, is a bit
rough around the edges. Not all the stories are
particularly involving, and the odd blend of pathos
and humor is often misguided. But it is a nod to
Jazmin Dizdar's maturity that all the stories feel
human. Unlike most ensemble films, `Beautiful People'
doesn't use a superficial plot thread to tie the
stories together. Instead, the characters are linked
by their similar feelings and actions.
Over the past few years, a few important films (most
notably Emir Kusturica's `Underground') have put their
own spin on the turmoil in the Balkan region.
`Beautiful People' is the first to explore life after
survival, where many realize that cultural diffusion
can be a war in its own right.
With this film, Jasmin Dizdar has taken a bold,
ambitious look at prejudice in a cultural melting pot.
However, his greatest achievement is shining all his
characters in a sympathetic light, regardless of their
race or gender. His all-inclusive approach to the
characters is the real lesson to be learned from the
experience.
The struggle of this group of people is one that
millions of immigrants go through every day, on all
continents. But in Dizdar's eyes, whether they be
black, white, green or red, they're all beautiful.
That's cultivation in a nutshell.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Chaos. It's the name of the baby in the ironically named BEAUTIFUL
PEOPLE by first-time writer/director Jasmin Dizdar, but CHAOS would have
been a more appropriate name for this unappetizing mess of a movie.
Not 15 minutes into the film and we've already been introduced to dozens
and dozens of characters. It's like going to a cocktail party and being
shown around by a hostess on roller skates. Not just any cocktail party,
but a multicultural one in which almost everyone is angry and unhappy
and in which racism runs rampant. But thanks to the choppy editing and
dizzying handheld camerawork -- is purposely shaking the camera really
necessary to attempt cinematic pseudo-realism? -- the movie is like an
incoherent story told by an inebriated guest.
Get your checklist ready because most of society's ills will make brief
guest appearances. From heroin addiction to gang rape, they're all
there. But they fly by with such velocity that you'll have trouble
pondering anything for long, although you will get the director's point
about life being hard and grim. He makes lots of other points too. Keep
that checklist handy. Messages zip by like Super Bowl commercials.
One reporter for the BBC suffers from "Bosnia Syndrome." This affliction
means that he has so identified with the victims of the war that he lies
on the train track in order that his leg can be severed too.
The movie plays fast and loose with plausibility in the hopes of getting
some cheap laughs. After two men pulverize each other on a bus, they are
taken away and put in the same hospital ward, with adjoining beds no
less. This means that they can continue their private warfare in the
hospital, pulling out each other's tubes and punching each other. Never
are the police called to put a stop to this mayhem.
In perhaps the hardest scene to buy in the movie, an ex-Bosnian soldier
marries into a wealthy British family in which the father is an MP. At
the lavish wedding, the Bosnian soldier's post-wedding speech has the
crowd aghast as he tells them about his killing women and children. The
filmmaker would appear to have us believe that it is a cultural thing
and that the soldier doesn't realize how inappropriate his speech is.
Dizdar tries without much luck to wrap up his movie in the end by tying
things together. It's a tedious film that isn't saved by its moral
ambitions. Like a rambling preacher, Dizdar has a lot on his mind, but
his lack of focus and his inability to create fully developed characters
means that his good intentions never amount to anything. Sometimes less
really is more.
BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE runs 1:47. It is rated R for violence including graphic
war violence, drug usage and language. The film would be acceptable for
older high school students.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
A couple of people walked out, never to return, about 20 minutes into
this British import, and I can understand their impatience.  Jasmin
Dizdar's is packed with a number of characters and plotlines and takes
its sweet time setting them all up that the opening stages cannot help
but seem like a complete jumble.  But to quote the trailer for
_Magnolia_--to which this somewhat similar film has been compared--"this
will all make sense in the end."  _Beautiful_People_ is cut from the same
Altman-esque cloth as Paul Thomas Anderson's film, following different
lives as they criss-cross over a stretch of days in London.
One key difference is that these lives mostly, in some way, end up
touching upon a central issue: the unrest in Bosnia.  Two men who knew
each other in the old country--one a Serb (Dado Jehan), the other a Croat
(Faruk Pruti)--meet by chance on a bus and then proceed to beat the
living daylights out of each other, landing themselves in the hospital. 
There, Portia (Charlotte Coleman), a med student borne of a rich English
family, falls for a fresh Bosnian immigrant named Pero (Edin
Dzanzanovic), whom she treated during rounds.  The mishap that brought
him there was related by association to the sad and angry Dr. Mouldy
(Nicholas Farrell), whose wife has just left him; among his patients is
one Bosnian refugee (Walentine Giorgiewa) bearing a war enemy's child. 
Dr. Mouldy lives next door to a strict teacher (Roger Sloman), whose son
Griffin (Danny Nussbaum) hangs with a drug-addled crowd.  Among Dr.
Mouldy's son's schoolmates is the daughter of a BBC news reporter
(Gilbert Martin) whose latest location assignment is in... Bosnia.
Despite the serious issue that serves as the film's connective tissue,
_Beautiful_People_ is not overwhelmingly grim.  There are moments of
sadness and shocking brutality, but there are just as many more comic
moments, in particular Griffin's hilariously unpredictable yet strangely
moving thread.  The film is also more about Bosnia: it's about the
immigrant experience in general; it's about tolerance; it's about making
a difference; it's about learning to make the best of what one has. 
_Beautiful_People_ is indeed a beautiful film, one that is
thought-provoking and moving while always remaining entertaining.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Trimark Pictures
 Director: Jasmin Dizdar
 Writer: Jasmin Dizdar
 Cast: Charlotte Coleman, Charles Kay, Rosalind Ayres,
Roger Sloman, Julian Firth, Heather, Tobias, Danny
Nussbaum, Siobhan Redmond, Gilbert Martin, Steve
Sweeney, Linda Bassett, Nicholas Farrell, Faruk Pruti, Dado
Jehan, Edin Dzandzanovic
   Though good national fences make good neighbors, there's
an adage that if you get to know the people on the other side
of the wall, you will inevitably like them.  Ironically the same
is not always true of people who share the same society and
become close friends, even mates.  In Jasmin Dizdar's
consistently surprising film "Beautiful People," winner of the
Prix Un Certain Regard for Best Film at the 1999 Cannes
Festival, four families are put under the director's microscope
with startling repercussions.  Two individuals from the same
society have been married with children but are separating
and hostile, while other folks from disparate cultures find
understanding and compassion for one another and become
good friends and lovers despite obstacles put in their paths
by our global order.
   "Beautiful People" is about the impact of Bosnian refugees
on London residents into whose civilization they're attempting
to fuse.  As you might expect, the English of a mature age
come of as snobbish, even intolerant, while their Bosnian
expatriates are down-to-earth, ranging from the starkly crude
to the most intelligently open-minded.  All of Dizdar's
characters vary from the whimsical to the downright bizarre--
which under this director's hand makes "Beautiful People"
one of the best-realized comedies of the past year.
   The opening scene will probably become the audience
favorite, a harbinger of the breathless pace that commands
the movie.  Two traditional Bosnian enemies, a Serb (Dado
Jehan) and a Croat (Faruk Prutti) who lived near each other
in their home country, bump into each other in London, revive
their animosity in a knock-down, drag-out fight that begins on
a London bus ("This is London transport--we don't do that
here," commands the driver), and continue their tussle into
the streets.  Geography knows no armistice--the Bosnians
bring their culture clash into a foreign city that looks upon
them with bewilderment and horror.  The two will end up in a
hospital room as bedmates, leading to some of the brightest
slapstick hilarity of the story.
   Other situations mirror this strife, bringing the runaway
Bosnians into the families of their hosts in Britain and in one
case carrying the confrontations back to Bosnia.  In the
circumstance that best shows the distinctions between the
English and their guests, a medical intern, Portia Thornton
(Charlotte Coleman) pursues an affair with a Bosnian patient
who is an unemployed former basketball player, Pero (Edin
Dzandzanovic), the latter the most eager to assimilate into his
new surroundings.  In one effective scene, the couple have
dinner at the intern's home, displaying a wide array of
patronizing behavior by her stiff-upper-lip family.  "I for one
am opposed to ethnic cleansing," one family member assures
the young man, as though he were making the most open-
minded statement yet heard on the planet. 
   In depicting the lifestyle of a distinctly scruffy set of
Londoners, Dizdar hones in on a stoner, Griffin (Danny
Nussbaum), whose friends have skinhead views toward the
refugees until they experience the poignancy of a small, blind
child who has been brought to their country.  Griffin,
perpetually chided by his respectable dad Roger (Roger
Soloman) and ditzy mother, Felicity (Heather Tobias), falls
under a blanket in a drug-induced stupor at the airport, is
transported with some UN food supplies to Bosnian,
parachuted into the war-torn landscape where he is shot at,
and ends up an unlikely hero by using his heroin to save an
unfortunate patient pain while the Bosnian is having his leg
amputated.  But perhaps the most riotous riff of all involves a
BBC reporter on the scene, Jerry Higgins (Gilbert Martin),
who identifies so strongly with the victim of gangrene that he
becomes afflicted with "Bosnian syndrome" and demands to
have his own healthy leg amputated.
   While we're tempted to find irony in the title "Beautiful
People" since, after all, most are outwardly shaggy, some
stoners and others mortal enemies, we're obliged to conclude
that one and all--Brits and Bosnians alike and by extension all
of us who populate this medium-sized planet--can indeed be
wonderful.  The film is a poignant, boisterous, and expertly
directed burlesque--an almost surreal version of Mike Nichols'
"Catch 22." 
Rated R.  Running Time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
