Title
Review for Crow: Salvation, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
Nothing like low expectations to enhance your movie-going pleasure.  Invited to
a special theatrical screening of Bharat Nalluri's THE CROW: SALVATION, recently
released on tape and DVD, I wasn't particularly looking forward to it.  Having
avoided previous movies based on James O'Barr's "Crow" comic book series, I was
pleasantly surprised with THE CROW: SALVATION.  Although I wouldn't quite go so
far as to recommend it, the movie does have a terrific look and some intriguing,
albeit overly dramatic, acting.  The script is so over the top that it would
probably work better for an animated movie than a live-action production.  Think
of the film as a cross between DARK CITY and a Charles Bronson revenge
thriller.
Alex Corvis (Eric Mabius) is a quiet hero who slaughters the bad guys in the
most dramatic and painfully violent ways possible.  As the story opens, he is
about to be executed for allegedly killing his girlfriend.  After being
electrocuted, but before completely dying, he goes forth into the world in order
to seek vengeance.  A zombie, neither dead nor alive, he proceeds to murder the
dozen or so people involved in setting him up.  A crow accompanies him on his
journey among the living.  Also along for the ride is Kirsten Dunst as the
sister of Alex's girlfriend.  Although Mabius gets maximum mileage out of his
quiet intensity, Dunst has trouble figuring out her character's purpose in the
story.  So far over the top that his performance is a real hoot, Fred Ward plays
a corrupt police captain with a badge the size of a large pancake.
Shot impressively by Carolyn Chen, the movie has a striking look of dark blues
shrouded in fog.  The red of the ever-present blood serves as the main contrast
to the film's bluish tint.  If you rent the movie and you find the story a bit
too ludicrous, you can always enjoy the visuals.
THE CROW: SALVATION runs 1:42.  It is rated R for pervasive strong violence and
for sexual content and language.  It would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I really liked the original CROW film. Many elements of the film worked for
me, especially the lead role inhabited by Brandon Lee, the fresh approach to
the "death avenger" theme, the fantastic soundtrack, the artful direction,
the entire look and feel of the movie, and whether I liked it or not, the
irony and sadness connected to the film's actual production. The follow-up
to the original film sucked because its lead was weak and carried a heavy
and distracting accent, the plot was lame and the ending...just
embarrassing. This third installment is now being paraded around in hopes of
finding a proper distribution outlet. Is it any good? Well, it's definitely
better than the second one... :)
PLOT:
Despite his continuous pleas of innocence, a 21-year old man gets the
electric chair after he is found guilty of murdering his girlfriend. Once
electrocuted, the dead man returns to the world as a "ghost" (for lack of a
better word) and attempts to piece together the real story behind the brutal
slaying of his love, and avenge both of their deaths.
CRITIQUE:
A great looking picture which did sort of remind me of the "feel" from the
original, but without any of its edge, passion or freshness. All I kept
thinking as I watched this movie was "haven't I seen this exact same movie
before?!?". There wasn't really anything new here. Same ol'- same ol' story.
Guy and his lover die...he wants to extract revenge on the bad guys...he
comes back from the dead and starts kicking ass. The only problem in a
situation like that is that since you already know just about everything
that is about to happen, you basically just sit there connecting the dots
without much invested in the story. In fact, the film's only real salvation
could have been in its key characters or interactions, but despite Mabius
putting forth a valiant effort, the rest of the cast, and overly poetic
dialogue, just plain sucked. In fact, many people in our audience (granted
it was a midnight premiere and a few people were...uhmm, let's just say "a
little tipsy") were cracking up during many of this film's "supposed" tender
moments of sincerity (and that's WITH both O'Barr and Mabius in the audience
with us).
I too found much of it to be a little overly melodramatic. Then again, this
is what we have pretty much come to expect from the CROW films, since the
dude is essentially heartbroken and poetic, but in this film, the premise
just didn't seem to fly anymore. The film itself was definitely a little
more entertaining that the second installment with some pretty slick gory
death scenes, a loud but cool soundtrack, and a lead who doesn't throw you
off with a cheesy accent. In fact, I credit Mabius for pulling off a decent
outing despite my initial skepticism (A teen Crow? Never!). Unfortunately,
you don't really care about ANY of the characters, especially the bad guys
or the family left behind, so all you're basically left with is a low-rent
CROW retread with a decent lead, a nice look, but plenty of bad dialogue,
zero originality or depth.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Nothing like low expectations to enhance your movie-going pleasure.  
Invited to a special theatrical screening of Bharat Nalluri's THE CROW: 
SALVATION, recently released on tape and DVD, I wasn't particularly 
looking forward to it.  Having avoided previous movies based on James 
O'Barr's "Crow" comic book series, I was pleasantly surprised with THE 
CROW: SALVATION.  Although I wouldn't quite go so far as to recommend 
it, the movie does have a terrific look and some intriguing, albeit 
overly dramatic, acting.  The script is so over the top that it would 
probably work better for an animated movie than a live-action 
production.  Think of the film as a cross between DARK CITY and a 
Charles Bronson revenge thriller.
Alex Corvis (Eric Mabius) is a quiet hero who slaughters the bad guys in 
the most dramatic and painfully violent ways possible.  As the story 
opens, he is about to be executed for allegedly killing his girlfriend.  
After being electrocuted, but before completely dying, he goes forth 
into the world in order to seek vengeance.  A zombie, neither dead nor 
alive, he proceeds to murder the dozen or so people involved in setting 
him up.  A crow accompanies him on his journey among the living.  Also 
along for the ride is Kirsten Dunst as the sister of Alex's girlfriend.  
Although Mabius gets maximum mileage out of his quiet intensity, Dunst 
has trouble figuring out her character's purpose in the story.  So far 
over the top that his performance is a real hoot, Fred Ward plays a 
corrupt police captain with a badge the size of a large pancake.
Shot impressively by Carolyn Chen, the movie has a striking look of dark 
blues shrouded in fog.  The red of the ever-present blood serves as the 
main contrast to the film's bluish tint.  If you rent the movie and you 
find the story a bit too ludicrous, you can always enjoy the visuals.
THE CROW: SALVATION runs 1:42.  It is rated R for pervasive strong 
violence and for sexual content and language.  It would be acceptable 
for older teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
