Title
Review for Riding the Rails (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I ain't got a dime," says the opening song.  "I don't what to
do."  It is the time of the Great Depression and over a quarter of a
million teenagers are riding the rails.  Even with movies such as
William A. Wellman's WILD BOYS OF THE ROAD (1933) trying to scare them,
the teenagers are leaving home in larger and larger numbers to hop a
freight to anywhere.  Some kids go for economic reasons and others
purely for adventure.  The show even has one man, now 72, who still
spends time every year riding the rails.  He enjoys it so much he never
wants to give it up.
     RIDING THE RAILS is a polished and moving feature length
documentary by Michael Uys and Lexy Lovell.  I saw it at San Jose's
Cinequest film festival, and it is so powerful that I will never forget
it.  The documentary's strength comes from the interviews with the now
grownup teenagers from that era.  These talking heads are black and
white, male and female.  Their tales are full of poignancy and
excitement.  I found myself feeling sorry for them and envious at the
same time.
     One man describes how his father came home one day and cried for
the first time in his life.  Sobbing he told his family simply, "I lost
my job."  The boy got depressed and left home the next day.
     Interspersed with the interviews in color are old black and white
films of the Depression.  Taken together, they may move you to tears
and at the same time you may be smitten by the desire for such an
adventure yourself.  Although there are numerous dangers hopping
freights from hunger to injury to jail, the camaraderie of the period
was electric.  One kid, the son of a wealthy doctor, left home for the
exhilaration of the experience.
     "It was a combination of my unhappiness at home with my desire to
roam that led to my hoboing," explains one of the men.  Or as another
one put it, "It's dangerous, that's why it's fun."
     The film is filled with songs from the Depression, most of which
I had never heard and all of which I found touching.  Still, it is the
words that have the most impact.  As one says, "It was a time when a
man could get killed for the shoes he wore, no matter what shape they
were in."
     RIDING THE RAILS runs 1:11.  It is not rated but would be PG for
the themes.  It would be fine for any kid interested.  I recommend the
film to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Louis Proyect
When Michael Uys and Lexy Lovell decided to make a documentary about
teenagers who rode the rails during the Great Depression, they placed
an ad in "Modern Maturity", the magazine of the American Association
of Retired People (AARP). To their astonishment, they received 3,000
moving and detailed replies. The film focuses on a group of nine men
and one woman who reminisce about their experience as hobos. Their
interviews are interspersed with archival footage from the 1930s and
they add up to a revealing portrait of how young people coped with the
ravages of unemployment.
"Riding the Rails" is not just about the hardships of riding in
boxcars, panhandling or living in shanty-towns. It is also about the
romance of the railroads. For many young people, including some from
affluent families, freight trains were an escape from the routines and
banality of small-town life. One interviewee says that "We thought it
was the magic carpet . . . romance, the click of the rails." This
fascination with trains persisted into the 1940s and 50s. Jack Kerouac
often hopped on freight trains when he wasn't tooling across Route 66
in his Hudson. He was fascinated with hobo life and saw this as an
expression of freedom and individuality. So do the interviewees in
"Riding the Rail" who are about as endearing a group of 70 and 80 year
olds that I have encountered in a film since Julia Reichert's 1983
documentary "Seeing Red." It is no coincidence that nearly all of the
former hobos eventually became involved with radical or trade union
politics.
For most of the interviewees, it was poverty that drove them to ride
the rails. They often got on a train headed in the direction where
they thought work was plentiful. They had the same sort of illusions
as the Okies in Steinbeck's "Grapes of Wrath." They soon discovered
that there were no jobs. When they got off a boxcar, they would be met
at the outskirts of a town by a sheriff who'd tell them, "We don't
have work for grown men with families. How do you expect us to find a
job for you?" Instead, they would often survive in hobo camps on the
outskirts of where they would eat every two or three days. They would
make forays into town and panhandle for nickels and dimes. The sight
of teen-aged beggars scandalized public opinion and was a primary
factor in the creation of the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which
put tens of thousands of impoverished adolescents to work. It is a
sign of the times that the Clinton administration lacks the political
will to push for these sorts of programs.
The documentary includes scenes from William Wellman's "Wild Boys of
the Open Road," a 1933 feature that is being shown with "Riding the
Rails" in New York City's Cinema Village. "Wild Boys of the Open Road"
is a remarkable film. It depicts the hobo life of two teenage boys and
one girl in shockingly unsentimental terms. One of the boys loses a
leg in a rail yard accident and the girl is raped by a railroad bull
(cop). This is not John Ford's "Grapes of Wrath", with its burnished,
sentimental tableaus of life on the open road. It is a film that has
more in common with Bunuel's "El Grito" or Hector Babenco's "Pixote",
films that depict the suffering of poor kids on the streets of Mexico
and Brazil in the most unflinching manner. Perhaps the only
explanation for the frankness of "Wild Boys of the Open Road" is that
it was made before any of the New Deal major social programs had been
implemented, including the CCC. Wellman must have been appalled by the
misery of America's children and made a movie without illusions. It is
too bad that so few films come out of Hollywood that have the same
courage to depict the suffering of our own children today.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) René Champion, a professor of anthropology at the University
of Denver, was abused as a child. But that wasn't the only reason he ran
away from home -- it also had something to do with the irresistible lure of
the horizon. 
Champion is one of hundreds of thousands of teenagers who ran away during
the Great Depression. They became hobos and transients, riding freight
trains around the country in search of work and adventure. Documentary
filmmakers Michael Uys and Lexy Lovell sought these people out to tell their
stories, and out of 3,000 potential subjects, they found 10 amiable,
talkative people to speak on camera in "Riding the Rails." 
These people's stories offer great insight into the everyday lives of hobos;
they put a personal face on the transient life and make the Great Depression
seem less abstract to younger generations. Each person is bright and
articulate, and each has an engaging story to tell. 
One ran away from home for the sheer adventure of it, even though his family
was well off. Still another said his family told him he had to leave because
they couldn't afford him staying at home. One woman ran away after her
father refused to believe she would follow through on her threat to leave. 
Transience was a way to fight the economic hardship of the times. It was a
way of being pro-active in a near-hopeless situation. If you could get a cot
and a meal at a shelter, you might only be allowed to stay for a night or
two. But you could always move on to the next town. 
For those who were looking for work, transience gave them options. They
could follow the harvests -- picking strawberries in one place, apples in
another, and so on -- until the last harvest of the fall. In this fashion,
they could earn enough money to survive the winter. 
For those who just wanted to get away from home, it was a once-in-a-lifetime
adventure. 
Of the 10 profiled in "Riding the Rails," Guitar Whitey is the only one who
still rides the rails. He's retired, but he spends his summers traveling the
country by freight. He took one of the filmmakers with him on one trip,
which he describes as the last free red-blooded adventure: It's illegal,
dirty, cold and fun, and he says he plans to keep doing it until he can no
longer climb on a boxcar. 
This film's great strength is that the 10 subjects do most of the
storytelling. Uys and Lovell have structured the film by breaking the
interviews into recognizable segments, but they let their subjects tell
their stories in their own way. And it's these stories that make the film
worth seeing. 
Only a few minor points detract from the movie. The film uses archival
footage -- a necessity in this type of documentary -- but the picture and
narration aren't always a close match. I kept looking for the narrator's
face in the crowd, but I eventually realized that the footage was only meant
to be a generalized representation of the narrator's experience and not a
specific one. It's a conventional technique, but in an era when documentary
film has been pushing its formal and conceptual boundaries, even the use of
conventional techniques should probably be examined. More daring, but for
some reason not very effective, is the use of new black and white video
footage to ease the transition between the historical. 
"Riding the Rails" tells a story we've all heard before, but it puts a human
face on that story. It's a well-made documentary with some very interesting
people, and at only 72 minutes long, it should be easy to work into your
schedule. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
