Title
Review for Green Mile, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
33

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Frank Darabont's follow-up to his Oscar-nominated 1994 film The
Shawshank Redemption will likely elicit comparisons to that much-loved
work.  Both films were adapted from the works of Stephen King and both
are set in the correctional systems of several decades ago.  While
Shawshank concentrated on the lives of two prisoners, The Green Mile's
focus is on the guards.  Mile is a riveting, well-paced, magical gift
full of delicious twists and turns.  It's long (180 minutes), but films
that have to contend with Southern accents generally run about 12%
longer than normal.
Tom Hanks (You've Got Mail) stars as Paul Edgecomb, a Depression-era
Death Row prison guard in Cold Mountain Louisiana State Penitentiary's E
block, which is also known as "the Green Mile" because of the
lime-colored paint job.  Edgecomb genuinely cares about his prisoners,
despite having to supervise their executions via the electric chair
(nickname: Ol' Sparky) with his fellow guards, played by David Morse
(Crazy in Alabama), Barry Pepper (Saving Private Ryan) and Doug
Hutchison (Batman & Robin), with the latter serving as the film's
antagonist, the spoiled nephew of the Governor's wife.
Mile's structure (and running time) resembles that of Titanic, beginning
and ending in the present day with an elderly Edgecomb (Dabbs Greer,
Picket Fences) and flashing back to 1935 for the majority of the film. 
Edgecomb tells the story of one particular inmate that changed his life
forever.  The prisoner, John Coffey (Michael Duncan, Bear from
Armageddon), is a giant black man convicted of raping and murdering two
white girls.  Coffey was found with the two victims in his arms, their
blonde hair matted with blood, and, as a result, Edgecomb and crew
expect the worst from this prisoner.  Instead, they find Coffey to be
more of a lamb than a lion, referring to the guards as "Boss" and asking
if they can keep a light on at night because he's afraid of the dark. 
While Coffey never proclaims his innocence, Edgecomb somehow detects it
I know what you're thinking - another one of these prison films where
someone has been wrongly convicted, with the entire focus of the picture
centering on them (or a second party) proving their innocence in the
final reel.  Every prison movie is like this (this year alone we've had
Instinct, True Crime and Double Jeopardy), which is probably why HBO's
OZ, a realistic prison drama with diabolically guilty characters, is
such a hit.  Plus, Coffey is in the last cell, making it the furthest
away from Ol' Sparky, so you know that eventually he'll have to take the
long walk.  It's just common sense.
But then, something happens.  Seventy minutes in, you realize Mile is
not your typical prison flick.  If you don't know the story, the
development in the story at this point of the film is a jaw-dropping
shocker.  Even after momentarily being taken aback, it still seems
painfully obvious where the rest of the film is going, but Mile isn't
through surprising yet.  The second-to-last-reel is absolutely
spellbinding.
Returning to Darabont's crew are Shawshank nominees Thomas Newman
(score), Richard Francis-Bruce (editing) and Robert J. Litt (sound), but
missing is cinematographer Roger Deakins (replaced by Episode One's
David Tattersall).  As a result, Mile doesn't look anywhere near as keen
as Shawshank's muted blues and grays.  Darabont's direction is terrific,
creating a leisurely pace yet somehow not letting the story drag.  He
uses a clip of Top Hat's Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers "Dancing Cheek
to Cheek" as emotional bookends to Edgecomb's flashback and peppers the
story with adequate humor, courtesy of a prison mouse named Mr. Jingles.
I was starting to lose faith in Tom Hanks as an actor, feeling that his
early comedy work easily outdistanced his mediocre dramas.  I'll take
his performances in A League of Their Own, Big and Punchline over his
over-praised Philadelphia ("Ooh, I can cry with fake lesions stuck to my
face"), Apollo 13 ("Ooh, I can look worried") and Saving Private Ryan
("Ooh, I can make my hand shake").  His directorial effort, That Thing
You Do!, was a mess, and don't even get me started on Mail, where he
phoned in his performance from the other side of the moon.  Hanks seemed
more interested in lending either his talent to develop pet projects,
like From the Earth to the Moon and Return With Honor, or his voice to
Toy Story's Woody.
But here, Hanks is a genuine pleasure to watch.  His Edgecomb is
pleasingly pudgy, has a decent Southern drawl and even gets to endure a
painful bladder infection.  He seems to be a lock for his fifth Academy
Award nomination and, since he has a black co-star, his odds of winning
seem pretty good.  Remember, he won for Forrest Gump (with Mykelti
Williamson) and Philadelphia (with Denzel Washington) while his
lily-white films (Apollo 13, Big and Ryan) sent him home empty-handed on
Oscar night.
And it's not just Hanks' performance that makes Mile a winner -
everybody is outstanding, from the usually reliable Morse and James
Cromwell (The Bachelor) to the usually annoying Michael Jeter (Jakob the
Liar) and Sam Rockwell (Safe Men).  Bonnie Hunt (Random Hearts) is, at
first, unrecognizable as Edgecomb's wife, beautifully portraying a
weathered, middle-aged woman in a rare non-comedic role.  But Duncan
steals the show as the scarred, hulking kitten with a voice that seems
several octaves lower than Barry White.  He's not extraordinarily tall
in real life, but Darabont skillfully shoots the actor to make him
appear about nine feet tall.  A fitting height for such a lofty film.
3:00 - R for violence (including several grisly electrocutions), adult
language and some sex-related material

Author
Nick Lyons
"The Green Mile" (which is based on the Stephen King series titled Green Mile)
is one of those films that you get so involved with, that you find yourself
releasing emotions, as if you were right there with Tom Hanks and company. It's
times like these that you know the film is a powerful experience.
   The story basically has 2 sections. The first half shows what life is like
in this such prison, and what the guards do on a regular basis, while the
second half focuses on the mysterious John Coffey (Michael Duncan). In the
first half we are shown the dreadful electric chair (known as Old Sparky) , the
cellmates, the mouse 9Mr. Jingles) the prison guards: Paul Edgecomb (Tom
Hanks), Brutus (David Morse), Percy (Doug Hutchison) , etc., and the tall but
peculiar John Coffey. Apparently he was charged with killing two young girls,
but we have reasons to believe he is innocent. We see that he possesses a power
to heal those who are in pain, and use that power in other situations. He seems
as harmless as Mr. Jingles, but you will have to see it to find out.
   This is by far the most riveting emotional experience since Saving Private
Ryan. Like I stated before, we are just so engrossed with the characters and
situations, that you feel as if you were there. It's attention to detail during
crucial moments in the film kept you on the edge of your seat, because the
characters were written so incredibly well. It's as if it were a deranged
fantasy that you are apart of. Only Stephen King could think of such a thing,
and of course he did. He is truly a talented author. I only wish he would
create more stupendous novels, that are as good on screen.
   Unfortunately however, I have a few minor complaints. The film was a bit
predictable and at times formulaic. It wasn't very complex, but it really
didn't mater that much because everything else flowed smoothly.
   The acting is top notch. Once again Tom Hanks proves why he is one of the
finest actors in the business today. I've never seen an actor who is constantly
putting all of his effort into his role film after film. It's good to see that
some actors do not sell out, simply because a film has a big budget and is a
guaranteed success. Same goes with the rest of the cast. Doug Hutchinson played
a nasty punk who we want desperately to punch. David Morse too was a good
supporting actor to Hanks, but the biggest surprise was Michael Duncan. He was
virtually unknown up until Green Mile, but I'm sure he will get noticed now.
He''s similar to Ving Rhames, only he hasn't really proven his acting ability
as of yet. I could definitely see him as a James Bond villain though. He's very
big and quite strong.
   Director Frank Darabont strikes again. His first and last film (The
Shawshank Redemption) was an absolute masterpiece. The characters were
intriguing and the story was very creative. I didn't know what was going to
happen. Very mysterious. The Green Mile is far from exceeding the quality of
Shawshank Redemption, because of it's lack of pizzazz and because they work on
a different level. Another aspect of the movie that people disregard is the
length. I personally had no problem with the time. I was never bored and always
interested. I guess those with short attention spans have trouble with the lack
of action. That's their loss.
   The Green Mile is by far one of the best films of the year. It's engrossing,
dazzling and a powerful experience. It's everything a solid film should be and
more. A must see.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Tom Hanks, David Morse, Michael Duncan, Doug Hutchinson, James
Cromwell, Bonnie Hunt, Patricia Clarkson, Barry Pepper, Michael Jeter, Sam
Rockwell, Graham Greene, Jeffrey DeMunn, Dabbs Greer, Eve Brent, Harry Dean
Stanton and Gary Sinise.
It is simply amazing how "The Green Mile" developed in its three hour running
time. Based on the Stephen King series of the same title, the film starts out
painfully slow, with underdeveloped characters and idiotic dialogue. However,
as the plot begins to progress, the film turns into pure perfection with
outstanding performances and wonderful direction. Frank Darabont, who
masterfully followed a prisoner's story in "The Shawshank Redemption", this
time follows the perspective of a prison guard, Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks).
Through Edgecomb's experiences on a cell block known as the green mile where
death row prisoners wait and repent, the audience sees good and evil on both
sides of the law. From an evil prison guard to an evil prisoner, "The Green
Mile" is successful in creating sympathy for kind-hearted hard working guards
and hard thinking prisoners. The plot follows Edgecomb and four other guards as
they meet a variety of prisoners  and after having strong relationships with
each eventually are forced to execute them.  
The performances by veterans and new comers to back up these original
characters are superb. The ensemble acting in the film is perfect. Hanks, David
Morse and Barry Pepper as guards are wonderful and are fitting for their roles.
They are the characters we most relate to because of their calm less extreme
roles. They are given the positions to make rational decisions at difficult
times and they are the ones who fulfill the demands of the audience.  The more
unique characters perfectly create friction on the green mile and make the
story interesting and exciting. Some particularly note worthy roles of the
unique characters include Doug Hutchinson, Sam Rockwell, and Michael Duncan.
Hutchinson, playing Percy Wetmore, a cowardly guard who hides his true feelings
by tormenting others gives the greatest performance of the movie. Every time he
appears on the screen, the attitude of others is very uncomfortable and the
creepy expressions he is able to create are effectively terrifying. It would
come as no surprise if Hutchinson was nominated for an Academy Award as best
supporting actor, not only because he did a wonderful job as Wetmore, but also
because he stole every scene he was in away from veteran Oscar winner Tom
Hanks. Rockwell, an independent film veteran, plays his role as Wild Bill
Wharton to perfection. As a prisoner who taunts and harasses the guards at all
hours, he really gets under your skin and irritates you for having to watch him
torture others. This irritation he creates makes his performance so believable.
The last noteworthy performance belongs to Duncan, as the enormous convicted
killer John Coffey who happens to hold the power of curing the ill. Duncan does
a wonderful job playing a frightened child-like behemoth, very similar to
Lennie Small in Of Mice and Men. His desire for love and the extinction of hate
evokes the most compassion because it is very obvious that he is suffering for
no just cause. His pain creates pain for the viewer. 
However, it takes over an hour for Duncan to be introduced completely in the
film. The film opens with a ridiculous present day setting which contains a
scene that jabs at "The Jerry Springer Show." The scene, containing one old man
complaining about how all guests on the show are inbred and rednecks. Not only
is this observation entirely pointless and out of place, but it is also
hackneyed beyond all belief. As the film flashes back to 1935, Graham Greene is
quickly executed without any introduction. His death seems very rushed and
without any knowledge of who he is, the scene is neither sad nor convincing.
Greene is not even given a final word, like some of the other characters, and
we don't even see him walk the infamous green mile. However, as the film begins
to specifically introduce more characters, such as Coffey and Eduard Delacroix
(Michael Jeter) as well as the five prison guards, the film becomes more
interesting. The speed in "The Green Mile" is perfect. If time was a matter of
concern and the film was edited to the two hour mark, it would have been
unsatisfactory because we would not be able to know the characters as they are
or as they treat others. The three hour running is perfect for plot development
and by the end of the film, a great amount of love or hate is attached to each
character. "The Green Mile" is so good following the rough beginning, that when
the pivotal moment at the very end finally comes, it is almost impossible not
to feel some sort of sadness for every person in this scene. Fighting back
tears was a difficult task that I barely succeeded in doing. If you survive the
first third of "The Green Mile" sit back and enjoy the remainder for some
priceless entertainment.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Five years after his directorial debut based on Stephen King's writings
called THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION (9/10), writer/director Frank Darabont
returns to the big screen with another prison film based on the famous
scribblings of Stephen King. Unlike the latter film, this one is a big,
long, laborious bore.
PLOT:
A seven-foot death row inmate is discovered to have secret healing powers.
CRITIQUE:
This film is slow, drawn-out, boring, uninteresting, unexciting, predictable
and topped with a couple of one-dimensional "evil" characters. Its only
positive attribute lies in its actors who all do credible jobs and its
message of hope and belief in miracles. The real miracle of my night was the
fact that I did not fall asleep during this straightforward, unimpressive
film about a guy with special powers who we never truly understand or care
about. Of course, much like all other death row cell blocks, this one is
filled with decent inmates who all happen to be "misunderstood", except for
one cookie-cutter crazy guy who is evil personified. And let's not forget
all the guards on death row, who also happen to be angels from the Heaven
above, except for one cookie-cutter crazy guard who is also evil personified
(and is there any reason why there are about six guards when there appears
to be no more than three inmates???). Am I supposed to identify with anyone
in this film? Or even more importantly, am I supposed to give a rat's ass
about anyone in this film? Well, if I was, I sure missed that boat, because
the only thing that I ended up caring about during this entire picture was
the obscene amount of fat that Tom Hanks has been able to burrow under his
loose chin.
Furthermore, there is absolutely no reason in the world why director Frank
Darabont needed to take three hours and ten minutes out of anyone's life to
present this story. In fact, the story is empty within itself. I truly did
not get anything out of the film other than the fact that there is a guy on
death row who has special powers to heal, and we are left wondering if he
should still be executed or not. Wow. How interesting . The plot's
utter predictability is also at fault here with one guess as to whom is to
get healed by the gentle monster in this film (we are told that one certain
lady has a tumor early on in the movie). Whip out those thinking caps, kids!
Hmmm, and I wonder what will happen to those two cookie-cutter "evil" guys
who have nothing in their system but hate and negativity. Hmmmm, now think
hard here, boys and girls. What a crock! I am guessing that this film was
supposed to be some three-hour exercise in spirituality, but unfortunately
for me, it was neither spiritual or the least bit engaging. In fact, it was
one big bore. I didn't see the point of the movie, I didn't see the point of
the story and I certainly didn't see the point in Tom Hanks' big
double-chin. All in all, a bad movie starring some great actors doing solid
work, especially Michael Clarke Duncan as the man of the hour, John Coffey.
Give that man an award or something!

Author
Gary Jones
Writer-director Frank Darabont has obviously got a thing about
inspirational period prison dramas based on Stephen King stories. With
The Shawshank Redemption, he made a film which, although not a great
commercial success on its original release, has since had a strange
cultural impact, making it onto many moviegoers' lists of all-time
favourites. With The Green Mile, Darabont has taken a superficially
similar King story and tried to tap into the same popular appetite for
uplifting tales of decent human beings rising above brutality and
injustice, but I think The Green Mile will disappoint many admirers of
Shawshank.
Tom Hanks stars as a death row prison guard who takes delivery of an
unusual new inmate to await execution - a gentle and slow-witted black
giant (played by Michael Clarke Duncan) convicted of the murder of two
young white girls. The prison regime, with its mundane distractions
filling time between the horrifying electrocutions, is nicely developed
and impeccably crafted. Then the relationship between the guard and his
new charge takes a mystical turn, at which point the film basically
falls apart, and none of the top-drawer production design, acting and
photography on display can save it.
Apart from Kubrick's The Shining, which King hated, I've always thought
that the films based on King's non-spooky stories, such as Shawshank and
Stand By Me, have worked better than those inspired by his supernatural
tales. But with The Green Mile, we get an ill-judged mixture of the
magical and the earthly. First, we're asked to accept that rather than
sitting in a multiplex surrounded by popcorn-munching filmgoers, we are
in a prison in 1930s Louisiana. Fine. I'll go along with that. That's
what I'm here for. Then, disbelief nicely suspended, we are asked to
abandon the alternative reality we've agreed to inhabit and construct a
new one so we can swallow a bunch of miracles, complete with bright
lights and spooky manifestations. Give me a break. In fantasy films, the
impossible thing we're meant to believe in for a couple of hours must be
introduced, or at least alluded to, from the start so we have a chance
to get used to the idea and give ourselves over to it. Introducing
unexpected miraculous elements into an established earthly story is to
trample on well-established conventions. Imagine an episode of NYPD Blue
in which Andy Sipowitz is abducted by aliens. Doesn't work, does it?
Even if the mystical thrust of the story had been established from the
start, our credulity would still have been severely tested by the sheer
niceness of the prison staff - apart from one enjoyably sadistic and
slimy guard (played by Doug Hutchison) they are probably the most
thoughtful and decent bunch every to fry people for  living.
Although beautifully made, The Green Mile is let down by its bolted-on
mystical elements and its crude religious allegory. It also suffers from
the sort of sentimentality that Steven Spielberg is criticised for,
often unfairly. After a bum-numbing three hours plus, I felt I'd served
my time and was glad to be released.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Mac VerStandig
A copy of this review can be found at =
http://www.moviereviews.org/the_green_mile.htm
---Starting on Christmas Eve you can hear Mac VerStandig's movie reviews 
on the radio in Portland, Maine once a week in addition to reading them 
on Moviereviews.org. Details on time and dial placement still to come. 
Stay tuned!---
The Green Mile, the film Warner Bros. is grooming for best picture 
glory, commits the same sin as Paramount's prized contender Angela's 
Ashes: the movie uses the emotional sentiments that death presents as a 
crutch of support for an otherwise weak and underdeveloped production. 
Both films also run too long, with Angela's Ashes weighing in at 140 
minutes and The Green Mile at 190 (that is 11,400 painful tic-tocks).
Set in a Louisiana penitentiary during the great depression, The Green 
Mile, based on Stephen King's novel, is a story of death row inmates and 
guards. The film's title is the term used for the walk from an inmate's 
cell to the electric chair, nicknamed "Old Sparky."
The protagonist is Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks who merits a best actor 
nomination), the head guard. Having walked the mile numerous times and 
witnessed more deaths than one man ever should, Paul has come to respect 
most of the inmates and offers them whatever dignity he can, especially 
in their final hours. Warner Bros.' deceptive marketing campaign tells 
you that Paul forms a special relationship with one inmate in 
particular, John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan, deserving of a best 
supporting actor nomination), who possess magical healing powers. Coffey 
does have mystical abilities but there is no special relationship (or, 
if there is, it is on the editing room floor).
Rather than develop Coffey or explore Edgecomb's personal life in depth 
(his wife seems interesting, but we hardly get to know her), the film 
chooses to focus its attention on another guard and another inmate, both 
cruel people. (Caution: SEMI-SPOILER AHEAD!) These two characters are as 
clichE9 as Hollywood can make them. The inmate is responsible for the =
murders that Coffey clearly didn't commit, something that seems a tad 
too ironic since there are only three inmates. It is also rather 
coincidental that the same revelation takes place in The Shawshank 
Redemption, a film from the same writer and director. The guard is 
single-dimensionally cruel to others, emotionless and death loving, 
making him the perfect Superman villain. But this film is neither a 
bird, a plane nor Superman, it is a serious death row drama and the 
character doesn't fit.
The Green Mile doesn't introduce Coffey's Cinderella qualities for the 
first hour and a quarter, the length of time that many films take to 
reach their conclusion. Even after that, the magic is a limited aspect 
of the movie until the end. Cinderella and death row probably don't mix 
in the first place, but not giving the silver slippers a fighting chance 
is self-destructive and yet another argument for a further development 
of Coffey.
The Green Mile could have been the contender that Warner Bros. wants it 
to be; the material is there. By cutting the evil guard and inmate you 
free up a lot of time. Fill some of the time with more Coffey and some 
of it with more of Edgecomb's home life. Stop there. Cut the movie 
between 120 and 135 minutes and this critic would consider the final 
product a modern classic.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Tom Hanks, David Morse, Harry Dean Stanton, James Cromwell,
Doug Hutchinson, Sam Rockwell. Directed by Frank Darabont. Rated R.
The infamous Last Mile is chockful of the supernatural and metaphysical
in The Green Mile, a gem from Stephen King and The Shawshank Redemption
director Frank Darabont. At three hours and eight minutes, your bladder
may punish you, but this is one lumberer worth enduring. Hell, it's a
pleasure through and through and one of the year's most powerful films.
Despite its imperfections, I will not forget The Green Mile for a long
time.
The story is told in flashback by an elderly Paul Edgecomb in a nursing
home. He tells his wife about the summer of 1935 when he (played by Tom
Hanks then) was a prison guard in charge of death row inmates.
Edgecomb's domain was called "The Green Mile" -- like the
traditional "Last Mile" except that the floor was the color of faded
limes. The hands-down star of the cellblock was "Ol' Sparky," the
electric chair, sitting peacefully, waiting for its next victim.
One day, a new inmate arrives. This is seven-foot-tall John Coffey
(Michael Clarke Duncan), a towering black man convicted of raping and
killing two young white girls. Coffey immediately shows himself to be
a "gentle giant," of sorts, keeping to himself and crying on occasion.
Soon enough, though, Coffey reveals his extraordinary healing powers by
healing Paul's bladder infection and bringing a mouse back from the
dead.
Doug Hutchinson, having oodles of fun, plays Percy, a vicious, sadistic
guard who takes pleasure in injuring inmates, causes everyone else in
the cellblock trouble and "knows people," preventing Paul or anybody
else to do anything significant about his deviant behavior. What Percy
wants is to be put "up front" for an execution; then, he promises, he
will transfer himself to another government job and Paul will never
hear from him again.
This doesn't sound like much of a plot and that's because it's not a
plot: it's a situation. That's what makes The Green Mile sorta unique:
it doesn't take us through a linear storyline; rather, it sets up a
situation and observes as the characters move through it. And these are
remarkable characters, some of the richest of the year. Hanks's Paul
Edgecomb is fascinating and three-dimensional, a man with an
understated, deeply personal crisis. Percy isn't much in terms of
depth, but he's very fun to watch and even more fun to hate. The most
engaging character in the film is Michael Clarke Duncan's John Coffey.
Duncan deserves an Oscar nomination (though he in all likelyhood won't
get it) for his performance which is genuinely touching and often
devastating.
For over three hours I didn't dare take my eyes off the screen. There's
no denying that The Green Mile is slow and yet it's surprisingly
involving. Moments where essentially nothing is going on manage to be
riveting; the more emotional scenes have unparalelled impact. Making a
movie this long, this passive and this unrelentingly interesting is no
small feat. It's a feat deserving of little gold men.
If there is one flaw here, and a reason I can't give the movie a
flat "A", it's King's/Darabont's insistence on ramming hokey Christ
imagery down our throat. The Christ metaphor is such a staple
in "thoughtful" filmmaking that it seems hackneyed when employed. The
Green Mile's otherwise extraordinarily powerful ending is hampered by
it because we are forced to make an outside connection, an act that
takes us partially out of the otherwordly experience this film provides.
Despite abominations by high-brow literary types, Stephen King is a
very insightful author with a remarkable window into human nature. He
makes keen observations, allowing his readers to tap into the human
part of his stories, no matter how far-fetched they got in their horror
aspects. This gets translated on celluloid when the films are done
right. This one is more than right.

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Green Mile (1999) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Tom Hanks, David Morse,
Michael Clark Duncan, James Cromwell, Jeffrey DeMunn, Sam Rockwell, Barry
Pepper, Michael Jeter, Doug Hutchison and Graham Greene. Written and
directed by Frank Darabont.
 Paul Edgecomb is a decent man. That's no big revelation unless you
consider his occupation. Edgecomb is a prison guard, but not just any
guard. He is head guard in Building E at Cold Mountain Penitentiary in the
deep South.
 Building E is death row, "The Green Mile" where men who are to face the
ultimate penalty are sent to spend their last days.
 Edgecomb guards his charges with fairness and firmness. His world is
orderly and routine.
 That is until John Coffey is delivered to his care.
 And that is the crux of "The Green Mile," a magical drama directed by
Frank Darabont, who like he did with "The Shawshank Redemption," has deftly
adapted the Steven King novel of the same name.
 Set in 1935 when many men were still out of work, "The Green Mile" is a
supernatural story about a poor simple man who has a power he can neither
explain nor understand.
 When the worlds of Edgecomb and Coffey collide, it brings about profound
changes in both men as well as several people around them.
 John Coffey is a gentle giant, convicted of the heinous murder and rape of
two little sisters. Weary of his new guest, Edgecomb eventually sees
Coffey's miraculous powers and realizes their implications.
 "The Green Mil"e runs three hours, but it is the quickest 180 minutes you
will ever spend in a movie theater. I doubt that anyone will take a moment
to glance at a watch once they get involved in this eerie, but poignant
story.
 This is not your usual Stephen King. Though it has tones of the
supernatural, it is a benevolent force as opposed to the usual cadre of
demons, vampires and ghosts unleashed by the Maine scribbler.
 And with only two exceptions most of the people - guards as well as
prisoners - who  are incarcerated and work on "The Green Mile" are decent
people.
 Edgecomb is a 44-year-old happily married man suffering from a very
painful bladder infection. His miraculous cure is the first clue that
Coffey is no ordinary inmate.
 Tom Hanks may be the star of "The Green Mile," but, as in "Saving Private
Ryan," this feature is an ensemble piece. The movie is no star vehicle,
even though Hanks gives a very fine performance.
 He is surrounded by a superb supporting cast including David Morse,
Jeffrey DeMunn and Barry Pepper as his fellow guards; James Cromwell as the
compassionate warden; and Michael Jeter and Graham Greene as death row
inmates.
 The movie's soul, though, belongs to Michael Clark Duncan as John Coffey.
Duncan, most familiar to audiences as Bear in Armageddon, gives a
performance that is so powerful, so touching, that it will make you weep.
 His Coffey is a man-child, an innocent. He can see into the hearts of men
and recognize good and evil. Yet his powers overwhelm and frighten him.
They are blessing and curse. A supporting actor Oscar nomination is
warranted for Duncan.
 The allegory is a little heavy-handed, of course, with the inmate's
initials J.C. The symbolism is sledgehammered.
 Two other performances of note include Doug Hutchison as a sadistic young
guard and Sam Rockwell as a psychopathic killer who stirs up trouble on
"The Green Mile."
 The performances are strong all around. Jeter, especially, is touching as
the mousy inmate whose last days revolve around a mouse he has found and
trained. His death scene is one of the most harrowing in any movie in
recent years.
 Hanks exudes a quiet strength as Edgecomb. He treats his prisoners with
dignity and compassion, neither judging nor condemning them.
 "The Green Mile" is a film that offers a surprise every now and then just
to keep the audience on its toes. Yet everything that happens is within the
parameters of the story and situation.
 Darabont's script is crisp as he deftly catches the Southern cadence of
these blue-collar people. His direction is no-frills, straight from the
hip, allowing the actors and plot to advance the story. He uses very few
camera tricks. Even the special effects sequences are not overplayed.
 "The Green Mile" is a winner, ranking among the best King adaptations
brought to the screen. It is a movie that instills faith. Despite its bleak
setting, it is a movie with a big heart. Don't miss it.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christopher Null
     THE GREEN MILE?  Let's talk about 26 miles.  The length of a
marathon.  Start the race and the movie together: The race would long be
over before the film.  The winner would be at home, taking a nap.  Yes,
THE GREEN MILE is three hours long.
     Not that long movies have never been successful, and not that THE
GREEN MILE is bad.  You might even think a long movie is required here.
Pulled from Stephen King's acclaimed series of six books by the same
name, King returns to the kind of work he was doing in THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION (based on a short story of his), the kind that seems to
perform the best, away from splatter and gore, and into the minds of the
strangest of characters.
     The resemblance to SHAWSHANK is uncanny.  Both are epic prison
films that ultimately tell stories of personal growth and
enlightenment.  But THE GREEN MILE isn't about the prisoners, it's about
the guards -- and one, notable prisoner that crosses their paths.
Leading the crew of the 1935 southern prison is guard Paul Edgecomb (Tom
Hanks), a kind man who treats his death row inmates with all the dignity
he can.  His latest charge is John Coffey (Michael Duncan), a gentle
giant with alarming powers of the spirit who was convicted of killing
two little girls.
     Before it's time for Coffey to walk The Green Mile (the road to
"Old Sparky," the electric chair), he has a profound effect upon the
other guards and inmates.  And Paul is the centerpiece.  Mr. Jingles,
the prison's mouse, takes second billing.  The light bulbs, which
explode more dramatically and more often than in any other film in
history, take third.
     There's plenty here to make you laugh and cry, and director Frank
Darabont (who also did SHAWSHANK) knows how to tug each string.
Surprisingly, it's Hanks who is forgettable in his role, mainly because
his phony southern accent wavers unconvincingly between those used in
his parts in FORREST GUMP and SAVING PRIVATE RYAN.  Duncan is the one to
watch here, and I'll put money on him right now for an Oscar nod.
     Sadly, the legacy of TITANIC has told directors that pacing is
irrelevant and a film's length can be boundless.  THE GREEN MILE even
bookends with Paul's character as an old man, looking back on his life
-- sound familiar?  But unlike TITANIC, you really feel the length in
this film, and it's just not necessary this time around.  I checked my
watch close to a dozen times during the film during the draggy parts --
a bad sign for those prone to sore butts.
     But maybe Darabont did this on purpose.  Sitting there, glued to my
seat, entranced by thoughts of what might happen next yet slowly rotting
while life passes me by outside... my, it feels just like I'm in prison,
waiting for my own trip down The Green Mile.
Director: Frank Darabont
Producer: Frank Darabont, David Valdes
Writer: Frank Darabont
Starring: Tom Hanks, David Morse, Bonnie Hunt, Michael Duncan, James
Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Graham Greene, Doug Hutchison, Sam Rockwell,
Barry Pepper, Patricia Clarkson, Harry Dean Stanton, Jeffrey DeMunn
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
GREEN MILE, THE (director/writer: Frank Darabont; screenwriter: from a
Stephen King novel; cinematographer: David Tattersall; cast: Tom Hanks
(Paul Edgecomb), David Morse (Brutus Howell), Bonnie Hunt (Jan
Edgecomb), Michael Clarke Duncan (John Coffey), James Cromwell (Warden
Hal Moores), Michael Jeter (Eduard Delacroix), Graham Greene (Arlen
Bitterbuck), Doug Hutchison (Percy Wetmore), Sam Rockwell (Wild Bill
Wharton), Barry Pepper (Dean Stanton), Jeffrey DeMunn (Harry
Terwilliger), Patricia Clarkson (Melinda Moores), Harry Dean Stanton
(Toot-Toot), Dabbs Greer (Old Paul Edgecomb), Eve Brent (Elaine
Connelly), 1999)
The Green Mile is adapted from the novel of Stephen King, that was
written in several installments and it features many supernatural things
that happen in the Death Row of a Louisiana prison in the middle of the
Depression in 1935. It gives the believers in such spiritual
transcendence something to cheer about and may give the faithful
Christians who view the film, a renewed belief in heaven and hell, in
God, and in redemption, through the means of a feel-good story, such as
this one, that is steeped in religious allegory.
The Green Mile is the nickname given to the Cold Mountain Louisiana
State Penitentiary's Death Row, which has a floor with a faded green
color where the prisoner takes his dead man's walk. It takes the film
three long hours to tell its simple story about an unusual black
prisoner who is in Death Row for the murder and rape of two little white
girls. The movie is told in flashback, just like Hanks did in Saving
Private Ryan, as the memories of Paul, a former guard at the 'Green
Mile,' now a 108-year-old man (Dabbs Greer), residing  in a nursing
home.
John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), whose initials are J.C. (you know,
like that other J.C.), is a simpleminded giant with supernatural healing
powers, who points out to those whom he is introduced to, that he spells
his name differently from the drink. What follows from his imprisonment
is a nightshift story on Death Row, telling of many unbelievable things
that occur there such as, an intelligent mouse brought back to life from
the dead, the supervisor prison guard, Paul Edgecombe (Tom Hanks), being
cured of a severe urinary infection by Coffey's putting his hands on his
testicles, a prison warden (James Cromwell) having his wife's cancerous
tumor cured by a kiss from Coffey, whereby he sucks her tumor into his
body system, visions coming to Coffey about those he touches, and
several other miracles Jesus himself would have been proud to have done.
The Green Mile is the most faithful retelling of a Stephen King novel
ever put to film, and thereby someone like myself who is not a fan of
his, is stuck with the popular writer's excesses on film (he makes me
cringe at how scattered his artistic intentions usually turn out to be).
What the film is trying to say, after it spends so much time on the
pedestrian lives of the characters who work and those who are prisoners
there, is difficult to say, because the director, Frank Darabont (The
Shawshank Redemption), really never came to the point he is making. The
message of this film is so muddled and unclear, that there seems to be
no point to be made, except how nice most of the people are in this
prison.
It is a film exploitively showing miracles that an audience might enjoy
seeing on the screen, while others might be taken in by the benign mood
of the story, others could be enthralled by seeing how the electric
chair works, and still others might just like the film for its solid
development of its main characters. There was much to like about this
implausible thriller, that would have been better served, if it had only
been pared down to around an eighty or ninety minute film. Darabont
spends so much time with a mouse called Mr. Jingles, who serves no
essential need in the story, whose animated antics for the most part
bored me. The best thing about the film was its performances, from
Hank's nice guy guard to Duncan's enormous presence to David Morse's
role as the steady Death Row prison guard. The actors were all terrific,
they couldn't have handled themselves any better, especially since they
were dealing with material that was very hard to swallow.
The star of the film, though, is an electric chair fondly called "Old
Sparky" by the guards. The filmmaker laboriously goes through the
electric chair drill that the guards have before the execution, which
made for at least a dull half hour of viewing. But not satisfied with
that, the audience is treated to three other electric chair executions
and watching all the dull routines the guards go through in their daily
work schedule. The most important lesson learned, is that before the
condemned man fries, the sponge placed on top of his head better be wet,
or else you get a horribly botched execution.
The tight group of death house guards, are just about the nicest bunch
of fellows you would ever want to meet, except for one, who is a
one-dimensional sadistic jerk (Doug Hutchison). Paul says of him, "The
man is mean, careless and stupid--that's a bad combination in a place
like this." He got this job because his aunt is married to the governor
of the state, and even though he could have a more choice job in the
state, he prefers to stay here because he likes to watch the executions.
The prisoners are also a great bunch of guys, but they too have a real
sadistically inclined jerk among them (Sam Rockwell). You can just guess
what happens to these two sadistic jerks by the film's end, sort of
King's reward to the audience for sitting through all his spooky doings,
as he throws them a bone for their patience and lets them see what they
wanted to see happen to those two.
The Green Mile is a handsomely made film, one that tried so hard to make
the audience forget how emotionally manipulative it was. A film where
the black giant, convicted of killing two white children, in
segregationist Louisiana, is treated like a royal visitor in his cell.
He is viewed as someone who has been granted a divine gift, but is still
afraid of the dark, is illiterate and defers to whites as expected,
reinforcing the vile stereotypes for the Negro of that era. His
explanation for being captured while holding onto the two dead girls is,
"I just took it back, is all." Whatever that means, though, the
filmmaker is implying that this black man is around to perform miracles
for only the good white folks, as he offers them his forgiveness for the
horrors their people brought into the world. With that being said, this
film can't even make a concise statement about an innocent man being
executed, which was the fodder of so many 1930s prison films, whose
directors clearly took a stand. If the filmmaker wanted to make a
statement against such executions, the Everyman Tom Hanks plays,
wouldn't have been the one pulling the switch in my film. I would have
chosen an actor with a darker personality to play the part.
This film lost its grit, after one lightbulb-exploding scene too many,
somewhere in the second hour of this interminable jail sentence of a
film, one in which there was just nowhere to go after its 'entertaining'
executions began taking place (sic!). The miracles shown had as much
believability as the fairy tale concocted for the benefit of that daffy
condemned prisoner (Michael Jeter), about to be juiced, who thought the
guards were telling him the truth, that they would take his pet mouse to
a special place where visitors would pay to see him do tricks for them.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
--------------4EF21058DA538ABEEDE18C58

GREEN MILE, THE (director/writer:
Frank Darabont; screenwriter: from a Stephen King novel; cinematographer:
David Tattersall; cast: Tom Hanks (Paul Edgecomb), David Morse (Brutus
Howell), Bonnie Hunt (Jan Edgecomb), Michael Clarke Duncan (John Coffey),
James Cromwell (Warden Hal Moores), Michael Jeter (Eduard Delacroix), Graham
Greene (Arlen Bitterbuck), Doug Hutchison (Percy Wetmore), Sam Rockwell
(Wild Bill Wharton), Barry Pepper (Dean Stanton), Jeffrey DeMunn (Harry
Terwilliger), Patricia Clarkson (Melinda Moores), Harry Dean Stanton (Toot-Toot),
Dabbs Greer (Old Paul Edgecomb), Eve Brent (Elaine Connelly), 1999)

Reviewed by Dennis Schwartz

The Green Mile is adapted from the novel of Stephen King,
that was written in several installments and it features many supernatural
things that happen in the Death Row of a Louisiana prison in the middle
of the Depression in 1935. It gives the believers in such spiritual transcendence
something to cheer about and may give the faithful Christians who view
the film, a renewed belief in heaven and hell, in God, and in redemption,
through the means of a feel-good story, such as this one, that is steeped
in religious allegory.

The Green Mile is the nickname given to the Cold Mountain
Louisiana State Penitentiary's Death Row, which has a floor with a faded
green color where the prisoner takes his dead man's walk. It takes the
film three long hours to tell its simple story about an unusual black prisoner
who is in Death Row for the murder and rape of two little white girls.
The movie is told in flashback, just like Hanks did in Saving Private
Ryan, as the memories of Paul, a former guard at the 'Green Mile,'
now a 108-year-old man (Dabbs Greer), residing  in a nursing home.

John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), whose initials are J.C. (you
know, like that other J.C.), is a simpleminded giant with supernatural
healing powers, who points out to those whom he is introduced to, that
he spells his name differently from the drink. What follows from his imprisonment
is a nightshift story on Death Row, telling of many unbelievable things
that occur there such as, an intelligent mouse brought back to life from
the dead, the supervisor prison guard, Paul Edgecombe (Tom Hanks), being
cured of a severe urinary infection by Coffey's putting his hands on his
testicles, a prison warden (James Cromwell) having his wife's cancerous
tumor cured by a kiss from Coffey, whereby he sucks her tumor into his
body system, visions coming to Coffey about those he touches, and several
other miracles Jesus himself would have been proud to have done.

The Green Mile is the most faithful retelling of a Stephen
King novel ever put to film, and thereby someone like myself who is not
a fan of his, is stuck with the popular writer's excesses on film (he makes
me cringe at how scattered his artistic intentions usually turn out to
be). What the film is trying to say, after it spends so much time on the
pedestrian lives of the characters who work and those who are prisoners
there, is difficult to say, because the director, Frank Darabont (The
Shawshank Redemption), really never came to the point he is making.
The message of this film is so muddled and unclear, that there seems to
be no point to be made, except how nice most of the people are in this
prison.

It is a film exploitively showing miracles that an audience might
enjoy seeing on the screen, while others might be taken in by the benign
mood of the story, others could be enthralled by seeing how the electric
chair works, and still others might just like the film for its solid development
of its main characters. There was much to like about this implausible thriller,
that would have been better served, if it had only been pared down to around
an eighty or ninety minute film. Darabont spends so much time with a mouse
called Mr. Jingles, who serves no essential need in the story, whose animated
antics for the most part bored me. The best thing about the film was its
performances, from Hank's nice guy guard to Duncan's enormous presence
to David Morse's role as the steady Death Row prison guard. The actors
were all terrific, they couldn't have handled themselves any better, especially
since they were dealing with material that was very hard to swallow.

The star of the film, though, is an electric chair fondly called
"Old Sparky" by the guards. The filmmaker laboriously goes through the
electric chair drill that the guards have before the execution, which made
for at least a dull half hour of viewing. But not satisfied with that,
the audience is treated to three other electric chair executions and watching
all the dull routines the guards go through in their daily work schedule.
The most important lesson learned, is that before the condemned man fries,
the sponge placed on top of his head better be wet, or else you get a horribly
botched execution.

The tight group of death house guards, are just about the nicest
bunch of fellows you would ever want to meet, except for one, who is a
one-dimensional sadistic jerk (Doug Hutchison). Paul says of him, "The
man is mean, careless and stupid--that's a bad combination in a place like
this." He got this job because his aunt is married to the governor of the
state, and even though he could have a more choice job in the state, he
prefers to stay here because he likes to watch the executions.

The prisoners are also a great bunch of guys, but they too have a
real sadistically inclined jerk among them (Sam Rockwell). You can just
guess what happens to these two sadistic jerks by the film's end, sort
of King's reward to the audience for sitting through all his spooky doings,
as he throws them a bone for their patience and lets them see what they
wanted to see happen to those two.

The Green Mile is a handsomely made film, one that tried so
hard to make the audience forget how emotionally manipulative it was. A
film where the black giant, convicted of killing two white children, in
segregationist Louisiana, is treated like a royal visitor in his cell.
He is viewed as someone who has been granted a divine gift, but is still
afraid of the dark, is illiterate and defers to whites as expected, reinforcing
the vile stereotypes for the Negro of that era. His explanation for being
captured while holding onto the two dead girls is, "I just took it back,
is all." Whatever that means, though, the filmmaker is implying that this
black man is around to perform miracles for only the good white folks,
as he offers them his forgiveness for the horrors their people brought
into the world. With that being said, this film can't even make a concise
statement about an innocent man being executed, which was the fodder of
so many 1930s prison films, whose directors clearly took a stand. If the
filmmaker wanted to make a statement against such executions, the Everyman
Tom Hanks plays, wouldn't have been the one pulling the switch in my film.
I would have chosen an actor with a darker personality to play the part.

This film lost its grit, after one lightbulb-exploding scene too
many, somewhere in the second hour of this interminable jail sentence of
a film, one in which there was just nowhere to go after its 'entertaining'
executions began taking place (sic!). The miracles shown had as much believability
as the fairy tale concocted for the benefit of that daffy condemned prisoner
(Michael Jeter), about to be juiced, who thought the guards were telling
him the truth, that they would take his pet mouse to a special place where
visitors would pay to see him do tricks for them.

REVIEWED ON 4/7/2000         
GRADE: C

Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"

http://www.sover.net/~ozus

ozus@sover.net ">href="MAILTO:ozus@sover.net">ozus@sover.net 

© ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated: R for violence, language, and some sexual content.
Starring: Tom Hanks, David Morse, Bonnie Hunt, Michael Clarke Duncan, James
Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Graham Greene, Doug Hutchison, Sam Rockwell, Barry
Pepper, Jeffrey DeMunn, Patricia Clarkson.
Stephen King has always made good horror movies (The Shining, Misery, Cujo) but
one might cringe at the fact of a drama coming from the hands of Stephen King.
Remember, however Stephen King also brought us great films such as "Stand By
Me" which became one of the best-known 'buddy flick', and "The Shawshank
Redemption" both movies being spectacular in every way and surprising people by
knowing that the horror master himself Stephen King wrote both of those books.
Now in 1999 we get yet another Stephen King masterpiece this one being better
than the ones mentioned above, it is strikingly original, emotional, powerful
and so absorbing that by the end we are left in a state that we sit in our seat
too amazed to move.
Tom Hanks plays Paul Edgecomb a guard at a prison in Louisiana. He works with
inmates on death row who have committed crimes and soon go to the Electric
chair. A new inmate comes aboard by the name of John Coffey (Like the drink
only spellt different) who is accused of killing two little girls. John Coffey
however even though the size of him (played by Michael Duncan "Armageddon's
Bear") John Coffey is a nice man. Paul Edgecomb starts to find out that maybe
John didn't kill those little girls. Then John does the most amazing thing ever
and Paul realizes that what they are dealing with here is a miracle...on The
Green Mile (as in the prison walk). Now Paul must try and prove that John did
not kill those little girls...and get him off death row before he must be
killed.
The best thing about this whole movie is the performance by Michael
Duncan...who gives in my opinion the best performance of the year. In fact he
might even give the best performance of all time with his southern accent...and
sweet side Michael Duncan is truly brilliant. Tom Hanks (who never gives a bad
performance) yet again delivers an Oscar Worthy performance in this three hour+
film that seems to go by in no time. Surprisingly enough with such a dramatic
atmosphere and story the movie also has a big amount of comedy and witty
dialogue that doesn't seem beligerant or unnecessary.
The supporting performances by Michael Jeter who plays an inmate with a cute
little mouse named Mr. Jingles is also truly a great actor who gives a great
performance as does David Morse, Bonnie Hunt, James Cromwell and Patricia
Clarkson who all give believeable and powerhouse performances. The screenplay
by Frank Darabont who also directed the film is well-crafted and stays very
close to the book. The whole movie moved me in a way no other movie has and has
it's special magic like this years earlier masterpiece "The Sixth Sense" which
had it's own substance to take the viewer by the hand and leads then through an
amazing experience that after it is over they are left in their chair unable to
move.
In other words "The Green Mile" finds it's own path and makes it's own
miracles. It's never slow and it's never too dramatic. The best thing about the
film is that you yourself become a character and you yourself are there
watching what is happened instead of watching it as a movie. Movies that do
this are always magical and as the tagline for the film goes "Miracles are
found in the most unexpected places" and therefore "The Green Mile" is a
miracle all of it's own.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring December 18, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Frank Darabont.
Cast: Tom Hanks, Michael Clarke Duncan, Doug Hutchison, David Morse, Michael 
Jeter, Bonnie Hunt, James Cromwell, Sam Rockwell, Barry Pepper, Dabbs Greer, 
Eve Brent, Graham Greene, Harry Dean Stanton, Patricia Clarkson, Jeffrey 
DeMunn.
1999 - 182 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, violence, and graphic depictions of electrocutions).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 11, 1999.
Expectations have been running so high for Frank Darabont's adaptation of the 
Stephen King serial novel, "The Green Mile," that many film industrialites 
prematurely labeled it "The Best Film of 1999," even before it was finished 
filming. 'Premature' is the correct adjective because, while "The Green Mile" 
is a very fine, intimately made drama on its own, it does not come close to 
standing up to its lofty presumptions. This is not a criticism of the film 
itself, but simply a negative observation about how hype is more often than 
not highly unnecessary, and ends up doing more damage than good.
Aside from the 3-hour-plus running time, "The Green Mile" occasionally bears 
a slight resemblance to 1997's "Titanic," particularly in the wraparound 
story in which we meet a very old man named Paul Edgecomb (Dabbs Greer), who 
lives at a nursing home and breaks down crying one afternoon when he happens 
to see Fred Astaire singing "Cheek to Cheek" in an old movie. When confidante 
Elaine (a fabulous Eve Brent) shows her concern and goes to see what is the 
matter, Paul decides to tell her a story that took place sixty years before, 
and that he has never discussed until now.
Switch back to the year of 1935 in Louisiana, a much-younger Paul (Tom Hanks) 
works as a prison guard at the Cold Mountain Penitentiary, where the 
convicted criminals on death row are sent. Currently suffering a painful 
bladder infection, but with a lovely, supportive wife (Bonnie Hunt), Paul's 
whole perspective on life gradually changes with the appearance of John 
Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), a 7-foot-tall, 350-LB. black man who has been 
convicted of raping and murdering two young girls. Like a giant kid himself, 
John instantly does not seem like the type who would hurt a fly, as he even 
requests that the lights stay on at night, "'cuz I'm scared of the dark."
Other inmates are met and also focused on, including Arlen Bitterbuck (Graham 
Greene), a highly spiritual Native American; William "Wild Bill" Wharton (Sam 
Rockwell), a psychopath as crazy as a crap-house rat; and Eduard "Del" 
Delacroix (Michael Jeter), a kindhearted man who befriends Mr. Jingles, a 
mouse that roams The Green Mile, called that because the floors are painted 
green as they lead the inmates to their executions. Complicating matters is 
the arrival of a new, young prison guard hotshot named Percy (Doug 
Hutchison), a truly despicable human being who gets his kicks out of 
humiliating and deliberately hurting others. As time passes, we watch as some 
of the inmates are taken to their deaths, people that we have grown to care 
about, and all the while Paul grows a close friendship with John Coffey, who, 
through supernatural plot developments that will not be divulged here, he 
becomes convinced is innocent of the crimes which will inevitably send him to 
his wrongful execution.
Frank Darabont, whose previous film was the similar Stephen King-adapted "The 
Shawshank Redemption," has returned back to the setting of a prison for the 
second time in a row, and it cannot be denied that he has a definite flare 
for this sort of storyline. While "The Shawshank Redemption" was that rare 
case in which it bombed in movie theaters, but gained an overwhelmingly 
positive following on video, I was not one of its strongest supporters. At 
close to 2 1/2 hours, the picture was an effective, but severely flawed drama 
that had (to me) several long, dry stretches in the middle that could have 
easily been cut out. In comparison, "The Green Mile" is over 3 hours in 
length, but never once overstays its welcome, nor does it even feel like a 
movie of such great length. This is because, while deliberately paced, it 
also has been tightly edited by Richard Francis-Bruce, with not one scene 
that should have been thrown on the cutting room floor; every second of 
screen time has a clear purpose, even when the developments themselves begin 
to grow strained by the finale.
One of the most powerful attributes of the film is its depiction of time 
passing within the penitentiary, as certain intimately drawn characters come 
and go through death row, just to end up as nothing more than memories within 
the walls of the building. This subject matter is superbly handled under the 
helming of writer-director Darabont, as are the occasional sequences of 
execution by electric chair. Credit must go to Darabont again for not turning 
his back on these harsh moments, as he graphically depicts the death scenes, 
which are tough to take not only for what they shows, but also because the 
victims are people we have grown to like and respect, whether they are guilty 
or not of their convicted crimes. One particular execution sequence is just 
about as stirring and devastatingly inhumane as anything I have ever seen on 
film before.
The ensemble cast of "The Green Mile" is first-rate across the board, 
headlined by star Tom Hanks, whose exact, naturalistic turn as Paul Edgecomb 
could very well be his most impressive since 1993's "Philadelphia" or 1994's 
"Forrest Gump." A perfect balance of personalities and casting, newcomer 
Michael Clarke Duncan is genuinely effective as the magical, honest John 
Coffey, all the more striking because it is his feature film debut. 
Supporting players all make an impression, no one more so than Michael Jeter, 
who is outstanding as inmate Del, a terminally lonely but giving person who 
finds joy in his life through the sort of loyal partnership he forms with Mr. 
Jingles. Heartbreaking and not easy to forget, Jeter gives one of the 
strongest supporting performances of the year. As cruel and heartless as a 
movie character can be without heading in cartoonish territory is Doug 
Hutchison, as Percy, a man without one redeeming quality who strives on the 
pain he causes others. While never rising above two dimensions, Hutchison 
still makes quite an impact. Sam Rockwell, a chameleon who has proven in 
recent years to be able to play a wide spectrum of characters (1997's "Box of 
Moonlight," 1998's "Lawn Dogs"), is downright creepy as William Wharton, a 
maniac that John Coffey senses is downright evil. The underrated Bonnie Hunt 
also turns in fine work as Paul's wife, despite not having much to do. 
While thoroughly effective and well-made, one major misstep the film takes is 
in its final fifteen minutes which, at first, abruptly switches gears into 
more mainstream territory, complete with a climactic scene that feels overly 
calculated and tough to swallow. This moment is so disappointing because it 
is purposefully treated to be a scene that gets audiences to cry, rather than 
one that is more truthful to the situation. Accordingly, when the wraparound 
story comes back into play in the end, the film takes another turn for the 
worst. Instead of being merely downbeat, the conclusion is inappropriately 
depressing and uncalled-for, and left me feeling more revolted than 
emotionally satisfied. [Side note: Riding home with my brother afterwards, we 
got into a brief argument spurred from me making a sarcastic comment at him, 
because the movie had put me in a very bad mood]. 
The ending may have come as a major letdown, but that, ultimately, cannot 
take away from the first 165 minutes of "The Green Mile," which are 
consistently engrossing and perceptive. Darabont is a master of writing and 
populating his films with memorable, solid supporting characters, and he has 
struck gold with his cast this time around. It's just too bad, then, that the 
finale could not have been stronger. It downgrades a potentially great film 
to being, at most, a very good one.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Cider_House_Rules_ (PG-13) ***
Of my six years of attending press screenings, the film that has
received by far the largest ovation at the film's end was
_The_Shawshank_Redemption_, Frank Darabont's 1994 adaptation of Stephen
King's prison-set novella.  Exquisitely written, directed, and acted, the
film was one of the most soul-stirring and moving motion pictures to
emerge from this decade, going on to earn seven Academy Award
nominations.  While the film ended up not winning a single statue (a
heinous snub if there ever were one), the film's esteem has only grown
through time, becoming on video the hit the film never was at the box
office.
With such a tough act to follow, it perhaps is no surprise that only now
has Darabont come out with his next film, which, as it happens, is also
an adaptation of a Stephen King prison story.  _The_Green_Mile_ shares a
number of other qualities with _Shawshank_, but one of them is not its
astounding excellence; not many will label the new film as the instant
classic its predecessor was.  But freed from the inevitable comparison,
on its own terms _The_Green_Mile_ is a very poignant and well-told tale,
albeit one not without its flaws.
As in _Shawshank_, the film is set in the past (here, 1935) and focuses
on an unlikely friendship that develops behind prison walls.  However,
the relationship here is between one Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks), the head
guard of a stretch of Death Row called "the green mile"; and John Coffey
(Michael Clarke Duncan), a an inmate convicted for the grisly murder of
two young girls.  Bulky and seven feet tall, Coffey certainly looks like
the type who could commit such a despicable crime, but his gentle
demeanor is a complete contradiction--as are the miraculous powers he
appears to possess.
This element of the fantastic is a fairly outlandish twist for a story
set on Death Row, but the turn is completely believable because Darabont
takes the time to strongly anchor his characters in reality.  However, he
takes a bit too much time; while getting to know and spending the time
with such colorful folk as Paul's guard cohorts and Coffey's fellow
inmates is rewarding, it could have been just as so in less the time.
The same can be said of the entirety of _The_Green_Mile_.  Execs at
Warner Bros. made a big deal about how they did not feel the need to cut
down the film after it received remarkably high marks at its first test
screening; even so, some trimming is clearly in order.  Granted, the
three-hour-plus film, bookended by scenes with an aged Paul (Dabbs Greer)
in the present day, consistently holds the interest and has an
unquestionably powerful emotional payoff.  But none of the film's virtues
would have been diminished with some careful pruning of the runtime.  In
fact, a shorter, less leisurely paced version would just bring its
strengths into clearer view.
And what strengths they are, particularly in the acting department. 
Hanks has become such a reliable dramatic performer over the years that a
good performance from him is hardly a surprise; needless to say, there
are no shocks here, and his trademark everyman quality makes him an
instantly likable and relatable lead.  More impressive, however, is the
much-buzzed-about work by Duncan, perhaps heretofore best known for his
supporting role in _Armageddon_.  Not much is learned, if anything at
all, about Coffey's past, but that Coffey is made into a believable human
being rather than a walking dramatic construct has a lot to do with
Duncan's vivid performance.  Just as good as the two leads are the
supporting players, all of whom shine.  Bonnie Hunt acquits herself well
in an uncharacteristically serious role as Paul's devoted wife; newcomer
Doug Hutchison is chilling as sadistic guard Percy Wetmore, as is Sam
Rockwell as psychotic inmate Wild Bill; and Michael Jeter is touching as
inmate Del, who takes in a pet mouse.  Gary Sinise also has a nice cameo
as Coffey's public defender.
With so much talent aboard, from the great cast to the solid storyteller
that is Darabont, perhaps expectations were trumped up to an unrealistic
level.  It goes without saying that _The_Green_Mile_ is no _Shawshank_;
after all, what is?  To give that easy criticism is to discount what
Darabont and his crew have accomplished, which is craft a heartfelt fable
that pushes all the right emotional buttons.  Long before its release,
_The_Green_Mile_ has been touted as the movie to beat at the Oscars, and
while I cannot honestly say that it's the best film I've seen this year,
it would certainly be a worthy winner.
The studio that is usually the one to beat during awards season is the
scrappy Disney subsidiary Miramax, and a lot of their awards hopes are
pinned on _The_Cider_House_Rules_.  An adaptation of John Irving's
highly-regarded novel (Irving also wrote the screenplay), _Cider_ is the
story of Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire), an orphan who is raised as protege
to one Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) at St. Cloud's orphanage.  Dr.
Larch hopes Homer will follow his path one day and assume his position at
St. Cloud's, but after the young couple of Cathy Kendall (Charlize
Theron) and Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd) stop by to take care of a
private matter, Homer decides to leave with them and experience the
world.  That he does, landing a job on Wally's mother's orchard while Dr.
Larch tries to cope with life without his surrogate son.
_Cider_ tackles a number of issues--abortion being the foremost--and
does so in an efficient manner, never detracting from the main story of
Homer's journey to self-discovery.  The film as a whole is an admirable
and enjoyable one, highlighted by superb performances, in particular
those of Delroy Lindo (as Homer's superior at the orchard) and, in a
surprisingly strong debut, R&B chanteuse Erykah Badu (as Lindo's
daughter).  But while a good film, _Cider_ is far from the great one
Miramax and director Lasse Hallström were hoping it would be, marred by
an unconvincing romantic subplot between Homer and Candy.  The
relationship is a keystone in Homer's growth as a person, but Maguire and
Theron have so little chemistry that it is never once believable.  If
_Cider_ is this year's big Oscar gun for Miramax, ŕ la _Shakespeare_in
_Love_ and _The_English_Patient_, then I don't think that the house the
Weinsteins built will be adding too many more, if any, gold statuettes to
their collection.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Scott Renshaw
THE GREEN MILE
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Tom Hanks, David Morse, Michael Clarke Duncan, James Cromwell,
Bonnie Hunt, Michael Jeter, Doug Hutchison, Sam Rockwell.
Screenplay:  Frank Darabont, based on the serial novel by Stephen King.
Producers:  David Valdes and Frank Darabont.
Director:  Frank Darabont.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  183 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In a way, you've got to admire Frank Darabont's chutzpah. After
pulling off an acclaimed, remarkably assured film-making debut with THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION in 1994, Darabont could have named his next project,
at any time he wanted. Instead, he waited five years, then selected as his
next project another Stephen King adaptation. Another Stephen King period
piece adaptation. Another Stephen King period piece adaptation set in a
prison. As if a successful rookie director didn't face enough of a
challenge from high expectations, Darabont practically threw audiences and
critics a dare: "Go ahead -- say 'It's no SHAWSHANK.'"
     His incredibly nervy choice almost works ... almost. Set primarily in
1935, THE GREEN MILE tells the story of Paul Edgecombe (Tom Hanks), a
guard on a Louisiana death row cell block with the titular designation. 
The latest arrival is John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), a hulk of a man
convicted of murdering two little girls found in his arms. Edgecombe is
surprised to discover that Coffey is gentle and quiet, but he's even more
surprised when Coffey begins exhibiting unique empathetic abilitites. As
life on the Mile continues, Edgecombe begins noticing even more unusual
things about John Coffey, leading him to suspect there's more to the man
than meets the eye.
     You're sure to see plenty of gripes about THE GREEN MILE that focus
on its three-hour-plus running time. It's a common and understandable
complaint in a year when 150+ minute running times are becoming standard
in "prestige films." However, the problem with THE GREEN MILE isn't simply
that it's long, but the way that it is long. Darabont's meticulous
attention to relating every event in the novel borders on fetishistic,
including encounters (like the one that permits a reunion between Hanks
and GUMP cast-mate Gary Sinise) that serve too little narrative purpose. 
THE GREEN MILE is never a bore during its three hours; indeed, it
consistently keeps you watching. This just isn't a story that builds to
anything compelling enough to warrant such epic length. Darabont's
adaptation doesn't show enough screenwriting creativity in transferring
the story to a cinematic context. Too often, it feels like a methodical
transcription.
     Darabont does have a way with actors, and that carries THE GREEN MILE
a long way. Michael Clarke Duncan is a shy and sympathetic Coffey, his
occasional moments of childlike wonder an effective balance against his
moments of anguish. There are two wonderfully wicked villains in sadistic,
nepotistically-advantaged guard Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison) and
maniacal inmate "Wild Bill" Wharton (Sam Rockwell). And any film with
Bonnie Hunt is doing something right. There is, unfortunately, a hole at
the center, and that hole is named Tom Hanks. In THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION,
the soulfulness of Morgan Freeman's performance grounded the film whenever
Darabont got too operatic. That quality is missing from Hanks. Though his
character also isn't as complex as Red, his performance at times feels too
mannered. I kept imagining David Morse -- who plays Edgecombe's right-hand
man "Brutal" Howell -- in the lead role, and suspecting THE GREEN MILE
would have been a better film with Morse's dramatic presence. Watching
Hanks emoting with a Sothern accent just kept reminding me of Forrest
Gump.
     With Edgecombe serving as a less-than-engrossing narrator, it's too
easy to notice the aforementioned operatic qualities: tearful goodbyes, 
battles between good and evil, more exploding light bulbs than I've seen
since THE NATURAL. There is no denying that THE GREEN MILE is a
well-crafted film, and that Coffey becomes an extremely affecting
character. It just takes a long time to get there, a long time that could
have been shortened in a more efficient screenplay. Darabont is a talented
director, and a pretty good writer. He's also earned the right to be less
slavishly devoted to his source material. While we wait for his next
effort -- and I don't think there are any more Stephen King prison stories
sitting around waiting to be made -- we can only applaud him for taking a
unique risk. And we can say, with a tinge of regret, "It's no SHAWSHANK."

Author
James Sanford
         The last time director Frank Darabont tackled a story by
Stephen King, the result was 1994's "The Shawshank Redemption," a
glorious emotional rollercoaster of a movie that never got its due at
the Oscars or at the box office; "Forrest Gump" was all the rage that
year.
 "The Green Mile," adapted from King's hugely popular serialized novel,
returns Darabont to the prison milieu of "Shawshank" and, as a ticket
selling incentive, he has managed to land "Gump" star Tom Hanks for the
role of Paul Edgecomb, the conscientious guard who learns a priceless
lesson about life while working on death-row. The mostly first-rate
supporting cast includes David Morse, James Cromwell, Bonnie Hunt and
Michael Clarke Duncan.
 Judged purely on its own merits, "Mile" is an entertaining,
extremely well-produced drama. It's also a film that's likely to be
enormously overrated by the millions of members of the Cult of Tom, that
sect which refused to admit "Saving Private Ryan" had some serious
flaws. Like "Ryan," "Mile" has dozens of shots of Hanks looking earnest
or mildly dismayed, a similarly clunky flashback structure (lifted
directed from King's pages), a tendency toward lengthiness, and too many
characters who never truly come to life. Michael Jeter's fey Eduard
Delacroix, for example, is taken straight from the actor's well-worn bag
of tics, while Doug Hutchison's Percy never evolves beyond a spoiled,
malevolent rich kid.
 "Mile" also displays a borderline-irritating tendency toward
clearly spelling out what emotion we're meant to feel at any given time,
particularly in the scenes involving Duncan's John Coffy, a towering
child-man whose dialogue and behavior sometimes veer dangerously close
to parody. Long before darabont gets around to having Coffey bathed in
the pure white light of a movie projector bulb you're likely to have
tired of the director and author's strenous attempts to turn this
mountain of innocence into a stand-in for Jesus Christ.
 Curiously, although Coffy becomes the focal point of "Mile,"
the film's most fascinating sections have little to do with him.
Darabont seems to have been much more intrigued by the day-to-day
operations of Edgecomb and his co-workers on "the green mile" (so named
because the prison floor is "the color of faded limes") than by the
supernatural twist the story ultimately takes.
 The sequences of Edgecomb supervising the rehearsals for an execution
and polishing "Old Sparky," the workers' nickname for the electric
chair, are quietly arresting, whereas the scenes showing a man expelling
disease from his body (he looks unfortunately like a backfiring
Dustbuster) or generating so much power he causes the lightbulbs in his
vicinity to shatter come off as overwrought.
 Despite the movie's numerous missteps, however, "Mile" has a
number of scenes in which you feel you've been transported back to
Depression-era Georgia. Edgecomb's relationships with his understanding
wife (a sweetly understated Hunt), his best friend Brutus (Morse,
uniformly superb)  and his deeply troubled boss (Cromwell) feel genuine.
And, as he did in "Shawshank," Darabont exquisitely captures the
claustrophobia of prison life. You can almost feel the unspoken sorrow
and resignation hanging in the air. James Sanford

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on March 3, 2000; certificate 18; 182 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Frank Darabont; produced by Frank Darabont, David Valdes.
Written by Frank Darabont; based on the serialised novel by Stephen King.
Photographed by David Tattersall; edited by Richard Francis-Bruce.
CAST.....
Tom Hanks..... Paul Edgecomb
David Morse..... Brutus 'Brutal' Howell
Michael Clarke Duncan..... John Coffey
Bonnie Hunt..... Jan Edgecomb
James Cromwell..... Warden Hal Moores
Michael Jeter..... Eduard 'Del' Delacroix
Graham Greene..... Arlen Bitterbuck
Sam Rockwell..... William 'Wild Bill' Wharton
Doug Hutchison..... Percy Wetmore
Here is a thoroughly absorbing supernatural fairytale about good and evil 
living under the same roof. Decent men work with cruel ones in this movie, 
and a creature with miraculous healing power winds up in a place inextricably 
linked with death. Perhaps that's the most appropriate place to witness him.
The location is E-block in a 1935 Louisiana prison, where inmates await the 
electric chair, and the condemned man's 'last mile' has been nicknamed 'the 
green mile' after the lime-coloured linoleum on the floor. We meet some of 
the guards: Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks), Brutus Howell (David Morse), Dean 
Stanton (Barry Pepper), Harry Terwilliger (Jeffrey Demunn), Percy Wetmore 
(Doug Hutchison).
All of these, except for the slimy Percy, who got his job because of a 
powerful relative, are good and patient men, who are firm yet kind to their 
prisoners. They view their role, correctly, as being a calming influence on 
inmates who would be dangerous if they got too nervy. "Think of this place as 
like an intensive care ward in a hospital," advises Paul.
One of the new guests is John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), a gigantic 
black man who has been convicted of the rape-murders of two young girls, but 
seems to exude simplicity and goodness, and turns out to have a very special 
ability. Other odd plot points creep up and get a fair bit of attention, such 
as a urinary infection Paul suffers from, an unusually talented mouse, and a 
boorish prisoner named Wharton. We wonder what significance all these things 
could possibly have, and then finally they come together in a climax of 
moving drama, religious symbolism and clever epilogue.
My vague descriptions are intentional. "The Green Mile" does not announce 
what it is about, but drops little clues here and there, letting its story 
unfold carefully, intriguing and enveloping us with its atmosphere. That is 
why virtue and depravity are set at equal levels throughout the film; the 
conflict is needed to create quietly gripping tension. And it is exactly how 
the original Stephen King source material worked -- slyly revealing the story 
by taking things slowly, letting us settle in, earning our care.
King released "The Green Mile" as a novel in six parts, leaving intervals of 
several months between instalments, engaging his public in a guessing game 
about what direction the material would go in. Even if you read the whole 
series at once, as I did, you still felt led through it slowly, because the 
author's prose was so delicate and detailed. The film captures this 
remarkably well; Frank Darabont, the writer and director, who previously 
adapted a King work into the great "Shawshank Redemption", recognises 
deliberate pacing as an essential part of this story, and never falls into 
the trap of condensing it into a series of meaningless spooky events.
If only Darabont had bought the rights to Alex Garland's "The Beach", instead 
of that hyperactive boor Danny Boyle! The way he lets "The Green Mile" 
develop involves us with the intimacy of a good book. The film is three hours 
long, but contrary to the opinions of some critics, extensive length is not 
the film's problem, but its appeal. We get so immersed in the routine of life 
on the 'green mile' that when paranormal activity starts to happen, we accept 
it, and are amazed along with the characters. Audience members prepared to 
sit still and give the movie a chance will be handsomely rewarded.
Not that you'd think it from the ads. This week two brilliant new releases, 
"The Green Mile" and "Three Kings", have been so badly misrepresented by 
their television commercials that many cinema-goers will be persuaded to stay 
at home. Darabont's film has been portrayed as some sort of mawkish 
sentimental drama, with its scenes of good fable taken out of context, and 
made to look like bad attempts at realism. This is a movie that knows exactly 
what it's doing, and while it does have its fair share of tender moments, 
they're needed to balance out the brutality. One scene, for example, 
graphically depicts an execution Percy has rigged to go wrong, and is one of 
the most horrifying single moments ever shown on film -- my hand 
instinctively jumped to cover my eyes. I was able to remove it, and look on, 
but it really means something when a film can trigger involuntary defensive 
movements.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Walter Frith
Director Frank Darabont's 1994 classic 'The Shawshank Redemption' has become
such a hit with the public that it's incredible the way people still talk
about it five and six years after its release.  It received seven Oscar
nominations including one for best picture but didn't win in any category.
Initially a box office flop with a take of only 28 million dollars, the film
gained steam in the second run media such as home video, pay t.v., and
recently, on a much welcomed DVD.  Consistently maintaining a position in
the top 5 on the Internet Movie Database's top 250 films of all time, and
right up their in the opinion of film buff's with films such as 'The
Godfather', 'Schindler's List', 'Casablanca' and 'Citizen Kane', 'The
Shawshank Redemption' now provides Darabont with a variation on that film.
Like 'The Shawshank Redemption', 'The Green Mile' is also based on a Stephen
King novel (and is written for the screen by Frank Darabont) and is a prison
film set in the past but with a twist, it's about miracles and the presence
of supernatural goodness witnessed by guards and inmates on a death row
section of prison in the south in the middle of the 1930's.  The title of
the film refers to the surface of the floor on death row, covered with green
tile and that walk to the electric chair can certainly seem like a mile with
the thought of where you will spend eternity hanging in the balance.
The film begins in the present day where a nursing home patient reflects on
his past and then we go there to see that as a young man he is portrayed by
Tom Hanks who stars as Paul Edgecomb, the head of the death row guards.
Included in the men under him are Brutus "Brutal" Howell (David Morse) and
the slimy and weasel like Percy (Doug Hutchinson) who has connections in
government and can have any job the state offers and wants to be a prison
guard because he views prison as a "bucket of pi** to drown rats in".
Hutchinson provided many chills for me in the first season of television's
'The X-Files' in 1993-94 in an episode and later in that same season, a
sequel to it where he played a liver eating mutant over a hundred years old
but looking like a man in his early thirties.  Sort of an alternative
vampire if you will.  The conflicts of duty and conduct on the job for these
death row guards makes the story watchable every second and their eventual
fates are just what the audience deserves to see.
One day, a prisoner is brought in.  He is a large black man named John
Coffey and is seemingly over seven feet tall (Michael Clarke Duncan in an
Oscar-worthy role).  He is set to be executed but his nature convinces
Edgecomb he is innocent of the crime he was convicted for.....murder.  We
see that he has healing powers so great, they are almost God like in helping
many people shake off their physical ailments such as a urinary track
problem that Edgecomb suffers from.
Darabont structures his film in three parts.  The execution of three
prisoners, one white, one native-American and the other black, all separated
about an hour apart over the film's three hour running time and the movie
has an anti-climax about hope, faith and showing an eventual injustice by
the time it's all over.
In many ways, the film is better directed than 'The Shawshank Redemption'
since the story is more confined and it is harder for Darabont to find
avenues of interest and the film looks like a play in many spots and its
deliberate slow pace at times is reflective of the very nature of death row,
a process that takes far too much time in the minds of many, especially
those convicted and the surviving members of a victim's loved ones.  'The
Green Mile' is filled with little elements of detail about the day to day
life of both prison guards and inmates and its humanity is countered by the
prejudices and injustices of a darker time where justice seemed to often be
discarded for the sake of comforting those desperate for a conviction.
Something that really hasn't changed in many situations all that much after
all these years gone by.
As of the date of this review, (February 7, 2000), the state of Illinois has
recently suspended the death penalty to look into flaws in the system where
many more people than first thought on death row may actually be innocent.
'The Green Mile' is one of 1999's best films because it centers on making
the film entertainment and emotion first and social commentary second.
After all, the movies should often provide us with thoughts other than those
in our own world and Stephen King's touch of the supernatural in this film
gives us an alternative and original look that can make us feel somewhat
good about a bleak and tragic situation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Homer Yen
There is an underlying theme that runs through "The
Green Mile," which I think rings hauntingly true.  And
that message is this: Although love and brotherhood
are the pillars of society, evil constantly chips away
at its foundation.  Those who try to tirelessly uphold
goodness are subject to great duress.  Some grow weary
over time and give up.  Others continue their battle
through great sacrifice.  
"The Green Mile," set during the post-Depressionary
era in the deep South, is a touching and tender story
about two men who try to uphold these heavy pillars. 
Paul (Tom Hanks) is one of these men, whose outlook on
life is seriously challenged everyday.  He has taken
on some kind of ailment that causes him great pain. 
His best friend and warden of the Penitentiary (James
Cromwell) is suffering a personal tragedy.  And his
job immerses him in an environment that points toward
society's continual decline.  
Paul is a supervisor of correctional officers for Cell
Block E at the Louisiana State Penitentiary. 
Prisoners who come to this particular cellblock are
all convicted murderers who will soon be executed for
their heinous crimes.  One new arrival severely taxes
Paul's love for humanity.  Nicknamed Wild Bill' (Sam
Rockwell), he is mean, vulgar, and openly invites
confrontation.  No one deserves a swifter death than
this morally depraved psychotic killer does.  Paul is
also baffled by the mean-spiritedness of one of his
officers, Percy (Paul Hutchison), who likes to lash
out at cellmates out of sheer petulance.  Percy is
nothing but a selfish wimp, but only gets his way
because he is the Governor's nephew.  These sets of
circumstances would be enough to tax any man's
patience.  Yet Paul believes that good exists in
everyone, and exercises compassion and charity in
everything he does.
One day, he receives a new prisoner name John Coffey
(Michael Clarke Duncan).  He has been convicted of
brutally raping two young girls.  John is quite a
sight to behold.  With his muscular build and 300
pound, 7-foot tall frame, he could easily intimidate
the bravest of men.  But there's something gentile
about him.  "Do you leave the lights on after dark,"
he asks Paul in a deep, syrupy voice?  He's quiet and
simple-minded.  He's even afraid of the dark and
sometimes cries at night.  But what really humbles
Paul is John's unique gift of healing.  What John
possesses is a gift from God.  As Paul gets to know
him a little better, he begins to question his guilt. 
"I work with violent men everyday," he says.  "There
doesn't seem to be any real violence in him." 
The "Green Mile" is a wonderfully told story,
purposeful in pace and thoughtful in its development. 
Characters slowly blossom like flowers in the morning
air.  It takes over an hour to meet before all of the
characters are fully introduced.  The result is an
emotionally compelling story filled with vivid
characters, each with affecting tales of their own. 
Tom Hanks effectively conveys fear and awe in light of
what he has seen as well as his personal anguish given
his duty at hand.  And the supporting characters all
add to the movies overall depth.  I only wished that
it were 30 minutes shorter.  It does take quite some
patience to be able to sit through a three-hour movie.
 And the first and last 15 minutes are not as
impactful as the rest of the film.  But your time will
be well rewarded, and when the Oscar nominations are
announced, I suspect that this film will be well
rewarded too.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./ Castle Rock Entertainment
 Director: Frank Darabont
 Writer: Frank Darabont, novel by Stephen King
 Cast: Tom Hanks, David Morse, Bonnie Hunt, Michael
Duncan, James Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Graham Greene,
Doug Hutchison, Sam Rockwell, Barry Pepper, Jeffrey
DeMunn
   "The Green Mile" has come out at an opportune time when
the Supreme Court is again considering whether capital
punishment constitutes cruel and unusual punishment. 
Motivated by two botched executions in Florida, the court has
agreed once again to research whether the legal taking of life
squares with the Constitution's Eighth Amendment.  
   And what an argument the movie presents!  Without
polemically coming out for or against capital punishment,
Frank Darabont's script, based closely on Stephen King's
once-serialized set of six novellas, takes on universal
meaning while implicitly condemning the legal taking of live
by the state.  The world is populated with bad people. 
Always was and always will be.  But there are good guys out
there to to meliorate--if not cancel out--the evil.  This is the
overall communication of King's page-turner, a book
whose prose is hardly lyrical, whose story is less than
original, but which is nonetheless a compelling piece of
fiction.  Because this concept is graphically dramatized by
King, the book makes for a solid choice for a screen adaption
and, given the top-notch ensemble acting and effective--if
generally conventional--cinematography under Frank
Darabont's direction, the three hours slide by effortlessly as
the audience takes in the pathos and the humor of a
remarkable story.
   Given Stephen King's penchant for horror and the
supernatural, you'd expect the usual suspects of kiddieland
shivers: shaking rooms, characters turning vampiric, ghouls
emerging from nooks and crannies: but happily "The Green
Mile" treats the transcendental with a light touch, discreetly
displaying occult occurrences more as metaphor than
materiality. Framing the tale by opening and closing it in the
present day--which gives the picture the mood of Steven
Spielberg's "Schindler's List"--Darabont opens the drama on
the 108-year-old Paul Edgecomb (played at that stage by
Dabbs Greer) who chats with his best friend in a nursing
home about his experiences during the 1930s when he was
just 44 years old.   Edgecomb (Tom Hanks), the supervising
guard in the Louisiana death house, oversees a handful of
prisoners scheduled to die in the Cold Spring Penitentiary
electric chair.  We get the impression from the current crew
who are behind bars that some have been quiet and
repentant while others are off-the-wall guilt-free blackguards
with no compunctions about what they had done.  Edgecomb
runs the ward together with Brutus Howell (David Morse),
Dean Stanton (Barry Pepper), Harry Terwilliger (Jeffrey
DeMunn) and Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison), the last
being a well-connected sadist who never lets a moment pass
by without doing his worst to the prisoners.  Life changes
dramatically when a huge convict, John Coffey (Michael
Clarke Duncan) is brought in, found guilty of brutally raping
and murdering two young girls--found by a posse with the
victims still bloodied in his arms.  Illiterate, retarded, and
menacing, Coffey is nonetheless a man of a sweet disposition
that belies his alleged crime--a murder which even his lawyer
(Gary Sinise) believes he committed.  You become aware of
Stephen King's hand only when some wondrous events
occur, circumstances that convince the guards that this
enormous man is a miracle of God.  One involves the way
John Coffey helps Edgecomb with a particularly gruesome
problem--a urinary tract infection that forces him to urinate
"razor blades" and puts a damper on his marriage.  The
other, shown in a remarkably touching scene, is the
technique he uses to aid a little mouse who has become the
pet of one of the convicts, Eduard Delacroix (Michael Jeter),
a Cajun who is despised by guard Percy.
   Most of the considerable running time of the picture is
spent on the daily routines, the drama coming from the
contrast between two evil fellows and the decent people who
must deal with them.  One convict, known as Wild Bill
Wharton (Sam Rockwell) is so off-the-wall heinous that we
wonder how he was ever judged competent to stand trial. 
Similarly Percy Wetmore demonstrates that people on the
other side of the bars can be almost as abhorrent, and given
the power vested in them by the state are capable of inflicting
great damage.  By contrast, the other guards are men of
conscience who do their best to keep things quiet on the wing
by acting diplomatically with the doomed prisoners.
   The title of the story comes from the green linoleum that
lines the floor of the death chamber, a floor that each
condemned man must eventually walk down on the way to
"Old Sparky."  In what is conceivably authentic historically,
when a condemned man is executed, he is not walled off
from the dozen or so witnesses but "rides the lightning" just a
few feet away from the observers in the first row.  We can
only speculate as to the reason director Darabont--known for
his "Shawshank Redemption" several years back--chose
graphically to stage executions thrice, in one case graphically
displaying the result of a botched job in which the prisoner
was literally burned alive.  (Such an event actually occurred
not just once in Florida's electric chair, the last causing the
Supreme Court to reconsider the justice of the death penalty
once again.)
   Though many will predictably say that the film could be
tightened and cut to two hours, the decency of all but one of
the guards, the compelling performance by Michael Duncan
as a man able to perform astonishing feats, and the skillful
manner by which the men, good and evil are contrasted,
provide solid justification for its unusual length.  Terence
Marsh's production design is adept enough that the movie
avoids the closed-in feeling that could have given the indoor
scenes the appearance of a photographed play.  This picture
is, like the cigarette of the old-time commercials, worth
walking a mile for.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
The Green Mile (1999) 
Rated R; running time 188 minutes
Genre: Drama
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0120689 
Official site: http://www.thegreenmile.com/  
Written by: Frank Darabont (based on the novel by Stephen King)
Directed by: Frank Darabont
Starring: Tom Hanks, Michael Clarke Duncan, David Morse, Doug Hutchison, 
Michael Jeter, James Cromwell, Bonnie Hunt, Sam Rockwell, 
Jeffrey DeMunn, Barry Pepper, Harry Dean Stanton, Patricia Clarkson, 
Graham Greene, Dabbs Greer, Eve Brent, Gary Sinise
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsgreen.html
Wow.  Awesome.  Wonderful.  Excellent.  Speechless. 
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Set in 1935 Louisiana, "The Green Mile" revolves around a few good men 
(and a couple'a scoundrels, a Chick or two, and a mouse) caught up in a 
bad situation.
In Louisana's Cold Mountain State Penitentiary, Corrections Officer Paul 
Edgecomb (Tom Hanks), along with his fellow guards Brutus "Brutal" 
Howell (David Morse), Harry Terwilleger (Jeffrey DeMunn), and Dean 
Stanton (Barry Pepper), are responsible, with the help of trustee inmate 
Toot-Toot (Harry Dean Stanton), for preparing Death Row inmates to walk 
the Last Mile (called the Green Mile here because of the green-colored 
floor tiles) to "Old Sparky"--the electric chair.  Inmates Eduard "Del" 
Delacroix (Michael Jeter) and Arlen Bitterbuck (Graham Greene) are 
joined by "Wild Bill" Wharton (Sam Rockwell), an vile inmate who Warden 
Hal Moores (James Cromwell) describes as a "problem child", and John 
Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), a magnificently large man accused of 
raping and killing two young girls--and in a study of contrasts, Coffey 
is brought in to Death Row's E-block by Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison), 
a small (in every way) man whose sense of self-worth is achieved solely 
through his connections to the state governor.  Edgecomb and his crew's 
task of leading the inmates to their death, as calmly as possible, is 
hindered by Percy's small-mindness - but Coffey has a special gift that 
will play a significant role in all of their lives (not to mention the 
life of a wee rodent...)
I prepared myself for "The Green Mile" keeping a few things in mind from 
what I've read about the movie in the trade mags, and saw in various 
trailers: first, that the character John Coffey was a big ("huge", 
actually, fits better) Black man accused of rape and murder in the South 
of the 1930's--which is to say, there'd likely be plenty for me to write 
about in the "Black Factor"; second, that there was some conceptual 
"magic" involved in the story (which meant that my Suspension Of 
Disbelief bar would have to be raised a bit); and third, that I'd 
probably want to go to the bathroom beforehand, since at 3 hours and 15 
minutes (with trailers), it'd be a long stretch.  Armed with the 
knowledge of these things, and that this flick is based on horror 
novelist Steven King's novella, I went in prepared for anything to 
happen.  And came out awed. 
Reminiscent of King's previous against-the-grain work, "The Shawshank 
Redemption", TGM lived up to its hype, and then some.  The protagonists 
in each--Morgan Freeman and Tim Robbins in "Shawshank",  Hanks and 
Duncan here--have similar roles to play in each others' lives; and 
though "Shawshank" was more about the prisoners than "Mile", they both 
reflected excellently on how prison affects the guards as well as the 
guarded.  (As an aside, I had the privilege of watching both "Shawshank" 
and "Mile" with a Corrections Officer--my husband, Bear--and was 
heartened by his saying that he tries to be the kind of guard that Paul 
was; though "The Green Mile" was a fable, the idea that the kind of 
guard that Percy was--a troublemaker who could only be strong if others 
were weak--was not someone to be emulated, wasn't lost on either of us).
The performances were outstanding; there was hardly a missed note from 
any of the actors.  Of the three leads that are normally bandied about, 
Hanks was as Oscar-worthy as he has been in the past, playing a man 
whose pain goes deeper, much deeper, than the physical ailment from 
which he suffers (man, it's hard to believe that this is the same actor 
from TV's "Bosom Buddies", eh?); Hutchison made me want to pimp-slap 
Percy every time I saw him (which is to say, Hutchinson did his job 
well); and if Duncan doesn't get a nomination from this, There Is No 
Justice In Hollywood (yeah, I know; I'm just sayin'); who says that Big 
Men can't act?  
But the "secondary" characters and actors don't get enough props for 
their roles in this flick, so let me remedy that here.  As I said in my 
review "Crazy In Alabama", David Morse is one of the most underrated 
actors in the business; neither acquiesent nor living up to his moniker, 
Brutal had my attention in every scene he was in, and it's a tribute to 
Morse's acting skills that he was more than able to hold his own against 
the Powerhouse Three that are Hanks, Duncan and Hutchison.  DeMunn and 
Pepper blended more into the background, but that's pretty much where 
their characters should've been; Cromwell, like Morse, is an 
extraordinary character actor, and his warden, grieving over the illness 
of his wife Melinda (Patricia Clarkson) showed a more tender side of 
Cromwell than he usually plays (Clarkson, on the other hand, just on 
this side of hammy; fortunately, we didn't see her for long).  Michael 
Jeter, as creole inmate Delacroix, was interesting though a little 
annoying; Green's Bitterbuck was barely there; having only a few lines, 
maybe his performance mostly wound up on the cutting-room floor; but the 
inmate to watch was the villainous (though amusing at times) Wild Bill.  
Whoever came up with the term "over-the-top", must've had Sam Rockwell 
in mind; but "over-the-top" was what Wild Bill called for, and Rockwell 
delivered.
As Jan Edgecomb, Bonnie Hunt once again added a playful quietness to a 
supporting-wife role, that matched Hanks' Paul Edgecomb nearly perfectly 
(the picnic scene with their knowing glances, was nice to see with 
someone I've shared such glances with); and nearly stealing the show was 
Harry Dean Stanton as Toot-Toot.  Besides the creepiness of the actor 
sharing a name with one of the characters, Toot-Toot was a riot ("still 
prayin' down here!").  And though he was in a 
blink-and-you'll-almost-miss-it cameo, Gary Sinise, Hanks' co-star from 
"Forrest Gump", makes an appearance as Coffey's lawyer 
(court-appointed?) Burt Hammersmith, that, had it been dragged out, 
would've impacted negatively on the believability of the story.
All that said, I'm glad I waited until this morning to write my review 
(I watched it late last night, and was exhausted, but gladly so, when I 
finally got home); the passage of time gave me a chance to reflect more 
objectively on it, which allowed me to recognize some flaws that I all 
but ignored last night.  Length aside, "Mile" did lay the 
mystical/spiritual nature of Coffey on pretty thick; I haven't read 
King's book, but one couldn't help but notice The Point that was being 
driven home, especially in the scene where Coffey holds Edgecomb hands 
to "share a piece of himself" with Edgecomb.  Building on to this, the 
weakest link in the movie was the flash-forward to Old Paul (played by 
Dabbs Greer, reportedly because Tom Hanks didn't look right in Old Folks 
makeup); if we hadn't gotten The Point from Coffey and young Edgecomb, 
Old Paul made sure we did, with his speech to Elaine (Eve Brent).  It's 
too bad that this was included; it provided unnecessary foreground noise 
that distracted from the story, told well enough in the timeframe of the 
1930s.
But that was a minor hiccup; the body of the film played just fine.  So 
fine that, if I can ever block out 188 minutes of my time for it, I plan 
on seeing it again.  Can't think of a better recommendation than that.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
It takes a strong Black man, secure in his Blackness and acting 
capabilities, to agree to play what on the surface appears to be a 
"simple nigra"; but Michael Clarke Duncan (a former ditch digger; 
"Entertainment Weekly" did a six-part spread on "The Green Mile" that is 
good reading for a lot of background details on the movie and its cast 
and crew) was wise enough to know that Coffey needed to be played 
exactly as he played him.  Coffey's humbleness belayed an inner strength 
that was felt by all the characters--yes, even the vile ones; and unless 
I miss my guess, that was no accident of acting on Duncan's part.  Good 
for him, I say.
Further, the idea that TGM was Yet Another "White man redeems the 
pitiful pathetic Black man" film, is dispelled not long into the movie; 
in fact, the opposite is more accurate.  So to those who saw it and 
tripped out on his "yassuh boss" acting, remember the times and the 
character that Duncan was playing, and talk to someone that was from the 
South in the 1930s to see if his characterization was on the money or 
not.  And to those who haven't seen it and are still trippin', go see 
it, or hush up.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I liked this quote from Jim "Chante" Hill so much, I asked him if I 
could use it here: 
  "If you crank out as many books as [Steven King] has, you're bound 
   to get a good one every now and again.  'Mile' is excellent, because
   like 'Shawshank' it is not a traditional horror movie but is rather
   an exploration of the good and the evil in man, cast in stark relief
   by the confines of prison."
I couldn't have said it better myself.
"The Green Mile" (rating: greenlight) 
A green light for "The Green Mile".  Seems apropos, no?

Author
Jerry Saravia
The Stephen King books that usually adapt well to the screen are the
melodramas. Sure, in terms of horror, we have had "Carrie" and "The Dead Zone,"
yet often they are so ludicrous ("Maximum Overdrive") and badly shaped that
they come across as pale echoes of their literary counterparts. "The Shawshank
Redemption" was one major exception to the rule, as well as "Stand By Me" (both
adapted from the "Different Seasons" book). "The Green Mile" is based on a
six-part novel from 1996, once again focusing on a prison setting (as did
"Shawshank"), and once again directed by Frank Daranbot, who also helmed
"Shawshank."It may not be as moving or as deeply profound as "Shawshank," but
it will do.
"The Green Mile" begins with a old man at a nursing home who weeps when he
watches Fred Astaire singing "Cheek to Cheek" in "Top Hat." The reason for his
distress is outlined in a flashback to an Alabama prison in the 1930's where he
worked as a prison guard. Tom Hanks plays death-row guard Paul Edgecomb, who
has a urinary tract infection he tries to keep hidden. There are other guards
in this pristine-looking yet ominous, lime-colored prison, such as David Morse
(once the gentle, bird-like doctor in TV's "St. Elsewhere") as the imposing
second-in-command, the clean-cut kid (Barry Pepper, best remembered as the
Biblical sharpshooter in "Saving Private Ryan"), and the past master guard
(Jeffrey DeMunn), who's seen it all. There is also the ambitious, mean,
sadistic guard, Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchinson), who has no qualms about
taunting the prisoners or killing mice. One mouse in particular that has the
guards in awe is adopted by a prisoner named Delacroix (Michael Jeter), and
named Mr. Jingles. 
One day, a massive bulk of a man named John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan) is
brought in for the crime of killing two young girls. He seems like a sweet man,
afraid of the dark, and takes a liking to Mr. Jingles. Paul Edgecomb doubts the
man is capable of violence, especially when John's hands glow mysteriously and
heals Paul's infection. But nobody has heard of Mr. Coffey. "He fell out of the
sky," says John's former lawyer (Gary Sinise, in an outstanding cameo). 
"The Green Mile" spends an inordinate amount of time expounding on the daily
routines of the guards - their camaraderie, how they bring in the prisoners,
their respectful treatment of them, and the preparations for the inevitable
executions (there are two of them in the film, and they are quite disturbing).
All this is as powerfully executed, no pun intended, as anything in "The
Shawshank Redemption," and the performance by Hutchinson reinforces that. His
character, Percy, has a killer instinct but he can also be scared and taunted -
it is a twisty, fascinating character.
The major fault with "The Green Mile" lies with the tedious bookends showing an
older Edgecomb, and it feels like writer-director Darabont is vying for the
same emotion as "Saving Private Ryan." No sale, and it is an unwanted
distraction that detracts from the more powerful moments in the film. Another
fault lies with the enormous sobbing scenes that actor Michael Clarke Duncan is
required to do - every scene he's in, he's teary-eyed. Duncan could have used
some moments of silence so that we would not know what to think of such a
gentle giant. On the other hand, director Darabont aims to make every moment as
dramatic as possible, cued with stretches of Thomas Newman's musical score,
making every scene far too self-important. I've said it before, and I will say
it again - restraint is an admirable trait. 
Though it does not match the power of Darabont's "Shawshank," "The Green Mile"
has a few great scenes in what is otherwise a middling, semi-laborious film
that plays it safe, and would have benefitted from some screenplay deletions.
But in an era where there are so few good Stephen King films, "The Green Mile"
is a step in the right direction. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
John Carroll
THE GREEN MILE, starring Tom Hanks, Doug Hutchison, David Morse, Bonnie Hunt,
Michael Duncan, James Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Sam Rockwell, Barry Pepper,
Patricia Clarkson, Graham Greene, Jeffrey DeMunn, Dabbs Greer and Harry Dean
Stanton.  Directed by Frank Darabont.  1999.
   After witnessing a film like The Shawshank Redemption, you have to wonder
about two things: first, why the heck does Stephen King write a lot of horror
junk when he has such tremendous ability to write about other subjects, like
The Shawshank Redemption, and second, when are Darabont and King gonna team up
again?  Well, to anyone looking for these answers, take a walk down The Green
Mile, the latest collaborative prison-setting effort from the Darabont-King
team.
   The Green Mile is a prison drama based on Stephen King's six-part serial
novel.  As it goes with most book adaptations, the book is indeed better. 
However, Darabont does such an immense job converting the book to the silver
screen, he stays faithful to King's novel while giving it an entertaining
aspect on the big screen.  While the original book focused on the whole aspect
of prison life and the interaction between the inmates and the guards, the
movie tries to follow that same footing, but also divulges deeper into the
relationship between guard Paul Edgecomb and John Coffey, an immense man
convicted of raping and murdering two little girls.
   Tom Hanks stars in the film, and plays the role solidly.  His performance is
not like the Oscar-nominated roles of the past, but considering the immense
talent of this ensamble, he does not need to be.  Hanks plays the younger
Edgecomb, while Dabbs Greer plays the older Edgecomb.  The older Edgecomb
bookends the film, reflecting on the year of 1935, and as he describes it, the
year of his terrible urinary infection and also the year of John Coffey.  While
this bookending may seem pretty pretentious, considering two of the most
popular films of the 90s, Saving Private Ryan and Titanic, used this method,
The Green Mile, written by Stephen King, follows this method.  And considering
The Green Mile was brainstormed and written before Titanic and Saving Private
Ryan, The Green Mile just sticks to the novel, and is not trying to follow the
rest of the pack.
   With Tom Hanks in the film, The Green Mile automatically was tagged as the
film to beat for the Academy Awards.  And while Hanks's performance may not be
above and beyond this year's competition, The Green Mile will definitely be a
contender this March, if justice is served.  Ironically though, Hanks does not
carry The Green Mile towards near-perfection.  In fact, no member of the cast
truly lead the film, it was definitely an ensemble performance, and a major
success at that.
   The ensemble definitely leads this film, but there are a few breakout
performances that are worthy of note.  First of all, Doug Hutchison is yet
another young actor who should be garnering more leading roles as the Millenium
approaches.  His performance as the evil and cowardly Percy Wetmore is
impeccable, and undoubtedly the best of the film.  He contributes perfectly to
the group, while still making a name of himself.  His Percy is dead on with the
character of King's novel.  Secondly, Michael Duncan, whose only previous major
roles came in Armageddon and A Night at the Roxbury, breaks out of his shell as
the enormous, yet spiritually powerful, John Coffey.  Be sure to note his
initials, because Darabont makes many religious references to Coffey's powers,
which both support and detract from The Green Mile.  And finally, the
impeccable Mr. Jingles.  Heavy advertising has taken place in the past month
for Stuart Little, but if you are looking for real mousey entertainment, The
Green Mile's mascot, Mr. Jingles, is the mouse to see this winter.
   The rest of the ensemble blends in with the rest, and until viewing the
credits, you never notice how many major roles are displayed in The Green Mile.
 Each character, from Tom Hanks's Paul Edgecomb to Gary Sinise's defense
attorney who spends all of three minutes on screen, play a tremendous role
towards advancing The Green Mile to its ultimate destination.
   Is there anything wrong with The Green Mile?  Yes, as minor as they may be,
there are one or two minor flaws, but nothing major.  The first thing that
comes to everyone's mind is the film's running time, but all things considered,
The Green Mile stays entertaining for pretty much all of its three hours.  When
trash like The Haunting has problems even filling up two hours, The Green Mile
is a fresh of breath air as its character interaction and unique entertainment
and sentiment keep everyone interested for the three hour marathon.
   Now onto the flaws.  I, for one, have read the book.  While some may see
that as a disadvantage, because it would prevent me from reviewing the film
fairly, it is actually an extreme advantage in the case of The Green Mile. 
While the film is very good, when it ventures into John Coffey's supernatural
powers, a lot of viewers who have not read the novel will be left in the dark. 
In the end, mostof the loose ends of the fiml are tied together, but it is
fairly vague to some people what is going on, which may lead to their
dismissing Coffey's acts as pure pretentiousness.  However, Darabont tries his
best, and The Green Mile does eventually make sense, just be sure to pay
attention.
   Those flaws may be nitpicking, but in the end, that is all The Green Mile
actualls fails at doing.  It has true sentiment and despite its few lapses into
unbelievability, The Green Mile keeps you entertained for the full three hours
with an unbelievable ensemble cast and a wonderful plot.  As Paul Edgecomb
says, the Green Mile can be "oh so long," but in the eyes of this critic, it is
also 'oh so beautiful.'
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Steve Rhodes
With THE GREEN MILE, writer and director Frank Darabont (THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION) is back with his second Stephen King adaptation.  This time
it's the story of a gentle giant, John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan),
who wouldn't harm a fly or a mouse -- more on the rodent later.  Since
he's a miracle worker who finds himself on death row, the story has a
fairytale aspect to soften somewhat its many horrific execution scenes.
Like a beloved old uncle who drops by to tell you a story, Darabont
rambles on and on, frequently letting himself get sidetracked.  The
result is a full three-hour movie that has no business being any longer
than two.  The viewers listen politely, trying not to fall asleep in the
long, slow moments because the acting from the ensemble cast is superb.
But with Darabont's proclivity for telegraphing every major plot turn
way in advance, much of the drama is removed.
In a performance certain to garner him another best actor nomination,
Tom Hanks plays Paul Edgecomb, the head guard of the death row section
-- called the "Green Mile" -- of Cold Mountain Penitentiary, where John
is sent to be fried in "Old Sparky" for supposedly killing and raping
two young girls.  Like the rest of the story, the director never allows
for much doubt about the crime.  (Why can't we have more mystery in our
motion pictures?)
Set in 1935, the claustrophobic movie takes place mainly within a few
rooms of a prison.  David Tattersall's lush cinematography makes the few
images outside the prison walls warmly nostalgic and the ones inside,
when the miracles occur, magical.
So deeply religious is Paul that he constantly worries about how his
actions will affect his own Judgment Day in heaven.  More a minister
than a guard to most of his inmates, he can deal effectively with
troublemakers if the situation calls for it.  Even if he gets awards for
his performance, Hanks's work here is relatively middle of the road for
him, which is a compliment to his talents.  He doesn't even have to
deliver his strongest work to justly be considered for an Academy Award.
A mouse named Mr. Jingles, who gets lots of screen time, steals scene
after scene with his antics.  The often funny script becomes charming as
well when the little critter takes center stage to strut his stuff like
the circus insects in A BUG'S LIFE.
"Sometimes the green mile seems so long," we are told in narration.  And
therein lies the problem.  What should have been a great film turns into
merely an enjoyable one because of its drawn-out length.  The
performances are admirable, but the characters aren't quite compelling.
You end up respecting the show more than liking it.  As it constantly
tries to shock us with frightening images of people being electrocuted,
we find ourselves becoming dispassionate observers.  Sometimes
intentional manipulation backfires as it does here.  Being instructed to
cry on cue every time they turn on the juice, this member of the
audience just wasn't able to perform his role properly.
THE GREEN MILE runs a full hour too long at 3:03.  It is rated R for
violence, language and some sex-related material and would be acceptable
for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, December 17.
In the San Jose area it will be playing at the AMC and the Century
theaters.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
She asked me what kind of movies I liked, and I couldn't answer.  "All
sorts of movies," would have been true, but it wouldn't have been an
answer.  Say "action movies" and she'll think you're just some typical
guy who would drag her to Jean Claude Van Damme kickboxer movies.  Say
"science fiction movies" and she'll think you're a member of the
geekhood, some sort of inane loser who can't match his socks.  Saying
"Quentin Tarantino movies" or, God help you, "Jackie Chan movies"
wouldn't help matters on that front, either.  "Independent movies?"
Please.
It's not any better to go the other way, either.  Say "gushy romantic
movies", and there's not telling what she'll think of that, probably not
anything good.  (I think I ended up saying something about how I didn't
see a lot of foreign movies, and changing the conversation to how good
Being John Malkovich was.)
Of course, at that time, I hadn't seen The Green Mile.  I wish I had.
That way, I'd have a ready-made answer:  "I like movies like The Green
Mile." And I liked The Green Mile for... oh, well, for several reasons.
* I like movies with Gary Sinise in them.  Nitpickers will point out
that Sinise is in The Green Mile for only a moment, and his performance
is hardly the most stirring in the picture.  Fine.  I like Gary Sinise.
I especially like it when he hooks up with Tom Hanks.  The Green Mile
isn't quite in the same neighborhood as Forrest Gump or Apollo 13, but
the caliber of acting is just as high.
And, you know, when you think about it, there are a lot of actors in
this movie who have the same high acting ethic as Sinise.  Consider the
work of David Morse and James Cromwell, two talented actors who have
spent a lot of time lately playing heavies.  They're both here in
second-banana roles, as a prison guard and a prison warden,
respectively.  Fortunately, instead of playing the bad guy, both Morse
and Cromwell get roles where their inner decency gets to shine through.
It's fun to see tough-guy actors play vulnerable for a bit -- the same
tough-but-vulnerable style that makes Sinise such a great actor.
(Hanks, of course, has perfected tough-but-vulnerable, and gets another
shot at playing Henry Fonda here.  And the lumbering, humongous Michael
Duncan has the archetypical tough-but-vulnerable role as inmate John
Coffey.)
*  I like movies with realistic Bad Guys in them.  I'm sure you've
noticed that, lately, every Bad Guy in the movies is some kind of
supergenius.  This trend reached its culmination not too long ago with
Con Air, featuring an all-star cast of supersmart crooks.  (Perhaps,
given the recent advances in law enforcement, you have to be pretty
smart to get away with crimes.)
But evil wears a thousand faces, and the supergenius villain is just
one.  One of the things I liked about The Green Mile is how we get to
see a lot of those faces.
You'd expect to see a lot of facets of evil in a prison movie, anyway.
Most of The Green Mile takes place in Cellblock E of the Louisiana State
Penitentiary, known as the "green mile" partially because of the green
linoleum floors and partially because it's the death row, the "last
mile" before execution.  It's not a homelike place, but it's not a
brutal, evil place, either.  (Morse's character is nicknamed "Brutal",
but that's just irony.)  The guards have the attitude that the death
house is more of a long-term intensive care ward, and are treated well
in return by the prisoners.  Graham Greene plays a silent-but-proud
inmate.  Harry Dean Stanton shuffles through the movie as a prison
trusty.  Michael Jeter makes a strong impression as a pathetic,
broken-down Cajun lifer.  (Jeter usually annoys me a great deal, but
it's nice to see him in a good role.)
The banality of evil is illustrated by Sam Rockwell as new prisoner
"Wild Bill" So and So.  Rockwell gets to chew up nearly as much scenery
here as he did as the red-shirted crew member in Galaxy Quest.  His
antics liven up the soggy midpart of the movie -- especially when he
gets into a pissing contest with the guards -- but one believes that, if
he stays on the Green Mile long enough, that he'll get just as
broken-down as the rest of the cellblock.
But the real evil inside the prison walls isn't in a cell.  The real bad
guy on the Green Mile is a guard, one Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison).
Percy, you see, just happens to be the Governor's nephew, which means in
Depression Louisiana that he can get away with about pretty much
anything he pleases.  He is vain, petulant, and casually cruel, both to
the inmates and to his fellow guards.  Not only does Percy have the best
personality in the movie, it is he -- far more than Hanks's bland prison
guard or the inarticulate John Coffey -- that keeps the motor of the
movie humming along during its three-hour length.  It's his character
that shows the true subtle face of evil.  Percy manages to commit the
most evil act of the year in movies, but even this act is subtle and
understated.  More than anything else, The Green Mile reminds us that
evil isn't always over-the-top.
*  I like smart storytelling.  Finally, the best thing about The Green
Mile is the story.  Frank Darabont pulls off another bravura performance
in his second adaptation of a Stephen King prison novel.
The Green Mile is nowhere near the movie that The Shawshank Redemption
was, of course, and it would be unfair to make such comparisons anyway
were they not inevitable.  (My theory is that Shawshank is rooted much
more strongly in the problems of the heart and the triumph of the spirit
than The Green Mile, with its emphasis on the supernatural, can be.)
What both films share, though, is a great story expertly told.
Shawshank is a better story, but it depends on one shattering moment
that changes our perception about the movie.  The Green Mile is the
lesser tale, but it is told more artistically, with the story threads
carefully stacked up one by one.
My boss does these three-dimensional jigsaw puzzles, and she brought one
into the office the other day that was a representation of Mount
Rushmore.  The puzzle is just some irregularly shaped pieces of
cardboard, none of which look like much of anything.  Instead of locking
together, these pieces stack one on top of the other, and a shape forms
around the contours of the edges.  The Green Mile is built in much the
same way.  One piece stacks on top of another piece with artistic
precision.  And even if you think you know what piece is next, there are
lots of other pieces that have to be put in place first -- with the
final result looking quite different than what you might expect at first
glance.  Instead of one big surprise, The Green Mile has lots of little
surprises that add up in time.  (The original novel, as you may
recollect, was published in serial form, which could account for the
Dickensian structure of the screenplay.)
Of course, there are things I didn't like about The Green Mile (namely,
the bookend structure of the beginning and ending which apes the
structure of Saving Private Ryan) and things that I liked, but not well
enough to include in the review (the Barry Pepper performance, let's
say, as long as we're on the topic of Saving Private Ryan).  There will
be things about the movie that, should you see it, you will like more
than the things I have enumerated here.  And that, finally, is the best
recommendation I can give for The Green Mile.  If this is the kind of
movie you like, you should go and discover its good points for yourself.
Movie Reviews:
http://www.hsbr.org/buzz/reviewer/reviews/bdreviews.html

Author
Greg King
THE GREEN MILE (M).  
(Castle Rock/Universal/UIP)
Director: Frank Darabont
Stars: Tom Hanks, David Morse, James Cromwell, Michael Clarke Duncan, 
Michael Jeter, Barry Pepper, Doug Hutchison, Bonnie Hunt, Patricia
Clarkson, Sam Rockwell, Graham Greene, Jeffrey DeMunn, Harry Dean
Stanton, Gary Sinise, William Sadler, Dabbs Greer, Eve Brent
Running time: 189 minutes.
Writer/director Frank Darabont previously gave us the superb
The Shawshank Redemption, one of the truly great films of the '90's.
He has followed it with yet another prison drama that is every bit as
moving and inspiring and, yes, damn good.
The Green Mile beautifully and brilliantly transcends the
limitations and usual cliches of the genre.  Although set on death
row, the film is suffused with a humanity and warmth of spirit that is
both surprising and unexpected, and ultimately elevates the
potentially bleak material into another sphere.  This also has more of
an element of fantasy to it.
Like its predecessor, The Green Mile is based on a non-horror
story from Stephen King, and proves that he is a strong writer when he
moves away from the genre that made his name.  In fact, it is King's
non-horror stories that have translated best into great films (Stand
By Me, Misery, Dolores Claiborne, etc).
The film is set on Cold Mountain Penitentiary's death row
(affectionately nick-named "the green mile" because of the colour of
its floor) during the bleak depression years.  In 1936, John Coffey
(Michael Clarke Duncan, from Armageddon, etc), a giant, barely
literate black itinerant, was convicted of raping and murdering two
nine year old girls and imprisoned in Cold Mountain.  Coffey possessed
a special gift that eventually transformed the lives of other
prisoners and even his hardened, cynical guards, who had become
desensitised to the worst atrocities committed by men.  Eventually
even the guards begin to believe in the innocence of this gentle
giant.
There is something of an obvious religious metaphor to the
story for those who care to look below the surface.  Darabont doesn't
overly sentimentalise the material, although the more cynical will
probably dismiss the whole thing as being shamelessly manipulative.
Darabont's direction is beautifully restrained and understated.
Although The Green Mile runs for just over three hours, there is
little wasted screen time and few slack moments.  There is a wealth of
incidents here that keeps the audience engrossed, and most will
willingly suspend disbelief for the duration.
The characters are all strongly drawn, and given depth by the
uniformly rich performances from the ensemble cast.  Tom Hanks gives a
compassionate performance as head guard Paul Edgecombe, a man
ultimately torn between his beliefs and his duty.  Duncan brings an
unexpected dignity and grace to his role as the enigmatic Coffey.  The
always excellent David Morse brings restraint to his superb
performance as "Brutal" Howell, Edgecombe's second in command.  Doug
Hutchison (best known for his role as Toomes in The X Files) is also
strong as the sadistic and incompetent guard Wetmore, who constantly
flaunts his political connections.
No prison film has yet won an Oscar for Best Picture, but The
Green Mile should prevail if there is any justice.  It's that good!

Author
Justin Felix
All of my film reviews are archived at 
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix
This review has been submitted to The Shrubbery  
http://www.theshrubbery.com
Any comments about this review?  E-mail me at justinfelix@yahoo.com
Based on the novel THE GREEN MILE by Stephen King. 
Starring Tom Hanks, Michael Duncan, and James Cromwell. 
Rated R (contains scenes of extreme violence and profanity)
Synopsis:  1930s Death Row warden Paul Edgecomb begins to suspect his 
newest prisoner, a huge bulking man convicted of killing two small 
girls, possesses supernatural powers and a philanthropic outlook on 
life. 
Comments:  Stephen King initially wrote THE GREEN MILE, the story from 
which the movie is based upon, in installments.  In other words, the 
story appeared in serial form and was later collected and republished as 
a novel.  While some considered this a ploy to garner even more money 
from King's legions of fans, others saw this as an attempt to recapture 
the feel of serials from the 19th Century.  Charles Dickens, for 
example, wrote many of his novels in a serial form.  Several 
contemporary critics are beginning to accept King as the "Dickens of our 
day".  King's voice, in other words, is the voice of the latter half of 
the American 20th Century, they say. 
Whether or not you feel King is a great writer, a good writer, or a 
god-awful writer is largely irrelevant when you see a movie based upon 
one of his books.  While a number of turkeys exist (the recent CARRIE 2 
for instance), there can be no denying that several of the finest films 
produced in the last decade and a half are based upon King's stories.  
THE SHINING, the understated STAND BY ME, and the Academy-Award-winning 
suspense classic MISERY are just a couple examples. 
The film which seems to garner the most fan praise, though, is THE 
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.  Because of this, die-hard Stephen King fans and 
movie buffs have been waiting for THE GREEN MILE, in some respects a 
sequel to SHAWSHANK, to be released.  THE GREEN MILE, like SHAWSHANK, 
revolves around a prison, is based on a King novel, and features the 
same director, Frank Darabont.
Was it well worth the wait?  Yes.  Is it perfect?  No.  In fact, THE 
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION may stand as the superior of the two films, though 
I do not necessarily wish to detract from THE GREEN MILE's appeal. 
THE GREEN MILE deals with rather unpleasant issues.  The main character, 
portrayed by Tom Hanks, suffers from a urinary infection and is in 
constant pain during the first half of the film.  He is the warden at a 
prison for Death Row inmates, most of whom are not pleasant people.  His 
staff includes a sadist who wishes to hurt the inmates in any way he 
can.  The audience is presented with three electrocutions during the 
course of the movie (set, by the way, in the 1930s), and these 
electrocutions are presented in a methodically slow and deliberate 
manner. 
The dark subject matter is contrasted, however, with dim-witted John 
Coffey, who seems to offer hope to all around him in the prison.  Coffey 
has been sentenced to death for the murder of two girls, though the 
audience, from the very beginning, suspects correctly that he is 
innocent of the crimes.  Coffey seems responsible for several "miracles" 
which occur throughout the film, and his sacrifices are obvious 
allusions to Christ (note that they both share the initials J.C.). 
While this all may seem "heavy" and dark, there are quite a few moments 
of human compassion and humor in the movie as well.  A mouse, christened 
Mr. Jingles by an inmate, in particular, provides several comic moments. 
 These moments are necessary, for the movie runs well over three hours.  
Add in trailers and theater promotions, the audience sits for nearly 3 
1/2 hours.  This is perhaps THE GREEN MILE's weak spot.  While a lengthy 
running time is certainly justifiable in many films, I couldn't help but 
feel that THE GREEN MILE could easily have been cut by about 20 or so 
minutes.  Several scenes seem to take too much time to develop. 
The acting in THE GREEN MILE is superb, and I wouldn't be surprised if 
an Academy Award nomination or two are in the works for the cast.  Tom 
Hanks is good as the lead, but he's supported by quite an ensemble which 
includes veterans like Graham Greene, James Cromwell, and Michael Jeter. 
 Michael Duncan seems to steal the show, however, with his massive 
presence as John Coffey, a presence which seems to hang over all the 
scenes that he isn't in as well as the ones that he is in. 
THE GREEN MILE was released during the Christmas season.  While it 
doesn't seem like a Stephen King film would make a good family holiday 
movie (and, make no mistake, THE GREEN MILE is certainly an adult film), 
its theme of redemption and sacrifice, oddly, do seem to resonate with 
the holiday spirit.  After the atrocious THE RAGE: CARRIE 2, it's good 
to see that America's most popular storyteller is again being 
well-represented by the movie industry.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 1999
Starring Tom Hanks, David Morse, Bonnie Hunt, Michael Clarke Duncan, James
Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Graham Greene, Doug Hutchison, Sam Rockwell, Barry
Pepper, Patricia Clarkson, Harry Dean Stanton
Screenplay by Frank Darabont
Directed by Frank Darabont
Rated R
What is it about Frank Darabont and prison films based on Stephen King
novels? His "Shawshank Redemption," based on a King novella and taking place
in a prison setting, collected several Oscar nominations in 1994 (including
Best Picture), and has since become a major fan-favorite, constantly ranking
high on Internet movie polls. "The Green Mile," also set in a prison and
based on a series of books written by King, is Darabont's latest effort.
Just in time for the Christmas season, the writer-director delivers what
audiences are often looking for at this time of year: a weepy drama that
packs an emotional punch and preaches a humanist message. "The Green Mile,"
though by no means a perfect film, succeeds on both levels.
Two-time Oscar winner Tom Hanks stars as Paul Edgecomb, a prison guard in
charge of death row, otherwise known as "the green mile" because of its
linoleum-tile floor. A new prisoner catches his eye: John Coffey (Michael
Clarke Duncan), a massive black man convicted of raping and murdering two
young girls. To Edgecomb and the other guards (David Morse, Barry Pepper,
Jeffrey DeMunn), Coffey seems exactly the opposite from his profile. Though
large, he is a gentle giant who loves animals and is afraid of the dark.
Edgecomb suspects Coffey may have been unjustly convicted, and his
suspicions are raised even more when the prisoner begins exhibiting a
strange supernatural power: the power to heal people. Other characters in
this colorful group include Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison), a stuck-up
sadistic guard who only has his job because he's related to the governor,
and the other prisoners, which include Arlen Bitterbuck (Graham Greene), a
quiet Native American; "Wild" Bill Wharton (Sam Rockwell), an insane serial
killer; and Eduard Delacroix (Michael Jeter), a Cajun who takes a mouse
living in the block for a pet. The mouse, called Mr. Jingles, provides a
source of amusement for the guards and inmates, save for Percy, who has been
frustrated in his attempts to catch the mouse.
The strong suit of "The Green Mile" is the acting. Tom Hanks, excellent as
usual, takes another step towards his evident goal of becoming this
generation's Jimmy Stewart, with a sympathetic, human performance. He's
surrounded by a fine supporting cast, most notably Michael Duncan as John
Coffey and David Morse as Edgecomb's right-hand man "Brutal" Howell. Each
would be a fine choice for a Supporting Actor nomination. The characters
remain somewhat sketchy, this being a narrative-oriented fable, but Duncan
and Morse manage to find some underlying humanity underneath what the script
gives them. The story also contains villains, with Doug Hutchison having a
great deal of fun as Percy, the world's biggest cad, and Sam Rockwell
hamming it up as the psychotic Wild Bill. Do they resemble real people? No,
but they still serve their purpose: to give the audience someone to root
against. In Percy's case, this shouldn't be a problem. Some well-known
actors show up in relatively small roles, such as James Cromwell (whose part
probably should have been larger) as Warden Hal Moores, Gary Sinise in
exactly one scene (a good one) as Coffey's lawyer, and Bonnie Hunt as
Edgecomb's supportive wife Jan. This film is lifted by all-around good
performances, one of the finest casts that could have been assembled.
Darabont's direction seems to exist in sharp contrast to the modern
quick-cut, moving-camera style so common to young directors. He engages in
elegant, throwback storytelling, in which he holds back most of the time and
pulls out all the stops for the big emotional climaxes, of which "The Green
Mile" has many, most resulting from Coffey's supernatural gifts. Darabont
swells the music, utilizes close-ups of his actors' faces, and plays the
audience's emotions like a drum. Of course, it's not as though the audience
will complain much about this sort of thing, being that it's what we expect
at this time of year. "The Green Mile" is a melodrama, a bit hokey, but
still effective. The film is lengthy, at over three hours of running time,
but strangely refuses to drag. It moves fairly quickly, leaving me
hard-pressed to come up with a way Darabont could have edited it without
damaging the narrative, save for one: the elderly bookends, in which an aged
Paul Edgecomb narrates the script's main story, are fairly unnecessary, with
the closing one providing not only a major anticlimax, but a seeming
contradiction to the film's original message. It's a similar problem to
those that marred two other highly-touted "epic" films of the past two
years, "Titanic" and "Saving Private Ryan." I'm still unclear as to why
filmmakers feel the need to include these devices. They don't add much to
the story, and merely cause the audience to leave on a bit of a let-down,
dragging on after the primary narrative has already run its course.
Other than the unnecessary bookends, the only other thing "The Green Mile"
suffers from is being overly familiar. If you've ever read a fairy tale, you
'll know exactly what's going to happen when credits roll. The good guys
will come out on top, and the bad guys will get their just desserts.
Furthermore, the script contains several plot contrivances that, while not
major atrocities, do tend to get bothersome after a while. Case in point:
when the real identity of a particular inmate is revealed near the end of
the film, it seems a little too coincidental to believe. Contrivances aside,
this film doesn't claim to be an exact representation of real life. (How
could it be, with so many non-racist white guards and a major supernatural
element?) It's a fable, and an effective one. The emotional climaxes hit
like a ton of bricks, and I must admit that I even got choked up a few
times.
"The Green Mile" is certainly not a perfect film, and probably not the major
Oscar contender the filmmakers intended it to be, but it is a well-acted,
tautly-directed film with emotional weight. It's schmaltzier elements (like
the affectionately cute Mr. Jingles) actually seem in place. You won't
receive any great revelations about the human condition from this movie, and
it's not remotely realistic, but with so many things going for it, it's not
hard to overlook such flaws and see the film for what it is: a story very
well told.
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Five years ago Frank Darabont released THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION a
film he wrote and directed based on a Stephen King story set in a
prison.  I picked that as the best film of its year.  Now Darabont
returns to that territory with what promised to be a powerful Stephen
King story, but one which is not compelling enough to justify the
film's three-hour length.  Certainly the payoff, when it comes, is
moving.  But it is undercut by the introduction of mystical elements
and by heavy-handed stylistic touches.  The addition of supernatural
elements to a gritty story of human experience seems ill-conceived.
     At a home for the elderly one resident Paul Edgecomb (Dabbs Greer)
has a number of strange behaviors.  Every day he gets out and takes a
walk in the woods.  Seeing the film TOP HAT on television reduces him
to tears.  Finally he tells his story in private to a friend.  In 1935
he was the lead guard on death row at a Cold Mountain Penitentiary in
Louisiana (here he is played by Tom Hanks).  The team of guards was
made up of decent men most of whom just wanted the best for the
convicts under their care.  The one exception is the sadistic Percy
Wetmore (Doug Hutchison), the governor's wife's nephew.  [No mention is
made of Senator Huey Long who was a virtual dictator in Louisiana.  It
was under his auspices political appointments like Percy's were made.
The governor that year was Long's handpicked replacement when three
years earlier in the middle of his term Long vacated the office for a
seat in the US Senate.  Long was at the height of his power at the
point this film was set.  Change was fast in coming, however.  This
film is set in July.  A little over a month after the events of this
film, on the night of September 8th, 1935, Dr. Carl Austin Weiss
assassinated Long in the State Capitol Building in Baton Rouge.]
     The story really begins when John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan)a
huge black man is brought to the cell block having been convicted of
raping and murdering two young girls.  Paul cannot believe that this
giant child-man who is afraid of the dark could be a murderer.  The
film slowly develops the stories of some of the inmates and guards.
For a long time the script neglects Coffey whose angel-like presence is
felt over the entire cell-block but who does little to interact with
people.
     Darabont's script apparently wanted to carry over from the novel
the feeling that the viewer really knows the inmates as individuals and
cares about them.  But the characterization comes slowly and too
frequently characters are dispatched quickly.  The one inmate not well
characterized is Coffey, the one who would be most interesting to know.
Our reactions to Coffey come mostly from stereotypes borrowed from
other films.  That is the problem with too many of the main characters.
We do not really understand Percy at the end of the film.  Nor do we
really understand Wild Bill.(Sam Rockwell of JERRY AND TOM), a wild
animal of a man.  Even Paul is not a character of much depth or wisdom.
He is simply a good and decent man.
     Almost the entire film is shot with a heavy yellowish filter that
blocks out any bright light and artificially casts a pallor on the film
and calls attention to itself.  In THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION Darabont's
team created a prison that looked like a prison of the period.  This is
a longer film and most of the film takes place in the one cell block
and the room of the electric chair.  While the confinements are not
claustrophobic, they do start to become tiresome after a while.
     Tom Hanks is reasonable as the decent and likable prison guard, a
welcome change from usual negative stereotypes.  A man with grown
children, he looks a little young for the role and the accent never
sounds exactly right.  His second in command is David Morse as Brutus
"Brutal" Howell.  Morse is a large quiet actor familiar from THE
CROSSING GUARD.  He his tall and calm image gives him the air of a
blond Gary Cooper.  James Cromwell has been a familiar face for many
years, but since BABE he has been getting more major roles.  Here he
plays a prison warden with the requisite dignity.  Another familiar
face in a very small role is Gary Sinese.
     The lineage of THE GREEN MILE is excellent, but the film itself is
only decent and probably could have been more effective at a two hour
length.  I rate is a favorable but disappointed 6 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Kong
Just when I thought Hollywood was on a slide down into mediocrity, I see a 
great film like The Green Mile that proves that there are still good movies 
that come out of Hollywood.  Lately, it seems that the good movies are the 
ones that come from independent studios, but The Green Mile shows that a 
big budget movie out of the stables of Hollywood can still be a gripping 
movie and grab a viewers emotions and drain them.
The Green Mile is like a follow-up to writer/director Frank Darabont's 
"Shawshank Redemption".  Both movies take place in about the same time and 
both movies take place in a prison.  The Green Mile is a milder movie and 
has only one little flaw that can be overlooked if one tries hard enough.
The Green Mile is a prison ward that has a floor that is a light lime 
color.  In this ward is held men who are on their last mile, they are on 
death row.  The head guard on The Green Mile is Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks) 
and his belief is that these prisoners should be talked to and not stressed 
during their last mile of life.  One day the biggest prisoner enters The 
Green Mile; his name is John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan).  As it turns 
out Coffey is in prison for the murder and rape of two young girls, but as 
we find out he's just a gentle giant.  Did Coffey commit the murders?  We 
all can guess that plot point.
Coffey though, has a special gift and it is here that we have the little 
flaw that I mentioned before.  Apparently, Coffey can take away disease 
with a touch and spit it out in a cloud of computer-generated flies.  And 
the first time we are introduced to this is long into the movie, probably 
halfway or so (and this is a three-hour movie).  With this much time 
invested in a wholesome movie that doesn't need any suspension of 
disbelief, all the sudden we as the audience are forced to change mindsets 
when that cloud of computer-generated flies comes out of Coffey's 
mouth.  It's jarring.  It doesn't by any means ruin the film, but it is 
jarring.
Both Shawshank and The Green Mile are scripts adapted by Darabont from 
Stephen King stories.  I would say that Shawshank is the better movie, but 
The Green Mile is not far behind.  With Shawshank it is a straight film 
about real people.  With The Green Mile it's a film with some need to 
suspend belief because of Coffey's supernatural gift.
I must say the cast of The Green Mile is excellent.  All of the actors do a 
wonderful job.  Hanks and Duncan give standout performances.  Both were 
convincing and were perfect for their characters.  I have to give big kudos 
to Duncan who has been doing better and better roles.  I first saw him in 
Armageddon, then in The Whole Nine Yards, and now his best role yet in The 
Green Mile.  Among the other cast members that give great performances are 
Bonnie Hunt as Edgecomb's wife; David Morse, Doug Hutchison and Barry 
Pepper as fellow guards; and Michael Jeter as Del an inmate in ward.
The script by Darabont and Darabont's direction of the film are near 
perfect.  And this film is one of the best films of 1999.  I'm sad that I 
kept procrastinating and finally missed see The Green Mile in the theatres 
and ended up seeing it on DVD.  If you were like me and missed The Green 
Mile in the theatres, don't hesitate, go rent the video or DVD right 
away.  Don't Miss The Green Mile.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Frank Darabont
STARRING:         Tom Hanks, David Morse, Michael Clarke Duncan, James
Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Doug Hutchison
WRITTEN BY:       Frank Darabont
RATED:            R for violence, language, and some sex-related material
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       1 Corinthians 12:7-11, Mark 10:51-52, Matthew 15:25-28
"Sometimes the 'green mile' seems sooooo long."  Indeed.  And any
filmmaker with a three hour movie who ends it with that gem of dialogue
should expect to see it quoted in a review.  On a more positive note, let
me add that sometimes THE GREEN MILE is almost good enough to make us
forget its length.
The mile in question (green due to its faded lime-colored linoleum) leads
from the prison cell to "Old Sparky," the electric chair where executions
were carried out at Louisiana's Cold Mountain Penitentiary in 1935.  Paul
Edgecomb (Tom Hanks, YOU'VE GOT MAIL) is the head guard of E-block,
otherwise known as death row.  Keeping his prisoners calm as they await
the carrying out of their sentence is his primary responsibility.  It is a
responsibility which he capably delegates to the other guards on his watch
by insisting they "talk to" the convicts instead of yelling at them.  This
practice leads to an unusual camaraderie between the guards and the men
behind their bars.
Into his charge comes one John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan,
ARMAGEDDON), a seven foot tall gentle giant who has been convicted of the
rape and murder of two young girls.  Immediately, Paul senses something
different about this prisoner.  Perhaps its the way he asked for a night
light because he is frightened of the dark.  Or perhaps it is the mystical
healing powers he demonstrates as he "takes back" Paul's bladder infection
thereby restoring him to health.
  Based on Steven King's 1996 serialized novel, THE GREEN MILE does offer
other characters who have stories to be told:  Eduard Delacroix (Michael
Jeter, PATCH ADAMS), is a frail Cajun convict who befriends and trains a
mouse to do circus tricks; Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison, A TIME TO KILL),
is a young and sadistic guard sitting on a transfer to a more lucrative
position because he has yet to see a prisoner "fry" up close; and Hal
Moores (James Cromwell, BABE: PIG IN THE CITY) is the compassionate warden
for whom, despite all the executions he's witnessed, death never loomed as
large as when his own wife was diagnosed with a tumor.
While it is Mr. Hanks "everyman" performance at the center of the film
which gives it the anchor to hold our interest for 180 minutes, it is the
performances of his supporting cast that are most worth noting.  All
involved do credible work in their respective roles, most especially Mr.
Duncan, who turns in an impressive, fully realized characterization.
If only the story were more credible.  Writer/director Frank Darabont
(THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION) has crafted a flawed fantasy/allegory of sorts;
one which is more spiritualistic than spiritual, relying on a
preternatural mysticism rather than a genuine and godly spiritual power.
Mr. Darabont also overplays his hand considerably in the manipulation of
our affection towards and association with his characters.  Was it an
accidental omission that the first two inmates who walked the green mile
were being punished for crimes never disclosed?  By not knowing the reason
for the condemned convicts' presence on E-block, the audience never gets
the sense of the justice which is being carried out, making the death
penalty appear cruel and unwarranted.  This is especially true during the
gruesome depiction of the second execution which was horribly botched.
Much has also been made of Coffey's Christ-like ability to heal but
unlike the numerous healings which are recorded in the scriptures,
Coffey's powers are shrouded in mystery, taking on the feel of a circus
trick, coupled with a voodoo-like "I feel your pain" transference.
In contrast, there is no mystery associated with the healing that is from
God.  The genuine "gifts of healing" listed in 1 Corinthians 12 is just
one of the nine manifestations of holy spirit and can be operated by any
spiritually instructed man or woman in accordance with the knowledge and
wisdom of God.
True spiritual healing (with few exceptions) requires the committed
believing of both the healer as well as the one being healed.  Such
believing comes not from the shrouded secrets of mysticism, but from the
revealed Word of God.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
In keeping with blockbusters like Titanic and Saving Private Ryan, The Green
Mile is a story told by a participant now in the golden years of life. Aside
from the dramatic frame, (weepy prologue, nostalgic epilogue . . .) this
set-up has two narrative functions: A) by making the story 'told,' i.e.
unreliable, it allows for the introduction of, say, supernatural events, on
the grounds that maybe they were just supernatural to the narrator, or maybe
that's just how he's remembering it (or maybe he's sophisticated enough to
use the supernatural as a device, etc.); and, B) by setting the action in
the past, the supernatural is once again 'normalized,' because the past is,
after all, where the magic has always happened. Look to the Old Testament as
compared to the New, or to primitive societies, where three generations back
there's always a mythical ancestor, a figure now legendary. In American
terms, these figures are the stuff of tall tales. Iron John, Paul Bunyon,
etc. And now Stephen King has given us another: John Coffey, (Michael
Duncan) a depression-era gentle giant both afraid of the dark and imbued
with the supernatural abilities Green Mile goes to such great lengths to get
us to accept.
Too, though--and unlike Dead Zone, Firestarter and the rest--the one with
the supernatural abilities here isn't the main character. Instead that falls
to prison guard Paul Edgecomb, (Tom Hanks, with yet another award-worthy
script) who's evidently never seen Murder in the First, doesn't know how
prison guards are supposed to have acted in the early part of the twentieth
century. Not only is he extraordinarily compassionate, but he's gathered
around him a crew of similarly kind guards. In fact, only one of them,
Percy, (Dough Hutchison) fits the stereotype, which allows the movie the
reversal of placing the real criminal on the wrong side of the bars. And,
when that's the case, then of course their sentences have to be meted out in
alternative manners, just to maintain some sense of justice.
Conversely, though, when the one behind the bars is in fact wrongly accused,
misunderstood, etc, as John Coffey obviously is, then similarly alternative
means have to be found to both permit his unearned punishment (voluntary
sacrifice is the usual tack) and do so in a dramatically acceptable way.
Which is no easy thing. Without King behind the pen, too, it likely would
have proved too difficult. Since he is there, though, the 'Green Mile' (E
block, death row) quickly becomes a closed little system, capable not only
of permitting John Coffey's punishment in an acceptable way, but requiring
it. Think Iron Giant; The Green Mile is simply an unanimated version. And
The Iron Giant was excellent. So is The Green Mile, even going so far as to
have John Coffey--the character too 'pure' for this world--be drawn as he
must to the idealized humanity presented in the movies. It's a very nice
touch, sets The Green Mile miles ahead of the other death-row dramas, (Dead
Man Walking, Last Dance, etc) and right up there with King's other
non-horror successes--Stand By Me, Shawshank Redemption. The Green Mile is
every bit as good.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Green Mile (1999)
Tom Hanks, David Morse, Bonnie Hunt, Michael Clarke Duncan, James
Cromwell, Michael Jeter, Graham Greene, Doug Hutchison, Sam Rockwell,
Barry Pepper, Jeffrey DeMunn, Patricia Clarkson, Harry Dean Stanton,
Dabbs Greer, Eve Brent, William Sadler, Gary Sinise. Written by Frank
Darabont, based on the novel by Stephen King. Directed by Frank
Darabont. 187 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"The Green Mile" is a good movie. At times, it is very good. But it's
not a great movie. I say this up front to try and balance out some of
the grandiose hype generated by the studio's publicity machine. For
months, "The Green Mile" has been touted as the most likely film to
sweep next year's Academy Awards. Last weekend, pre-release ads in
Sunday papers across the country upped the ante, with Paul Wunder,
Patty Spitler, Susan Granger and other notorious quote whores calling
the movie "the most extraordinary entertainment event of the year,"
"the best film of 1999," and "a masterpiece."
Were I cranking out a blurb for the movie, it would simply read
"'E.T.' on Death Row." Not that there's anything wrong with
that. Overall, director Frank Darabont ("The Shawshank Redemption")
does a fine job translating Stephen King's bestseller to screen,
although he focuses so much on whimsy and magic that the horrific
execution scenes almost seem out of place, which is pretty odd for a
story named after the green tile walkway leading to the electric
chair.
The bulk of the film takes place in 1935, centering on Paul Edgecombe
(Tom Hanks), a guard on a Louisiana death row cell block who spends a
lot of time grimacing in pain due to a severe bladder
infection. Things change with the arrival of John Coffey (Michael
Clarke Duncan), a hulk of a man sentenced to die for the murder of two
little girls. The guards soon learn that, despite his physically
imposing appearance, Coffey is a timid sort with the soul of a
child. Edgecombe discovers even more when the gentle giant abruptly
reaches out and cups the guard's crotch. The man isn't copping a feel:
Coffey is a bona fide healer. He magically absorbs Edgecombe's
infection, then releases the bad hoodoo by coughing up
computer-generated fly-like things that dissolve into the air above
him.
Despite clocking in at a whopping three hours, the bulk of "The Green
Mile" glides by, thanks to some extremely likable cast members,
including a cute-as-a-button pet mouse. The film drags only during the
cumbersome contemporary segments that bookend the story and when Hanks
drops by for a needless visit with fellow "Forrest Gump" veteran Gary
Sinise.
"The Green Mile" works best when Darabont focuses on Edgecombe and his
wife Jan (Bonnie Hunt); humane fellow guards Brutus "Brutal" Howell
(David Morse), sensitive newcomer Dean Stanton (Barry Pepper) and
seasoned vet Harry Terwilliger (Jeffrey DeMunn); and their
interactions with equally likable inmates Eduard Delacroix (Michael
Jeter - far less annoying than usual), Arlen Bitterbuck (Graham
Greene) and especially Michael Clarke Duncan, ole E.T. himself. Duncan
gives an absolutely convincing performance as the massive man-child:
he is so lovable that you want to take him home and treat him to about
a hundred Happy Meals.
Unfortunately, the aforementioned cast is so charming that the
cell-block often feels less like death row and more like an extra
large version of Andy and Barney's Mayberry jail. When Darabont cuts
to the demented exploits of his two cartoonish villains, sadistic
guard Percy Wetmore (Doug Hutchison) and whacked-out prisoner "Wild
Bill" Wharton (Sam Rockwell), I half expected Aunt Bea to show up and
settle them down with some biscuits and apple butter.
The notion of a cozy, folksy death row seems especially bizarre during
the execution scenes. Imagine Barney Fife saying, "Come on, Otis,
we're gonna take a little stroll down the hall, hook you up to 'Old
Sparky,' then fry you like a Tater Tot," and you'll get the idea. One
electric chair sequence midway through the film is particularly
graphic and appropriately revolting. I would like to believe that
images such as these might give pause to proponents of capital
punishment, but if those folks can't grasp the concept that, if the
premeditated murder of another person is wrong, we shouldn't
collectively agree to do it, then visual aids probably won't help.
If you don't find the leapfrogging between homespun moments and grisly
deaths too disconcerting, then you should enjoy "The Green Mile" as a
cheesy, but absorbing fable with some dandy acting. I did, although in
the latter portions of the film, when Darabont drops the "E.T." motif
in favor of ham-handed religious allegory (John Coffey = J.C. = guess
who?), I found myself hoping for Coffey to lean out of the screen,
touch my forehead with his glowing fingertip and intone, "Go home."

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Frank Darabont
Written by: Stephen King (novel), Frank Darabont
Allow me to point out one thing which some people in Hollywood seem to have
forgotten. In order for a movie to be an Oscar contender, it doesn't have to be
over three hours long. This is, in fact, one of those rare cases where one is
happy that parts of the book were removed from the screenplay. That said, "The
Green Mile" is still a great film, blending humor and drama in a nearly
flawless manner.
Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks) is the head guard of a death row strip in the 1930s.
He and several other guards, including his friend Brutus (David Morse) run the
prison efficiently but not harshly. However, the presence of a sadistic guard
named Percy (Doug Hutchison) is throwing the situation into disarray. Enter
John Coffey (Michael Duncan), a mountain of a man who brings yet more confusion
to the prison with his apparent powers of healing. Edgecomb finds himself
unable to believe that Coffey could possibly have killed the two little girls
he was convicted of murdering. Coffey soon endears himself to the other guards
to such an extent that they are uncertain if they will be able to carry out his
sentence.
To start with, let me say that this isn't a particularly original film. Several
characters, such as Percy and one of the prisoners, who is called "Wild Bill"
(Sam Rockwell) are nothing more than cardboard stereotypes. The films
conclusion isn't particularly surprising, and the identity of the killer who
framed John Coffey isn't remotely unexpected. However, this isn't supposed to
be a murder mystery, and it's not supposed to be a shocker like "The Sixth
Sense". This is supposed to be an uplifting story filled with brilliant acting.
On both counts, it delivers.
The acting here is certainly the film's highpoint. Tom Hanks is great, as
always, but the real standout performances here come from Michael Duncan and
the always underrated David Morse ("The Negotiator", "The Long Kiss
Goodnight"). Duncan's portrayl of Coffey is flawless, especially considering
that he could have easily played him as a living cartoon character. If David
Morse is not granted a nomination for best supporting actor, this will be a
true travesty of justice, similar to Tom Sizemore being passed over last year
for his performance in "Saving Private Ryan".
Another spotlight stealer here is one of the cast's smaller members, Mr.
Jingles. Mr. Jingles is a small mouse who is adopted by one of the prisoners,
and eventually by the entire block. Mr. Jingles's antics may seem out of place
at times, but they do add some much needed humor during some of the more
depressing scenes. One thing I found rather interesting was the presence of two
wonderful actors in what were really nothing more than cameos. James Cromwell
makes an appearance as the prison warden, and Gary Sinise makes a very, very
brief appearance as Coffey's lawyer.
The film's biggest weakness is really the running time. At over three hours,
even the best film can seem to drag. "The Green Mile", being quite good, but
not the best film, seems to crawl along at a snail's pace. This movie certainly
isn't appropriate for children as there are several grotesque scenes and some
very adult content. Be forewarned, you had best get plenty of sleep before
seeing this or you may find yourself drifting off. This is not to say that the
film is dull, quite the contrary, but it's simply hard to stay focused for so
long. Overall, I give "The Green Mile" a recommendation and four stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
