Title
Review for Screwed (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
Starring Norm MacDonald, Dave Chapelle, Elaine
Stritch, Sherman Hemsley, Daniel Benzali, and Danny
Devito
The most popular trend of the last couple of years has
been the twist ending. Watching one of these movies,
everything seems to make sense until suddenly you are
blown away by an unexpected surprise. When the film
ends, there is a moment of confusion, then
recollection, then some more confusion, then possibly
a second viewing for clarification. This is a
description of an ideal twist that perfects everything
it sets out to do and more. Good surprises make movies
fun to watch. Then there are the bad twists. You
either know what is going to happen ten minutes into
the movie (I'm talking about you Reindeer Games) or
you did not guess the ending because it is so
outrageously stupid. Screwed perfectly suits the
latter description. What starts out as a dumb guilty
pleasure which should be fun to mock with a group of
friends ends with a complex finale with way too much
going on. 
By the writers of Man on the Moon and The People Vs.
Larry Flynt, Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
leave Milos Forman behind and take a stab at film
directing. Whoops. Screwed is an inane Christmas Carol
gone berserk with few genuine laughs and many acting
embarrassments. Norm MacDonald stars as Willard
Filmore, a hard working chauffeur who just wants a
little respect from his rich, old, insidious boss,
Miss Crock (Elaine Stritch). When he overhears her
plans to fire him on Christmas day, Willard is
convinced by his best friend Rusty (Dave Chapelle) to
kidnap Crock's beloved dog and hold it for a ransom of
one million dollars. Too excited to pay any attention,
the hapless losers' plan goes awry when the dog
escapes and returns home. Now Crock thinks Willard has
been kidnapped and the two friends, realizing they can
make even more money, decide to stage the fake
kidnapping. Of course, everything that could go wrong
does. 
The first forty-five minutes of Screwed is harmless
entertainment - a guilty pleasure that should be
enjoyably bad. But the convoluted script eventually
builds into a disaster that is impossible to bear. The
more idiotic these characters get, the more reckless
the script becomes. At one point, I wanted to get out
of my seat and yell at these characters: "No, you
idiot!" I'm not just talking about Willard and Rusty,
who were extremely annoying, I'm also talking about
the cops in this film. A monkey could have solved this
case within an hour but these guys (headed by Murder
One's Daniel Benzali) were just too clueless to
forgive. They give real cops bad names. 
Also poor Danny Devito apparently does not know how to
turn down a role these days. Looking almost identical
to his Penguin in Batman: Returns, every time he
appeared on the screen I had to shake my head in
disbelief. He just didn't belong in this movie.
MacDonald and Chapelle are veterans at these kinds of
movies but Devito made the film much worse than it
already was, gross out humor is certainly not his
forte. 
If you're a fan of Norm MacDonald's other chaotic
comedy, Dirty Work, you might actually love this
near-sequel. Otherwise, don't get screwed out of your
hard-earned money. 

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/00749ece25ab063e882568de001da736?OpenDocument
Rarely does a film like Screwed come across my desk: a film so utterly
easy to insult, from its title on in, that writing the review is an
absolute piece of cake.  Somehow, the producers of this film chose the
title Screwed over such options as Ballbusted, Foolproof, and
Pittsburgh, probably hoping to attract a teenage crowd with its
would-been-risque-if-not-for-the-likes-of-S.F.W. title and its screwball
Norm-MacDonald-needs-better-work antics.  Sadly, this marketing
technique will probably succeed and result in, well, a lot of people
feeling screwed.
Screwed concerns a butler (Norm MacDonald) and a chicken wing vendor
(David Chapelle) who team up to try to, well, screw a bitter old hag out
of five million dollars.  Needless to say, the plan goes south, and the
two have to run all over Pittsburgh (which is obviously not really
Pittsburgh) to get away with their perfect crime.  Norm sleeps with some
girl in a bit part that should have been bigger, David convinces good
old Norm to fake his death with the help of a mortician (Danny DeVito),
and all the while we watch the hag bitch and gripe, not really caring
The antics in Screwed are childish, the humor pandering to a sub-human
chord that will resonate with no one with an IQ over 80.  Norm MacDonald
once again shows that the pinnacle of his career will most likely be
doing the Weekend Update on SNL (a shtick which has been stolen and
improved upon by `The Daily Show' on Comedy Central, a job Norm
MacDonald should campaign for vigorously).  David Chapelle shows that
his comedic talents lie in stand up and not physical antics.  The
pleasure that Screwed offers is in the supporting role of DeVito, which
is pretty much only a pleasure because watching DeVito in such a darkly
comic role is so very different from the average part you see him
pigeonholed into.
Screwed is the perfect title for this movie if only because, after
watching it, you feel screwed six ways from Sunday by virtue of how
absolutely wretched this pitiful excuse for a film is.  Writer-directors
Scott Alexander and Larry Karazewski, the writing team behind Milos
Forman's last two flicks, Man on the Moon and The People vs. Larry
Flynt, should probably stick to writing other peoples' movies.  Behind
the camera, they prove that directing is not their strong suit, and that
the input that others add to the script proves invaluable to the end
product.  Letting them direct, it seems, just gets a lot of people
screwed.
Director: Scott Alexander and Larry Karazewski
Writer: Scott Alexander and Larry Karazewski
Starring: Norm MacDonald, David Chapelle, and Danny DeVito

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures
 Director: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
 Writer:  Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
 Cast: Norm Macdonald, Maria Arce, Daniel Benazali,
David Chappelle, D. Harlan Cutshall, Danny DeVito, Elaine
Stritch
   Some movie buffs say that despite varied genres that well-
known directors use during their careers, you should be able
to tell who is at the helm of their movies.  The personalities
show through.  I wonder how these fans could explain how
"Screwed" is any way the product of not only the same
directors but the same writers as "The People vs. Larry Flynt"
and "Man on the Moon"and "Ed Wood."  After knocking out
three quality films, each with subtle comedy and trenchant
satire, Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski must have
taken a bet that they couldn't emulate Groucho and Harpo--
sort of like those assignments we had to write in college
literature classes "in the style of Hemingway" or "in the
manner of Faulkner."  Karaszewski and Alexander would
have come out on the screwed side of that wager, because
their latest effort--utilizing a principal character who was fired
from Saturday Night Live because he was unfunny--proves
that the TV hatchet-people were correct in their decision.
  But maybe we should not blame all on Norm Macdonald
who as Willard Fillmore, a chauffeur in the employ of a
harridan that Karl Marx and Bert Brecht might have used as a
model of the injustices inherent in the final stages of
capitalism.  The pathetic riff on the name of a former U.S.
president--which Alexander and Karaszewski used for another
character named Grover Cleaver--is not only inept but
baffling.  How does the U.S. presidency relate in any way to
those two losers? (Don't answer that question.)
   In this buddy-caper burlesque, Willard, a chauffeur is
exploited by his boss, the millionaire septuagenarian Virginia
Crock (Elaine Stritch), who owns an Entenmann's-like cake
factory and appropriately names her little brown Pomeranian
dog Muffin (Bam Bam).  Willard is the only servant in the
Crock mansion, washing the carpets while in his cutaway
attire, driving the car, and fetching the madam's clothing from
her capacious closet.  Willard gets together with his best pal,
Rusty (David Chappelle), who runs a small fried chicken
emporium, and together they kidnap Muffin.  Somehow
Virginia, her special adviser Chip, and later the general
public, all believe that the chauffeur, and not the dog, is the
kidnap victim--which is fine by Willard and Rusty who cool
their heels waiting for the delivery of $5 million ransom.
   While NY Times critic Stephen Holden considers Danny
DeVito as undertaker Grover to be the only successful cast
member "who succeeds in making something out of the
movie's nothing of a screenplay," it looks more as though
DeVito is willing to embarrass himself for a little extra cash. 
A fan of the TV program "Hawaii-Five-O" who knows every bit
of Jack Lord's dialogue in much the way that the stockbrokers
of "Boiler Room" could have understudied Michael Douglas in
"Wall Street," DeVito is styled like a mad scientist obsessed
with collecting the innards of corpses.  He is offered a large
payment for finding a body resembling Willard's and placing
the chauffeur's I.D. on the cadaver.
   If Norm Macdonald did not employ a poker-faced
countenance throughout this dud he would have revealed
little besides embarrassment for going through the ungainly
lines afforded him by the two previously dexterous writers. 
The comedy throughout "Screwed" is as luscious as a cake
baked in honor of Virginia's Crock's thirtieth birthday.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Norm MacDonald, Dave Chappelle, Danny DeVito, Daniel Benzali,
Elaine Stritch, Sherman Hemsley, Lochlyn Monro, Sarah Silverman 
Written and Directed by: Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski 
Running Time: 81 minutes 
Screwed stars Norm MacDonald as a much put-upon butler whose boss
(Elaine Stritch) treats him like a slave.  When he finally feels as
though he can't take the abuse anymore, he and his dim-witted friend
(Dave Chappelle) launch a scheme to kidnap the woman's dog and hold it
for ransom.  This leads to a bizarre chain of events that leads
authorities to believe that MacDonald himself has been kidnapped, and
that the ransom for his return is $5 million. 
Written and directed by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, who wrote
the excellent biopics Ed Wood, The People vs. Larry Flynt, and Man on
the Moon.  Their work here however more resembles their scripts for
drivel like the first two Problem Child movies and the remake of That
Darn Cat.  There are some funny moments in Screwed, but the majority of
them come thanks to the performances of the actors and not from the
material itself.  (One odd thing of note about the script is that all
the names of the main characters are all variations of lesser known U.S.
Presidents.) 
The story just isn't as sharp as it should be.  The events in Screwed
only make sense in the film's own reality.  Here in the real world, any
police investigation (no matter how inept) would have the kidnapping
figured out in no time.  Also, there are two plot twists late in the
film that serve no other purpose but to make the audience say
"Ewwww...". 
Norm MacDonald is one of the funniest people on the planet, but he's
just not in the right role here to display his comedic talents. 
MacDonald is at his best when he's being sarcastic, so casting him as a
poor hapless schmuck doesn't let him show his stuff.  Dave Chappelle is
another good comedian misused here.  Chappelle is able to carry limp
films like Half-Baked and steal movies like Blue Streak away from its
star, but like MacDonald he's just not given good material here to work
with.  Daniel Benzali (the bald guy from "Murder One"... to quote
"Saturday Night Live") overacts his role as the lead detective on the
case.  Everything in the film seems to exasperate his character to
cartoonish levels, and it renders his performance just too silly for the
film.  The thing is, had Benzali just played the role as he always plays
roles like this it would have been perfect.  I guess because he was
doing a comedy he felt he had to overdo it.  And I'm not even sure why
Danny DeVito (who makes a lot of "Penguin" noises in the film) thought
this was a good idea. 
The most annoying thing about Screwed isn't how much of a disappointment
it is (although that is a close second)... it's how LOUD the film is. 
The music in the film (generic frantic music that plays at some point in
every single scene) is so exhaustingly obnoxious that it wore me out
just having to hear it.  Also, the film just degenerates into a shouting
match amongst the stars to see who can deliver their lines the loudest. 
Louder jokes aren't funnier jokes. 
Screwed runs 81 minutes long, which leads me to the possible conclusion
of the dreaded "studio tampering".  Potential example of that: Danny
DeVito's character is the vice-president of the "Hawaii Five-O" fan
club.  Why?  It's adds nothing to his character and never really comes
into play in the film.  I doubt Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
would write details for these characters without any rhyme or reason for
them.  Also, Screwed sat on the proverbial shelf for a long time after
completion and went through several title changes. 
Everyone involved with this project has talent.  Somehow though it just
never came together as it should have.  So who ends up getting screwed
here?  The audience. 
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
John Baechem
Directed by: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Written by: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Willard Fillmore (Norm Macdonald) is chauffeur to an evil old hag, Virginia
Crock (Elaine Stritch). Actually, his job title may be chauffeur, but his
actual duties consist of doing just about everything from scrubbing Crock's
dentures to feeding her dog, Muffin. After Crock gives him a pie for
Christmas, rather than the new suit he so desperately needs, Willard hatches
a plan with his friend, Rusty (Dave Chappelle), to kidnap Muffin and ransom
him back to Miss Crock. The plan, of course, backfires and a new plan must
be hatched. This one consists of Willard himself being ransomed. Rusty and
Willard decide to fake Willard's death by having a mortician, Grover Cleaver
(Danny DeVito), fix up a corpse to look like him. Everything manages to go
wrong with every plan the trio think up, and the situation grows worse and
worse.
Danny DeVito seems to be developing an interesting and slightly worrisome
habit with his script choices. His last two pictures have had three things
in common. Both involved evil, universally hated old women; some sort of
cheesy, tacked on mystery; and a horrible, poorly written script. This is a
shame considering what a talented actor DeVito is. "Screwed" is a weak,
often painfully forced and unfunny film which will most likely vanish from
theaters in a month. The movie starts off with no humor except Macdonald
("Dirty Work") doing a somewhat amusing impersonation of Bruce Campbell's
Ash from "Evil Dead II". This lack of humor lasts for about 45 minutes, and
the movie then begins to show some signs of life, with one or two truly
funny scenes. Unfortunately, this doesn't last, and the film ends horribly.
Let's get one thing straight everyone. Norm Macdonald cannot act in any way.
The man stumbles through his lines with the same poker face and dreary,
boring voice throughout all his films. His lack of emotion can be somewhat
amusing in stand up comic sketches on Saturday Night Live, but it doesn't
translate well into movies. Dave Chappelle can be one of two things in his
movies: irritating or very irritating. In Martin Lawrence's "Blue Streak" he
was irritating. In "Screwed" he is very irritating. The man has the most
annoying, whiny tone of voice you're likely to hear. DeVito does what he can
with his miserable role, but you can't pull something out of nothing. I
think the character of Grover Cleaver was supposed to be some sort of mad
scientist who was funny because of all the disgusting things he did - like
play harmonicas pulled out of dead people. However, Cleaver is disgusting in
a very unfunny way.
There are few things worse than a movie which tries far too hard to be
funny. Comic films are at their best when they aren't trying as hard as
possible to be humorous. On the rare occasions that "Screwed" manages to
pull a chuckle out of its audience, it drags the scene on well past the
point where it is welcome. For example, when Muffin jumps out the back of
Rusty's van while he and Willard are driving (that's funny, right?), the
camera stays focused for several minutes on the two in the front seat,
joking about taking the dog. "Screwed" only runs 90 minutes, but it's a long
hour and a half. I'd recommend it to people who, for some reason, like Norm
Macdonald movies, but to no one else. I'm giving the movie two and a half
out of five stars out of respect for Danny DeVito, and because there are a
few funny scenes at about the mid point that almost give the film some
saving grace. Almost.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Homer Yen
Watching "Screwed," an underwhelming comedy, is like
trying to drive a car 10 miles in 2nd gear.  You can
only go so far before you become frustrated with the
pace and progress.
In fact, this film has such little momentum that at
some point, the movie almost stops from its own lack
of inertia.  "Screwed" primarily fails because it has
no ambition.  It doesn't try to offer anything new as
far as comedies go.  Instead it relies too heavily on
an atmosphere of tomfoolery and inherently silly
characters that bumble their way through the plot.  
Yet, when it goes for a laugh, its method is to evoke
a sense of queasiness.  One such joke involves a
creepy mortician (Danny DeVito) who displays way too
much enjoyment for his job.  He comments, "It's
amazing what you dig out of dead people's bodies," as
he proceeds to play a recently acquired harmonica. 
Another joke involves a wrinkly, semi-naked, 80-year
old woman.  And another one involves seeing Sherman
Hemsley (TV's George Jefferson) in a thong.  These
sights are more apt to make you cringe with discomfort
rather than chuckle.
The story revolves around a disgruntled butler named
Willard (Norm MacDonald) and a dognapping scheme gone
awry.  Willard has been toiling for fifteen years as a
butler for the miserly Miss Crock (Elaine Stritch). 
Crock is a wealthy pastry mogul who lavishes her dog
with a lifestyle fit for a king.  But for anything and
anyone else, she's a mean-spirited tightwad.  She
seems especially put off by Willard's request for a
new butler suit.  His is tattered and frayed.  In
fact, it's the same suit that his father used to wear.
 On Christmas day, when he receives a Crock brand
mincemeat pie, he can no longer stand the humiliation.
 So, with the help of his bumbling friend, Rusty
(David Chappelle), they devise a plan to kidnap
Crock's precious canine.  "I'd bet she pay $1 million
for that sack of fleas," he derisively says.
Of course, criminally inept fools like Willard and
Rusty don't become skilled dognappers overnight. 
Though Willard is intent on revenge, he warns his
friend, "we're not criminals; you fry chicken and I
drive a car."  But then they think about all the
things they can do with that kind of money and are
instantly motivated.  Willard wants to escape to a
tropical paradise.  Rusty, who is more simple-minded,
hopes to laminate the menus in his restaurant.  They
proceed with the dognapping, which they completely
botch.  And then in a twist stranger than bizarre, the
police believe that Willard is the one who is
kidnapped.  Now, the jittery butler must find a way to
'unkidnap' himself and avoid being exposed by a
tough-looking but soft-spoken detective (Daniel
Benzali). 
"Screwed" is the kind of mediocre filmmaking that
sacrifices story for hammy acting.  The only likable
character was Miss Crock as the apathetic, crotchety
old woman who debates whether to pay the ransom money
for Willard's release.  The others were just plain
silly, though watching Rusty hit people with desk
lamps might illicit a chuckle or two.  And the story
has the consistency of rice pudding.  The film's
direction saunters from one idea to another, and as a
result, it becomes a melange of half-baked ideas in a
now-you-see-it-now-you-don't kind of way.  The film
starts off as a revenge flick, transforms into a story
where Willard must cover his tracks, and then
ultimately introduces an angle of reconciliation and
forgiveness.  Slowly paced and completely
unremarkable, this film is more than enough to make
you feel screwed.

Author
Michael Dequina
        The tagline for the comedy _Screwed_ is "Everyone gets it in the end." 
That could not be more true--especially for the audience, who gets it
much worse than any of the characters in the film.  It is tempting to say
that any audience that sees _Screwed_ will themselves feel "screwed." 
But that's putting it lightly; anyone who sees it would know that a more
profane term would be more appropriate.
        As bad as the film is, _Screwed_ isn't, well, screwed from the start. 
In fact, it does hold some degree of promise from a plotting standpoint. 
Writers Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski (who make their directorial
debut with this film) do devise an interesting set of twists from a
simple premise: as payback against his slavedriving employer Miss Crock
(Elaine Stritch), overworked and underappreciated chauffeur Willard
Fillmore (Norm Macdonald) and his friend Rusty (Dave Chappelle) come up
with a plan to kidnap Miss Crock's beloved dog and hold it for ransom. 
Of course, the plan doesn't go quite as they planned, and the turns the
plot takes as events quickly spin out of control are not without some
inspiration.
        Where Alexander and Karaszewski could have used more inspiration are the
gags that fill the time between turns of the plot.  Ben Stiller's fight
with a pooch in _There's_Something_About_Mary_ was indeed hilarious, but
other film's attempts to ape that scene have always fallen flat on their
faces; _Screwed_'s weak try is no exception.  The scene, with Willard
spraying blood all over the walls of Miss Crock's house as her dog's
teeth remain clenched on his hand, is indicative of the juvenile level of
slapsticky humor that dominates the film.  An old lady in a hospital hits
Rusty in the head with a bedpan.  A woman kicks a man a number of times
in rapid succession.  There's even a running gag where Rusty hits guys in
the head with lamps.  It's all more numbing than funny.
        Alas, the tiresome physical gags aren't numbing enough to spare the
audience the pain of spending time with such unpleasant characters. 
Willard and Rusty aren't charmingly dimwitted--as is the obvious
intent--but obnoxiously stupid; Macdonald's whiny performance makes
matters even worse.  Stritch makes a hateful bitch, but she is so
unlikable that it's painful to watch and listen to her; no less than an
excruciating death for her character would be a satisfying payoff for the
film (needless to say, that doesn't happen).  It's rather telling that
Danny DeVito's weirdo morgue attendant, a grimy guy who mines dead bodies
for hidden treasure, exudes the most charm, comparatively speaking.
        Even harder to figure than why Alexander and Karaszewski--who have 
established themselves as gifted screenwriters (_Ed_Wood_,
_The_People_vs._Larry_Flynt_)--wrote _Screwed_ is why they chose this
script to serve as their maiden directorial effort.  Perhaps they thought
that only they would be able to give the script its full justice, but I
can't imagine any other filmmaker doing much worse with the already-poor
material than they have.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Written by: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Willard Fillmore (Norm Macdonald) is chauffeur to an evil old hag,
Virginia Crock (Elaine Stritch). Actually, his job title may be
chauffeur, but his actual duties consist of doing just about
everything from scrubbing Crock's dentures to feeding her dog,
Muffin. After Crock gives him a pie for Christmas, rather than the new
suit he so desperately needs, Willard hatches a plan with his friend,
Rusty (Dave Chappelle), to kidnap Muffin and ransom him back to Miss
Crock. The plan, of course, backfires and a new plan must be
hatched. This one consists of Willard himself being ransomed. Rusty
and Willard decide to fake Willard's death by having a mortician,
Grover Cleaver (Danny DeVito), fix up a corpse to look like
him. Everything manages to go wrong with every plan the trio think up,
and the situation grows worse and worse.
Danny DeVito seems to be developing an interesting and slightly
worrisome habit with his script choices. His last two pictures have
had three things in common. Both involved evil, universally hated old
women; some sort of cheesy, tacked on mystery; and a horrible, poorly
written script. This is a shame considering what a talented actor
DeVito is. "Screwed" is a weak, often painfully forced and unfunny
film which will most likely vanish from theaters in a month. The movie
starts off with no humor except Macdonald ("Dirty Work") doing a
somewhat amusing impersonation of Bruce Campbell's Ash from "Evil Dead
II". This lack of humor lasts for about 45 minutes, and the movie then
begins to show some signs of life, with one or two truly funny
scenes. Unfortunately, this doesn't last, and the film ends horribly.
Let's get one thing straight everyone. Norm Macdonald cannot act in
any way.  The man stumbles through his lines with the same poker face
and dreary, boring voice throughout all his films. His lack of emotion
can be somewhat amusing in stand up comic sketches on Saturday Night
Live, but it doesn't translate well into movies. Dave Chappelle can be
one of two things in his movies: irritating or very irritating. In
Martin Lawrence's "Blue Streak" he was irritating. In "Screwed" he is
very irritating. The man has the most annoying, whiny tone of voice
you're likely to hear. DeVito does what he can with his miserable
role, but you can't pull something out of nothing. I think the
character of Grover Cleaver was supposed to be some sort of mad
scientist who was funny because of all the disgusting things he did -
like play harmonicas pulled out of dead people. However, Cleaver is
disgusting in a very unfunny way.
There are few things worse than a movie which tries far too hard to be
funny. Comic films are at their best when they aren't trying as hard
as possible to be humorous. On the rare occasions that "Screwed"
manages to pull a chuckle out of its audience, it drags the scene on
well past the point where it is welcome. For example, when Muffin
jumps out the back of Rusty's van while he and Willard are driving
(that's funny, right?), the camera stays focused for several minutes
on the two in the front seat, joking about taking the dog. "Screwed"
only runs 90 minutes, but it's a long hour and a half. I'd recommend
it to people who, for some reason, like Norm Macdonald movies, but to
no one else. I'm giving the movie two and a half out of five stars out
of respect for Danny DeVito, and because there are a few funny scenes
at about the mid point that almost give the film some saving
grace. Almost.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
            "Screwed" sneaked into our local theaters without advance
screenings for critics - and screwed is how you'll feel if you
inadvertently pay at the ticket counter. Stand-up comic Norm Macdonald
plays Willard Fillmore, a mild-mannered servant who works for nasty
Virginia Crock, a wealthy Pittsburgh bakery owner played by Elaine
Stritch. Understandably bitter - since he has to scrub her dentures
along with her toilets and cars - and egged on by his best buddy, Dave
Chappelle, he decides to kidnap her beloved, yappy, mean-tempered lap
dog for $1 million ransom and flee to the Caribbean. But, of course,
their contrived, chaotic plan backfires.  None of this is funny -
particularly Danny DeVito as a creepy, degenerate coroner. And Norm
Macdonald is amazingly inept; he cannot act - period.  Written by
Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski before "Ed Wood," "The People
vs. Larry Flynt," and "Man on the Moon," it serves as their
directorial debut. Perhaps that's understandable since they also
collaborated on the sloppy scripting of "Problem Child." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Screwed" is a wretched, idiotic
1. Hard to believe, but it's worse than "Battlefield Earth."

Author
Steve Rhodes
The name says it all.  SCREWED is exactly what people will feel like if
they make the mistake of wasting their hard-earned dollars on this
turkey.
Amateurishly acted, with one exception (Danny DeVito who manages to have
a high old time chewing up the scenery), and crudely written and
directed by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, SCREWED will have
many viewers wanting to head for the exits well before the end of the
first reel.
The story involves the dognapping of a pooch owned by a pie mogul named
Miss Crock (Elaine Stritch).  If funny names are all that it takes to
make you laugh, then you might get a kick out of SCREWED, which also
likes to give its characters names that are humorously based on past
presidents and presidential candidates.
Willard Fillmore (Norm Macdonald) is a decade-long servant of Miss
Crock.  A heartless woman, Miss Crock plans on firing him on Christmas
Day and burning his possessions.  Overhearing his fate, Willard hatches
a plan to steal her dog, Muffin, and demand a million dollar ransom for
its return.
When he and his cohort in crime, Rusty P. Hayes (Dave Chappelle), botch
the job, Miss Crock ends up thinking that Willard has been kidnapped and
that the ransom is for his life.  Refusing to pay, she becomes such a
pariah in the news reports that it affects her company's stock price, so
she quite reluctantly agrees to pay up.
As a diabolically comedic mad-scientist type, DeVito plays Grover
Cleaver (gosh, aren't these names funny?), who is a disreputable worker
at the local morgue.  Willard and Rusty visit Grover in order to hire
him to get a body to fake Willard's death after they collect the ransom.
Before taking on the assignment, Grover wants to show the lads his
prized collection of goodies that he has found in bodies which he has
cut open.  These include a pet rock, a "perfectly good comb," a
"clicker" (television remote control), and other bloody remnants of his
deceased clients. Grover loves to get corpses' blood all over himself
and put filthy things in his mouth in order to gross out the audience.
Without a genuine moment or character and with an uncountable number of
scenes that will have you looking away from the screen, SCREWED tries
hard to be awful and succeeds.  Finally, it hit me that this whole movie
must be one long (bad) inside joke.  The writers and directors of
SCREWED collaborated on the scripts of many other successful pictures --
I know that's hard to believe.  One of them was ED WOOD, the biography
of the director of some of the worst films ever made.  SCREWED must be
their homage to him.  If Ed Wood were alive today, SCREWED would be
exactly the type of movie that he would be making.
SCREWED runs 1:30.  It is rated PG-13 for crude and sex-related humor,
nudity, language, some violence and brief drug content and would be
acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
