Title
Review for Mrs. Dalloway (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Seth Bookey
"Marriage is a disaster, particularly for women!" announces young Sally
Seton (Lena Heady) to her friend, Clarissa Dalloway (Natascha McElhone),
as they spend the summer lazing around the latter's estate. This is what
Mrs. Dalloway (Vanessa Redgrave) remembers as she goes about her errands
the day of her big party--coming up that evening. Is it such a disaster,
though? That's part of what she considers forty years later, when she
looks back on her life and the people to whom she was close when she had
that conversation. There was her suitor Peter (Alan Cox), and Sally
(another suitor of sorts), and finally, the stuffy, boring, dull Richard
Dalloway (Robert Portal). Despite her exposure to different things and
ideas, Clarissa chooses the safest route possible--the one she can best
imagine herself following. Was it the right one? "I'm not even Clarissa
anymore--I'm Mrs. Dalloway," she realizes. 
*Mrs. Dalloway* explores this question while Clarissa goes about her
errands and meets callers and mulls things over in the diegetic time of
one day. Interwoven into this is the story of the shellshocked Septimus
Warren Smith (Rupert Graves), who sees ghosts from the Great War
everywhere, and for whom life is pretty unbearable. He and Clarissa don't
meet, but he plays a big part in her life that day. 
*Mrs. Dalloway* is a difficult movie to review. I almost would need to see
it a second time to give it the attention it deserves. The performances
are first rate--especially that of Vanessa Redgrave, who brought more to
Mission: Impossible with a crinkle of her nose than the entire cast every
could. The writing is also good. Thoughtful, yet funny.  Let's face it,
the stuffy mores and rituals of the British upper classes is very amusing
to late 20th Century Americans, and always will be.  Margaret Tyzack, as
the brutal Lady Bruton, is horrifying and hilarious as the aristocrat who
wants all unemployed young men sent to Canada if they cannot find jobs
within a year--and might have it happen, as she has the ear of Members of
Parliament. 
"Relationships are just scratches on the surface," is one conclusion
Clarissa eventually makes as she mulls over life, and her life. It's a
shattering statement, but accurate. Despite their hopes and thoughts for
her, Sally and Peter, forty years later, realize that perhaps Clarissa is
happy, even if they don't understand her choices, or even ever knew her at
all. This solitary contemplation of human nature is not for everyone, but
seeing *Mrs. Dalloway* is a worthy endeavour nonetheless. 
Directed with sensitivity by Marleen Gorris, Mrs. Dalloway's difficult
stream-of-consciousness is fathomed. The movie is a nice contrast to
Gorris' other big film, *Antonia's Line*, which followed several strong
women making their own choices and eschewing the world of men. 
Based on the novel by Virginia Woolf with screenplay by Eileen Atkins.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Virginia Woolf wrote MRS. DALLOWAY as a stream-of-consciousness
novel taking place in the title character's mind.  Now Eileen Atkins
has adapted the story as a somewhat non-linear narrative jumping
forward and backward in time.  There are two story lines, tangent at
many points but never really converging into a single story.  We have a
view of Clarissa Dalloway as a young woman (played by Natascha
McElhone) and as an older woman (Vanessa Redgrave), and we have the
story of Septimus Warren Smith (Rupert Graves).  More on his story
later.  Even as a young woman Clarissa could not commit to anything but
comfort and ease.  Now as an older woman she has attained comfort and
ease and her big concerns at the moment we see her all over the success
of one of her own parties.  She is an empty shell woman inside whom
thoughts bounce around un-weighted by any real profundity.  She is
nostalgic for a past in which she consistently chose the path of least
resistance in spite of frequent temptations to show a little character.
As an adult she is an antique and a relic of a dying way of life with
little inkling how irrelevant she is outside of a small circle of
friends.  She has little understanding of the hard world outside that
circle.
     Nearby and yet so far away is Septimus Smith who fought in the
Great War and saw a close friend blown to pieces by a land mine.
Already in shock from the war, he felt nothing at seeing his friend die
so horribly.  Now he is coming out of the initial shock and the meaning
of what he has seen is haunting him.  He blames himself for feeling
nothing at the death of a friend.  And he hates his doctors who seem as
out of touch with the harsh realities of life as Mrs.  Dalloway.  They
cannot even understand Smith's painful howl and instead pallidly
prescribe a rest cure at an asylum.  They see Smith as insane when the
pain he feels is more real than anything in Mrs. Dalloway's entire
useless life.
     The theme of the two worlds is curiously reminiscent of Sidney
Lumet's THE PAWNBROKER with Holocaust survivor Rod Steiger telling
well-meaning do-gooder Geraldine Fitzgerald that he comes from a whole
world that she knows nothing about and whose people are of an entirely
different species.  MRS. DALLOWAY is in some ways very much like THE
PAWNBROKER told from the viewpoint of the genteel Fitzgerald character.
     Mrs.  Dalloway's friends and, in fact, her whole class seem to be
out of touch with harsh reality.  In a particularly telling sequence, a
friend of Dalloway's decides that the best thing for England would be
to take all the returning WWI veterans who have been unable to find
work on their own and effectively exile them to Canada.  Her friends
who know a little more decide to humor her in spite of the foolishness
and probable illegality of the plan.
     Virginia Woolf's MRS. DALLOWAY must have been a difficult novel to
adapt (by all accounts, I have not read it) and the script has some
technical problems made worst by some casting problems.  The telling
drifts from present into the past with little signal and it is not
always obvious that it has happened.  It is very difficult in the
flashback sequences to match the younger versions of characters to the
older ones since the characters are played by different actors who
often are physically quite different.  The young Clarissa and her
friend Sally are nearly the same height in their 20s and considerably
different in height what is probably their 50s.  We are led to assume
that having children has shortened Sally by what must be six inches.
It might well have been better to use only young actors and age them
much as Orson Welles aged himself in CITIZEN KANE.  But for these
problems in the casting, most of the roles seem well-played with
veteran British actors in several of the roles.
     This film is for the most part gentle, but deep-down there seems
to be a lot of anger in the telling, perhaps more than one would find
in even an E.  M. Forster or John Galsworthy story.  It would be
interesting to read the novel to see if Woolf has the same disdain for
the characters that the film seems to have.  I rate MRS. DALLOWAY a 6
on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Marleen Gorris.
Cast: Vanessa Redgrave, Natascha McElhone, Rupert Graves, Michael 
Kitchen, Alan Cox, Lena Headey, Amelia Bullmore, Sarah Badel, Oliver 
Ford Davies, Katie Carr, John Standing, Robert Hardy, Margaret Tyzack, 
Phyllis Calvert.
1998 - 97 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for brief nudity).
Reviewed October 10, 1998.
I've never really enjoyed period pieces because, most of the time, I 
don't think they are done very well. Usually, they seem to lack the 
urgency that they desperately need so that they become interesting. In 
"Mrs. Dalloway," unfortnately, there is no such luck.
At the start of "Mrs. Dalloway," which is set over a period of one day 
in 1923, the title character (Vanessa Redgrave), an aging, recently 
divorced woman living in England, is preparing for a party that she will 
be holding that night. Throughout the day, she reflects back to the life 
she once knew when she was a young woman (portrayed by Natascha 
McElhone), and had the chance to marry a spontaneous, loving man (Rupert 
Graves), but chose instead to play it safe with an uncaring beau. 
I rented "Mrs. Dalloway" basically because I thought it might be 
interesting, since it is set during a 24-hour period, but what I didn't 
count on was for it to be constantly distracting. The film switches 
countless times from 1923 to when she was younger, to the point that it 
started to feel muddled and painfully episodic. By having the story cut 
away so often to other things (and a few subplots I haven't mentioned), 
I could never get caught up in Mrs. Dalloway's ultimate search for 
happiness. And the way that another story involving a shell-shocked WWI 
soldier is interwined with the main one felt convoluted and obvious.
The performances in "Mrs. Dalloway" are not to be faulted. Redgrave is 
believable as Mrs. Dalloway, and she looks startlingly like McElhone, 
who plays her in the flashbacks. Another performance I admired, but who 
was underused, was Katie Carr, as Redgrave's young daughter.
Since the structuring of the story was needlessly drawn out and 
unnecessary, I didn't grow to care about any of the characters, and at 
the end, when "Mrs. Dalloway," attempts to be moving, it left me cold. 
    - Copyright 1998 by Dustin Putman
      Dustin Putman's
Film Reviews > 

Author
Jon Popick
I'm not going to lie to you.  Just the very thought of Mrs. Dalloway
sent shivers down my spine.  It's a period costume drama (Strike One).
It stars Vanessa Redgrave (Strike Two).  It's based on a Virginia Woolf
novel (Strike Three).  Still, I kept my mind relatively open.
The title character, played by Redgrave (Julia), is a snooty old
socialite.  She wakes up on the morning of her big party and won't
frigging shut up about it for a second.  Then, she finds out that Peter,
an ex-suitor from about 100 years ago, happens to be in town on the very
same day.  Apparently, Dalloway has always questioned her decision to
marry her current husband instead of this Peter.  The trouble is that
they're all a bunch of corpses now, so who really gives a crap?
There is also another story line about a shell-shocked war hero who
perpetually thinks that he is seeing a guy named Evans blown to bits
right in front of him.  That's right.  Explosions.  Smack dab in the
middle of this frighteningly boring story.  My guess is that the
explosions were put in to wake the sleeping viewer and, I'll have you
know that my neck snapped up so hard that my glasses almost flew off.
That's powerful filmmaking!
The only bright spot radiated from Natascha McElhone (The Devil's Own),
who played the young Dalloway in a series of mind-numbing flashbacks.
It was still hard to enjoy her, knowing that she would grow up and
become the annoying bird that can only seem to fixate on her party and
how any number of uncontrollable sources could effect its success.  And
you just know there's going to be a big dance scene.  YAY!
So, I'm basically saying that I really enjoyed Mrs. Dalloway and that
the people who are responsible for making it should not be killed or
harmed in any way.  Or something

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "It's a disaster," Mrs. Dalloway thinks to herself in voice-over.
"The party's a disaster."  She has invited just the right members of
English society but things are on the verge of falling apart.  One
person has brought along a friend who is a known bore, and Mrs.
Dalloway's own daughter may skip the party.  Her daughter has plans to
go to the mission to help the poor instead of attending of her own
mother's party -- how inconsiderate.
     But hold on, the guests are beginning to laugh.  "Oh, it's not a
failure afterall," Mrs. Dalloway thinks to herself as she breathes a
sigh of relief.
     The movie MRS. DALLOWAY, based on the Virginia Woolf novel,
suffers from a surfeit of one-dimensional characters.  Having never
read the book, I cannot be sure if the problem stems from the book,
Marleen Gorris's direction or Eileen Atkins's adaptation.  Regardless
of the source, the result is a film that is as dull as dishwater even
if most of the cast is quite talented.
     Set in upper class society in London in 1923 as well as years
earlier during Mrs. Dalloway's late teens, the movie flits back and
forth between the two time periods in a manner certain to confuse half
the audience.  Most characters are played by both a younger and an
older actor, but the actors cast to play them look so dissimilar and
the cuts back and forth in time are so frequent that the effect is
jarring.
     Vanessa Redgrave, playing Vanessa Redgrave, is Mrs. Dalloway.  As
a teenage girl, she is known as Clarissa -- one loses one's first name
when one becomes a society matron -- and is played by Natascha
McElhone.  The strikingly beautiful McElhone, last seen in THE DEVIL'S
OWN and SURVIVING PICASSO, brings nothing to the role.  She smiles
radiantly in every scene but makes Clarissa seem like a person who does
not have a brain in her head.
     The only complex character in the movie, a shell-shocked World War
I veteran named Septimus, is played with feeling by Rupert Graves.  If
the other performances had been as strong as his, the movie would have
had more life to it.
     Every time the movie looks like it will finally come alive, as
when Sally (Lena Headey) kisses Clarissa in the garden, the story
quickly goes off in another direction.  Likewise, when the rich Sally
complains that the problems of the world stem from people's being
allowed to own private property, Clarissa says she hopes she is not
including her family's house (read mansion).  But nothing is ever made
of Sally's budding socialism, and the thin Sally turns up later in life
as the plump Lady Rosseter (Sarah Badel) with five kids and no desire
to upset the social structure.
     Most costume dramas, THE WINGS OF THE DOVE being a recent,
excellent example, are bristling with life, but not MRS. DALLOWAY.
None of the characters, with the possible exception of Septimus, are
worth caring about.
     "Oh what snobs the English are," says Mrs. Dalloway's old suitor
Peter Walsh (Michael Kitchen) at her big party.  "How they love
dressing up."  And the movie MRS. DALLOWAY is nothing more than a
dress-up party.
     MRS. DALLOWAY runs 1:37.  It is rated PG-13 for emotional elements
and brief nudity.  It would be acceptable for kids ten and up, but they
would probably need to be older teenagers to be interested in the
story.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Vanessa Redgrave, Natascha McElhone, Rupert Graves, 
      Michael Kitchen, John Standing, Alan Cox, Lena Headley, 
      Amelia Bullmore
Director: Marleen Gorris
Producers: Lisa Katselas Pare, Stephen Bayly
Screenplay: Eileen Atkins based on the novel by Virginia Woolf
Cinematography: Sue Gibson 
Music: Ilona Sekacz
U.S. Distributor: First Look Pictures 
     In 1996, director Marleen Gorris, who hails from the Netherlands, 
entered the international spotlight when her 1995 feature, ANTONIA'S 
LINE, won the Best Foreign Film Oscar.  Now, two years later, Gorris' 
follow-up to that much-lauded effort has arrived in the form of MRS. 
DALLOWAY, an adaptation of Virginia Woolf's classic novel.  Because of 
its strong leading character and female-oriented themes, it's easy to 
understand why the film held such appeal for an avowed feminist like 
Gorris.  In conjunction with Vanessa Redgrave, the director paints a 
probing-but-flawed portrait of a thoughtful woman.
     Redgrave, who brings depth and a sense of poignant longing to 
Clarissa Dalloway, was instrumental in getting this picture made.  After 
canvassing Virginia Woolf's body of work in preparation for a stage 
role, Redgrave was struck by the potential cinematic quality of MRS. 
DALLOWAY, and suggested to screenwriter Eileen Atkins that it would make 
a good movie.  Several years later, the film has traversed the road from 
concept to feature, and, six months after making its debut at the 1997 
Toronto Film Festival, it is opening in selected theaters across North 
America.
     MRS. DALLOWAY is a "day in the life" motion picture that uses 
flashbacks to broaden the time span from a single day in June 1923 to a 
lifetime.  The film begins by introducing viewers to Clarissa Dalloway, 
the upper class wife of Richard Dalloway (John Standing), a wealthy 
Member of Parliament.  Clarissa, who lives a life that is safe, 
isolated, and dull, is planning a gala party for the evening, where 
guests of stature will mix and mingle, telling boring stories and 
engaging in stuffy conversation.  Clarissa is well-known for her 
parties, and they have become social events in London society.  Then 
something happens to shatter the stillness of Mrs. Dalloway's life -- a 
man named Peter Walsh (Michael Kitchen), an old flame from 30 years ago, 
shows up on her doorstep.  This leads Clarissa to think back to the 
choices she made during the summer of 1890, and how they shaped the rest 
of her life.
     MRS. DALLOWAY is about regrets and coping with the consequences of 
one's decisions.  Clarissa has not led a bad life -- in fact, it has 
been quite comfortable -- but she is cognizant that she gave up love and 
passion for security.  The point of the film isn't to debate whether she 
made the right or wrong decision, but to emphasize that everyone has 
roads not taken.  For Clarissa, the alternative to her pampered life of 
parties and domestic tranquillity would have been an existence of travel 
and adventure, two things that frightened her.  The greatest strength of 
MRS. DALLOWAY is that it manages to effectively capture the poignancy 
and wistful yearning of gazing back through the years at what was and 
what might have been.  Clarissa's bittersweet reminiscences are so 
powerfully-presented that they will strike a responsive with many 
viewers.  I left the film contemplating the undeniable truth of how 
quickly (and sometimes cruelly) time passes everyone by.
     Juxtaposed with Mrs. Dalloway's story is that of a young, shell-
shocked soldier, Septimus Warren-Smith (Rupert Graves), who has never 
recovered from his experiences in World War I.  This material, although 
thematically relevant to the main plot, causes unwanted interruptions in 
the narrative that threaten to derail the picture.  Graves plays the 
part effectively, and the story of the young man's loss of identity is 
tragic, but I found the Warren-Smith scenes to be more of a distraction 
than a crucial subplot.
     Not surprisingly, the acting is top-notch.  Redgrave shines, 
whether she's gazing back through the mists of the past or, in the 
film's best sequence, making pithy asides to expose the true nature of 
the guests at her party.  Michael Kitchen and John Standing are solid as 
the two men who were once rivals for Clarissa's affections, and who have 
changed very little over time.  In flashbacks, Natascha McElhone 
(SURVIVING PICASSO) brings a sparkle to the young Clarissa, and Alan Cox 
cuts a dashing figure as Peter.  The 1890 scenes also feature Lena 
Headley as Clarissa's best friend, and their are hints of a subtle 
lesbian attraction.
     MRS. DALLOWAY will probably appeal most strongly to those who 
appreciate Merchant-Ivory's unhurried pace.  The story, which is more of 
a character study than a plot-oriented narrative, moves slowly and 
deliberately, giving us a crystal-clear picture of the many faces of 
Clarissa Dalloway -- who she was, who she might have been, and who she 
has become.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 First Look Pictures
 Director:  Marleen Gorris
 Writer:  Eileen Atkins from Virginia Woolf's novel
 Cast: Vanessa Redgrave, Natascha McElhone, Rupert
Graves, Alan Cox, Michael Kitchen
   Psychologists and journalists seem almost prosaic when
they discuss mid-life crisis and post-menopausal syndrome. 
To find a more lyrical expression of the dubious pleasures of
these phenonema, you'd have to turn to literature, and when
you direct your attention to the novelists you could not do
better than select Virginia Woolf's "Mrs. Dalloway."  In her
novel, which was first published in 1925 and which deals with
the period immediately following World War I in England,
Woolf creates a 52-year-old woman, the title figure, who
seems to plunge into late-mid-life straits one morning and to
reconcile herself to her plight by the evening.  Experimenting
with interior monologues and numerous stream-of-
consciousness flashbacks, Ms. Woolf constructs a story to
which a great many of us can relate in a book which is
considered by some literary critics to be her masterpiece.
  Because of the fluidity of its telling--particularly in its early
segment in which Mrs. Dalloway introduces the movie
audience to many characters both in the present and her
youthful bloom--the novel adapts easily enough to the movie
medium.  In director Marleen Gorris' ("My Antonia") hands
with the adaptation of the principal performer's right-hand
woman, Eileen Atkins, the First Look Pictures interpretation of
this thoughtful piece highlights both the satirical take on the
British upper classes and the somber drama of a woman in
distress.  You come away from this movie with a better
understanding of two of its principals, "What does the brain
matter, when compared with the heart?"
   Centered on Mrs. Dalloway, who is played by Vanessa
Redgrave--a luminous woman considered by some the world's
finest actress--the story unfolds in a tony section of London
on a sunny day in June 1923 as Mrs. Dalloway (Vanessa
Redgrave) gleefully prepares for a party by stopping in a
Bond Street florist's shop and walking spiritedly about a park
announcing plans for "my party."  Despite her outward show
of happiness, which is genuine so far as we can see, she is
inwardly troubled by a decision she made some 30 years
back when she chose a safe marriage to a successful
politician who still loves her and rebuffed the entreaties of an
impetuous, adventurous young man.  As she begins to relate
her torment to the movie audience, Sue Gibson's camera
plunges us into Clarissa Dalloway's youth, revealing her
courtship with Peter Walsh (Michael Kitchen) and baring her
20-year-old self as performed by the lovely Natascha
McElhone.  While she is apparently footloose and fancy-free
with this spontaneous young man, she is bewildered by her
sexual feelings toward her best friend Sally (Lena Headey), 
who at one point prances naked throughout Clarissa's home
and unselfconsciously embraces and kisses her pal.  As
though the two brash young people were not enough for her
fragile emotions, she is pursued as well by the somewhat
stodgy Richard Dalloway (Robert Portal), who is determined
to make his mark in politics and appears to promise her a
safe, comfortable, frivolously bourgeois life filled with teas,
parties, and idle chatter.
   In a fragment of the story seemingly unrelated, we are
made privy to an account of a disturbed fellow, Septimus
Warren Smith (Rupert Graves), shell-shocked from an
experience during the war in Italy, in which he witnessed the
sudden death by a explosion of his fellow soldier and
comrade, Evan.  We are soon to see a parallel between
Septimus's life and that of Clarissa--both share a backdrop of
homosexual feelings, both are afflicted with demons, and both
have contemplated suicide.  (Perhaps the most interesting
aspect of the movie is the subtext in which novelist Virginia
Woolf, who took her own life, has projected her passions onto
this disturbed young man.)
   Particularly suited to the medium of film is director Gorris's
lavish evocation of the life of a snobbish British society of the
1920s, a haughtiness that has by no means disappeared in
that thoroughly class-conscious isle.  Miss Kilman (Selina
Cadell) effectively conveys the religious extremism of one
sector of the upper caste, insisting that "there is wisdom in
suffering," and tries to inflict her ideology onto Clarissa's
beautiful 17-year-old daughter Elizabeth (Katie Carr)--who is
strangely infatuated with this older woman.  The film's
lingering exposition builds up to its most striking segment, as
guests arrive for Mrs. Dalloway's party and, for the most part,
engage in trivial and prevaricating conversation.  It is here
that the movie shines, utilizing the technique of inner
monologue as did Eugene O'Neill in "Strange Interlude" to
contrast with the outward conversation.  While lavishing
compliments on her guests, Clarissa shares with us--and with
us in the movie audience only--her true feelings about the
prigs and uglies in attendance.  When Peter, the true love of
her youth, arrives unexpectedly, her spirit soars, an incident
which only makes her ponder once more on the mistake she
may have made in choosing her loving but stuffy husband.
   "Mrs. Dalloway" has the Merchant-Ivory look, a view that
should be taken as an entirely positive measure.  The entire
ensemble, but especially Ms. Redgrave, convey the flights of
feeling that entangle their lives, the sudden changes of fervor
that make life both exciting and anxiety-ridden.  Mrs.
Dalloway's ultimate reconciliation, which is furthered by news
of the fate of the shellshocked young man who is about to be
involuntarily sent to an institution for "rest" by an unfeeling
duo of psychologists, is credible, dramatic, and moving. Rated
PG-13.  Running Time: 97 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
Matt Williams
Marleen Gorris directs this timid adaptation of Virginia Woolf's novel,
Mrs. Dalloway.  There's probably a point to be made, but the film lacks
the confidence to make it.
Vanessa Redgrave plays the title role of Mrs. Clarissa Dalloway, wife of
a successful politician.  The film takes place primarily in London after
WWI.  Mrs. Dalloway is planning a party, but her life is thrown in
disarray when she receives a visit from Peter Walsh (Michael Kitchen), a
man who once loved her.  She has come to think of herself purely in
terms of her husband, so such a return of individuality is a shock to
her.
There are several flashbacks to when they were young adults.  Clarissa
(here played by Natascha McElhone) is being wooed by both the wild Peter
(Alan Cox) and the stiff Richard Dalloway (Robert Portal).  Should she
choose security or danger?  Judging from the title, it's not that
surprising a decision.
Intercut with the action is a completely unrelated story of a
shellshocked WWI soldier.  Septimus Smith (Rupert Graves) has been
mentally troubled since the war.  His suicidal tendencies have baffled
his wife, Rezia (Amelia Bullmore), who reluctantly seeks help.
The connection between these two stories is tenuous at best.  The
strongest parallel I could draw was that Mrs. Dalloway had been
shellshocked in her own way, but coped with it differently. However, if
that was the intended message, it is awfully muffled here.
In fact, the film flirts with several ideas, but it is much too
tentative in its approach.  For example, there's a possible romantic
interest between Clarissa and her friend Sally (Lena Headey), but it is
unclear if this exists, or if there's much thought behind it at all.
As the film progresses, it slowly gains confidence.  By the time we
reach Mrs. Dalloway's party, everything finally clicks.  With a swirling
combination of Mrs. Dalloway's mental commentary and some dizzying
camerawork, the film sweeps us into a delightful stream-of-consciousness
narrative.
But, overall, the film has difficulty overcoming its rather dry tone. If
it proceeded with some early experimentation, some sort of energy might
have brought it to life.  But in the end, like its title character, the
film chose the safe and timid way out...at the cost of its identity.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
