Title
Review for Prophecy, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Elias Koteas, Virginia Madsen, Christopher Walken, Eric Stoltz,
      Moriah Shining Dove Snyder, Viggo Mortensen, Adam Goldberg,
      Amanda Plummer
Director: Gregory Widen
Producer: Joel Soisson
Screenplay: Gregory Widen
Cinematography: Richard Clabaugh and Bruce Douglas Johnson
Music: David C. Williams
U.S. Distributor: Dimension Films
     Every once in a while, someone gets the bright idea of making an
apocalyptic horror film.  THE OMEN series is probably the best-known
example of this sub-genre, but it's not the only one.  Now, THE
PROPHECY, with its tale of warring angels and lost Bible chapters,
joins the group.  There's a twist here, however.  In the past, Lucifer
has always been the bad guy.  This time around, he's actually on the
"good" side.  Of course, that's only because it suits his purposes, but
still....
     Unfortunately, Viggo Mortensen's Devil doesn't appear until very
late in the proceedings, and by then, THE PROPHECY has long since worn
out its welcome.  The script, with its odd combination of Biblical
ramblings and gory violence, is as silly as they come.  Characters take
all sorts of supernatural occurrences as a matter of due course.  No
one seems bothered by the sudden appearances of angels or the knowledge
that God has basically left humanity to "work out [its] own salvation"
in rather literal terms.  Even the unexpected apparition of Satan does
little more than raise an eyebrow or two.
     Not counting Lucifer, there are basically two angels floating
around:  Simon (Eric Stoltz) and Gabriel (Christopher Walken).  The two
are mortal (or should that be immortal?) enemies; thus, one of them
doesn't make it to the climax.  Before Simon departs his earthly body,
he passes on his secret weapon--the soul of the perfect killer--to a
young girl (Moriah Shining Dawn Snyder).  Gabriel wants this weapon for
his side, and is willing to rip the girl apart to get it.  Standing in
his way are a pair of puny humans--seminary student-turned-cop Thomas
(Atom Egoyan regular Elias Koteas) and the girl's teacher (Virginia
Madsen), aided of course, by the aforementioned Lucifer, who has a
grudge against Gabriel.
     As dumb as THE PROPHECY is--and it's very dumb--at least the film
rarely takes itself seriously.  Writer/director Gregory Widen
apparently realized that the best way to approach the story is to take
the campy road, which is exactly what he has done.  THE PROPHECY is
frequently irreverent and is littered with lines of dialogue which
equate to the director winking at his audience.  Christopher Walken's
wonderfully droll performance is perfect for his role as the "killer of
firstborns."
     Alas, Walken is really the only interesting performer.  Koteas and
Madsen are boring, and most of the unnecessarily protracted story
centers around their characters.  We never feel anything for them, so
all the screen time used attempting to develop their personalities
becomes wasted.  In fact, "waste" is a good way to describe most of THE
PROPHECY.  In the final analysis, this is a bad movie with a good sense
of humor.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1995. Director/Screenplay - Gregory Widen, Producer - Joel Soisson, 
Photography - Richard Clabaugh & Bruce Douglas Johnson, Music - David C. 
Williams, Cave Sequence Visual Effects Supervisor - Johnson, Enemy Ghost 
Sequence - Todd Masters Co (Digital Supervisor - Scott Coulter), Angel 
Effects/Mesa Mattes - Effects Associates Inc (Supervisor - Jim 
Danforth), Additional Digital Effects - Available Light (Supervisor - 
Laurel Klick), Digital Magic Co & Neo Digital (Supervisor - Phillip 
Giles), Special Effects Supervisor - Jor Vankline, Makeup Effects - 
Patton EFX (Supervisor - Scott Patton), Production Design - Clark 
Hunter. Production Company - First Look Pictures/Neo Motion Pictures.
Christopher Walken (Gabriel), Elias Koteas (Thomas Dagget), Virginia 
Madsen (Katherine Henley), Eric Stoltz (Simon), Viggo Mortensen 
(Lucifer), Moriah Shining Dove Snyder (Mary), Adam Goldberg (Jerry), 
Amanda Plummer (Rachael)
Plot: Investigating a mysterious eyeless, hermaphroditic dead body 
Thomas Dagget, a former priest who has lost his faith and is now working 
as a detective, is thrust into the midst of an earthly war between 
angels. A fallen angel Gabriel is trying to create a new Heaven and 
seeks the soul of a Korean War colonel accused of human sacrifice. The 
soul has been transplanted into the body of a young Indian girl for 
protection and Thomas must fight to protect her as Gabriel comes to 
collect her.
`The Prophecy' is the directorial debut of Gregory Widen, previously a 
scriptwriter on the likes of `Highlander' and `Backdraft'. (Well 
technically Widen made his debut on an episode of `Tales from the Crypt' 
but this is his feature debut). And here Widen makes an impressively 
literate venture into the theme of angels. When one thinks about angels 
on film what invariably comes to mind is the likes of Roma Downey in 
`Touched by an Angel' or Michael Landon in `Highway to Heaven' and their 
accompanying assortment of insipidly preachy feelgood family sentiments. 
Perhaps at its best the feelgood angel treatment reaches the heights of 
an `It's a Wonderful Life' or ventures off into the beatific meditations 
of Wim Wenders `Wings of Desire' and `Faraway ! So Close', but most 
angel films seem trapped somewhere between Pollyanna fantasies and being 
all-but-in-name Baptist recruiting commercials. Amidst this `The 
Prophecy' is welcome as the first film to venture into the angelic 
fantasy by way of a full, heady flight of Biblical mythology and to 
eschew the weepy positive thinking sentiments in favour of a grand Old 
Testament fire and thunder. Indeed the only other filmic effort to so 
venture into this take on angelic mythology is an impressive recent 
episode of `The X Files', `All Souls'.
`The Prophecy' is equally rare for being a horror film that is conducted 
not with gooey meltdown effects and campy one-liners but with literacy 
and intelligence. (Which may well explain why it was not a major 
box-office success). It is certainly a film that asks patience of an 
audience - it is a good half-hour into the film before the often 
wilfully cryptic plot strands begin to coalesce and one begins to 
properly understand what is going on. And even when they have done so, 
one feels, one or two strands are left unwound - I, for instance, was 
never sure coming away from the film what Gabriel needed the colonel's 
soul for. But Widen gives his Gabriel and Lucifer some beautifully 
ornate pieces of dialogue: "You know how you got that dent in your top 
lip ?" Gabriel taunts hero Koteas. "Way back, before you were born, I 
put my finger there and said `shhhh'." Equally appealing are Widen's 
playfully amusing images of angels in the modern world - Gabriel 
resurrecting the dead because he hasn't learnt how to drive a car or the 
delightful throwaway gag with Gabriel sitting amongst a group of school 
children, getting them try out his trumpet. If the film is to be faulted 
it is that its medium range budget never quite allows Widen to direct 
his angelic war with the grandiose scope it keeps seeming to want to 
break out into, but on the other hand this also does allow him to keep 
the story contained at a more cerebral rather than physical level.
As Gabriel, Christopher Walken has quite the most fun he appears to have 
had in a role in some years. The role is perfectly suited to Walken and 
both he and Widen craft the part with just the right balance of 
extravagant playing to the gallery and wry, ironic humour. Also very 
good is Viggo Mortensen as Lucifer. Mortensen, who is usually cast as 
blue collar working men and who always seems to have eluded the star 
quality he seems eminently capable of, makes for an intense and darkly 
captivating Lucifer. It is one of the joyous ironies of this fine film 
that it is Lucifer that becomes the unexpected benefactor to the hero's 
struggle and at the climax even the equivalent of the Seventh Cavalry 
arriving to save the day.


Author
Jerry Saravia
Make no mistake: "The Prophecy" is not one of the great horror films of all
time nor is it on my list among the best, but it is as intelligent and
hallucinatory a demon/angel horror flick as we are likely to say for some time.
And it is Christopher Walken who transcends its murky storyline. 
The film is set in a small Arizona community where there are no secrets, and
somehow this is an existential resting area for the archangels and demons from
above and beyond. There is the sweet, bearded angel Simon (Eric Stoltz) who
takes the souls of humans with him by sucking their breath (a reminder of the
breath-sucking gremlin in "Cat's Eye") - in this case, he has taken the soul of
the most vile human corpse on earth, a general. The archangel Gabriel
(Christopher Walken) is continuing the Second War of the Angels by trying to
prevent Simon from continuing his soul-sucking methods - he wants the souls for
himself. Somehow, this all relates to a brooding homicide detective (Elias
Koteas) who almost became a priest, an elementary school teacher (Virginia
Madsen), a Native American child who may or may not be possessed, and so on. We
see eyeless angels, morgues, burned corpses, demons chained to rocks, visions
of angels impaled in a vast horizon, war atrocities on grainy film stock, and
it is all done with style to spare and never gratuitous or exploitative. 
"The Prophecy" never makes much sense and I never quite understood Gabriel's
intentions - does he want to rule the heavens by taking a few souls or is he
just mad at God? Some of this is supposedly based on Milton's "Paradise Lost,"
but it would have been more productive if Lucifer was the one bent on vengeance
against all, including God. After all, Lucifer was a former angel, "The Bringer
of Light," until he was cast down in Hell after questioning God's blind faith.
The main impetus of the film is that the angels got jealous and felt God did
not love them anymore when He gave humans souls but since angels are not human
anyway, what do they care? 
The main attraction is the tall, entertaining wonder known as Christopher
Walken - his trademark tics and maneuvering of body language keeps me
interested and riveted from one film to the next. His piercing eyes and offbeat
humor are enough compensation and justified when playing a miffed angel like
Gabriel - imagine what he could have done as the Tall Man in "Phantasm." 
"The Prophecy" is a fitful blend of humor and horror and tends to be
over-the-top - Viggo Mortensen overacts and undermines as Lucifer during the
fiery finale. Still, it is unusual and enlightening to see a horror film
concerned with so much biblical jargon and wars between angels. Milton would
have been proud.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 

Author
Derek Banas
     Yet again we have here another example of a possibly great story
that is ruined by trying to cram to many characters and scenes into
ninety minutes.
     The movie stars Thomas Daggett (Elias Koteas) a former priest
become cop that has been thrown into the middle of a war started in
heaven between two angels, the arch-angel Gabriel (Christopher Walken)
and the good angel Simon (Eric Stoltz).  I thought I was going to like
this movie because Simon seemed to be a very charismatic character that
was a good opposite to Gabriel, who played a evil yet comical in a
gruel way character because the story was developed well in the
beginning in that what was occuring was that Gabriel came down from
heaven to steal the soul of a evil general to lead his evil angels
against the good, Simon got there first and hide the soul in a little
girl.  But then my opinion soon changed when Thomas started to take
over with the same old tortured cop we've all seen so often before.
And worst of all we were constantly again and again seeing angels
impaled on stakes which became more of an annoyance than a good
addition to the movie.  And as if the story wasn't ruined enough then
we have two more worthless characters added to the scene.  Catherine
(Virginia Madsen) the school teacher of the little girl that Simon hid
the soul in.  And probably worst of all a very small part played by
Lucifer.  Isn't that ironic Lucifer playing a small part but that is
what it was and a part better left out all together because all he did
was tell Catherine a secret we never hear and then ruined the ending
all together leaving the crowd hating him more than ever?
     Like I said, there were many possibilities in this movie but in
trying to make up for wasted time spent with Thomas and Catherine the
ending became a quicky job that left everyone very disappointed.  I did
like a few things about this movie however such as the camera work and
some of the scenes were beautiful and probably one of the best parts in
the whole movie was Gabriels tortured sidekick praying for death and of
course Simon and Gabriel.  If you want a few and I mean a few good
scenes and want to see a few nice scenes you might want to see this but
don't expect a good ending and be prepared to leave the theater asking
yourself what was Lucifer's secret and why was he in it for except to
ruin the ending.  I give this a 5 on a scale of 1 to 10.
