Title
Review for Gas Food Lodging (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
104 min., R, Drama, 1992
Director: Allison Anders
Cast: Brooke Adams, Ione Skye, Fairuza Balk, Robert Knepper,      
      Donovan Leitch, David Lansbury, Chris Mulkey, James Brolin, 
      Julie Condra
     Brooke Adams is a waitress at a truck stop.  Her husband, James
Brolin, has moved out of the house and left her with two girls, Ione
Skye and Fairuza Balk.  Skye spends her time skipping high school and
having sex with men.  Balk spends her time either trying to fix up Adams
with other men, or trying to get in contact with Brolin.
     I read a preview of GAS, FOOD, LODGING in PREMIERE magazine during
the summer and I have been waiting for it to be released in my area.  It
just came, and so I rushed out to see it.  I had high hopes for this
film, and I am pleased to say that the film lived up to them.  I highly
recommend that you try to see this film, in the theater if possible, and
if not, off video cassette when it is released.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give GAS, FOOD, LODGING a five.  GAS, FOOD, LODGING is rated R
for explicit language, adult situations, and female nudity.
     All the actresses and actors in this film do a great job.   Brooke
Adams (SOMETIMES THEY COME BACK) is excellent as the girls' mother.  Her
performance showed the stress from raising Ione Skye's character, while
trying to show love for her.  Ione Skye (SAY ANYTHING...)  is
exceptional as Brooke Adams' troubled daughter.   She shows the
resentment that she has for her mother, but the love that exists between
her and her sister Fairuza Balk, even though it is not always shown by
Skye.  Fairuza Balk is very good as Brooke Adams' other daughter.  Most
of the things that happen in this film, happen to Balk.  She is
constantly looking for a father figure so that she can have a complete
family.  She learns about love and loss through the course of the film.
James Brolin (THE AMITYVILLE HORROR) does a good job as Brooke Adams'
ex-husband.  He has to face his fear and go visit his children, of whom
at least one wants to see him.
     GAS, FOOD, LODGING is very well written.  The film never gets slow,
boring, or tedious.  The characters are extremely well written and kept
my interest throughout the entire film.  I found myself caring for the
people in the film, wanting to see what would happen to them.  The
locations used are great.  Especially the desert scenes.  They really
add to the quality of the film.

Author
Pedro Sena
There are not many films that explore the way women interact.  Theatre tends
to bring out much of the emotional side of women, and rarely give us another
view of things.  Film tends to create dolls out of many women, and never
allow us to see them as anything but the pretty things that many women can
be.
Allison Anders has opted for something else.  This is more of a film  about
the interaction between a mother and her two daughters, than it is about
anything else.  How they get along, and how they last together, is the real
story.  This may seem that the story takes  a back seat to the many changes,
and sub plots which might take
place, but Allison seems right at home, and showing us how all three of them
get by, from day to day, even if nothing ever comes out of that one moment.
Nora has been left behind with two daughters, both in their teens, and now
trying to make friends and learn to live in a rather rough area in New
Mexico.  The mother has become a bit callused and bitter since her husband
walked out years before.  The oldest daughter has become an incarnation of
the mother, something which the mother doesn't like, but has to face
everyday.  And the younger daughter is becoming a total romantic, in a world
that has basically lost that feeling, except in the movies.  Trudi
spends much of her time checking out the films of a Mexican film star, whose
body of work is every woman role and predicament  that you could think of.
The ultimate silver screen soap opera star.  At least, the film seems to
point out, the character in those films is a real woman, and she fights for
her beliefs.
Quite a bit of this is found in all three women and their relationships,
although we might be more choosy about their getting along.  Shade ( the
older daughter ) finally finds someone she has come to love, but like
everything else, it moves on, and she is left pregnant. Trudi, finally gets
to know that young man that she has been facing all the time, and although
he is Mexican, he is nice, and not the generalized depiction that everyone
around her  thinks of them.  And the mother.... after a serious altercation
where she is told by the older daughter that she hates men, finally grows up
a bit from her anger, and learns to appreciate a little of life herself.
The intricate, and well done, thing in this film, is the way each character
moves, and goes about their daily lives.  The mother is always mothering,
and never enjoying herself.  She is basically unhappy as a person.  The
older daughter has been raped and is basically looking for love, and instead
gets the results of it thrown in her face, right or wrong. The young one,
takes her time, and at least seems to be better
adjusted than the other two.  She has a hard time, but she makes it.
The inter mechanics of these relationships adds a nice interplay for the
three actresses, while also showing something about the life in the areas of
the country where we might feel that there is none.  In most cases, the
women are grossly abused, and taken advantage of, but in several situations,
as the film points  out, there is the opportunity to learn, and develop into
something far worthier as a person.  The older daughter may not have
survived it as well, and it might be said that her fault was that she could
not figure out when to start and when to stop.  Both the mother and the
younger daughter take their time, and do not get involved in the sexual game
which obviously befell the mother in her younger days, and is hitting the
older daughter.
Maybe this is the point.  And some get hurt in the process. But, Allison's
point seems to be, how do you get strong out of your own infallibility....
Wonderful film to watch, despite its obvious short comings of  small budget,
it takes its time, and might even be considered a bit slow, but it is not
boring.  Life is not easy in many walks of life and some people do get hurt
in the process.  And the real strength, then, is about to appear.
