Title
Review for Baby of Macon, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David N. Butterworth
        No other filmmaker, living or dead, could have made "The Baby of
Mâcon."  And no other filmmaker would have wanted to.
        Peter Greenaway's controversial and rarely-seen 1993 film saw a
very limited run here in the United States, opening in New York and L.A.
and then disappearing forever.  Its content--your typical Greenaway
excesses of murder, gang rape, disembowelment, dismemberment, full-frontal
nudity, and more philosophical and allegorical allusions than you can shake
a stick at--was judged too offensive, and the film failed to find a U.S.
distributor.
        "The Baby of Mâcon" is staged as a 17th century masque performed
before a live theater audience of Medici noblemen and women.  Unfolding
like a spectacular Renaissance tapestry, the film makes full use of
Greenaway's huge and non-traditional cinematic palette, a
highly-ritualistic style that emphasizes the filmmaker's straight-laced
approach to the film's unsettling themes.  In "The Baby of Mâcon,"
Greenaway employs widescreen, saturated hues (a lot of the time it looks
like it was shot in red and white), extravagant costumes, baroque music
(without the help of regular composer Michael Nyman, alas), and a wildly
witty and literate script that is often times absurd, provocative, and
downright nasty.
        All the descriptions commonly associated with the director's work
apply here: sumptuous, decadent, outrageous, intellectually provocative,
hard-to-stomach.  Greenaway's artistic assessment that the making of his
films is more stimulating than the watching of them will be supported by
those looking for traditional elements of plot and character, but fans of
this unique talent will find much to appreciate in "The Baby of Mâcon,"
even though the film is definitely not one for the squeamish.
        In a world riddled by plague, pestilence, and female sterility, a
beautiful baby is miraculously born to a grotesque old woman.  The baby's
sister (Julia Ormond) claims the child as her own, proclaiming a virgin
birth.  Ralph Fiennes as The Bishop's Son is plainly skeptical that the
child is the new Messiah and takes it upon himself to disprove the
blasphemous contention.  As one might predict from both the subject matter
and the director of the piece, "events build to a shocking and brutal
climax."
        With "The Baby of Mâcon," Peter Greenaway once again proves that he
is unlike any other filmmaker and that makes this film--and his eclectic
body of work in general--well worth seeing.  Unfortunately, after just one
week, Greenaway's latest opus (the less-satisfying "8 1/2 Women") has
already been and gone.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I think I always have one of two reactions to Peter Greenaway
films.  Either I dislike the film or I like it but feel it is un-
recommendable.  In the latter category were THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS
WIFE, AND HER LOVER and PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  His BABY OF MACON [there is
a circumflex over the "a" in "Macon"] also falls into that category,
but I do not have to worry about people not liking it as much as I did,
at least in the United States.  It was considered either so
controversial, so revolting, or both, that it just never found a United
States distributor.
     More than usual with a Greenaway film, it is difficult to tell
exactly what is going on.  Presumably the story is of a play being
performed and/or set at the 17th Century Court of the Medici--it is
hard to tell which since events in and out of the play seem to blend
together.  As would have pleased Philip K. Dick, how many levels of
play-within-play there are is impossible to determine.  The story is a
sort of burlesque of the birth of a new Messiah, twisting as many of
the traditional Catholic symbols as possible.  It is a time of multiple
pestilence's and all the women of the region are sterile.  When an
obese old hag actually succeeds in giving birth to a beautiful baby,
the local women see it as a miraculous birth, even to the point of
asking for the baby's spit to use as an elixir.  The baby's sister
(played by Julia Ormond), sees a good thing and claims the baby as her
own child and "proves" the birth to be miraculous by proving she is
still a virgin.  The son of the Bishop (Ralph Fiennes) is a scientist
and a skeptic who does not believe in the purported new Messiah and in
trying to disprove the ersatz Virgin Mary is pulled into the symbolism
as a latter-day Joseph.  As Ormand's character tells him, "Too many
proofs spoil the truth."
     Somehow all this does not convey the throat-biting viciousness of
this satire.  By any objective measure, THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST
was by comparison a gentle and reverent jibe.  Greenaway is a Howard
Stern for intellectuals and he keeps revealing that he has stores of
untapped acid and bile still in him.  While he has a right to express
himself as he wishes, I think if I were Catholic I would be very
uncomfortable with this film.  As interesting as THE BABY OF MACON is,
Greenaway makes it a real trial to sit through.  He uses a stodgy,
mock-neo-classical, dry style that sucks the interest out of a scene
like fluids out of a baby.  It is hard to imagine another director who
could make so dull a scene that features full- frontal nudity from both
Ormond and Fiennes.  Perhaps the reason Greenaway gets away putting so
much nudity in is films is that in doing so he completely sidesteps
eroticism.
     The production design skillfully makes each frame fascinating
while at the same time making so many full scenes seem endless.  This
film had four reasonable endings and gave the impression of finishing
all afternoon.  Greenaway often tries to build to a sort of twist
ending, but here the twist is much more expected than it was in THE
COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER.  Fans of Masterpiece Theater
in the 1960s will no doubt recognize the main musical theme as well as
an unsurprising plot twist near the end.
     Julia Ormond could well prove herself the Ingrid Bergman of her
generation.  Like Bergman she is a B+ actress with an A+ screen charm,
even in what is in this case a rather detestable role.  Ralph Fiennes,
on the other hand, completely submerges his ENGLISH PATIENT charm and
plays the rather pasty-faced son of the Bishop.  The Bishop,
incidentally, is played by veteran actor Philip Stone.  I first noticed
Stone in UNEARTHLY STRANGER, a great (but sadly now very rare) science
fiction film from 1963.  It is good to see him still acting.
     The best Greenaway film is really a mixed bag of quality, and this
one is more mixed than most.  I would give THE BABY OF MACON a low +2
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Gareth Rees
     When Greenaway came to introduce the film at the 1993 Cambridge
Film Festival, he explained that he was no longer interested in making
films in a naturalistic style, or in ideas such as "character" and
"plot."  As far as he is concerned, there are plenty of other
film-makers making films in these ways, and he wanted to set out to
make films that are different, that he would want to watch, films that
do for naturalism in cinema what the abstract movement did for
naturalism in art.
     The result is something that is difficult to identify with because
the characters are flat and the dialogue is completely unconvincing (in
much the way that the dialogue of a verse drama is unconvincing).  I
found the result utterly compelling, but very distasteful.
     The business of the film is a play called "The Baby of Macon,"
that is being presented to a group of Renaissance nobles in the
Cathedral at Macon in France.  The play is introduced by the figure of
Famine sitting on a swing describing how the land around Macon has been
beset by famine and pestilence; crops will not grow, everything decays,
when women give birth at all they give birth to monsters.  One
particularly ugly woman, horrendously distended, is about to give
birth.  We see one of the actors running up with a doll to represent
the baby, but before he can supply it to the midwives, a real baby is
born.  It seems that on this evening the play is to happen for real.
The miraculous baby becomes a source of contention between the Church,
represented by the bishop's son (Ralph Fiennes) and the baby's sister
(Julian Ormond), who later pretends that she is its mother.  Both sides
exploit the baby for their own ends, their own riches, and their own
power.  The play ends in tragedy and bloodbath.
     One of Greenaway's aims in THE BABY OF MACON is to say something
about the relationship between a film and its audience.  He said that
one of the sources of inspiration for the films was the banning of the
Benetton advertising poster campaign in the UK that featured pictures
of a newborn baby, covered in blood and still attached to its umbilical
cord.  An outcry caused the posters to be removed.  What is so horrible
about a newborn baby, Greenaway wanted to know.  Why is that image (one
that is seen many times a day in hospitals all over the country) so
unacceptable, when much more horrific images are presented on
television and the cinema, featuring murder and rape, but glamourised
and made safe.  Greenaway set out to make a film featuring murder and
rape in which nothing was glamourised and nothing was safe.
     The centerpiece of the film (I am not spoiling very much here; one
of the characters in the film explains beforehand what the scene is
going to involve and how long it will last) is a ten-minute long rape
scene, filmed in a single virtuoso take.  There's no edit to make it
safe for us, no looking away; we can't say so easily and so quickly "it
was all illusion" (although of course it is).  The play-within-a-film
construction of THE BABY OF MACON allows this scene to become a
representation of a snuff film: the actress "steps out of character" to
express relief that it's only a play, only to discover that this night
it is "for real."  This step out of the fiction is disconcerting and
horrifying; a number of people walked out of the cinema at this point
on both the occasions that I've watched the film (though not as many as
walked out of THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER - perhaps
cinema-goers had received more warning of the kind of images they were
likely to be confronted with in this case).
     At the end of the film, the camera pulls back through the theatre
(actually the cathedral at Macon) and the cast bow toward the camera to
the sound of rapturous applause.  Clearly it is the audience in the
cinema to whom the applause is attributed, and the effect is to make
the audience feel that it is complicit in its approval of what it has
seen on the screen.  I felt that however much I admired Greenaway's
film-making skill, I did not want to applaud the action, and yet the
framing of the end of the film made me complicit in the action,
implying that because I had chosen to attend the film, I had some part
in causing it to be made.  The feeling was uncomfortable and
thought-provoking.
     Other ideas in THE BABY OF MACON are treated in less detail: the
exploitation of children; the oppression of women by the medieval
Church; the relationship between science and superstition during the
Renaissance; the Catholic fascination with the Madonna and Child.
     If you expect a conventional film in which you can identify with
one or more of the leading characters and enjoy and entertaining plot,
then you are sure to be annoyed and disappointed.  If you're prepared
for a film that's quite different from Greenaway's previous feature
films (though anticipated by the "TV Dante" and "M is for Man, Music
and Mozart") then you might be impressed.

Author
Michael Brooke
Written and directed by Peter Greenaway.
UK/Netherlands/France/Germany, 1993, colour, 122 mins.
Starring Julia Ormond, Ralph Fiennes, Jonathan Lacey.
     After a pre-release screening of Peter Greenaway's THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER, the audience (mostly critics and
exhibitors) were split down the middle.  Some loved it, others thought
he'd gone much too far and was looking at a major critical and
commercial disaster ("it's Greenaway's 1941", was a phrase I recall).
Well, as hindsight reveals, COOK THIEF was Greenaway's biggest hit
ever, and the film that finally cemented his reputation on the other
side of the Atlantic (helped no doubt by the row over its X rating),
and critical opinion was, in the main, favourable.
     Well, with THE BABY OF MACON, he really does go too far, and the
result is one of the most gratuitously unpleasant and indefensibly
nasty films of recent years.  Although Greenaway has argued that the
violence in THE BABY OF MACON is more than justified by the amount of
allegorical interpretations that it throws up (he's even cited the
current Bosnian tragedy as inspiration), the film itself doesn't stand
up to such scrutiny for a moment, because of Greenaway's perverse
determination to make the process of watching the film as much of an
ordeal as possible, right from the stuttering plague victim who
supplies the scene-setting narration.  When he's not treating us to
murder, multiple rape and child dismemberment, he's numbing our brains
with boredom over the ritualised style that for some reason demands
that the majority of the lines in the play-within-the-film are repeated
three times (apparently the screenplay was originally intended as an
opera libretto, which is easy to believe--imagine how tedious the
average opera libretto would be if read out in incantatory tones
without the music to underpin it).
     COOK THIEF was often equally nasty, but it kept us riveted to the
screen, by virtue of the superb performances of Michael Gambon, Helen
Mirren and Alan Howard.  Despite a cast that includes Ralph Fiennes and
Julia Ormond (both do full-frontal nude scenes, if anyone's interested
--given that Fiennes is graphically disembowelled shortly afterwards I
don't recommend the film as an erotic diversion), the rigid stylisation
of THE BABY OF MACON saps their performances of any energy they might
have had under a different director.  The dialogue, blending the blank
verse of the play with Greenaway's attempt at cod-sixteenth-century
speech, is excruciatingly awful--he's always had a tin ear for the
English language, and this time round he's deprived of Michael Nyman's
music (the music he used could have come from any baroque CD
compilation chosen at random, for all the effect they have).
     The film is, as usual with Greenaway, crammed to bursting with
ideas and extra-cinematic references.  There are nods to the barbarity
and corruption under the aristocratic surface of the Medici clan, there
are debates on religion and its attitude towards the miraculous, and
there's a full-scale exploration of the age-old theme of illusion
versus reality, as the miracle play 'The Baby of Macon' is performed
before the Medici court, and the events depicted gradually spill over
into real life, culminating in the scene where an actress (Ormond), is
actually raped 217 times by her fellow actors (the number is, as with
everything in Greenaway, meant to signify something or other).
     But despite the fact that this agonisingly protracted gang rape is
almost immediately followed by the graphic dismemberment of the baby of
the title, by this stage much of the audience is too comatose with
boredom to care--one can neither get a kick out of it or be shocked by
it, and that's the most shocking thing about the film.  There's no
centre to give it focus, no Prospero, no Thief.  It's two hours of
elaborate costumes, scenery and philosophical ideas in desperate search
of a reason for their existence.
     As always with Greenaway, design and cinematography (Ben Van Os,
Jan Roelfs, Sacha Vierny) are stunning--especially considering the
relatively low budget.  But then they usually are with these
collaborators, and the cast is perfectly adequate considering the
script they had to put up with.  It's a powerful example of auteurism
gone mad, of a film-maker so convinced that what he is doing is
absolutely right that he removes everything that audiences might be
interested in (characters we care about, stories worth following) in
the assumption that the power of his vision is enough to keep our eyes
riveted to the screen.  Well it isn't--and one hopes the colossal
commercial failure of THE BABY OF MACON helps get the message across.
