Title
Review for Woman of the Year (1942)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Louis Proyect
Spencer Tracy and Katherine Hepburn made a number of popular movies in 
the 1930s and 40s written specifically as vehicles for the two. He 
starred as a blunt, homespun, no-nonsense sort of guy while she was 
sophisticated, aristocratic and somewhat aloof. The plot centered on 
their clashing characters and inevitably involved his struggle to break 
through her formidable exterior and win her heart. 
"Woman of The Year" was one such movie and it has the rather odd 
distinction of being a propaganda piece, if ambivalent one, for the 
August 1939 Stalin-Hitler non-aggression pact. Hollywood Ten screenwriter 
Ring Lardner Jr. wrote it in collaboration with Michael Kanin. It is 
produced and directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and George Stevens. While 
the film was released in 1942, the evidence is clear that it retains the 
isolationist orientation of the prior year when Hitler and Stalin had 
tenuously peaceful relations. 
The Stalin-Hitler pact lasted until June 1941 when the Nazis invaded the 
Soviet Union. Communists around the world, including those on the 
payrolls of Hollywood studios, cheered every foreign policy initiative of 
the Soviet Union. When the Kremlin called for international solidarity on 
behalf of the Spanish Popular Front, Communists around the world rallied 
around the flag. But all of a sudden in 1939, the Kremlin called off the 
crusade against fascism and a new non-interventionist, if not 
isolationist, attitude became politically correct. The Almanac Singers, 
led by Pete Seeger and Woody Guthrie, sang songs like "Washington 
Breakdown":
Sam Craig, played by Tracy, is a sportswriter at a New York daily and 
Hepburn is Tess Harding, an international reporter at the same paper. 
While not exactly a defender of the Stalin-Hitler pact, he does 
articulate the sort of isolationist mood that the treaty fostered in the 
Communist milieu. Tess Harding, on the other hand, is a tireless defender 
of antifascist struggle. Not only does she use her column to denounce 
Hitler, she devotes many non-working hours to speaking at anti-Nazi 
rallies. In addition to her strong antifascist convictions, she is a 
feminist. At a rally sponsored by a feminist group, she tells the 
audience that the best way they can celebrate the suffrage victory of two 
decades ago is by joining an international campaign to stop fascism.
One day after work Sam Craig is at a saloon with some newspaper pals and 
overhears Tess Harding on a radio quiz show. She fails to answer a 
baseball question correctly. Then she excuses her error by making a 
dismissive remark about baseball. In face of the burning questions of war 
and peace, she wonders why people would fill their heads with useless 
knowledge about children's games. Sam takes offense at her snobbery and 
attacks her in his sports column. She counterattacks and before long a 
full-scale flame war is taking place between the paper's two star 
columnists.
The editor intervenes and summons the two into his office to call for a 
truce. Sam takes one look at her and falls head over heels in love. He 
asks her for a date and they go to watch a ball game. In a classic Tracy-
Hepburn scene she misunderstands all the rules and he fails to explain 
them despite his best efforts.
Their next date produces another communication failure. She invites him 
to her apartment and he arrives expecting the two of them to be alone. 
Instead he walks into a cocktail party at full tilt. It is a gathering of 
her mostly foreign antifascist friends and allies. Most appear upper-
class and wear formal clothing. Sam feels out of place as he wanders from 
group to group trying to have a conversation in English. His ears pick up 
one such conversation and he tries to participate. The others immediately 
start speaking in Spanish in a deliberate attempt to exclude him. As he 
sits forlornly by himself on the sofa, a man in a turban takes a seat 
nearby. Again Sam tries to have a conversation but the turbaned man 
answers every question of Sam's with a bemused "Yes?". It soon becomes 
obvious to Sam that his companion speaks no English. As Sam walks off in 
disgust, he makes a rude comment about the "towel" on the man's head. 
This is a jarring note in a progressive film.
A day later Tess figures out that Sam didn't fit in and is remorseful. 
She wants to make it up to him and so asks him for another date. This 
time the two begin to show signs that they are falling in love. A few 
months pass and they decide to marry.
Their marriage fails to solve the same compatibility issues that haunted 
them at their first meetings. Her life revolves around her political 
commitments, particularly the need to rouse humanity against fascism. He 
simply wants her to be a housewife and resents all the time she spends 
globetrotting, or going from meeting to meeting. He doesn't understand 
her need to get mixed up with other people's problems. His isolationism 
does not speak of "America first" but of "family first." Spencer Tracy's 
ability to project warmth and humanity makes Sam Craig easier to accept 
than if someone like Clark Gable had played opposite Hepburn but the 
character is at the outward bounds of likeability, especially for a 
contemporary audience.
Even when they start a family, the bothersome issues of war and peace get 
in the way. She informs him out of the blue one day that they are going 
to have a child. He assumes that she has become pregnant but learns that 
instead she had made the unilateral decision to adopt a Greek boy. The 
boy is the orphaned child of parents who are the victims of some sort of 
political violence. He speaks no English, another disappointment for the 
long-suffering Sam Craig. 
He makes the decision to leave her since he feels she is incapable of 
change. He doesn't want to the husband of a movement figure any longer.  
He has decided that Tess cares more about humanity than their own family 
and will leave her to this suffering, non-English speaking humanity with 
all its strange clothing and customs. He will stick with baseball and 
other familiar icons of American life. 
The movie's tone changes abruptly after their separation. The insouciant 
comic scenes give way to somber portrayals of the two on their own. They 
miss each other desperately but seem unable to overcome the differences 
that set them apart. 
The pain of their separation in some ways must reflect the uneasiness 
that the Hollywood left felt in the two year period of the Hitler-Stalin 
pact. By 1939, the Communist intelligentsia had established a certain 
intimacy with the American New Deal liberal establishment.  Someone like 
Tess Harding was clearly a stand-in for Eleanor Roosevelt who had exactly 
the same sort of antifascist and feminist attitudes. By the time of the 
1939 non-aggression pact, you had to assume that screenwriters like Ring 
Lardner Jr. still retained a great deal of affection for figures like the 
Roosevelts despite the newly acquired anti-antifascist loyalties of the 
top party hacks. 
It is just such clashing loyalties that gives the film dramatic tension. 
Lardner simply lacks the sort of emotional distance toward the Hepburn 
character that would have caused her to be written one-dimensionally. No 
matter how much Lardner might have felt his "assignment" was to ridicule 
Tess Harding, what came out was an affectionate portrait. You can see Sam 
Craig's mixed feelings for Tess Harding as a projection of the divided 
loyalties of Lardner, who like most Communists of the era, probably 
thought of themselves as much as New Dealers as Reds.
Speaking metaphorically, Sam Craig and Tess Harding were reunited in June 
1941 as the Nazis invaded the USSR. The Kremlin found new allies in 
England and the United States and Communist screenwriters started to turn 
out mindless wartime propaganda like "Action in the North Atlantic." 
"Woman of the Year" with its troubled and ambivalent mood holds up much 
better than the flag-waving films that followed it after everybody in 
Hollywood became fashionably antifascist, including John Wayne and Ronald 
Reagan.

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by George Stevens.  Written by Ring Lardner, Jr., and Michael
Kanin.  Starring Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, with Fay Bainter.  1942,
114 min., Not Rated.
     "Woman of the Year" is a landmark film if only for one reason, that being
it was the first teaming of Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn.  It is
remembered as an alternately comedic/dramatic classic, and while the chemistry
between Tracy and Hepburn is undeniable and engrossing, it is at times in
question whether or not they can overcome the contrived material they have to
work with.  Tess Harding (Hepburn) is one of the most respected, high-profile
political commentators in the world.  Sam Craig (Tracy) is your average Joe
sports columnist for the same newspaper Tess works for, and when she makes a
baseball comment on a radio program that gets Sam fuming, the two begin
directing critical jabs at one another in their columns.  They are, of course,
destined to fall in love.
     The courtship is hurried, like everything in Tess' aristocratic and
workaholic life.  This becomes too much for Sam to handle, and their marriage
is jeopardized by her career.  What has the potential to become a great
battle-of-the-sexes comedy, like their fifth film together, "Adam's Rib," is
instead marred by a grasping-at-straws script, co-penned by Ring Lardner, Jr.,
and Michael Kanin.  By the end of the movie I was not only aware of how long
I'd been watching it for (almost two hours), which is never a good sign, but
also of how it would end, which was a typical early 40s ending that the
writer's coyly left a shred of hopefulness about.  The truth is that neither
the characters nor their relationship were developed enough to give the
audience much to root for.  It's only saving grace was the Tracy/Hepburn
chemistry.  
     If the some of the drama had been cut out, and more scenes, like Sam
trying to explain baseball to Tess as she watches a game for the first time,
were in, "Woman of the Year" wouldn't seem as uneven.  In spite of this fault,
there are moments of hilarity and Tracy and Hepburn are reason enough to watch
it and form your own opinion.  Produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz, and directed
by George Stevens ("Giant," "Alice Adams"), I wondered how much different the
film would be had George Cukor, with his light-touch and comic genius, directed
it.    
     DVD Details: This is a standard MGM release with one exception, the
absence of an 8-page production booklet, which is explained by this being a
snapper release instead of the usual keepcase packaging.  The film is shown in
full-frame format, preserving it's original aspect ratio.  The transfer is
top-notch, with only occasional, minor flaws, and the contrast between grays is
clearly defined.  The mono (one track) soundtrack is surprisingly clear for a
film so old.  Also included is the original theatrical trailer.  English,
French, and Spanish language tracks and subtitles are present, as is English
captioning for the hearing impaired; scene selections.     
     Notes: The video is out-of-print.  Not rated, suitable for all audiences. 
     The Verdict: "Woman of the Year" is notable for being the first film that
Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn starred in together.  It is also often
funny, but forced drama makes parts of the movie uninvolving.  Worth a view,
best seen on DVD.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
