Title
Review for Joe the King (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If Tolstoy were a moviegoer, he'd amend his introduction to
"Anna Karenina" by saying "Happy families are all alike: they
appear only on sitcoms.  Unhappy families are different: they
are depicted in serious films."  Just as romantic poetry goes
hand in hand with love unrequired, coming-of-age movies are
inspired by people who grew up in unhappy homes.  "Joe the
King" is yet another entry into the "400 Blows" sweepstakes,
the story of a poor kid from minimum-wage-earning, uncaring
parents who, because of his background, is persecuted as
well by his teacher and his job supervisor while he is
unwittingly sent up the river by a well-meaning guidance
counselor.
   Frank Whaley, known principally as an actor ("Swimming
with Sharks"), makes his debut in this somewhat
autobiographical story which does not take home gold stars
for originality or depth of screenplay.  The picture does
display a fine array of performers in supporting roles,
highlighting a terrific appearance by 14-year-old Noah Fleiss
in the title role of a down-and-out sad sack who cannot fit in
with the gang and is given the barest affection at home.  Yet
despite the unfortunate way his life is turning out, he has a
good heart which stands to become thoroughly corrupted by
a mandated stay in a juvenile reformatory.  His basic decency
gives an audience every reason to care about him and to
despise the people who are making his life a living hell.  
   Fleiss's interpretation of the role is on the money.  The
kid's a natural who gives a modulated performance in a
drama that's well-directed by Whaley but unfortunately gives
us no relief, no hope, and aside from a modicum of
amusement that Joe's nerdy-looking friend Ray (James
Costa) supplies, the picture is virtually devoid of humor or
even some lighter moments.
   Taking place in an upstate New York community (actually
filmed in Staten Island) during the 1970s, the 28-day shoot
opens on the 9-year-old Joe (Peter Tambakis) who is
spanked on the bare bottom by his hostile teacher for lying
about his father's occupation.  Joe's dad, Bob (Val Kilmer),
works as a custodian in the same school, perpetually
threatened with dismissal for drinking on the job.  Nor does
Joe get much support from his working mother, Theresa
(Karen Young), and his slightly older brother Mike (Max
Ligosh) does not want to include him in his activities.  
   Five years later, the oppressive life takes its toll as the 14-
year-old Joe (Noah Fleiss), now working illegally as a
dishwasher in a greasy spoon, commits a steadily escalating
series of thefts.  He has logged into school tardy fifty-four
times, has no interest in his subjects, and given the harsh
environment in this shantytown can almost not be blamed for
taking his anger out in antisocial ways.
   Val Kilmer, who has deliberately gained some weight to
develop a beer belly, is convincingly despicable as a drunk
who, despite his physical violence and lack of any
communication with the kid fails to make the boy hate him. 
In slight supporting roles, Austin Pendleton cements the lad's
view of an uncaring society by cursing the kid while
simultaneously buying a hot gold ring from him, and Ethan
Hawke, who seems also to have filled out for the role, acts as
the boy's only sympathetic ear--though for some strange
reason he likes to take a seat behind him in an empty
classroom while giving him advice.
   The film is burdened by a redundant script, a one-damn-
thing-after another syndrome, so that instead of
demonstrating the collective effect of Joe's miserable
environment, Whaley simply takes us from one misfortune to
another.  Despite this flaw, Whaley as director does a good
job portraying the banality of life in a poor, ramshackle
community during the late 1970s and can be thanked for
giving Noah Fleiss a vehicle for that actor's intensely sincere
performance.

Author
Jon Popick
In yet another case of `Sundance Blues' – hype-heavy films bought for
big bucks at the famous January festival that fall flat upon theatrical
release – Frank Whaley's Joe the King is a stale coming-of-age story
that plays like a ‘70s Outsiders, only with rumbles replaced by roller
rinks.  Actor-turned-writer/director Whaley, probably best known as
Kevin Spacey's whipping boy in Swimming with Sharks, elicits good
performances from his actors, but his weak script is too much to
overcome.
The film opens in a blue-collar Upstate New York town with chain-smoking
nine-year-old Joe Henry (Peter Tambakis) reluctantly participating in
his school's `Career Day,' where students tell their classmates both
what job that they hope to have and what their parents' line of work
is.  Joe wants to be a crooner, just like the guys from his mom's record
collection.  He also tries to make up exciting jobs for his parents, but
the class reminds him that Joe's pop (Val Kilmer, At First Sight) is the
school's janitor, while his mother (Karen Young, Daylight) works in the
rug mill.
To make matters worse, when the girl in front of him says something
mean, Joe retaliates the only way he knows how – using the same violent
anger repeatedly taught to him by his drunk, abusive father.  Joe is
dragged to the front of the class by his teacher (Camryn Manheim, The
Practice), who rips his pants down and spanks him as his classmates
cackle.
Flash to five years later, where a teenaged Joe (Noah Fleiss, Josh and
S.A.M.) is malnourished and wears a dingy white tank-top, jeans and
Chuck Taylor sneakers.  Every adult that Joe comes in contact with is
owed money from Joe's now unemployed dad.  Joe is illegally working as a
dishwasher at a local restaurant, where he receives the majority of his
daily nutrients by eating discarded food from the plates he is about to
wash.  His school life is a mess, too, accumulating a whopping
fifty-four tardies in the academic year; and, predictably, he begins to
dabble in petty theft by shoplifting Ho-Hos.
As his relationship with his brother Mike (Max Ligosh, Hackers) becomes
stalled (he failed to back Mike up in a fight against the school
harelip), Joe's criminal offenses grow bigger and more daring.  Kilmer
even grunts a line at the end that pretty much sums up the film in one
line - `Stevie Wonder coulda seen that comin'.'  So could everybody in
the audience.
In Whaley's defense, the film does look pretty decent and, like most
actor-turned-directors, he extracts strong performances, especially from
the kids in the film.  Kilmer, who must gained about sixty pounds for
his role, finds himself in a role with slightly more screen time than
when he played Elvis in True Romance.  I think it was probably one of
those you-don't-have-a-chance-of-making-your-stupid-movie-unless-you-
get-a-big-star-in-it deals, so Whaley called in a favor from his
co-star from The Doors.  Ethan Hawke, Whaley's A Midnight Clear co-star,
also appears in the film as a guidance counselor.
Incredibly, Whaley's script shared the Waldo Screenwriting Award at this
year's Sundance Film Festival.  I think he shared it with Runaway
Bride.  If it's supposed to be autobiographical, or semi-autographical,
I guess you can't fault the guy for not wanting to alter what is
essentially the story of his youth.  But, at the same time, it doesn't
make the movie any more interesting.
1:33 - R for language and abusive situations concerning a child

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writers and directors figure that the more the adults scream obscenities
at the kids, the more the films will gain the sympathy of the audience.
If the kids do their own share of cussing, then even better because it
will reflect on the kids' upbringing.  And, if the filmmakers can get an
A-list star (Val Kilmer in this case) to attach himself to the project,
they can easily find a studio to green light its production.
So it is with JOE THE KING by actor Frank Whaley in his debut as a
writer and director.  The movie has an underdeveloped script that feels
like an uncompleted outline.  Not much happens in this coming-of-age
story, save one incident.
The opening section, shot comically with wide-angle lenses, is so
unbelievable that it made me think that the movie was going to be a
parody, not the grippingly realistic drama that it was billed to be.  In
it, a third-grade teacher (Camryn Manheim) needlessly ridicules poor Joe
Henry (Peter Tambakis).  Then for the sin of not giving the right
answer, she pulls down his pants and spanks his bare bottom in front of
the entire class.
When we meet Joe's father, Bob (Kilmer), he, too, has been lambasted by
one of the school's teachers.  He's an alcoholic and the school's
janitor.  As he cowers in the shadows, the teacher lambastes him for his
drinking.  A born loser, he owes almost everybody in town money.
After a few minutes, the movie skips ahead 5 years, when Noah Fleiss
plays Joe as a 14-year-old and Max Ligosh plays his year older brother,
Mike.
Joe works late every night at a local restaurant.  He's also a thief,
but the story treats this so inconsequentially that you almost don't
notice.  Joe is an abused kid so we are supposed to be sympathetic, not
critical.
The movie's central characters are all miscast.  As a semi-illiterate,
blue collar worker, Kilmer is never credible.  The two boys playing his
sons have the good looks and perfect skin of photographic models.  They
show the intelligence and demeanor of prep school students, not children
below the poverty line.  Karen Young, as the boy's mother, phones in her
performance, bringing nothing to her role.
"There are good people, Joe, and then there are guys like me," his
father says in perhaps his only cogent thought in the story.  "Don't get
caught on the wrong side of this equation."
For all the movie's problems, one can't help but feel sorry for Joe.
Too bad his story was just sketched for us.  With a different cast and a
more finished script, we could have gotten to know him.
JOE THE KING runs 1:40.  It is rated R for language and abusive
situations and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Atul Khare
In a way Joe the King is a movie that feels too bad to be true :
surely, it couldn't be happening at this time, and definitely not in
this country?
Well, that's a question for the audience to answer, and film depicts
the plight of its 14 year old character, Joe Henry, well played by Noah
Fleiss. It's impossible to ignore the similarities with Truffaut's 400
Blows while watching the film, but to its credit, the story is told in
an uncompromising fashion without any sentimental moralizing baggage.
Joe's absentee father -- convincingly played by Van Kilmer (with a beer
belly and all) -- is an alcoholic janitor who works at his school. Joe
is subject to countless taunting and humiliation revolving around this
fact, and even his teachers don't seem immune to it. His mother (Karen
Young) works full time, and is too tired to care for Joe. His father's
absenteeism may be for the better, as his idea of discipline seems
to be brutalizing his son.
Joe also works at a small eatery to try and make ends meet, and his
woes are multiplied by his father's debtors who hound him regularly.
The uncared and lovelorn Joe plays truant, and resorts to petty theft,
but very soon things spin out of control.
Debutant writer-director Frank Whaley's film tells it as it is, but
don't go to the movie expecting the king to be redeemed.

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0d80c2138f9e77fe882568100003c38a?OpenDocument
If you go to see this movie because you like Val Kilmer or Ethan
Hawke, you're making a mistake. You won't get the typical flamboyance
a la Kilmer, nor the masculine ruggedness you've come to expect from
Hawke. Both actors put on weight and changed their look in order to
portray absolute degenerates in this film, but that old trick doesn't
work for these two. No matter how sloppy, drunk, or flabby these two
get, they can't hide their Hollywood faces--they're just too
pretty. Both are unconvincing, and when the two biggest names fail to
produce, you know you've got a lousy product.
JOE THE KING is the sad story of a young boy trying to cope with his
dysfunctional family in a poor, small town in the 1970s.  Director and
writer Frank Whaley's debut attempts to reveal the loneliness of
adolescence by exposing the heart of a boy made tough by the harsh
circumstances of his miserable family life. Set in upstate New York,
the film follows Joe Henry (Noah Fleiss-JOSH AND S.A.M.) as he deals
with an abusive father (Kilmer) and a hapless mother (Karen
Young). His only salvation is his fifteen-year-old brother, Mike (Max
Ligosh). Together they comfort each other as they deal with each
violent and horrific episode of family crisis.
The weight of the film relies heavily upon the shoulders of young Joe
Henry. Unfortunately the story doesn't allow for his character to
develop because he gets no support from any of the other
characters. His mother has no time, his father is constantly drunk,
his brother hates him throughout most of the film, and his guidance
counselor (Hawke) doesn't seem to care.  So we're stuck with two hours
of one kid's pathetic existence.
The bright spot is that the young cast outshines the adults. Deprived
of food for days, the adolescents survive on a diet of Hohos and
whipped cream. They'll do anything for a buck from stealing to washing
dishes to mopping toilets. Strangely enough, the adults throughout the
town fail to notice how desperate the kids actually are, and their
indifference is disturbing. To their credit, the kids of the small
town are a lot more convincing and resilient in dealing with despair
than their elders.
But no matter what era it takes place in, this film is overdone and
clichéd. If you see it, I recommend some No Doz, otherwise you
might find yourself being awaken by some theater attendant. Or he may
have nodded off as well, who knows.
* one star [lowest rating]
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom
