Title
Review for Life Less Ordinary, A (1997)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Have you ever felt like you're not in control of your life?" the
angel Jackson asks poor Robert in A LIFE LESS ORDINARY.  Robert, you
see, has been having a hard time coping lately.
     It all started when Robert was fired from his janitorial position.
It seems a robot could do his work cheaper and faster.  When he told
his girl about it, she casually mentioned that she was leaving him for
her aerobics instructor.  And to add insult to injury, the finance
company repossessed his furniture and car.
     Played beautifully as an everyman by Ewan McGregor, Robert strikes
back by trying to throw the pesky little robot who replaced him out the
office window of the company's billionaire owner, but the unflappable
robot just bounces off the glass and keeps on working.  Robert ends up
kidnapping Celine, the boss's daughter, as a way to extract revenge.
     Celine, a more than slightly deranged rich kid, favors such
pastimes as using big guns to shoot apples off her butler's head.
Cameron Diaz gives a strikingly alluring portrait of Celine, a
confident and resourceful young woman.  Oozing charisma out of her big,
blue eyes, Diaz owns her scenes.
     When Robert proves an inept criminal, Celine scolds him.
Afterall, having been kidnapped before at age 12, she is an expert on
precisely how these things are supposed to be done.  "'Kidnap for
beginners,' Chapter One," she chides him.  "Have you even asked for a
ransom yet?"  And when he insults her by suggesting what she considers
a petty amount, she tells him she could never hold her head up again in
society if he didn't demand more.
     Diaz has delighted audiences in little films like THE LAST SUPPER
as well as in glitzy productions such as MY BEST FRIENDS WEDDING with a
wide acting range from bitingly bitchy to cloyingly sweet.  In all of
them her charm never fades.  In a nice bit of complementary casting,
McGregor plays opposite Diaz.  McGregor, who will soon be famous as the
young Obi-Wan in the new STAR WARS, got his initial accolades from his
role as Mark Renton in TRAINSPOTTING.  McGregor's Robert is as lost and
out of his league as Celine is in total control of the situation.  Diaz
even manages to keep a straight face when Celine gets lines like, "Love
is merely a physical adaptation to an emotional necessity."
     As interesting as the plot setup is and as fine as the
performances are by the leads, the film limps along at best.  Director
Danny Boyle, in his first movie since his hit comedy about heroin
addicts, TRAINSPOTTING, has trouble staging compelling scenes.  With
the remarkably unfunny script by John Hodge, who also worked on
TRAINSPOTTING, the storyline becomes little more than bizarre.
     Delroy Lindo plays the morally ambiguous angel Jackson and Holly
Hunter is his pistol-toting angel sidekick O'Reilly.  The subplot of
their using dastardly means to force the two leads into true love
probably sounded promising on paper, but as delivered, it is as flat
and uninviting as the rest of the film.
     With such a hopelessly underdeveloped and muddled plot, the most
surprising aspect of the picture is that Diaz and McGregor remain
unscathed.  Even if you hate the film, which is quite likely, you leave
admiring two troopers who poured their hearts and souls into a hopeless
project.  In the film's single totally captivating moment, a delightful
musical number with the two of them singing and dancing to a karaoke
playing "Beyond the Sea," Diaz and McGregor are able to show what the
chemistry between them could have produced.  But the film, A LIFE LESS
ORDINARY, is exactly that.  Ordinary would have been an improvement.
     A LIFE LESS ORDINARY runs 1:43.  It is rated R for violence and
profanity and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Michael Dequina
A Life Less Ordinary (R) 1/2* (out of ****)
        While the extremely peculiar A Life Less Ordinary does live up to its
title, a more appropriate moniker would be A Movie More Misguided, for this
confused, confusing attempt at romantic comedy is a most disarming disaster
from the talented Trainspotting team of director Danny Boyle, producer
Andrew Macdonald, and screenwriter John Hodge.
        At the core of this strange film is a fairly basic--and, yes,
ordinary--premise.  After Robert (Boyle regular Ewan McGregor), an aspiring
writer of trashy novels, is fired from his janitorial job at the Naville
Corporation, he kidnaps Naville's (Ian Holm) spoiled daughter Celine
(Cameron Diaz) and holds her for ransom.  The joke here is that Celine is a
willing victim--her father threatened to cut her off financially, so she
wants revenge--and that she soon becomes not only an accomplice but the
brains behind the scheme, teaching the inept Robert a thing or two about
kidnapping... and, ultimately (didn't we see this one coming?), love.
        So far, so mediocre.  But mediocre is better than dreadful, which this
film is, thanks in no small part to the Hodge's contextual frame for the
romance.  It turns out that God is displeased with the divorce and romantic
breakup rate on earth, so the chief of Heaven's police, Gabriel (Dan
Hedaya) dispatches two angels, O'Reilly (Holly Hunter) and Jackson (Delroy
Lindo), to earth to hook up Celine and Robert--or lose their angel status.
This conceit might have worked if the angel dimension played an integral
role in the entire picture.  But it could have easily been cut without any
clear loss to the film; as it stands, it is simply a waste of time that
distracts from the romance at hand.
        Not that there is much of a romance to begin with.  Try as Diaz and
McGregor may, Celine and Robert are too one-note to become very endearing
characters.  Celine is rich bitch; Robert is a dullard.  As such, it is
quite hard for the audience to really connect with these two--then again,
they never seem to really connect with each other.  When Celine and Robert
start to overtly act on their "feelings," it comes off more like something
scripted than anything natural.
        But I am not exactly sure if Boyle and company's point was romance;
honestly, I am not exactly sure what they were trying to accomplish.  Boyle
juices up the visuals with his characteristic razzmatazz, but it remains
just that--energy, not energy in service of a story or even acting.  The
cast seems lost, especially Hunter, whose performance is so adrift as to be
baffling.  And then there are the many eccentricities splattered onto the
film: some violent confrontations involving the angels, who are not exactly
angelic--in fact, they end up staging their own ransom scheme; some
mystical hokum in the climax; and a cutesy Claymation epilogue.  Watching
much of A Life Less Ordinary is like being trapped in indie hipster hell,
stockpiling quirks in the name of cool.  Instead, the film just gives
quirky a bad name.
        My best guess as to what the filmmakers wanted to accomplish is an
atmosphere of warped womantic (yes, misspelling intended) whimsy, which
comes through in only one scene: an extended musical number where Celine
and Robert sing "Beyond the Sea" at a karaoke bar.  After a verse or two,
the couple are magically dolled up in snazzy outfits and hairdos, and
engage in a spirited dance routine on the counter.  The scene works not
only because of its relative simplicity but also because it does not try
too hard, just relying on the innate charm of the leads, allowing them to
build a romantic rapport.  Alas, not nearly enough is built, for this
moment comes to an abrupt end.
        I applaud any attempt to bring something fresh and unique to movie houses,
but sometimes even cleverness can reach overkill.  A Life Less Ordinary
certainly delivers something "different," but by the time the film was
over, I was clamoring for A Life More Ordinary.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in your heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ewan McGregor, Cameron Diaz, Holly Hunter, Delroy Lindo, Ian Holm,
Dan Hedaya, Stanley Tucci, Tony Shalhoub, Ian McNeice, Maury Chaykin
Director: Danny Boyle Screenplay: John Hodge
This movie is an exercise on creativity, but in the midst of trying to
be original it loses all objectivity on the subject matter. We have the
usual scenario of a kidnapping which is your basic garden variety story
line for the round the mill mystery suspense thriller. Throw in a
kidnapper and victim who are destined to fall in love and get a surge of
endorphins as the eroticism mounts. Next include God, the angel Gabriel,
some other meddling angels and your mixture has just transformed into a
volatile stink bomb of a ludicrous farce.
The kidnapper (Ewan McGregor) is a poor nice guy who doesn't know what
he's doing. After being sacked he kidnaps the boss's daughter (Cameron
Diaz) who is not a very nice rich girl. We are meant to envision the
short, blue collar Ewan in grunge clothing, slipping within the leggy
tights of tall, classy, sexy Diaz. This erotic notion starts out on a
high note, but ends up with the same feeling of a trash romance novel
where the let down comes soon after the first sex scene. Oh and what a
let down it is. If only one can keep fantasising. Diaz's character soon
takes control of the kidnapping operation and soon has Ewan's character
trapped between her thighs. The movie starts to suffocate as she goes on
a wild spree of extortion, crime and bank robbery. Supposedly it is
meant to have a liberating feeling for this poor little rich girl. I
call it being plain bratty.
Sure there are great scenes of Diaz impersonating William Tell, and the
dialogue is in vogue and punchy. It sounds good, but a lot of it is
cleverly disguised nonsense that is as airy as the minds that thought it
up. The final scene discusses love and destiny between Diaz and
McGregor. It totally escaped me. I didn't see any love in the movie,
lust maybe, but definitely not love. As for destiny, well I'm glad these
sad characters found each other cause I wouldn't want them destroying
anybody else's life per chance. It is absolutely ludicrous that screen
play writer John Hodge has presumed that this is God's way of uniting
man and woman to have lasting relationships. I think a few Sunday School
lessons are in order.

Author
David N. Butterworth
"In the old days, you just had to introduce a man and a woman and nature
did the rest."
So laments Jackson (Delroy Lindo), an angelic bounty hunter of sorts who,
along with co-operative O'Reilly (Holly Hunter), has been ordered back to
earth by "Chief of Police" Gabriel (Dan Hedaya) to help unite an unlikely
couple in "A Life Less Ordinary."
Robert (Ewan McGregor) is a janitor who has just lost his job to
automation.  Celine (Cameron Diaz) is the needs-to-be-indulged, spoiled
little rich girl who also happens to be the boss' daughter.  When Robert
bursts into Dad's (Ian Holm) office demanding his job back, Celine provides
for some spontaneous kidnapping material.  Robert, a bit of a dreamer,
hasn't thought this out very well, but he'll be damned if he'll be replaced
by a bloody robot, and the chase is on!
Sounds like something from the Coen brothers you're thinking.  Well, funny
you should say that...  "A Life Less Ordinary" contains a scene of a car
parked by the side of a freshly-plowed field with our protagonist
scrambling for his life in a ditch (see: "Blood Simple").  It's got a man
being walked through a thicket of silver birches to an imminent, grisly end
(see: "Miller's Crossing").  And it's got an attractive, slightly wacky
couple being hounded by some not-of-this-earth malevolence (see: "Raising
Arizona").
Could the casting of Coen alums Hunter and Hedaya simply be coincidental?
As it happens, the team that made "A Life Less Ordinary" isn't Joel and
Ethan Coen but rather the British threesome responsible for the black
comedy "Shallow Grave" and last year's transatlantic junkie hit,
"Trainspotting" (both of which starred McGregor): producer Andrew
MacDonald, writer John Hodge, and director Danny Boyle.  For their first
foray into the American mainstream, if you can call it that, what better
way to pay homage to the Coens' wild and whacked-out style than to try to
duplicate it?
For a good proportion of the film, they succeed.
The film is not as satisfying as it might be, however, due to some basic
miscalculations.  Diaz has already proven she can't sing (in "My Best
Friend's Wedding"), and the remarkably similar "dream sequence" in a
Karaoke bar just doesn't work.  The soundtrack, so well synchronized in
"Trainspotting," is all over the map here, with some songs actually
drowning out the actors' dialog in places.  Lindo and Hunter are oddly
peripheral in this picture, with Hunter resembling a strung-out Sarah
Jessica Parker, adding to her increasing roster of eccentric, unstable
women you'd be afraid to take home to Ma.  And what's with that cutesy
claymation bit over the end credits?
In "A Life Less Ordinary," writer Hodge does comes up with some very funny
scenarios, especially those involving the honest, naďve Robert hopelessly
attempting to pass himself off as a ruthless tough guy.  His love for
Celine might turn out as obvious as the trashy novel he plans to write, but
that's a cracked American romance for you, even as envisioned by a trio of
Brits.

Author
Kristian Lin
There's still some time left, but I'm nominating A LIFE LESS ORDINARY as
the year's most unfairly bashed film.  You'd hate to think of a better
film getting worse treatment from the critics.  There have been some
good reviews, but the early negative ones have probably killed whatever
chance this movie had of doing much business.   That's too bad, because
A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is a true oddity with enough marvels in it to
gratify you.
This road film begins when a recently-fired janitor named Robert (Ewan
MacGregor) decides to kidnap Celine (Cameron Diaz), a spoiled heiress on
the outs with her father.  They're pursued by two angels (Delroy Lindo
and Holly Hunter) who are masquerading as hit men and whose real mission
is to make sure that Robert and Celine fall in love.
Most of the bad notices have taken an aggrieved tone of "How dare the
people who made TRAINSPOTTING do something as light as this?"  You'd
think that the reviewers would appreciate the adventurous spirit that
director Danny Boyle and writer John Hodge bring to this genre picture. 
Instead, though, they've criticized the filmmakers for going off the
rails, as if the Coen brothers or Quentin Tarantino never went too far. 
A LIFE LESS ORDINARY isn't a great film, and it certainly isn't fully 
realized the way TRAINSPOTTING is.  But the filmmakers seem relieved to
have turned from TRAINSPOTTING's bleakness to making this giant piece of
candy.  Yes, Boyle and Hodge lose their judgment in the last half hour,
and the movie's ending really goes splat.  That's more than compensated 
for by the number of ideas that take flight, like Robert serenading
Celine with a karaoke version of "Beyond the Sea."  The dance that
follows has an exhilarating lyrical joy that you won't find in any of 
Boyle's previous movies.  A LIFE LESS ORDINARY may be excessive, but
it's certainly preferable to the slick, soulless efficiency of Boyle and
Hodge's debut film, SHALLOW GRAVE.
In addition to the filmmakers' off-kilter point of view, A LIFE LESS
ORDINARY also boasts some old-fashioned movie-star glamor.  Early on,
Robert is accosted by a menacing redneck named Tod Johnson (a hilarious
Maury Chaykin).  Just when the scene seems to be building to a
hysterical climax, it goes in an entirely different direction, as Celine
defuses the situation by showing up wearing a bedsheet and spinning 
a story about Robert being a pop star who's hiding from the press with
his new wife.  The scene was obviously written with a disarmingly sexy
actress in mind, and could have easily fallen flat, but Cameron Diaz,
who proves what a nimble actress she is, brings it all.  Diaz, you'll
remember, put some teeth into a wimpy, underwritten part in MY BEST
FRIEND'S WEDDING.  Here, she's not afraid to emphasize Celine's
unattractive side, playing the character as bratty, impatient,
headstrong and dangerous to be around - she even points a gun at a
12-year-old girl's head.  Now how many actresses could get away with
that?  Diaz does, and it's because she finds the neglected child inside
the character and lets her find redemption when she falls in love.
So completely does she inhabit the character that she darned near
obliterates MacGregor, engaging and hugely talented fellow that he is. 
That's only appropriate, since Celine takes over her kidnapping, that 
Diaz take over the movie.  Nevertheless, he projects a genuine and
unobtrusive sweetness that's really likeable, and it's refreshing to see
the lead in a movie like this behaving unheroically.  One of the movie's 
funnier scenes comes when he's told he's going to be killed - and he
bursts into tears.  Still, even though Celine's attraction to Robert's
regular-guy charm is credible, MacGregor's overmatched by his leading 
lady.
Something similar happens with the angels.  Holly Hunter and Delroy
Lindo have been paired up not because of their chemistry (which they
have little of), but because of how they look together.  Lindo's a 
fine actor who has a nice understated moment when he reminisces about a
girl he once knew, but Hunter gets the better of this duo.  Her accent
goes from Cruella de Vil to a fearsome hillbilly drawl, she vamps 
madly when auditioning for the hit man job, and gets this terrifying
gleam in her eye when she menaces the lovers with a gun as she's hanging
onto the hood of their truck.  She can be bizarre and intense under 
normal circumstances, and here she's downright crazed, but the odd part
is that she's somehow cuddly, too.  It's possible that this is her
funniest performance to date.
To be sure, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is definitely not for everyone.  A lot
of violence is played for laughs, which doesn't always work.  The
filmmakers really let their imaginations run amuck, and it results 
in a wildly uneven crazy quilt of a film.  But A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is
more than good enough to deserve a following, and the tremendous skill
and inspiration of Danny Boyle and John Hodge renders them as promising
as any other new filmmakers in the world.

Author
Jamie Peck
20th Century Fox / 1:43 / 1997 / R (language, violence, sexual 
material)
Cast: Ewan McGregor; Cameron Diaz; Holly Hunter; Delroy Lindo; 
Ian Holm; Stanley Tucci; Maury Chaykin; Ian McNeice; Dan Hedaya
Director: Danny Boyle 
Screenwriter: John Hodge 
The opening scene of "A Life Less Ordinary," the new comedy from 
the creative team behind "Trainspotting" and "Shallow Grave," 
takes place in heaven, and although eventually messy plotting in 
the last half-hour almost sends the film to script hell, it's 
still quite an enjoyable, fast-paced romp. Sturdy acting, 
splendid visuals and warped originality amount to much in the 
long run and act as a steering wheel to jerk the movie back on 
track whenever it veers off course -- which is more often than 
you'd think. 
The film's afore-mentioned kickoff finds bumbling celestial cops 
O'Reilly (Holly Hunter, who's never looked more luminous) and 
Jackson (Delroy Lindo) receiving an ultimatum from Chief of 
Police Garbiel (Dan Hedaya), who is under pressure from God to 
"unite men and women" -- they must successfully play matchmaker 
for a pair of humans, or spend the rest of their existence 
walking on earth. But uniting target couple Celine (Cameron Diaz) 
and Robert (Ewan McGregor) isn't as easy a task as it sounds -- 
she's a pampered heiress who passes the time by shooting apples 
off the top of the hired help's heads, he's a janitor for her 
wealthy businessman dad (Ian Holm) who dreams of writing the 
"great American trash novel." 
Their lives collide right away -- when Robert loses both his job 
and his apartment, he storms into the office of his boss, who 
happens to be in the midst of scolding Celine for a recent pistol 
and fruit-related accident. Operating on impulse, Robert takes 
Celine hostage, but her general willingness and lack of 
resistance throws him off. She dislikes her father just enough to 
work with Robert on a kidnapping scheme -- they'll hit him up for 
a hefty ransom for her safe return, then take the money and run. 
O'Reilly and Jackson trail Robert and Celine the whole way, 
staging wild tricks that give them little choice but to fall in 
love. 
Less is certainly not more in "Ordinary"'s case. It takes pride 
in its overabundances, and for the most part, so do we. The 
characters are quirky, the story is interesting and the movie's 
funky visuals are not to be denied. Considering the cheeky 
material that's being performed, it's a blessing that "A Life 
Less Ordinary" never sprouts an overtly serious edge, even when 
the first hour's fascinating execution is traded in for a 
send-off that grows progressively non-sensical, including a corny 
bit of Divine Intervention and a Claymation ending sequence (go 
ahead -- scratch your heads with me). But even when the movie 
begins to fall apart, it's still pretty much a blast to watch. 
The setup is almost exactly similar to August's awful Alicia 
Silverstone vehicle "Excess Baggage," but "A Life Less Ordinary" 
livens up the convoluted territory with some really inventive (if 
flawed) material. For example, take the plight of the angels. 
Conceptually, they're a great idea, and Hunter steals the picture 
with her twitchy mannerisms and oft-changing accents. But 
screenwriter John Hodge limits their imagination by placing them 
in too-absurd situations. Why do they masquerade as bounty 
hunters for Celine's dad? And why, if they're supposed to be 
getting the pair together, are they constantly endangering their 
lives? These questions are never answered, but they make for some 
clever scenes (it's a funny running gag how violently Hunter's 
O'Reilly is knocked around). 
"A Life Less Ordinary" doesn't fully realize its potential (a 
slightly angering flaw), but there is still enough solid material 
to keep you entertained and enchanted. McGregor and Diaz exhibit 
a strong chemistry; their sequences together -- one where she 
trains him on how to make a ransom call and another where they 
perform a surreal, rollicking karaoke version of "Somewhere 
Beyond the Sea" -- rank as the movie's brightest. And director 
Danny Boyle keeps things spinning with "Trainspotting"-like 
camera angles and even a subtle reference to McGregor's upcoming 
role as Ben Kenobi in George Lucas' new "Star Wars" trilogy. "A 
Life Less Ordinary" isn't ordinary in the least, and it proves 
that that's not necessarily a bad thing. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Danny Boyle
Writer: John Hodge
Starring: Ewan McGregor, Cameron Diaz, Delroy Lindo, Holly Hunter, Ian
Holm, Stanley Tucci, Dan Hedaya, Maury Chaykin, Tony Shalhoub, Ian
McNeice, Judith Ivey
I so wanted to love this movie.  I mean, after adoring both the awesome
awesome awesome "Shallow Grave," and the masterpiece "Trainspotting," I
was ready to see another absolutely amazing piece of film work by the
team of Boyle/MacDonald/Hodge/McGregor.  But, sadly, I have to give this
a disappointing rating.  It kills me to do that to a film which I had
hyped up so much, and it's definitely with a kind of tear in my eye that
I write this review.  Well, maybe I'm overly exaggerating this little
melodrama.
Well, as the ads had put it, this was to be a darkly comic twist on the
old 30s screwball comedy, which includes such films as "It Happened One
Night," "His Girl Friday," and "Bringing Up Baby."  Anyone who's seen
either of them knows how awesome they are - cleverly written,
wonderfully acted, and just plain memorable as hell.  After going
Hitchcockian with "Shallow Grave," and Kubrickian with "Trainspotting,"
it seemed that them going Hawks-ian and/or Capra-ian was a clever idea.
And it is.  And for a lot of the movie, the twist is great.  Here we
have the chief screwball element - two completely different people who
bicker so much that they eventually fall in love.  Take this, mix it
with a lot of black comedy, hitmen, graphic violence, and a great style
only Boyle can bring us, and sprinkle a bit of Coen on it, and we have
what this film is.  But this film has so much going on, that it seems to
fall apart after awhile.
The plot, which sounds a lot like the plot of that Alicia masterpiece
(ahem!) "Excess Baggage," deals with a down-on-his-luck loser/semi-idiot
named Robert (the Boyle staple Ewan McGregor) who loses his job,
girlfriend, and apartment in the space of 24 hours, and kidnaps the
dauther (Cameron Diaz) of his ex-boss (Ian Holm).  But the twist is that
these two completely different people (Ewan and Cameron, not Ewan and
Ian or Cameron and Ian) are bound to fall in love because of the help of
two angels (Delroy Lindo and Holly Hunter) who are assigned by the
grumpy Angel Gabriel (Dan Hedaya, perfectly cast) to unite these two in
bliss because God is a little perterbed of the amount of
divorces/seperation/general-love-unrest.
Soon,  the daughter, Celine, is cooped up in a falling-apart house with
her totally inept kidnapper, Robert, who totally forgets to even make
the ransom.  Soon it seems that Celine, who helped herself get
kidnapped, is pretty much running the show, and eventually has become
partners with Robert, whether he likes it or not.
Meanwhile, the angels are running around as hired assasins for Ian Holm,
trying desperately to get them together, because if they don't, they
aren't allowed back in heaven.  And soon it seems that they're out for a
lot of money to back themselves up if they don't suceed with their job.
On a plus side, this film IS very funny.  I mean, I laughed a lot of the
time, especially at Robert's inept antics, which are really never
tiresome.  The William Tell deal is also done very well, ending in a
hilarious conclusion, but never used again (which kind of brings to an
empty experience, I suppose).  The style is great, with lots of the
traditonal Boyle film schtuff, like cool camera uses, and a great
soundtrack which blends nearly-perfectly with the action going on.  The
dialogue is very funny, but then what do you expect from John Hodge? 
The claymation at the end is humorous, and ends the film nicely.
The acting is also excellent.  Ewan is one of the best young actors
working today, or perhaps one of the best actors in general, and he
shows great prospects in comedy.  He has a great sense of comedy, and is
easily likable and sympathetic.  He also has a bit of singing to do, and
he sounds mysteriously like Liam Gallagher from Oasis.  Also, Cameron is
one of the better young actresses, someone who can do big budget flicks
like "The Mask" and "My Best Friend's Wedding," and then slip into indie
fare, like "The Last Supper."  The two of them have great chemistry
together, trying to hit the notes that people like Clark Gable and
Claudette Colbert hit in flicks like "It Happened One Night."
Also good are the two angels, Delroy Lindo and Holly Hunter, and, yeah,
they're two of the best actors out today too (this is getting redundant,
eh?).  In smaller roles, Ian Holm is a cold and funny evil boss/father,
Maury Chaykin is a bizarre backwoodsman who befriends the two
protagonists, Stanley Tucci is a perfect egotistical dentist (who
suffers an accident in one of the first scenes), Dan Hedaya (as I said)
is a flawless Gabriel, and Tony Shalhoub is good in the one scene he has
where he speaks (and we learn once again the horrible truth that his
italian accent is not real).
But.  The film has so much, goes in so many directions, and wants to be
so much, that it just falls apart.  The last half hour or so are
muddled, and the humor is never as hysterical as it should be.  The
karaoke scene should be absolutely mesmerizing, wonderful, and
side-splittingly funny, but it's just fractions of all those.  The angel
subplot, which is a nice idea, is not used to its fullest extent, but
ends on a very good note.  And the film isn't as greatly plotted as it
should be.  The plot should be more frantic, and more tightly-plotted,
which I suppose is Hodge's fault, but I suppose Boyle had a bit to do
with that.  And the direction, while being very stylistic, is still too
American.  In fact, the first scene, which parodies a Quentin movie,
isn't as hysterical as it should or could be.  This is typical of
modern-day romantic comedies, and the only thing saving this is the
black comedy, which isn't as good as it should be either.
Anyone who knows me knows that I worship the brilliant ground that the
team of Boyle/Hodge/MacDonald/McGregor walk on, but this group has made
one slip-up, which is okay.  It seems that a director (or team's) early
flims involve at least one bad film in the first three or four.  While
it's usually the second, it can be the third (like Quentin's "Four
Rooms," if you count that as a film).  Therefore, I think that they will
rebound nicely and realize the mistakes they made with this film.
I just want to say that although it's disapointing, I still had a good
time.  This isn't a bad film at all, just a near-miss.  It's quirky,
it's funny, it's violent, and it's slightly romantic, but it's never all
at once.  If they had found a great balance for it, then this would have
been a great flick.  But, it's not, and therefore the film suffers a
bit.  But even if it's not a great film, it's at least a good film, and
worth a viewing or two.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Sometimes a movie comes along that falls somewhat askew of the rest. Some
people call it "original" or "artsy" or "abstract". Some people simply call
it "trash". A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is sure to bring about mixed feelings.
Definitely a Generation-X aimed movie, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY has everything
from claymation to profane angels to a Karaoke-based musical dream sequence.
WHEW! Anyone in their 30's or above is probably not going to grasp what can
be enjoyed about this film. It's somewhat silly, it's somewhat outrageous,
and it's definitely not your typical romance story, but for the right
audience, it works.
A lot of hype has been surrounding this film due to the fact that it comes to
us from the same team that brought us TRAINSPOTTING. Well sorry folks, but I
haven't seen TRAINSPOTTING so I can't really compare. Whether that works in
this film's favor or not is beyond me. But I do know this: Ewan McGregor,
whom I had never had the pleasure of watching, definitely charmed me. He was
great! Cameron Diaz's character was uneven and a bit hard to grasp. The
audience may find it difficult to care about her, thus discouraging the hopes
of seeing her unite with McGregor after we are immediately sucked into caring
about and identifying with him. Misguided? You bet. Loveable? You bet.
A LIFE LESS ORDINARY was a delight and even had a bonus for me when I
realized it was filmed in my hometown of Salt Lake City, Utah. This was just
one more thing I didn't know about this movie when I sat down with a five
dollar order of nachos and a three dollar Coke. Maybe not knowing the premise
behind this film made for a pleasant surprise, but I think even if I had
known, I would have been just as happy. A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is quirky,
eccentric, and downright charming! Not for everyone, but a definite change of
pace for your typical night at the movies.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This surprising stinker from the TRAINSPOTTING team is an unfunny,
overly hip romantic comedy about a cute-as-can-be janitor (Ewan Mac-
Gregor) who one day gets replaced by a robot, tries to talk to the
company president (Ian Holm) about it, and ends up taking the million-
aire's spoiled-rotten daughter (Cameron Diaz) hostage.  The catch?
Well, she kinda likes being kidnapped.  And-- are you ready for this
one?-- they're pursued by a pair of increasingly aggressive angels
(Delroy Lindo and Holly Hunter) neither of whom can return to Heaven
until the kids are in love!  No, not an ordinary movie by any means.
The innumerable odd (and often yawn-inducing) sights include a pool-side
game of William Tell, a fantasy dance sequence set to "Beyond the Sea,"
and a T2/Robert Patrick impersonation by the diminutive Ms.  Hunter.
(Not only does she crawl across the hood of a moving vehicle, she also
spits a wad of chew, in a single screen moment that all but cured my
longtime crush on the actress.) While it's difficult to dislike *any*
movie that allows the line "this is Gabriel, get me God"-- or one that
closes with a cute claymation sequence-- there's absolutely *nothing*
compelling at the story's core.  No chemistry.  No charm.  Nothing.
Directed by Danny Boyle, written by John Hodge, and produced by Peter
MacDonald, all of whom prove that it takes real talent to make a movie
this bad.  (Rated "R"/102 min.)

Author
James Sanford
Near the beginning of "A Life Less Ordinary" there's a knockout of a
scene: Exquisitely bored rich girl Cameron Diaz (in a white swimsuit
that will probably never touch water) coerces her dopey dentist fiance
into balancing a carefully polished apple on top of his head so that
she can shoot the fruit with her equally carefully polished
revolver. At the last minute, the worm squirms, just as the shot is
fired. "Call a doctor," the shootist tells her butler, in a tone that
suggests disappointment rather than despair.
Yes, director Danny Boyle and screenwriter John Hodge are up to their
old tricks again. Having previously mined murder ("Shallow Grave") and
drug abuse ("Trainspotting") for jet-black humor, they're now out to
set the romantic comedy on its ear, pairing Diaz with Scottish hottie
Ewan McGregor in a kidnap-caper-gone-awry yarn that starts off in
Heaven and wraps up with a postscript dramatized via Claymation.  No
one is likely to accuse the British filmmakers of playing it safe in
their first cruise through the American mainstream.
Even so, the millions who embraced their first two films may find "A
Life Less Ordinary" a bit less enchanting; certainly the 90 minutes
that follow that poolside scene don't come close to topping it. The
concept of angelic intervention in modern-day life must be one of
those ideas that always sounds great on paper, but on the screen it's
given us failed fantasies like last year's clunky remake of "The
Preacher's Wife," as well as John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John's
"Two Of A Kind" and director Alan Rudolph's "Made In Heaven." Casting
Holly Hunter and Delroy Lindo as militant Cupids ensures that
"Ordinary" has a much lower sugar content than most films of its
ilk---you call almost retitle it "Slugged By An Angel"---but even this
pair eventually wear out their welcome and become little more than a
mildly irritating gimmick.
What flashes of magic "Ordinary" has come not from its concept but
from its quirks. Having half-heartedly kidnapped heiress Celine (Diaz)
with the hopes of getting a fortune from her billionaire daddy, the
graceless Robert (McGregor) comes to realize his supposed victim knows
a good deal more about working these kinds of scams than he does. When
Robert tells Celine he's asking $500,000 for her return, she gasps
that at that "if word got out that I went for only $500,000, I'd never
be able to show my face in polite society again," and while Robert
wants to send an old-fashioned ransom note made up of letters clipped
from newspaper headlines, Celine nonchalantly slashes her arm and
writes the message in her own blood.
Though Hodge's story is little more than a string of set-pieces (the
karaoke fantasy, the bungled bank job, the slam-bang Road Runner-style
chase, etc) the movie looks and sounds fabulous, thanks to Boyle's
sharp eye and a soundtrack featuring everyone from Underworld to
Elvis. Even when "Ordinary" doesn't quite capture the madcap mood it's
after, it always offers something unique to look at and listen to, and
McGregor and Diaz (looking more than ever like Michelle Pfeiffer's
sullen little sister) handle the comedy deftly. If this had been the
first film from Boyle and Hodge it would probably have been celebrated
as an auspicious debut, but when you've raised the bar so high with
two instant cult classics, a middling follow-up is destined to look
much worse by comparisson.  James Sanford

Author
James Kendrick
director: Danny Boyle
screenwriter: John Hodge
stars: Ewan McGregor (Robert), Cameron Diaz (Celine), Holly Hunter
(O'Reilly), Delroy Lindo (Jackson), Ian Holm (Naville), Ian McNeice
(Mayhew), Stanley Tucci (Elliot), Dan Hedaya (Gabriel)
MPAA rating: R
Review: **1/2 (out of ****)
"A Life Less Ordinary" premiered in theaters with heavy anticipation as
the follow-up film by director Danny Boyle, screenwriter John Hodge, and
actor Ewan McGregor, the team that brought the wildly entertaining
"Trainspotting" (1995) to life. Unfortunately, the film was ransacked by
critics and, worse, lost on audiences. Its love story of a
kidnapping-gone-wrong mixed with heavenly angels and earthly black humor
was either too bizarre, not bizarre enough, or just plain muddled.
Nevertheless, "A Life Less Ordinary" is a slightly better movie than it
was made out to be, although it comes nowhere close to the astounding
achievement of "Trainspotting," or even Boyle's freshman film, "Shallow
Grave" (1994). Here, the filmmakers try to put a fresh, clever spin on
what is essentially an old, tired story, and the result is a freaky
grab-bag of humor, action, and surreal idiocy.
McGregor stars as Robert, an aspiring pulp novelist who works as a
janitor at a huge, unnamed corporation run by a selfish, cruel
millionaire mogul (Ian Holm). On the same day Robert is informed that he
has been replaced by a robot, his girlfriend dumps him for an aerobics
instructor. In a moment of sheer frustration, Robert bursts into Holm's
office to complain about his unfair treatment. He is quickly swamped by
security guards, and in a sequence reminiscent of "The Three Stooges,"
he manages to get one of their guns and escape by kidnapping the mogul's
daughter, Celine (Cameron Diaz), who happens to be in the office.
The whole time we know that Robert and Celine are supposed to eventually
fall in love. The movie opens in heaven (everything is white, how
original) where the archangel Gabriel (Dan Hedaya in either the best or
worst casting decision in years, depending on your view) is instructing
two lesser angels, Jackson (Delroy Lindo) and O'Reilly (Holly Hunter)
that God is upset about the divorce rate. Gabriel tells them that they
must go to earth to ensure that Robert and Celine fall in love, or they
will be exiled on earth permanently.
>From here, it's not hard to see where the plot goes. Celine is not a
passive kidnappee, and it isn't long before she's helping the befuddled
Robert get a bigger ransom (she was offended that he would only ask for
$500,000). Celine and her dad don't get along very well, and she sees
Robert as a great opportunity to get back at him. Robert turns out to be
more of a victim because he's simply too nice to be a kidnaper. He
apologizes to everyone for everything, and his inability to assert
himself is displayed in a hilarious sequence where he tries
(unsuccessfully) to make a threatening ransom demand over the phone.
Through all this lunacy, McGregor and Diaz are the only actors who make
it out alive. McGregor's Robert is an amusing and sympathetic character,
while Diaz makes Celine into a believably frustrated rich-girl who has
spent her whole life searching for a man who's not like her father. Ian
Holm, who was so brilliant in "The Sweet Hereafter," is a boring
caricature of wealthy insolence. Delroy Lindo and especially Holly
Hunter are downright goofy as the angels; Hunter does some kind of weird
and ineffectual combination of her performance in "Raising Arizona" and
"Crash."
Some of this may be because Boyle doesn't put any tight restrictions on
his direction; he seems willing to just go with the flow. The stylized
cinematography by Brian Tufano ("Trainspotting," "Dreamscape") gives the
film's assorted locations a wicked, cartoonish feel; the colors are
exceptionally bright and glossy, as if everything was lit with one light
too many. He has one great transition shot, from a scene in heaven to a
sparkling blue swimming pool in the Hollywood hills.
In fact, if anything undermines "A Life Less Ordinary," it is the script
by John Hodge, whose adaptation of "Trainspotting" was nominated for an
Oscar. Here he doesn't seem to have a very clear-cut notion of what he
wants, so the movie is uneven throughout.
For instance, he insists on including angels and divine intervention
(the end of the movie is a literal deux ex machina), but he never
establishes clear guidelines within which the angels must act. On earth,
they appear to be completely human and can only operate within the same
earthly confines as you or I, but in one sequence Holly Hunter's
character is literally crushed between a falling pickup truck and a
giant rock, and she comes away with only a broken arm. Plus, Hodge's
ideas about intervention in the name of love are a bit screwy, since the
angels do more harm than good.
But, of course, that may have been in the service of making what is
essentially 45 minutes worth of material much longer . . .


Author
James Berardinelli
     A LIFE LESS ORDINARY, the latest collaboration from the 
TRAINSPOTTING/SHALLOW GRAVE team (director Danny Boyle, writer John 
Hodge, producer Kevin MacDonald, and star Ewan McGregor), is a movie 
less ordinary.  And that's part of its problem.  The film is so focused 
on being quirky and unusual that it turns into a cliché of everything 
offbeat.  From start to finish, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY feels like a group 
of sometimes amusing, sometimes clever, and sometimes tedious skits 
forced to fit together.  
     The film is part romantic comedy, part caper movie, and part road 
movie.  In fact, it's a lot like TRUE ROMANCE with the violence toned 
down.  Or, if you prefer, EXCESS BAGGAGE meets RAISING ARIZONA.  Still, 
while there's a lot to admire about A LIFE LESS ORDINARY, chief of which 
is its daring, I found myself sitting through the film thinking that I 
should have been getting more out of it -- I wasn't laughing hard enough 
at the comic bits, gripping the seat arms tightly enough during the 
exciting parts, or smiling enough during the idiosyncratic sequences.  
Frankly, although I admire the craft that Boyle displays in his first 
studio effort (which is much like the technique he previously showed in 
SHALLOW GRAVE and TRAINSPOTTING), the film left me cool and strangely 
dissatisfied. 
     The film starts off in Boyle's satiric version of heaven, where 
everything is gloriously white, but God has decided to execute some new 
corporate strategies.  It seems that the angels haven't been doing their 
jobs very well when it comes to bringing men and women together for 
lifelong commitments, so, using Gabriel (Dan Hedaya) as the bearer of 
bad tidings, the Big Man decides to implement a few new "incentive 
schemes."  The first pair to work under these conditions are O'Reilly 
(Holly Hunter) and Jackson (Delroy Lindo), who are sent to Earth to 
bring together a janitor named Robert (Ewan McGregor) and a spoiled 
heiress named Celine (Cameron Diaz).  If they fail, they stay in 
permanent exile.  That's the incentive.
     As things develop, Robert and Celine meet when he kidnaps her as a 
form of revenge against her father (Ian Holm), who fired him.  But 
Robert, an all-around nice guy who is in over his head, doesn't have a 
clue what to do with a hostage, and Celine, who starts out giving him 
lessons in "Kidnapping 101", ends up running the show.  Of course, as 
time passes, we recognize that their heated arguments are hiding a 
deeper, more lasting emotion.  Meanwhile, O'Reilly and Jackson, 
desperate to get back to heaven, show up as a couple of bounty hunters 
who begin to get ideas that, if they're stuck on Earth, maybe stealing 
the ransom might be a good way to spend their permanent exile in style.
     Boyle has tried his hardest to fashion a romantic comedy that 
doesn't follow the expected formulas.  "No cliches!" Robert screams at 
one point, and this seems to be the director's philosophy.  Ironically, 
by swinging the pendulum so far into the realm of the absurd and 
violent, Boyle has stumbled into Tarantino/Coen Brothers territory, and, 
seen through the prism of all the copycat features that have sprung up 
in this area, huge chunks of A LIFE LESS ORDINARY seem like a retread.  
At least the ending, which is done using clay animation, is refreshingly 
unexpected.
     The film is arguably most successful as a comedy.  Several scenes, 
including one in a phone booth where Celine gives Robert lessons on how 
to demand a ransom, are funny.  Boyle has always had a penchant for dark 
humor, and it's perhaps more evident here than in either SHALLOW GRAVE 
or TRAINSPOTTING.  As a romance, however, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is dead 
in the water.  Cameron Diaz is a blast as Celine, the platinum-blonde 
queen of bad fashion and a worse attitude, but McGregor is barely 
interesting as the meek Robert.  Together, these two generate no 
chemistry.  There's more heat between O'Reilly and Jackson.  And, 
speaking of the angels, Hunter and Lindo do fine, intentionally over-
the-top jobs as these two.  Hunter is especially noteworthy, playing a 
smoking, tobacco-chewing tough who waves a gun around like she means 
business.  Maybe she's the reason I thought of RAISING ARIZONA.
     The supporting cast is populated by an interesting group of 
performers.  In fact, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY features a mini-BIG NIGHT 
reunion, with Ian Holm, Stanley Tucci (as a dentist wooing Celine), and 
Tony Shalhoub (as a sympathetic bartender) all making appearances.  Atom 
Egoyan favorite Maury Chaykin, who is rarely in a "normal" movie, has a 
part as a backwoodsman who is curious about Robert and Celine's 
activities in an abandoned cabin near his home.  And Dan Hedaya plays 
the archangel Gabriel like a grumbling, put-upon representative of 
middle-management.  
     When it comes to love stories, no matter how lavishly they're 
adorned with auxiliary elements, I'd rather see a worn-out story with 
characters who really connect than something eccentric with a leading 
pair who are poles apart.  Sadly, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is the latter.  
However, while it's not the most successful romance, the movie does 
contain enough elements of interest to intrigue, if not always involve, 
the viewer.  A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is fun -- it's just less fun and more 
familiar than I had expected.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Berge Garabedian
>From the creators of the creepy SHALLOW GRAVE (8/10) and the great
TRAINSPOTTING (8.5/10) movies, comes A LIFE LESS ORDINARY. This movie
is, well, if you don't mind me saying so...a little less than ordinary.
PLOT: 
The plot has Robert getting fired from a corporate heartless company,
kidnapping the daughter (Celine) of said firm almost involuntarily,
hitting the road with the whining spoiled brat, and being sought after
by two "angels" sent down by Gabriel the Saint, who are supposed to
attempt a love connection between the polar opposite pair.
CRITIQUE: 
Nothing special here. The plot line is pretty thin and unoriginal. The
ending is all but given away by the poster of the film itself. The lame
angels, played surprisingly by Delroy Lindo and Holly Hunter, are
annoyances more than anything. Even Danny Boyle's most original style
seems to have taken a back seat
here. And to think that he turned down the fourth installment of the
ALIEN series for this shite.
Overall, I did not care about either of the characters enough to get
into the movie one bit. Some scenes were semi-funny (when Robert is
calling in the ransom request), there's a bit of style in the first ten
minutes or so but then it disappears, the soundtrack is pretty slick,
and the acting is passable, but overall
the movie just didn't have enough originality or drive to muster any
kind of enthusiasm from this big Danny Boyle fan (and that's saying a
lot).
Oh yeah, I almost forgot the best part of the movie which takes place
during the closing credits. A claymation rendition of the couple
travelling through their adventures is much more interesting than
anything in this entire picture. 
Little Known Facts: 
Ewan McGregor has starred in all three of Danny Boyle's feature films.
John Hodge has written all three of Danny Boyle's feature films.
Andrew McDonald has produced all three of Danny Boyle's feature films.
Ewan McGregor will play the young Obi-Wan Kenobi in the prequel to the
STAR WARS series.
Holly Hunter stands 5"2, and once shared a house (on and off) with
directors Joel Coen and Sam Raimi, writer/producer Ethan Coen and
fellow actresses Frances McDormand and Kathy Bates.

Author
Steve Kong
The team that made Trainspotting has come back and made a new film, but
since I've never seen Trainspotting I didn't know what to expect when I
stepped into the theatre to watch A Life Less Ordinary.  What I got was a
wonderfully hilarious and silly romantic, action, comedy.  This is what
Alicia Silverstone's horribly terrible Excess Baggage should have been.
God has implemented a new strategy in heaven.   Angels are sent down to
Earth to make people fall in love and if the angels are successful, they
get to return to heaven.  If not, they get to stay on Earth.  O'Reilly
(Holly Hunter) and Jackson (Delroy Lindo) are the first two angels that
this policy gets stuck on.  Their job?  Get Robert (Ewan McGregor) and
Celine (Cameron Diaz) to fall in love.  The problem is that these are two
completely different people.  Celine is a spoiled rich girl of a
millionaire and Robert is a lowly dreamer janitor for the company that
Celine's dad owns.
Robert is fired and is being replaced by a robot.  He is evicted from his
home and dumped by his girlfriend.  His life is in the toilet and he's just
about to go postal.  And he does.  He goes to threaten his ex-boss into
giving him back his job but in a chain of events ends up kidnapping the
ex-boss' daughter, Celine.
Here we follow Robert and Celine in a road-trip type film and we see that
as much as we, and the angels, want to have Robert and Celine fall in love,
some strange cosmic force seems to be pulling them apart.  This makes it
different from the typical romantic comedy where the two would
instantaneously fall in love.  The two of them go through a series of
events that lead them to fall in love together, at least we think.  One of
the problems though is that in the events that Robert and Celine go through
don't really all seem to fit together well and they feel like a bunch of
funny skits put together.  Which for A Life Less Ordinary is not that bad.
I found myself laughing out loud many times during A Life Less Ordinary.
The film definitely has its moments.  The film is tries to be quirky and
sometimes it works out very well, but other times it just seems like the
film makers are trying way too hard.
Worth mentioning is the camera work and the music.  The camera work is
different to say the least.  It is very stylistic camera work and there
were more than a few shots that I really loved seeing.  The music is also
great.  The score itself is somewhat forgettable but the music that goes
along with the film is perfect.  This includes "Beyond the Sea" which is
the love song that Robert picks for Celine in a country-western karioke bar.
The performances were all great.  I loved Holly Hunter's over-the-top
performance the most.  She is hilarious throughout the film.  The two leads
are great too, though, I would suggest a haircut for McGregor, that nappy
hair just does not work.  Cameron Diaz, who starred in one of my favorites
from this summer, My Best Friend's Wedding, goes from the perky perfect
girl in My Best Friend's Wedding to the conniving, cheating, and spoiled
daughter in A Life Less Ordinary.  And Delroy Lindoy is just fantastic as
Jackson the poetic angel.
A Life Less Ordinary is a must see movie.  It is hilarious and very
enjoyable and its two-hour showing moves along rather quickly.  When you
see A Life Less Ordinary look for the exceptionally funny scene in which
Robert demands a ransom from Celine's father.  Now that I know what the
Trainspotting team can do, I'm going to go rent Trainspotting and see how
it's like.

Author
Walter Frith
'A Life Less Ordinary' is such a quirky film with jabs of satirical themes
that I could have sworn I was watching a film by the Coen brothers.  In fact,
this movie is the latest from 'Trainspotting' director Danny Boyle.  That
film's writer, John Hodge, is responsible for the screenplay here as well.
 To describe 'A Life Less Ordinary' is to put a puzzled look on your face as
you say, "Yeah, that's really what it's about".
Heaven is the setting for some of the film's opening scenes where St. Gabriel
(Dan Hedaya) is about to give a mission to two less than squeaky clean angels
(Delroy Lindo and Holly Hunter) who have to return to Earth and cause two
people to fall in love if they want to get back into Heaven and stay.  
Ewan McGregor ('Trainspotting') plays a janitor who works in a building owned
by a tyrannical businessman (Ian Holm) and loses his job when the boss
replaces all the cleaning staff with robots!  Yes, little robots who bleep,
turn and perform their duties accordingly.  Needless to say, this causes
McGregor so much anger and grief that he storms into the boss' office and
demands his job back.  His timing is somewhat awkward.  It comes just as Holm
is telling his daughter (Cameron Diaz) that she will learn responsiblity by
going to work at the company and will stop living off of her trust fund.  She
takes pity on McGregor who ends up being swarmed by security guards inside
the office and he takes her hostage and the two of them eventually take
refuge in a broken down shack in the heart of the countryside.  All along,
the two angels (Lindo and Hunter) are watching them and try to set up a
scenario where McGregor and Diaz will fall in love.  If you have to wonder
whether or not they DO fall in love, then shame on you.  
I immediately started getting flashbacks of 1994's 'The Chase' with Charlie
Sheen and Kristy Swanson as Sheen played an armed robber who holds up a
convenience store and when the police intercept him, he takes a little rich
girl (Swanson) hostage.  Ditto here!  'A Life Less Ordinary' is nothing more
than a hostage movie where the romance is implausible and unconvincing.  It
tries to entertain lightly but comes off as a silly and innocuous with no
real reason to exist except to tell a story which has very little originality
and even less edge.  
Relax.  Ewan McGregor will be featured as a young Ben (Obi-Wan) Kenobi in the
next 'Star Wars' trilogy but Cameron Diaz's act is starting to wear thin as
she tries to act seriously and when she displays anger in films, she really
makes me laugh.  'A Life Less Ordinary' demonstrates one thing.  While the
title suggests it's less than ordinary, it turns out to be just the opposite.
