Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
Chris Webb
        I often argue that the terms movie and film come under different
definitions.  A movie is an enjoyable theater experience that creates
memorable characters.  A film is made for artistic purposes with qualities
in the behind-the-scenes areas taking the forefront.  Not since Fargo has there
been such a good movie/film.  In fact this is the best one since Fargo.
        Unfortunately, it is not often that a movie qualifying as an action
picture will even be given a second look for Oscar contention.  Face/Off
deserves such attention.  John Woo is a technical wizard on this picture with
an almost surreal opening in which a child gets shot.  Then, toward the middle
of the film, we witness a shootout through a child's eyes as he listens to
"Over the Rainbow" on a headset.  It is truly a spectacular moment that you
will remember.
        The drama and charcter development are established in this film 
pushing it beyond the limits of Eraser or Con Air.  Nicolas Cage plays Castor
Troy, a homicidal maniac, who killed Sean Asher's (John Travolta) child while
the latter two were riding a merry-go-round.  We then move to six years later
as Troy plots to demolish Los Angeles in a cold-blooded bombing.  In order
to diffuse the bomb, Asher is coaxed into trading faces with Troy, who is in 
a coma.  This top secret mission, however, heads down the wrong path.  Troy
wakes up and forces Asher's face to be transplanted onto himself.
        From there, plot shifts abound as suddenly Cage is playing the 
kind-hearted guy and Travolta the dispicable one.  Cage illuminates the
screen as he watches the evil Asher (Troy) gain credit for saving the city.
The real Asher is helpless and now he must save his well-being by getting 
Troy.
        Joan Allen (Nixon, The Crucible) magnificently portrays the third of
a series of tortured wives.  The depths that John Woo has extended the action
genre into amazes.  A shootout in a church toward the end works the viewer 
into a frenzy, but the film still is not over.
        It runs an enjoyable and quick two hours and ten minutes.  And is
truly worthy of highest honors.  Cage deserves an actor nod since he had
to create the bad guy and then earn back our sympathies as the good guy.
Cage's work let Travolta off easy, though he was spectacular as well.  The
direction was top-notch, and its easily the best picture since Fargo.
        Maybe the academy will take notice of this intelligent and
ground-breaking film.  It isn't often that I do this, but the film was
extremely impressive.  

Author
Jerry Saravia
After seeing the implausible "Air Force One," I thought to myself - the action
genre is dead and buried. Then comes "Face/Off," which is superior in every way,
despite having an even more ludicrous storyline. 
The vibrant John Travolta plays an FBI agent, Sam Archer, whose son was killed
by a colorful, psychopathic terrorist named Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage). Sam has
a vendetta and wants to capture Castor. Castor is caught and wounded, and placed
in a coma. Sam has a problem, though: he needs to find a bomb that is planted
somewhere in the vast metropolis of Los Angeles. Despite some objections, Sam
has his face surgically removed and implanted with the comatose Castor's! This
way, Sam can pretend to be Castor making it easier to find where the bomb is
hidden. Problem is the real Castor has awakened from his coma, and has had his
face surgically implanted with Sam's! Farfetched? You bet.   
The difference between "Face/Off" and "Air Force One" is that "Face/Off" is
actually great fun and it's also wickedly entertaining: it takes its inventive
premise and brings it to life with imagination and fire. The tour-de-force is
John Travolta and Nicolas Cage who each cleverly play two roles: Travolta is the
obsessed, quiet, compassionate Sam, and also plays the devious, evil Castor
unbeknownst to Sam's family (they include Joan Allen as Sam's wife, Dominique
Swain as his daughter). There's one priceless moment where Travolta as Castor
gleefully announces, "Things are going to change around here." 
Cage naturally plays the grandiose Castor who walks around in red and black
attire complete with two gold-plated guns, and he also convincingly adopts Sam's
placid nature while trying to prove to Castor's foes that he is the brutal
Castor, and simultaneously tries to prove to his wife that he is the real Sam!
Both actors pull this off brilliantly (and they should be nominated for Oscars).
Travolta had the best role (or roles) of his career since "Pulp Fiction," and
Nicolas Cage proves that he hasn't lost his offbeat nature (look at the
hilarious scene where he dons priestly robes and sings "Hallelujah!").    
"Face/Off" is that rarity: a smart, complex, humanistic, fast-moving character
study draped with director John Woo's trademark slo-mo, close-up visuals, and
outrageous, explosive action. It's like watching a live-action comic book. The
film may have too high a body count and seem somewhat relentless, but it's
always top-notch in every other department. "Air Force One" is the mediocre,
senseless, exploitative action picture with little to remind us of the great
Harrison Ford films of the past. "Face/Off" shows that some imagination can
still spill into your local multiplex from an accomplished director. The choice
is ultimately yours. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
FACE/OFF
(Paramount)
Starring:  John Travolta, Nicolas Cage, Joan Allen, Alessandro Nivola.
Screenplay:  Mike Webb and Michael Colleary.
Producers:  David Permut, Terence Chang, Christopher Godsick, Barrie M.
Osborne.
Director:  John Woo.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  135 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In John Woo's FACE/OFF, two men exchange faces.  They don't wear
masks of one another or impersonate one another -- they actually,
physically exchange faces.  Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage) is an infamous
international terrorist; Sean Archer (John Travolta) is a Federal
anti-terrorist agent who has been obsessed with Castor for six years since
Castor was responsible for the death of Archer's young son.  After Castor
is rendered comatose during his capture, Archer learns that Castor has
left a bomb filled with nerve gas somewhere in Los Angeles.  Only Castor's
imprisoned, paranoid brother Pollux (Alessandro Nivola) also knows the
bomb's location, leading Archer to submit to a radical procedure:  he will
have his own faced surgically replaced by Castor Troy's, then go into
prison to get information from Pollux.  The problems begin when Castor
wakes up, and takes on Archer's face while destroying all evidence of the
switch.
     The premise is, of course, absolutely ridiculous.  It also is
absolutely brilliant, and incredibly subversive.  Hollywood film-making is
built around the idea of the star, around the idea that the audience is
always and automatically on the side of the star.  It's not necessary to
write an interesting character for Arnold Schwarzenegger, because the
people in the audience aren't expected to be rooting for the character.
They're rooting for Arnold Schwarzenegger, the actor, the star.
     FACE/OFF, ridiculous though its premise might be, demands the
creation of compelling characters.  For the first forty minutes, John
Travolta plays Sean Archer, the tormented hero who has the audience's
sympathy.  Then comes the switch, and suddenly Nicolas Cage is playing
Sean Archer.  The only way viewers can transfer their allegiance is if
they spent the first forty minutes rooting for Sean Archer, not John
Travolta.
     To make FACE/OFF work, director John Woo had to hand Mike Webb and
Michael Colleary's sharp script to a couple of movie stars who could act,
who could transcend persona for the demands of a dual role.  Both Travolta
and Cage are in fine form in FACE/OFF, tearing up scenery with eye-popping
relish when playing Castor or seething with intensity as Archer.  Of the
two, Cage has the greater challenge, and pulls off the more impressive
transformation.  His Castor Troy is flamboyant, lusty and brutal, the
perfect action villain; his Sean Archer faces the agony of becoming the
man who ruined his life.  Travolta, meanwhile, proves that an action film
with thematic depth can still be a whole lot of fun, riffing on Cage's
manic acting style and offering self-deprecating observations about his
own "ridiculous chin."  Woo delivers the kind of surging action summer
movie-goers have come to expect, while adding touches they probably don't
expect:  evocative musical interludes, confident pacing and -- wonder of
wonders -- an actual script.
     FACE/OFF only really loses its way late in the film, when an
apparently climactic showdown between Archer and Troy in a church instead
turns into a speedboat chase chock-a-block with explosions.  Woo has
always loved his action on a grand scale -- grand opera, actually -- but
the final ten minutes of FACE/OFF are just a bit much, especially at the
tail end of 135 minutes of running time.  Perhaps Woo, who built a loyal
following by filling his Hong Kong action films with stories of guilt,
family ties and redemption, was so excited to be making this kind of film
in America that he just didn't want it to end.  He certainly pulls of a
neat trick in FACE/OFF, investing a conventional genre with unconventional
resonance.  He also challenges the star system of 1990s Hollywood with the
revolutionary notion that an audience can invest itself emotionally in
the characters in the story, not just the names above the title.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: The first American production by John Woo to equal or rival
his Hong Kong work.
Most people I know sit in the movies and tick off whole lists of blown
opportunities. They sit there and go, "You know, if only he had gone
back and told that guy off, then the movie would have been *really*
interesting." Most movies are anthologies of ideas that
near-miss. Happily, FACE/OFF is not one of those movies.
Calling FACE/OFF an "action thriller" is like calling a Maserati a
"commuter vehicle". You have the function -- maybe -- but not the
form. FACE/OFF wraps a muscular action plot in a story of remarkable
emotional resonance, one in which *no* mental stone gets unturned.
Consider the premise. An antiterrorist expert named Sean Archer (John
Travolta) is obsessed with capturing his number one quarry, a mad-dog
manic named Castor Troy (Nicholas Cage). Violence ensues, in which
Castor is thrown into a coma. All too late, he learns that Castor has
planted a bio-chemical bomb somewhere in L.A., and that only Castor's
equally unhinged brother Pollux knows where it is. After a good deal
of failure, Sean finally buckles and allows a bizarre plan to be
enacted: his face and Castor's are surgically swapped, and he is sent
to sweet-talk Pollux into revealing the location of the bomb.
Yes, this is neat. Preposterous as all hell, but neat. What's even
neater is the twists that develop later on, when Archer is betrayed
and forced to live with Castor's face and body. In the process, both
he (and his enemy, about whom the less said the better) make many
unnerving discoveries about each other's lives, and their own. How do
you behave when the young son of the man you have wanted dead for so
long tries to embrace you?
This whole level of emotional context shoots under the skin of
FACE/OFF and raises it above being just a technically clever effects
show. It's about personalities and attitudes as much as it's about
plots, guns, and Mexican stand-offs, of which John Woo is perpetually
fond. Although in his movies, they're always used as means to an end
-- they further a deeper story. FACE/OFF is right in that grand
tradition.
The acting is fascinating and creepy. Both Travolta and Cage swap
voices, faces, and even work to exchange mannerisms. Look carefully at
the cafeteria brawl scene, where Cage (playing Travolta's character)
screams out "I'm Castor Troy!" and uses violence as a way of trying to
check his real anger and self-loating. Or the creepy scene where
Travolta (playing Cage's character) tells his daughter how to deal
with a guy who won't say no. Most movies don't have the fiendishness
to try this kind of stuff out. FACE/OFF wears it like a good suit of
clothes.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Travolta, Nicolas Cage, Joan Allen, Gina Gershon, 
      Alessandro Nivola, Dominique Swain, Nick Cassavetes, 
      Harve Presnell, Colm Feore, Margaret Cho 
Director: John Woo 
Producers: David Permut, Barrie M. Osborne, Terence Chang, 
      and Christopher Godsick 
Screenplay: Mike Werb & Michael Colleary 
Cinematography: Oliver Wood 
Music: John Powell 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     FACE/OFF, the third English-language feature from acclaimed Hong 
Kong director John Woo, isn't the best movie of the summer, but it 
certainly features some of the best action.  Woo, who is known and 
appreciated for his unique stylistic approach to violence and bloodshed, 
creates a kinetic ballet of bullets and explosions that drives the 
adrenaline level through the roof.  There are problems with this film, 
some of which are quite obvious, but the end result is much like Woo's 
1996 effort, BROKEN ARROW -- as long as you don't think too much, the 
action maelstrom will suck you into its vortex and keep you spinning for 
roughly two hours. 
     To Woo's credit, he doesn't stick strictly to action.  FACE/OFF is 
only in overdrive for about two-thirds of its running length.  The rest 
of the movie is devoted to such mundane tasks and plot exposition, 
character and relationship development, and ruminations on philosophical 
issues like identity.  While there's very little of the latter 
(certainly not enough to turn off viewers who don't like their action 
leavened with anything intellectual), there is enough to give FACE/OFF 
an interesting subtext.  How much of who we are is determined by our 
physical appearance?  And, if we're given the face of another, how like 
that person are we likely to become?  These issues aren't explored too 
deeply, but, to Woo's credit (and to that of the screenplay, by Mike 
Werb & Michael Colleary), they are addressed. 
     Such weighty questions are posed because the two main characters 
swap faces and identities.  Sean Archer (John Travolta) is a dedicated 
federal officer whose obsession with bringing down one particular master 
criminal, Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage), has blinded him to all other 
concerns.  Six years ago, Troy's attempt to kill Archer went wrong, and 
Archer's young son was killed.  Since then, a thirst for revenge has 
driven the FBI agent to pursue Troy with a single-minded relentlessness 
that has alienated both his wife (Joan Allen) and his teenage daughter 
(Dominique Swain).  When the latest confrontation between the two leaves 
the criminal in a coma, Archer is forced to undergo a face transplant 
with Troy's features so that he can go undercover in a prison, interact 
with Troy's paranoid brother, Pollux (Alessandro Nivola), and learn the 
location of a bomb that is ticking away somewhere in downtown L.A.  But, 
while Archer is masquerading as his arch-enemy, the real Troy regains 
consciousness and hijacks Archer's face.  
     The biggest hurdle to overcome while watching FACE/OFF is 
suspending disbelief.  After all, the scenario that enables Troy and 
Archer to swap identities is preposterous.  No matter how desperately 
Woo tries to make the procedure seem logically and medically feasible, 
it's all a little too much to swallow.  In fact, a better strategy might 
have been to be as vague as possible about the details (such an approach 
was used effectively in 1992's PRELUDE TO A KISS).  Rather than 
enhancing credibility, specifics damage it.  Regardless, appreciating 
the movie as anything more than a series of flashes and bangs demands 
that the viewer accept, if not believe, that Troy and Archer can 
exchange features without showing any lingering signs of surgery or 
physical trauma. 
     There's almost too much action in FACE/OFF.  After a while, no 
matter how much flair Woo invests in the project, the intensity starts 
to wear off and things become repetitive.  At one-hundred forty minutes, 
the movie is probably about a half-hour too long.  That said, however, 
there's a great deal of difference between the kind of action served up 
in FACE/OFF and what's offered by dozens of inferior features.  The 
opening sequence is a perfect example.  Woo cranks things up to a 
fevered pitch, choreographing everything for maximum visceral impact.  
Instead of just a bunch of people shooting at each other, we get a 
series of memorable images superimposed upon one other:  Nicolas Cage 
emerging from a car with an unbuttoned coat billowing in the wind like a 
bat's wings, Handel's MESSIAH used to score the planting of the bomb, 
and a game of chicken made all the more nerve-wracking because of the 
manner in which it is edited.  FACE/OFF has a helluva first reel.  Then, 
later in the film, there's an unforgettable sequence that juxtaposes a 
bloodbath with Judy Garland's rendition of "Somewhere Over the Rainbow."   
     Both John Travolta and Nicolas Cage seem to be having a lot of fun.  
This is Travolta's second outing with Woo (following BROKEN ARROW), and 
he appears perfectly at home.  Cage, who's in the midst of an action run 
that started with last year's THE ROCK and continued in the recently-
released CON AIR, enjoys the opportunity to really let go, although he 
never completely discards subtlety in favor of passion and energy.  And, 
since both actors have to play two wildly-different characters, there's 
more acting skill demanded for FACE/OFF than one might initially 
suppose.  The eclectic supporting cast, which includes Joan Allen (THE 
CRUCIBLE) as Archer's wife, Gina Gershon (BOUND) as Troy's old 
girlfriend, Nick Cassavetes as the delightfully nasty Dietrich, and Colm 
Feore (32 SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD) as Dr. Walsh, gives Cage and 
Travolta a group of diverse individuals to play off of.  
     FACE/OFF is primarily for hard-core action junkies and those who 
appreciate Woo's inimitable style.  Like the director's other two 
Western films (HARD TARGET and BROKEN ARROW), this is a flawed and 
occasionally ridiculous piece of work, but there's enough here to hold 
just about anyone's interest, and it's almost always great fun.  The 
movie is brash, loud, and far from the intellectual cutting-edge, but, 
on those occasions when FACE/OFF gets everything right, it's capable of 
moments of rare cinematic perfection.  That alone makes it worth the 
price of admission. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: John Travolta, Nicolas Cage, Joan Allen, Gina Gershon, Alessandro
Nivola, Dominique Swain, Nick Cassavetes, Harve Presnell, Colm Feore,
Margaret Cho Director: John Woo Screenplay: Mike Werb & Michael Colleary
Today's modern standards of plastic surgery haven't quite reached the
pinnacle of sophisticated ‘face lifting and shifting' so fancifully
displayed in this montage of action packed thrills. This however,
doesn't detract from the fundamental key elements of ‘gut wrenching'
anguish, ‘edge of the seat' suspense and ‘bladder-bursting to go'
tension generated by this John Woo movie.
If violence can be described as artistic, then ‘Face/Off' is the movie
to watch. John Woo has the impeccable flare of a master demolition
expert combined with the talents of a maestro painter; who uses the
brush strokes of exploding boats, flying bodies and two talented actors
to help colour the doll canvass of the big screen. John Travolta and
Nicholas Cage are two actors of commendable note-worthiness, who not
only switch faces but also families and identities. Their complex
characterisations and improvisations of the characters Sean Archer and
Castor Troy, are best appreciated when standing behind the other's face.
Sean Archer (Travolta), the deputy in charge of the special services
division of anti-terrorism is hell-bent on catching terrorist Castor
Troy (Cage). Troy the magnificently insane creator of chaos, is amongst
other things the executioner of Archer's son's life. The chase, which
carries more than a heart beat of professionalism, has now become a
personal vendetta for vengeance. It is Archer's way of overcoming the
grief of his lost son, and also the means of resolving the remorse of
survivor's guilt - ‘why didn't I die instead?'
It is when Travolta becomes Cage, and Troy becomes Archer that things
begin to heat up on screen. Memorably and ironically, each is given the
opportunity to change, alter and\or destroy the worlds of their most
hated enemy. Troy the Terrorist is given the chance to become Archer the
Hero. The egotistical villain grasps the addictive opportunities for
much needed attention with two very greedy hands. So much so he defuses
his own bomb to get blazing national praise and personal glorification.
His opportunities include the sick urge to satisfy his enemy's wife in
bed, by becoming the alluring gentleman that never was; visiting the
grave of the child he killed without a shred of remorse, and teaching
his daughter self defence which in foresight would become his undoing.
Sean Archer is mortified by the prospect that he will be forever trapped
behind the face of the man who murdered his son. Looking in the mirror
is all he needs to remind himself of the heinous crime. When given the
opportunity to save Castor Troy's family, he does so because of the
gentleman that he is; and by a morbid twist of fate he finds the son he
lost by killing the man who would be Sean Archer.
Strangely satisfying, poetically just and painfully moving when the
enemy you face carries your own appearance.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) Of all the John Woo movies I've seen, THE KILLER is the
most fascinating. It is difficult to watch because of all the blood and
violence, but it seems Woo chose violence as his medium, not his
message. The violence is the texture of the movie, not the movie itself. 
Since coming to America, his movies seem pretty tame by comparison. I
haven't seen his first U.S. film, HARD TARGET, but BROKEN ARROW and
FACE/OFF both seem much more polished and mainstream than THE KILLER.
Woo still includes tons of bullets, big explosions, and thematic
descants that float above the violence on-screen, but the violence is no
longer non-stop. It is no longer the canvas; it is now the flourish. 
In trying to appreciate Woo on his own level, it seemed that his whole
purpose, like Quentin Tarantino's in RESERVOIR DOGS, was to take the
violence inherent in the action genre and carry it so far that no action
movie could ever be viewed the same again. Rather than continuing that
experiment, Woo is now just making action movies. 
Woo does have a talent for making action movies, and many of his
signature pieces grace FACE/OFF. One brutal gunfight is partially shown
from a child's point of view, both visually and aurally, giving the
scene an emotionally confusing feel. There's also plenty of Woo's
trademark, a mutually-assured-destruction standoff, each participant
holding a gun to the other's head. 
FACE/OFF is smarter than many other action movies, but it lacks heart.
It's interesting to ponder, but it doesn't suck you in. 
Sean Archer (John Travolta) works for a secret anti-terrorism branch of
the government. He's tracking Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage), a notorious
criminal who has planted a bomb somewhere in L.A. After losing a game of
cat-and-mouse, Castor goes into a coma, unable to talk (and therefore,
unable to tell Archer the location of the bomb). Archer's last hope is
to somehow convince Castor's brother Pollux to talk. 
Like their mythological namesakes, Castor and Pollux are very close
brothers, and Archer knows Pollux would never squeal. A new
"morphogenetic" mask, however, along with a computer chip implanted in
the larynx, would allow Archer to perfectly adopt the look and sound of
Castor, allowing Archer to get close enough to Pollux to learn the
location of the bomb. A modern-day Trojan horse. 
The plot takes an interesting twist when Castor wakes up without a face.
He and his cronies strongarm the doctors into putting Archer's face onto
Castor, and now the roles are completely reversed, and the bad guys have
the upper hand. 
It really does sound like it should be a good movie, and there are lots
of details that are well executed. For example, Nicolas Cage does a
wonderful job at playing John Travolta. All of the facial expressions we
got used to in GET SHORTY and PULP FICTION are copied exactly by Cage.
During a later standoff, Castor and Archer have trapped each other on
opposite sides of a mirror, an interesting metaphor for their
switcheroo. The Trojan War references that run through the movie are
interesting too - It was an archer who found the weakness in and killed
Achilles; pay attention to how Archer finally finishes off his nemesis. 
In fact, there are many aspects of FACE/OFF that can be praised, from
the careful costume design (Cage wears a big black billowing cape and a
blood red silk shirt), to the cool gross face effects. 
But one has to wonder if Woo's talent doesn't translate to Hollywood as
well as it could. The speed boat sequence at end was top notch, but the
stunt doubles didn't really match the actors (it'll play better on your
TV). The fight scenes were more edited and less choreographed than I
expected and hoped from Woo. Worst of all, FACE/OFF lacks that essential
spark that draws you in and makes you care about the outcome of the
movie. 
I'm starting to wonder if Woo is slipping or if I'm remembering his Hong
Kong films too flatteringly. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a scene in FACE/OFF when all hell breaks loose and both
sides are shooting so fast that it looks like rival fireworks vendors
in a turf war.  In the midst of this Gotterdammerung, John Travolta and
Nicolas Cage face each other in their big showdown like a shoot out at
the OK Corral.  Only Hong Kong action director extraordinaire John Woo
would choose to set this pyrotechnic ballet to a version of Judy
Garland's "Somewhere Over the Rainbow."  (Handel's Hallelujah Chorus
provides the background for two other dramatic scenes and a Latin
religious chant for yet another.)
     Woo, who directed Travolta last year in the exciting BROKEN ARROW,
puts a unique stamp on his films.  His mastery of the slow motion
action sequence is unrivaled.  Bullets come turning slowly out of their
barrels, and gunmen twirl slowly in the air as they fire a hail of
bullets.
     The two leads of the film rise to the challenges of their parts
and clearly relish the immense complexities and opportunities of their
roles.  As the film opens in a highly stylized sequence, John Travolta,
playing FBI agent Sean Archer, is holding his young son on a
merry-go-round.  Nicolas Cage, who plays hired gun Castor Troy, shoots
Sean, but the bullet misses his vital organs and accidentally kills his
son instead.
     This transforms Sean into an obsessed detective who spends the
next 6 years tracking Castor down.  Sean becomes nervous, constantly
irritable, and massively unhappy.  He will do anything to get Castor.
("When we put this thing away, you can brand the 4th amendment on my
butt," Sean yells to a complaining superior.)
     Cage, on the other hand, gives to Castor all of the joy he gave to
the cheerful alcoholic in LEAVING LAS VEGAS.  Castor is as smooth and
effusive as Sean is uptight and angry.  Castor lives a life of luxury
with fast planes, fast women, fast guns and fast acting drugs.  His
matched pair of big golden guns are used to do some shooting worthy of
the best Westerns.
     Whenever Sean and Castor get near each other, Woo stages another
beautiful and imaginative action sequence.  In one Sean, riding in a
Hummer, plays chicken with Castor in a private jet.  When that fails,
Sean switches to a helicopter and tries to disable the jet's wings and
flaps.  Oliver Wood's cinematography uses the explosions to give the
film the awe of a Fourth of July spectacular.
     Sean captures Castor, who taunts him with a bomb he has planted.
"I'm about to unleash the biblical plague LA deserves," Castor says
shortly before he is put out of commission for what looks to be
forever.  Since only his brother knows the location of the bomb, a
doctor suggests that Sean take Castor's face and try to trick his
brother in prison.  Eventually, Castor will steal Sean's face to
further complicate matters.  The special effects for the operation are
reasonably simple, but quite well done.
     The intelligent script by Mike Werb and Michael Colleary manages
to make this preposterous experiment in biological engineering
plausible.  Never in the film did the suspension of disbelief become a
problem.
     Travolta and Cage then had the acting difficulty of adopting the
other person's mannerisms while retaining their own voice and body.
There are both superb at it, but Travolta does the better job of the
two and clearly has more fun at it.  The effective chemistry between
the two actors provides a charged atmosphere that seems perpetually on
the verge of explosion.
     The best of the smaller roles in the picture is that of Sean's
wife, a doctor named Eve.  Joan Allen (THE CRUCIBLE), who has the frail
and homely look so atypical to most actresses, gives a convincingly
confused and frightened performance as Eve.
     Travolta is at his best when expropriating Sean's home life.  He
leers at Sean's teenage daughter, and claims his marital privileges in
bed with Sean's wife.  Since Sean's sex drive had almost died with the
death of his son, Eve is both perplexed and pleased that her husband is
now interested in her again.
     After a perfect ending scene of check, but who has the checkmate,
Woo blows it by tacking on several more endings.  The most elaborate is
an exhausting speedboat demolition derby and pyrotechnic extravaganza.
After a well paced show, the extra conclusions subtract quite a bit
from the film's rhythm and effectiveness.
     As proof of the quality of the acting, when Travolta appears in
the epilogue as the good guy Sean again, the immediate reaction is to
want to warn his wife not to kiss him.  Remember, he is the bad guy.
(Or was.)
     FACE/OFF runs way too long at 2:20.  It is rated R for violence
and language.  Most of the violence is cartoonish, but there are two
scenes that will cause the squeamish to look away for a few seconds.
The film should be fine for and will be enjoyed immensely by teenagers.
I recommend the show to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jesse Kaplan
Cast:  Nicholas Cage, John Travolta, Joan Allen, Alessandro Nivola, Gina
Gershon, Dominique Swain
Directed By John Woo
        To tell you what, I was not impressed at all by the only other
John Woo film I have seen.  Starring Travolta, BROKEN ARROW was a
mediocre action movie at best, and I really could have cared less about
anything when I saw it.  Not ture here.  I went into FACE/OFF expecting
the same and was blown away!!      This is by far, one of the best films
of the year.  Amazing action sequences, stunts, explosions, some hott
girls, and (is this the best thing?)  Characterization!!!!!
John Travolta (PULP FICTION, PHENOMENON) stars as Sean Archer, leader of
an L.A. Anti-terrorist squad.  He is still working to find and kill
Castor Troy, Nicholas Cage (THE ROCK, CON-AIR).  Cage, you see, had
killed Archer's son several years back and his life hasn't been the same
since.  After an amazing shoot out involving aiplaones and hangars, Troy
is captured as is his brother Pullocks (Nivola).  However everything is
fine from peachy as Castor has planted a bomb somewhere in L.A. and
Archer has no idea how to find it.
    So, the doctors recommend switching faces, so Archer can be at jail
as Troy to find out where the bomb is.  In a rediculous sequence,
Travolta and Cage switch faces.  However Cage is left without one and is
out like a light.  Prolems begin when Cage wakes up and is able to get
Travolta's face on him, then he kills the medical staff.  The movie
really takes off from there and let me tell you, Cage deserve's an
Acadamy Award Nomination for this one.  First he is the evil cold heated
villian Troy, then he must win back our hearts as Archer.  Not that
Travolta good either, he certainly had fun.
        Joan ALlen plays Archer's wife who is confused and hen scared as
she slowly realizes the man she's living with is not her husband.
Dominique Swain is great as Archer's misunderstood daughter.  And Gina
Gershon (remember SHOWGIRLS) gives a good performance as Troy's
ex-girlfriend, who tells Cage (as Archer) that her son is his.
    The action sequences here are memorable.  One of the best includes
Gerhon's son listening to "Over the Rainbow" as a fight goes on all
around him.  ANother includes a mexican standoff in a church, complete
with the doves and the whole megillah.
    The only prob's i had with FACE/OFF is that its about 25 minutes too
long,  Just when you think its over, there is another chase scene
involving speed boats, etc.  This scene is actually better then the
entire movie of SPEED 2.  Thats another stor yall together though.
FACE/OFF runs way too long at 2:20. It is rated R for violence and
language.  See it, but check your brain at the door.  *** 1/2
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan

Author
Cameron Shelley
Face/Off is an action picture in which everyone seems to have "hit
their stride." Furthermore, it shows that an interesting premise can
enliven any movie, even one embedded in such a notoriously
formulaic genre.
Face/Off concerns the fortunes of two arch-nemeses, Castor Troy
(Cage) and Sean Archer (Travolta). Castor Troy is a violent but very
intelligent sociopath who wants to screw the world for what he
imagines it did to him. Archer is an Elliot Ness for the nineties, an
agent of the secretive anti-terrorism squad of the FBI, who wants most
of all to visit upon Castor Troy the pain he suffered when Castor shot
little Michael Archer to death six years earlier. In an all-out slugfest
and shootout in the first act, Archer finally captures Troy, but only
after Troy has planted a chemical/biological bomb somewhere in
downtown Los Angeles. With the clock ticking, Archer must find
some way to turn an apparently Pyrrhic victory into a real triumph. In
desperation, he attempts to save the situation by taking on Castor
Troy's identity, which includes an operation in which both their faces
are removed so that Troy's face can be literally grafted onto Archer's
body!
Although he meets with initial success, Archer's plan goes badly awry.
He is sent to the same prison as Castor's brother Pollux (a throwaway
reference to the Roman/Greek brothers of the same name) and
wheedles the location of the bomb from him. In the meantime,
however, Castor awakens from his coma (induced by his capture in act
I) to find he has no face. He calls in some goons, forces the doctor to
give him Archer's face and then murders everyone who knows about
this super-secret, identity-swapping operation. Troy and Archer have
completely changed places. Describing events from this point on could
become rather tortuous, so suffice it to say that Troy and Archer now
have a unique opportunity to walk a mile in the other's shoes and to
employ a new and unfamiliar set of resources to deal with each other.
The identity-swapping premise works surprisingly well, and at several
levels. First, it cleanly motivates the action of the picture by placing
the two main characters in such direct conflict. After Archer escapes
from prison (in Troy's persona), he wants his old identity back, but
Troy (in Archer's persona) likes being in control of such powerful FBI
resources and so prefers things the way they are. Second, the premise
allows the two men to explore each other's turf. Archer, not
surprisingly, finds the underground world of terrorism and
drug-dealing extremely distasteful, but also strangely compelling. For
his part, Troy finds Archer's workaday life bizarre and comments,
when driving through Archer's neighborhood, "I am in hell." Third,
the not infrequent fistfights constantly present the audience with the
rather disgusting prospect that someone's face will literally fly off
their head!
Fortunately, this premise is seldom overextended and the
presentation of various "dualities" doesn't pretend to a greater
significance than it can sustain. Instead, the basic conflict gives rise
to many well-choreographed action sequences, played out amid a hail of
bullets, pigeons, and religious backdrops. The movie also apparently
includes the boat-chase scene that Woo could not fit into Hard Target.
In fact, Face/Off has much of the look of Hard Target, right down to
the intercutting of slow-motion into the fast-paced scenes, and the
affected intrusion of all those damn pigeons! Also included is a
many-cornered standoff scene adapted from Leone's For a Few
Dollars More, complete with closeups of people's eyes shifting. The
result is a very watchable blend of style and pacing.
Another distinct plus for this film is the acting of the principle
characters, particularly Nicholas Cage. The contrast with the
somewhat bland Cameron Poe of Con Air is quite noticeable. Cage is
as convincing as could be expected for a character caught in such an
outlandish predicament, looking genuinely terrified out of his wits at
the prospect of being locked away as Castor Troy for the rest of his
days. Travolta too puts in a good performance. Playing cool but
psychotic criminals is now old hat for the action flick, and Travolta
certainly can't be accused of not playing to type.
Even with all the high-octane gunfire and chase scenes, Woo has
clearly proceeded thoughtfully. It is a given, of course, that the good
guy will win in the end, but the means of Troy's downfall is kept in
the dark until the late innings and not telegraphed right off the bat.
Naturally, a small detail gives the villain away, but several candidates
are raised in the course of the film and made the subjects of
misdirection. While not rivetingly suspenseful, this sort of attention
to detail is very gratifying. Overall, Face/Off is an interesting and
stylish piece of moviemaking, and definitely sets the mark for action
pictures this summer.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: John Woo
Cast: John Travolta, Nicholas Cage, Gina Gershon, Joan Allen
To get straight to the point: Face/Off is based on a brillant idea for
an intelligent action movie, but unfortunately turns out to be a third
rate Hollywood flick. The beginning seems promising enough: two men
who are as different as can be exchange their lives. One does so
willingly, the other has no choice.
John Travolta is FBI agent Sean Archer whose son is killed by a bullet
meant for him. Archer is a bundle of virtues: a good husband, loving
father and loyal law enforcement officer. Whereas Travolta played a
not-so-holy angel in MICHAEL in this movie he is the guardian of law,
order and justice. Until he finds himself stuck with the face of
gangster Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage) and suddenly has to play the
opposite part. He does that quite well. Another plus for Travolta: he
doesn't dance.
Nicolas Cage is gangster Castor Troy who falls into a coma after being
shot and wakes up to realize that his face is gone. So of course he
takes the doctors hostage and forces them to give him Archer's face.
To destroy the evidence of what he has done Troy burns down the clinic
so nobody knows about Archer's true identity anymore. The change of
identity is perfect. From now on Cage 'is' Travolta and Travolta 'is'
Cage.
Unfortunately this is also the point when the script becomes
increasingly obscure. The writers seemed to think that an audience who
buys the face transplant will believe virtually anything. Maybe it
would have been more believable if the protagonists had been more
physically alike. But the fact that a wife has to do a blood test to
verify her husband's identity is a bit too much. She might have
noticed that her husband has gone from model citizen to despicable
creep. This seems even stranger considering that Travolta isn't quite
as good as Cage when it comes to acting like the other one. But these
are only minor deficiencies of the script. 
What weighs more heavily is the fact that the last half hour of the
movie consists only of action movie cliches. There are wild
shoot-outs, but the climax is a speed boat chase that - finally -
brings on the obligatory explosions. They show us three in a row, each
one more impressive than the one before. After all the pyrotechnists
have to work for their money . Unfortunately John Woo had no more
original idea for a finale, when we already had begun to doubt a boat
this size would explode so easily while watching SPEED 2. But this
ending wouldn't have been too bad, if they had just removed the dead
and wounded and been done with that. 
Well, things can always get worse. The movie ends with a big family
reunion that seems to be a new Hollywood trend in action movies.
FACE/OFF meets CON AIR. Too bad, Mr. Woo. That didn't work.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
Chad Polenz
Face/Off
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1997, R, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
[action]
starring: John Travolta (Sean Archer/Castor Troy), Nicholas Cage (Castor
Troy/Sean Archer), Joan Allen (Eve Archer), Alessandro Nivola (Pollux Tory),
produced by written by Mike Werb, Michael Coleary, Terence Chang, Christopher
Godsick, Barrie M. Osborne, David Permut, directed by John Woo.
I never thought the "switcheroo" premise that was big back in the 80s would
be used again, especially in a 1997 action film. So you have to give
"Face/Off" credit for using something so played out in an original manner.
But this is also where the biggest problem lies, as the film mistakes
originality for a license to go ballistic.
The film's premise is a simple one: "What if a top cop and his
most-sought-after prey switched places?" John Travolta stars as Sean Archer,
an L.A.-based Fed obsessed with catching the notorious Castor Troy (Cage) who
killed his son six years prior. The opening sequence paints a vague,
dream-like description of that incident, but we never really learn why Troy
wanted Archer dead.
Within a few minutes the film's adrenalin starts to rush and we get a
fantastic action sequence involving Archer and his team's effort to capture
Troy at an airport. It's your typical Hollywood action stuff, reminiscent of
every major action film of the last few years: explosions; high-speed chases;
guns-to-the-head; a firestorm of bullets; and just all-out carnage. It's
interesting to watch mostly because of the rivalry between Travolta and Cage
and the fact these two are probably the last people you'd expect to see in a
film like this. 
Soon the plot thickens as we learn the only way Archer can get Troy's
brother and partner in crime, Pollux, to reveal the location of a secret bomb
is to have Troy's face surgically removed and switched with his own as to
trick him into talking. I'm sure modern science and medicine have come a long
way, and the movies are usually good at making the semi-plausible seem
plausible (what with computers, lasers, etc.), but this seems a bit silly to
me. Is this really the only way to get Pollux to talk? With all the high
technology in this film, you'd think some kind of duplication of Troy's face
could be made to use as a mask (it's been done before). 
Cutting to the chase: Archer becomes Troy and is sent to a secret maximum
security prison to find Pollux, hoping he talks. Meanwhile, Troy wakes up
(from a coma!), calls in his associates, forces the doctors to give him
Archer's face, then destroys all the evidence (including people). 
A fairly large amount of time is spent showing Archer (now Troy) in prison
and his attempt to survive when he realizes Troy has escaped with his face.
We know somehow Archer will escape and this does happen through another
over-the-top action sequence which never seems to be resolved (one of the
film's many plot holes). 
Most of the film involves each man's struggle to blend in with completely
opposite atmospheres. We get a few comedic scenes no fish-out-of-water
premise could pass up. Many sub-plots also start to form, especially one
involving Archer's wife, Eve (Allen), and her suspiscion of Archer's new
personality. The script works in a very comic book-like manner, as everything
is portrayed realistically but it's too far-fetched to let it sink in.
What also disappointed me was how little advantage the film took of its
premise. I was expecting (or at least hoping) for something along the lines
of "The Fugitive," or "Heat," with characterization, detective work, and just
an overall sense of an intelligent, intricate crime story, but this doesn't
happen. Woo is an action director and he delivers an action sequence here at
least once every 20 minutes, but you can sense his frustration when the story
slows down a little to add some details. 
The last act is the clincher you'd expect it to be and is symbolic of the
film's inability to be anything more than another action movie. I really got
sick of seeing all the deaths that occur, both of the supporting characters
and people in the background. I counted at least four explosions within the
course of three minutes - what does that tell you? 
Although "Face/Off" can be interesting at times, it's not nearly the
exciting thrill ride it wants to be. It's just another case of a good premise
ruined by cliches, plot holes, and script a few drafts shy of greatness.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Michael Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     Dis/appointing.  The talkiest thrill-ride of the summer stars John
Travolta and Nicholas Cage, as two guys who swap faces.  Literally.
Cage plays a terrorist and Travolta plays a terrorist tracker and each
ends up with the other's face, and identity, through a series of events
that writers Mike Werb and Michael Colleary, along with director John
Woo (BROKEN ARROW, HARD TARGET), take great pains to make believable.
They explain the entire medical process and how the facial skin is re-
moved and what's done about scars, hair lines, and body fat.  Surpris-
ingly, this premise-- set in the near-future, if that helps-- is one of
the more *plausible* components of the movie.  It's so utterly over-the-
top that it blends perfectly with the accompanying action, Action a la
Woo, a gracefully choreographed carnival of all things flinging, flying,
shooting, and exploding.  What's much more *difficult* to believe are
the smaller, subsequent story details, ranging from the circumstances
surrounding a character's heart attack to a wife who fails to notice a
scar that her husband no longer has.  (Not to mention other physical
differences that are never, ah, expanded upon!)
     Those only familiar with the John Woo of BROKEN ARROW are in for a
treat, as the world-renowned director is almost back to his old self.  I
say, I say, *almost*.  He's returned to the world of Grand Guignol, but
without enough lighting!  Three, maybe, four sequences are damn diffi-
cult to follow, shot for shot.  (From what I recall of his more-recent
HARD TARGET and HARD BOILED, the photography was much...  cleaner.)
Worse, there isn't *enough* action to keep these pulpy characters in-
teresting.  (At least an hour passes without any gun battles, which is a
l-o-n-g time to spend with Cage's good guy, all stooped shoulders and
stupored stares.) That said, there's still enough here to satisfy most
moviegoers.  The surgery sequence is an armrest gripper.  The body count
is refreshingly high.  Travolta is wicked fun playing Cage's character
playing Travolta's.  Olivia Newton-John sings "Over the Rainbow."  And
two late sequences-- a Mexican standoff in a church (complete with flut-
tering white doves) and a high-speed powerboat chase (is there any other
kind?)-- bring everything home.  For those fast, furious, fleeting 
moments, it's why we go to the movies.  (Rated "R"/140 min.)

Author
kah seng
I'll admit I went for this one to discover America's fascination (Face/Off
was a huge hit there) with the new director of reel action in Hollywood,
John Woo. I thought, Singaporeans have had lots of cinexposure to Woo after
his Chow Yuen Fatt movies, so for once the Americans are a step behind us
in Western cinema. There still remains a lot to admire in Woo's latest
action vehicle: the way Nicolas Cage (playing Castor Troy in a considerably
better offering than his last, Con-Air) stepped out of his car to meet his
brother, jacket blowing out behind him in the wind, and the segment where
Troy, his nemesis Sean Archer (John Travolta) and their respective allies
covered each other before bullets started firing off (and man, they have
never gone off more spectacularly!). As the story went, supercop Archer and
highvillian Troy exchange faces as the cop carries out a hare-brained
scheme to foil an audacious bombing attempt. When Archer encounters the
sin-streaked cronies of Troy in human friendship terms and Troy enters into
Archer's family world pained and wrecked by his accidental killing of the
latter's son 6 years ago, the line between good and evil is blurred. But
where Woo's legendary A Better Tomorrow was the painful story of a hard man
trying to find his way among other hard men, Face/Off lacks this crucial
human element. Cage and Travolta come across simply as cool hitmen fighting
off huge odds in traditional Hollywood style, instead of human beings
struggling within a massive cobweb of human relations. Woo's trademarks of
doves and two-handled gun-fighting bring to the Singaporean movie-goer fond
memories of his past cinematic achievements more than offerings of stunning
new innovations. With a collosal budget and a couple of megastars, John Woo
had the idea of closing out the movie with more explosions, a high-speed
boat chase and an excessively positive ending that is typically American.
Chow Yuen Fatt never won that way. West has met East in this face-off, and
we remain unsure which philosophy of life will in the end predominate over
the other. Because beyond all the guns, melodrama and machismo, that's what
the movie stands for: an interaction of two proud cultures. 
Grade: B+

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Woo
Writers: Mike Webb and Michael Colleary
Starring: John Travolta, Nicolas Cage, Joan Allen, Dominique Swain, Gina 
Gershon, Alessando Nivola, Nick Cassavetes, Harve Presnell, John Carrol 
Lynch, CCH Pounder, Margaret Cho
I had only seen one John Woo film before this and that was "Broken 
Arrow."  Not a bad film (I give it about two and a half stars) but 
nothing great.  But what I noticed was Woo dealt with a great topic - 
that being nuclear warfare.  And while he didn't really get too into it 
(although I guess one could argue that we really need to treat these 
pilots who have to take care of these nuclear bombs with care and at 
least some respect), he had a lot of action.  And the action overtook 
the idea he had presented and made it into only a fair film.  But with 
"Face/Off," he wonderfully balances bloodbaths with plot and depth.  Not 
a bad move.
"Face/Off" is a film about identity, irony and obsession.  It deals with 
the obsessions of an FBI man, Sean Archer (John Travolta), with a 
maniacal criminal, Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage), who had killed his son in 
a sniper attack on him.  Six years later, Archer finally captures him in 
a beautifully executed action sequence which winds Troy in a coma and 
probably death.  Archer revels in the fact that he can quit the bureau 
and promises his wife (Joan Allen), whom he has secluded from his life 
for the past six years that everything will be better.  
But the thing is before the big capture, Troy planted a huge bomb 
somewhere that could ignite a city block.  The only people who know 
where it is is Troy, but he's in a coma, and his brother, Pollux 
(Alessandro Nivola), a paranoid little man who was captured easily in 
the big opening bloodbath.  Pollux will only tell his brother so a 
surgeon comes in and tells Archer about an operation that could have him 
switching faces with Troy and duplicating his voice and whatnot.  This 
is a totally ridiculous proposition but, to Woo's credit, he handles it 
at least semi-believably, as long as the viewer suspends their 
imagination.  Archer doesn't really want to, since he promised his wife 
a new life, but he's been so obsessed with him that he's the only man 
who knows him perfectly.  So he does it and goes to prison to get the 
location of the bomb.  Then Troy wakes up...
Troy takes his identity and leads his life while Archer (now Cage) is 
stuck in a bizarro prison.  Meanwhile, Troy (now Travolta) is having sex 
with his wife and becoming more or less of a father figure to his 
daughter (the new Lolita, Dominique Swain), who has become someone who 
likes to switch her clothes and identity about thrice a day.  
There is surprising depth to the film, which is mired in ironic scenes. 
 For instance, Archer has to confront many people he put away when he 
was who he was before and two people he pushed around in his pursuit of 
Troy.  And in one of the best scenes in the film, Troy visits Archer's 
son's grave with his wife, knowing he had accidentally killed him.  He 
feels bad about it, since it was an accident, and we see it on 
Travolta's face brilliantly.  There are many surprises in the film, so I 
will not divulge any more of the plot.
There are some problems with it though.  For one thing, it runs way too 
long (Roughly 2 hours and 20 minutes, with 10 minutes of previews).  And 
the final scene is very sappy and doesn't mesh well with the film, which 
is very cool.
But the good things weigh out the bad about 100:1.  There are enigmatic 
bloodbaths, wild scenes, a huge mexican standoff in a tiny, well-lit 
church, and even a grandiose battle scene orchestrated to "Over the 
Rainbow."  And the acting is awesome.  Allen is wonderful as the removed 
wife who doesn't know what to make of her husband acting up and all sexy 
and stuff.  And Swain gets to play an interesting character who is far 
and away from the usual removed daughter.  And Gina Gershon and new 
director Nick Cassavetes are amazing as an amoral brother and sister 
pair.  
But it is Travolta and Cage who shine acting-wise.  They both have to 
play themselves and they do it nicely.  Cage gets to overact in the 
beginning then has to become the brooding, depressed and confused Archer 
after a half hour or so.  And Travolta gets to play the baddie for most 
of the film, which is fun 'cause he's so good at it.  
John Woo has finally made a wonderful film which has depth and wild 
action sequences which are a wonder to watch and fun to laugh with.  
Some of the stunts are actually jaw-droppingly cool.  While many dumb 
action films live up to their name and are totally stupid, this one has 
a brain AND a nervous system.

Author
Michael Dequina
Face/Off (R) **** (out of ****)
        After two mediocre films in the past four years, Hong Kong action
maestro John Woo has finally, truly, arrived in the United States with his
third American feature, the dazzlingly kinetic and wonderfully complex
thriller Face/Off.
        The complicated plotline by Mike Werb and Michael Colleary defies
any brief explanation.  FBI agent Sean Archer (John Travolta), after years
of obsessive pursuit, finally captures the murderer of his young son
Michael, Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage), but not before Castor leaves one final
calling card--a large bomb waiting to detonate at an undisclosed Los Angeles
location.  With Castor near death in a hospital, the only way to find out
the bomb's location is from Castor's imprisoned brother Pollux (Alessandro
Nivola), but the task is much easier said than done.  To gain Pollux's
unconditional trust, Sean, through the use of a revolutionary surgery
technique, literally becomes Castor, adopting the criminal's face, voice,
and body.  Needless to say, when the true Castor wakes up from his coma,
things get even more complicated.  The newly free Castor (now played by
Travolta), wearing Sean's face, voice, body, and identity, shakes up the
FBI--not to mention the lives of Sean's wife Eve (Joan Allen, again
impressive) and rebellious daughter Jamie (Dominique Swain)--as the true
Sean (now played by Cage), incognito as Castor, sits in prison.
        What ensues is a most intriguing acting exercise for Travolta and
Cage, who spend most of the movie playing the other's role, not to mention
the other's persona.  It's a tricky, ambitious gimmick, and its success is
absolutely critical to the film--if it fails, so does the whole movie.  But
in the capable hands of two consummate actors like Travolta and Cage, under
the direction of an underrated acting director like Woo, the switch succeeds
brilliantly.  Each actor nails the other's mannerisms and speech rhythms so
perfectly, that it is never difficult to keep track of who's who; one really
does believe that each character is trapped in the other's body.  Travolta
has the showier part, playing the over-the-top, oddball villain with gusto,
but it is Cage who really impresses, striking no false notes in the more
difficult, subtle, emotional role.
        Woo's claim to fame is his delirious action scenes, and in Face/Off
moreso than any other of his American features, he is able to show off his
fresh, wildly imaginative approach to mayhem--elaborate choreography,
standoffs, flashy editing, etc. Woo fans dismayed by the watered-down
pyrotechnics in Hard Target and Broken Arrow will be relieved by the
spectacular action sequences in this film.  One standout sequence, where
Olivia Newton-John's cover of "Over the Rainbow" plays while a defenseless
young boy watches numerous people getting shot to death, is the type of
hypnotic yet unsettling violence-as-poetry moments only Woo can pull off.
        While Woo has made his name as a masterful action director, fans
know that the gunplay is just part of what makes his best HK action films so
great.  They also feature rich characters and abnormally (for an action
film) strong emotion, and what makes Face/Off a Woo film through and through
are these two qualities.  A number of the film's most memorable scenes
aren't elaborate sequences, but quieter, more emotional ones.  Particularly
poignant are moments involving Sean as Castor--when Sean first sees his
reflection as Castor and angrily yells "Fuck you!" over and over again to
the doctors; when Sean fights off tears playacting as Castor during a prison
fight; and, most notably, when Sean/Castor meets the son Castor never knew
he had and loses himself in the moment, hugging the child tightly and
calling him "Michael."  These scenes, whose success is in large part due to
Cage's terrific performance, recall the raw, intense emotion Woo brought to
1990's devastating Bullet in the Head and his masterpiece, 1989's The Killer.
        If there's one thing about Face/Off does not feel completely,
totally John Woo, it is the incredibly sunny ending, which comes complete
with garish white lighting.  But that aside, Face/Off is still a refreshing,
undiluted dose of Woo--an exhilarating, engrossing, intelligent action
thriller that puts all of this summer's other popcorn movies to shame.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
CONGRATULATIONS MICHAEL & THE BULLS!

Author
Nick Schaden
        "Face/Off" is the story of Sean Archer (John Travolta), a member of an
elite secret FBI team attempting to hunt down and catch Castor Troy
(Nicholas Cage), one really vile and over the top terrorist (of course,
who ISN'T in today's action movies). In the opening of the movie we
watch as Sean gets nailed from Castor Troy with a sniper's bullet.
Unfortunately, while Sean barely survives the attack, his son doesn't,
and thus sets Sean on a  life-long pursuit after the evil Castor.  
        Normal action movie right?  Wrong.   Flashy action director John Woo
(somewhat unsuccessfully) throws the audience a curveball.   To better
infiltrate Castor's crime syndicate, mainly in attempt to stop a bomb
going off in the middle of LA, Sean uses "modern day technology".   What
technology you ask? It's not just rubber noses: Sean literally exchanges
his own face with the face of Castor (who at this point has been brought
into justice and is resting peacefully in a coma).  Sound moderately
corny?  It is, and no matter how many special effects John Woo brings
into the mix, the switch still seems awkward to me.
        While this is in some ways a pitfall of the movie, fortunately it turns
around to make the movie more enjoyable.   As suspected, Castor gets out
of the coma, and takes the original face of Sean Archer. Thus for the
majority of the movie, you have literal role reversals, Sean appears to
be Castor, and vice versa. More importantly however, the audience gets
to see John Travolta acting like the wild Nicholas Cage we've come to
love, and Cage play the more straight-shooting Travolta.  You can see
the actors are having a good time in their roles, and the actors play
wonderfully off each other.
        Now the real question: how's the ACTION?   Fortunately, it's the other
major strength of the movie, with incredibly original sequences, from
speed boats to planes on runways.   John Woo is a master at this art,
and succeeds in creating exciting and invigorating shoot outs.  On that
same note however, I was disappointed in that what I believed to be the
best action sequence - where Sean is attempting to intercept Castor at
the airport - is the first sequence of the movie!  Consequently, while
the movie opened with a bang, I was a little let down by the remaining
action sequences.  And on a minor point, while most of the slow motion
touches are nice, Mr. Woo seems to be a little too obsessed with this
movie making quality.
        All in all, if you allow yourself to be wrapped up in Face/Off's
vortex, you may look back at a few parts (the face swapping scene comes
instantly to my mind) with skepticism, but you'll certainly enjoy the
two hour ride.

Author
Jun Yan
Written by Mike Werb & Michael Colleary;
Produced by David Permut, Barrie Osborne, Terence Chang
Actors: John Travolta, Nicolas Cage, Joan Allen, Gina Gershon
Directed by John Woo
        I had been worried about this film ever since I heard the plot.
It's PREPOSTEROUS!  Who would buy into such a crazy idea without either
being confused or turned off by its ridiculous nature?  Given the terribly
disappointing career in Hollywood so far for John Woo, I had enough reason
to keep a low expectation for "Face/Off."  Well, I have to say I was
pleasantly surprised by the final product.  The concept is still
preposterous, but everything else is quite well done. 
        The movie opens with an assassination attempt 6 years ago that
results in FBI agent Sean Archer's(John Travolta) little son Michael.  It
becomes the driving force for Archer to pursue the worst of the worst
terrorist Castor Troy(Nicolas Cage).  In a breath-taking confrontation
within the first half hour of the film, Troy is captured, but remains in a
coma.  In order to dig out the secret hiding place of a time bomb set by
Troy earlier, Archer agrees, with hesitation, to switch faces with Troy to
get the information out of Troy's kid brother Poullex in jail.  Well, we
know Troy would wake up and turn the table on Archer and before you know
it, the trap-setter becomes the trapped.  
        Naturally, Archer is in complete hell wearing his worst enemy's
face, becoming the jailed criminal, knowing Troy is now FBI official and
his wife's husband.  He does manage to escape the maximum security
facility and we anticipate an explosive showdown between these two men.  I
was not disappointed.  
        Many details in the plot is very far-fetched and illogical.  The
concept of face-switching is medically IMPOSSIBLE.  Travolta and Cage have
very different body characteristics which should be easily spotted by
Archer's wife (Joan Allen).  There is no way for Troy to know the daily
routine work of FBI and fool all his associates.  Thankfully, the surgical
procedure of ripping off one face and putting it onto another person is
done as vaguely as possible to avoid being too silly.  Surprisingly, the
flow of the movie does not stumble over the vast implausibility due to the
gripping performances from Travolta and Cage, who sucessfully imitate each
other's characteristics in acting within the context of the story.  The
audience are caught in concerns for the characters and thus are willing to
forgive the holes in the plot.  
        Contrast to almost every big-budget action movie in recent years,
"Face/Off" spends numerous quiet moments to develop the story and dig the
characters minds, especially the frustration and fear in Archer that not
only he's wearing Troy's face, but he's slowly becoming Troy inside too.
The characters are interesting because they are not rushed from one fight
scenes from another.  Many small aspects of the film are not treated with
the simplistic formulas.  Archer's family problems, Troy's family
problems, honorable thieves and crooked law enforcement, evil thieves
and good law enforcement, Archer's love for his wife, Troy's affection for
his kid brother, and the tangled relationship among Troy's ex-girlfriend
(played by Gina Gershon), her brother and her small son.  The emotional
drama feels realistic without the cheesiness and stupidity of "Con Air".
The movie is full of small details that reveal the inner conflicts and
motivations of the characters.  Cool and neat. 
        Credit to the writers Werb and Colleary, the romance of two weary
adults, Archer and his wife Eve, is presented with maturity and delicate
balance.  Joan Allen has provided the anchor of sanity to save the film
from going 'way over the top and successfully reduced the sense of
disbelief and ridiculousness in the audience.  Travolta tends to overact a
little in Troy's role and makes his character more cartoonish than scary,
but the occasional flicks of goodness in him rings true and believable.
Cage is refreshing and thoroughly enjoyable as the bad guy in the first
half hour of the movie and is reasonably vulnerable and strong as the
trapped Archer.  
        While the drama of "Face/Off" is intriguing, the action sequences
are absolutely first-rate (except for the fist fight at the very end) and
stomach turning.  The first airplance chasing scene and the last boat
chasing scene are textbook perfection in action filmmaking, while the
church confrontation is most poetic and reminds me the most of the
passionate, sentimental and heart-wrecking films John Woo had done in Hong
Kong.  Although gunfight scenes are abundant in this movie, I don't feel
excessiveness as I did watching "Hard-Boiled" because they are nicely
paced with quiet moments and human interactions.  The characters and
emotional intensity in the action scenes make them engaging and
meaningful.  The master demonstrates *how* a real action movie should be
done with passions and fury and pain.  It's not all about how balletic the
actors move with 2 guns in hand, but more about the rage and hurt and
passion and motives of the players involved.  
        On a last note, I realized recently that the multiple Mexican
standoff can be dated back to the days of 20's and 30's pulp detective
stories, for it is repeatedly used in every other short story by Raymond
Chandler.  I'll be damned if Werb and Colleary never read Chandler and
borrowed more than a little spirit from his passionate, sentimental and
violent tales.  
        "Face/Off" runs 2 hours and 10 minutes, which does not feel long
at all, at least to me.  In fact I didn't want the film to end.  Again, it
proves that realistic characters and human emotions can override
implausibility in plot devices.  Maybe I can finally say John Woo has made
the transition to Hollywood.  Although American audience may not be ready
to accept his ideals and moral obsession with male bonding, friendship and
love, loyalty and betray themes derived from Chinese chivalry stories, he
still can successfully incorporate his uniquely imaginative and innovative
style with Hollywood good screenplays.  Welcome back. 

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Been there, done that, seen this, seen that.  This seems to be the
attitude that many filmgoers share regarding one of the most well known
yet over done movie genres ever - action.  Can you blame them?  Well
after hundreds of tiring Van Damne/Bruce Willis style movies, I hardly
think so.  But what is this - a light at the end of a long, dark tunnel?
Maybe, just maybe, I've found the first proper action film equal to The
Rock.
If you think you know what on screen action is, wait until you see it
John Woo style.  Beginning as a popular Chinese film director, Woo's
talents were recognized as something truly special, and it was just a
matter of time until he entered the Hollywood scene.  And when he did,
he not only left a mark of excellence but also set incredibly high
standards for the industry after his successful creations Hard Target,
Broken Arrow and now Face/Off.  What's so special, you ask, about his
work?  Well Woo surely goes where no director has ever been before, and
finds himself working the movie into unpredictable, incredibly
suspenseful scenes of man to man conflict and a host of other small
surprises.  However the greatest part of his films is not these
mesmerizing scenes, but the fact that he never loses site of the big
picture - which keeps the films running slick and smooth all the way
through.
Woo's latest film, Face/Off, restores faith in the action genre and
gives audiences something to chant and rave for, with the performances
of John Travolta and Nicholas Cage worth the price of admission alone.
Just as the suspense thriller Scream made up for decades of pathetic
horror films, Face/Off does exactly the same thing with action films,
making it a worthy addition to anyone's ticket collection.  Never before
has an action duo looked so good on the silver screen.  Never before has
the good guy worn the bad guys face.  Never before have I apologized to
the person sitting next to me for cheering for the wrong guy.
His names Castor Troy (Cage), and he's the slickest, most cool bad dude
since Bobba Fett of Star Wars.  Surrounded by weapons, henchmen, drugs
and good looking women, Troy's career is exactly the way he wants it - a
whole lot of fun.  On the other side of the spectrum is Sean Archer
(Travolta) an FBI agent who has perused Troy for six years after he
accidentally assassinated his infant son while aiming for Sean.  Archer,
basing his whole life around trapping Troy, is all too glad to hear that
his mentor is in town and rushes out to catch him in the early minutes
into the film.  But after finally beating Troy at his own game and
sending him into a coma, more bad news is ahead.  Archer soon discovers
that Troy rigged up a bomb that will blow Los Angeles's to pieces, and
only one person knows the location of it - Troys half witted brother
(who bears a striking resemblance to Radar off Mash).  After Archer
fails to make Troys gang spill the beans, he is left with only one
option - to enter the prison looking like Troy so he can find the
location from his brother.  A plastic surgeon removes the faces of both
Archer and Troy so that the FBI agent assumes the identity of his
nemesis so he can prevent a disastrous detonation.
As far as a twist in the plot is concerned, the one coming up is a
beauty.  When Archer is busy getting used to being inside the master
criminals body, Troy wakes up from his comer on the wrong side of the
bed - not at all happy with the fact that he is without a face.
However after making a few firm phone calls, his henchmen come running
to the scene and force the surgeon to put the only face on Troy that is
available - Archer's.  Assuming his identity, Troy couldn't be happier
with the situation after burning all evidence that a face transplant
ever existed and eagerly getting to know Archer's wife Eve (Joan Allen).
Trapped inside each other's bodies, the two arch enemies discover things
about each other that they never knew could exist such as family
commitments and a clash of different identities inside different
identities.  But in no time the showdowns become blood baths of action
and gripping suspense courtesy of Woo's guiding hand, which can be
described as nothing less than brilliant.  The action scenes are quite
obviously the height of the film, giving fans of both actors a great
time as they witness them playing both the good guy and the bad guy for
the first time.
Although I admit that the whole idea of such a farcical transplant is
laughable, not for one second can you look back on the film and
criticize it for attempting something original and entertaining.  A
silly idea, yes, but the entire movie is crafted so well that it is
easily forgotten in a mess of action that is unmistakably the best we've
seen so far this year.
Face/Off is quite honestly an outstanding look at what can be achieved
with even the most ridiculed and overused Hollywood genre, and delivers
non stop slabs of action that will glue you to your seat in
anticipation.  This film truly is top class, and never before has action
looked this good.

Author
Neal Richardson
Principal Actors: John Travolta, Nicolas Cage
Written by: Michael Colleary and Mike Werb
Directed by: John Woo
Imagine what it might be like to wear the face of the person you hate the
most.  What would that do to you? 
This is the dilemma at the heart of John Woo's latest action thriller,
"Face/Off."  The premise the screenwriters use to make us believe that the
two leads "swap" faces is ludicrous but when this occurs we aren't really
concerned with suspending our disbe lief.  This movie has already sucked
us in. 
What makes this movie work is the intensity that Travolta and Cage bring
to their roles as they play themselves and then switch roles a quarter of
the way through the film.  The scenes become more poignant as the audience
knows who's really who and everyo ne else does not.  A very interesting
human drama unfolds as the best in these characters is brought out due to
the role reversal. 
If none of this grabs you as you watch this in a multiplex, John Woo's
direction and outrageous stunts will.  This is without a doubt his most
Hong Kong like of his American films.  Those who are familiar with Woo's
style will undoubtedly smile knowingly at some of these shots throughout
this picture. 
This is an action movie with a lot of heart.  You'll be hard pressed to
find a better action film this summer. 

Author
Jeff Walters
      A couple of months ago, when I first downloaded the Face/Off
trailer from the Net, my initial reaction was a fourteen carrot gold
'yawn'. Followed swiftly by a press of my computers delete key, not
wanting to waste six or seven megabytes of precious space on this
piss-poor trailer. Then I started reading the first wave of reviews
from the U.S.....unique...excellent....must-see. Well, I thought still
skeptical, I suppose I might as well go see it when it gets here.
'Here', of course, was still three months away.
       I'll admit, when I trotted off to see this film, the only John
Woo movie I had seen before was the fairly enjoyable but highly
forgetable Broken Arrow. I'd heard good things about his previous work
with movies like Hard Boiled, but his films were definitely not on my
must-see list. That, let me tell you, has changed completely. I knew
this fact only five minutes into the film, after the brilliantly shot
and acted opening sequence where Sean Archer loses his son blew me off
my feet.
     The acting throughout the film is staggeringly good for an action
 flick. Seriously. I've never been a big John Travolta fan, but he,
like Cage, perfectly suited his role in the movie.....sorry, make that
'roles' in the movie. Even Travolta's great performance, however,
paled in  comparison to Cage's character portrayals. My favourite Cage
scene was definitely when he was crashed out in compardre Dietrich
Hassler's hideout. Half drugged out of his mind, he sits there
reclining back in a chair talking about his son's death from Castor's
perspective - "Doesn't it just break your heart." he mutters coldly.
         Now don't go thinking from the previous comments about
brilliant acting that this is a drama focused movie - it's not. That's
what really makes this movie unique. It's an action movie with
brilliantly portrayed characters.....not a common mix at all.
Suspension of disbelief is paramount in this movie though.....that's
the only way to overlook the fact that Travolta and Cage fire around
5671 rounds at each other....and never hit.
         Several action scenes are just so well choreographed that
they just make wish that you could press 'rewind' and watch it over
again. The part where Archer and Troy have a stand off on either side
of a double-sided mirror is just plain brilliant. 
     Whilst Cage's and Travolta's performances would be enough
alone to sustain most movies, the lesser characters are just as
intriguing. Joan Allen, who usually sticks to the straight drama
movies, plays her part perfectly as Archer's long suffering wife. I
like the fact that her character didn't end up toting a gun at the
end of the movie...it would have wrecked her potrayal. Gina Gershon
was surprising to say the least as Castor Troy's mistreated
girlfriend.....make that *one of* Castor Troy's mistreated
girlfriends. Other movies would have used her character as just window
dressing...a sex object, but instead her character is very strong and
independent. Dominique Swain, who plays Archer's daughter,
also does a nice job, though her character is not as explored as much
as Allen's or Gershon's.
     Faults? Well...there were some I have to say. First, the movie's
ending, whilst being very good overall, was a bit too drawn
out for it's own good. After the two combatants begin duelling again
after the final boat crash you can't help but think - "Geez, are
you guys nuclear powered or what?". There were certain bits that
weren't handled properly, like where Archer appears safe and
sound on solid ground after jumping off the converted oil
platform/prison - more explanation here would have been nice. 
Overall, this movie was not perfect. But I thought it was about as
close as an action movie has ever came to perfect. Many
critics have claimed that this movie will change the way action movies
are made.....I certainly hope so. 

Author
Walter Frith
     Face off.  It refers in many ways to two rival parties squaring off in
competition.  In this latest film from internationally acclaimed action
director John Woo, the title is literate.  John Travolta plays an FBI man who
assumes the identity of a terrorist he's captured (Nicolas Cage) in order to
get inside Cage's band of criminals by going undercover to prison to find the
location of a biological explosive set to go off somewhere in the Los Angeles
area.
     The procedure in which Travolta assumes Cage's identity is quite
unusual.  Cage is in a coma after being captured and his face is cut off with
lasers and is placed over Travolta's face and the only problem is that
Travolta's face has to come off as well and Cage awakes from his coma in the
hospital and calls upon his goons to force the doctor who performed the
surgery on Travolta to do the same on him using Travolta's face.  Travolta is
caught in a nightmare to say the least as he's now locked in to Cage's
identity and must remain in prison with no chance of reversal since the team
who performed the surgery is murdered by Cage.  Cage assumes the life
Travolta had which includes a promotion within the FBI and the pleasures of
Travolta's home life including a relationship with his wife (Joan Allen).
     This is a high-tech, original and slick minded action picture that has
both leading men in fine form and Cage is a treat to watch as the bad guy and
Travolta has Cage's mannerisms and style of presence down to a tee once he
assumes his identity.  It's a confusing parody to discuss and it's a little
bit like that old Abbott and Costello joke about who's on first.  When you
talk about the movie it's hard to distinguish between the two actors in the
reversal of roles and director John Woo has a knack for making action films
much more meaningful by utilizing the academics of craftsmanship from his
actors.  Even a terrible actor like Jean-Claude Van Damme came across well in
Woo's 'Hard Target' from 1993.  'Face-Off' suffers only from over length and
a screenplay that could have resolved things better in the end but with so
much to please the senses on the screen, these things seem innocuous.

Author
Homer Yen
For weeks I have prayed to the movie Gods for a film that would give me a   
sustained adrenaline rush, would have really strong characters, and would   
give me something to remember this summer by.  Finally, my prayers have   
been answered.  Face-Off is my deliverance from the normal humdrum summer   
action fare.  Directed by the stylistically supreme John Woo, he gives us   
something to relieve us from the summer heat´a really cool movie.
For 6 years, FBI agent Sean Archer (John Travolta) has been on the trail   
of psychotic killer Castor Troy (Nicholas Cage).  And,  he gets his   
chance to catch him very early on in the film.  Quickly,  we are treated   
to a visceral offering of gunplay, violence, and terrific action as   
Archer finally gets his man.  This kind of action would be the finale for   
most movies.  But, here, it is just the start of what's to come.  Troy is   
captured -- and left in a coma -- but Archer soon discovers that Troy has   
left a giant time bomb where it will kill everyone within one square   
mile.  Archer must discover the whereabouts before it blows.  But the   
only other person who would know is Troy's brother, Pollux, who was also   
captured in the initial gunfight.  But how can they get Pollux to reveal   
the location of the bomb?
When the Bureau's high-tech medical division informs him of new surgery   
techniques, Archer conceives a plan. He'll allow the physicians to give   
him Troy's face -- literally -- and he'll assume Troy's cruel but   
charismatic personality. They'll also surgically implant a microchip to   
alter his voice to be just like Troy's.  Then he'll go into a   
maximum-security prison and trick Pollux into mentioning where the bomb   
is ticking.  So far so good.
However, Troy awakens from his coma.  He's not quite feeling himself   
anymore, so with the help of some of his goons, he forces the physicians   
to put Archer's face on his skull. The identity swap is now complete   
(Troy is now Travolta and Archer is now Cage).  Troy/Travolta then kills   
everyone who knew of this project and burns down the facility.  He then   
uses his new identity to get into Archer's house -- and next to the   
agent's unsuspecting wife (Joan Allen) and extremely pretty daughter   
(Dominique Swain), while Archer-as-Cage is now stuck in a   
maximum-security prison Í alone and enraged that he has the face of his   
most hated enemy, and fearful for the safety of his family.  Archer/Cage   
must escape and must face off with Troy one last time.
Well-scripted and well-choreographed, this is an operatic and intensely   
violent fable about two men who pursue each other through hell and back.   
Cage and Travolta display genuine gusto for their roles (both when each   
one is bad and good) and despite the switch in identities, we are always   
in step with their characters.  When we see Cage or Travolta walk in, the   
audience knows who they really are.  The arrogant and flamboyant   
Troy/Travolta endures a quiet, domestic, suburban life and a subdued   
Archer/Cage makes his way into the kinetic frenzy of the underworld   
marked by drugs and fast women.  And although they find poignant lessons   
in their new surroundings (Troy trying to teach Archer's daughter how to   
defend herself or Archer learning about loyalty from the goon set), their   
hatred for each other consumes them.  Troy/Travolta definitely has the   
upper hand because he now has the resources of the FBI.  Archer/Cage is   
now wanted dead or alive.  And, even if he survives, will he ever regain   
the family that was taken away because no one knows who Archer-as-Cage   
really is?  A spectacular final confrontation is inevitable and we are   
not disappointed with the finale.
In the world of Woo, movie-watching is a whole new experience.  There is   
a delirious mixture of spectacular gun battles, furious explosions and   
breathtaking stunt work.  Gun battles and terrorist attacks are staged   
like ballets, bullets spray across every inch of the screen and even the   
most mundane scenes are brought to life as captured in poetic slow   
motion.  Cage languished in Con Air, but here he sizzles.  And Travolta   
infuses energy and hipness.  This hot summer, treat yourself to something   
refreshing and something cool.  This is one not to miss.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        In a summer populated with stinker action flicks like 
SPEED 2 and THE LOST WORLD, John Woo's FACE/OFF is a 
breath of Fresh/Air. This is just what I want from an action movie -- 
something that gives us artistic, well-choreographed scenes of 
violence and explosions contained in an intelligent plot about 
interesting characters we care about. That's the recipe right there, 
and the auto-pilot writing of those two sequel action flicks 
shortchanged us in at least half of those departments.
        FACE/OFF takes the time-worn body-switching premise 
and makes it fascinating again. John Travolta plays a cop who's 
spent most of his adult life tracking down psycho criminal Nicolas 
Cage, to the chagrin of his sick-and-tired-of-it-but-still-standing-by-
her-man wife Joan Allen. When Travolta finally captures Cage after 
an airplane hangar, he can't let it go at that. He lets himself get 
sucked back into the case when he finds out Cage planted a bomb 
somewhere in the city.
        If a doctor came to you with the idea of cutting your face 
off and putting it on the head of your mortal enemy and doing the 
same to your enemy, you'd give the doctor a swift kick to the groin 
followed by the meanest rectal exam ever, right? Not Travolta. He 
sits right down in the chair and lets them cut his distinguished 
features right off his head. A few laser-induced hairline changes and 
one microchip voice implant later, Travolta is Cage and a comatose 
Cage is left faceless in an abandoned hospital.
        The plan is to send Travolta/Cage into prison so he can 
pump Cage's accomplice brother for information about the bomb. 
It doesn't work too well -- oh, he gets the information within a few 
scenes, but prison life is hell for poor John/Nick. He has to wear 
these heavy metallic boots that track his whereabouts at all times, 
take abuse from the Commie guards and get his ass whooped by 
fellow inmates. And, to top it all off, his damn face itches!
        Cue the faceless Cage, who soon wakes up from his coma. 
There's no one guarding him, no one in the entire building in fact, 
and before long, his henchmen have the doctor at gunpoint, forcing 
him to put Travolta's face on his head. Now Cage/Travolta has the 
upper hand, killing the few people who know of Cage/Travolta's 
mission and even showing up at prison to visit Travolta/Cage. It's 
delicious torture watching Travolta/Cage's world fall apart before 
his eyes, playing off the universal fear of being completely alone in a 
situation.
        The movie never stops being fascinating, as T/C tries to 
break out of jail and stop C/T, and C/T assumes Travolta's former 
life as a star agent of the law and a family man. Woo keeps the pace 
moving and gives us plenty of action to boot, but the key to the film 
is in the performances of Travolta and Cage. Cage in the trapped 
Travolta role has to go from psycho to mellow within minutes, but 
it's Travolta's mellow-to-psycho transformation that is the most fun 
to watch. The premise is outrageous, but these actors almost make it 
believable.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Jeff Shooman
First Impressions:  Truly, a good action flick.  John Woo is a master at
pulling off an action scene, even if the movie did overexaggerate that last
boat scene a tad bit.  Performances by Nicolas Cage and John Travolta are
truly remarkable -- Cage is in top form and Travolta continues to exhibit his
great acting skills.
Meaningless commentary aside, Sean Archer (Travolta/Cage) is an FBI agent who
dedicates his whole life to catching a psychopath by the name of Castor Troy
(Cage/Travolta).  Archer finally catches Troy and his equally evil brother.
 This sets off a series of events which leads Travolta's Archer to take the
face of Cage's Troy.  Through awful means, Cage's Troy then assumes the face
of Travolta's Archer.  The result is Nic Cage playing Sean Archer and John
Travolta playing Castor Troy.
Here, Troy's one-dimensional, slick-"cajun-bizarre" antics are brilliantly
portrayed by Mr. Travolta, who also played a psychopath in Mr. Woo's earlier
BROKEN ARROW.  However, Mr. Cage has the tougher part here:  He must deviate
from playing the wieldy sociopath to the family-loving Archer.  He lives up
to the task -- his performance is also nothing short of brilliant.  Like in
LEAVING LAS VEGAS, he plays the Archer part with a cheery sort of edge, and
the audience knows he's smarter than everyone.  That's the message that was
supposed to be conveyed:  Mission accomplished there.
The violent scenes in this film have led some people to denigrate movie
critics for their immense liking of the film -- they claim that the violence
in this film is dispicable, reprehensible, and a bunch of other
long-worded-adjectives.  I have to say however, that the scenes in this film,
while gory, are poetically directed by Mr. Woo.  Mr. Woo has such an eye for
action that he even pulls off the first scene in the movie, which is
disturbing as it is, with such finesse and flare that it makes you wonder
whether or not he was "born" to do this.  This first scene and the other
action scenes, especially the church scene ("Weee...what a predicament") are
masterfully directed.  If there was an Oscar for Action, Mr. Woo would make a
clean sweep.
The plot, inventive and unique, did suffer a bit at the end however from that
extremely drawn out boat-scene.  Again, this scene was truly remarkable,
however, some of it probably unnecessary.  This movie did not have to be two
hours and twenty minutes long, so that last scene didn't help.  But, it was
there, and the audience member must appreciate the ability to pull this
caliber of scene off.  The action here was "awesome."

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Woo, this is a wild ride of an action movie! Despite it's elaborately
overdone plot line and non-stop (meaning just when you think it's gonna wrap
up, it doesn't) action, FACE/OFF managed to knock my socks, shoes, and Levi's
off and become my personal pick for best action movie of the year!
The problem with this one is that it does manage to be just a bit too much.
Well, maybe a bit more than a bit too much. But most audiences out for a good
action flick aren't going to mind, especially in the midst of such
high-energy, richly complex action. This movie had the potential to be one of
the most satisfying movies of the year, but it went just a step beyond and
leaves us stuffed silly, perhaps looking for the mental equivalent of Pepto
Bismol. "I can't believe I ate the whole thing!" to quote the famous
commercials.
But even the acting is fascinating when you realize that what you're watching
is Nicolas Cage portraying John Travolta portraying Nicolas Cage. And vice
versa. Subtle mannerisms are awesome to pick out, and when made even more
apparent, the audience I was in (including myself) burst into an avid and
accepting chorus of laughs.
Someone who doesn't know the plot for FACE/OFF is definitely not going to
find it here! I've never been one to give summaries, but I'm not even going
to attempt one with this film! It's very complex. I could lay it out in
simplicity, but then it would truly lack it's integrity as a great action
flick.
So while I can't go into much greater detail, the fact remains that FACE/OFF
is by far the best action film yet this year. And, in case you didn't notice,
the year is drawing near to a conclusion. Far fetched, wildy overdone, and a
bit long, FACE/OFF still manages to hold you tight and make you wonder if
you're ever going to be let go!

Author
Steve Kong
Just when you're sick of those loud and dumb summer action movies, there
comes one that proves that they are not all the same. The film is Face/Off,
and it is directed by the world acclaimed action director, John Woo.
I've admired John Woo mainly for his two Hong Kong works: Hard-Boiled and
The Killer. After I saw those two movies, I was convinced that Woo was the
ultimate action movie director. As much as I liked those films, though,
none of his American films has yet to generate such admiration, until now.
Hard Target was entertaining, but it didn't feel like an actual Woo movie.
Broken Arrow was better than Hard Target, but it still did not have that
Woo touch.
What is the Woo touch? In most action movies, you'll find an infallible
unfeeling hero who is nothing but good. Then you'll find his adversary, the
evil bug-eyed crazed madman. It's a simple game of good versus bad, no
in-between, no real character development. And, for most summer moviegoers,
character development is not the selling strong point of a summer movie. It
seems that more and more the summer films are getting worse at creating
real characters. The explanation for this is simple; not having character
development can allow for two hours full of action. What Woo does is create
a movie that is full of action but includes characters that are fully
fleshed out. His films have characters that think, feel, and are not afraid
to cry. The themes that he works with are still of good versus bad, but he
takes that theme to a new level. Woo adds gray area to the usual black and
white, good versus bad, action genre.
The other thing that Woo does is choreograph action scenes like nobody
else. Many try to copy his style, but none have achieved it. His action
scenes are agile and flowing like a ballet, and are hard to describe unless
they are seen.
In Face/Off, the two characters, though tagged good and bad, are not what
they seem. And a third of the way into the film, they truly are not who
they seem.
Sean Archer (John Travolta) is an FBI agent that has been chasing
terrorist, Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage), for many years now. Archer is
obsessed with catching Castor. This obsession stems from Castor
accidentally killing Archer's son. As Castor is leaving L.A., Archer gets
his chance to capture him. But instead of being captured, Castor ends up in
a coma after a large and violent gunfight and his brother Pollox is put
into prison. Archer finds out is that Castor and Pollox have planted a
large bomb somewhere in L.A., and it is going to go off soon. Pollox is a
paranoid delusional man and will not talk to anyone but his brother about
the location of the bomb. The only way to get Pollox to talk is to have
Castor talk to him, but of course Castor is in a deep coma. The solution
--and you'll have to suspend your disbelief for a moment-- is to take
Castor's face and plant it on Archer. Archer is unwilling to do it at
first, but agrees after some convincing. He takes Castor's face, is altered
to sound like Castor, and is sent into prison to try to find out the
location of the bomb from Pollox. While Archer is in jail talking to
Pollox, Castor wakes up from his coma and takes the only face that he can
find, Archer's. Castor kills everyone that knows about the plan to put the
face of Castor on Archer.
This twist gives John Woo the freedom to explore the theme of good versus
bad. Are you truly what you are inside? Or is it how you look? Or is it
your reputation? And what can you get away with while looking like someone
else? This leads both Archer and Castor to re-evaluate who they are and
what they believe in. That's a lot of drama for an action film, but it does
not bog it down a bit.
Archer, with the face of Castor, escapes prison and wants to put his life
back together, but no one knows of the plot to change his face. It is hard
for Archer because he ends up having to deal with the people that he fought
so hard against as an FBI agent, Castor's cohorts. He begins, though, to
see that the other side is not so bad at heart, and softens up a bit.
John Travolta gives a solid performance as both Archer and Castor. But it
is really Nicolas Cage who carries the film. Cage's performance as Castor
is, to say the least, maniacal. When he switches over to portraying Archer,
he completely changes his performance and tones everything down. Travolta,
though solid, does not give that feeling that he's someone else after the
face change. His performance feels mostly as if he were himself all the
time. But there are times when Travolta just unleashes, and those are his
stand out moments. The switching of faces also allows both actors to poke
fun at themselves, including Travolta, as Castor, saying to Pollox, "This
nose, this hair, this ridiculous chin!"
Woo fills this film with powerful imagery. One moment that remains in my
mind is that of Castor getting out of his car, and his coat blowing in the
wind. Once you see it, you'll be entranced by how powerful that one short
sequence is. Another scene that is quite memorable happens halfway into the
film. With the two main characters wearing each other's face, they come to
a standoff. Castor and Archer are standing opposite each other with guns
drawn. But, between them is a decorative double mirror. As Archer looks
into the mirror he sees himself with Castor's face. And on the other side
Castor looks at himself with Archer's face. All the sudden there is silence
and a realization by both characters that this is their chance to kill each
other. The image they face is of the person they want to kill, but on the
other side both know that it is an image of themselves.
This imagery goes further into the action sequences. Woo uses quick cuts
and odd camera angles to capture the action and the urgency. What Woo does
not resort to, and what most new action directors overuse, is the
unnecessary camera jiggling and shaking. Woo captures all of the action in
without having to use such a technique, which usually disorients and makes
sick more than it does capture the urgency of an action film.
Kudos to Mike Werb and Michael Colleary for putting together this wonderful
script. Though originally set in the not-so-distant future -- which makes
the face swapping a bit easier to swallow -- Werb and Colleary have adapted
the script well to Woo's request to set the story in the present.
Worth mentioning is John Powell's score for the film. It is reminiscent of
some scores done by Hans Zimmer, but it stands by itself. And it fits the
images on screen hand-in-glove. The opening theme with the images shown are
the perfect pairing of image and music. And the theme that Powell creates
for Castor Troy is unforgettable -- listen for it as Castor makes his big
entrance into the film at the airport.
Woo is one of the last true action directors. So, if you're sick of walking
into another theatre with the feeling that you'll be subjected to a loud
and dumb action film, don't worry. Go see Face/Off, which proves that an
action film just doesn't have to be loud and dumb; it can have a story and
characters that you'll care for. The violence is over the top, but is done
so well that it is almost poetic. If this is the first film of John Woo's
that you've seen, you'll find it amazing. If you're recovering from his
last two American outings, you'll be glad to hear that this film is right
on track with his Hong Kong films.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Michael Redman
Nicolas Cage is on an action film roll. Following the dynamic but flawed
Con Air by just a few weeks, "Face/Off" pulls out all the stops for over
two hours of non-stop intensity. Director John Woo ("Broken Arrow" and many
Hong Kong high-action films) doesn't give the audience a minute to catch their breath.
FBI agent Sean Archer (John Travolta) has spent years of his career hunting
Castor Troy (Cage) after the criminal accidentally killed Archer's young son
while attempting to kill the agent. In a blinding episode of a blaze of
bullets, an airplane crash and more blood than you'd see in an ER; the
criminal is captured and in a coma. It's time for celebration, or so they think.
It turns out that there's a megabomb hidden somewhere and the only person who
know its location is Troy's psychotic brother Pollux (Alessandro Nivola). In
order to get the information, Archer undergoes a science-fictiony transplant
of Troy's face.
While the lawman is in a secret high security prison as Troy, the real
criminal mastermind awakens from his coma literally faceless. Finding Archer's
face floating in a jar, he forces the surgeon to attach it to him and then
burns the lab and everyone who knows about the operation. This leaves no
evidence as to who's actually who.
Archer (now Cage) is stuck in lock-up while Troy (now Travolta) is taking his
place in his job and at his home with his wife (Joan Allen). When the
agent-who-looks-like-the-criminal inevitably breaks out, he becomes the
desperado with his cronies and his babe-with-a-gun (Gina Gershon).
It is to Woo's credit that the movie is as easy to follow as it is. The two
actors are also responsible for masterful work. Not only does each have to
play his character, he has to play his character playing the other man. Even
more difficult, each has to imitate the other actor. Cage and Travolta are
both wonders at this, but it is Travolta who has the meatier role. With
Archer's face, he is the FBI agent but with Troy's personality, even capturing
some of Cage's acting quirks. When he no longer has to masquerade as Archer,
but still with his face, Travolta's sneers and whoops are a delight.
Although movies of this genre very rarely pick up Oscars, Travolta certainly
deserves one. In a difficult role, the former sweathog gets a chance to strut
his stuff.
Climbing into each other's life is a study in shadows for the two men. Troy is
obviously touched at the graveside of Archer's son. Archer becomes attached to
Troy's young son. Each man is the shadow of the other: they are more alike
than they would want to admit. In one scene, wearing each other's likeness
they stand on opposite sides of a mirror aiming their guns at themselves but
as images of their enemies. If not for the other, they would only be half a person.
Woo's signature style is in full bloom. Blood splatters everywhere, bodies
fall like flies, Troy is blown down a tunnel by a jet engine, Archer escapes
from a police copter by diving hundreds of feet into the ocean. There are more
bullets in this film than are fired in a major military battle. Oddly enough
for two men who live by the gun, thousands of shots fired at each other fail
to find their targets.
"Face/Off" looks to be the best action this summer. There may be 
better films, but it's difficult to imagine any more thrilling.
[This appeared in the 7/3/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When I grew up noodle soup was a lot of broth and only a little
bit of noodles.  Then on the market from East Asia came ramen which was
mostly noodles.  The marketers of this product acknowledged that many
people bought noodle soup for the noodles so they made that most of the
soup.  When I grew up an action film was something like THE GUNS OF
NAVARONE.  It had a good story and some action sequences.  Unhappily
much of the audience really was watching the film for the action
sequences and the plot just bound them together, but at least it was
there for those who wanted it.  The Hong Kong action film formula
delivers action the way ramen delivers noodles.  It gives you more
action than plot.  Part of the formula is to turn the drama to
melodrama.  Melodrama allows for more dramatic moments in a shorter
space of time, leaving more time to devote to action sequences.  Then
the action sequences go off like a strings of firecrackers on Chinese
New Year.  Turning the story to melodrama and increasing the pace of
the fireworks destroys much of the credibility of a film, but it gives
the audience what it wants.  That is the Hong Kong action film formula
and one of its leading proponents is John Woo.  But Woo has been lured
to Hollywood and he has had to compromise his style a bit.  He has
toned down the melodrama making for a longer story to tell.  He has cut
down the proportion of action scenes while lengthening the film.
FACE/OFF is a long film at 138 minutes, it spends less time with action
sequences than his earlier films, but he uses the extra time to tell a
more dramatically satisfying story with a more engaging premise.
     In action films we have had more than our share of films of law
agents stalking psychopathic killers.  And a few seasons back we also
had in a short time a lot of films with people switching bodies and
having to live as the other person.  Combining the two ideas does not
sound like a promising idea, but it makes for a much more interesting
piece dramatically than most of Woo's films.  Castor and Pollux Troy
(played respectively by Nicholas Cage and Alessandro Nivola) are
brother sociopaths who have little in common with their namesakes, the
Dioscuri who accompanied Jason on his quest for the Golden Fleece.
Castor is a super- extrovert (and obnoxious) criminal genius.  Six
years earlier he nearly killed FBI agent Sean Archer (John Travolta)
and did kill Archer's young son.  The ruthless and narcissistic killer
has been pitted against stiff and introverted FBI agent for several
years, and finally Archer manages to kill Castor Troy.  However, the
government knows that Castor and Pollux have set a bomb to destroy Los
Angeles and Pollux refuses to talk.  Then Archer finds out that Castor
is still alive, albeit comatose, and that a new process can transform
Archer to look like Castor.  It is suggested that Archer become Castor
and perhaps trick information from Pollux Troy.  Of course Castor wakes
from his coma, finds out what has happened and forces the doctors to
transform him to look like Archer.  The logic (or lack of logic) in
this scene is one of the low-points of the film.  But to fool people
Castor and Archer each has to take on the other's mannerisms.  The
introvert must force himself to be an extrovert, the extrovert ... well
that would be telling.  Each must get involved with the family or
friends of the other, and gets a better understanding of the enemy.
Loyalties become confused.  Many things are happening at different
levels in this film and Woo manages to keep things together.
     John Woo's anything goes Hong Kong style just does not really work
all the time.  There is a somewhat questionable sequence in with a
child's home is shot up and a child is very nearly killed all done to
the tune of "Somewhere Over the Rainbow."  The scene may well have been
inspired by the brilliant "Danny Boy" sequence in MILLER'S CROSSING,
but here it is too easy to construe it as making light of child
endangerment.  It indicates that Woo, like some of his characters, is
not always in full control of his talents.  And in this scene, like
most of Woo's action scenes, the violence is turned up to a degree far
beyond any realism and all subtlety is lost.  When Woo is finished with
a set for one of his action scenes it is pretty well shredded.  Other
places he has more control such as well-choreographed sequence in which
FBI agents try to stop a plane from taking off.  The opening sequence
is a nightmarish flashback showing a good deal of atmosphere.
     Woo goes neither for drama nor his usual melodrama, but something
somewhere in between.  He has good actors in Travolta and Cage and more
than his other films he needs them as each goes through layers of the
others personality.  Nancy Allen plays Archer's wife, for once an
intelligently drawn character.  Allen is a two-time Oscar nominee for
her roles in THE CRUCIBLE and as Pat Nixon in NIXON.  In a role that
other filmmakers might have minimized, she holds her own.  Gina Gershon
also plays well in a sympathetic role as a close friend of Castor.
     John Woo is showing signs of maturing as a filmmaker.  While he
still is a fan a large scale destruction scenes, he has shown he can
make a film with a little more to it.  I rate this film a +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Kong
Just when you're sick of those stupid, loud and dumb summer action movies,
there comes one that proves that not all summer action movies are the same.
The film is Face/Off, and it is directed by, the world acclaimed action
director, John Woo.
I've admired John Woo mainly for his two Hong Kong works Hard Boiled and
The Killer. After I seen those two movies I was convinced that Woo was the
ultimate action movie director. As much as I liked those films though, none
of his American films have yet to spawn such admiration, until now. Hard
Target was entertaining, but didn't feel like it was an actual Woo movie.
Broken Arrow was better than Hard Target, but it still did not have that
Woo touch.
What is the Woo touch? In most action movies you'll find an infallible
unfeeling hero who is nothing but good. Then you'll find his adversary, the
evil bug-eyed crazed madman. A simple game of good versus bad, no in
between, no real character development. And, for most summer movies goers,
character development is not a strong point for the movie. But, as more
summers roll around, the worst films have become in even creating some
character development. The explanation for this is simple, not having
character development can allow for two hours full of action. What Woo does
is create a movie that is full of action but includes characters that are
fully fleshed out. His films have characters that think, feel, and are not
afraid to cry. The themes that he works with are still of good versus bad,
but he takes that theme to a new level. The characters are labelled as good
and bad, but it's a matter of perception on who is good and who is bad.
The other thing that Woo does is choreographing action scenes like nothing
else. Many try to copy his style, but none have achieved it. His action
scenes are as most put it like a ballad. And are hard to describe unless
they are seen.
Face/Off is one of Woo's most Hong Kong films yet. After the success of his
last film, Broken Arrow, he must have got more creative control over
Face/Off. Most noticeable is that the two characters, though tagged good
and bad, are not what they seem. And a third of the way into the film, they
truly are not who they seem.
Sean Archer (John Travolta) is a FBI agent that has been chasing a
terrorist, Castor Troy (Nicolas Cage), for many years now. Archer is
obsessed with catching Castor. This obsession stems from Castor
accidentally killing Archer's son. As Castor is leaving L.A. Archer gets
his chance to capture him. But, instead of capturing Castor, in a large and
violent gunfight, Castor is put into coma and his brother, Pollox, is put
into prison. What Archer finds out is that Castor and Pollox have planted a
large bomb somewhere in L.A., and it is ready to go off soon. Pollox is a
paranoid delusional man and will not talk to anyone else about the location
of the bomb but his brother. The only way to get Pollox to talk is to have
Castor talk to him. Castor being in a deep coma is a problem though. The
solution, this sounds strange, but works in the movie, is to take Castor's
face and plant in on Archer. Archer is unwilling to do it at first, but
agrees to do it after some convincing. Archer takes Castor's face and is
altered to sound and look like Castor, and is sent into prison to try to
fine out the location of the bomb from Pollox. While Archer is in jail
talking to Pollox, Castor wakes up from his coma and wants a face.
Obviously, Castor takes the only face that he can find, Archer's. Castor
kills everyone that knows about the plan to put Castor's face on Archer.
This twist gives John Woo the freedom to explore the theme of good versus
bad. Are you truly what you are inside? Or is it the looks? Or is it the
reputation? And what can you get away with while looking like someone else,
who is good or bad? This leads to both Archer and Castor to re-evaluate who
they really are, and what they believe in. That's a lot of drama for an
action film, but it does not bog it down a bit.
Archer, with Castor's face escapes prison and wants to put back together
his life. It is hard for Archer, who has to deal with the people that he
fought so hard against. He begins to see that the other side is not so bad
at heart, and softens up a bit.
John Travolta gives a solid performance as both Archer and Castor. But, it
is really Nicolas Cage who carries the film. Cage's performance as Castor
is, to say the least, maniacal. When he switches over to portraying Archer,
he completely changes his performance and calms everything down. Travolta,
though solid, does not give that feeling, throughout the movie, that he's
really someone else. His performance feels as if he were himself all the
time. But there are times when Travolta just unleashes, and those are his
stand out moments. The switching of faces also allows for both actors to
poke fun at themselves, including Travolta, as Castor, saying to Pollox,
"This nose, this hair, this ridiculous chin!"
Woo fills this film up with imagery that is very powerful. One that remains
in my mind is that of Castor getting out of his car, and his coat blowing
in the wind. Once you see it, you'll be entranced by how powerful that one
short sequence is. This imagery goes further into the action sequences. Woo
uses quick cuts and odd camera angles to capture the action and the
urgency. What Woo does not resort to, and what most new action directors
over use, is the unnecessary camera jiggling and shaking. Woo captures all
of the action in without having to use such a technique. This technique
usually disorients and makes sick more than it does capture the feel of an
action film. Woo is one of the last true directors that knows how to make a
real action movie. So, if you're sick of walking into another theatre
dreading the feeling that you'll just be treated to a loud and dumb action
film, don't do it. Go see Face/Off, which proves that an action film just
doesn't have to be loud and dumb, it can have a story and characters that
you'll care for. The violence is over the top, but is done so well that it
is almost poetic. If this is the first film of John Woo's that you've seen,
you'll find it amazing. If you're recovering from his last two American
outings, you'll be glad to hear that this film is right on track with his
Hong Kong films.

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

This is John Woo's third film in America.  He's the supreme Hong Kong
action film directory, best known for a certain balletic violence.
Dead-eyed men with unlimited ammunition shoot at each other in a
landscape of easily shattered glass and pottery.  In slow motion.  Amid
doves and billowing sheets.  Usually with choir music in the
background, or with silences amplifying the sound of spent shells
hitting the ground.  No, really, I think this is terrific, just easy to
get carried away with, and easy to mock when that happens.
The problem with Woo's first American film, "Hard Target", was that Van
Damme was in it.  There are flashes of the Woo style, but they're
overwhelmed by the Van Damme-ness of the exercise.  "Do not hunt what
you cannot kill", spoken in that thick Flemish accent of his.  The
second film, "Broken Arrow", was less restrained, much more exuberent.
I remember a review noted that the reason there wree two nuclear bombs
in the movie was so that Woo would have a chance of blowing up one of
them somehere in the middle.  And that wouldn't be the most spectacular
piece of action film making.  This movie was an improvement over the
Van Damme film, but the occassional moments when Woo had his trademark
scenes felt forced, and easily mocked: Travolta, too cool for this
world, lighting a cigarette in slow motion, walking away from an
explosion while doing so, synth music filling the air.  And there
wasn't enough glass to shoot out in the movie, not enough vases to
shatter.  The movie takes place in a desert, after all.
In the first 15 minutes of "Face Off", there was a serious danger of
Woo's trademarks being overused.  The shot with Nicholas Cage getting
out of the car at the airport in slow mo, the wind whipping up his long
coat, too cool for words, as the worst of them.  But the film picked up
after these first gaffes.  The Woo signature shots were more
understated, not really calling attention to themselves.  Yes, there
was the bit near the end, with white doves and billowing white
curtains, but that felt appropriate.
The plot of the movie is a bit like "The Prince and the Pauper", I
suppose.  The bad guy and the good guy switch places, and live each
other's lives for a while.  But don't pay too much attention to the
plot (which isn't half bad), and ignore the small facts about
establishing identity in the modern world.  Too much attention  to that
and the problems of carrying around that much ammo will get in the way
of virtuoso action film making.  There are Mexican standoffs (Though
nothing will touch the Mexican standoff from "The Killer", when the men
have their guns trained at each other's heads, and a blind girl is
trying to serve them tea, unaware of the lurking violence.  They circle
through a small apartment, 9mm and tea service in hand.  The glory of
this scene is that it was damn funny -- Woo seems to have become less
funny, actually, though after working with the less-than-humorous Van
Damme who can blame him? -- and has a certain, "Can you top this?" feel
too it, as he extends to scene for more minutes than you think he
possibly could.), lots of glass being broken in slow motion, a fair bit
of jump-to-one-side-a-gun-in-each-hand shooting (in slow motion), and a
speed boat sequence that suggests Woo may miss Victoria Harbor (not in
slow motion, except the explosion at the end).  The most inspired
moment is in the gangster's penthouse, just after Travolta says, "I
guess we'll just have to kill each other." I won't spoil it, like some
of the TV commercials spoiled it, but it was inspired.
In any case, the new Jackie Chan movie will be out in a couple of
weeks.  He's clearly survived the Mountain Dew commercial, so who wants
to catch this on openning night?
