Title
Review for Valentino (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Typically raucous Ken Russell biography is a bit of an odd one out in his 
catalogue.  I'm not sure why he was attracted to the story of silent-movie 
idol Rudolph Valentino after several years of tackling composers and 
artists, but I would guess that the allure of recreating the old days of 
Hollywood is a pretty potent lure for any film director in love with his 
craft.
Despite flaws, and its liberal interpretation of the facts, VALENTINO at 
least introduces the man to those casual viewers that may have never heard 
of him.  At best, it implants the image of Rudolph Valentino as a screen 
phenomenon of the silent era and points out the distinctive impact of the 
medium.  It's summed up quite simply in one shot which shows an audience 
composed entirely of women watching a Valentino film while the camera moves 
in on one and transports her into the events on the screen.  Russell, 
however, is not one for understatement – to compensate for the lack of 
filmic events that take place in Valentino's life he inflates scenes with 
loud music and hysterical, obnoxious characters.  Given the right subject 
matter, Russell's excessive style can be effective (ALTERED STATES, THE 
DEVILS, THE BOY FRIEND, TOMMY).  Here, it's just puzzling – at least for any 
viewer unacquainted with the notorious director.
Cast as the central character is ballet dancer Rudolf Nureyev, who shares 
not only his forename with the screen idol but a workable physical likeness. 
  Aware that this was Nureyev's acting debut, Russell wanted him to speak 
more with body language than words, but the dancer saw this as a chance to 
develop an acting career (which ironically paralleled Valentino's own 
artistic progress).  At times he is striking in the part, particularly when 
he is on the dance floor.  He also alternates between wooden and hammy, but 
that conforms to our stereotype of silent film actors anyway and isn't 
necessarily a distraction.  The interesting cast also includes Leslie Caron, 
Felicity Kendal, Carol Kane, Michelle Phillips (from The Mamas and the 
Papas) and John Ratzenberger in a bit part.  And where on Earth did Russell 
dig up Huntz Hall?
By the film's end we are still left with the impression of Valentino as an 
icon, not a man.  It's a curious thing, which we might like to blame on the 
story, Russell's handling of the material or Nureyev's performance.  But I 
think the answer is simpler than that:  Valentino was and always will be an 
icon because although we know him by sight we have never heard him speak, 
henceforth freezing him in time exclusively by image.  He also died young, 
reinforcing that the image would never develop, grow old, or change.  
Valentino was, for all intents and purposes, the smoldering characters he 
presented on screen.  Could any biographical picture have transcended that 
legacy?  What attracted Russell to the project – Valentino's legend – is 
also the same thing that ensured his film would never be entirely 
successful.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
