Title
Review for Angels in the Outfield (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
John Walker
My form of "rating": I started boring people with my comments/praise
     as soon as I could; I think I bored practically everybody at
     work.  Also, the main theme stuck with me for a couple of hours
     after I left the show.  I probably have to get the soundtrack.
In Brief: As ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD itself says: you've got to
     *believe*:
     If you don't believe, nothing's going to happen.  If you do, one
     miracle comin' up.  You're about to get a dose of sentiment the
     like of which the '50s could only try to imitate, and the like of
     which succeeding decades have seldom even *tried* to imitate.
     ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD is a remake of the 1951 flick of the same
name.  (I don't run numbers, but I'll note that Leonard Maltin gives
the original three stars; Steven Scheuer gives it three and a half.)
     Roger Bowman (Joseph Gordon-Levitt), ten years old or so, is in a
temporary foster-care situation in the home of Maggie Nelson (Brenda
Fricker).  Roger is a fan of the rock-bottom total-losers last-place
Los Angeles Angels; his mother's dead; his apparently 20-something
father just isn't up to handling a kid.  After a rare meeting with his
father, in which he's been told that he's being handed over to the
courts, Roger asks his father:
     For his father, it's offbeat way to say never.  But Roger takes it
more literally.  That's what he prays for that night--not even sure
whether there's a God, he or she, much less whether there are angels.
     Of course, angels show up the next day, led by Al (Christopher
Lloyd).  Of course, only Roger can see them.  Of course, the angels
make the Angels win the game.
     The ill-tempered manager of the Angels, George Knox (Danny Glover)
can see that *something* odd has happened, and he finds out that Roger
can "see angels".  Roger and his younger cohort at Maggie's, J.P.
(Milton Davis, Jr), become sort of mascots--with Knox basically
following Roger's signals.
     The angels have their work cut out for them with a team of flakes
and goof balls--and a formerly great pitcher, Mel Clark (Tony Danza),
who only wants a chance to get back on the mound.  As the team turns
around with angelic boosting, the nearest this film has to a villain is
Ranch Wilder (Jay O. Sanders)--the Angels' announcer ("The *Voice* of
the Angels"), who tries to put down Knox and the team at every
opportunity.
     It's on the tube, but I don't think I've ever seen the original
version of ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD.  (Although maybe I have--because
one line hit me with deja vu all over again.  [And that, I think, will
be my *only* "baseball metaphor" in this review.])  Turner
Entertainment owns it now, and apparently it's *not* on video.  I hope
they bring it out.
     This 1994 ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD doesn't feel like a "remake" so
much as a "re-creation".  Yes, it's set in the '90s.  Yes, it's updated
a bit.  But its values, its outlook, its sentiments, and everything
about it are really from a time when Hollywood more or less actually
believed in the values and outlook of ordinary nobodies.  Even when
Hollywood didn't really believe, it exulted in expressing those views
-- doing so as a sort of noblesse oblige.
     This was, this *is*, a 1940s film.  (Ignore the technicality of
the 1951 date: The '50s didn't begin until noon, January 20, 1953.)
     Almost needless to say, this '94 version came from Walt Disney
Pictures.
     There are some nice touches in the updating, by the way.  One
updating will probably go unnoticed, and even reinforces the
hopefulness-quotient.  Jackie Robinson had only just broken the color
bar--in what?  '48?  '49?  But now the *manager* is black (as is
Roger's sidekick, J.P.).  An utterly trivial point, some might say, but
nice.
     So also, the presence of a team called the Angels provided a nice
opportunity.  (Dare I say a godsend?)  In 1951, the team was the
Pittsburgh Pirates--perhaps chosen because it was the most
*anti*-angelic name available at the time!
     In other respects, there's a slight amount more of contemporary
realism.  In descriptions of the 1951 film, Roger is an orphan.  Now,
there's an absent father who can't cope.
     Someone who knows the '51 version would have to comment on any
other changes.  The important thing is that the *values* seem to have
stayed the same.
     When you see MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET, do you see it as only a sort
of traditional Christmas thing?  Or do you really *like* it?  Do you
figure it says something, however sappy, that needs to be said?  Do you
want *more*?  Do you want it *now*?
     If you *do*, I think ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD will be a
no-compromises triumph for you.  (Have your parents [or grandparents]
grumbled that "they don't make 'em like they used to"?  If they don't
try to see this on the big screen, you're gonna be able to hold it over
their heads forever.  They weren't willing to put their money where
their mouth was.)
     If you're undecided, well, ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD will be a test
case.  Terms like "shameless manipulation" may come to mind.  To which
I which only respond, well, *yes*!  But shameless manipulation that's
*honest* shameless manipulation!  Shameless manipulation that's
*integral* to the whole film!  Shameless manipulation where it would
*betray* the whole spirit and soul of the film if it *weren't* there!
     Let's face it, lots of people approve of the values of the '30s
and '40s so long as those values are safely restricted to the '30s and
'40s.  If those values show up in a '90s film, then that film is felt
to be a *lie*.  Supposedly, *no one* can believe those things any more
-- they *must* be lying!  Even a remake has to be "intellectually"
updated, according to this view.
     And even many folks who are not so puritanically modernistic still
cannot quite bring themselves to go along.  Yes, they feel, it might
even be *better* if we could believe that stuff again--but, sigh,
well, who can?  We can suspend disbelief in events, even angels; but we
can't suspend disbelief in values, attitudes, and outlooks--even for
a remake.
     I'm trying to find something wrong with ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD.
     Gordon-Levitt carries a large chunk of the film.  He plays Roger
as all eagerness and hope at some times, and dealing with a basically
painful, lousy situation at others.  Given the role, he doesn't have to
deliver a gigantic range, but he projects Roger's emotions effectively
throughout.  He gives us a kid who may not understand what's going on,
but he wants it to work.  (He seems familiar.  I can't place where.  I
have to assume it's from some minor role or from one of my occasional
glimpses at the tube.  But it's sort of fun to imagine he might
resemble a kid in some 50- or 60-year-old flick!)
     Glover handles the manager's role easily.  He's able to be the
hard charger who checked his heart at the door, and then learn to ease
up--if only, at first, not to offend the angels!  Fricker just
radiates basic common sense and decency.  Lloyd is suitably wacky as
Al.  Danza is convincing in a dramatic role as the pitcher hanging on
tenacity and willpower, even while his arm is finding the job harder
and harder to do.  Sanders is particularly neat as the creep we're
hoping to see fall on his face.  His performance gave me one of the few
times when I could understand the idea of "the guy you love to hate".
     Davis makes his sweet little J.P. basically believable as well as
likable.  I think some may find the sweet a bit strong, but this is a
'40s remake.  (Let's face it, this film would be great for a suitable
'40s "New Yorker" cartoon--with director William Dear prompting Davis
or Gordon-Levitt: "In *this* take, I want you to *pluck* their
heartstrings rather than *tug* them!")
     Some of the team may be a little hard to take--they're divided
between modern and ethnic baseball-player types and types straight out
of 45-years-ago comedies.  (The types have never really left comedy,
but again I'd like to see the original to see how much is *directly*
from the past.)
     I suppose for at least some of us who *like* the '30s-'40s
sweetness and light, the too-obvious comic figures might be the first
candidate for expendability.  But the original is from the era of the
Bowery Boys and other staples who make its stereotypes look modest by
comparison.  If I have to put up with a few details that I think went
too far, that's a small price to pay for the rest of the film.
     The screenplay is by Dorothy Kingsley, George Wells, and Holly
Goldberg.  I've got to see the original if only to see what they
changed.  The music, by the way, is by Randy Edelman.  It moves nicely
between upbeat "contemporary" for some of the game scenes, and a full
cinematic treatment for maximum effect.
     So, where does that leave us?  Is the '94 version of ANGELS IN
THE OUTFIELD an anachronism?  *Of course!*  Is it wallowing in
sentiment?  *Undoubtedly!*  Is it "unrealistic"?  *Certainly!*
     But let it never be forgotten that those are *not* criticisms.
For some of us, they're not even mere descriptions.  They're virtues.
With a film like this, I like it not in spite of the fact that it is
"false", but *because* of it.  I can admire both CAMILLE CLAUDEL and
ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD: one for telling a painful truth, the other for
defying the same sort of truth.
     I don't expect angels to swoop down and get my work done for me.
God doesn't do dishes or fix flats.  But some mornings, just getting up
can be said to be a miracle, and plausible evidence of divine
intervention.
     It is precisely because ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD is impossible that
it is hopeful; it is because it is false, that it is true.
     End of basic review.  Comments requiring spoilers follow.
     One has to be careful of a religious issue like spoilers, so I
decided not to mention that if you saw the trailers, you got a synopsis
up through the climax.  At least when I saw it, I *knew* what was going
to happen.  (Although maybe that was subliminal memory from a forgotten
viewing)
     A more interesting spoiler concerns the ending itself.  Yes, I
*wanted* Roger's father to come back with a miracle.  But this is a
very fine ending--and perhaps better from the '40s-sentiment point of
view.  My tribute to the film (almost a "rating") is that I didn't
think of either the problem or its resolution until *after* I was out
of the theater.
     The funny thing was, that after I left the ending left me all
upbeat and whatnot, I suddenly turned somber.
     Knox is black, Roger is white.  Aren't most jurisdictions cool on
interracial adoption?  The neat thing, of course, is that J.P.'s being
black finesses at least part of the problem.  Moreover, it's a black
adult adopting a white kid.  It's not the problem of a minority kid's
sense of identity being swamped in a majority family in a majority
culture.  It's the minority guy who's the rescuer, even as the adult
was rescued, in spirit, by the kid.  Two very nice reversals, I think.
     Intriguingly, this is something a popular '40s flick could never
address.  The facts just weren't there.  The worlds were too separate.
Again, Jackie Robinson had only just started playing in the majors.
     Again, I don't think anyone necessarily *thought* about any of
this.  They might even have decided, "Hey, let's have a black manager,"
as an obvious way to update the film.  The bottom line, though, is that
it had to be someone like Glover--who was a good choice for the
role.  Perhaps someone decided to make J.P. black in response, but I
suspect it was all no big deal.
     The '40s were not unaware of the difficult balance between groups
keeping their own identity, and yet working together and recognizing
one another's worth.  This was the heyday of ethnic politics.  And then
and since then, we've always had to deal with the tendencies to
obliterate the differences in forced conformity, or to rule some groups
out of the community, or to split up into warring camps.  Presumably,
there has to be a better way.
     ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD just ignores the problem and focuses on the
simply human.  That resolution *fits*.  It's the sort of thing that
fits in with the whole spirit of the film.  Unnoticed, perhaps even
unconsciously, the people who put together the remake added something
that could only be added nearly 45 years after the original.
     If it's impossible, that's what makes it hopeful.  If it's false,
that's what makes it true.

Author
Joan Ellis
     Disney has served up one of each of the things it does best for
this summer's younger movie fans and the grownups who love to accompany
them.  ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD is an unashamed lunge for your
heartstrings, while THE LION KING is an invitation to watch the
extraordinary marriage of computer graphics with human animation.
     ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD bounces itself off the sure-fire subjects
of redemption, parentless children and snatching victory from the ashes
of defeat.  Roger, a young baseball fan, concocts the dream that his
dad will come home to him if his California Angels can win the
pennant.  Since the Angels are cellar-bound and dad is a dark and
dreary loser who rides his motorcycle with a cigarette dangling from
his lip, the possibility of either dream coming true is close to
zilch.
     But Roger prays, and the real angels hear him.  Flying in
throughout the season at critical moments, they steam a pitch, abort a
homer and supply the general sizzle needed to bring the moribund team
to life.  Coach George Knox (Danny Glover) is nasty in the early
scenes--all the better for his later redemption.
     Roger and his very cute sidekick run their operation from the home
of their warmly wise foster mother, Maggie (Brenda Fricker).  Watch for
another standout performance by Fricker, who manages to seem very real
in the midst of all this emotional manipulation.  The movie is massive,
sentimental overkill, but it's also a no-lose deal for everyone between
three and ten as well for big people who want to believe that an angel
is waiting at their shoulders to offer an assist in a tough situation.


Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Danny Glover, Christopher Lloyd, 
           Brenda Fricker, Tony Danza 
Director:  William Dear 
Producers:  Irby Smith, Joe Roth, and Roger Birnbaum 
Screenplay:  Dorothy Kingsley, George Wells, and Holly Goldberg 
Cinematography:  Matthew F. Leonetti 
Music:  Randy Edelman 
Released by Walt Disney Pictures 
HC:  Hello, and welcome back to the ballpark.  I'm your play-by-play 
     announcer Harry Canary, and joining me in the broadcast booth for 
     today's game is our guest color man, James Berardinelli.  Can I call 
     ya Jim? 
HC:  Okay, Jim.  If you don't mind my saying, you seem a little on the 
     grumpy side today.  Care to share with the listening audience why? 
JB:  Take a look who's coming up to bat, and you'll understand. 
JB:  Hard to believe.  Any time Disney tries their hand at live action, 
     though, the results are usually pretty poor.  Just not this bad. 
HC:  So, ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD stands in the box.  I have to admit, Jim, 
     it doesn't look too good from where I'm sitting. 
JB:  Yeah.  Check out the premise.  Some young kid named Roger (played by 
     Joseph Gordon-Levitt) is left at a temporary foster care home by a 
     father who says they can be a family again when the California 
     Angels win the pennant.  So, naturally, Roger starts praying for 
     that.  Presto!  Angels, led by the irrepressible Al (played by 
     Christopher Lloyd) appear, and the team starts winning in the most 
     amazing ways.  The crusty manager of the Angels, George Knox (played 
     by Danny Glover) can't believe what he's seeing as his team begins 
     the inevitable trek from worst to first. 
JB:  That's not the only thing it doesn't have any idea about.  For a 
     baseball movie, the script shows an amazing lack of fundamental 
     knowledge about the game.  Every sports aficionado knows that the 
     "Injured Reserve List" is not a baseball term.  In this sport, it's 
     called the "Disabled List."  Such simple, basic mistakes rankle.  
     And there are lots of them. 
HC:  Well, at least ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD gets the clubhouse spirit 
     right, doesn't it? 
JB:  No.  This is somebody's idea of what it might be like in a rowdy 
     clubhouse, and bears no resemblance to anything real.  Sure, the 
     film is basically a fantasy, but its depiction of the reality it 
     wants to be grounded in is ludicrous. 
JB:  It's in a deeper hole than that.  There's so much wrong that it will 
     be difficult to cover everything in the course of a single at-bat. 
JB:  Take the ending.  It's so sweet, it makes you want to gag.  Then 
     there's the film's view on religion.  The screenwriters want to use 
     angels--which are spiritual creatures by nature--but they don't 
     want to offend anyone, so they come up with some namby-pamby, broad, 
     meaningless definition of God and His or Her minions. 
JB:  Then there's the acting.  Suffice it to say that Tony Danza gives 
     one of the most "impressive" performances, and young Joseph Gordon-
     Levitt has serious credibility problems.  Danny Glover looks 
     embarrassed. 
HC:  Forgive me for asking this, but why bother going to a movie that's 
     this bad?  I mean, you obviously couldn't have known for sure 
     beforehand, but the previews look pretty dumb. 
JB:  I always like to give baseball movies a chance.  Every once in a 
     while, something decent comes along, like EIGHT MEN OUT.  
     Unfortunately, that was a few years ago. 
HC:  Okay.  Well, the pitcher's back into his windup, and here's the next 
     pitch.  Swing and a miss.  Strike Three!  And ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD 
     is outta there on three straight strikes. 
JB:  No more than it deserves, and if I have to sit through another bad 
     baseball movie, I'll.... 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
