Title
Review for Topio stin omichli (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LANDSCAPE IN THE MIST  (director: Theo Angelopoulos; cast: Michalis Zeke
(Alexandre), Tania Palaiologou (Voula), Stratos Tzortzoglou (Oreste),
Vassilis Kolovos (Truck driver), Dimitris Kaberidis (Uncle), 1988-Greek)
None of us know where we are going, could be the theme for this road
movie, which is more intense and somber than most other movies of this
ilk. The plot is very simple, a small boy and a slightly older girl want
to go to their father, who their Greek mother told them is living in
Germany. They don't know his name or have his address, or for that
matter know if he really exists, yet one day they steal aboard a train
and they are heading north, through the Greek countryside, their
destination being Germany. Trains are always mysterious places for
travelers, they take on their own strange landscape.This Greek
travelogue is definetly not a touristy one, the itinerary is
frightening, the barrenness of the stations is eerie, the mood is
strikingly joyless, as these kids are living in a dream world, seeing in
their dreams a father they never knew but deeply yearn for. When they
are caught by the conductor as possible runaways and are turned over to
the authorities, all they manage to say is that they are going to their
uncle's place. It turns out that they do have an uncle in this
small-town, but when he meets with the police, he tells them that he
can't take responsibility for these kids, that his sister lied to them
about their father, because she didn't want to tell them that they were
illegitimate.The girl overhears this, but refuses to believe it, running
away with the boy, as they continue hitchhiking  north.
They are picked up by a miserable truck driver, and are subject to his
depravity. Their dreamlike odyssey, nevertheless, continuing, ever
moving northward. One of the more interesting and better people they
meet, is Orestes, a young man on a motorcycle, a roadie for an acting
troupe, a loner about to go into the army. He becomes a father figure to
the kids, his silence and mythic presence is a tower of strength to the
frightened and lost kids, who can't open up to him and tell him where
they are going, they can only tell him that they are heading north. He
vows to help them get on the train, he sees that as his special mission.
His youth can be viewed in contrast to the old country dying all around
him. His goodness and restlessness represents the hope of the country.
The north represents the unknown, a place of childhood fantasies.
The question asked, is why carry on, if you can't reach where you are
going? The subtle answer, probably lies in what lies beyond the mist,
there must be something to believe in, even if you can't see it.
The camera work is stupendous, capturing in total the dreamlike quality
of the film. We witness a wedding in the snow, a giant hand of creation
being lifted out of the sea by a crane, and the innocent kids gazing out
at a world of adults that is incomprehensible to them. The mood is so
harsh, even biblical in scope, that when it asks the question in its
voice-over, "If I were to shout, who would hear me?" We are left
speechless, knowing that we are ruled by fate, that the poor kids, whose
plight tugs at our heartstrings, will not be given an easy way out of
their predicament. This film is not a soapy Hollywood production, it is
a film that is meant to haunt us, to make us ask questions that we
cannot easily answer.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Screened at the San Francisco International Film Festival (March 12, 1989).
Synopsis:
     Two young Greek children set off on an odyssey to find their Father.
Their voyage takes them through a world dominated by adults, a strange, surreal,
and savage world.  A depressing, disturbing film.
Greece (Greek with English subtitles), 1988, color, 127 minutes.
Director/Producer: Theo Angelopoulos
Screenplay: Theo Angelopoulos, Tonino Guerra, Thanassis Valtinos
Principal Cast: Michalis Zeke, Tania Palaiologou, Stratos Tzortzoglou
     The time is the present, the place: Greece.  Two young children, Alexander
(6 years old) and his sister Voula (11 years old) go to the Athens train
station every night to await the return of their Father, a man they have never
met or even seen pictures of.  Their Father never arrives, and the children,
desperate to find him, jump on a train to go to far-off Germany, where they
believe their Father is to be found.
     Thus begins the children's odyssey in the world of adults, as seen through
their eyes.  It isn't long before they are discovered by the train Conductor,
and turned over to the Police.  They tell the Police that they are on their way
to visit their Uncle.  When delivered to their Uncle, he repudiates them,
telling the Police that he doesn't want to get involved, for the children are
illegitimate.  This is overheard by the girl, and she is very angry.  The
children are then taken to the Police station.  At this point it starts to
snow, which causes all the Police to go outside and stand like statues
(literally) watching it snow.  This allows the children to make a convenient
escape, and continue their travels.
     The children stubbornly continue their journey to Germany, and are
alternately befriended, exploited, and brutalized by adults along the way.  A
member of a traveling theatre company helps them in their trip to the "border."
     The adult world, as seen through the children's eyes, is a strange place
indeed.  For some reason, these adults are in the habit of standing as still as
statues whenever the Director thinks it is convenient.  Although this tends to
give the picture a "surreal" feel, it is also quite ridiculous!
     The picture of the adult world that this picture paints is bleak and
despairing, cruel and savage.  Be warned that there are some shocking scenes in
this picture.  In particular, there is a scene where a live horse is dragged on
its side, down the road by a tractor.  The rope breaks and the horse dies
(apparently in great pain) in front of the children.  As the horse dies, a
wedding party emerges from a building in the background; they are celebrating a
joyous wedding.  The Director may have been trying to produce a great contrast
here; all he succeeded in doing was disgusting me.
     This film makes a very large emotional impact on the viewer.
Unfortunately, the emotions it raises are: despair, depression, shock, and
anger.  It has been a long time since I have seen such a depressing film!  In a
certain sense, it is reasonable to describe this as a "real life horror film."
     If you go to the movies to wallow in depression, then this is the movie
for you!  If you go to enjoy yourself, than avoid the pain by avoiding this
film!
Reviewer: Thomas E. Billings; Department of Statistics
          University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact: teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
