Title
Review for Arachnophobia (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One tends to expect new ideas in films from Steven Spielberg's Amblin
Entertainment.  And with Disney Enterprises starting a new film branch,
Hollywood Pictures, you would expect something fairly original to inaugurate
the new label.  That makes it all the more puzzling that this collaboration
between Amblin Entertainment and Hollywood Pictures would be a plot that was
already old when Spielberg made CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND .  There
have already been so many "Invasion of the Killer Vermin" films that one
more is no novelty.  In other films we have seen people threatened by
infestations of spiders, ants, birds, slugs, rats, bats, feral dogs, bears,
even frogs.   (Don't ask me how you make a threat out of a frog; I saw the
film and still don't know.  You have to be pretty desperate for phobias to
make a film about killer frogs!)  However well a new film of this type is
done, and ARACHNOPHOBIA was nicely executed, there is not much new you can
put into a film about a small town threatened by an infestation of deadly
spiders.
     The idea of the film is that there is a prehistoric breed of spider--
one with a very different social structure from what modern spiders have--
living isolated in the jungles of Venezuela.  This breed of spider has a
"king" and a bunch of drones, much like bees have with a queen and drones.
That is something of a stretch since spiders are much more closely related
to sea crustaceans than they are to insects.  A plot device that could have
been devised by Rube Goldberg takes the king spider and drops him (quite
literally) into the backyard of a new doctor in a small California town.
Dr.~Ross Jennings (played by Jeff Daniels) has a bugaboo about spiders and
the fact that he has a barn full of them is only one of the many problems he
is facing as a result of moving to Canaima, California, from San Francisco.
There are, in fact, many elements of the plot that executive producer Steven
Spielberg might have found extremely familiar.  We have one lone man, who is
not really accepted by his town, who has to convince disbelieving officials
that they have a problem.  He has his own phobias to overcome, but the love
of his family, charmingly portrayed, convinces him that he has to overcome
his fears and see that the problem gets solved.  Luckily he has a
knowledgeable expert he can call on to help him out and to explain to the
audience how scary the situation really is.  Surely all this must have rung
a bell somewhere in Spielberg's memory.
     What is nice about the film is that it takes the time to develop
characters so that the audience has some understanding and empathy invested
in them.  That too makes the film seem as if it were really a 1970s film.
The viewer gets to know the people who are threatened by the spiders--not as
well as you get to know the Brodie family in JAWS, but far better than you
know anyone in most current horror films.  Nobody follows the new popular
formula of being introduced and making vacuous or stereotyped conversation,
then being quickly dispatched to nobody's regret.
     The effects work usually is believable, though occasionally a spider
just does not scramble right.  A fair number of live spiders were also sued
and unfortunately the film bears no endorsement of the filming practices by
any humane society.
     ARACHNOPHOBIA is entertaining and has some genuinely creepy moments,
but lacks anything that really distinguishes it from other films with very
similar plots and approaches.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chris J Hillery
     *Do not* see this movie if you actually are affected by
arachnophobia (fear of spiders, in case you didn't know).  The friend I
saw this with is a severe arachnophobe, and he practically broke the
poor chair he was sitting in by flying out of it so hard.  If you can
guess from this that this is a scary movie, well, it is.  While it is
marketing itself as a "Thrill-omedy," this movie has much more thrill
than "omedy," which is fine if that's what you're prepared for.  It also
spends a good deal of its time in extreme close-ups of spiders in
action, hence the opening warning.
     Basic plot synopsis: a large (!) and ill-tempered South American
spider (a new species no one knew of previously, natch) hitches a ride
to a small backwoods town in the coffin of a photographer whom it had
killed in the  jungle.  It escapes into the local woods, where it mates
with a local spider and creates a whole bunch of deadly toxic
mean-spirited little spiders, which take off to terrorize the town.
     Most of this movie centers around the new local doctor's struggle
to get people to believe that the deaths of several people were not
cardiac arrests brought about by his own negligence, as the old doctor
would have it, but are in fact attributable to these spiders.  Once real
evidence is found for this, a regional spider expert is brought in, and
the ground is laid for a plan to rid the town of the threat, leading (of
course) to a grand confrontation  between the grandaddy spider and the
doctor, who (of course) has a serious fear of spiders due (of course) to
an incident in his infancy.
     You might have notice that this summary makes no mention of the
role of the exterminator, played by John Goodman, who is in all the
commercials.  This is because, unfortunately, he has very little screen
time and is not at all important to the plot or development.  This is a
real shame, and a great waste of both a good character and a good actor.
The scenes involving Goodman are uniformly quite funny, as his role as
the down-n-dirty and rather thick-headed exterminator is ideal for him
and played to the hilt.  If this movie had been, as I suspected,
Goodman's first real starring role and centered on his battle against
the spiders with his spray-gun, this could have been a truly hysterical
movie, while still being a thriller.
     Luckily, the movie isn't a total loss without this; indeed,it's a
reasonably enjoyable flick with many good scares (plenty of spiders
flying around) and quite a few laughs along the way.  It's pretty
formulaic, beyond its unique plot device, but still well-done; the plot
and tension build nicely if a bit slowly, and the climax is quite, well,
climactic.  All the important characters are pretty well fleshed out.
The plot is sensible and has several sub-plots which interact quite
nicely.  And so on.
     All in all, this is a "solid" movie.  It could have been much
better had it been, as it is being marketed as, a movie starring John
Goodman as the back- woods exterminator on a mission to save the town;
that could have been made into a truly funny, cornball movie based on a
thriller, in the same style as the classic GHOSTBUSTERS (the first one,
of course).  However, when you realize that it isn't that movie, you can
enjoy what it is.  Check it out; it's worth a look.
     Please note that the "Overall" ratings above are in no way intended to be
a summation of the previous ratings, but instead a true rating of how good the
movie was taken as a whole.  Four categories are not enough to rate all aspects
of a movie, neither should all four be weighted equally.  For instance, the
rating for Thrills in GHOSTBUSTERS above was quite low, but that wasn't what
the movie was intended to be about; whereas Thrills were central to ARACHNO-
PHOBIA.  The reason I chose to compare it to GHOSTBUSTERS was, as I said, that
ARACHNOPHOBIA was marketed to appear to be a similar type film.
-- 
-- Ceej    (=
ceej@pawl.rpi.edu
gmry@mts.rpi.edu
aka Chris Hillery

Author
Frankie Paiva
The back of the video box for Arachnophobia is deceiving. It markets itself as
a horror movie with a comedic side and it's anything but that. What begins as a
cool idea for a horror movie (out in the tropical rainforest) trying to find
old species of spiders and other creepy crawlies (OK, I admit that word is
extremely hokey.) But once the film gets off to it's interesting start, and the
story is set up, it's all down hill from there.
Ross (Daniels in one of his non-comedic roles) and Molly (Jane Kozak) have just
moved to a lovely small town in California from San Francisco. But he's
frightened when his wife shows him a huge spider web in their barn because he's
an arachnophobic, someone who is afraid of spiders. He's destined to become the
local doctor when the town's current doctor retires, but when he decides not to
throw in the towel yet, his job is insecure. When a throws a party for everyone
in the town and someone is killed shortly thereafter he begins to wonder.
Naturally the spiders take over, killing and sucking the blood of all of the
surrounding areas from their house. A spider from South America and a domestic
house spider have bred a whole new deadly species who's headquarters is in
Ross's barn. It takes them more than three fourths of the movie to figure this
out, but the movie shows you the solution in minutes.
While having it's creepy moments, Arachnophobia isn't that scary. Hollywood has
once again easily taken something that's almost harmless and turned it into the
evil villain. Everyone in the film realizes that they are in a cheesy movie and
they pretty much play it to the limit. The film isn't funny at all (but the
video package won't tell you that.) If you enjoy a film that will have you
checking your bed, shower, or other household appliances for weeks, rent
Arachnophobia which gets * 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains some brief graphic spider bites and related
goo and gore. It also contains some language. Good Age: 10 & Up, if they can
handle spiders
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
