Title
Review for Hideaway (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 3/3/95  
Running Length: 1:45 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, sex, mature themes) 
Starring: Jeff Goldblum, Christine Lahti, Alicia Silverstone, 
          Alfred Molina, Jeremy Sisto 
Director: Brett Leonard 
Producers: Jerry Baerwitz, Agatha Hanczakowski, and Gimel Everett 
Screenplay: Andrew Kevin Walker and Neal Jiminez based on the novel by 
            Dean R. Koontz 
Cinematography: Gale Tattersall 
Music: Trevor Jones 
Released by TriStar Pictures 
     HIDEAWAY, director Brett Leonard's adaptation of the novel by Dean 
R. Koontz, is about a man who is resuscitated after having crossed 
death's threshold.  Considering what happens after Hatch Harrison is 
reborn, it might have been better for everyone--both the characters in 
the film and those unfortunate souls in the audience--had he stayed 
dead.  In fact, this entire production should have been consigned to a 
very deep grave. 
     Jeff Goldblum plays Hatch, a man with a more serious problem than 
his unorthodox, pulp-fiction like name.  After "dying" in a car crash, he 
is revived by a brilliant doctor (Alfred Molina), but since his return, 
he has started having all sorts of sick visions.  Apparently, he has 
brought something back with him from the other side, and now he has a 
bizarre symbiotic relationship with a serial killer.  Each can "see" 
through the other's eyes.  And the sicko has decided that Hatch's 
daughter Regina (Alicia Silverstone) might make a tasty victim. 
     If an excruciatingly bad ending can ruin a good movie, what can it 
do to a film that's already beyond redemption?  HIDEAWAY provides an 
emphatic answer to that question.  As the climax unfolds, with its deluge 
of computer-generated not-all-that-special effects, jaws are likely to 
drop--not at the wonder of the images, but at the mind-boggling 
stupidity of what's happening.  And don't be surprised if there are a few 
snickers, as well.   
     If nothing else, the concluding pyrotechnics roused me from the 
stupor the rest of the movie had put me into.  In this case, spending 
over one-hundred minutes with Jeff Goldblum and Christine Lahti becomes a 
trying experience, especially considering the moronic level of the plot.  
Lahti is adequate as the worried wife, but the normally-reliable Goldblum 
is unconvincing, never connecting with his character or the audience.  
And, based on the merit of her performance here, Alicia Silverstone (last 
seen terrorizing Cary Elwes in THE CRUSH) isn't ready for an Oscar 
nomination, either.   
     Early on, HIDEAWAY almost fools its audience, but it doesn't take 
long for us to realize that we're not watching a legitimate psychological 
thriller.  HIDEAWAY is pretty poor entertainment, and what starts out as 
a superficial trip into the occult ends with a pointless, overblown fight 
to the death.  "Overblown" is the key word here, because a pair of very 
special supernatural entities make cameo appearances.  I don't want to 
drop any names, but one of them was a lot more impressive handing 
Charlton Heston some tablets in THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 
     I haven't read the book by Koontz upon which this material is based, 
but the author himself seems extremely put out by what appears on screen, 
having publicly stated the he finds it "astonishingly incoherent, filled 
with contradictions and moronic logic."  Not exactly a ringing 
endorsement.  And as for how Neal Jiminez (THE WATERDANCE) got mixed up 
in this--well, even the most promising writers have bad days.  
Hopefully, HIDEAWAY will go away ... fast. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Jon A. Webb
Directed by Brett Leonard
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker and Neal Jimenez
With Jeff Goldblum (Hatch), Christine Lahti (Lindsey),
     Alicia Silverstone (Regina), Jeremy Sisto (Vassago).
     This is a standard horror film, with average direction and writing
for this genre (which is to say, they aren't too great).  Production
values are pretty good; the effects, which seem familiar to me from
previews and other promotion of THE LAWNMOWER MAN are probably the
best thing technically about this film--though I this particular class
of computer effects has been used up.
     The role for Jeff Goldblum is weak but okay; the other actors
don't have an awful lot to do except the usual--run around and act
scared or diabolical as the case may be.
     The story opens nicely, with a creepy Satanic murder-suicide.
Jeff Goldblum is then in an accident and dies, experiencing special
effects oddly reminiscent of the wormhole from STAR TREK: DEEP SPACE
NINE.  When he comes back, he starts experiencing visions of violent
murders.  It took me a while to figure out what was going on--maybe I
wasn't too quick on the uptake here but I found the false leads and
their resolution pretty satisfying.
     Jeff Goldblum spends quite a bit of time trying to figure out
what's going on.  Most of this time he doesn't have much to do but sit
around and look puzzled, have visions, scribble, or make phone calls to
the police.  Given this limitation, he's pretty successful at making
this part of the film fun to watch.  I don't know how many times he has
to act like he's seeing something elsewhere which leads him to some
great insight--but each time he manages to do it a little differently.
This shows how a good actor can help save a film with weak writing.
     Jeremy Sisto has a nice greasy creepiness to him; he brings
something extra to his role, and is fun to watch.  I can see him quite
easily as every (horror movie) father's greatest fear; the nice-looking
young man his daughter brings home who sees the girl not as a work of
art, but as raw materials.
     I would have liked this film a lot better if it has been a little
more campy.  The scene at the end, with the appearance of the younger
daughter, would have been enhanced a hell of a lot if when we see
Alicia Silverstone's face she was allowed to roll her eyes a little
("They're *still* thinking about her!  What, am I invisible?")  If
you're making a film like this, and you can't make it really good, try
to make it really fun.  All the raw materials were there (silly father,
roller coaster, shotgun, etc.)
     All in all I'd give this film a B for the good acting of Jeff
Goldblum and Jeremy Sisto and the okay special effects.  If you really
enjoy this sort of thing, you'll probably enjoy this one; but I
wouldn't go expecting to be scared or intrigued much.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Dean Koontz reportedly asked to have his name taken off HIDEAWAY
and it's easy to see why.  The author's voice is nowhere to be found in
this absurd adaptation of his 1993 bestseller.  Koontz writes about men
with mysteries--mysteries that take half the novel to unravel.  His
stories work because the author never tips his hand too soon.  Here,
the secrets are revealed at the very beginning.
     The first scenes explain the psychic relationship between two
strangers:  the loving husband Hatch (Jeff Goldblum) and a teenage
serial killer (Jeremy Sisto).  With the big mystery solved so early,
the plot has nowhere to go.  The story can only devolve into simple
scare tactics.
     Sure, cheap thrills are fine for some.  HIDEAWAY can certainly
hold its own against any slasher pic.  The plot is only mildly awful,
and the actors actually can.  There is a slight problem with the bad
guy, though--he's about as threatening as a member of Spinal Tap.
Maybe if he wore a hockey mask..

Author
Robin Shortt
     If the movie adaptation of Dean R. Koontz's novel HIDEAWAY is
anything to go by, then the lightshow you get when you kick the bucket
almost makes dying worth it.  The afterlife scenes--the movie's
principal special effect--make the most imaginative use of CGI that
I've seen in a film (certainly far outclassing the effects in THE
LAWNMOWER MAN).
     The story begins--notwithstanding a powerful, chilling opening
sequence--with Hatch Harrison's (Goldblum) 'death' in a car
accident.  After two hours clinically dead, he is resusitated (by a
team of medics led by Alfred Molina) and appears to fully recover.
     But, as the movie's tagline suggests, he hasn't come back alone.
A series of visions (also using inspired CGI) leads Hatch to believe
he's developed a psychic link with a psychotic killer who preys on
young girls--and has developed an interest in Hatch's own daughter
Regina (Alicia Silverstone).
     What really makes HIDEAWAY work are the performances by Goldblum
and Jeremy Sisto (as the killer).  Goldblum is utterly authentic as
Hatch--his low key performance never seems anything but real.  Sisto is
a perfect villain, and imbues his character with enough personality to
even make him (barely) sympathetic.
     The other cast members turn in solid performances.  Christine
Lahti, as Hatch's wife, more or less reprises her role in THE DOCTOR.
Alicia Silverstone is believable as Regina.  Alfred Molina has the same
problem he had with SPECIES--his character's a walking plot device,
with no real purpose except to move the story along, but he does what
he can with his limited role.
     I'd give HIDEAWAY a "thumbs up".  It covers more or less the same
territory as THE CROW, and I'd say it failed where THE CROW succeeded
(director Brett Leonard doesn't have the style of Alex Proyas) and
succeeds where THE CROW failed (HIDEAWAY's characters have more
substance and are much more sympathetic than those of Proyas' film).
     If nothing else, see it for the CGI graphics and the pounding
score (featuring music by Fear Factory and Godflesh) which is great and
keeps the film moving.
NOTE: Be sure to stick around during the credits, there's more after they
finish.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jeff Goldblum, Christine Lahti, Jeremy Sisto, Alicia
Silverstone, Alfred Molina.
Screenplay:  Andrew Kevin Walker and Neal Jimenez
Director:  Brett Leonard.
     Thriller-cum-horror films tend to come in two basic flavors.
On one end you've got your high-school audience slasher film, one of
those infinitely sequeled flicks based on a charismatic killer named
Freddy or Chuckie or Pinhead; on the other end is your moody,
upscale thriller, something that genuinely tries to be creepy and
doesn't depend entirely on bursts of music or a cat leaping out at
someone.  There are about ten times as many of the former as the
latter, and as a result I limit the films in the genre that I choose
to see to those I have some moderate hope for.  HIDEAWAY could have
been one of the rare quality efforts, but instead of being
ambitious, it's mostly just pretentious and gimmicky, and pretty
dull besides.
     HIDEAWAY stars Jeff Goldblum as Hatch Harrison, a man returning
from a vacation with his wife Lindsey (Christine Lahti) and daughter
Regina (Alicia Silverstone) when the family car is hit by a truck
and sent over an embankment.  Lindsey and Regina survive, but Hatch
seems lost, until a doctor (Alfred Molina) uses an experimental
technique to bring him back from clinical death.  Naturally, there
are a few side effects:  headaches, trouble sleeping and an
unsettling tendency to see visions of murders.  Soon Hatch begins to
believe that he has become psychically connected to a young killer
who calls himself Vassago (Jeremy Sisto), and who appears to want to
make Regina his next victim.
     Based on the novel by Dean Koontz, HIDEAWAY has some fairly
promising psychological material at its core.  We learn that the
Harrisons recently lost another daughter in a hit-and-run accident,
an accident for which Hatch feels he is partly to blame, leading
Lindsey to conclude that Hatch's "visions" of Regina in danger are a
manifestation of is need to redeem himself by saving his other
daughter.  There are also some potentially intriguing sexual
dynamics involved in Hatch's psychic voyeurism of his daughter being
seduced by Vassago.  These issues could have been utilized to make
HIDEAWAY something more than standard issue supernatural horror
fare, but director Brett Leonard refuses to let character matter.
While not nearly as techno-happy as he was in his previous film THE
LAWNMOWER MAN, Leonard still makes HIDEAWAY too much about filtered
shots (used to simulate Hatch's visions) and some absurd computer-
generated visions of the afterlife.
     At least the computer tricks are moderately interesting to look
at.  HIDEAWAY is mostly a big fat bore, full of performances which
could politely be called somnabulistic.  Jeff Goldblum takes his
halting, shifty-eyed, big-hand-gesture delivery and transforms
himself into...Jeff Goldblum.  It often appears as though in between
takes he was watching his own performance in THE FLY and wondering,
"How did I do that?"  Christine Lahti is solid as his wife, limited
mostly to looks of fear and worry, but she is convincing at both;
Alicia Silverstone, on the other hand, is just another nymphet in a
mini-skirt.  It is Jeremy Sisto who really deserves our pity,
though.  His teen psycho could have been fascinating and even
sympathetic, but he is turned into a tiresome heavy-metal-listenin',
sunglasses-at-night-wearin', virgin-sacrificin',
black-candle-lightin', devil-worshippin' plot device.  Satanists
everywhere should protest that this guy is ruining their image.
     HIDEAWAY completely implodes with a preposterous climax which
reduces the eternal battle between good and evil to a cool
psychedelic light show, with a life-affirming vision from beyond
thrown in for good measure.  It is, however, merely the logical
culmination of an incompetent directing job which can't even seem to
do cliches right.  HIDEAWAY is a good idea for a thriller; if only
it had been scary.  Or different.  Or *something*.
