Title
Review for Malli (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Whoever said that girls are made of sugar and spice and
everything nice never met Malli, the title character of Santosh
Sivan's searing portrayal of a teen-age terrorist brainwashed
into thinking that she is doing something beneficial for her
people.  Filming in the Indian states Madras and Kerala with
all dialogue in the Tamil language, Santosh graphically
represents a 19-year-old beauty who can look you right in the
eye for several moments, then fire off a few rounds from her
machine gun straight into your head.  And if you should turn
you back on her, don't be surprised to find a club cracking
your skull not once but a dozen times or so.  Malli is not the
first young woman that the movies portray as a murderer. 
Bridget Fonda did a wonderful job some years ago in John
Badham's "Point of No Return."  But she is one of the few
females we have seen on the screen who allegedly commits
her assassinations for political reasons.  Malli, played in a
clear-eyed, sincere way by the lovely Ayesha Dharkar, is a
recruit for a terrorist group in India fighting against its own
allegedly repressive government.  The film could not have
been introduced to the U.S. in a more timely way, given the
recent hijacking of an Indian Airlines plane by a trio of
guerrillas who demanded the release of Kashmiris held in
Indian jails.
  While the Rajiv Gandhi assassination was the starting point
for director Sivan's film, he shows Malli and a group of
women about her age in a guerrilla training camp to be
lacking a real footing in politics.  Though she is told that what
she is doing is for "her people," she is uneducated and naive,
her real motive being to avenge the death of her brother at
the hands of an Indian soldier.  That being the case, Sivan
tells us nothing about the nature of the so-called political
repression in India today, focusing all of his attention on the
title character who is simply adored by Sivan's camera.  (The
director does the lensing himself in what he calls a no-budget
film using non-professional actors who acquit themselves
expertly--so much so that one wonders whether actors are
born and whether acting schools make that much difference!)
   Taking in the lovely colors of the southeastern Indian states
of Madras and Kerala, Sivan shows Malli joining the same
group that captivated her slain brother, eagerly volunteering
and competing with a half dozen of her peers to take on a
suicide mission.  With a lunch meeting with the leader
deemed a sufficient payment for agreeing to give up her life,
Malli is praised as future martyr who'd always be
remembered by the Indian people.  She is then sent on a
odyssey to a place in which a VIP is to hold a brief
ceremony.  Her task is to place a garland around the
important man's neck and then to detonate plastic explosives
tied about her waist.
   Having carried out thirty successful missions against the
Indian army, Malli confidently follows the path to the
designated town and, in the movie's one decent thrust at
comic relief forms a relationship with an eccentric farmer with
whom she is housed, dining with him, in that brief time
essentially relating to him as though he were her grandfather.
It's not long before her humanity competes with her blood
lust.  For the remainder of the movie Sivan keeps his
audience eager to learn whether Malli will carry through her
leader's plan to blow herself and her appointed victim up or
surrender to her compassion for life for the first time in her
adolescent life.
   As Malli, Ayesha Dharkar doesn't talk much, which is all to
the good.  Her facial gestures tell us what goes on in her
mind, with Sivan wisely selecting close-up photography for a
good part of the story.  Dharkar is most sympathetic when
she takes a shower and examines her nails and long hair,
and when she inspects some photos on the wall of the
farmer's cottage, pretending that she is a debutante primping
to meet her admirers.  Instead of dialogue, for the most part,
she murmurs and moans incessantly and breathes heavily, to
the extent that a guy entering the theater with closed eyes
might believe he's watching "Debbie Does Dallas" rather than
"Malli Does Madras."  All in all, "The Terrorist" is effective 
cinema, showing what a talented director can accomplish with
just a few rupees and a dedicated crew able to take their
assignments without real compensation and to portray their
characters in an unaffected manner.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
