Title
Review for While You Were Sleeping (1995)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 4/21/95 
Running Length: 1:43 
MPAA Classification: PG (Nothing offensive) 
Starring: Sandra Bullock, Bill Pullman, Peter Gallagher, Peter Boyle, 
          Glynis Johns, Jack Warden, Monica Keena 
Director: Jon Turtletaub 
Producer: Roger Birnbaum 
Screenplay: Fred Lebow and Dan Sullivan 
Cinematography: Phedon Papamichael 
Music: Randy Edelman 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     While it's true that making good romantic comedies is still 
something of an art, producing average films of the genre has become a 
science.  Take a little chemistry, a portion of physics, some basic 
biology, and mix them together according to a well-understood formula, 
and you have a result guaranteed to give audiences everywhere that 
mushy, feel-good sensation they crave.  WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, a movie 
likely to appeal to the SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE crowd, is a perfect example 
of this unoriginal-but-enjoyable type of film making. 
     The story opens with a voiceover as the camera gives us the sights 
of modern-day Chicago.  We are introduced to our narrator, Lucy (Sandra 
Bullock), a token collector for the local transit company.  After 
explaining that life never turns out as you expect, she tells us about 
this guy (Peter Gallagher) that she's had her eye on for the past three 
months.  Since mid-September, he's arrived at her booth every weekday 
morning between 8:01 and 8:15, brightening her day with a smile.  She 
wants to marry him, even though she doesn't know anything about him. 
     Then, on Christmas day, fate intercedes.  As the object of Lucy's 
romantic fantasies waits on the platform, a pair of muggers confront 
him.  He loses his balance and ends up unconscious on the tracks in the 
path of an approaching train.  Lucy takes action, saving his life.  She 
then accompanies him to the hospital and, when a nurse overhears her 
murmuring something wishful about marrying the man, the 
misunderstandings begin.  Suddenly, the patient's entire family is 
convinced that their son Peter's rescuer is also his fiancee.  Everyone, 
that is, except brother Jack (Bill Pullman), who sees Lucy not as 
Peter's type, but as his own. 
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a pleasant movie that looks like it was 
originally designed for a Christmas release.  Considering 1994's 
pathetic holiday fare (MIXED NUTS, TRAPPED IN PARADISE), it would have 
been welcome.  Nevertheless, no love story is confined by a time of 
year, and this one works nearly as well in April as in December.  After 
all, people fall in love during all seasons. 
     The story has a little more depth than the usual romantic drivel.  
Lucy is a very lonely woman, and her loneliness is set up as the 
motivation for her becoming a party to the central deception.  She 
pretends to be Peter's fiancee not because she really expects to marry 
him, but because she has no family, and the parents and siblings of her 
supposed husband-to-be are delighted to take her into their fold.  In 
her own words, all she has to come home to is "a cat, an apartment, and 
sole possession of the remote control... just no one to laugh with."   
     The love story between Lucy and Jack starts late (the male half of 
the pair doesn't make his first appearance until 30 minutes into the 
film) and is only sketchily developed.  The relationship is warm but not 
especially passionate.  There certainly aren't any sparks, and physical 
contact is limited to a kiss under the mistletoe.  It's easy to accept 
Lucy and Jack as best friends; but more difficult to see them as lovers.  
In some ways, this restrained view of love and sex is a throwback to 
Hollywood's early era. 
     Sandra Bullock (SPEED) is an amazingly engaging performer.  Though 
not the best actress of her generation, she has a winning smile and a 
variety of noteworthy expressions.  She's perhaps at her best looking 
bewildered, and this movie gives her plenty of opportunities to do that.  
Bill Pullman is equally likeable, and it's refreshing to see him finally 
get the girl (he was the sap who gave up Meg Ryan in SLEEPLESS IN 
SEATTLE).  The supporting cast is okay, although everyone appears a 
little too cheerful for a family whose son is in a coma. 
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING has its share of nice moments, none of 
which are especially memorable.  The plot runs out of steam just past 
the one-hour mark and the charade, although necessary to the story, goes 
on for too long.  The ending is, of course, the requisite happy one, but 
it seems a little anticlimactic.  And we definitely don't need Bullock's 
narration to supply us with the meaning of the title.  All-in-all, WHILE 
YOU WERE SLEEPING delivers what it advertises:  no surprises, but a load 
of warm feelings. 
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a gem of a movie.  It tells the tale of
a lonely Chicago subway toll collector named Lucy (Sandra Bullock).
She dreams of speaking to a dashingly handsome guy called Peter
Callahan (Peter Gallagher) who passes by her tollbooth every day
without speaking.  She lives in a small apartment and her conversations
consist of talking to her cat or to local nominal ladies' man and
actual slimeball called Joe Jr. (Michael Rispoli).
     One cold Christmas day Peter speaks to her, but her mouth turns to
mush and she is unable to respond.  An unhappy series of events turns
her would be lover into a vegetable.  While Lucy is checking on him in
his comatose state in the hospital, his family (Peter Boyle, Glynis
Johns, Micole Mercurio, et. al.) decides that Lucy is Peter's fiance.
She is going to tell them the truth, but she falls in love with the
whole family and can not bring herself to do it.  Jack Warden plays
Peter's godfather and the only one who knows Lucy's secret.
     The problems really set in when Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pulman)
arrives.  He suspects Lucy may be a fraud since she is a brunette and
not Peter's type.  Peter's real girlfriend, Ashley Baily Bacon (Ally
Walker) is blond and is a hell-on-wheels type who, as the movie
evolves, keeps calling and leaving messages on Peter's answering
machine.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a romantic comedy and although there is
tension and suspense about when Peter will wake up and what will he
say, it is of minor importance.  The real story is the developing love
between Lucy and Jack.  Pullman plays Jack as a shy and unassertive
character who is not quite sure of what to make of Lucy.  Bullock plays
Lucy as a captivating woman with a winsome smile, but one that you
believe might work all day at a tollbooth while dreaming of her Prince
Charming.  The chemistry between Lucy and Jack develops slowly and
naturally as it would with reserved characters of that sort in real
life.  Rather than kiss they do some serious "leaning" as they call it
in the movie.
     The writing by Fred Lebow and Dan Sullivan is marvelous.  On the
one hand we have a romance that comes alive.  On the other hand, we
have a comedy full of so many great lines that the audience was in a
constant state of mirth.  My favorite and the audience's was when the
family asked Lucy to prove that she really was Peter's fiance.  You
will have to see the movie to find out how she proved it.  The writers
also did something unusual.  They put in many scenes that were not
linked to any other part of the movie.  They were there solely to
provide some good laughs, and they all worked.  My favorite was the
paperboy on the ice.
     The cast did real ensemble acting.  It was as if the cast actually
was a family.  Even the character of Joe Jr., I thought was well done,
and I generally detest characters like that in the movies.  One
character I wish I had seen more of was the original girlfriend.  Her
character was so outlandish relative to the sweetness of the others
that I wanted to see what she was going to do next.
     The coldness of Chicago in winter was a good metaphor for the
loneliness of Lucy's life.  The scene of the snow around the Callahan
family home on the other hand looked so Norman Rockwell and soothing.
Quite a contrast.  Well done sets by Garreth Stover and beautiful
cinematography by Phedon Papamichael.  I found myself wondering however
why they released what was clearly a Christmas movie in April.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING works because of the excellent direction
by Jon Turteltaub, the witty writing, and the compelling yet highly
reserved acting by Bullock and Pullman.  It was edited (Bruce Green)
just about right at 1:43.  It is rated PG for adult themes.  The actors
keep all of their clothes on at all times, never say a bad word, and
never think a violent thought.  I recommend this movie to anyone old
enough to be interested in romance, and I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     In case you aren't already prepared, brace yourself for a literal
onslaught of summer movie romances.  WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is one of
1995's early entries.  It certainly isn't going to be the best.
     As heavily promoted as it's been, you should know the plot by know. 
Sandra Bullock is Lucy, a goofy, salt-of-the-earth Chicago Transit
Authority toll booth attendant who falls in love (at first sight) with
Peter (Peter Gallagher), a yuppie lawyer.  Almost immediately after Lucy
swoons, Peter gets pushed onto the train tracks, whereupon Lucy comes to
the rescue.  Then the obligatory "misunderstanding" occurs:  Peter's
concerned parents think Lucy is Peter's fiancee, pulling Lucy into the
family as a new member.  But when Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pullman)
arrives on the scene, Lucy and Jack begin to fall in love and, well ...
you get the picture.
     Or maybe you don't.  Most of the film is pretty nonsensical.  It's
predictable at best and just plain dull most of the time, focusing ad
nauseam on Lucy's moral dilemma about whether or not to end her charade. 
Slapstick is the preferred method of making the audience laugh:  there is
a considerable amount of falling down and other humorous forms of injury. 
Peter's dysfunctional family is good for a few laughs, but otherwise I
barely cracked a smile.
     The sad thing about WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING isn't just the lack of
originality and humor, rather, it's the statement that the film ultimately
makes.  The movie's apparent bottom line is that people can be really
shallow, but that's okay, because love will conquer everything, and it
doesn't matter who gets trampled along the way.  When you think about it,
it's not just annoying, it's insulting.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This makes for a very light romantic comedy.  If you are not
looking for anything deeper,  you will find it entertaining.
     Poor but winsome Lucy (Sandra Bullock) works as a cashier at an
elevated station in Chicago, about as dull a job as one could find.
The only bright spot in her day is the handsome man she sees each
morning as he is about to board his train.  They've never spoken; in
fact he does not even know she exists. That is the extent of Lucy's
love life.
     Because Lucy has no real excuse not to work on holidays she is
always talked into doing so; other cashiers have family with whom to
celebrate but for Lucy one day is like the next ... except this day
unexpected things happen.  The man she has a thing for, the one who
shows up every day, is Peter (Peter Gallagher).  For him it turns out
to be a different kind of day, too, as he gets mugged and pushed onto
the tracks.  Lucy races out of the booth, jumps onto the tracks and
saves Peter (and herself) by rolling away from the oncoming train.
Peter, however, ends up in a coma.
     At this point a comedy of errors begins to occur.  Lucy visits
Peter but not being family, she is not allowed to see him.  A nurse
mistakenly surmises that she is his fiancee and allows her into the
room.  When his family arrives, the nurse innocently introduces Lucy as
Peter's fiancee.  He is still in coma.
     Jack (Bill Pullman) is Peter's suspicious brother. Their father is
played by Peter Boyle, the mother is Micole Mercurio, and Glynis Johns
is the grandmother.  Jack Warden is Peter's Godfather.  Everyone
(almost) is overjoyed with Lucy.
     Like all romantic comedies, this one has its twists and its happy
ending.  Sandra Bullock looks lovely and wistful and cute and the
camera keeps focussing on her until I was ready to cry "enough!" But
that is only a small complaint.  It is not IT HAPPENED ONE NIGHT but
for light comedy it suffices.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     And while I was watching, I was wondering why this was such a
popular movie.  Sure, it's a good date movie, but I saw this movie on
residence hall cable with my militant "Wings"-obsessed roommate (the
one I've been berating mercilessly in my comedy diary "Another Year in
the Life of a Nerd."  Check it out sometime.), so I think we can throw
the romantic element right out the window, just like I'd love to toss
that damn hat he always wears right out the window.  But that's not
something I should go into in this separate manuscript.
     Even without the romantic element, I still expected to like WHILE
YOU WERE SLEEPING for its comedic element and the element of
tungsten....  Sorry, we nerds know the Periodic Table like the back of
our hands.  You can't even call yourself a nerd if you don't know the
atomic mass of Ytterbium (163.0, of course).  And before that pitiful
digression, I was going to list Sandra Bullock, the movie's glamorous
yet seemingly down-to-earth star, as the movie's other major element of
appeal.  As always, Bullock's charm and beauty remains intact, but her
performance, like everything else in the movie, seems lackluster.
Maybe it proves Bullock should stick to action movies like The Net and
Speed rather than cutesy comedy.
     Bullock plays a lonely subway employee (that's half her problem
right there--what guy's going to date someone that works for the
transit system?) who has a classic case of unrequited love (you think I
don't know what that's like?!) for a man that comes by every morning.
One of those mornings he happens to fall on the subway track and
Bullock is the one to come to the rescue and save his life.  The poor
guy's in a coma, yes, and when she visits him at the hospital, a little
misunderstanding ensues, with the nurse blurting out to the guy's
family that Bullock is his fiance.
     And as you know, you can't have one misunderstanding in a movie
without several hundred others ensuing, so Bullock plays along with the
masquerade for whatever reason.  The guy stays in his coma while
Bullock wins over the family, while slowly finding herself in a
dilemma--she now loves the unconscious one's brother.  But she can't
make a move because she's engaged to a guy she's never spoken to.  If I
had a dime for every time that's happened to me....
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a pretty good movie, but not nearly as
good as I was expecting.  That may have to do with the lack of romantic
atmosphere during my screening (watching a romance movie with the one
person you'd most like to stick red hot pokers in the eyes of probably
has that effect) but it also has to do with Bullock's half-hearted
performance and lack of quality writing.  The movie is too predictable
in plot and humor.  About halfway through, I started finishing all the
character's jokes before they did based on the setups.  Of course I did
have a copy of the script sitting in front of me....

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Preston Sturges could have had a good time with this story.  John
Turteltaub is no Preston Sturges, but he is at least able to make it
into an amiable comedy.  Sandra Bullock plays Lucy, a drab and lonely
token-booth attendant for the Chicago Transit Authority.  Her life is
dreams.  She dreams of travel,   She dreams of getting a nice boy
friend.  She dreams of having a family.  And Turteltaub dreams of the
audience believing Sandra Bullock as a drab and lonely token-booth
attendant with no boyfriends.  Lucy does have a dream boyfriend, a
well-heeled and handsome man who comes by her CTA station.  One lonely
Christmas the family-less Lucy is working and her dream boyfriend is
mugged on the platform and falls into the path of an approaching train.
Lucy saves his life and takes the unconscious man--Peter as she
discovers his name is (appropriately played by Peter Gallagher)--to a
hospital.  There a careless comment gives a nurse the impression that
Lucy is really the now-comatose Peter's fiancee.  In the sort of comedy
of errors that can occur only in the most contrived of stories, when
Peter's somewhat strange family show up, they hear Lucy referred to as
Peter's fiancee and they also believe it.  Peter's family adopts Lucy
as a prospective family member that they have never met.  Further
complicating matters is that Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pullman) is
skeptical that brother Peter would have gotten engaged to Lucy without
Jack finding out.  He sets out to prove that Lucy is not what she
appears to be.
     This is a film with its heart in the right place, and one with a
good sense of humor.  But it just does not have the polished style ofa
professionally made film.  There are mismatched styles of humor that
often conflict with each other.  Pieces of slapstick are thrown into
what is mostly a comedy of personality.  Much of the humor is built
around the eccentric conversations of Peter's family.  Somehow this
joke just does not work as well as scriptwriters Daniel G. Sullivan and
Frederic Lebow think it does.
     Sandra Bullock has been winning in SPEED and was likable in
DEMOLITION MAN, but here she overplays her personality.  She gives the
kind of performance in which you can read her every emotion, just a
little too exaggerated, on her face.  That works for a while, but the
slight overplaying eventually makes her seem sappy and unctuous.  It
may well have been a director's decision since Peter Gallagher also
seems to have the same problem, though luckily for Gallagher he is not
on the screen and conscious long enough to allow it to become
irritating.  Several good veteran character actors are also present
including Jack Warden, Glynis Johns, and Peter Boyle are present but do
not have sufficient screen time to show us any acting touches that we
have not seen from them many times previously.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is no great classic of cinema.  In fact,
to all appearances it no more than a light Christmas programmer that
got delayed in its release.  If it has no great virtues, at least it
has no great faults either.  This piece of feather-light holiday fluff
gets a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chad Polenz
While You Were Sleeping
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Sandra Bullock (Lucy), Bill Pullman (Jack), Jack Warden (Saul),
Peter Gallagher (Peter), written by Daniel G. Sullivan, Fredric Lebow,
produced by Joe Roth, Roger Birnbaum, directed by Jon Turtletaub.
"While You Were Sleeping" is truly a modern day fairytale. It's a story so
fantastic and romantic you don't realize how impossible it seems. After all,
what are fairytales for?
The film stars Sandra Bullock as a Lucy, a cute but lonely token collector
for Chicago's famous elevated transit system. Everyday she goes through the
same routine, but there is one man (Gallagher as Peter) who comes to her line
everyday who makes it all worthwhile. She adores him, but she knows he'll
never ask her out and she isn't brave enough to ask him. She doesn't even
know his name.
One day the man is mugged and pushed on to the tracks and knocked
unconscious. Lucy runs to his rescue and miraculously saves him, and rushes
him to the hospital. But when the hospital staff won't let her in to see him,
she accidentally leads them to believe he is her fiancee just as the man's
family walks in. And so the typical comedy where everyone is mislead ensues,
but it works perfectly here. It's very romantic as you hope that somehow the
man will come out of his coma and the two really will fall in love. 
Enter Jack Callahan (Pullman), the brother of Peter (the mystery man), who
becomes suspicious of Lucy. The two start to hang out and get to know each
other, and it's obvious an unspoken attraction here. This makes for an
original situation, because you'd expect the two would fall madly in love
right away... but thankfully this doesn't happen.
Most of the film shows Lucy's relationship with the Callahans and her
involvement with Jack. Jack doesn't know the truth about the "engagement,"
but Lucy never tells him. Here is where a real problem starts to occur, do we
hope Lucy will tell the truth and get together with Jack? Or is this just a
bad idea altogether and should she somehow try to marry Peter? After all, she
did say he was her dream man - why would she turn down the opportunity to
finally be with him? 
Eventually Peter recovers from his coma, and when the family tells him about
Lucy he doesn't know what they're talking about. There are some pretty funny
scenes in which Peter tries to remember everyday things, but doesn't
understand why he can't remember meeting and falling in love with Lucy. We
also learn Peter's character is a Scrooge-like greedy lawyer who chases
ambulances and fakes his own heroics in order to make himself look good. Even
though Peter can't remember Lucy, he feels reborn and does fall in love with
her. He even proposes to her in a scene that's unlike anything you've ever
seen before.
The ending might be a little typical but at least it's funny and very
charming. I can't believe it works as well as it does, which is quite an
accomplishment for such a mainstream film.
Maybe the premise to "While You Were Sleeping" is a little cheesy, but darn
it, I liked it. It's funny, romantic, creative, and makes you feel good and
shows the mysterious power love has.  
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     The romantic comedy is a mainstay of popular entertainment,
existing in theater and literature that predated the movies.  As other
genres have come in and out of favor in Hollywood, filmmakers have
continued to regularly produce new romantic comedies.  While the
characters and situations change, the basic form has remained
remarkably consistent.
     The genre's best entries are those that follow believable
characters through interesting situations leading to romance.  The best
romantic comedies strike a delicate balance between complicated
situations that border on fantasy and believable characters that seem
like real people.  The specifics of the situations portrayed may seem
unlikely, but it is important that the audience be able to relate to
the characters.  We need to believe that these could be real people
that we know--or even that they are much like ourselves.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a very strong and smart romantic
comedy.  It starts from an outlandish premise, but it features central
characters with such realistic behavior and emotions that we are able
to completely accept everything that happens.  The result is a very
appealing film with some surprising depth of emotion.
     Sandra Bullock stars as Lucy Moderatz, a lonely tollbooth
attendant for the Chicago Transit Authority.  She secretly pines for
Peter Callaghan (Peter Gallagher), a handsome stranger who wordlessly
passes by her booth every day on his way to work.  Since Lucy has no
family, her boss (Jason Bernard) convinces her to work on Christmas
Day.  On that day, she sees Peter mugged and pushed onto the train
tracks.  She quickly acts to pull him from the tracks, but he ends up
in a coma.  At the hospital, a series of misunderstandings results in
Peter's family believing that she is actually his fiance.  Lucy quickly
is accepted as a part of the family and eventually she finds herself
falling for Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pullman).
     The biggest strength of the screenplay by first-time writers
Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow is its very clear understanding of
the emotions that go with loneliness.  Lucy is portrayed as a
good-hearted but shy individual who is longing for people to share her
life.  She is an only child who's mother had passed away when she was
young.  For many years her father had been her only family and he too
had recently passed away.  This movie is as much about Lucy's strong
attraction to the love and support provided by Peter's close-knit
family as it is about the unusual romantic triangle.
     Sullivan and Lebow show a great deal of perceptiveness about the
support system that a close family can provide.  Lucy's loneliness
clearly goes beyond a simple need for companionship.  Like most people,
she has the everyday need for the support that comes from being a part
of a group.  This is most strongly reflected in the film's best scene,
a very simple moment where Lucy has joined Peter's family around the
dinner table.  The family is engaging in familiar chatter and Lucy's
facial expression very clearly shows how special this everyday event
seems to her.
     The film's portrayal of this kind of loneliness really struck a
chord with me.  I come from a very close-knit family.  While they are
still alive and I have stayed in contact with them as much as possible,
in the last couple years we have spread to different parts of the
country.  I miss the constant support of having my family nearby and
was able to easily relate to Lucy's feelings of isolation.  For me,
some of the most satisfying movies are the ones where a character
experiences strong feelings that match ones I have had.  This
connection made the film really work for me.
     A great deal the film's success can be attributed to the fortunate
casting of Sandra Bullock as Lucy.  Bullock is an actor who generates
an instant, strong sense of likability.  She is able to convey a mix of
strength and vulnerability that is absolutely perfect for Lucy.  She
comes off like a completely real person without ever seeming like an
actor playing a role.  Bullock made a strong impression with terrific
supporting roles in SPEED, DEMOLITION MAN, and WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY, but she shows here that she can easily carry a film.  This
movie should make her into a major star.
     Wisely, Peter's family is kept relatively small and is never
portrayed as excessively quirky.  The film could have easily become
bogged-down if the family had consisted of too many colorful
characters.  Instead, they seem like a normal family.  Peter Boyle is
terrific as the family patriarch (affectionately referred to as "Ox" in
the film) with Glynis Johns and Micole Mercurio also good as the
grandmother and mother.  The film doesn't spend an excessive amount of
time developing the family members (it wisely concentrates most of the
attention on Lucy), but it gives them all just enough time to seem like
real people.
     Of course, the film's unusual romantic triangle is also central to
the story.  It too is played well.  All my life, I have had a constant
struggle to overcome a powerful shyness that has made it extremely
difficult to get to know people, particularly impeding romantic
relationships.  Lucy's fantasy crush on Peter rung very familiar to
me.  Sullivan and Lebow treat her crush as very natural and the slow
replacement of her fantasy image of him with his real personality is
handled well.
     The relationship with Jack is also portrayed well.  Bullock and
Pullman have plenty of chemistry and it seems that they genuinely like
one another.  It is particularly refreshing that the film never
overcomplicates their relationship by forcing any long sequences of
animosity between them.  Instead, the relationship is allowed to build
in a low-key manner keeping the main source of conflict Lucy's claim
that she is Peter's fiance (and Jack's cautious suspicion).
     It would have been very easy for the film to be derailed by its
own premise. After all, a deception is the basis of the story.  The
reasons given for Lucy maintaining the deception are convincing.  We
are able to believe that both Lucy >and

     One of the wisest moves was the introduction of Saul (Jack
Warden), a family friend who quickly finds out the truth.  His
character provides Lucy with a confidant who knows the family and
understands why they need to believe that she is Peter's fiance.  I
suppose that the film does stretch credibility a bit to establish these
reasons, but it never seems to go too far.
     When Peter eventually wakes up, the film takes some interesting
directions with his character as well.  Once again, some stretches of
credibility are needed to keep the film from ending right there, but it
is so deftly played that it remains convincing.  His reactions to the
situation are not nearly as predictable as they could have been.
     As good as the film is, it has a few weak points.  It includes a
few supporting characters that are not as effective as they should be.
For some reason, Sullivan and Lebow selected to have several scenes
where Lucy confides in her boss about the situation.  It is a bit hard
to buy such an employee/boss relationship (particularly in an unskilled
profession). His character doesn't seem to serve any purpose that
couldn't have been fulfilled by Saul.
     Another unnecessary character is Joe Jr. (Michael Rispoli), Lucy's
slovenly neighbor.  Rispoli brings a surprising amount of charm to a
stereotyped character, but he didn't entirely seem to fit with the rest
of the film.  The writers also gave Peter a real girlfriend (Ally
Walker) who is played much too far over-the-top.  A final "twist"
involving her character is neither surprising or particularly
interesting.
     It is a bit difficult to accurately convey the tone of the film in
writing.  Some of my comments might make the film seem a bit
depressing, but that really isn't the case.  The film contains a great
deal of humor and is generally played with a light and breezy tone.
The general subject matter and some of the more serious themes does give
the film a bit of a dark side, but it isn't overwhelmed by it.  The
movie is more of a drama then some people might be expecting (I have
seen some reviews where the reviewer was obviously expecting a
screwball comedy), but it certainly isn't overly downbeat.
     Director Jon Turteltaub previously made COOL RUNNINGS into a much
better film than the script should have allowed and he does a terrific
job with this much stronger material.  The pacing is good and he finds
just the right mix between comedy and drama.  Even the few sequences of
physical comedy are staged well.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a film that struck some personal chords
with me and my response is certainly affected by that.  Still, I
suspect that most people will find it to be a terrific romantic comedy
that manages to touch on some interesting themes and some deep
emotions.  I recommend it very highly.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     The romantic comedy is a mainstay of popular entertainment,
existing in theater and literature that predated the movies.  As other
genres have come in and out of favor in Hollywood, filmmakers have
continued to regularly produce new romantic comedies.  While the
characters and situations change, the basic form has remained
remarkably consistent.
     The genre's best entries are those that follow believable
characters through interesting situations leading to romance.  The best
romantic comedies strike a delicate balance between complicated
situations that border on fantasy and believable characters that seem
like real people.  The specifics of the situations portrayed may seem
unlikely, but it is important that the audience be able to relate to
the characters.  We need to believe that these could be real people
that we know--or even that they are much like ourselves.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a very strong and smart romantic
comedy.  It starts from an outlandish premise, but it features central
characters with such realistic behavior and emotions that we are able
to completely accept everything that happens.  The result is a very
appealing film with some surprising depth of emotion.
     Sandra Bullock stars as Lucy Moderatz, a lonely tollbooth
attendant for the Chicago Transit Authority.  She secretly pines for
Peter Callaghan (Peter Gallagher), a handsome stranger who wordlessly
passes by her booth every day on his way to work.  Since Lucy has no
family, her boss (Jason Bernard) convinces her to work on Christmas
Day.  On that day, she sees Peter mugged and pushed onto the train
tracks.  She quickly acts to pull him from the tracks, but he ends up
in a coma.  At the hospital, a series of misunderstandings results in
Peter's family believing that she is actually his fiance.  Lucy quickly
is accepted as a part of the family and eventually she finds herself
falling for Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pullman).
     The biggest strength of the screenplay by first-time writers
Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow is its very clear understanding of
the emotions that go with loneliness.  Lucy is portrayed as a
good-hearted but shy individual who is longing for people to share her
life.  She is an only child who's mother had passed away when she was
young.  For many years her father had been her only family and he too
had recently passed away.  This movie is as much about Lucy's strong
attraction to the love and support provided by Peter's close-knit
family as it is about the unusual romantic triangle.
     Sullivan and Lebow show a great deal of perceptiveness about the
support system that a close family can provide.  Lucy's loneliness
clearly goes beyond a simple need for companionship.  Like most people,
she has the everyday need for the support that comes from being a part
of a group.  This is most strongly reflected in the film's best scene,
a very simple moment where Lucy has joined Peter's family around the
dinner table.  The family is engaging in familiar chatter and Lucy's
facial expression very clearly shows how special this everyday event
seems to her.
     The film's portrayal of this kind of loneliness really struck a
chord with me.  I come from a very close-knit family.  While they are
still alive and I have stayed in contact with them as much as possible,
in the last couple years we have spread to different parts of the
country.  I miss the constant support of having my family nearby and
was able to easily relate to Lucy's feelings of isolation.  For me,
some of the most satisfying movies are the ones where a character
experiences strong feelings that match ones I have had.  This
connection made the film really work for me.
     A great deal the film's success can be attributed to the fortunate
casting of Sandra Bullock as Lucy.  Bullock is an actor who generates
an instant, strong sense of likability.  She is able to convey a mix of
strength and vulnerability that is absolutely perfect for Lucy.  She
comes off like a completely real person without ever seeming like an
actor playing a role.  Bullock made a strong impression with terrific
supporting roles in SPEED, DEMOLITION MAN, and WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY, but she shows here that she can easily carry a film.  This
movie should make her into a major star.
     Wisely, Peter's family is kept relatively small and is never
portrayed as excessively quirky.  The film could have easily become
bogged-down if the family had consisted of too many colorful
characters.  Instead, they seem like a normal family.  Peter Boyle is
terrific as the family patriarch (affectionately referred to as "Ox" in
the film) with Glynis Johns and Micole Mercurio also good as the
grandmother and mother.  The film doesn't spend an excessive amount of
time developing the family members (it wisely concentrates most of the
attention on Lucy), but it gives them all just enough time to seem like
real people.
     Of course, the film's unusual romantic triangle is also central to
the story.  It too is played well.  All my life, I have had a constant
struggle to overcome a powerful shyness that has made it extremely
difficult to get to know people, particularly impeding romantic
relationships.  Lucy's fantasy crush on Peter rung very familiar to
me.  Sullivan and Lebow treat her crush as very natural and the slow
replacement of her fantasy image of him with his real personality is
handled well.
     The relationship with Jack is also portrayed well.  Bullock and
Pullman have plenty of chemistry and it seems that they genuinely like
one another.  It is particularly refreshing that the film never
overcomplicates their relationship by forcing any long sequences of
animosity between them.  Instead, the relationship is allowed to build
in a low-key manner keeping the main source of conflict Lucy's claim
that she is Peter's fiance (and Jack's cautious suspicion).
     It would have been very easy for the film to be derailed by its
own premise. After all, a deception is the basis of the story.  The
reasons given for Lucy maintaining the deception are convincing.  We
are able to believe that both Lucy >and

     One of the wisest moves was the introduction of Saul (Jack
Warden), a family friend who quickly finds out the truth.  His
character provides Lucy with a confidant who knows the family and
understands why they need to believe that she is Peter's fiance.  I
suppose that the film does stretch credibility a bit to establish these
reasons, but it never seems to go too far.
     When Peter eventually wakes up, the film takes some interesting
directions with his character as well.  Once again, some stretches of
credibility are needed to keep the film from ending right there, but it
is so deftly played that it remains convincing.  His reactions to the
situation are not nearly as predictable as they could have been.
     As good as the film is, it has a few weak points.  It includes a
few supporting characters that are not as effective as they should be.
For some reason, Sullivan and Lebow selected to have several scenes
where Lucy confides in her boss about the situation.  It is a bit hard
to buy such an employee/boss relationship (particularly in an unskilled
profession). His character doesn't seem to serve any purpose that
couldn't have been fulfilled by Saul.
     Another unnecessary character is Joe Jr. (Michael Rispoli), Lucy's
slovenly neighbor.  Rispoli brings a surprising amount of charm to a
stereotyped character, but he didn't entirely seem to fit with the rest
of the film.  The writers also gave Peter a real girlfriend (Ally
Walker) who is played much too far over-the-top.  A final "twist"
involving her character is neither surprising or particularly
interesting.
     It is a bit difficult to accurately convey the tone of the film in
writing.  Some of my comments might make the film seem a bit
depressing, but that really isn't the case.  The film contains a great
deal of humor and is generally played with a light and breezy tone.
The general subject matter and some of the more serious themes does give
the film a bit of a dark side, but it isn't overwhelmed by it.  The
movie is more of a drama then some people might be expecting (I have
seen some reviews where the reviewer was obviously expecting a
screwball comedy), but it certainly isn't overly downbeat.
     Director Jon Turteltaub previously made COOL RUNNINGS into a much
better film than the script should have allowed and he does a terrific
job with this much stronger material.  The pacing is good and he finds
just the right mix between comedy and drama.  Even the few sequences of
physical comedy are staged well.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a film that struck some personal chords
with me and my response is certainly affected by that.  Still, I
suspect that most people will find it to be a terrific romantic comedy
that manages to touch on some interesting themes and some deep
emotions.  I recommend it very highly.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Test screenings for the new romantic comedy, WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING, which  stars Sandra Bullock (SPEED), Bill Pullman
(SPACEBALLS) and Peter Gallagher (SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE), received a
95 out of 100 approval rating.  At first, that number seemed high, but
since there are so few well-made, good-natured movies out there, the
score makes more sense.
     Bullock's career, which began before but really started with
DEMOLITION MAN, is going to get a big push from this film which should
launch her into the upper atmosphere of stardom.  She plays Lucy, a
lonely Chicago transit worker who gains a fian and a family when she
saves Peter Callaghan (Gallagher) from a speeding subway train.
     Unfortunately for Peter, he lands in a coma and a misunderstanding
leads his family to believe that Lucy and he are engaged.  Lucy's
quandary becomes worse when she falls in love with Jack (Pullman),
Peter's brother.
     Cute and nice, the two worst adjectives in the English language,
instantly come to mind when describing WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING.  Yes,
the plot is predictable but director Jon Turteltaub (COOL RUNNINGS) and
screenwriters Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow create many "happy"
moments that pin smiles to our faces.  I looked around and saw people
grinning from ear to ear during the scene in which Jack escorts Lucy
across an icy walkway to her apartment, slipping and sliding, falling
into each others arms.
     Bullock doesn't show a great deal of acting chops, but her role
allows her to be adorable and endear herself to us.  WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING is what many in Hollywood have called, "the perfect vehicle
for her," which means it showcases Bullock in  a manner best suited to
her talents and makes her a big star.
     With his wackiness and facial expressions toned down, Bill Pullman
believably plays a normal guy and adds another solid performance to his
filmography.  Gallagher is fine, although he spends most of his part in
a coma.  Jack Warden, a great character actor, returns to the screen
and offers the film some needed weight.
     My score for WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is more like an 85.  95 does
not give me much room to go higher and films can definitely reach
greater heights than this one.  Still, it is perfect for dates and
brings us some much needed cinematic water in what has been the
movie-drought of 1995.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sandra Bullock, Bill Pullman, Peter Gallagher,
           Jack Warden, Peter Boyle.
Screenplay:  Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow.
Director:  Jon Turtletaub.
     When--and for that matter, why--did SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
become the sine qua non for any critical blurb for a romantic
comedy?  "This year's SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE!" they rave, or
"SLEEPLESS IN (insert name of city in which film is set here)."
Actually, the "why" part is easy; SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE was a huge
box office success and an easy point of reference for an idealized
modern romance.  WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is already drawing
comparisons to the 1993 hit with some basis, but not because Bill
Pullman is in the cast or the word "sleep" is in the title.  Both
funnier and more genuinely romantic than SLEEPLESS, WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING seems destined to be for Sandra Bullock what SLEEPLESS was
for Meg Ryan:  the vehicle that stamps her as one of the few
genuinely bankable female stars in Hollywood.
     Bullock stars as Lucy, a token collector for the Chicago
Transit Authority.  Mostly alone since the recent death of her
father, Lucy fantasizes about a handsome businessman (Peter
Gallagher) who takes the train every day.  Their lives cross in an
unexpected way when Lucy saves the man's life after he falls onto
the train tracks and ends up in a coma.  At the hospital, Lucy
learns that the man's name is Peter Callaghan, that he has a large
and loving family, and that through a series of misunderstandings,
the family believes that Lucy is Peter's fiancee.  Delighted at
being welcomed into the family, Lucy plays along, until Peter's
brother Jack (Bill Pullman) arrives.  Although Jack is initially
suspicious of Lucy, a friendship grows between the two, a potential
romance complicated only by Peter's recovery.
     In many ways, the recent film of which WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING
reminded me most was not SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, but GROUNDHOG DAY.
It has a paper-thin, high-concept premise which at any moment could
have collapsed under the weight of its contrivances.  But it never
quite happens; just when you expect the script to go in a
predictable direction, it doesn't.  Writers Daniel G. Sullivan and
Fredric Lebow don't load the story with awkward little situations
that Lucy gets out of by sheer coincidence (although naturally there
are a few), nor do they resort to farce or slapstick.  Indeed, they
provide a surprisingly touching story about mutual need and
affection, with Lucy finding herself drawn to the family she lacks,
and the family viewing Lucy as a connection to their injured son.
In one particularly engaging scene around a boisterous dinner table,
WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING becomes more than its easily-summarized plot
point.
     It also boasts a winning performance by Sandra Bullock and an
impressive chemistry between Bullock and Bill Pullman.  With her
wholesome beauty and radiant smile, Bullock is perfectly cast as
Lucy.  It is not a particularly complex character, but Bullock has
real grace as a comic performer, an under-appreciated skill evident
in far too few current screen stars.  She has a solid and relaxed
partner in Pullman, who previously had seemed in danger of making a
career out of never getting the girl.  He does not have conventional
leading man looks, but there is an appealing self-deprecation in his
manner which could make him a natural romantic lead.  Their scenes
together are well-developed and steadily directed by Jon Turtletaub,
and they receive fine supporting help from Glynis Johns as the
Callaghans' quirky grandmother and the always-reliable Jack Warden
as a family friend who acts as Lucy's confidante.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING loses a lot of its momentum once Peter
wakes up, however.  There are suggestions throughout the film that
he's going to turn out to be a truly narcissistic jerk, but we never
get a chance to see that character.  Peter Gallagher ends up playing
Peter as mostly befuddled, and not very interesting.  There is also
a throwaway sub-plot involving Peter's hell-on-wheels _real_
fiancee, who is not given a chance to do much of anything.  The
final twenty minutes of the film become mostly a waiting game until
Lucy and Jack end up together, and one that drags on a bit too long.
But it's what goes on while Peter is sleeping--a bright, charming
romance--that makes WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING a pleasant dream.
