Title
Review for Babettes gćstebud (1987)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Pedro Sena
Babette has been the wife ( or mistress, the film does not clarify it ) of a
noble in France, whose life is in trouble due to the political situation
that ever changed during the 1850's.  And a famous musician takes a doctor
mandated vacation to Sweden to get away from  the pressures of the music
scene, or to get away from the new government.  In the place where he is, he
meets two twin sisters that are the daughters of an old line minister whose
work still lives on.  One of the sisters has a magnificent voice,
and the singer takes her on as a student, to try and develop her talent. But
when she denies his request to travel with him, and tour with that wonderful
voice, he lives back to France.  A few years later, a woman is taken to the
doorstep of the two sisters, with a message from the singer to take her own
as she is a victim of another revolution.  She becomes the maid of the house
and does all the cooking.
As is befitting all hopefuls, she buys an occasional lottery ticket, and one
day finds out that she has won.  And she proceeds to set up a feast for
everyone around.  Her feast involves some of the delights
which are afforded by an upper class, and the resident family and friends
are somewhat anguished by what is being served.  A special guest, a minister
of something or other happens to come by.  And he
partakes in the meal.  He is astounded at the service and the quality, which
all the other members of the family are trying so hard to ignore, and avoid,
but are eating so not to offend the cook, and the special moment which
celebrates the spirit of the father of the twins.
For a simple film, with no great pretentious, to come off so well, and show
up many others, is an accomplishment in itself.  The film carries some
outstanding acting, even if subdued by the sisters and the town residents so
firmly entranced in their religious fervor. And they partake in the meal,
probably enjoying it, but not admitting it out in the open, lest they feel
that they are offending the
humble leader which taught them.
Babette spends all of her earnings to acquire the food, all fresh, and the
special wines and desserts that go with it.  The special guest, the
minister, is astounded that he is eating such incredible food,
which he had only tasted once in a particular restaurant in Paris, the
suggestion being that Babette was the chef in that place.
An excellent film, with some rather profound moments, and sayings, to keep
us entwined in its ideas, it is a bit slow, but it provides an exceptional
showcase for all the actors.  The film is softly directed, with no sweeping
angles, or fast camera movement, in order to display the slow lifestyle
which these people enjoy all year round.
This film won an Oscar for Best Foreign Film, and deservedly so.  It has
some very well done musical moments, showcasing some period music which was
played in the French courts for the amusement of the kings, and the upper
class, thanks to the lively Mr. Pappon, who is so happy to have found a
wonderful voice to duet with, but saddened when he  can not partake in the
enjoyment of sharing that voice with another audience, other than a living
room.  In many ways, it is a statement that the best work is done in the
privacy of our own spiritual work, rather than in the clubs, saloons, and
concert halls.  And it takes a special type of people not to share it with
anyone else but their own kin.  In an industrial society, we might say that
this is foolish.
But, even in the worst of times, in the wrong place, some wonderful things
can happen.....
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Reviewer and Moderator of the CENTIPEDE's THE FILM.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In Denmark, a short story by Isak Dinesen is turned into an
enchanting film.
     BABETTE'S FEAST is a delight.  The story itself is nothing much
and doesn't even sound as if it would be anything one would care to
make into a film.  But the beauty is what's wrapped around the story
and the characters in it.
     Set in an isolated little. windswept village in Denmark, the
residents are kept alive by their unquestioning belief in God.  There
are 2 elderly spinster sisters ("just past their youthful bloom") who,
when their minister father dies, become the center of the spiritual
community.
      Babette, a Frenchwoman, leaves France where there is civil
unrest, for Denmark.  She is taken in as a maid and helper by the 2
sisters.  For the 100th birthday of their deceased father, the sisters
decide to give a nice dinner to about a dozen of their church friends.
.and they allow Babette to make the dinner.  As she has just come into
some money she also insists on paying for the food.  How that
wonderfully funny feast transforms the town is the story.

Author
David Dalgleish
"This head chef had the ability to transform a dinner into a kind of 
love affair."
Starring Stéphane Audran, Bodil Kjer, Brigitte Federspiel, Jarl Kulle
Written & Directed by Gabriel Axel, from a story by Isak Dinesen
Cinematography by Henning Kristiansen
It is hard to imagine, in the last years of the 20th century, why 
anyone would choose the chaste, ascetic lifestyle that deeply 
religious people lived in the past (and that some still live today).  
The pleasures of the flesh are so immediate, so tangible: why forsake 
them?  BABETTE'S FEAST, a wise, gentle Danish film, poses this 
question, but rather than the usual contrast of pious self-denial with 
the intense rewards of sex, it approaches the issue from a different 
angle, by looking at that other great carnal pleasure: eating.
Based on a novella by the great Isak Dinesen (probably best known for 
her memoir, OUT OF AFRICA), the tale is set in a village on the wild, 
rugged coast of Jutland.  It is the 19th century, but it could easily 
be the 17th.  The people are kind but puritanical; they live in 
simple, modest cottages; their favourite recreation is singing 
devotional songs.  There are few young people in the community, and 
it's not hard to imagine why.
The first half of the film mostly fills in details of the past.  We 
meet Philippa and Martina (Bodil Kjer, Brigitte Federspiel), the 
sweet, virginal daughters of a respected minister.  Each sister is 
wooed by an outsider, but they reject their respective suitors, opting 
instead for lives of duty and charity, following in their father's 
footsteps.
As is often the case in Dinesen's stories, these brief, youthful 
passions have long-lasting consequences.  Martina's suitor is an 
emotional French singer, and years later, still remembering the 
sisters' generosity and humanity, he refers a woman to them, a refugee 
from civil war in Paris.  The sisters agree to let her live with them 
as a maid.  The woman is Babette (Stéphane Audran).  And years after 
this, Philippa's suitor, Lorenz (Jarl Kulle), who had departed when he 
realized he could not have her, happens to be visiting, on the 
occasion of their late father's 100th anniversary.  For this special 
occasion, Babette asks that she be allowed to create a special dinner.  
Reluctantly (they don't want to indulge themselves), the sisters agree 
to let Babette treat them and their guests to the full range of her 
culinary talents.
The movie's first half is awkward; it betrays its literary 
provenance.  We are shuttled back and forth in time, jarringly.  
Frequent voice-overs try to smooth over the awkward transitions, but 
the end result is intrusive.  The film explains everything that is 
happening--the emotions and events are kept at a distance.  But if it 
seems hurried and detached, it is perhaps because the filmmakers were 
anxious to get to Babette's feast, and who could blame them?
What a dinner it is.  It is the centerpiece the movie, and it is 
wonderful.  The guests arrive; are seated; they chat; fine wine is 
poured; and, one by one, exquisite French dishes are set before them.  
The camera lingers lovingly on every aspect of the meal: the 
preparation, the serving, the consumption.  With musical precision, 
the film cuts back and forth from kitchen to dining room.  Babette 
devotes herself to the feast, while the guests enjoy the results of 
her devotion, all the while making small talk, or religious 
observations, or toasts, or quiet sounds of satisfaction.  Without 
fuss or bother, we are shown just how much pleasure can be had from a 
single meal, after a lifetime of soup and ale-bread.
There is very little use of incidental music; instead, ambient noises 
are emphasized, and this is particularly effective during the feast.  
The sounds of the kitchen and the dining room become a sort of ersatz 
orchestration, the perfect accompaniment to the conviviality and 
epicurean delight of the dinner.  The fizz of champagne filling a 
glass, the bubbling of sauce in a pot on the stove, the soft clink of 
knife and fork as a piece of fruit is sliced open--these become a 
symphony, and Gabriel Axel the conductor.  He makes the dinner 
sequence sensuous, intimate, vivid, but never calls attention to his 
methods: this is filmmaking so fine, so subtle, you are hardly aware 
of it.
Because they fear they are indulging their appetites unbecomingly, 
the dinner guests make a pact: they will say not a word about the food 
or drink.  They will not admit that they have enjoyed it.  Lorenz 
alone is not part of this pact, and his vocal enjoyment of the meal is 
humourously contrasted to the other guests' refusal to express their 
delight.  But they certainly are delighted, and, in, the end, it is 
fortunate that they promised to say nothing--no words would have been 
adequate to express their dawning realization that in the 
gratification of our earthly senses there is, perhaps, something holy.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     I eat a lot of junk food.  It's part of my current lifestyle.  But
I've also experienced fine dining and know the joys of it.
     BABETTE'S FEAST was the Academy award winner for Best Foreign Film
in 1987.  It's in Danish and French with subtitles.  The only reason I
noticed this on the shelf is due to a reference I saw to it on Usenet
in a discussion on the currently released Spanish film called LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.
     If you can get past the pieties in the picture (and there are
many) you will find that kernel of excellence which makes its 110
minutes all worthwhile.  Like the truffle and goose pate' wrapped in a
roasted quail, it is a hidden treasure.
     In a village in Jutland, Denmark two sisters live with their
ministerial father, hence the piety often expressed throughout the film
which takes place mostly in 1871.  It was a time in which, as the
narrator says, "Piety was much in fashion."  The sisters befriend a
French woman who has escaped the atrocities of her own country.  What
the sisters don't know is that Babette is one of the premier chefs of
Paris.
     After fourteen years of service, Babette wins a lottery prize.
She then requests to prepare the dinner which will celebrate the
memorial to the minister, long deceased.
     The film is constructed almost like a meal itself with an
appetizer being the love stories of the sisters as young women, the
main course and catalyst which is Babette and the resolution which is
the dinner itself.
     Twelve of the locals who are part of the congregation are invited
to this dinner.  They are used to dining on such things as something
called ale bread: bread soaked in water and a bit of beer then cooked
into a gruel.  Boy, are *they* in for a surprise.  :-)
     Babette, you see, is a great artist. And like any artist she takes
this opportunity to do her work.  I was reminded in an incongruous
manner of another film during BABETTE:
     In THE HUSTLER starring Paul Newman from a book by Robert Rosen,
the billiard shark Fast Eddie Felsen has fallen on hard times.  He's
hustling pool in dives on skid row.  As he is trolling for fish, he
lets his opponent win a few games.  The opponent ups the stakes and
says just enough about 'luck' to The Hustler to bring out the artist in
him.  Fast Eddie then delivers one of the great speeches in the film.
He tells this skid row joker in effect, 'You know the game.  Here's
what it's like when it's *great*,' and clears the table of nineball on
the break shot.

Author
Frankie Paiva
This is not an unseen movie. Thousands, even millions have watched it. Feast 
grossed just under 4.4 million dollars in the United States alone. Most of 
this revenue comes from its theatrical run, not its video release because Babe
tte's Feast is something most screenwriters avoid. It's a tough sell, and 
there's no hook to go along with it. Unlike the theater, if you rented the 
movie, and wanted to turn it off, you could. There's nothing unique you could 
convey to your friends about the story in under two sentences either. Despite 
this, Babette's Feast is an elegant, simple film. A wonderful and 
heartwarming experience awaits those who are patient enough for it to find 
its footing and unfold.
Martina (Birgitte Federspiel) and Philippa (Bodil Kjer) are the daughters of 
a long dead minister (Pouel Kern). They carry on their father's religious 
sect even though they've had several opportunities to leave their remote 
village. Through flashbacks we learn that young Martina (Vibeke Hastrup) and 
young Philippa (Hanne Stensgaard) were beautiful and kind young women who 
drove all the young men in town wild. They drove old ones, including French 
opera singer Achille Papin (Jean-Philippe Lafont), crazy too. Years later, 
Papin has aged even more, but remembers the women and their generosity. He 
sends Babette (Stephane Audran), a French refugee and cook, to them. Babette 
beseeches the two to let her stay, and eventually the sisters agree. It's 
back to the present. Martina and Philippa want to honor their father's 100th 
birthday. Since she has recently come into good fortune, Babette offers to 
cook a real French dinner for the celebration. The feast of a lifetime 
conflicts with the guest's conservative beliefs, and by the end they will all 
be changed. 
The only major problem with the movie is one common to older foreign films. 
The subtitles are the traditional yellow, but they're in a large and 
difficult to read font. If a character says more than two lines of dialogue, 
it ends up filling the bottom third of the screen. To compensate, the words 
move very quickly, often too fast to read. This is really a shame because 
there is some beautiful framing. Parts of the movie, especially the 
beginning, are just gorgeous. The scenery is constantly changing and we get a 
good view of the character surroundings every time. There's also some very 
enjoyable singing.
The flashback format works for the movie, and it never gets confusing. 
Gabriel Axel wisely takes the background information from Isak Dinesen's 
novel and uses it to his advantage. He makes sure we know the people onscreen 
before they get put into an awkward situation. The performances are 
excellent, and I particularly like Audran and Lafont. Audran makes Babette an 
almost mysterious individual who always seems like she knows something or has 
something to say that she's not divulging. Lafont portrays a tender Achille 
Papin, a famous man who doesn't seem like he wants celebrity. While it 
languishes a bit, Babette's Feast is never boring. There's always something 
going on that's entertaining regardless of what it sounds like from the video 
box.
