Title
Review for Devil at Your Heels, The (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
You might think this documentary is a put-on after the first ten minutes - 
the kind of thing stunt-comedian 'Super Dave' Osborne might come up with - 
but it's further endorsement that truth is stranger (and funnier) than 
fiction.  Star of the show is 'Mad Canadian' daredevil Ken Carter, whose 
speciality is jumping cars.  His dream is to go one better than Evel 
Knievel's famous leap over the Snake River Canyon and build a ramp and car 
that will enable him to jump the St Lawrence seaway from the USA into 
Canada.  He should have just used the Ambassador Bridge.  The events that we 
watch unfold become a comedy of errors on a scale so monumental it 
practically lobbies for a renaming of Murphy's Law in honor of Carter.
The pitfalls Carter experiences are best left undisclosed here, but his 
quest is a captivating story.  A great cast of 'supporting characters' drift 
in and out of the film, all promoters or stunt performers (including Knievel 
himself) with their own opinions of Carter and his harebrained stunt.  
Taking central place among them is Carter himself, congenial all the while 
(compare him with fellow stuntman Ken Powers near the film's end) and 
maintaining an optimistic perspective while he suffers one setback after 
another.  Carter remains equanimous throughout the entire project, proving 
that he is either a nice guy or just plain nuts (he's probably too fixated 
to get genuinely angry). Born to hustle, he shares with his 
adrenaline-hooked buddies an unfortunate tendency to deliver one clumsy 
aphorism or mixed metaphor after another - even his last words are a 
misattribution of a Crosby, Stills and Nash song - but at least this proves 
that Carter is the kind of everyman that we could easily root for.
The preparations for the costly stunt stretch out to months, then years.  
Like Carter, we too never know what is around the corner, and become just as 
frustrated as the players in the film who keep waiting for something to 
happen.  Film-maker Robert Fortier wrings every last drop of expectation out 
of us, serving up one false alarm after another (the use of music is very 
effective) until the tension in the film's final reels is unbearable.  
Guaranteed to produce laughs and gasps from the audience, there's no reason 
why this obscure gem shouldn't become a regular on the festival circuit.  
Don't even try to guess the real-life twist ending!
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
