Title
Review for Hollow Reed (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
     British couple Martyn and Hannah Wyatt are divorced but are living
in loving relationships with their live-in lovers.  Martyn has an
idyllic and monogamous relationship with his gay lover Tom Dixon.
Hannah has had similar luck with her heterosexual lover Frank Donally.
The Wyatt's son Oliver, about eight or nine, lives with Hannah, but
Martyn's has been granted "reasonable access" by the courts.
     This pastoral scene is shattered when a battered Oliver shows up
at his Dad's flat.  The boy explains how he was beaten up in the
commons by some strange boys.  Soon a swirl of unanswered questions
arise that make it clear that someone may be abusing Oliver, but if so,
who?  When he is hurt again, Oliver has a different explanation.  This
time he claims to have smashed his hand on an derelict car in the park.
     HOLLOW REED is a great film of intense power and ensemble acting
that tells the story of these two families.  Films like this defy
characterization.  The exquisite script by Neville Bolt and Paula Milne
is a thriller and a mystery, an examination of child abuse, a
discussion of what constitutes a family, an exploration of trust and
love, and most of all, a character study.  (Every time I try to tell my
friends what SLING BLADE is about, I can see from the looks on their
faces that they will never go see it.  So I fear it may be with HOLLOW
REED.  The more you know about the superficial aspects of the plot, the
less likely you are to want to see it, and yet this compelling film has
the power of SECRETS AND LIES and deserves a wide audience.)
     In a cast of wonderful actors, Martin Donovan, playing the father
Martyn, stands out for his incredible and yet understated performance.
Donovan is a character actor only recently coming into his own.  Most
people probably saw him last in THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY where he played
Ralph Touchett, Isabel's cousin who was dying of consumption.  As the
father in HOLLOW REED, he gives an empathetic reading of the character,
who is caring, confused, and vulnerable.  His loves his boy and
transmits his feeling of hopelessness to the audience.
     New film actor Sam Bould gives a touching performance as the small
boy, Ollie, at the heart of the controversy.  His big, but sunken, eyes
speak of the horrors that have befallen him even if he will not talk
about them.  You will want to hold him gently and reassure him that he
must tell the truth.  But you must know, what is he covering up and
why?
     Joely Richardson, who played Anita in the most recent 101
DALMATIANS, gives a complex and tender performance as the mother
Hannah.
     Also quite good as the respective lovers are Ian Hart (MICHAEL
COLLINS) as Tom and Jason Flemyng (STEALING BEAUTY) as Frank.
     In excellent minor roles, David Calder, from the BRAMWELL TV
series on Masterpiece Theater, plays Martyn's sincere, but not very
reassuring lawyer.  Even better is Edward Hardwicke as the judge who
looks as though he may require the wisdom of Solomon to sort the case
out.  Hardwicke was last seen in the film RICHARD III and as Dr. Watson
from the latest SHERLOCK HOLMES series on television.
     The script takes care to build a detailed story, not the outline
with which most plots content themselves.  We know that Martyn is a GP,
Hannah is a nurse, Tom works at a record store, and Frank is a
stay-at-home architect.  It also lets the characters make the stupid
but normal mistakes and false assumptions that happen in real life,
especially when a withdrawn and incommunicative child is at the center
of a predicament.
     Although the mystery is fairly transparent, director Angela Pope
nevertheless manages to keep the tension high.  In the best of
thrillers, of which this is one, the eerie calmness of most of the
scenes creates more foreboding than cataclysmic events ever could.
There is a composed, redemption scene that will have you wanting to
scream, "No!"  And when Hannah says, "It'll never happen again," about
the abuse, your stomach will likely go into knots.
     I am not going to give anything away.  If you've seen the trailers
or read any of the other reviews, you already know more than the little
I've told you.  I want you to see the film fresh so its power can
overwhelm you as it did me.  Although never manipulative, the
intelligent script and moving acting may reduce you to tears even
though almost all of the abuse happens off screen.  I saw it at a
press-only screening with only a half dozen critics present, but I
could hear frequent weeping around me.  Rarely does this happen at such
an event.
     The ending of the movie is strikingly photographed by Remi
Adefarasin and directed with precision and power by Angela Pope.  As
the cameras rapidly circle our players, we know the drama is at an end.
Although the brief epilog afterwards is satisfying, since it allows you
to know how the players put their lives back together, it detracts
slightly from the film's intensity.  Then again, perhaps most viewers
need that catharsis to make their emotional system whole again after
such an experience.
     HOLLOW REED runs 1:44.  It is not rated but would be an R for
mature themes, language, sex, and nudity.  This is not an NC-17 film,
and the abuse is of a physical and not a sexual nature.  The film would
be fine for mature teenagers.  I recommend the picture strongly and
give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Some very fine films get made for British television and only few
of them ever get seen in the United States.  HOLLOW REED tells the
moving story of a custody battle between two divorced parents.  It also
subtly comments on the advantages that a woman has in the British legal
system.  As the film opens Martyn and Hannah Wyatt (played by Martin
Donovan and Joely Richardson) have been married, had a child, and been
divorced and each now lives with a lover--both male.  Martyn, a doctor,
has nominally accepted fault for a marriage he suspected from the
beginning could not work because he simply could not make himself
sufficiently interested in a woman.  Though he practices medicine, he
lives in a rather tatty apartment with his lover Tom Dixon (Ian Hart).
In the divorce Hannah received the rather upscale house and at least
temporary custody of young Oliver, their son.  To reaffirm her
attraction to men she lives with Frank Donally (Jason Flemyng), a macho
construction worker, the antithesis of Martyn.  As the film opens
Oliver has been badly beaten and comes to his father's apartment.
Oliver remains mysterious about the boys he claimed did the beating,
but since nobody can find any more about the incident it is allowed to
pass.  When Oliver shows up at school with a crushed hand and this time
obviously lies about how he got the injury Martyn begins to suspect
that his son has fallen victim to being systematically brutalized by
Frank.  Hannah denies that as a possibility and Martyn realizes his
only chance to protect his son lies in trying to win Oliver in a
custody battle.  But that makes for a doubly up-hill battle being gay
and a man in a country that systematically shows preference to the
mother in custody battles.
     The audience eventually knows who attacks Oliver though it takes
the characters a good deal longer to piece it all together.  Meanwhile
Oliver remains a cipher.  He ingenuously devises complex ways to escape
from his house and to spy on his parents, apparently planning some
counter-attack of his own.  But in the presence of adults he remains
withdrawn and nearly silent, only coming out of his shell to show
enthusiasm for STAR WARS toys and radio broadcasts.  Just why he
behaves as he does forms the central mystery of HOLLOW REED.  He
clearly misses having both his parents present, but Hannah fills
herself with hostility for her former husband and now even jumps at his
touch.  At the same time she reaches out for the stable relationship
she thought she had and later lost in her marriage to Martyn.  The
screenplay is by Paula Milne based on a story by Neville Bolt, itself
based on a true story.
     Angela Pope directs the film in a generally low-key style.  That
seems for the best since her one flamboyant touch is to send the camera
orbiting around the major characters in the climactic scene of the
film, a touch which may have some symbolic meaning but it gets lost on
the viewer as much as the unexplained title of the film.  Top billing
goes to Martin Donovan of THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY as the concerned
father.  He and Ian Hart have a steamy gay love scene that brought
gasps from the audience.  Joely Richardson has less passion in her role
in spite of character's professed disappointment with Martyn as a
husband.  She went on to be the second female lead in 101 DALMATIANS.
Most familiar to American audiences will be Edward Hardwicke as a chief
magistrate but who may be best known as Watson to Jeremy Brett's
Sherlock Holmes.
     The land of Shakespeare and Marlowe still has its share of good
writers still prizes writing as part of a basic education and much of
what they give away free on television is better than what we pay for
here.  I give HOLLOW REED a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jun Yan
        The small English film "Hollow Reed" is a little like a
made-for-TV production  on Sunday night.  It's inspired by a real
incidence and it centers around a divorced couple and their small son.  It
also contains an inflammatory homosexual relationship.  Howeverr, the
sincerity and seriousness of the filmmakers to the issue of child abuse
seperate this film from others that exploit and sensationalize such
tragedy.  
        Martyn is a middle-class physician who was divorced because he
could not deny any more the fact that he was gay.  Presently, he is living
with a cute (even to a girl) lover and has a stable, happy relationship.
His ex-wife Hannah, who is still bitter about the unfortunate marriage,
has an equally pleasant relationship with an architect Frank.  Martyn and
Hannah's small son Oliver.  Naturally, Hannah has the custody and Martyn
has only a restricted visiting right -- who says it's easy to be a
homosexual and a dad the same time?  
        The film starts with Oliver's frentic escape to his father's
apartment with a terrible cut on his face.  He was frightened, but lied
about the cause and the person responsible for such a brutal crime.  It
was not hard for any viewer to figure out who did it, and it was a little
odd that Martyn the father did not until the second incidence in which
Oliver ended up with hand fractures.  At least the filmmakers made no
secret that Frank, Hannah's boyfriend, is a violent child abuser.  
        Things got sticky when Martyn went to court seeking the custody
and safety for his son.  He was obviously on not-so-firm ground being
homosexual and living with a man.  Tension escalated to a final showdown
between the father and the abuser.  I have to say that it's not a
completely satisfying ending to deserve the heart-wrenching development of
the whole film.  
        Even though childless as I am, I did not hold back a couple of
drops of tears when I watched the unspeakable scenes of child abuse.  It
was, however, more of rage than of sadness, and it made the character
Hannah a not very believable person -- at least to me.  Even after her
seeing the abuse with her own eyes, she continues to allow her boyfriend
living in the house and getting the chance to beat up her young,
defenseless child.  The film goes through great trouble to argue that she
is not a bad person and she loves Oliver very much, yet I just don't buy
that.  Of course, it's true that a parent's pleasure and happiness may not
be consistent with their child's, but I still cannot imagine anyone who
loves their children would let such horrible abuse go on.  The writers
want us to sympathize  with Hannah along  with feeling for Oliver -- well,
they cannot have it both ways, no matter how hard they try to explain her
bitterness and hurt from her failed marriage.  
        Martyn, the father, was more sensibly written and easier for the
audience to identify with.  His anguish and frustration are understandable
and his situation beyond his own control.  The helplessness of not able to
protect his own son is nicely delivered by Martin Donovan.  Still, I
cannot help comparing this film to Sling Blade, which involves a similar
theme of child abuse.  The characters in this screenplay pale due to
their simplicity and lack of depth.  They are farely straight forward,
especially the villain Frank, who is stereotypical and very predictable.
The situation is also fairly see-through for the audience to take sides.
One side is a loving and decent father and his extremely understanding and
caring companion in a warm, stable relationship; the other is a selfish
mother (yes, selfish, a more old-fashioned word than denial) who weighs
her own pleasure over her child's safety and a terrible scumbag
child-beater.  There is no challenge, no dilemma, no ambiguity in the
situation.  The same problem lies in the climax of the film that is too
convenient and too easy.  

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 5/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Martin Donovan, Joely Richardson, Sam Bould, Jason Flemyng,
      Ian Hart, David Calder, Edward Hardwicke
Director: Angela Pope
Producer: Elizabeth Karlsen
Screenplay: Paula Milne
Cinematography: Remi Adefarasin
Music: Anne Dudley
U.S. Distributor: Cinepix Film Properties
     Angela Pope's HOLLOW REED is one of the most striking, forceful
films to emerge onto the American art house scene so far this year, but,
like many powerful motion pictures, it can be extremely difficult to
watch.  In examining how the physical abuse of a child affects an
already-broken family, HOLLOW REED doesn't pull any punches, literally
or figuratively.  And, while the beatings aren't as graphic or brutal as
those in another recent domestic violence motion picture, ONCE WERE
WARRIORS, they're all the more wrenching because, in this case, the
victim is a ten year old boy.
     Yet, if HOLLOW REED's sole subject matter had been child abuse, it
wouldn't have been as provocative or challenging.  In crafting this
film, however, Pope and her screenwriter, Paula Milne, have followed an
ambitious agenda -- expose the multi-faceted pain of domestic violence
and show how the courts discriminate against gay men in any custody
battle.  Lawyers and judges can mouth polite platitudes about how
sympathetic they are to the plight of homosexuals and how everyone has
the right to do what they want "in the privacy of their own bedroom,"
but, when it comes to handing over a child into the custody of a gay
father, the deep-rooted ugliness of homophobia rears its head.  Equality
is a word that everyone loves to speak, but, in today's world, there are
times when it remains a distant fantasy.
     Part of the reason that HOLLOW REED is so punishing is that it's
told from a child's point-of-view.  That child is Oliver (Sam Bould), a
quiet, introverted boy who seems to be the perfect son and student. 
He's a STAR WARS fan, and spends hours in his room playing with Luke
Skywalker action figures and remote-controlled cars.  His parents are
divorced, and their relationship is far from amicable.  Oliver lives
with his mother, Hannah (Joely Richardson), and her boyfriend, Frank
(Jason Flemyng).  Meanwhile, Oliver's father, Martyn (Martin Donovan),
an out-of-the-closet homosexual who shares a home with his lover, Tom
(Ian Hart), has only the right of "reasonable access" to his son. 
     The film opens with Oliver arriving at his father's door late one
evening with a bleeding, bruised face.  Although Oliver claims that he
was beaten up by a group of local thugs, Martyn has his doubts.  Days
later, when the boy shows up at school with a crushed hand, Martyn goes
to the police, requesting that they investigate whether Frank has been
abusing his son.  He then instigates a custody lawsuit, with the
intention of taking Oliver away from Hannah if she doesn't kick Frank
out.  And, as the case goes before a judge, all sorts of ugly truths
about society's perception of homosexuals are unveiled.
     Relating the story from Oliver's perspective allows us to better
understand the fear, confusion, and self-blame that the child
experiences.  Physical damage isn't the only byproduct of abuse; it has
deep-reaching psychological ramifications as well, the effects of which
can be far more lasting.  Oliver's reasons for not telling are complex,
and HOLLOW REED makes his silence on the subject seem completely
rational under the circumstances.  Oliver loves both of his parents, so
we see them in a sympathetic light.  Understandably, he doesn't like
Frank, but, while the movie casts him in the role of the villain, it
manages to humanize him to a degree, offering a motivation for his
actions.  The easy route would have been to present Frank as a sadistic,
faceless monster; Pope rejects that cliched path.
     As Oliver's situation becomes more precarious and a legal
resolution remains hanging in limbo (the courts want to investigate
further, and Oliver's stubborn silence robs Martyn of his only witness),
frustration grows.  Desperate to appear "clean" to the court, Martyn
asks Tom to move out, then reconsiders when he realizes the hypocrisy of
that desire.  He also considers illegally abducting Oliver and going on
the run.  His impotence ratchets up the level of tension that Pope works
so hard to create.  HOLLOW REED isn't meant to be a thriller, but the
tone is darker and more ominous than is typical for a drama.
     Both Martin Donovan and Joely Richardson do fine jobs as Oliver's
parents.  Richardson (Disney's live-action 101 DALMATIANS) arguably has
the more difficult role playing the torn woman who doesn't want to
believe a horrible truth that is becoming increasingly more evident. 
Oliver's silence allows her to remain in blissful denial. Donovan, a Hal
Hartley favorite, portrays a man who, despite having the moral high
ground, is powerless to save his son.  The key to Donovan's performance
is that it starts out low-key.  That way, as the situation becomes
increasingly desperate, he never seems over-the-top.  However, all of
the adults, including Richardson, Donovan, and the fine supporting cast,
are outacted by young Sam Bould, who captures the essence of Oliver
without a hint of the confusion and awkwardness that sometimes marks
child performances.  Bould has many memorable moments -- hiding under a
work bench so that Frank won't find him, preparing to defend himself
with a chisel, and bravely enduring the punishment that Frank dishes
out.
     What starts out as a "simple" tale of child abuse widens into a
damning expose of the essential hypocrisy of a "civilized" society --
how certain, "normal" wrongs are tolerated.  To save his son, will
Martyn have to live a lie?  And, if he remains true to himself, will
that continue to place Oliver at risk?  In life, there are no easy
answers, and HOLLOW REED is nothing if not an accurate mirror of
reality.  This is not the sort of motion picture that's likely to find
favor with the "feel good" crowd, but, if you aren't afraid of a movie
that is capable of challenging convictions and wrenching emotions,
HOLLOW REED makes for an unforgettable two hours.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I have come up with a definition -- admittedly arbitrary -- for 
"TV-movie" as it tends to be used in a derogatory fashion.  Melodrama
certainly plays a part in that definition, but it is more symptom than
disease.  The real problem with TV-movies is that they tend to be about
issues, not about people.  Melodrama results from a story about a 
situation; drama results from a story about people responding to a
situation.
     HOLLOW REED has been garnering some comparisons to TV-movies which 
are only half fair.  The story concerns that TV-movie standby the custody
battle, with a few provocative twists.  Young Oliver Wyatt (Sam Bould)
lives with his mother Hannah (Joely Richardson) and Hannah's new boyfriend
Frank (Jason Flemyng); Oliver's father Martyn (Martin Donovan) lives with
his gay lover Tom (Ian Hart).  One day Oliver shows up at Martyn's door
with injuries the boy claims came in a schoolyard fight, and later turns
up with a broken wrist supposedly slammed in a car door.  Martyn begins to
suspect that the cause of the injuries may be Frank, and sues for custody
when Hannah is unresponsive to his concerns.  Thus begins a legal battle
which will expose the biases in the system and force a family to confront
its own biases.
     HOLLOW REED really covers two issues, then:  domestic violence, and
attitudes about homosexuality both institutional and personal.  On the
first front, cries of "TV-movie" amount to utter nonsense.  Director
Angela Pope has crafted a splendid domestic drama which includes many
wrenching scenes of people coping with personal turmoil.  Sam Bould's
performance as Oliver is the centerpiece of that story, a quiet and
reflective piece of work which allows the audience to feel his fear,
confusion and isolation.  Oliver's perspective is everywhere, from furtive
glances through window blinds to the boy's use of a radio-controlled car
fitted with a rear-view mirror to observe things from a distance.  Pope
also includes a marvelous reconciliation scene between Hannah and Frank
which captures a dysfunctional relationship to chilling perfection.  As
long as HOLLOW REED is focused on the dynamics of Hannah, Frank and
Oliver, it is truly exceptional.
     There is, however, another issue with which to grapple, and the
grappling is frequently clumsy.  Martin Donovan, the laconic protagonist
of Hal Hartley's TRUST, SIMPLE MEN and FLIRT, here plays another laconic
protagonist.  In Hartley's films, Donovan's mannered delivery works with
the surreal situations; in HOLLOW REED, Donovan is like a mugging victim
who mutters "Stop, thief."  There is a passion missing from his
interactions with every character in the film which blunts the impact of
his relationship with his son _and_ his relationship with Tom (a more
effective but under-developed Ian Hart).  Pope tries to make up for that
lack of spark by providing a big court-room scene where HOLLOW REED begins
to feel exactly like a TV-movie.  The testimony is treated like a therapy
session where the characters' deep dark feelings are exposed, turning the
climax into a lecture.  Like the least effective TV-movies, HOLLOW REED
starts to feel like it is exists to arouse your indignation rather than to
involve you emotionally.
     If HOLLOW REED is ultimately worthwhile viewing, it is because there
is much more right with the domestic violence story-line than there is
wrong with the gay rights story-line.  Still, the way Pope and writer Paula
Milne approach each issue shows that a timely topic does not a TV-movie
make.  HOLLOW REED is a sensitive study of a particular family responding
in a very personal way to child abuse; it is also a study of Homosexuality
in Society in capital letters.  It's only the latter that you'd probably
see on Fox starring one of the cast members of "Melrose Place."
