Title
Review for Billy Madison (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG-13, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Adam Sandler (Billy Madison), Bridgette Wilson (Miss Veronica
Vaughn), Bradley Whitford (Eric), Darren McGavin (Mr. Madison), written by
Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler, produced by Robert Simonds, directed by Tamra
Davis.
Sometimes things come along that are so insanely stupid they border on sheer
genius. "Billy Madison" is an example of this. It is both a cliche and
original comedy, full of wacky jokes and total idiocy, but for some reason it
works well. So well in fact, we actual laugh along with the film rather than
at it, and that's what makes for good comedy.
Adam Sandler stars as idiot manchild Billy Madison, the son of a billionaire
who owns a chain of hotels. All he does is hang around his mansion, drinking
and going nuts with his two other idiot friends. Billy acts like he's seven
years old and it's hilarious to watch him be so stupid. For example, he gets
so excited when he realizes it's "nudie magazine day" and Sandler's baby talk
is hilarious. 
But the attitude doesn't stop there. Even his magazines are wacky: "She-Male
Fiesta," "Women Over 80," and "Drunk Chicks." Another funny scene involves
Billy and the boys playing practical jokes on people, and their victims are
even bigger idiots than they are. No, this is not the most believable story
in the world, but it certainly is fun to watch. 
Then the movie has to go normal by bringing in a plot. Mr. Madison (McGavin)
knows Billy is a blithering idiot and he always wanted to hand the Madison
Hotel Company over to him when he retires, but how can he give it to such a
moron? When he tells Billy this, they make a deal: if he can pass grades 1 -
12 all over again in 24 weeks, he'll be qualified to take over the company,
otherwise Eric (Whitford), Madison's snotty second in command, will get it.
Eric is the standard comedy villain, his arrogance and vileness are obviously
exaggerated, but so is everything else, so nothing seems too zany here.
And so Billy ventures off to school and the real hilarity ensues. The style
isn't so much "fish-out-of-water" as it is just watching an idiot be an
idiot. Even the teachers are portrayed as very kooky. All of this absurdity
adds up and is funny and likable even though it shouldn't be.
Of course there has to be the
sexy-woman-who-won't-give-the-main-character-the-time-of-day, and that
character is Billy's third grade teacher Miss Veronica Vaughn (Wilson). Is it
necessary to mention what will happen between her and Billy? Another generic
comedy element unfolds when Eric somehow gets to the hero by blackmailing his
principal.
To settle everything once and for all, Billy challenges Eric to an "Academic
Decathlon" in which they will battle for the company - guess who wins?
"Billy Madison" is thin on plot, but big on laughter. It's pathetic humor in
a way, but it's funny, and I can respect that.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
James Brundage
Ah, the joy of the newsgroup.  These psuedo-anonymous message boards can be
home to freaks, weirdos, and just about anyone else that would like to walk
in the door and put their opinion on the ground… myself included.  They also
can be home to the flame war, a particular brand of argument with well
thought-out yet often incoherent point-counterpoint arguments that more
often than not sound like the ravings of a truculent drunk (go ahead, flame
me for that comment, see if I care).  Of course, I'm not exempt from this.
My profession as a critic makes me the prime target of many a flame war,
such as one going on at present at alt.movies discussing the fate of the
cinema, and whether the entire form has gone to crap.
The key argument in this has been that younger individuals are incapable of
writing a screenplay: a point I vehemently disagree with, yet my antagonist
has missed a prime example: Billy Madison, Adam Sandler's attempt at getting
out all of those demons of k through 12 school (God knows what will happen
when he gets out those collegiate demons… a former classmate of Sandler's
described him as `the kid who thought he was really funny that just annoyed
everyone.').  After all, with a concept as unimaginative as a man going back
through all of his grades so he can inherit a company, how far can your
really go?
The movie reeks of desperation.  Nonsensical musical numbers, imaginary
penguins, and cheap sex jokes… they're all here.  No one will escape the
wrath of Adam in his quest for laughter and a better tomorrow.
In case you really wonder about the plot, Adam Sandler is Billy Madison,
loony toon son of a millionaire who stands to inherit a hotel chain if only
he'll stop acting like a moron.  But instead of placing Billy around mature
individuals to accomplish this, his father sends him back through every
grade, giving two weeks for each one.  Billy goes to school, falls for his
3rd grade teacher, and sings crazy selfmotivational music numbers as he
attempts to pat himself on the back so he can make it through high school.
Adam Sandler, please learn that many (extending the `I' here) don't like
your catharsis, and you should keep the moral message in check and just
deliver an idiotic comedy.  As an idiotic comedy, Billy Madison almost
works – after all, Sandler is immature enough to nail the part – but the
film also has misguided attempts to insert such goody-goody messages as
`love thy [insert unloved party here]' that just interrupt what would have
been enjoyment.  The result: a dumb comedy that I can only stand if I'm
watching it out of the corner of my eye and paying attention only during
certain scenes.
This, needless to say, is not great filmmaking.
Oh well.  Like The Blob, there is no escape from the Adam Sandler film.
They have become cultural icons, films that are regularly broadcasted when
they should have been boycotted.  But now I have been there, I have done
that, and I would love it if Adam Sandler would just leave us alone.
Director: Tamra Davis
Producer: Robert Simmons
Writer: Adam Sandler, Tim Herilhy
Starring: Adam Sandler, Bridgette Wilson, Bradley Whitford, Josh Mostel,
Norm MacDonald, Mark Bletzman
Short Stuff short film review:
http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Billy Madison is the spoiled, rich, immature, slacker son of a
multi-millionaire who is about to retire. To prove that he is worthy of
taking over his father's company, Billy must go back to school and pass all
of his classes from 1st to 12th grade. If he doesn't make it, one of his
father's evil henchmen will take over the corporate reins.
CRITIQUE:
Adam Sandler's first starring role is pretty standard Sandler fare with a
touch of weirdness sprinkled throughout. This film is definitely not for
kids, geared more towards adults who love all of Sandler's stupid schticks,
his man-child character, rude behavior and over-the-top acting. I personally
like Sandler's tricks, despite the fact that not all of them work in this
movie. The plot in itself is a farce, and should not be taken seriously by
anyone, unless they are looking to hate this movie. It's a stupid comedy
movie that has been created to make you laugh at the exaggerated behavior by
Adam and his goofy buddies (Chris Farley and Steve Buscemi come through in
their nutty cameos). Unlike his other flicks, this movie takes some very
strange turns in its second half, with Sandler breaking into a musical
number, a person in a Penguin suit floating around, a wrestling character
saving the day and plenty of material to demonstrate the possibility of soft
drugs or heavy liquor being related to the writing of this screenplay :)
Throwaway plot but enough funny "Sandler moments" to satisfy anyone looking
for some strange, cheap laughs.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Sandler's love interest in this film, actress Bridgette Wilson, was Miss
Teen USA in 1990.
Adam Sandler brought some of his buddies from TV's "Saturday Night Live"
along for this one with Chris Farley playing the crazy bus-driver, Robert
Smigel portraying Mr. Oblaski, Tim Herlihy (head writer at SNL) co-writing
the screenplay with Adam and Norm McDonald playing his buddy Frank. Robert
Smigel is known for doing those goofy cartoon sketches on SNL and for being
the lips and voice of Bill Clinton on Conan O'Brien's TV "Late Show".
