Title
Review for Brothers, The (2001/I)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE BROTHERS (2001)
Rated R; running time 106 minutes
Genre: Romantic Comedy/Drama
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.sony.com/thebrothers/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0250274
Written by: Gary Hardwick
Directed by: Gary Hardwick
Cast: Morris Chestnut, D.L. Hughley, Bill Bellamy, Shemar Moore,
Gabrielle Union, Jenifer Lewis, Tamala Jones, Susan Dalian,
Tatyana Ali, Julie Benz, Clifton Powell, Vanessa Bell Calloway,
Marla Gibbs, Angela Brooks
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsthebrothers.html
On 3BC's "Viewer Voices" webboard, Chris Utley mentions that in numerous
other reviews of THE BROTHERS, some [begin code word] mainstream [end
code word] critics are complaining that it's "just another flick in the
same vein as THE BEST MAN and THE WOOD and the films in this genre of
young Black professionals seeking romance, etc."
Yeah; lord knows we need to get back to the days when the only Black man
in a movie, played the ObThug.  What's that now: FIVE "Professional
Black Man/Woman Seeks Fulfillment And The American Dream - Just Like
Their White Counterparts" movies to UMPTEEN "Hoodrat/Thug/Drug
Dealer/SkantchHoe/Pimp/Ig'nant Shuffling Sambo..." flicks?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
THE BROTHERS literally starts with a bang, as Dr. Jackson Smith (Morris
Chestnut) recounts the nightmares he has of a mysterious woman in bridal
attire coming after him with a gun, to his therapist (Vanessa Bell
Calloway).
And speaking of brides, Terry Wright (Shemar Moore), one of Jack's
running buddies (a group of four professional Black men who call
themselves "The Brothers") announces that he's about to jump the broom
with his girlfriend of two months, BeBe Fales (Susan Dalian).  The
Brothers are underwhelmed by this news, especially lawyer Brian Palmer
(Bill Bellamy), who's never met a Black woman without Issues [listen
closely, and you can almost hear the Black Sista 3-Snaps-Up from Angela
Brooks as the spurned Judge], and thus looks to a White woman (Julie
Benz) to fulfill his needs.  And speaking of not having one's needs
fulfilled, fellow Brother Derrick West (D.L. Hughley) is also not quite
enthusiastic over Terry's news; Derrick speaks from experience, as his
wife Sheila (Tamala Jones) refuses to, as the youngsters say, "give
Derrick brain", or to entertain thoughts of letting D's mother (Marla
Gibbs) live with them.
Jack also has Intimacy Issues, stemming from the way his father (Clifton
Powell) abandoned his feisty mother (the wonderful Jenifer Lewis),
leaving them and his wacky sister Cherie (Tatyana Ali) to fend for
themselves.  But Jack's world is about to be turned upside down, as he
meets and falls for freelance photographer Denice Johnson (Gabrielle
Union); Denice *seems* normal enough at first glance, but like most of
the women in The Brothers' lives, she has a skeleton in her closet, too.
The Upshot:
Even with my eyes rolling at my fellow critics, it pains me to say that
THE BROTHERS just didn't Do It for me; not because of some misguided
notion that the Black Movie Role scale has been balanced now that it's
finally hitting the positive end more often - sorry Mr. Charlie, we're a
*lonnnnnng* way away from things being Even, Steven - but because it
paled in comparison to the much better THE BEST MAN, and indeed, was too
derivative of that movie.  One could easily switch the actors in both
movies, and except for the more balanced strength of TBM's cast (sorry
Shemar Moore and Bill Bellamy; you're no Morris Chestnut/Taye Diggs and
Terrence Dashon Howard), come away with nearly the same concept, though
not nearly the same strong movie.
Not to say that there weren't some good-to-great performances in THE
BROTHERS.  Morris Chestnut, as always, put in solid work as Jackson
(even though his character's main conflict made absolutely no sense to
me), and had wonderful chemistry with Gabrielle Union as Denice.  D.L.
Hughley had me absolutely rolling as the sexually frustrated Derrick
West, and put me in mind of, strangely enough, Burgess Meredith in
GRUMPY OLD MEN (made more evident by the outtakes shown at the end).
And Jenifer Lewis once again ran away with a movie, in a role (the
mother) that was probably supposed to suppress her power, but you might
as well ask the sun not to shine as to try to tuck Lewis' abilities to
Bring It, away.
But Bill Bellamy ought to go back to stand-up comedy, or MTV-hosting,
because - as his scenes with his movie mother proved - the man can't
act; more's the pity, because his character's playa-hating and "jungle
fever" *could* have had much more pivotal impact, given a better actor.
Ditto Shemar Moore, who stood there looking as pretty as he wanna be,
but added little to the movie itself.  In his case, though, I fault the
writing and directing more than the actor.  Where Bellamy was given *too
much* to do with too little talent to support it, Moore simply wasn't
given the tools he needed to make Terry much more than a bad plot
device.
And the women in THE BROTHERS?  Besides the powerhouse that is Ms.
Lewis, and Union's good showing, the women came off here pretty badly.
Not that I was surprised by that; after all, the Black Males In
Female-Driven Black Movies scale is also unbalanced with an
overabundance of McMillanesque No Good Black Men.  "Touche", I guess.
My biggest gripe?  It's not so much that women, as a gender, get blasted
in "Brothers" - hey, some of my sisters *deserve* the thrashing - but
that putting a penis on a skreech, doesn't improve the skreech.
Apparently, Terry McMillan doesn't have the corner on Black
gender-bashing.  Writer/director Gary Hardwick had the beginnings of a
good idea, but let it get away from him, failing to support his idea
with a solid storyline, believable backstory, or straightforward
character development.  What started out as a near-copycat of THE BEST
MAN ended up as WAITING TO EXHALE in drag, with an implied Oedipal
conflict thrown in for "good" measure.
The Interview:
I had the honor of interviewing Morris Chestnut before the special
limited showing of THE BROTHERS in which he came to Lansing (yes, I was
shocked, too) to introduce the movie to our audience.  As I expected, he
was quite charming, rivetingly handsome (though slimmer than I expected,
especially after seeing him in THE BEST MAN last year), and serious
about his craft.  We spoke about his breakout role in BOYZ IN THE HOOD
and how he's grown as an actor since then; he told me that he looks for
roles with depth and meaning, and that his long-term plans are to get
involved behind-the-scenes as a producer and director, and to continue
to elevate his art.  He seemed proud of THE BROTHERS; and though I don't
share his enthusiasm with the overall product, Chestnut's solid
contribution to it, as with his past performances, warrant his pride.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I struggled with this one - I truly did - but in the end, I had to mark
it down a notch from the conditional green that I *wanted* to give THE
BROTHERS, because its miscues, lack of direction, and derivative nature,
overshadowed the solid performances by Morris Chestnut, Gabrielle Union,
Jenifer Lewis, and the hilarious D.L. Hughley.  I *will* have to see it
again, though - the ghettofabulous crowd made me miss too much the first
time.
THE BROTHERS (rating: flashing yellowlight):
But still, I'd take a thousand "Brothers" over one more Black Gangsta
flick, *any*day.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Four young, successful, black professionals are closing in on the big "30"
and contemplating the direction of their respective love lives.
CRITIQUE:
Yet another early year puff piece which doesn't try to innovate, give us
anything new or blow us away with anything out of the ordinary. In other
words, check it out on video, if interested. This movie's got a few laughs,
one or two clever lines here and there, but mostly just the same ol', same
ol'. In fact, now that I look back at the film, I can't remember anything
especially distinct or interesting about it. And that's despite the fact
that I could relate entirely to all of the lead characters' issues in the
film, seeing as I'm going through most of the exact same things right now.
But the story just didn't do much for me. It's basically just a bunch of
scenes spliced together to make "a movie". Some mediocre acting here and
there, some groovy tunes tossed all around and a few shots of sweet boot-ay,
but nothing to write to momma about. In fact, even though most of the lead
characters in the film are played pretty well by the boys who are "the
brothers", you simply don't get attached to any them because there are just
too many characters in the film as a whole. And seeing that the dramatic
scenes in the movie don't work as well as the comedic ones, with many of the
transitions feeling forced and awkward, you're essentially left with a film
which looks and feels like an okay comedy, but delivers one too many "corny"
moments as a drama. But I will give it up to the many jokes which did work
in this movie. D.L. Hughley's scenes alone cracked me up throughout,
especially the ones in which he and his wife went back and forth on
blowjobs. Now that was funny! But the development of their relationship, the
separation and their eventual resolution all felt kinda distant to me.
Mostly cause we just didn't get to know the characters all that well.
A perfect example of the film's unevenness is during one scenario in which
one character is shooting a gun into a house, and even though it's initially
treated as a joke, it's suddenly turned serious, and the whole thing just
feels "off". And the final resolutions for all "the brothers" are just
resolved too swiftly, like the screenplay couldn't go over a certain amount
of pages, and they needed to wrap them all up. Director Gary Hadwick has
dubbed this film "Refusing to Exhale", an obvious play on the very
successful drama "Waiting to Exhale", but I'm not sure that's entirely a
good thing (check out the similar posters too). This movie's got some nice
elements going for it, like Shemar Moore's awesome six-pack, many laughs
sprinkled throughout and a few clever insights. But unfortunately, all that
doesn't make up for the fact that the film basically covers a lot of the
stuff we've already seen a thousand times, the fact that the drama/comedy
balance is not played out well and the fact that the ending is wrapped up
too quickly. I certainly wouldn't tell you to stay away from this one on
home video, but even then, don't expect the messiah to come out of your TV
screen and change your life. A sub-par entry into the growing market of
black professional films, this one doesn't come across as a step up as much
as it does a simple step sideways.
Then again, I ain't really this film's target audience, so don't be afraid
to tell me to piss off, if this is your cup o' tea... ;) And hey, if you
wanna go see it just to google all over Shemar Moore and Morris Chestnut's
rippin' abs, don't let me stop you. In fact, both muscular regions scored
very high in my books. Damn, I wish I worked out more...
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Bachelor (4/10) - Beautiful Girls (9/10) - The Best Man (8/10) - High
Fidelity (7/10) - Save the Last Dance (7/10) - Very Bad Things (8/10) -
Whipped (7/10) - Your Friends and Neighbors (4/10)

Author
Steve Rhodes
Gary Hardwick, the writer of the awful TRIPPIN' from two years ago, is 
back with his second film, THE BROTHERS, which he writes and directs.  
Although it is infinitely better than his first attempt, it isn't much 
of a movie.  A lightweight comedy which surrounds some clichés about  
the need to respect women, it does have the occasional laugh and is 
filled with strikingly beautiful, wealthy people possessing great bodies 
and the right revealing clothes to show them off.
The story concerns four lifelong black friends who have always had a 
problem with women in general and commitment in particular.  As the 
movie starts, their shared belief is that black women come with unwanted 
kids and too much blubber.  "It's like they're giving out government 
cheese sandwiches with babies," one of them remarks.  Women who have all 
of the sex that they want are derided as "'hos," while guys doing the 
same earn major bragging rights.  Terry White (Shemar Moore), the 
buffest of our group of four, is attacked in his office by a temp who 
starts stripping and throwing herself at him, pinning him to the wall.  
Sure.
Lawyer Brian Palmer (Bill Bellamy), who makes the mistake of dating a 
white woman who knows karate, gets the least screen time.  The real star 
of the film and the best looking one of the bunch is Jackson Smith, 
played by Morris Chestnut.  Jackson's divorced parents, played by 
Jenifer Lewis and Clifton Powell, also get to tell their story.
The seeming odd man out is Derrick West (D.L. Hughley), who is the only 
married man in the group.  It turns out that he only married his wife, 
Sheila (Tamala Jones), because she got pregnant and insisted on 
marriage, or so he claims.  He and his wife end up separating because of 
his firmly held belief that getting oral sex is his right as a husband.
The movie, which the director says that he likes to think of as REFUSING 
TO EXHALE, gives the guys great looking women to spurn. They, of course, 
will end up realizing what they are missing.  Jackson, for example, 
starts, stops and then starts again dating a woman called Denise Johnson 
(Gabrielle Union) who possesses jaw-dropping beauty.  Eventually Jackson 
will remark to one of his buddies, "This world is filled with amazin' 
women waiting for brothers like us who have got it together."  A nice 
platitude.  The movie rarely rises much above that level.
THE BROTHERS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for strong sexual content and 
language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Annette Cardwell
Like many other African-American-targetted flicks like The Best Man and
Waiting to Exhale, The Brothers is best when it's trying to be a comedy
and comes off as fluffy if not sappy and lame when attempting to teach
us more serious lessons about life and love.  But this movie about the
trials and tribulations of four attractive, successful "buppies" will
definitely entertain, and it's sure to rake in the box office cash.
The four "brothers" are commitment-fearing Jackson (Morris Chestnut, who
also starred in The Best Man), woman-hating playboy Brian (Bill
Bellamy), not-so-happily married Derrick (D.L. Hughley) and reformed
womanizer Terry (Shemar Moore).  When Terry decides to get married, his
boys start sizing up their own lives.
Jackson's new girl Denise (Gabrielle Union) seems like "the one," until
he finds out a secret from her past.  Derrick's wife (Tamala Jones)
isn't meeting his -- ahem -- needs.  And Brian is busy fighting off
crazy "sistahs" and venturing into interracial dating, only to find that
all women are -- to him -- just plain crazy anyway.  In the end, they
all have a lot to learn, as all these kinds of movies seem to preach.
Unfortunately, you'll have to endure the film's preaching to enjoy the
truly hilarious dialogue and ad libbing from this talented cast.  While
the script is full of great lines for him to deliver, almost everything
that comes out of Hughley's mouth gets a laugh.  He's especially a riot
in the outtakes shown at the end of the movie, where he invents new
versions of one of the film's already hysterical speeches.
Bellamy and Chestnut are serviceable and sometimes even good in their
roles, but the wooden Moore is clearly just hunky, chiseled, Rick
Fox-wannabe eye candy.  Thankfully for him, this is definitely the type
of movie that calls for a guy like Moore.  It's a picture that's
tailor-made for the ladies -- especially black women -- who will be
swooning over these almost-perfect, hard-working, educated "brothers"
who just need a good woman to make them "wanna be a man."  And, it
doesn't hurt to throw in a few gratuitous shirtless basketball scenes
that could rival the famous volleyball scene from Top Gun.
For anyone who's already a fan of Hughley or the comedy of Chris Rock
and his ilk, or even if you just like ogling a pack of "fine" young
African-American men, The Brothers has a lot to offer.  Don't go looking
for any sage revelations on life, love and happiness.  When this
hit-and-miss script gets up on its pulpit, you may want to walk out on
the sermon.
Director: Gary Hardwick
Producer: Darin Scott, Paddy Cullen
Writer: Gary Hardwick
Starring: Morris Chestnut, D.L. Hughley, Bill Bellamy, Shemar Moore,
Tamala Jones, Gabrielle Union, Tatyana Ali
Web site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/thebrothers/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
