Title
Review for Pather Panchali (1955)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kanu Bannerjee, Karuna Bannerjee, Subir Bannerjee, Uma Das Gupta, 
      Chunibala Devi
Director: Satyajit Ray
Producer: the Government of West Bengal
Screenplay: Satyajit Ray, based on the novel by 
      Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay
Cinematography: Subrata Mitra
Music: Ravi Shankar
U.S. Distributor: Merchant-Ivory/Sony Pictures Classics
In Hindi with subtitles
     When discussing "giants" of the non-English-speaking, international 
film world, four names leap immediately to mind:  Ingmar Bergman, 
Federico Fellini, Akira Kurosawa, and Satyajit Ray.  Of these men, Ray 
has received the least North American exposure, but, arguably, the most 
critical acclaim.  Praise for the Indian director, who died in 1992 
shortly after receiving a lifetime achievement Oscar, has been effusive 
from both film makers and critics.  Vincent Canby, of the NEW YORK 
TIMES, once wrote that "an entire world is evoked" by each of Ray's 
films.  The late Louis Malle called Ray's body of work "magical and 
completely unique."  And James Ivory, the director of HOWARDS END and 
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, has said that, after watching a Ray movie, the 
viewer will feel "fulfilled, enriched, maybe wiser, and wanting more."  
     Indeed, it is Ivory, along with his partner, Ismail Merchant, who 
has made this screening of PATHER PANCHALI, Ray's directorial debut, 
possible.  With financial backing from Sony Pictures Classics, Merchant 
and Ivory have cleaned up, packaged, and released a series of Ray 
pictures for distribution in select United States theaters.  Included in 
"The Masterworks of Satyajit Ray" is the complete APU TRILOGY, which is 
comprised of three of the director's early films:  PATHER PANCHALI, 
APARAJITO, and THE WORLD OF APU.  The movies, which exist on video but 
are not readily available, are worth searching out.  Anyone who believes 
in the uplifting power of motion pictures will not be disappointed.
     PATHER PANCHALI, Ray's first foray into the film making world, was 
completed in 1955, and proceeded to win the top prize at the 1956 Cannes 
Film Festival.  It's a quiet, simple tale, centering on the life of a 
small family living in a rural village in Bengal.  The father, Harihar 
(Kanu Bannerjee), is a priest and poet who cares more about his writing 
and spiritual welfare than obtaining wages he is owed.  The mother, 
Sarbojaya (Karuna Bannerjee), worries that her husband's financial 
laxity will leave her without enough food for her two children, daughter 
Durga (Uma Das Gupta) and son Apu (Chunibala Devi).  Harihar's family 
often lives on the edge of poverty, coping with the unkind taunts of 
their neighbors, the burden of caring for an aging aunt (Chunibala 
Devi), and the terrible aftermath of a natural catastrophe.
     PATHER PANCHALI starts slowly, but builds inexorably towards a 
powerful climax as we come to know, and empathize with, the characters.  
Ray takes the time to create a meticulously believable world that draws 
the viewer in.  There isn't a false note in the entire film -- not in 
the characterization, the dialogue, or the storyline.  The emotions 
evoked by the events of PATHER PANCHALI are honest and true, not the 
contrived byproducts of manipulative formulas.  Ray makes us feel with 
the characters, not just for them.
     Most of what transpires is shown through the eyes of either 
Sarbojaya or Durga, and, as a result, we identify most closely with 
these two.  Harihar is absent for more than half of the movie, and, 
before the penultimate scene, Abu is a mere witness to events, rather 
than a participant.  Until the closing moments, we don't get a sense of 
the young boy as a fully formed individual, since he's always in someone 
else's shadow.  
     With its often-poetic black-and-white images and heartfelt method 
of storytelling, PATHER PANCHALI speaks intimately to each member of the 
audience.  This tale, as crafted by Ray, touches the souls and minds of 
viewers, transcending cultural and linguistic barriers.  The languorous 
pace, which initially seems detrimental, proves to be an asset -- PATHER 
PANCHALI would not have been the same experience had material been cut. 
Each scene builds upon what has come before.  This is the kind of motion 
picture that will stay with you for hours, or perhaps even days, after 
you've left the theater, and that's a rare characteristic for any movie.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     PATHER PANCHALI (1955), also known as SONG OF THE LITTLE ROAD, is
an Indian film that is showing now at some of the cinematic art houses.
It is considered by many to be a classic movie and is the first part of
director Satyajit Ray's "Apu Trilogy."  The movie has a lot going for
it, not the least of which is extremely earnest and heartfelt
performances by all of the cast.  In its depiction of abject poverty it
reminded me somewhat of King Vidor's OUR DAILY BREAD (1934) and John
Ford's THE GRAPES OF WRATH (1940).  I am sorry to report that, being
one of the slowest films I have ever seen, I did not like PATHER
PANCHALI.  Sincerity is not enough for me; I like a movie where
something happens.
     At first I had trouble figuring out what was going on since not
much of anything was happening so I figured I was missing something.
After a while it dawned on me that PATHER PANCHALI is a slice of life
movie, but one at a glacial pace.  The director gets lots of long
sequences of people looking pensively.
     The story is a tale of a long suffering wife, Sarbojaya Ray
(Karuna Bannerjee), a financially irresponsible father, Harihar Ray
(Kanu Bannerjee), a daughter, Durga (Uma Das Gupta), a son, Apu (Subir
Bannerjee), and a very old and invalid Aunt, Indir Thakrun (Chunibala
Devi), whom the mother views as a lot of trouble.  The father is proud
to be the descendant of a long line of artists and scholars.  He wants
to be a playwright and poet, but has trouble making any money in the
meantime.  He works as an accountant, but does not want to complain to
his employer that he is not being paid lest he be fired.
     The movie works best in the scenes of everyday life.  My favorites
are the candy man who walks through the jungle ringing his bells like
an ice cream truck in this country, the six week old kittens
frolicking, and the great cinematography (Subrata Mitra) of water bugs
dancing on a pond.
     Most of the movie consists of incidents like Durga stealing fruit
from the old family orchard that used to belong to them.  She eats the
fruit herself as well as gives it to her Aunt and to Apu.  She
continues to get caught and get in trouble for it.  There is a constant
tension about whether the father will ever make any money to feed his
family.  The father has a simple philosophy of "Whatever God does is
for the best," which is a pleasant enough aphorism, but leaves his kids
close to starvation.
     PATHER PANCHALI may be an acquired taste.  Certainly the acting is
straight forward and earnest, but not much actually happens in the film
and what does happen happens so slowly.  I think tighter editing (Dulal
Dutta) and a more energetic script (Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay and
Satyajit Ray) would have kept my attention better.  Finally, for me the
best part of the picture is the music by Ravi Shankar who was then an
unknown musician.  It is sublime.
     PATHER PANCHALI runs 1:55, but I think it would have been much
more effective at about 1:25.  The picture is filmed in black and white
and the print I saw was in acceptable shape, but showed its age.  The
film is in Bengali with English subtitles.  It is not rated, but would
certainly be rated G.  There is exactly one mildly harsh word in it,
and there is no sex, nudity, or violence.  The movie would be fine for
children of any age, but the slowness would lose most of the young
ones.  I admire the sincerity of the film, but I can not recommend it
no matter how much of a classic it is.  It is unmercifully slow.  For
its sweetness I give **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Murali Krishnan
[3.5/4.0]  (dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film, with the English title "Song of the Little Road", is the
first component of Satyajit Ray's "Apu Trilogy".
The story begins with the introduction of the Roy family. The anchor
of the Roy family is Sarbojaya (Karuna Bannerjee). Because her husband
Hari (Kanu Bannerjee) is often out of work, she has the difficult duty
of managing all the daily needs of the family with meager resources.
Hari is not overly concerned with the family's plight because he more
concerned with spiritual needs than with material needs. He works odd
jobs as a priest and a clerk so that they scrape by, and he spends his
free time composing his literature. Hari's general view is that
"whatever God does is for the best." Although their most basic needs
are met, Sarbojaya knows that they live a precarious existence. Their
house is in disrepair, their daughter Durga (Runki Banerjee as the
small child, Uma Das Gupta as the adolescent) is acquiring a bad
reputation by stealing fruit from a neighbor's orchard, and it is
sometimes a struggle to make sure everyone has enough to eat. Hari's
elderly aunt, Indir (Chunibala Devi) also lives with the Roys, but
Sarbojaya dislikes how she spoils Durga. Sarbojaya, who is pregnant
as the story opens, eventually gives birth to a son, Apu (Subir
Bannerjee). Because Hari is often away working, Sarbojaya is the
backbone holding the family together.
The family's poverty is no drag on the spirits of the children. Durga
and Apu make their own world adventurous and carefree. Even though
they miss treats like being able to buy sweets from the traveling
candy man, they enrich their lives with the multitude of simple
pleasures available to them. From the joy of getting drenched by the
monsoon, to the thrill of traveling across the countryside to see a
train, Durga and Apu do not miss any pleasures of childhood. It is
only the responsibilities of the adult world that gnaw at the spirit
of the individuals. It is perhaps this specter that keeps Durga from
maturing. Her mother tells her that she should be more helpful in the
household, but Durga's only interest is in playing. As Durga watches
one of her friends get married, she gazes forlornly knowing that it is
difficult for a poor girl to get a marriage arranged. It is as if she
knows impending adulthood cannot be avoided. If she could choose, she
would probably want to spend her entire life as a child.
Although the trilogy is centered around his character, Apu himself has
a diminished role in this story. He is only a young boy through all the
events. The primary characters are really the women, and they symbolize
the major stages of life. The irrepressible Durga represents the
carefree nature of childhood, when dependence on parents allows the
spirit to be free. The somber Sarbojaya represents the heavy
responsibilities of adulthood, when life is a serious matter and the
needs of self and others are a constant struggle. The fragile Indir
represents the precariousness of old age, when the return to dependence
can become a shackle if one is restricted by
poverty.
Perhaps the only aspect that indicates that this film was made decades
ago is the quality of the print. In all other aspects, it displays a
remarkable moderness. Although the story is set in the 1920's, the
issues that it deals with are timeless. Only the absence of
technological advances (motorized vehicles, electric light, etc) and
the style of clothing indicate the time period. All the acting
performances are flawless. This is no small feat considering the depth
to which each character is explored. In terms of cinematography, it is
almost difficult to believe that this was Satyajit Ray's first feature
film. He displays a virtuoso mastery of the medium on par with any
filmmaker, regardless of era. The main narrative is interspersed with
simple and evocative scenes of nature, like water bugs skimming back
and forth over the surface of a pond. These images, along with the
languid pace of the story, serve to underscore the individual's
insignificant presence in the greater universe. Whatever the fate of
the Roy family, the world continues in its eternal rhythms unperturbed.
With this, his first film, Ray immediately established himself as a
master of Indian and international cinema. Although all aspects of
the story are characteristically Indian, he brings out concerns and
struggles shared by people in every corner of the world. This film
deservedly won several international film awards, including the
appropriately named "Best Human Document" at the Cannes Film Festival.
Highly recommended. This is an absorbing and moving drama. Ray is
able to portray the vagaries of the human condition in a simple,
poignant story.
--== Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ ==--
---Share what you know. Learn what you don't.---

Author
Dennis Schwartz
PATHER PANCHALI (SONG OF THE LITTLE ROAD) (director: Satyajit Ray; cast:
Kanu Bannerjee (Hari), Karuna Bannerjee (Sarbajaya), Uma Das Gupta
(Durga), Subir Bannerjee (Apu), Chunibala Devi (grandmother),
1955-India)
An understated masterpiece in simplicity and poetical mood, the first
part of Ray's trilogy, THE WORLD OF APU, based on the popular 1934
two-volume novel by Bibhuti Bannerji, as Ray studies the life of a very
poor family, trying to survive on an income of next-to-nothing in a
rural village in Bengal. PATHER PANCHALI covers the early childhood of
the hero of the story, Apu. We, as observers, seem to become a part of
the family and share in their dreams and hopes, wondering what can be
done to make life better, as we ask ourselves, is it best to leave
everything in the hands of God, believing that God knows best.
We first become acquainted with the utterly adorable Durga (Uma), as she
steals fruit from the local orchard and is detected by the spiteful
neighbors, who blame her mother Sarbajaya (Karuna) for not teaching her
the difference between right and wrong. The mother hears this being said
while she is doing her laundry by the communal well, and confronts her
daughter with this information, realizing that she is taking the mangoes
and guava to her very old, hunchbacked, toothless and unwanted
grandmother (Devi), who is devilishly charming. She has gotten under
Sarbajaya's skin, making her unhappy that the playful Durga loves to
help her out. Mother accuses grandmother of being a bad influence for
the child; and, the reason she is being thought of as a bad mother by
the neighbors; so she asks granny to leave, claiming she can't stay here
any longer, that she is spoiling the child.
Apu (Subir) is born, and grandmother returns to live with the family.
Durga is childishly playful with her wide-eyed younger brother (who
represents all the hopes of knowledge and success for this family). She
is constantly teasing him; but, also, she shows great affection for him.
They seem to have a natural bond.They are both trapped in their
environment and have only their childhood dreams to help them escape
their poverty.The father, Hari (Kanu), is a failure as a provider for
the family. He is a dreamer. He thinks of himself as a scholar, who will
one day become famous for writing plays. He also conducts religious
services to try and meet expenses. But this is not going well, the house
is badly in need of repairs, and his wife constantly nags him to get
some money. He is of such a good nature, that he can't stand to argue
with anyone or ask for something, even if it is rightfully his, putting
all his fate in God. He can't even ask his boss the reason why he isn't
being paid; or, as his wife reminds him, he didn't even fight for his
rights to the fertile orchard, which would have softened life for the
family to a considerable degree, when his inheritance of it was
challenged because his brother had huge debts.
Tragedy comes to the family when the father has to leave the local area
to seek work and fails to return for months, leaving the family in an
impoverished state. During a monsoon rainstorm, Durga develops a chill
and because the family lacks the proper medicine, she dies. This takes
the heart out of the family, as the father returns too late to be of any
help. Death has already come to their grandmother, after feeling
rejected by her family, she goes out to the hidden fields and is found
starved to death by the children who went there to look at the trains
passing by.
The final scene shows the family moving away from the isolated village
their family has lived in for generations, opting for the bigger city of
Benares, where it might be possible for them to better their lives.
Satyajit Ray's old-fashioned and slow developing film, graced with the
sublime sitar ragas of Ravi Shankar, is unpretentious and starkly
beautiful in its depiction of the human condition just as it is, giving
relevance to the lives of these ordinary people, without the need to be
arty about it, as the characters find in their hearts how best to
transcend the situation they are in. This film should be a magical
lesson in film-making for those modern filmmakers who think they must
inject heavy doses of symbolism to get their point across.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
