Title
Review for Diary of a Hit Man (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Hit man being caught in the existential crisis is a concept
that is quite common for today's Taratinoesque comedies. But
it was used even before, and, believe it or not, in dead
serious stage plays. One of such stage plays is INSIDER'S
PRICE by Kenneth Pressman. In 1991 same author adapted his
play for the big screen in a film DIARY OF A HIT MAN,
directed by Roy London.
The hit man in question is Dekker (played by Forrest
Whitaker). He is professional assassin who is good at his
work, yet, who feels less and less satisfied with his career
and way of life. Like many people in his situation, he wants
out, but it isn't so easy. First he must do the very last
job, that should settle him financially for good. That job
is Jain (Sherilyn Fenn), beautiful woman, and the contract
was put on by her half-crazed husband. When he finally meets
her, Dekker finds out that he is attracted to the woman and
that he simply can't pull the trigger.
Movies based on stage plays are sometimes very recognisable,
because the scripts almost always put more emphasis on
characters than the action itself. DIARY OF A HIT MAN isn't
much different. Although the plot isn't limited on one or
few isolated places, theatrical feel is still present.
Mostly because some of the actors work really hard,
sometimes forgetting that they don't play at the stage. But
the main actor, always reliable Forrest Whitaker, plays the
character of a hit man with excellence, making his anxiety
and transformation quite believable. Unfortunately, most of
the other actors aren't so good, especially Sharon Stone,
who was wasted in small and rather unnecessary role. Director
Jerry London doesn't excel either, making this theatrical
film even cheaper-looking than it actually is. The plot is
also sometimes confusing, because the characters aren't
well-drawn. All in all, DIARY OF A HIT MAN is a film with
good idea, but poor execution, and hitmen suffering from
existential crisis were doomed to fall into domain of
Tarantino.
