Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
Number of Reviews
29

Author
Walter Frith
Meet Jerry Fletcher (Mel Gibson).  He's a New York City cab driver who is
obsessed with conspiracies at every level.  Whether it's in government, big
business or anywhere else you can be sure that Jerry has a theory on it if
there is indeed any conspiracy at all.  Jerry lives in a very small apartment
which he has turned into a shrine complete with walls decorated with pictures
and news articles on such things as the assassinations of JFK and John Lennon
and the list goes on and on.  Jerry padlocks his refrigerator and has the
food and other articles inside it in containers with miniature padlocks while
his shelf food around the kitchen is kept behind an anti-burglar cage.  This
guy is really paranoid and believes that the drinking water contains
ingredients to make people slaves to the state.  He even sleeps at night with
multiple locks on his front door and balances a beer bottle on the top of his
inside doorknob which will tumble to the floor and break if anyone tries to
break in.
Jerry is in love with Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts).  She is a U.S. Department
of Justice attorney and as the story unfolds we learn that he saved her from
being mugged by two thieves and the two of them become friends while he
thinks it's more than platonic, she likes him as only a friend.  The two of
them become embroiled in a fight for their lives as one of Jerry's theories
apparently seems to be true but he doesn't know which one and the audience is
caught in the middle of it as the film looks for answers.
'Conspiracy Theory' is a film that has to be viewed to its conclusion in
order to judge it fairly. It is an extremely uneven motion picture which is
uneventful at times with a sense of muddled plot and a lack of focus but
there are genuine moments of action and excitement which are compelling and
the film has a sense of appeal to both men and women who will be equally
catered to in the film's running time which is a bit too long but prepare to
sit still and avoid making trips to the pay phone, rest room or snack bar as
it needs to be followed in extreme detail.
Uncanny as it may seem, Patrick Stewart plays a sharply unique villain and
the film would be obtuse and flat without his presence.  
'Conspiracy Theory' is a good film in a summer lacking in quality and
original ideas and with Julia Roberts involved, you may draw parallels to
1993's 'The Pelican Brief' but this one should entertain most people even if
you walk away trying to figure out exactly what happened.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
CONSPIRACY THEORY
Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts, Patrick Stewart
Rated R, Three stars (out of a possible five.)
"Conspiracy Theory" is a puzzle box. This entertaining, engaging and 
thoroughly loopy thriller is full of surprises. It's a rare, and quite 
refreshing, treat to watch a Hollywood film and actually be kept off 
guard almost all the way through. Richard Donner, director of the "Lethal 
Weapon" series, reunites with Mel Gibson for this tale of a paranoid New 
York cab driver who stumbles into a great deal of trouble. Gibson plays 
Jerry Fletcher, a deeply disturbed man who overwhelms his passengers with 
tales of bizarre conspiracies. 
According to Fletcher, militia groups are actually U.N. troops, the 
Vietnam War was fought over a bar bet between Howard Hughes and Aristotle 
Onassis, and filmmaker Oliver Stone is really an government agent in 
charge of disseminating disinformation (actually, there may be something 
to that one). Fletcher publishes a newsletter called Conspiracy Theory, 
which has only five subscribers ("I think it's because of the economy", 
he sheepishly explains). When not startling passengers or experiencing 
flashback-induced panic attacks, he focuses his attentions on Alice 
Sutton (Julia Roberts), a lawyer with the Justice Department. He watches 
her through her apartment window, and periodically bursts into her office 
to share his latest paranoid notions. Sutton permits the intrusions 
because Fletcher once protected her when she was attacked by muggers. 
Things change suddenly when Fletcher is scooped up by mysterious agents, 
led by Dr. Jonas (Patrick Stewart), whose questions indicate that one of 
Fletcher's conspiracy stories has struck a nerve with someone very 
powerful. Sutton gets drawn into the fracas and the questions begin. Just 
how mentally ill is Fletcher? Is he an ally or a threat to Sutton? Who is 
Dr. Jonas and what does he want from Fletcher. Who are the good guys and 
who are the bad guys? Just what the hell is all this really about? 
Richard Donner keeps you guessing as he confidently spins his tale. Far 
too many key moments in "Conspiracy Theory" depend on coincidences, and 
the film is occassionally too slick for its own good, but that's par for 
the course from the guy who directed "Lethal Weapon". What Donner excels 
at is utilizing actors and locations for maximum effect, and he's in fine 
form here. 
The film's three leads are exceptional actors. Mel Gibson does an 
outstanding job portraying the mentally ill cabby. His mannerisms and 
phrasing are credible, creating a character who is sometimes touching, 
sometimes beguiling, and often quite disturbing. In addition to his 
paranoia, Fletcher is obsessive/compulsive. When confronted about his 
irresistible urges to seek out copies of "The Catcher In The Rye", he 
breaks down in a swirl of confusion, frustration, and shame. The scene is 
completely believable and quite moving. Gibson is a connoisseur of bad 
puns and the Three Stooges, and tosses in several puns and one pointed 
Stooge reference. The self-indulgence is mildly annoying, but stays 
within acceptable limits, because its conceivable that the character 
might share the same traits. 
Julia Roberts does fine work as Alice Sutton, adding welcome personal 
details to what could easily have been a stock character. At one point, 
Sutton uses a fire extinguisher to crack apart a padlock. After breaking 
the lock, she pauses to hand one of the pieces to a cohort. Nice touch. 
Roberts shades Sutton with a wistful nature that compliments her powerful 
personality. 
Patrick Stewart's Dr. Jonas shares the commanding presence that made his 
Star Trek performances resonate, combined with an extra air of elegance 
and menace. Again, Stewart takes a potential stereotype and adds just the 
right amount of nuance to keep the audience wondering about the true 
nature of the man.
Donner does wonders with his New York locale, playing the city as if it 
were another character. It rains during most of the night scenes - - all 
the better to reflect the neon lights and enhance the romance of New York 
after dark. It's a obvious trick, but it works. His daylight scenes 
depict New York as a huge, intricate and somewhat threatening machine. 
Most of the daytime scenes are shot under overcast skies. In fact, it 
seems the sun only shines to make Julia Roberts' beautiful hair glisten 
all the more.
"Conspiracy Theory's" storyline is admittedly ragged. The plot gets a bit 
too confusing at times, while becoming overly conventional at other 
moments. But despite the weak points, the film is consistently 
entertaining, thanks to the premise, Donner's assured direction and the 
sharp performances from Gibson, Roberts and Stewart, along with well-
drawn work from the supporting players. "Conspiracy Theory" will never be 
mistaken for art, but it's a fine diversion during these dog days of 
summer.

Author
Christopher Null
     Hitting theaters shortly, with surprisingly little fanfare, is
CONSPIRACY THEORY, a very long and very scattered production which
introduces the never-before-used plotline that the government is full of
bad guys.
     I was intrigued at first:  as the ads tout, a conspiracy nut (Mel
Gibson) suddenly learns one of his theories is true, and everyone's out
to get him.  And in the process, he has to protect a redhead (Julia
Roberts).  That would normally be enough for me, but without spoiling
the movie for you, that just ain't what the movie is about.
     While the central plot twist turns out to be pretty shocking, it
can't make up for the sad reality that THEORY has an appalling script --
and most notably that the dialogue is totally ridiculous.  The film's
cinematography is painful to watch, and Gibson, who would seem perfect
for the nutcase role given his LETHAL WEAPON roots, comes off as silly
and pathetic.  Clocking in at well over two hours, THEORY quickly earns
a place on the too-much-of-a-bad-thing wall.  In the end, the movie
makes enough sense, but it leaves so many loose ends dangling that it's
hard to care.
     Oh well, I guess a Julia Roberts fetish can't overcome a crummy
script and bad production values after all.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Phew, what a mess!  For his fifth collaboration with director Rich-
ard Donner (LETHAL WEAPON I-III, MAVERICK), Mel Gibson plays a
motormouth, maybe mentally ill New York City cabbie, Jerry, whose wild
conspiracy theories are all but ignored by Alice (Julia Roberts, acting
all serious), the Justice Department employee that he has a crush on.
She not interested, but another person is:  a CIA psychiatrist (Patrick
Stewart) who promptly kidnaps him.  Is one of Jerry's conjectures
correct?  *Is* the metal strip in the new $100 bill being used to track
your movements?  Is Oliver Stone still alive, because he cut a deal with
George Bush to spread *dis*information?  Is this movie really about
*any* of the crazed cabbie's theories?  No, no, and no.  As it turns
out, there's some other nonsense going on here, involving and revolving
around Jerry's background.  (Hint:  pay attention to an early scene
where Jerry blacks out and flashes back, in quick succession, to images
of an interrogation room, hypodermic needles, and Ms. Roberts herself.)
     The *initial* premise is pretty good and is played, for a while, at
a delightfully dizzying clip.  Mel is wider-open that we've ever seen
him and, if his character's relationship with Roberts' initially strains
credibility, their combined star power is blissfully intoxicating.  (The
highest wattage of the summer, perhaps?) Even when the plot contrivances
begin to intrude, the two remain a randy dandy screen pair.  There's a
great scene in Jerry's fortress, er, apartment, with Alice trying to act
casual as her hyperactive host tries to remember the combination to a
locked coffee bean container.  (Which he stores in another locked con-
tainer, his fridge.) Other hilarious moments, of which there are many,
include a trio of memorable convention-breakers, where Alice ditches a
tail, Jerry cold-cocks someone, and, later, eludes a foot pursuit, each
in a uproariously unexpected fashion.  (That's Donner's own LADYHAWKE
playing in the theater, BTW.)
     Let's see, other pleasures include... a brilliant title sequence, a
jazzy score from Carter Burwell, and the worth-paying-to-see sight of
Roberts pumping lead into one bad guy and slamming another's head into a
wall.  Oh, pretty woman!  Getting to the latter, however, requires
slogging through an increasingly overburdened and ultimately unappealing
story.  The last hour of CONSPIRACY THEORY devolves from tolerable to
torturous to almost unwatchable.  More stuff happens of the stupid shit
variety than is worth mentioning here, except, perhaps, for a late
sequence that has Alice locating Jerry in an abandoned wing of a mental
hospital by hearing his voice carrying through the air ducts.  And here
I thought it was wabbit season.  Good God, who rewrites these movies?
And do they arrive in nondescript black vehicles?

Author
Steve Kong
I've fallen in love again with Julia Roberts. It's been a while since I've
seen a movie with her in it but I'm glad to see her again. Conspiracy
Theory is a movie that doesn't go far enough on anything. It doesn't have
enough action to be an action film, it doesn't have enough thrills to be a
thriller, and it doesn't have enough laughs to be a comedy. But, it does
have Mel Gibson and Julia Roberts, and at the helm of the production
Richard Donner.
Gibson's last outing with Donner was the failed Maverick. This time around
though, the film is enough to draw a crowd and the story enough to hold our
attention.
Jerry Fletcher (Mel Gibson) is a paranoid man who thinks that there is a
conspiracy behind everything. People are trying to kill the President with
a major earthquake caused by the Space Shuttle. Fluorine in our water is
there not only to keep our teeth white, but also to help loosen us up and
make us easily controlled by the government. And the best one yet, Oliver
Stone is just a misinformation guy helping to cover up government
conspiracies. Jerry is also a little strange and has flashbacks while
driving his cab. He has a deep infatuation with Alice Sutton (Julia
Roberts) who is a lawyer for the Justice Department. Jerry's apartment is
lined with aluminum foil, his door is quadrupled locked, his refrigerator
is locked, and even his cans have locks. And in his free time Jerry likes
to write a newsletter named Conspiracy Theory. It's subscriber base? Five.
Now that Jerry has published another issue, it seems that someone is out to
get him. There must have been a theory in there that struck a nerve,
something that is true.
Julia Roberts gives a good performance, as Jerry's love interest. I loved
Mel Gibson's performance, but it is Roberts who steals the show with her
smile. Gibson's performance is almost on par with his performance in the
Lethal Weapon series (which he also did with Richard Donner.) His character
is nuts and sometimes very unpredictable. But Jerry is a loveable guy also.
Patrick Steward plays the suspicious good and bad Doctor Jonas. Steward
gives as good as a performance he can with the material that he is given.
And he actually does make for a good protagonist. Donner, who is not really
a very visual director, does a nice job with this film. The buildings look
ominous, the rain even worse, and the bad guys all faceless. The movie does
run a little long, but it is bearable.
I recommend Conspiracy Theory for all of those who are interested in a,
though uninspired, action romantic comedy thriller. It's hard to get all of
those genres into one film, and Conspiracy Theory shows that it is. But,
Conspiracy Theory does not fall under the weight of it all. When there is
action, it is well staged. When it needs to thrill it certainly does. When
it wants to make us laugh, it does it. And when there is an emotional
moment, it makes us choke up.

Author
Hanson Yoo
Yet another Donner/Silver/Gibson team-up with Julia Roberts thrown into the mix,
Conspiracy Theory really does little to go beyond the formula of the Lethal
Weapon series - the set-up, the funny middle, and the sagging, auto-pilot,
guns-a-blazing ending.  The difference?  Gibson is partnered with a woman and
there aren't any big explosions.  My theory is that anteing up for both Gibson
and Roberts didn't leave enough budget left over to blow things up.
The story sets up a bit slowly - Gibson is Jerry Fletcher, a cabbie with a mind
grounded solidly in conspiracy theories.  Julia Roberts is Alice Sutton, a
Justice Department lawyer and the object of Jerry's affections.  Jerry seems to
have made a habit of gaining entry to the Justice Department offices to meet
with Alice and apprising her of his latest conspiracy theories (you know, it's
impossible to recap the plot without constantly mentioning the title.  Do you
think it's all a nah).  She humors him, although grudgingly, because he saved
her from a mugging six months prior.  Alice has an obsession of her own - she's
still investigating the murder of her father, even though the case is officially
closed.  And Alice hasn't ridden her precious horses since her father's death.
Will Alice find out who really murdered her father?  Will this all tie in with
Jerry?  Will she ever ride again?  Take a wild guess.
There are some nice touches besides the kooky conspiracy theories (there's that
title again).  Jerry never enters his apartment the same way twice in a row, and
he leaves toothpicks in strategic places to ensure that his apartment hasn't
been entered without his knowledge.  His refrigerator and it's contents are all
locked up to ensure nothing is tampered with.  And metal lines all his walls
(although we later find out that it's not just to block out CIA mind control
transmissions).  In short, Jerry's not only sees conspiracies around him, but
he's also one paranoid puppy.  Of course, Alice doesn't believe a word of it
until...
Well, you'll have to see the movie to find out.  But it's not really all that
clever nor is it original.  Pretty soon, the movies runs rampant with shadow ops
baddies (including Patrick Stewart) and doubts about who's telling the truth and
who's in on the conspiracy (not that the film leaves any doubts).  Sure, the
second act is well made - it's both funny and interesting with a couple of very
good performances from Gibson and especially Roberts (who hasn't been this
fetching since Pretty Woman).  Stewart seems to waver between a passable
American accent to full Jean Luc-Picard mode.  Note to Patrick - you're supposed
to be sinister.  Go with the English accent.  Who cares about plausibility in a
film like this?
About the time the duo hits Connecticut, the movies loses all it's charm and
steam.  Right about then you can see the ending coming from a mile away because
you've seen it about a hundred times before.  It's as if the filmmakers reached
for a box of "Instant Action Movie Ending" and just added water without even
bothering to stir (which may be another reason why there weren't any
explosions).  Not that the movie was great up until that point, but at least it
was entertaining.  The last act is so generically blah that there's hardly a
reason to watch it - most of the audience can connect the dots at this point.
As if the ending isn't perfunctory enough, stick around for the credits -
there's yet another seemingly obligatory hip-hop remake of an older song (this
time it's the Frankie Valli standby, Can't Take My Eyes Off Of You).  And like
My Best Friend's Wedding, people singing the song in unison are used for cheap
laughs.  
Conspiracy Theory is another one of those "starts interesting, ends formulaic"
Hollywood movies that coasts more on the charms of it's stars than anything
else.  In other words, yet another summer action flick.    

Author
Michael Rizzo
        A long time ago, (and seemingly in a galaxy far, far away) back in
the days of Alfred Hitchcock and Otto Preminger, American moviegoers, and
movie critics, enjoyed the idea of a little tinge of suspense and
intelligence in their films.  In 1997, however, with huge multiplexes,
huge budgets, and huge special effects, this no longer seems to be the
case.  To support this theory, I offer you the decidedly mixed reviews
which so far have been given to "Conspiracy Theory", the fifth
collaboration between Mel Gibson, Richard Donner, and producer Joel
Silver.  With so many movies flooding the multiplexes, perhaps critics are
too tired for a little bit of mental gymnastics once the picture begins;
perhaps also moviegoers are too accustomed to seeing a film's entire plot
laid out in its trailer.  While by no means an accomplishment of
Hitchcockian proportions, in "Conspiracy Theory", Donner and screenwriter
Brian Helgeland have created a fast-paced, suspenseful, and intelligent
film in which not everything is as it seems to be, a very rare commodity
in this summer of big-bang action blockbusters.
        Crackpot cabbie Jerry Fletcher (Gibson) drives around New York
espousing far-flung theories on every type of conspiracy under the sun, to
anyone who'll listen (and even when nobody is listening).  Jerry stammer,
blabbers, talks to himslef, and thinks out loud; he comes across as the
product of a cross between "Taxi Driver", "Rain Man", and "The X-Files".
The only person who'll listen to Jerry is saintly Justice Department
attorney Alice Sutton (Roberts).  She tolerates his crazy theories - he
babbles something about NASA trying to kill the President with an
earthquake - with a roll of the eyes and a smile (she is Julia Roberts,
after all).  In return, Jerry has an unannounced (to her, at least) love
for her.  Somewhat unnervingly, we see Jerry watching Alice through her
apartment window - an interesting moment early in the film where we don't
know whether he a peeping tom, or a guardian angel, or just a nutcase.
Hwoever, there's something more beneath Jerry's nutty exterior than the
audience, Alice, or even Jerry himself, is prepared for.
        THere is far too much back story to "Conspiracy Theory"'s dense,
labyrinthine plot to describe it in detail without giving away too much.
If you're like me, discovering it is the most enjoyable part of the film.
AS it turns out (and this is what has most trailer-addicted folks in a
tizzy), it's not his theories, but it's Jerry himself that "They" are
after.  Jerry is quite obviously more than just a little crazy;  besides
the aforementioned peeping, he has violent flashbacks (which almost cause
him to wreck his cab), and he waves a gun around in public haphazardly.
Jerry is definitely dangerous, but to whom?  Jerry is kidnapped, pumped
for information, and tortured in a squirmingly vivid manner by a
suspicious "CIA shrink" known as Dr. Jonas (Stewart).  When Jerry escapes,
both Jonas and a team of FBI agents (led by Cylk Cozart) show up looking
for him, but not necessarily for the same reasons.  Jerry's only seeming
ally is Alice, who isn't surewhether she can trust him, or Jonas, or
anybody.  Things get considerably more complex from there.  Helgeland's
script is audacious enough to to continue developing both stories and
characters well into the film's second hour, as Jerry's past, top-secret
CIA experimentation, and the mysterious death of Alice's father play large
parts in the film's final resolution (hint: Jerry's fixation on Alice
isn't a coincidence).
        "Conspiracy Theory" works on the whole, though the two halves of
the film are of starkly different moods.  The second half of the film
doesn't keep up with the first hour's sense of paranoia, or the humor
which is derived from that paranoia; Jerry's idiosyncracies are quite
amusing to observe.  When the paranoia comes to fruition and Jerry is
being chased, the paranoia and humor fade.  Gibson, however, holds
everything in place, as he delivers one of his very best, certainly most
artistic, performances ever.  It's clear that the character of Jerry was
written for him, as no other star of his ilk combines groundedness with
feree-floa ting mayhem so adeptly.  His Jerry Fletcher is a good-natured
loon, but a ticking time bomb nonetheless.  We have no idea what he's goin
to do next, or how crazy he really is.  His blabbering and spouting are
fun, but it's when paired with Roberts as his object of unrequited
affection that he's at his best.  When Alice finally visits Jerry's
apartment, it's a glorious yet crushing moment - he's excited that she
finally sees how he lives, yet sane enough to to realize that the way he
lives is pretty embarrassing, and Gibson renders it beautifully.  Roberts
does well with what she's given, despite the fact that she really doesn't
have a character to play until midway through the film.  She does have
some nice momenst, especially as she grows more suspicious of Jeryy and
his role in her life.  Stewart, effective in in a break from "Star Trek"
mode, doesn't really get enough of a chance to be duplicitous, as we're
aware early in the film that he's up to some kind of no good.
        In terms of production, really there isn't much to quibble about.
Being their fifth go-around, Gibson, Donner, and Silver have this thing
down (rumor has it that teaming number six will be the much-anticipated
"Lethal Weapon 4", possibly next summer).  "Conspiracy Theory"'s ending hs
been noticeably tinkered with, as Donner filmed it two different ways and
let the test audiences make the decision; the final cut leaves the door
open for a possible sequel, provided that Gibson and Roberts, both red-hot
at the moment, aren't more expensive than their reported $32 million
combined salaries for this one.  Composer Carter Burwell's offbeat jazz
score is one of the most refreshingly original of the year, after too many
films either going bombastic ("Batman and Robin", "The Lost World", etc.)
or hip-hop (a la "Men In Black").  High praise for screenwriter Helgeland,
whose pop-culture tweaks are by far the most literate on screen in some
time.  A special notice to Helgeland's homage to J.D. Salinger, as a key
development in Jerry's character involves, and at the same time is cribbed
from, Salinger's classic _The Catcher in the Rye_.  Imagine that. a studio
movie using a book as a part of its plot.  Maybe Hollywood is more
intelligent than we thought.

Author
Stian M. Landgaard
CONSPIRACY THEORY (Warner Bros. / Donner/Schuler-Donner Productions /
Silver Pictures)
CONSPIRACY THEORY wasn't very well received by audience and critics.
Personally, I think it lacked a sense of nerve and thrill. Mel Gibson
plays Jerry Fletcher, a paranoid taxi-driver with an extraordinary
past. He spends most of his time telling passengers of his conspiracy
theories and writing a newsletter named after the movie. Julia Roberts
is the U.S. Justice Department agent Alice Sutton. She met Fletcher
earlier when he saved her from some muggers. Constantly bothering
Sutton with his conspiracy theories, one day Fletcher finds himself
captured by ill-natured agents. The FBI, CIA and "all the other initials 
one could put together" seem to be after him. He can't understand why,
only that is has something to do with his past, and maybe his "thing"
for conspiracy theories. 
CONSPIRACY THEORY didn't quite enthrall me. Although Gibson is good
as Fletcher (maybe he borrowed some of his LETHAL WEAPON character?),
Roberts doesn't impress very much. She is more of a romantic character,
and only in a few scenes I feel that Alice Sutton is captivating.
Patrick Stewart plays the bad guy, but he lacks a certain evil charisma
that one would expect in a such a character.
All in all, half action, half thriller, but neither genre was fully
mastered. CONSPIRACY THEORY's plot is interesting, but the screenplay
as a whole doesn't succeed. Richard Donner has done well as the 
director, however.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, April 12th, 1998

Author
James Sanford
         Recently on a call-in radio show the topic was ``Why aren't
there any real movie stars anymore? Where are today's Clark Gables,
John Waynes and Katharine Hepburns?'' griped the host, as some callers
attempted to make cases for Harrison Ford, Tom Cruise and Jodie
Foster.
  Oddly, no one brought up Mel Gibson, but after ``Conspiracy
Theory'' it's unlikely he'll be overlooked next time. If you've ever
questioned Gibson's appeal, this serio-comic thriller offers 135
minutes of persuasive evidence as to why he's become one of the
world's most reliable box-office draws.
  ``Conspiracy Theory'' is an unabashed Ode To Mel, written
specifically for him by Bryan Helgeland and directed by Richard
Donner, who previously led him through the ``Lethal Weapon'' trilogy
and ``Maverick.''
  Julia Roberts may share top billing, but this is not a duet:
Roberts' character isn't even properly introduced until 20 minutes
into the picture, and she doesn't fully figure into the action until
the second hour.
  Donner has always been able to bring out the full spectrum
of Gibson, especially the actor's wackier tendencies and his penchant
for calling up looks of little-boy innocence in the face of
love. ``Conspiracy Theory'' leans heavily on both of these resources,
as Gibson portrays spacey New York City cabbie Jerry Fletcher, who
sees deception and disinformation everywhere.
  Those silver threads in the new $100 bills? Jerry claims
they're a tracking device. And the Grateful Dead is always on tour
because ``they're British agents.''
  ``Conspiracy Theory'' spends a lot of time and energy
establishing Jerry's lunacy; as was the case in ``Maverick,'' Gibson
indulges his passion for ad-libbing and Donner is reluctant to cut
away. As a result, the story often comes to a halt so that its star
can do his thing.
  Not that Helgeland's tale is any ground-breaker itself. Of
course, nutty Jerry's homemade newsletter contains one far-fetched
theory that proves to be true, prompting chases by alleged CIA
psychiatrist Jonas (Patrick Stewart) and his henchmen.
  Justice Department investigator Alice Sutton (Roberts),
Jerry's secret love, is drawn into the whirlpool as mysterious pasts,
hidden identities and old coverups are exposed.
  For at least two-thirds of its length, the film is agreeably
lighthearted nonsense, with a few genuinely odd details: Jerry's
kitchen, for instance, is a paranoiac's dream. Improbabilities and
unanswered questions abound, but they're really moot points.
  What ``Conspiracy Theory'' is really about is Gibson's
talent for charming an audience, and this faux-Hitchcock yarn allows
him to play funny, frantic, edgy and infatuated. Though the story
abruptly turns serious in the last half-hour, Gibson is continuously
charismatic.
  Roberts is allotted a few moments to beam her patented smile
and even gets a couple of solid freak-out scenes near the end, but
she's simply a "special guest star" in Mel's showcase.
  Never a terrifically distinctive director, Donner does have
a gift for making his stars look dazzling and surrounding them with
well-choreographed chaos. He's also extraordinarily self-referential,
as he sends Jerry and his pursuers into a revival theater that's
presenting ``Ladyhawke,'' that 1985 sword-and-sorcery spectacular
directed by, yes, Richard Donner.

Author
Ben Hoffman
There is no question about the acting abilities of Mel Gibson and
Julia Roberts.  Given that, it is unfortunate that the story jars
with reality when we have to assume that Alice (Julia Roberts), an
attorney in the Justice Department of New York City will find
enough in common with Jerry (Mel Gibson), a taxi driver who is a
crackpot on the question of conspiracies.   It just does not seem
believable Alice will see anything in Jerry that would make her
fall in love with him.
Jerry, in his cab, keeps up a running babble with his passengers,
ranting and raving and expounding about conspiracies while
maneuvering through NYC traffic.   There is nothing that happens
in the world or in NYC that does not indicate conspiracy to Jerry.
In short, he is a fanatic. Somebody out there is trying to get us.
Unlike the average fanatic, Jerry has some reason to feel as he
does: he is subject to momentary quick visuals in his brain that
are recollections but he cannot pin them down   He does not know
why but he is certain there are bad guys "out there" who would
like to kill him.   Although he has been tossed out of Alice's
office eight times, he still returns to her with  whatever
information he has been able to put together at home.  Alice is
the only one who will, at least for a little bit, listen to him.
Alice has a reason for tolerating Jerry.  Her past includes her
father, a federal judge who was murdered under mysterious
circumstances and she is not content with official explanations.
When Jerry is kidnaped by a strange government psychiatrist, Dr.
Jonas (Patrick Stewart)  who wants to probe Jerry's mind to find
out what memories it still harbors, Jerry escapes and turns to
Alice for more help.
Sadly, from this moviegoer's point of view, the story does not
ring true.  It appears to be a concocted tale and a not too
exciting one at that.    Despite Gibson's believable acting in
the role of a confused fanatic and Roberts turning in some equally
good acting, the movie goes not very far.   Truth is, I could not
picture Roberts as an attorney.  I just could not.

Author
Jun Yan
        A black helicopter flew in the middle of a busy street in New York
and a bunch of armed soldiers dressed in black started landing through
ropes.  Need I explain why there is a rumor about black UN helicopters
invading United States?  Just watch "Conspiracy Theory."  
        The first half hour of this movie is absolutely intriguing and
promising.  Jerry Fletcher (Mel Gibson) is just a small-time New York cab
driver minding his own little harmless business, which is printing a
little harmless newsletter spreading rumors about government conspiracies.
(I won't spoil them for you since they are the best part of the film)  One
day his seemingly wacky fantasy suddenly come true and he is kidnapped and
tortured in a small house by a malicious Dr. Jonas (Patrick Stewart).  Now
I smell the chilling thriller "Vanishing" (the original version).  
        Unfortunately, the writer of the screenplay seems to run out of
ideas from this point on.  All they can ever do is to plagerize some
really lousy B movies of such theme (brain washed assassins blah blah
blah).  As if they realize how idiotic their story is, any explanation is
drowned in Jerry's feverish schizophrenic babbling.  In the end, the whole
story is buried under a stupid romance theme, which in itself was terribly
developed.   
        Let's start with the romance.  A lawyer of the Justice Department
Alice (Julia Roberts) tolerates Jerry's open obsession for her because he
saved her from being mugged once and even visited his heavily-guarded
apartment (I mean *heavily* guarded).  Although at first shrugging off
Jerry's crazy ideas (like any sane person would), she starts getting
suspicious after meeting Dr. Jonas, with the words "BAD GUY" written all
over his face.  The problem is, there is NO chemistry between Roberts and
Gibson.  Roberts often looks slightly embarrassed to be reading the
awkward lines, while Gibson seems nearly breaking into laughter at his own
cheesy, cheap love talk to her.  It's embarrassingly juvenile and
primitive, attempted in half-hearted playfulness that's all pretending and
not an ounce of emotion to it.  
        Then the action sequences.  As a veteran director with "Lethal
Weapon" series in hand, I cannot believe how bland and wimpy the actions
are in this movie.  Some routine explosion and shoot-'em-up's.  The
connecting non-action elements are long and dull, extremely uninteresting,
filled with stupid dialogues that make no sense.  Again, he displays great
pleasure in torturing and shooting up his buddy Mel Gibson, which is the
more intense and dark part of the film.  
        Although appropriately wacky and weird, Gibson's Jerry remains
unsympathetic throughout the film, never really stands up as an
interesting character with real emotions and fears.  I think he always
watched to play a mental patient and here's the chance.   As for why
Roberts would keep taking meaningless and badly-written roles in cheesy
thrillers is beyond me.  She doesn't even seem like having fun!  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts, Patrick Stewart
Directors: Richard Donner
Producers: Lauren Shuler-Donner and Joel Silver
Screenplay: Brian Helgeland
Cinematography: John Schwartzman
Music: Carter Burwell
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Lee Harvey Oswald did not act alone in the assassination of JFK.  
Water fluoridation isn't designed to protect our teeth, it's a 
government plot to weaken the will and make everyone a slave of the 
State.  One night, all of the Nobel Prize winners were rounded up at gun 
point and forced to make sperm donations.  (What about the women, I 
wonder?)  And, best of all, Oliver Stone isn't really a conspiracy 
theory nut, he's a disinformation junkie working for the mysterious 
"them" (the forces behind covering up all the conspiracies).  These and 
other loopy (and not-so-loopy) ideas make up the background of 
CONSPIRACY THEORY, the fifth teaming of director Richard Donner and 
actor Mel Gibson.  Alas, the movie itself isn't half as interesting as 
some of the one-line theories it mentions then quickly forgets about.
     Originally, CONSPIRACY THEORY was slated to go toe-to-toe with 
Columbia's AIR FORCE ONE, but someone at Warner Brothers blinked.  It's 
probably a good thing, because, against the Harrison Ford action 
vehicle, this film would have gotten buried (it may still get buried, 
even with the release pushed back two weeks).  The storyline for 
CONSPIRACY THEORY is just as moronic as that of AIR FORCE ONE (which is 
saying a lot), but at least Wolfgang Petersen's picture moved.  Donner's 
summer entry is moribund.  It spends well over two hours trying 
unsuccessfully to find a niche.  The result is frustrating, irritating, 
and wearying.  In the end, CONSPIRACY THEORY fails to work as an action 
film, a romance, or a mystery -- all of which it aspires to be. 
     It seems to me that the biggest problem with CONSPIRACY THEORY is 
that it can't decide whether to take the well-paved highway (throw Mel 
Gibson into the comfortable role of action hero with Julia Roberts as 
the love interest) or ramble along on some little-used back road (cast 
Gibson against type and throw in a couple of really nasty plot twists).  
This indecision causes the film to veer off course and run into a ditch.  
The plot ends up needlessly convoluted, the characters are hard to get a 
handle on, and the ending is dissatisfying.  Here and there, certain 
elements hold great promise, but, for the most part, they remain 
undeveloped.  And, on the one occasion when the film has an opportunity 
to do something truly daring, it wilts in the face of the challenge.
     Gibson plays Jerry Fletcher, a slightly unstable Manhattan cab 
driver who suffers from paranoid delusions (many viewers will see shades 
of Gibson's LETHAL WEAPON character in Jerry).  He believes almost every 
conspiracy theory concocted by even the least-reputable source, and 
publishes a small newsletter in which he prints his views.  His personal 
life is a wasteland, and he is obsessed by one woman.  Every night, he 
sits outside in his cab and watches Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts), an 
agent of the U.S. Justice Department, as she exercises on her tread 
mill.  Jerry has had a serious crush on Alice ever since he saved her 
from being mugged.  
     Then, one day, Jerry is kidnapped.  He is taken to a dark, dank 
room where his eyes are taped open and a bright light is directed at his 
face.  He is physically and psychologically abused by a smooth, sinister 
"psychiatrist" named Jonas (Patrick Stewart), who wants some 
information.  Apparently, one of Jerry's conspiracy theories has hit a 
little too close to the truth for someone's comfort.  Soon, Jerry is on 
the run, with the FBI, CIA, and other arms of the government on his 
tail.  The only one he can turn to is Alice, who is understandably 
skeptical... until she pays a visit to Jerry's apartment.
     Mel Gibson appears confused about how to play Jerry -- is he a 
hero, an antihero, or something else entirely?  Gibson settles for a 
drugged-out version of THE FUGITIVE's Dr. Richard Kimble.  Jerry's 
increasingly bizarre behavior makes him more and more difficult to 
relate to, even if he is being played by one of the world's most popular 
movie stars.  Meanwhile, Julia Roberts is as bland and ineffective as 
she was in THE PELICAN BRIEF.  Clearly, thrillers do not use the 
actress, who was wonderful in this summer's MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, to 
her best advantage.  In the villain department, it's pleasant to see 
someone given a chance other than Christopher Walken, Dennis Hopper, 
James Woods, and the other usual suspects.  Patrick Stewart is too good 
an actor to do anything poorly, and his slippery performance here lends 
CONSPIRACY THEORY a badly-needed injection of energy.
     One of the most disappointing aspects of CONSPIRACY THEORY is its 
poor pace.  With films like SUPERMAN, LETHAL WEAPON, and MAVERICK, 
Donner has fashioned a reputation as a director who values clearly-
structured movies.  CONSPIRACY THEORY, on the other hand, is confused 
and disjointed, and the resolution of the story is more than a little 
anticlimactic. Donner never really seems to have things under control.  
So, although there may be some good ideas in CONSPIRACY THEORY, they 
rarely surface.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Brian Takeshita
You think that these people only exist in the movies, but trust me,
they're as real as life.  I once talked to a guy who thought the
United States government was putting satellites into orbit which could
fry an individual person's brain with microwaves.  Then I sat in a
room full of people who believed that the government rigged state
elections.  I even listened to a man who swore that nicotine was an
additive that cigarette companies put in their products for the
specific goal of getting people addicted.  These people had what are
known as "conspiracy theories" - ideas about how unseen forces work to
deceive and control the public.  A little imagination goes a long way.
In Richard Donner's CONSPIRACY THEORY, Jerry Fletcher (Mel Gibson) is
a New York City cab driver who seems to have a conspiracy theory about
everything.  His latest, that NASA is trying to kill the President by
causing an earthquake from the space shuttle, might sound outrageous
to us, but is all in a day's work for him.  He combs the newspaper,
looking for tidbits that leave telltale warnings about the goings-on
behind the scenes, and from there Jerry draws his conclusions.
Upstanding citizen that he is, he tries to convince Alice Sutton
(Julia Roberts) of the Justice Department that the President must be
warned.  Lucky gal, Alice, who met Jerry when he saved her from a
couple of muggers and has had to listen to his theories during the six
months since.  What she doesn't know is that Jerry's interest in her
is far more than, well, professional.  He goes to great lengths to
follow her around and watch her in her own apartment.  But when some
secret government types seem to take an interest in Jerry's ideas and
his limited-circulation "Conspiracy Theory" newsletter, he finds
himself in danger and in real need of Alice's help.
One of the problems with CONSPIRACY THEORY is that it tries to pass
itself off as an action-thriller when it seems to have neither a whole
lot of action, nor a significant number of thrills.  Part of this is a
result of the film's slow pace.  It takes forever to set up the
relationship between Jerry and Alice, and even once that is over with,
the rest of the film seems to be a lot of boredom that every once in a
while stops to take a break for excitement.  At over two hours, this
film could have been significantly condensed and had it's running time
shortened by twenty minutes to half an hour, but even then, the action
scenes would not be able to save the film.  Instead of truly exciting
and engaging set pieces, we're treated to a few of the generic scenes
with the requisite "black elements":  Black helicopter, men in black
action suits and body armor, black vehicles - you know the drill.
They come on down with all kinds of neat gadgets and weapons, but for
some reason a guy with just a bunch of theories and some chick with no
training somehow manage to elude them every time.  Big deal, we've
seen it all before.  Watching the film, I wished Donner had at least
tried to use a little imagination, but I was out of luck.
Now, when I say it took forever to set up the "relationship" between
Jerry and Alice, I completely mean what one person is relative to the
other, and not romantic involvement.  Oh, Donner and screenwriter
Brian Helgeland would like you to believe that by the end of the
movie, the two main characters will end up falling hopelessly in love
with each other, but there seems to be no evidence of that ever
occurring.  You see, there were more sparks between Gibson and Danny
Glover in the LETHAL WEAPON movies (also directed by Donner) than
between Gibson and Roberts in CONSPIRACY THEORY.  The two just don't
click, and when you throw in a number of happenings that would cause
Alice to reject Jerry altogether (like finding out he's been stalking
her), the subsequent attraction is absolutely forced.
The script in general also seems forced, like someone sat Helgeland
down and forced him to write it, then took it and forced it upon us.
Dialog is undistinguished and rather unmemorable, to the point that I
almost stopped listening.  Even Gibson's usual gift for ad lib
couldn't punch up the film sufficiently to raise my interest, although
one of Jerry's theories about Oliver Stone was mildly amusing.
Unfortunately, much of what's discussed in the film is not inherently
important to what's going on, but instead filler that starts out with
potential, but ends up just being extraneous because it's never
followed through.  For example, Jerry professes that a man found
drowned in his swimming pool was actually murdered by the government
in a New York subway station.  He even goes so far as to explain that
the station was flooded at the time due to a water main break (hence
the water in a subway station), and that the coroner should check the
man's lungs for chlorine.  This is convincing enough to Alice that she
seems to believe him.  You know what happens then?  Nothing, zip,
nada.  No follow-up whatsoever, so what's the significance?  Okay,
here's another one.  A couple of well known (real life) assassins were
found to have possessed copies of the J.D. Salinger novel "The Catcher
in the Rye".  Jerry also has a bunch of copies.  Whenever he goes into
a bookstore, he has to buy one.  Leaving out the question of whether
or not this makes Jerry an assassin, we're never given a reason to
believe WHY this would make him an assassin.  Not when we find out
about his Salinger collection, not when he goes to the bookstore, not
later on when we get the answer to our first question.  The point
becomes totally extraneous.
Oh, did I mention that Patrick Stewart is in this film?  Yeah, he
plays this government psychiatrist named Dr. Jonas who may or may not
be a bad guy.  That's about it.  For all the presence this usually
marvelous actor has, he's nearly forgettable in CONSPIRACY THEORY.
You can just lump him in with the supporting players, with the
exception of Cylk Cozart who plays Agent Lowry of the FBI.  This guy
was really likable, and I wish he and his character had gotten more
screen time.
Okay, here's my theory.  This really started out as a great film, but
some of its jokes were actually true!  The government came in and
forced Donner to make edits for the sake of national security, and
this was what was left over.

Author
Mike Borzumate

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
Rating: 6.0 and $5.50
Plot teaser: Jerry Fletcher (Mel Gibson) analyzes various government
conspiracies.
    This movie kept reminding me of the style of A Clockwork Orange,
without the perversions.
    The two principal actors, Mel Gibson and Julia Roberts, performed very
well in their roles.  The other players gave spotty portrayals, but none
that were lacking enough to be considered outright bad.
    My big gripe is with the soundtrack.  Everytime I heard the music, I
wondered how it was supposed to fit into the movie.  It sounded like the
soundtrack of a cartoon.  Am I supposed to take Fletcher as a serious
portrayal of a bizarre man?  Or am I supposed to just dismiss him
out-of-hand as an overacted stereotype of a fruitcake, as the music
suggests?  I tried to ignore the background music and concentrate on the
story.  It was a decidedly uphill battle.
    And speaking of the story...  I wouldn't say it was unbelievable, just
that the choice of topics for the movie was too "quaint" and didn't flow
in an even pattern.  The plot tosses the audience hither and yon, and
often causes a viewer to lose focus.  But I'm bordering on spoilers, and I
hate spoilers in reviews. 
    Go see it on a matinee.  It's worth watching, even if it just dazes
you with its oddity.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Author
Jeff Walters
       When I entered the theatre I was expecting a fairly light
mystery type movie, and came away pleasantly surprised and
somewhat dissappointed at the same time. The film opens with an
extremely amusing sequence which sees Gibson's character
(paranoid cabby Jerry Fletcher) trying to convince various fares of
several different conspiracies. Jerry is just a treat to watch,
especially in the first hour, where he manages to be funny and
touching in the same scenes.
     Jerry's manic behaviour is countered nicely by Julia Roberts'
portrayal of a caring Justice Department official, Alice Sutton, and
it is through her eyes that you experience most of the movie. Several
of the key scenes involving Jerry and Alice are genuinely
touching, like in Jerry's apartment where he gives his explanation for
owning so many copies of "Catcher in the Rye". There is no
doubt that this film's strength lies in the interaction between Mel
and Julia. The pair just have terrific on-screen chemistry. 
     Conspiracy Theory takes a dramatic change of direction not too
long into the film, with a fairly confronting torture scene that
really surprised me and many others around me, especially after the
light-hearted introduction. Don't get me wrong though, the scene is
terrific and Gibson does a brilliant job conveying the outright terror
the character is experiencing.
        I feel though that the 'conspiracy' storyline was
disappointing and bungled to a certain degree. What started out as an
intruiging premise (i.e. One of his theories is correct - But which
one?) peters out and when the conspiracy is revealed, it is after no
real deductive work at all by the main characters. Also, Conspiracy
Theory's main villan, Dr Jonas (Patrick Stewart), is not
explored as much as you'd probably like, but Stewart does a terrific
job with what he was given and was well cast. I'd never have picked
him as a villan before, but he's very cold and convincing.
             Overall, I'd say this is a film well worth seeing. The
acting was simply terrific and the movie was filled with genuine
humour, not lame Batman & Robin one liners. If it wasn't for the
fairly weak 'conspiracy' storyline - this would have been a big hit.
Many people have said that this film was simply too long, but I didn't
seem to notice any problem there. Anyway, go and see it, if for no
other reason than to listen to Jerry's off-the-wall conspiracy ideas
or to take a look at his apartment........he's got a combination lock
on the fridge and he stores his coffee in a padlocked container.

Author
Alex Fung
CONSPIRACY THEORY (Warner Bros. - 1997)
Starring Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts, Patrick Stewart, Cylk Cozart
Screenplay by Brian Helgeland
Produced by Joel Silver, Richard Donner
Directed by Richard Donner
Running time: 135 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
Brian Helgeland is currently one of the Hollywood's hottest properties.
Formerly known primarily for screenwriting the horror film 976-EVIL and
for taking over writing duties from the Wachowski Brothers (themselves no
longer to be trifled with after the industry notice and critical acclaim
for their film BOUND) for Richard Donner's ASSASSINS, Mr. Helgeland has
sinced churned out screenplays for Curtis Hanson's L.A. CONFIDENTIAL,
scheduled for imminent release as of this writing, and for the
post-apocalyptic thriller THE POSTMAN as a vehicle for Kevin Costner.
Mr. Helgeland's own directorial debut, the thriller PARKER, is scheduled
for release next year, and features no less of a star than the top A-list
Mel Gibson in the lead; it is perhaps indicative of just how successful
he has become that Mr. Helgeland is being called upon to deliver the
screenplay for the highly-anticipated fourth film in the LETHAL WEAPON
series.  The pivotal film in Mr. Helgeland's resume? -- he wrote the
screenplay for CONSPIRACY THEORY, and based upon the projects with which
his name is now being associated, one might expect a stellar, original
and inventive screenplay for the film which resulted in his career
ascention.  To some extent, he delivers -- CONSPIRACY THEORY has a
dynamite premise.  Unfortunately, that's about the only thing the film
has going for it: after the film lays down the tracks for a truly
original film with a promising setup, it promptly sinks into
uncompelling, slightly inane generic formulaism.
Have you heard a good conspiracy theory lately? Jerry Fletcher has a
thousand of them.  From the real cause of the Vietnam War (a bet between
Howard Hughes and Aristotle Onassis) to solemn cautions about the black
helicopters constantly hovering overhead (they're on whisper mode), New
York taxi driver Jerry (Mel Gibson) has a theory on just about
everything, and he cheerfully prattles on about his paranoid ideas to his
captive backseat audiences.  When they're not nervously twitching,
shifting back and forth, Jerry has his eyes lovingly focused on Justice
Department agent Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts), and when he's not gazing
through binoculars into her apartment during evenings or causing
commotions by bursting into her workplace by day, he formulates new
conspiracy theories by leafing through stacks of newspapers and archiving
his latest wild notions into a self-published newsletter (circulation:
five), "Conspiracy Theory".  One of the theories in his latest newsletter
seems to have struck a nerve; Jerry is snatched off the street in broad
daylight by an anonymous group led by Dr. Jonas (Patrick Stewart), and
taken to a secret location where he is forcefully interrogated (in a
manner which attempts to be evocative of Stanley Kubrick's A CLOCKWORK
ORANGE) about whom might be familiar with his theory, which presumably
has some actual basis in fact.  Jerry manages to pull off an unlikely
escape, but is left wounded, on the run, and wondering *which one* of his
theories is the cause for his persecution.
CONSPIRACY THEORY has a good setup with an terrific premise, and has the
potential for great intrigue, but sadly the film *is not* interested in
conspiracies at all -- what the film *is* interested in is chase scenes.
The film could have latched onto its promised premise and had, say,
Jerry backtrack through all of his assorted zany conjectures in order to
attempt to determine why he's the subject of this intense, lethal
manhunt, or at least do *something* vaguely interesting, but instead
CONSPIRACY THEORY slides into conventional pursuit thriller
mechanizations.  Virtually every unimaginative convention of the genre
appears at some point in the film: in a cat-and-mouse game, Hero
demonstrates his wily nature by outsmarting an attempted capture by
Villain; Hero has to turn to dubious and reluctant Heroine for refuge
while trying to avoid capture; initially-skeptical Heroine begins to
truly realize the grave danger that Hero (and by association, Heroine
herself) now faces; the requisite highly-destructive storming of an
abode by a ruthless heavily-armed armada which Our Heros escape by the
skin of their teeth; the car chases; the planting of seeds of doubt into
the mind of Heroine; gunbattles; cool, sinister pronouncements by
Villain; many scenes of Hero and Heroine fleeing, hand in hand, into the
night; and, of course, the most predictable -- Hero and Heroine fall in
love.
Wasted in the proceedings is a fine, jittery manic performance by
Mr. Gibson -- he is well-known for this sort of performance, often
playing wild-eyed characters such as his famous Martin Riggs role in
the LETHAL WEAPON series, but what is notable about Mr. Gibson's work in
CONSPIRACY THEORY is how distinctly eccentric and atypically unempathetic
his depiction of Jerry is (at least in the first quarter of the film);
his creation is a fascinating genuine curiosity at which to be gawked,
not merely a lovable kook (which he unfortunately becomes in the film's
final three-quarters).  Carter Burwell's big, brassy score is notable;
while I do not think that it coalesces particularly well with the tone
of the film (what that there is), it is inventive and cheery, and gives
the interesting opening title sequence additional energy.
CONSPIRACY THEORY is a frustrating viewing experience: to dangle the
promise of an engaging and original story before us and then dash it
away with generic action (and rather *unaccomplished, poorly-handled*
action, at that) is an unnecessary miscalculation.  In terms of
filmwatching, there is little more painful than seeing a potentially
strong film suddenly turn woefully feeble.  In CONSPIRACY THEORY, the
screech of just such a turn can be heard in the scene when Jerry's
wheelchair tumbles down the final flight of stairs.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Let's hurt somebody." - Aaron Eckhart, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It can now be revealed.  A cabal of screenwriters are toiling away
in the basements of their Hollywood mansions with a scheme to sap the
brainpower of our nation by dumbing down American movies.  As proof
that this conspiracy exists, consider as evidence the script by Brian
Helgeland for the new Mel Gibson and Julia Roberts picture, CONSPIRACY
THEORY.  Helgeland's previous works include such intellectual tour de
forces as NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET 4, 976-EVIL, HIGHWAY TO HELL, and
ASSASSINS.
     The packed audience at the advanced screening of CONSPIRACY THEORY
became almost outraged at the picture.  Serious lines generated massive
laughter because they were simultaneously ridiculous and stilted.  At
one point, a guy shouted an insult about the picture's quality and the
audience broke into applause.
     In Warner Brothers's defense, the project must have sounded
promising when the producers, Lauren Shuler-Donner and Joel Silver,
pitched it to them.  The producers had a successful director, Richard
Donner, two big stars, Mel Gibson and Julia Roberts, and a promising
premise.  Donner, who directed Gibson in all of the LETHAL WEAPON
films, would use Gibson's ability to create quirky characters to
maximum advantage.  Gibson would be a conspiracy theory kook named
Jerry Fletcher, who has some serious but unexplained mental problems.
     The film opens promisingly and stays that way for the first ten
minutes.  Seeing just that part and then leaving is the winning
strategy for this film since the quality goes straight downhill as soon
as Patrick Stewart appears on the scene in the overwritten and
overacted role of Dr. Jonas, a psychiatrist in a secret part of our
"spook" community.  (In one of the film's more laughable bad snippets
of dialog, one of the agents describes the organization saying, "If the
intelligence community is a family, think of us as the uncle no one
talks about.")
     In the beginning, we learn many of the theories concocted by Jerry
Fletcher, an especially bizarre New York City taxi driver: The new $100
bills have tiny transmitters.  NASA is angry over budget cuts so they
are sending a space shuttle to cause an earthquake that will kill the
president on his upcoming trip to Turkey.  The Vietnam War was fought
over a bet that Howard Hughes lost to Aristotle Onassis.  And to make
sure he is current on all the latest theories of others, he listens to
what sounds like Conspiracy Talk Radio.  On it we find that Jack Ruby
did not kill Lee Harvey Oswald since it was not Ruby who fired the
shots and the person killed was only someone who looked like Oswald.
     Julia Roberts, who should have worn a dunce cap on her head for
all of the unbelievable things she was called upon to say and do, plays
Alice Sutton, a member of the Justice department.  In the first of many
implausible aspects of the story, we learn that her last case was the
investigation into the murder of her own father, a judge.  Alice walks
into dark buildings loaded with heavily armed rogue agents ready to
kill her, but neither takes weapons nor calls for help.  She trusts
people who have "bad guy" tattooed on their forehead.  And she is not
the least bit scared when a mental case like Fletcher brandishes a big
gun at her and two cops.  The latter happened not long after she had
said of Fletcher, "This guy's a restraining order waiting to happen,"
since he followed her so obsessively.
     Speaking of obsessive.  Fletcher lives in a metal-lined secret
room.  His door has four locks, his refrigerator one and even the
coffee beans and the grapefruit juice inside the fridge are in locked
containers.
     After this setup, the aforementioned Dr. Jonas, creeps onto the
scene.  In a surreal sequence modelled after the interrogation scene
from 1984, Dr. Jonas questions Fletcher while his eyes are taped open
and bright strobe lights drive him and the audience crazy.  Finally,
borrowing from CHINATOWN, Fletcher tries to bite off the doctor's nose.
Bloods oozes out of Fletcher's mouth in a gory image that adds nothing
other than shock value.
     In a film with more low points than Death Valley, two stand out as
much worse than the others.  When Fletcher escapes, Dr. Jonas and
company track him down with their computers.  Since Fletcher is known
to like "The Catcher in the Rye," the spook's computers scan constantly
for anyone in New York City buying a copy of the novel.  As soon as
someone does, they send a large assassination team to capture the
buyer, who conveniently turns out to be Fletcher.  There is even a
shiny black helicopter that flies down one of Manhattan's main streets
and drops a squad of killers from ropes onto a busy intersection.
     The film's other "delight" is the explanation of the mystery
surrounding Fletcher that Dr. Jonas gives to Alice.  Contrived would be
the most charitable thing that can be said of this part of the plot.
     Editor Frank J. Urioste exercises little self-control.  Many
pointless scenes are left in and others are allowed to go on way past
their welcome.  The result is a film as tedious as it is ridiculous.
     Yes, Virginia, there is a conspiracy.  And this show is but one of
many that prove the theory.
     CONSPIRACY THEORY runs far too long at 2:15.  It is rated R for
gore and profanity.  The film would be fine for most teenagers.  I do
not recommend the movie and give it * 1/2 only for the two good leading
performances in an awful movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
Fluoride in the water is a secret government conspiracy to weaken our minds.
NASA attempted to assassinate the president with an earthquake. The Grateful
Dead were actually engaged in clandestine covert operations. Lee Harvey Oswald
didn't act alone. Jack Ruby didn't kill Oswald because Ruby wasn't the gunman
and the victim wasn't Oswald in the first place. The Vietnam War wasn't really
fought to save the world from the evil empire of communism.
Believe any of these? Meet Jerry Fletcher, New York cabbie and self-styled
conspiracy expert. He believes them all - and hundreds more. And he's out to
convince everyone else. Sitting in the back seat of his hack is an exercise in
endurance as his mouth runs faster than the vehicle.
Fletcher (Mel Gibson) is living proof that just because you're paranoid
doesn't mean that "They" aren't out to get you. Shortly after he mails the
latest issue of his conspiracy newsletter to all of the five subscribers, four
of them end up dead and he is kidnapped and tortured in an abandoned lab. He
must have stumbled onto a true one, but he can't figure out which.
Turning to the only person he trusts, Justice Department investigator Alice
Sutton (Julia Roberts), he entices her to help him. What she doesn't know is
that Fletcher has been secretly in love with her since he saved the agent from
a mugging and sits outside her apartment at night watching her jogging on a treadmill.
Pairing Roberts and Gibson is a natural. The attractive but daffy victim and
the brave levelheaded savior is a tried-and-true film formula. The difference
here is that Gibson is the ditz. It's difficult to tel when he is dazed and
confused from the drugs injected by his interrogators and his natural mania.
Half way through the film, the plot takes a left-hand turn and an unlikely
conspiracy that Fletcher never saw coming reveals itself. This new information
explainswell, not everything, but a lot. It also completely changes the
direction of the movie.
Gibson takes his crazed "Lethal Weapon" (also directed by this film's Richard
Donner) character and amps him into over-drive. Although uncomfortable to
watch at times in the same way that being trapped in real life by a motor
mouth who wants to tell you all about it is, his performance is compelling.
Roberts is much more interesting in this type of role than the "Pretty
Woman"esque parts she is popular for. Her character is only a bit more
grounded in reality than Gibson's. For an experienced Federal Agent, she is
remarkably naive, believing outrageous lies by the bad guys and making huge
leaps of faith. Sutton isn't very realistic, but then neither are the
governmental cover-ups in our world.
Patrick Stewart as Dr. Jonas, the ultra-mysterious spook, is surprisingly able
to shed his Captain Piccard image, not an easy task when his voice instantly
brings the "Star Trek" bridge to mind. Jonas is not one of the good guys and
heads a faction of the intelligence community devoted to...something that's
not very nice.
The film rambles at times, but it does so at breakneck speed and intersperses
important developments with the inanity. You need to pay attention to follow
the story. There are problems, but they don't get in the way of the fun. The
ending is too "feel good" however sure to delight audiences. Very little is
realistic, but name a Mel Gibson film that is.
You may not walk away believing all of Jerry Fletcher's ideas, but you will
probably have a suspicion that all is not as it appears. I think you'd
probably be right.
(The Michael Redman who wrote this column is the same one who began writing
them over 21 years ago. Or is he? Even he's not too sure. Email to
mredman@bvoice.com _might_ reach him - or someone.)
[This appeared in the 8/14/97 "Bloominton Voice". Michael Redman can be
reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Andrew Hicks
        In a summer of better movies, I'd probably give 
CONSPIRACY THEORY a lower star rating, but 1997's mid-year 
crop of blockbusters has been less than noteworthy, and that's 
made even this muddled Mel Gibson / Julia Roberts thriller seem 
entertaining overall. Yes, I know it's got a convoluted plot, recycled 
action scenes and a main character whose characterization shifts 
abruptly and without explanation, but there are enough moments 
of genuine suspense that I liked it most of the time. And, come on, 
it's the only Mel-Julia teamup this side of PRETTY WEAPON... or 
was it LETHAL WOMAN?
        Mel plays a cabdriver who, in his spare time, writes 
newsletters with his own personal conspiracy theories. We hear 
about 15 or 20 of them during the opening credits and they're all 
pretty laughable. It's easy to see why no one takes him seriously -- in 
fact, the first reel is almost satire. Mel is way over the top as a guy 
who keeps combination locks on his coffee and juice jars and 
actually believes "the Vietnam War was fought over a bet Howard 
Hughes lost to Aristotle Onassis."
        Mel's character is a complete kook who shows up regularly 
at Julia's Justice Department office to warn her of all the things he 
believes will come true. Yeah, she's just pretty enough to have her 
own personal stalker, as we find out when Mel sits in the street, 
watching her jog on her apartment treadmill and sing along to the 
appropriate "Can't Take My Eyes Off You." And, yes, the movie 
does come complete with its own hip-hop "Can't Take My Eyes Off 
You" remake by the Fugees, which should be killed softly.
        With all this workplace harrassment and stalking, it's pretty 
hard to feel much sympathy for Mel's character until his paranoia 
pays off and government baddie (sorry, I've been waiting for months 
to use the phrase "government baddie") Patrick Stewart kidnaps 
him. Stewart is so evil that one of the gossipy old biddies that sat 
behind me in the theater said to her friend, "Oh, he's depraved." 
Another pearl of wisdom from the biddies, this time about Julia: 
"She's got pretty eyes."
        Stewart ties Mel down to a wheelchair and gives him an 
injection ("truth serum," according to the biddies, who wouldn't shut 
up). He wants to know information about the Romulans or 
something, but Mel bites his nose off and makes a hasty action 
movie escape -- while still in the wheelchair, no less. He high-tails it 
back to Julia's office to tell her all about Stewart and his phasers. 
This begins a lengthy series of captures and escapes, while slowly 
Mel seems less and less crazy and certain open plot threads are 
brought together in predictable ways.
        Still, CONSPIRACY THEORY has enough sequences that 
work that I can almost forgive the use and abuse of action flick 
convention, some of which director Richard Donner pioneered in the 
LETHAL WEAPON trilogy. And the star power of Mel and Julia, a 
$32 million salary between them, lifts this above the level of the 
typical paranoia formula thriller. CONSPIRACY THEORY is 
entertaining and it even kills my conspiracy theory about Julia 
Roberts and Patrick Stewart being the same person.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A love story hidden inside a half-serious thriller, and the love
story comes out on top.
A friend of my mother's is a compulsive collector of odd trivia. One night
she came back after a cab ride with six photocopied pages of closely-packed
conspiracy theory gibberish, which the cabdriver had apparently foisted off
on her after lecturing her about the evils of technology. I guess both she
and screenwriter Brian Helgeland must've ridden in the same cab, because
CONSPIRACY THEORY takes that kernel of an idea, wraps a love story around
it, and milks it quite nicely.
The cabbie in the movie is named Jerry Fletcher, and is played by Mel
Gibson. So many of his previous roles featured him playing intensely
masculine and assertive roles, so it comes as a shock when we see him
gibbering and waving his fingers around like squid's tentacles and
motormouthing his way through the opening credits about everything from what
they put into the water to who killed JFK. He's a nut.
He's also a nut with a case of puppy-dog erotomania, and the object of his
affection is a woman who works in the Justice Department -- Alice Sutton,
whose father, a judge, died under bizarre circumstances. Fletcher and Sutton
know each other: he comes to her office with another wacko theory every
week, and she tolerates his presence, if only because he saved her from some
muggers once. But she's clearly only going to take so much of him at a time,
and she's not charmed by him. At least at first.
One day Fletcher comes under the attention of some shadowy characters, and
is abducted and put through a serio-comic chamber of horrors that makes the
"dentist's chair" scene in MARATHON MAN look positively comforting. After
that, he's no longer just kooky -- he's charged with the convinction that
someone really IS after him. Convincing Alice, on the other hand, is another
story.
The plot unspools in several directions at once, but it doesn't come up with
anything that leaves us tearing out the cushions of our seats in amazement:
the movie isn't working in that direction. The timing in every scene is
comic, and the relationship between Jerry and Alice is like a mutant version
of a screwball comedy where the society dame is pestered by the resourceful
grocery boy. It is, at heart, a relatively sweet-natured story. Sounds
strange considering that a good deal of the plot concerns stuff which almost
any other movie would have made X-FILES-bleak and BLADE RUNNER-black, but
the movie tries something neat and for the most part makes it. Who'd've
thunk it: a date movie about MK-ULTRA?

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast:  Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts, Patrick Stewart. Screenplay:  Brian
Helgeland. Producers:  Joel Silver and Richard Donner. Director:
Richard Donner.
    "China's title of 'Most Favoured Nation' is in truth a joint effort
between the US and Chinese governments to bring about the economic
down fall of the industrial giant Japan. If this joint trade assault
fails, there is always Plan B devised by the Brits - the actual invasion
and take-over of the Japanese country itself. The hand over of Hong Kong
to China is nothing more than a ruse; the first step of many toward a
pre-planned invasion of the Japanese mainland. If this fails there is
always Plan C. The landing on Mars is not an expedition of discovery
into the unknown, it is in fact a cover for a much more sinister
project, code named 'Death Star': in which the Americans are developing
a top secret, deadly laser array on the far side of the moon. When
complete, Japan and then the rest of the world will be subjugated to the
tyranny of the Americans or become completely eradicated.
    Lastly, I'm not really Timothy Mark Voon, I am in truth Stephen
Graham the moderator of this Newsgroup. I see and know all. Remember
'Big Brother' is watching you this very moment."
  From "The Conspiracy Theory Issue 6 vol 5" by TMT Voon.
If we watch enough TV, read enough newspapers, anyone can come up with a
conspiracy theory. Most of it will be nonsense. Ever heard of the
'African-Korean Conspiracy Of Body Organ Theft', or the 'Jewish
Psychiatrist Conspiracy of Selling Christ'? Mind boggling, but I've
actually come across these conspiracies first hand from people who
actually believe them! It just happens, that in this movie a
particularly incredulous conspiracy - 'The Conspiracy of Government
Funded, Mind Controlled Serial Killers' happens to be true. The question
then is what does one do about it?
A very mature Julia Roberts plays an intelligent district attorney of
the justice department, whose father has recently been murdered. A very
confused, mumbling, paranoid Mel Gibson is a taxi driver who has
conspiracies for every known news subject, and lives in an apartment
where everything is under lock and key - including the combination
locked coffee beans in the refrigerator. When Mel's life comes under
threat as a result of issuing several copies of his conspiracy theories
to his subscribers, Jules is dragged into helping this raving lunatic
Mel, but does she believe him?
With what can be described as a slow start to a movie, the plot slowly
grows in momentum until it reaches a satisfactory end. It is a long sit,
but the director has wisely chosen not to cut corners, thus the longer
footage, but at least the events remain comprehensible to the viewer. A
very original concept for a movie, but sadly to say Mel Gibson is
slightly out of place as the obsessive news reading, paranoid, mentally
unbalanced taxi driver; whose acting can be described as a cross between
his roles as the insane, over the top detective in 'Lethal Weapon', and
the mentally handicapped grown-up in 'Tim'. However, Julia Roberts seems
to be at peace with herself as she calmly and confidently accepts her
role as a smart lawyer, with thoughts of that 'Pretty Woman' far behind
her.
Comment: A satisfactory conspiracy theory.
Conspiracy Feel Scale:
0% Elvis Lives / *THE CONSPIRACY THEORY * / The Second Coming 100%

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring  Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts and Patrick Stewart
I know guys like Jerry Fletcher, Mel Gibson's whacked-out protagonist in
Conspiracy Theory.  Maybe they aren't so overtly insane, maybe they don't
keep padlocked coffee containers inside their padlocked refrigerators to
avoid poisoning by their enemies.   But they believe that black helicopters
watch us from the skies  (there is supposed to be a secret United Nations
air field in Butler County, Ohio, near my hometown of Cincinnati), and they
believe the CIA sold crack to street gangs in Los Angeles and that the
Elders of Zion control all international monetary transfers.  Spurred on by
the raging paranoiac floodwaters of the Internet and the need to find
patterns in the violent chaos of human existence, these would-be Jim
Garrisons are either permanent residents of the lunatic fringe, or they're
right.  Conspiracy Theory posits the latter premise.  It's a clever idea
for a film, and screenwriter Brian Helgeland must have had goosebumps when
he came up with it.  But then a couple of 500-pound A-list actors came and
sat on the project, and Warner Brothers brought in hack Hollywood insider
Richard Donner to direct, and Helgeland's clever idea was buried in an
avalanche of rewrites and test screenings.  Conspiracy Theory is a tragic
example of how quickly a good idea can become a mediocre film once it falls
into the wrong hands.
The picture begins promisingly enough with a clever opening credits
sequence that promises hip, quirky action, Get Shorty meets Taxi Driver. 
The cabbie in question is Jerry Fletcher, a jumpy, mostly harmless crank
who regales his passengers with tales of dark conspiracy and the
interconnectedness of every sinister event in world history.  NASA is
trying to kill the President by causing earthquakes from the space shuttle.
 Jerry Garcia was a CIA agent.  The Vietnam War was fought over a bet
between Howard Hughes and Aristotle Onassis.  You get the picture. 
Fletcher publishes a newsletter called Conspiracy Theory, which he
faithfully mails to his five subscribers.  He also worships from afar
Justice Department attorney Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts), whom he saved
from a mugging several months back.  Jerry's life as a bottom feeder seems
set until one day a couple of thugs kidnap him, take him to a deserted
warehouse (kidnappers in the movies always take the hero to a deserted
warehouse), tape his eyes open and subject him to torture at the hands of
sinister Dr. Jonas (Patrick Stewart).  Apparently one of Jerry's theories
is true, though Jerry has no idea which one, and Jonas wants to know who
else knows about it.  Jerry bites Jonas on the nose, escapes and winds up
in the care of Alice, who is understandably skeptical- until all of Jerry's
subscribers turn up dead.
There's good stuff here, and Mel Gibson does a lot with the plumb role of
Jerry, a man to whom cocaine would function as a sedative.  His performance
is at times comic, at times touching.  The best scenes in the film are the
quiet ones, particularly in Jerry's apartment, which is the cramped
exoskeleton of his paranoia.  It's filled with file drawers, books,
manifestos, clippings, and wall to wall posters of assassination victims
and revolutionary heroes.  When he brings Alice to the place for the first
time, we are touched by his shyness and frantic sincerity as he tries to
make her coffee and fails because he can't remember the combination to the
canister.  This scene shows the intelligent character film buried beneath
the veneer of money and star-power.  If the film had focused on the
relationship between Jerry and Alice, and if it had created a plausible
conspiracy within a labyrinthine plot, it might have worked.
But the script is derivative and formulaic.  The crucial torture scene is
lifted from Marathon Man.  The plot is pinched from The Manchurian
Candidate (though the having the characters themselves point out this
comparison keeps the movie from crossing the line from homage to rip-off). 
The nature of the premise leads you to believe that you're in for a
joy-ride into the right-wing fantasy world of shady government agencies,
freemasons, Bavarian Illuminati and the Tri-lateral Commission.  But the
script never opens up into these larger possibilities- it just ambles along
on its well-trodden path, never reaching a crescendo or shocking us with
unexpected twists.  And the love story between Jerry and Alice is a
complete contrivance, unnecessary to the plot, illogical in terms of the
characters, but present because the producers think we want to watch Gibson
and Roberts get the thigh-sweats for each other.
As mentioned before, Gibson's performance mostly works.  Roberts does what
she can with the role, but her character is underwritten and held prisoner
to the plot.  It's fun to see Patrick Stewart step off the bridge of the
Enterprise to play a villain, but he never really develops any sort of
menacing presence.  The supporting performances are perfunctory and
forgettable.  Richard Donner fashions a few interesting scenes,
particularly Jerry's drug-induced delusions during his torture and escape,
but more often then not the action scenes go nowhere and the ending looks
phoned-in.  For all the cash funneled into this picture, it's a
surprisingly flat and uninspired piece of work.  It was probably doomed
from the moment Gibson signed on.   There is the seed of a good idea in
Conspiracy Theory, but it has been strangled by the weeds of Hollywood
packaging.  If you see it, enjoy it for its few quiet moments, and for the
many and varied crackpot theories it tosses around.  And if you have a copy
of The Catcher in the Rye on your bookshelf, you may want to get rid of it-
it could come back to haunt you.
"Reviews for the discriminating movie fanatic"

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Donner
Writer: Brian Helgeland
Starring: Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts, Patrick Stewart, Cylk Cozart
"Conspiracy Theory" is basically two films - one which is totally 
brilliant and fun to watch; the other, with the same characters from the 
first one, a typical Hollywood thriller where the two co-ed leads fall 
in "love" and there is peace in Hollywoodland.  "Conspiracy Theory" 
starts off like a indie film with a big budget and A-List stars, then 
tweaks off into cliche-land and turns into a confused (not confusing) 
thriller.  And I'm stuck here with a giant dilemna because I enjoyed it 
all.  Ugh.
The thing that's great about this film is the lead character - Jerry 
Fletcher (Mel Gibson) - a total paranoiac who is very off-kilter.  He's 
a New York cab driver in the tradition of Travis Bickle who rants and 
raves to all his passengers about his totally paranoid theories (i.e. 
the Vietnam War was fought over a bet that Arisotle Onassis lost to 
Walter Mondale; and Oliver Stone is a government-hired filmmaker who 
tells lies, because if he was right, he'd be dead by now) and is totally 
obsessed with a Justice department woman, Alice (Julia Roberts).  The 
first half hour serves as a character introduction, as we see his 
totally bizarre apartment which has locks on everything (even the 
tapioca pudding) and is rigged to ignite if ever penetrated by "them" 
(or "they").
He annoys Alice constantly by going to her office and telling her strane 
conspiracy theories out of his "Conspiracy Theory" newsletter, which has 
a total of 5 subscribers.  But it soon turns out that he may be right 
because he is soon caught and tortured in a "1984" and "A Clockwork 
Orange"-esque scene, done by a government psychiatrist, Dr. Jonas 
(Patrick Stewart, resembling Laurence Olivier in "Marathon Man").  What 
I think should have developed is a paranoid character study to see if 
its really all cerebral, kind of what some people have said with 
"Hamlet": it might just all be in his head.  What happens is good, just 
not as great as that idea would have been.
Anyway, what results...the film continues to be really good for a while, 
but as it gets into the third act of the film, it begins to sag, become 
confused (again, not confusing), and just fall apart.  In this lovely 
act, you'll see some not-so-clever plot twists, a couple pretty good 
action sequences (nothing special), and of course, the "obligatory" love 
interest betwixt Mr. Gibson and Miss Roberts grow.  The latter, of 
course, is only there because the schmucks behind this film said 
something along the lines of "Hey, we have Mel and Julia - the audience 
will WANT them to fall in love."  What they have at the beginning and 
what develops into the second act is what works with the rest of the 
film.  Time to not pander to audiences and just do what works for the 
film, which is what it is, ok, shmuckboys?
"Conspiracy Theory" kind of turned me off in the last act.  Too many 
chases, too little interest, and what seemed to be a rather loss of 
identity to what it was in the first two acts.  The whole Dr. Jonas 
thing starts off as a rather ingenius idea, but then gradually 
detoriates into just some loner cliched villain.  Alice, who was kinda 
shallow and all, yet somehow interesting and intriguing, turns into just 
some biting-lip chick who will do anything for her man.  And, of course, 
that love thing.  The ending doesn't really work really, because the 
filmmakers are just pandering to their perception of the stupid american 
public.
However, the first two acts are so good and set up such an interesting 
premise and fascinating characters (okay, two of them, really) that the 
third act doesn't even matter.  Yes, it doesn't work, but it's still 
very entertaining.  The Jerry Fletcher character is so intriguing, so 
carefully constructed, that it's a pity to learn about his origin 
(doesn't work again).  He rants and rambles about all sorts of hilarious 
conspiracy theories (most which make a whole lot of sense, especially 
one about the Grateful Dead), and is so unbelievably funny that it makes 
it one hell of a ride just watching this guy go through his daily moves. 
 The film is at its high pinacle when he's just hanging around his 
apartment or driving in his taxi.  It's also so hilariously written and 
executed, so that even if it's not totally suspenseful, at least you'll 
get a ton of good laughs out of it.  Personally, I was laughing 
consistently throughout the film (most of them really in the first act).
The third act brings it down so much that it's not the brilliant film it 
really should be.  I would have loved to seen a film where everything's 
anti-government, proving he may be right yet having us question him.  
But there's no doubt for us that Jerry was tortured by the government, 
thus causing us to just sit back and watch it on auto-pilot.  But the 
film has so much else going on, that it somehow works out being fun and 
entertaining, despite its numerous faults.  
Anyway, the bottom line is Mel Gibson should get an Oscar nomination for 
his brilliant portrayal of this complex character (his second most 
complex, behind Hamlet, of course), and this film really could have been 
a masterpiece.  But hell, someone could always make it again and make it 
right.  For now, this will do nicely.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Justin K. Siegel
CONSPIRACY THEORY -- a movie review by Justin K. Siegel
Scenario: Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts) walks into the office of one Henry Finsch, a man who she needs to get in contact with due to the fact that his life may be in danger.
"He'll be with you in a moment," his secretary says.
Then I, Justin K. Siegel, viewer, turn to my viewing companion and
whisper, "it's the guy with the nose."
She tells me to shut up and watch the movie.
Predictability is often frowned upon by movie critics and civilians
who like to think they're movie critics, but in a lot of cases,
CONSPIRACY THEORY being one of them, predictability can can be a
welcome thing.
Mel Gibson plays Jerry Fletcher, a freaked-out cab-sriver who
publishes a quarterly newsletter entitled "Conspiracy Thery." In it,
he includes newspaper clippings and his beliefs on everything from
flouride in drinking water ("It turns you into a robot unable of
creativity or free thought") to the cinema of Oliver Stone ("do you
think he'd still be alive, knowing what he knows, if he weren't
working for them?"). It is safe to say that Jerry _is_ a wild and
crazy guy.
He is also stalking Alice Sutton, a lawyer whose father was murdered
about six months ago. Jerry, I don't think, is in love with her per
se, but the conspiracy surrounding her father's death. She should hate
him, but something draws her to him. It could have something to do
with the fact that he looks like Mel Gibson.
When Mel prints something in his newsletter that has a slight ring of
truth to it, the aforementioned "guy with the nose" (Patrick Stewart,
from "ST:TNG") kidnaps him, drugs him and almost gets him murdered. He
is called the guy with the nose because Jerry, in the process of
defending himself, bites this guy's nose off.
Now, I would be lying if I said I fully comprehended the gist of this
film, but I understood enough to know I liked it. My viewing
companion, in fact, believes that Mel Gibson should be nominated for
Best Actor for his performance. I tended to disagree, as Peter Fonda's
heartbreaking turn in ULEE'S GOLD is still too fresh in my mind, but
who knows what I'll think come next Febuary when the nominations are
handed out? Not me.
I do know one thing, though: I'm tired...

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Mel Gibson (Jerry Fletcher), Julia Roberts (Alice Sutton), Patrick
Stewart (Dr. Jonas), Cylk Cozart (Agent Lowry)
DIRECTOR: Richard Donner
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) presumably for violence, language, and intense
situations
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1997
I was fortunate enough to attend an advance screening for the upcoming
thriller CONSPIRACY THEORY.  This was, of course, a big deal for me
because reviewing movies is basically just a hobby for me and I never get
a chance at something like this.  Not only did I get to see an advance 
screening, I was able to see an advance screening of a *very good* movie.
The very fast-paced film stars Mel Gibson as Jerry Fletcher, a
fast-talking, witty, comical taxi driver in New York City.  Gibson's
performance is terrific, and his character is similar to that of Martin
Riggs in the LETHAL WEAPON films.  Gibson again teams up with Richard
Donner, as he did in the LETHAL WEAPON films and MAVERICK, and this time
around, the combination works even better.  The character of Jerry
Fletcher is indeed unique.  Try to imagine a toned-downed version of 
Travis Bickle who, this time around, is a jittery guy with
knowledge of government conspiracy cover-ups.  If you can imagine that,
then you've basically got Jerry Fletcher.
In many ways, I was surprised by this movie.  To begin with, I was
surprised at how good it was.  Don't get me wrong, it's not going to be
accepting any gold trophies next Spring, but it was a very enjoyable
movie.  Secondly, I was surprised at Mel Gibson's performance.  He
provided a fantastic performance.  The previews of this film led me to
believe it was an all-out action flick, which after viewing, it was almost
the opposite in a certain sense.  Gibson's character has an almost
uncountable number of one-liners, hilarious situations, and his character
is one that the audience tends to side with throughout the film.  For
instance, Jerry's apartment (and especially his security) is memorable. 
And last, I was surprised at how good the plot is.  Writer Brian Helgeland
has created a terrific story, and when watching this film, you are left to
wonder if all of Jerry Fletcher's far-fetched (or so they seem at first)
conspiracy theories are Helgeland's own opinions.
Mel Gibson isn't the only stand-out in the film.  Julia Roberts is
very good in her performance as Alice Sutton, the Department of Justice
employee who can't seem to stay away from Jerry Fletcher, who continually
visits Alice in hopes that she will do something about his theories.  He
also seems obsessed and in love with her.  But whenever he approaches her
with another one of his theories, she shrugs him and his beliefs off,
continually noting that one day she is going to slap a restraining order
on him.
Jerry, obviously determined to continually seek out the truth, continues
to research information for his next conspiracy theory, which will be
printed in his newsletter (same title as the movie).  Although he only has
five subscribers, he puts a large amount of time and effort into his work,
and publishes his next edition.  Very soon after he does so, he is
abducted and tortured by a sinister man who refers to himself as Dr. Jonas
(Patrick Stewart).  After barely escaping alive, Jerry is forced to turn
to the only person he can trust: Alice Sutton.
The remainder of the film is almost always fast-paced and full of action
and suspense, with Jerry's life being constantly put into jeopardy.  And
more along the way, the audience (and Alice) learn more and more about
Jerry's life.  Many things are explained throughout this film, both to the
characters and to the audience.  For instance, the meaning of the book
"The Catcher in the Rye" and its ties to assassins, the reason lone gunmen
have three names (e.g. Lee Harvey Oswald and James Earl Ray), and the real
truth behind the Grateful Dead.  Make sure listen closely throughout the
film, as Jerry is constantly throwing out interesting tidbits such as the
above.
Definitely, when CONSPIRACY THEORY hits theaters August 8th, make sure you
are standing in line to see it.  I am nearly positive everyone should
enjoy this film, especially if you are into an action-thriller with witty
dialogue and numerous suspenseful situations.  And even if you aren't, you
should still like this film.


Author
Michael Dequina
Conspiracy Theory (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        Mel Gibson plays a paranoid, downright crazy New York cab driver
obsessed with the idea of conspiracies.  Suddenly, he finds himself the
target of shady government types, apparently because one of his theories is
true.  On the run for his life, only a Justice Department investigator
(Julia Roberts) can help him.  Sounds like a strange cross between Lethal
Weapon, Taxi Driver, and The Pelican Brief, and, for about half of its
running time, Richard Donner's Conspiracy Theory does play as such.
However, one wishes that Donner and company had remained on that track, for
the film quickly degenerates into a murky mess that grows more hopelessly
convoluted with each passing minute.
        What makes Conspiracy Theory initially interesting--and
promising--is Gibson's wacked-out cabbie, Jerry Fletcher.  There are
paranoid people and then there are people like Jerry, who even keeps his
refrigerator and its contents under lock and key (one of the more inspired
sight gags are the combination-locked jugs of coffee and pudding).  Gibson,
a proven pro at playing off-kilter characters, is so much fun to watch that
we are interested when the contrived plot surfaces.  Jerry voices his wild
theories in a self-published newsletter (which lends the film its title), so
when some government agents led by the mysterious Dr. Jonas (an underused
Patrick Stewart) start chasing him, Jerry, his "friend" Alice Sutton
(Roberts, well-cast), and the audience are led to believe that one of his
wild ideas is indeed true.
        Alas, if only it were that simple.  Certainly, the scenario
initially set up by writer Brian Helgeland is contrived, but at the very
least it was easy to follow, and Donner directs the proceedings with an
energetic urgency.  But, as it turns out, it's nothing more than a red
herring.  Midway through a couple of new, complex plot elements are brought
to the forefront: the long-ago murder of Alice's judge father and, most
regrettably, a left-field development involving (yes) mind control.  This
twist would not have been as bothersome if it made some sense, but it never
does, nor is everything clearly, satisfactorily explained.  The way in which
Conspiracy Theory hooks viewers with its questions (and fascinating
protagonist) and then loses them with its answers more than recalls the
recent thriller Smilla's Sense of Snow, even if the outlandishness of the
plot "secrets" is not as awful as that of the half-baked Smilla.
        Conspiracy Theory marks Gibson and Donner's fifth collaboration
(following the three Lethal Weapons and Maverick)--and their least
satisfying one.  As it is, the film is a mildly diverting piece of popcorn
entertainment, but it would have gone down a lot more smoothly had it not
been too "clever" for its own good.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Did anybody notice that Roger Ebert gave "Anaconda" three and a half stars?
This fact made me feel better about giving "Conspiracy Theory" four stars.
You see, I have yet to find anyone out there, critic or no, who thought that
"Conspiracy Theory" was a great film. I figured there must be something wrong
with me. I saw it twice, TWICE and both times I was blown away and came out
of the theater knowing it would be near the top of my "Top Ten of 1997" list.
When I noticed that nobody I could find seemed to like the film as much as
me, I started to worry. Was something wrong with me? What did I miss that
made everybody else so reluctant to praise this fine film?
But did anybody notice that Roger Ebert gave "Anaconda" three and a half
stars?
"Conspiracy Theory" was one of the only movies that I actually thought "Best
Actor Nomination?" while I was watching it. Mel Gibson blew me away, as
always. Do I have a sub-concious Gibson fetish? It happened last year with
"Ransom". I loved it and put it at number one for my "Top Ten of 1996" list.
Nobody seemed to agree! What am I seeing in these movies that everybody else
is missing?
But then again, did anybody notice that Roger Ebert gave "Anaconda" three and
a half stars?
Julia Roberts is getting high acclaims for her work in "My Best Friend's
Wedding", one of the most overrated films of the year. It was stale, it was
way underdevloped, and it lacked any appeal. But people are applauding it and
leaving "Conspiracy Theory" to dwindle in box office death? Shame shame!
Oh well. I am standing my ground with giving "Conspiracy Theory" four stars.
I thought it was fantastic. I can understand someone giving it less . . .
maybe even three stars from some of those harsh critics. But less than
three???? Come on!! "Conspiracy Theory" comes highly recommended from me.
Just be warned that nobody else seems to agree.
But by the way, did anybody notice that Roger Ebert gave "Anaconda" three and
a half stars?

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) The problem with a movie titled CONSPIRACY THEORY is
that if you take it too seriously, the whole movie becomes a joke (like
JFK, to some extent). Don't take it seriously enough, and your action
movie becomes a farce. Richard Donner (who directed Mel Gibson in the
LETHAL WEAPONs and MAVERICK) found the right balance. 
Gibson plays Jerry Fletcher, a cabbie who talks the ears off his
passengers about all sorts of conspiracies, including black helicopters,
manufactured earthquakes, and Roswell, NM. I say that Donner found the
right balance because the opening sequence shows that Jerry is a nut.
He's not mean or angry, just hot for conspiracies. The important thing
is that the movie doesn't take him too seriously or too threateningly so
he can be our sympathetic hero. 
Still, Donner went too far in exposing us to Mel's character. By the
time we see the tapioca in the locked container inside the padlocked
fridge, we say "duh; we got it." 
Soon, though, we see that Jerry is right to be paranoid. He is put
through a CLOCKWORK ORANGE-type of treatment at the hands of a
diabolical Dr. Jonas (Patrick Stewart). At this point, we've already
accepted the movie's setup, so the problem here is no longer
plausibility, but emotional direction. 
As Jerry tries to escape, tense serious music plays, indicating the tone
for the scene. But visually, the scene is pure slapstick: Mel Gibson is
strapped to an old wooden wheelchair, eyelids taped open, moving as fast
as he can (not very fast), wildly waddling his feet to roll the chair,
while the incompetent bad guys slip and slide and never quite catch up.
It's the Keystone Kops on acid and, with a little circus music, would be
a great bit of comedy. But the music tells us it's not funny, so someone
somewhere didn't do their job - either composer Carter Burwell or
Donner. 
Julia Roberts is worked into the movie as Alice Sutton, the object of
Jerry's obsession. When Jerry is able to prove to her he's right about
one conspiracy (none of the big ones, though), she teams up with him out
of pity, curiosity, and professional duty (she's a public defender[?]). 
The movie really hums along for a while when Jerry and Alice both flee
and pursue the mysterious "them," but that pace doesn't last. Too soon,
the movie bogs down in details, and for the last hour, we keep waiting
for the pace to pick up like it did in the middle act. The movie was
probably 30 to 40 minutes too long. 
By now, there have been many other reviews of CONSPIRACY THEORY, and
they are mostly unfavorable. For the most part, they are right, but they
are probably too harsh. CONSPIRACY THEORY does have its moments. But you
may have to sift to find them. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In Richard Donner's CONSPIRACY THEORY, Mel Gibson finds himself with
a classic action-comedy premise on his hands.  Gibson stars as Jerry
Fletcher, a Manhattan cab driver whose hobbies include stalking an
attractive Justice Department prosecutor named Alice Sutton (Julia
Roberts), harboring paranoid delusions about anything and everything, and
committing the aforementioned paranoid delusions to a monthly newsletter
called "Conspiracy Theory."  He's just another crackpot in a city full of
crackpots, until a mysterious doctor (Patrick Stewart) kidnaps him and
wants to know "who else knows what you know."  He manages to escape,
realizing that one of his half-baked theories may actually be true...only
he has no idea which one it might be.
     Given a classic action-comedy premise, Gibson makes what would seem
to be a rational acting choice:  he gives a classic action-comedy
performance.  He informs his captive fares of the menaces of fluoridated
water and the new 100 dollar bill.  He wanders around in a wool cap
muttering paranoid non-sequiturs like Popeye after an "X-Files" bender.
He knocks a Fed over the head, then asks the prone G-Man, "Are you
faking?"  For about half the film, Gibson is an oddball delight.
     What a waste.  By all evidence, no one besides Gibson involved in
CONSPIRACY THEORY realized that it was an action-comedy.  For some
inexplicable reason, Donner and screenwriter Brian Helgeland decide that
CONSPIRACY THEORY is a psychological thriller.  Exit slick, simple plot,
enter a muddle of dark experiments and indecipherable connections between
characters who never even appear in the film.  Exit Alice Sutton the sane
foil to nutty Jerry, enter Alice Sutton the haunted woman with a wounded
psyche of her own in need of nursing back to health.  And exit Jerry the
entertaining crackpot, enter Jerry the tragic basket case who clings to
copies of "The Catcher in the Rye" as though they were life preservers.
     The latter choice is ill-advised bordering on inexcusable.  Like the
professional that he is, Gibson sobs dutifully through the scenes of Jerry
at the end of his tether, spewing forth exposition between squints and
grimaces, but it's clear he'd much rather be goofy than grandiose.  It's
easy to laugh at Jerry when Gibson is playing him for laughs, because
there's no sense that he's genuinely mentally ill; he's just a man who
thinks he knows something who becomes a man who knew too much.  When the
script yanks him into the realm of the deeply disturbed, it yanks the
viewers' feet right out from under them.  Every bit of fun Jerry provides
suddenly becomes vaguely tainted.  You start to feel as though you really
should be feeling sorry for him instead of laughing at him.
     That fun is desperately missed through much of CONSPIRACY THEORY,
because it turns into a very long sit.  As the conspiracies pile up and
the chases become a blur over two hours and fifteen minutes, Gibson's
sharp line readings act like electrical paddles to the film's heart.
After four previous films together, you'd think that Gibson and Donner
could find themselves on the same page.  No such luck.  CONSPIRACY THEORY
is the big action-comedy that wasn't, buoyed by the common sense of a star
who realizes when to ignore the director and give the people what they
want.
