Title
Review for Ride with the Devil (1999/I)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Dennis Schwartz
RIDE WITH THE DEVIL (director: Ang Lee; screenwriter: James Schamus,
based on the novel "Woe to Live On" by Daniel Woodrell; cinematographer:
Frederick Elmes; editor: Tim Squyres; cast: Tobey Maguire (Jake Roedel),
Skeet Ulrich (Jack Bull Chiles), Jeffrey Wright (Daniel Holt), Jewel
(Sue Lee Shelley), James Caviezel (Black John), Jonathan
Rhys Meyers (Pit Mackeson), Simon Baker (George Clyde), Thomas Guiry
(Riley Crawford); Runtime: 138; Universal Films; 1999)
Taiwanese director Ang Lee (The Ice Storm), now living in the States,
has exploited the rich American Civil War history to tell a fringe story
about the war taking place along the Kansas-Missouri border, as he
follows a band of Southern bushwhackers who oppose the pro-Union
Jayhawkers by waging a guerrilla war against them. It is a darkly
violent film that fails to be dramatically engaging, but has its brief
moments of edification as it satisfactorily points out how each side
harmed innocent citizens in their fight and what ultimately the Union
victory meant for the country. But the film could not present a coherent
plot, as it seemed to shrivel up as the story dragged on after its
colorful battle scenes. Taking the Southern side, the film found humor
in the awkward situations presented and found beauty in the landscape
photographed, and reasons in the Southern cause which doomed them to
failure. But many things about the film seemed to be perfunctory and
more like a costume show where the soldiers were more interested in
showing off the plumage on their cowboy hats than in giving a dramatic
presentation.
Missouri was a slave state that remained loyal to the Union. After an
anti-slavery Jayhawker raid on their Western Missouri hometown in the
1860s, two best friends, one the son of a poor German immigrant, the
19-year-old Jake Roedel (Tobey Maguire) and the other, a son of the
old-style of Southern life, Jack Bull Chiles (Skeet Ulrich), hook up
with the bushwhackers, a renegade Confederate Army made up of young men
from Kansas and Missouri whose aim is for revenge on the Union soldiers
and their sympathizers.
"Ride With the Devil" brings us into a world of besieged farmhouses and
dusty frontier towns and Southern chivalry toward women, and into brutal
battle zones of pillage and killing, of neighbor fighting neighbor.
Everyday life is fraught with dangers from raiding partys on both sides.
The Southern side has as their inspirational leader, Black John
(Caviezel); a mistrustful and hateful sociopath with a need to kill, Pit
Mackeson (Rhys Meyers); a cultured Southern gentleman George Clyde
(Simon Baker); and an ex-slave of Clyde's who remains loyal to him for
graciously freeing him, the wiseman Daniel Holt (Wright). Holt is the
contradiction in the Southern cause, as he and the immigrant's son Jake
are the outsiders among the Southern fighters, as they don't exactly fit
the image of what Southern gentlemen are supposed to be like. Their
reasons for joining the Confederate side is both emotional and complex.
The main battle scene restages Quantrill's raid on the abolitionist town
of Lawrence, Kansas. The bushwhackers massacre over a hundred of the
young men in town and then burn it down. Jake and Holt decide to have a
restaurant breakfast in the middle of this bloodshed and are
supposedlyresurrected as thinking men against the blatant violence that
just took place, as they prevent their cohorts from exercising the
unnecessary killing of an older man serving them. It was unconvincing-a
John Ford touch put in that didn't have the director's deftness of
making it smoothly fit into the story, as it was impossible to
disassociate them from the violent army they were part of.
The goal of the Lawrence attack is the burning down of the school at
which, one Confederate sympathizer said, the children are educated with
"no regard for status, custom and propriety." He goes on to say that
this belief in mass education and the democratic values that it
expresses spell defeat for the Confederacy, as it stands for values that
we can't match. This explains a key weakness of the Southern cause,
according to the filmmaker, that the Southern values are tradition-bound
and part of a static culture. This becomes the theme of the film and
goes for the reason the Civil War's outcome changed the direction the
country was going, as the Union victory allowed the country to prosper
and grow to become a great nation, as their philosophy for public
education and free enterprise took root.
A love story also blooms, as the alluring Sue Lee (Jewel), a recent
widow after three weeks of marriage, attracts Jack Bull's attention. She
brings scraps of food to him and Jake and Holt, who are hiding from
Union troops on the wooded land of her Missouri family who supports
their cause, as they built a lean-to out of mud. They have been spending
their time having longwinded unnatural conversations that sound much
like sermons, so Sue Lee's intrusion is more than welcome at this time.
The romance is broken up by more battles and a horrific amputation scene
in the hideout where there is no anesthetic administered.
Upon returning from Lawrence and staying in the farmhouse of Sue Ellen's
new providers, Jake and Holt find that she had the deceased Jack Bull's
baby, and because of Southern conventions regarding morality, Jake is
roped into being the widow's next husband.
Though this is a technically correct and serious movie and tries to
cover a controversial topic in an intelligent way, yet the presentation
of the story didn't seem to always jell. It was a dull film, the acting
was misplaced, the story was too distant and the dialogue was stilted.
It never got around to being an entertaining film, and it could never be
perceived as just an informative film, because it could never quite spit
out what it was trying to say. I also found Tobey Maguire's performance
grimacing to take--this was the wrong part and film for him to go
through his innocent contortions that he has done in all his previous
films. He should get a new act, already. On the other hand, pop star
Jewel came across as the life-force in the film and breathed some life
into the story about how the young were coping with the war.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Question:  What do you get when you blend Gone with the Wind and Glory?
Answer #1:  The cinematic equivalent of Viagra for your excitable high
school history teacher that still spends his weekends reenacting the
battles of the Civil War with other middle-age losers/fanatics.
Answer #2:  Ride with the Devil, a movie about the Civil War made by a
Taiwanese filmmaker.
A Taiwanese filmmaker?  Making a Civil War picture?  Why, that sounds as
preposterous as Spaniard Antonio Banderas directing a film about 1965
Alabama!  But Ang Lee is no ordinary filmmaker.  His resume is nearly as
diverse as indie icon John Sayles, knocking out movies about the frocky
(Sense and Sensibility), retro sex (The Ice Storm), cultural contrast
(Pushing Hands), the love of food (Eat Drink Man Woman) and taboo
relationships (The Wedding Banquet).
Although Ride with the Devil is a remarkably beautiful film, it offers
nothing that we haven't already seen in Gone with the Wind and Glory.
It's also a balanced movie, meaning that war buffs will have to wait for
extended periods between battle scenes.  The ending is weak and the film
is not nearly emotional as it could be.  Yet, somehow, Devil is still
entertainingly captivating.
Based on Daniel Woodrell's novel `Woe to Live On,' the film focuses on
one Jake Roedel (Tobey Maguire, Pleasantville), the son of a pro-Union
German immigrant transplanted in Missouri.  Like other Southern boys,
Jake is eager to bear arms in order to maintain their Southern way of
life.  Jake and his best friend Jack Bull Chiles (Skeet Ulrich, Chill
Factor), the son of a wealthy plantation owner, join a rogue group of
Confederate fighters known as `Bushwhackers.'
Banded together with rich boy George Clyde (Simon Baker-Denny, L.A.
Confidential) and ex-slave Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright, Basquiat), Jake
and Jack Bull pull off a particularly savage raid of a group of the
Union soldiers believed to be responsible for the murder of Jack Bull's
father.  After the attack, the men lay low by holing up for the harsh
winter in what is essentially a cave, with a young widow named Sue Lee
Shelley (hippie songstress Jewel Kilcher) supplying their provisions.
Later, the fabulously endowed Ms. Kilcher has a provocative
breast-feeding scene that ranks as one of the best ever.
Adapted for the screen by The Ice Storm scribe James Schamus, Devil is a
hypnotic combination of love and war that also has a great sense of
humor.  Behind the scenes, Lee's production team creates some of the
more lush scenes of the cinematic year.  Devil's graphically violent
battle scenes are extremely well done, as is the portrayal of the
evolving friendship between Jake and Holt.  Neither is completely
trusted by their cohorts, continually having their loyalty questioned by
fellow Bushwackers despite their obvious devotion to the Southern
cause.  Holt (played in Oscar-worthy fashion by Wright) is somehow still
sympathetic to the Confederacy despite a life of slavery, while Jack is
seen as a German first and a Southerner second.  They are both victims
of ethnic intolerance.  And, yes, Spike Lee will probably blow a gasket
over the use of the dreaded `n' word.
2:18 - R for graphic war violence, brief nudity, adult situations and
sexual content

Author
David N. Butterworth
        If you compare "Ride with the Devil" to such American Civil War
epics as "Gettysburg" and "Glory," then Ang Lee's film is always going to
come up short.  Although already touted as an epic, the only epic aspect of
the latest film from the director of "Eat Drink Man Woman," "Sense and
Sensibility," and "The Ice Storm" is its length, and that's only 134
minutes.  That's not much of a showing alongside "Gettysburg"'s staggering
four hours plus.
        So one really needs to look at "Ride with the Devil" on the
strength of its individual merits.  Fortunately it has one that stands out:
strength of character.
        The story here is one of a small band of renegades caught in the
middle of an escalating civil conflict.  The war they wage on the
Missouri-Kansas border is not one of North vs. South, Blue vs. Gray, but a
smaller, more intimate struggle--that of friend against friend, neighbor
against neighbor, father against son.
        Jake Roedel ("Pleasantville"'s Tobey Maguire), together with his
longtime friend Jack Bull Chiles (Skeet Ulrich), George Clyde (Simon
Baker-Denny) and George's "freed" black slave Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright),
form a band of bushwhackers after Chiles' family is slaughtered by
marauding Unionist jayhawkers.  These genteel Southern gentlemen, their
long hair flowing like lions' manes, take it upon themselves to rid the
surrounding countryside of anyone they suspect of being a Yankee
sympathizer.
        Jake and his fellow mercenaries hole up for the winter in a
makeshift shelter they've dug out of the side of a hill on the property of
a pro-Southern landowner.  The landowner's daughter Sue Lee Shelley (pop
ingenue Jewel, appropriately subdued) visits them on her mule, bringing
them vittles, her prim and proper presence making them all feel a little
uncomfortable in their ramshackle, muddy environs.
        From time to time there are bloody skirmishes in which nameless,
faceless Federals are massacred, young or old it doesn't seem to matter,
but the film finds greater strength in focusing its efforts on the men and
their inevitable waiting games.  This allows for some wonderful character
development, especially between Roedel and Holt, whose relationship up
until this point has been of the "what are you looking at?" type.  Maguire
and Wright have exactly what it takes to make their relationship--and
resulting friendship--believable, such as the scenes in which Roedel reads
letters aloud from a Union-confiscated mailbag to the illiterate Holt.
Maguire, typically, does some fine work here.
        Writer/producer James Schamus, once again collaborating with
director Lee, draws fine Southern sensibilities in a very personal story
that treats the Civil War (in the words of Daniel Woodrell's adapted novel
"Woe to Live On") as "an open wound."  This makes the long, thoughtful
"Ride with the Devil" less a history lesson than a richly rewarding
character study drawn from a historical perspective.
        With any luck the film will be marketed appropriately because with
its questionable title and Jewel buttoning down the credits, moviegoers
might be excused for expecting "Young Guns 3."  "Ride with the Devil" is
far better than that.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Murali Krishnan
One of the most inspirational chapters in American history is the
Civil War. It has been the source of voluminous works of literature,
including numerous films. Many of those examine similar themes and use
familiar settings. This film is different in that it is set in one of
the lesser known theaters of the war -- the guerilla battles in the
state of Kansas.
The opening of the film gives a brief overview of the historical
situation. It explains the conflict between the two factions among the
residents of Kansas -- the Jayhawks, who are supporters of the Union,
and the Bushwhackers, who are supporters of the Confederacy. It goes
on to explain that instead of the groups battling each other with
regular armies, they attack each other in guerilla assaults; a
particularly brutal form of war that encompasses innocent civilians.
The story begins by introducing Jake Roedel (Tobey Maguire) and Jack
Bull Chiles (Skeet Ulrich), who are young men about to be sucked into
the developing political situation. Although his father is a German
immigrant, Jake identifies himself singularly as an American, and
particularly as a patriotic Southern supporter like all his friends.
When animosity between the two groups erupts into actual violence, the
boys do what honor dictates and join a loosely organized band of
Bushwhackers in their grave fight for control of the state.
This much of the narrative is typical of a war story. Naive young men
filled with pride and honor are thrust into the hell of war and become
little more than cannon fodder. What is unusual is that the story does
not attempt to show the protagonists in a positive light. The
Bushwhackers are drawn as ruthless terrorists who callously murder and
loot innocent civilians. It is not that the opposing side is intended
to be more pure, in fact they also commit their share of atrocities.
The point is that all war is horrible, but that civil war is
especially tragic because it is necessarily cannibalistic, with hatred
born of familiarity with and proximity to the enemy.
The story adds extra dimensions by injecting a relationship between
Jack and a civilian sympathizer, Sue Lee Shelley (Jewel Kilcher).
Another interesting facet is that one member of the Bushwhacker troop,
Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright), is a black man. Historically, most
blacks supported the Union, for obvious reasons, but this story
presents the case of one of the very few former slaves who fought for
the Confederacy.
Although the film has many compelling issues to work with, it is not a
very impressive effort. In order to keep the main character (Jake)
likeable, he is never shown to commit any of the brutality of his
mates. His distaste of cruelty does not mesh with his willingness to
associate with it.
The film is also careless in its presentation. It is jarring to see
men who live rough in the brush consistently wearing clean satin
vests. Director Ang Lee strives to present vivid and engaging imagery,
but some aspects, like the above and the obviously choreographed
battles are disingenuously excessive. It is worthy to note that
although most of the performances are forgettable, Maguire is
successful in presenting a believable character with a charismatic
performance.
Marginally recommended. Although it is well paced and cinematically
rich, the film is pedestrian because of a weak story. Except for the
performance of Tobey Maguire, nothing in the film is noteworthy, yet
the film is watchable. The historical component of the film is
involving, but the poorly developed story is a detriment to any issues
that might be examined.

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2a679a79ef9917b50825683a000847ee?OpenDocument
RIDE WITH THE DEVIL A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright
filmcritic.com 1999.
Hands down, this is the best Civil War movie since GLORY.  RIDE WITH THE
DEVIL is captivating from the opening scene and its eclectic cast is
shockingly powerful.  Don't worry about Jewel ruining anything; she
convincingly makes the transition from pop star to actress, and Jeffrey
Wright's (BASQUIAT, CELEBRITY) performance of a former slave fighting
for the Confederacy is unprecedented and chillingly realistic.  I have
no clue what they were thinking with such a misleading title -- RIDE
WITH THE DEVIL isn't some supernatural, special effects-laden, cheesy
line-filled, end-of-the-millennium dud; it's a movie about a perspective
of American history rarely talked about in classrooms across the
country.  The plot sympathizes with the ideals of the Confederate
bushwhackers fighting a guerilla-style war against the Union Jay Hawks-
and to its credit; it almost makes you believe in their cause.
Our protagonist is Jake Roedel, (Tobey Maguire  THE ICE STORM) a young
Missouri-raised son of a poor Dutch immigrant, and he along with his
child hood buddy Jack Bull Chiles, the son of a Missouri plantation
owner, (Skeet Ulrich -- AS GOOD AS IT GETS, CHILL FACTOR) join up as
bushwhackers when their homes and families are seized by Union
soldiers.  They both become skilled gunmen and execute daring raids on
Union soldiers and sympathizers.  By 1862, their unit, headed by Black
John (James Caviezel), includes George Clyde (Simon Baker) and Clyde's
loyal former slave Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright).  With a harsh winter
looming, the Bushwhackers must disperse and find shelter.  Several
members hole up in a hidden hillside dugout.  While in hiding, their
food and supplies are provided by the young widow Sue Lee (Jewel).  When
casualties are taken from a Jay Hawk surprise attack the group is
splintered and Jake and Holt are united as soldiers in solidarity.  As
the war rages on, most of their remaining Bushwhacker compatriots are
either dead or lost on the Southern cause, so Jake and Holt must decide
whether to keep the fight alive or flee west.
The production of the film is outstanding; the settings, costumes,
imagery, and soundtrack add a strong dose of reality to the characters.
The gunfights are as exciting as any war movie I've seen, and the
dialogue is also vintage mid-1800s Southern jargon, which Ulrich pulls
off surprisingly well.  The real gold nugget of the film however is
Jeffrey Wright's character: Daniel Holt is a Southern black man fighting
against Northerners.  In principle, he's killing those who are fighting
for the freedom of his people.  This role has rarely been touched, if
ever, in modern filmmaking, however the reality of the situation is that
there actually were a number of black Southerners who fought for the
Confederacy, many of whom thought that it would lead to better treatment
after the war.  Throughout the film Holt's emotions are expectedly
hidden but when he reveals some inner demons the film is at its peak.
Believe me, I can understand why you wouldn't want to see it.  Jewel,
Skeet Ulrich, and nobody else you've ever heard of.  It's sounds hard to
take seriously, right?  Every once in a while a good one comes along
against the odds and that's the case here.  Director Ang Lee (SENSE AND
SENSIBILITY) has done a fantastic job and this film is really worth
watching, even at two hours and ten minutes.  I still haven't figured
out what RIDE WITH THE DEVIL means exactly, but it would be a travesty
if a lame title kept this one from being a real success.
 Based on the novel Woe to Live On by Daniel Woodrell

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 USA Pictures/ Universal Pictures
 Director:  Ang Lee
 Writer:  James Schamus
 Cast: Skeet Ulrich, Tobey Maguire, Jewel, Jeffrey Wright,
Jonathan Rhys Meyers, Simon Baker-Denny, James Caviezel
   When "Gone With the Wind" hit the screens, the Civil War
was one of the most popular topics in America.  You couldn't
keep books about that tragic, if oxymoronic, event on the
shelves.  Now, high school kids think that the U.S. fought in
"The Silver War" and that the event occurred in ancient times
(about 1955).  "Ride With the Devil" is an entertaining way of
jogging our memories while providing a look at one particular
state which was--as the journalists commonly say about
families during that time--torn apart by the momentous,
appallingly self-destructive event.  Why self-destructive? 
Simply because the U.S.--unlike the other great powers of
now and then such as the former Soviet Union and just about
all the sovereignties of Europe--has been protected from
foreign aggression by two great oceans only to stupidly battle
its own countrymen!  
   "Ride with the Devil" takes us behind the scenes of a
chapter in the history of the Civil War with which few today
are familiar.  In fact, only those who have read Daniel
Woodrell's novel with the woebegone title "Woe to Live On"
would have the foggiest notion that a band of guerrilla
fighters began harassing and killing Northerners even before
the firing on Ft. Sumpter started the war officially, and that
these ragtag groups called Bushwhackers actually continued
a pattern of vindictive killing up to ten years after General Lee
signed off on the peace!  Maybe we here in the U.S. are not
so different from civil warriors of far less developed countries
like, for example, Vietnam, where the southern part during
the war were composed of people with divided loyalties--
some fighting for the Communist side, others staying loyal to
the pro-Western forces.
   "Ride with the Devil" is a long film at 134 minutes, a period
of time that could have been justified had the movie dealt
with the Civil War on a broader basis.  But focussing as it
does on the feelings of brotherhood and of tension among
these Bushwhackers with a dollop of romance and a
considerable amount of humor thrown in, the picture could
have been curtailed and tightened.  As a force for our
enlightenment about a forgotten chapter in our history, the
movie is invaluable.  As a piece of entertainment, it is spottier
in that some of the hostilities within the guerrilla group are not
sufficiently developed and the tragic massacre at Lawrence,
Kansas in which 180 civilians were killed, was over in a
couple of minutes.
   The picture is directed by Ang Lee, the Taiwanese born
helmer whose "The Ice Storm" was one of the most
discussed films of its year and who, as a man who might be
considered an outsider, is an ideal person to make a film
centering on two outsiders.  The action takes place around
the Kansas-Missouri border, with Kansas fighting on the
northern side and Missouri, though a slaveowning state,
surprisingly loyal as well to the Yankees.  But the state of
Missouri is far from unified, and these Bushwhackers are
determined to delete those forces within the area that are
loyal to the North and also to plunge across the border to the
abolitionist-centered city of Lawrence, Kansas.  
   Essentially Jake (Tobey Maguire), the son of a German
immigrant raised in Missouri is tight with the Jack Bull Chiles
(Skeet Ulrich), who as the son of a plantation owner is
anything but an outsider.  They meet up with a freed slave,
Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright) who is loyal to his former master
and like a surprising number of other blacks actually fights on
the Confederate side.  The big villain in the piece is the
sociopathic Pitt Mackerson (Jonathan Rhys-Meyers), a
bloodthirsty outlaw who regularly badgers Jake because of
the latter's foreign ancestry (German-Americans were
generally loyal to the Union side) and has threatened to kill
him.  Complicating the plot is the presence of Sue Lee
Shelley (played by the pop singer Jewel in her first acting
role), a liberated widow who has the briefest of affairs with
Jack, becomes pregnant, and because of a turn of events
winds up as Jake's fiance.
   James Schamus's script eschews the sweep of "Gone with
the Wind" by delving into the topic of Bushwhackers, but the
dialogue is not what you'd call particularly sharp or edgy. 
Battle scenes, on the other hand, featuring scores of stunt
people and filmed in the style of the old Westerns but in a
way that might have warmed the heart of Akira Kurosawa,
look darn good.  The massacre at Lawrence, Kansas does
spare the women (these are southerners after all) but we get
the impression that most of the killing is being carried out by
the more psychotic types among the Bushwhackers since,
after all unarmed local residents are slaughtered, their stores
burned to the ground.
   Jeffrey Wright, who wowed the Broadway world in his role
in Tony Kushner's "Angels in America," gives a subtle
performance of an illiterate former slave who takes on a low-
key guise as a guy willing to fight for the southern tradition
while dreaming of buying freedom for his mother in Texas. 
Skeet Ulrich doesn't get to do much, but Tobey Maguire is
contributes a warmly humorous performance as a 19-year-old
who agrees to a shotgun wedding despite his virginity, and a
few other big names like Zach Grenier and Tom Wilkinson
add class to a reasonably solid Western on an little known
subject.  The subtext--that this war brought forth a nation of
greater freedom and equality than had been known before
but at the sacrifice of a great deal of tradition--is
demonstrated effectively.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Patience.  In this Jerry Bruckheimer era of rock 'em, sock 'em
filmmaking, audiences have little patience.  Worse, when they do, the
films frequently don't deliver the rewards promised by their slow
approach, frustrating audiences and making them more likely to go for
quick gratification the next time.  There's nothing like watching Bruce
Willis save the world, or some large part of it, to pump up your
adrenaline.
In a complete opposite to the in-your-face action style of filmmaking,
Ang Lee's career has been devoted to the human dimension.  From his
comedic EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN to his intimate SENSE AND SENSIBILITY to his
biting THE ICE STORM, his pictures have cut through the gloss to deliver
fascinating, realistic character studies.
Lee's latest, RIDE WITH THE DEVIL, tells a rarely told story of the
American Civil War.  Set on the Kansas/Missouri border, it follows a
group of Southern militia, called the Bushwhackers, as they fight
skirmishes with the locals, the Union army and their Northern
counterparts, the Jayhawkers.  Soldiers in the regular army fought
gloriously and died, whereas the Bushwhackers just fought and died.  The
complex reasons why they chose this unusual path are explored and
explained convincingly in James Schamus's script, which is based on a
Daniel Woodrell novel ("Woe to Live On").
Those going expecting a traditional war picture will be sorely
disappointed.  If that's the film you want, then Lee is not the director
to make it.  RIDE WITH THE DEVIL moves with its own methodical rhythms
and with most of its story told in quiet moments of anguish as the
Bushwhackers hide between fights.  Battle scenes there are, but they are
few and far between and rarely take center stage.
The story is one of men, young and old, but mainly older teenagers,
trying to wage a war of retribution against the better equipped
Northerners.  Lee sets this in a wonderfully pastoral setting, full of
chirping crickets, clucking hens and mooing cows.  The fighters aren't
glamorous or heroic; they're just persistent and, for all their bravado,
obviously frightened.
In the large ensemble cast, Tobey Maguire (THE ICE STORM), as the
innocent and naive Jake Roedel, has perhaps the most important role.  He
isn't the leader, but the story revolves around him and his friends.
With the arrival of a bleak winter the Bushwhackers disband into
foursomes that go off to hide in the woods.  Along with Jake the first
winter are Jack Bull Chiles (Skeet Ulrich), George Clyde (Simon
Baker-Denny) and Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright), an ex-slave whose freedom
George purchased.
Adopted by a local Southern family, the men take a liking to the
family's recently widowed daughter-in-law, Sue Lee Shelley (Jewel).  "He
was a good husband to me," Sue Lee rather matter-of-factly tells the
four of her deceased husband.  "The three weeks he was a good husband.
He didn't last."  It was a time when not much of anything lasted.  Every
visitor brought news of more dead friends, neighbors and relatives.
One of the touching scenes has the men reading stolen mail to Union
soldiers.  The letters are full of resignation to the fact that the
recipient or the sender or both may be dead before the letter is
delivered.
It was a cold and lonely calling, but the Bushwhackers coped somehow.
The beauty of Lee's picture is that he relates their story with
compassion but without schmaltz.  Enlightening, fascinating and tender,
it is the movie for those who want to get behind the lines and the
action and get to know the individuals drawn into such a hellacious
situation.
RIDE WITH THE DEVIL runs a little too long at 2:18.  It is rated R for
some graphic war violence and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom
Ride With the Devil (1999) 1 star out of 4. Starring Tobey Maguire,
Skeet Ulrich, Jewel and Jeffrey Wright. Directed by Ang Lee.
 "Ride With the Devil," an overwrought Civil War melodrama, is a very
long and boring trot.
 The mediocre offering from director Ang Lee is a major misfire, a big
disappointment that will do nothing to further the career of its two
main stars, Tobey Maguire and Skeet Ulrich.
 Nor will Jewel probably want to add her lackluster film debut to her
resume.
 This wounded turkey lacks focus and a point. Is it about the futility
of war? Is it a story of accepting responsibility? Or is it a tale of
brotherhood?
 Who knows. Who cares. Director Lee, best known for his fine work on
"Eat Drink Man Woman," "Sense and Sensibility" and "The Ice Storm,"
seems lost as he tries to handle this potboiler that looks at the war
from the point of view of two Missouri youths who join the Bushwhacker
guerrilla movement to protect their state from being overrun by
Jayhawkers and federal troops.
 The stilted dialogue sounds like it was ripped from the pages of some
failed romance novel.
 None of the main actors shows any personality or spark. When not
skirmishing with the enemy, they sit around a lot just chewing the fat,
boring us to death.
 The movie's bright spot belongs to Jeffrey Wright as Daniel Holt, a
former slave who chooses to fight with the Southern sympathizers. Holt
is the only character who shows any complexity or dimension.
 Ulrich, especially, with an accent dripping with molasses, sounds like
a refugee from a road show company of "Gone With the Wind." His
mannerisms are such sickening affectations that you find it hard to
believe Lee actually allowed his cinematographer to film his scenes.
 Maguire seems to spend most of his time pouting, when he's not shooting
people or talking endlessly about family and honor.
 The only positive about "Ride With the Devil" is the scenery. Otherwise
this is one Civil War drama that should be gone with the wind.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
