Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Ben Hoffman
When director Noyce undertook (sic!) this version of THE SAINT, he
asked the writers, Jonathan Hensleigh and Wesley Strick, to include
something about Simon Templar's early life, how he changed from a
sinner to a saint, something the original writer of The Saint stories,
Leslie Charteris, neglected to do.  The movie therefore starts off
in an orphanage in the Far East.  There, young Simon refuses to reveal
his identity to the orphanage's administrators. It was there he learned
to use disguises, retreating from the real world.
Val Kilmer who plays the title role, gets to use a dozen or so
disguises.  Unfortunately, one would have to be blind not to recognize
old Val under all the makeup.  On the other hand, Kilmer appears to be
well aware of that and he plays The Saint with a twinkling eye and a
half grin.  That is the good part of the film.  The rest is downhill.
What does a nuclear scientist look like?  What if she is a woman?  The
woman scientist may very well look like Dr. Emma Russell (Elisabeth
Shue) but we have all been conditioned to expect something less than a
beautiful blonde.  It therefore makes Ms. Shue an unbelievable
scientist.  That may be our fault but this being a movie, we want our
scientists to look like what we expect a scientist to look like.
Right?  Right.
The plot can be disposed of very quickly.  The movie takes place in
present-day Russia.  In a key supporting role, there is Ilya, (Valery
Nikolaev) the violent and unpredictable son of a very influential
industrialist Ivan Tretiak (Rade Serbedzjia.)  The Saint is hired to
get a valuable secret from Dr. Russell which will enable holding the
world hostage.  They did not reckon that The Saint would fall in love
with Dr. Shue, thus putting a crimp in everyone's plans. Why they did
not anticipate that, I cannot say.  It certainly occurred to me.

Author
Seth Bookey
On the television series of the same name, Roger Moore and Ian Ogilvy
played the Saint as a Robin Hood via James Bond.  Not so in the latest,
cinematic version, where Simon Templar (Hollywood bete noire Val
Kilmer) uses his human fly and lockpicking services for the highest
bidders. But, as the prologue shows, no one can go though a cruel church
orphanage full of Dickensian horrors and a tragic event without a
conscience. So, when Tretiak, a Russian former Communist turned mob boss
and presidential candidate, employs him to steal the secret of cold fusion
from an American physicist at Oxford, Dr. Emma Russell (Elisabeth Shue),
he has a difficult time. A master of disguise and escape, The Saint
penetrates Emma's life, and surprises himself by falling for her. 
One of the biggest stars of the movie is Moscow. To my knowledge this is
the first big Hollywood movie to take full advantage of Moscow for its
backdrop--from the Kremlin and Red Square to Soviet-style apartment blocks
and subterranean mazes. The political intrigues and doublecrosses are not
contrived and for once, the real suspense is in the chases, not the
explosions (kept, gratefully, to a minimum). London and Berlin also
provide wonderful atmosphere. Most of the sites shown in this wintry film
evoke a lot of gray, somber tones. 
Val Kilmer puts in a good performance as The Saint, with a variety of disguises.
He seems believable as the mercenary daredevil who finally lets his conscience
dictate to him. Elisabeth Shue seems a bit too young and naive for the role
of the physicist. But, she seems addled enough throughout to be the scientist
suddenly tossed into skullduggery. The plot also avoids ending at a romantic
upswing and delivers a few last-minute surprises without being excessive.
Rade Serbedzija and Valeri Nikolayev are wonderful as the diabolical
father-and-son-duo, Ivan and Ilya Tretiak, respectively. Charlotte
Cornwall and Alun Armstrong are also very amusing in their roles of
Scotland Yard Detectives who are onto the Saint. 
TV has made much of the soundtrack, which does not seem so apparent during
the movie. At one point, during the initial love scene, a pop tune that
drifts in and out of the much better score is quite annoying.
Copyright 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
Seth Bookey
sethbook@panix.com
Criticism         http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/mission.html
Family History         http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/8588

Author
Christopher Null
[REVIEWS TAKE A NEW, SHORTER FORMAT BEGINNING WITH 'THE SAINT']
     The Next Big Franchise hits theaters this Friday, with all the
trappings of a sequel-destined event.  Infused with a backstory to set
up the past of its nameless hero (Val Kilmer) as something of a "rogue
James Bond with a guilty conscience and a Volvo," THE SAINT is as
improbable as it is entertaining.  With a plot revolving around a
successful cold fusion experiment developed by miniskirt-clad scientist
Emma (Elizabeth Shue) and the Russian Mafia's enlisting of the Saint to
"steal the formula," it would be easy to sit back and laugh at the
film's goofiness.  However, Kilmer comes off as so engrossing and
delivers his wryly hilarious lines with such precision that you end up
forgetting the bad techno soundtrack and the series of unlikely
coincidences that drive the picture to its inevitable end.  And while
that obviously-altered-to-make-it-happy ending is truly annoying, it's
THE SAINT's combination of action and comedy that make it a worthwhile
trip.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael Dequina
After briefly trying on the cowl of the caped crusader, Val Kilmer
has found a role that's an even better fit for his blend of charisma and
cockiness--master thief The Saint.  It's too bad the rest of Phillip Noyce's
big budget update of the Leslie Charteris character is so mediocre that
future adventures seem far from likely.
Kilmer perfectly embodies Simon Templar, an ace thief, master of
disguise, and all-around rogue who uses his charms and quick wit to ensnare
any woman for his personal gain.  For the first time, Simon reaches a crisis
of conscience when he develops genuine feelings for scientist Dr. Emma
Russell (Elisabeth Shue), who holds the commodity which he has been hired by
a mafia-affiliated Russian billionaire (Rade Serbedzija) to steal--a working
formula for cold fusion.
Kilmer has a perfect grasp on the character, pulling off convincing
accents in his different guises (the fairly plain makeup work, however, does
leave something to be desired), and keeping a great sense of humor
throughout.  Simon is not only good at what he does, but he has a lot of fun
doing it.  On the other side of the token, there's the completely miscast
Shue.  Emma is supposed to be kooky yet so brilliant as to perfect a formula
that many scientists have been trying to discover for years.  We first meet
Emma when she lectures a class on cold fusion.  The scene is absolutely
crucial to establishing the credibility of the character, and Shue blows it.
She plays up the character's quirks and nervous foibles, and any hint of
real intelligence is lost in the process.  Instead of being brilliant yet
kooky, Emma is just kooky--kooky and vacuous.
The character of Emma also gets short shrift from screenwriters
Jonathan Hensleigh and Wesley Strick.  One of Emma's key defining traits is
a heart ailment she's had since childhood, and early on a lot is made of her
need for medication.  But lo and behold, act three rolls around and suddenly
Emma's heart condition is written off in a single line of dialogue.
Hensleigh and Strick also don't give any convincing reasons as to why Simon
would feel any differently about Emma than any of the other women he's used.
The implication is that Emma "understands" the real Simon, but their
relationship isn't developed thoroughly enough to make that clear.
The lackluster romance shouldn't come as too big a surprise, since
The Saint is directed by Noyce, a skilled craftsman whose work, most
recently the Jack Ryan films Patriot Games and Clear and Present Danger and
the voyeuristic thriller Sliver, is characterized by their technical
achievement and emotional chilliness.  Noyce creates a number of exciting
and suspenseful moments, in particular an extended chase midway, and the
film is visually enthralling.  But with the "heart" of the picture, the
romance between Simon and Emma, so unconvincing, it's easy to just be
superficially interested in the picture without really caring about the
people involved.
Simon Templar is an interesting character with infinite promise as
the protagonist in a series of films, and Val Kilmer is the perfect man for
the job, but based on this unexceptional initial outing, Kilmer may soon
regret giving up his Batman meal ticket.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1997, PG-13, 116 minutes [1 hour, 56 minutes]
[thriller/action]
starring: Val Kilmer (Simon Templar), Elisabeth Shue (Dr. Emma Russell), Rude
Sebedzija (Ivan Tretiak), Valeri Nikolayev (Ilya Tretiak), written by
Jonathon Hensleigh, Wesley Strick, produced by David Brown, Robert Evans,
William J. MacDonald, Mace Nuefeld, directed by Phillip Noyce.
"The Saint" is probably one of the most mindless and typical of the modern
Hollywood thrillers. It has a dashing hero, a beautiful damsel in distress, a
villain from the cliche vaults, and an overly complicated plot which
conviently provides for lots of action and special effects. But it is not
these elements alone that make it mediocre, the film is just not interesting
or impressive to begin with.
The film opens with a flashback to establish the main character's "origin."
The setting is an old Catholic orphanage where the priests and nuns aren't
just mean, they're evil. One boy refuses to go by his Catholic saint name, so
he is  beaten and the children's food is locked up until he complies with the
priest's demands. But the child is clever and brave as he leads the children
on a revolution of sorts. This scene did not serve any purpose at all. It
seemed to be the worst case of Catholic bashing I have ever seen and was
quite offensive. 
We then skip ahead to the present day and meet the adult version of the
rebellious child. His  name is Simon Templar (Kilmer) and he seems much like
James Bond, but instead of being a spy, he is a thief. And since this is a
commercial film (with a huge budget) about espionage, the film tries to
impress us quickly  by having Templar attempt to steal a microchip from a
highly secured building in Moscow. Of course he must single-handedly beat all
the computer security systems (a la "Mission: Impossible"), fight a mobster,
fall 40 stories and land safely, and then proceed to outrun and outwit lots
of goons with Uzis.
The film then starts to form a plot as Templar's next assignment is to steal
the formula for cold fusion from an American scientist in London. Her name is
Dr. Emma Russell (Shue), a blonde bombshell who just happens to keep the
formula for cold fusion on some Post-It notes in her bra! It's obvious where
this film is going and it wouldn't have been so bad had it not presented
itself in such a serious manner. 
Templar proceeds to seduce Russell and steal her formula, but after being
with her for only 24 hours the two seem to fall in love. Relationships in
thriller and action movies such as these are always taken seriously because
of the danger. Fear can be an erotic sensation, but here it is totally
shallow.
Ever since the Cold War ended we haven't had a Russian villain, so it was
actually a pleasure to have see one crop up. Rude Sebedzija co-stars as Ivan
Tretiak, a Russian mobster who will stop at nothing to get Russell's magical
formula. From the second act on, the film revolves around Templar and
Russell's escape from Tretiak and his son Ilya's (Nikolayev) goons. 
Along the way we get a lot of violent chase scenes, passion scenes, scenes
that trick both the characters and the audience, but mostly a lot of
action-packed chase scenes.
Major motion pictures such as these often use complex plots to make the
viewer think it is an intelligent thriller when it's not. This film simply
plugs in the villains, the plotlines, and the action at all the right places.
None of these characters have much depth to them, their dialogue is too
"written" to take seriously, even the actors seem bored at times. When the
suspenseful, climatic scenes kick in, it's hard to be swept up in the
adventure because you don't care.
The plot to "The Saint" was so confusing I'm having a difficult time
recalling it, much less describing it. There isn't much to it, just another
high tech government thriller that happens to take place in modern Russia.
The reason most films of this genre fail is because they try too hard, this
film doesn't try hard enough. 
(4/8/97) (6/29/97) [see also: "Mission: Impossible"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Author
Joshua McAdams
        Boy, what can you say about a movie like the Saint? Did I say
movie? I apologize. I should have referred to this Val Kilmer vehicle
as an experience ---  an experience that I will now attempt to relate
to you. It was four in the afternoon on a rainy Sunday  when I pulled
into the parking lot at the Carmike Six Theater. As local movie houses
go the Carmike is easily the best in Charlottesville; the screens are
the right ratio, the sound is DTS, and the place is generally showing
big budget  films with mass appeal. Case in point, last week Carmike
was screening four different Harrison Ford movies in five  theaters.
Talk about over-exposure.
        The first thing I noticed was the line that generated from the
box office and spilled into the parking lot to block traffic. Strange,
I thought, there must be a debut this week other than "The Saint."
Quickly I scanned the posters hanging outside: it was definitely too
late for  Star Wars mania and word of mouth had pretty much killed
"The Devil's Own." It turned out that two other features, both low
concept romantic comedies,  were going heads-up with Val this very
weekend. Still, even taking into account the weather and the sizable
student population, I got the errie feeling that these carbon drones
were really waiting in line to see a cheap Mission Impossible rip-off.
        Now don't get me wrong, I thought Mission Impossible was an
James Bond rip-off, but at least it was expensive. I'd seen the
trailers for "The Saint" --- lots of Kilmer in disguises, Elizabeth
Shue acting vulnerable, and machine guns in every third shot.  Enough
of the plotline had trickled out to let everyone know that communism
may be dead but those crazy Russians were up to something again. As
contrived as it was,  Mission Impossible killed Emilio Estevez in the
first reel and then dusted Voight in the climax! The most one could
look forward to with "The Saint" is allot gunplay and generic villains
delivering cornball lines. Yet here I was locking my car door and
strolling toward the theater.
        I walked quickly up the sidesteps and examined the lobby. The
"Help Wanted" sign had been taken down so I had to assume the theater
was no longer under-staffed. No matter. Two guys, both high school
age, were grabbing cash and handing out tickets like trained seals at
the box office. The concession stand was absolutely buried under five
different lines of hungry movie-goers eager to pay the 300% markup for
artery clogging popcorn.  Quickly I counted out anyone at these two
stations, they were too busy to notice me and hadn't batted an eye
before when I did my thing. The assistant manager was a different
story however. 
        Standing in his red-vested monkey suit at the portal to the
screens, he was mechanically ripping tickets and giving directions to
the public. The Jedi Mind Trick had never worked on him, he took it
way too personal to be influenced with any slick talking.  The
"backdoors", two wide corridors for exiting patrons that can be
accessed from the front of the lobby,  looked like the best bet.
However, they were not without risk. If spotted by Monkey Boy
assistant manager there would probably be a confrontation. The rest of
the staff were getting paid 4.25 an hour and doing their level best to
avoid bumping heads with anyone; especially someone that looked like
they would make them feel stupid for even questioning. Monkey Boy was
a different story, he had actually thwarted me and comrade just the
day before at a four oclock showing of Star Wars.
         I opened the door and walked inside, finding a place at the
back of a food line.  Slowly drifted sideways, pretending to examine
the Titanic hanging poster, and tried to scope the manager. I hadn't
seen him here in weeks but I knew that he would be on-premises for a
triple debut weekend. But where?  There he was, coming out of the
"Employees Only" door with a roll of greenbacks  in his hand, looking
flustered, annoyed, and constipated all at once.  The day was going
bad for him, he was probably scheduled off but had to show up when the
place was swamped by unexpected interest in "The Saint." As he crossed
to the ticket booth I made my move, sliding behind a tall potted plant
just as Monkey Boy looked down to rip  tickets and proceeding down
the one way open corridor. The exposure time was less than three
seconds but the familiar juice was still there - a hot rush that
generated in my upper spine and flowed through my head until it began
to resonate behind my eyes. 
         I made a b-line for the theater where "The Saint" was playing
but DAMN! ---there was a chick taking tickets right in front of the
double doors. It was to late, having already committed I held my
breath and just jump right in and walked straight past her. She didn't
even acknowledge me. Once inside the viewing area my prediction was
realize; the place was packed. I stood against the wall for a few
minutes then sat it the last seat on the left in the last row. A few
minutes after the designated start time the lights dimmed and the
projector whirred to life.
        The movie began erratically in flashback. The weakest title
card I have ever seen in my life tells us its: The Far East -
Yesterday. Cool idea about the ambivalence of the timeline but the
delivery is fundamental screwed by a generic block font that
completely clashes with spirit of a spy adventure film. It turns out
that The Saint is was once a nameless orphan with a gift for picking
locks. He wreaks havoc at the orphanage and escapes one night but not
before: (A) naming himself Simon Templar and (B)watching his first
love dashed to pieces on a hardwood floor when she is knocked off a
balcony by a couple of German Shepherds lead by the Evil Priest!
Attack dogs hunting down away children? In a Catholic orphanage? It a
little extreme even for the Far East. They couldnt expect us to buy
that, could they? Yes, they actually did feel you would buy it
because after that  "The Saint" ventures into fields of ludicrous
absurdity hitherto untrodden. Certain things can be bad but tragically
comic at the same time. See Daylight and recently released Devils Own
for examples of such camp.  The Saint is so screwed up that you have
to dig deep in the cluttered rough to find even the most tarnished
chunk of iron sulfide. Needless to say the plot is Hollywood fools
gold on a level of such utter banality that a I could spend hours
peering into, and shining the light of day through, each and every
plothole. 
        The second title card fades in the words :Moscow - Tomorrow.
Then some  Russian oil magnate is shown goading his rebellious
countrymen by mimicking Mark Anthony in his famous Caesar funeral
dirge: "Friends, Countrymen, Russians!" The crowd assembled cheers and
the screenwriters figured the crowd in the theater would shiver at the
thought of yet more anarchist Russians controlling the power of
nuclear life or death over us. Hell, Muscovites cant even feed
themselves, so I aint worried about them too much; but i guess it's
better than Islamic terrorists.
        Enter the orphan who has fashioned himself into a high-end
thief who  can scale walls, crack safes, and  deliver cheesy
one-liners with the best of them.  Mr. Templar steals a important
"microchip" from the Bad Russian Industrialist but not before creating
a "jealous son" subplot that is never explore during the rest of the
movie. Bad Russian Industrialist then hires The Saint to steal  a new
formula for creating free and endless energy. 
        Enter Elizabeth Shue as, get this, a scientist who invents
said workable cold fusion theory! In here first scene she stands,
complete with schoolgirl skirt and bobby socks, and answers some
questions posed by her colleagues on her invention. A vacuous actor
playing a equally vacuous-looking rocket scientist queries "Could you
explain the process of cold fusion?"  All he left out was the part
about "for the audience." 
        Immediately Simon falls for the hot bookworm and has a moral
dilemma when he steals the formula from his new found love.  Should he
turn the plans over to the Bad Russian Industrialist? Should he give
it back? 
        Before any of these questions can be explored the story once
again degenerates into endless shots of Russian thugs running after
Kilmer, Russian thugs shooting machine guns at Kilmer, or Russian
thugs chasing Kilmer in a Range Rover. Did I say this movie was beyond
bad?  It gets worse. Example: the hip-hop, one-two-one soundtrack that
makes you feel like you are attending some under 18 rave sponsored by
Diet Pepsi. I must have checked my watch on at least a dozen different
occasions. 
        When the plot dragged to the point where it became painful I
sat in on Jedi for a few minutes to try and remember what good,
creative filmmaking was all about.  As much as I'd like to have stayed
and watch the Emperor try to turn Luke to the Dark Side of the Force I
had to go back. After all, I had burn too many synapses plotting my
ingress strategy to not see the majority of the flick I came to judge.
        Back in cinematic hell I began to notice that the special
devices, pre-requisites in an spy caper, were exceptional low budget
and impractical. Though few of the gadgets worked miracles via
blinking lights alone, apparently Templar still had the functionally
inaccurate Macintosh laptop issued by the IM Force.  Unfortunately old
Simon should have considered what a better move it would have been to
back up Ethan Hunt instead of going solo. Sure the money is  better
playing the field but the chance of a sequel are completely ruined. 
        On a closing note I would like to say that Val Kilmer is
pretty much my ideal Hollywood actor.  I would cast him for one of my
leads any day. Hes been Jim Morrison and Deniros sidekick (the only
one to escape in "Heat"). Hes played an FBI agent  and Batman with
equal measures of aloof coolness. However in "The Saint" I fear that
the idea of headlining has gone to his head; he executes with the
carelessness and egotistical grandstanding of a bullfighter. Maybe it
was the director or maybe the lines he was given affected the
performance but I really expected more from the Iceman.  Elizabeth
Shue is a wasted completely and the Russian heavies were more comical
than anything.  
        All togather a bad, bad movie.
Rating:  Kilmer arches his eyebrows and Shue bats her lashes. People
fire machine guns endlessly with impunity. Fifty thousand dollar
automobiles explode. Is it action or romance? Do you care?

Author
Perry Mercer
It is safe to say that when all else fails, the simple thing to do is
go back to those days of yesteryear where a good concept for a movie
means invading the vastlands of television graveyards. The latest (and
certainly not the last) big screen adaption from the novels and boob
tube show of the same name is the glossy, gadget-driven,
chameleon-coated THE SAINT. For those of you old enough to remember the
Roger Moore version of THE SAINT on television (1967-69) or Ian
Oglivy's version (1978), some of you might appreciate the simplistic,
charismatic antics of Simon Templar's dashing persona on the small
screen. However, THE SAINT featuring brooding star Val Kilmer as an
elegant mastermind high-tech thief out to capture a cold fusion formula
for the Russians only to realize his love for his intended target Dr.
Emma Russell (Shue) seems all rather convoluted, overwrought, and
confusing. Kilmer's Simon Templar is supposed to be mysterious to us,
to his discovered love Dr. Russell, to his adversaries...even to
himself.  However the film tries to convey this so-called mystique by
constantly burying Kilmer in all these wacky wigs and disguises in a
clumsy effort to show us that Simon Templar really does not know who he
is or where his identity lies. His only reference in life is to rob and
swindle for big lucrative bucks and compare his empty soul to that of
revered Catholic saints. The question is who is going to identify with
what the coherency of this film is about?  THE SAINT has everything
going for it: scenic locations in Moscow and London, satisfying action
sequences, a beautiful lady here and there, and a colorful host of
villains out to destroy our beloved rogue Templar led by a scheming
Russian industrialist (Rade Serbedzija).  Then why the reservations?
Well, just because a film has an intriguing, espionnage-type premise
doesn't necessarily mean that it has to be complex to be fascinating.
If anything, THE SAINT could have been an effective thriller had it
bothered not to indulge itself so much into all the cliched' gadgetry
and repetitive suspense stunts that we have all seen a thousand times
before. A film like this can be smart, enjoyable, crafty, and cunning
without having to be abstract and preposterous. And yet audiences had
the nerve to scratch their heads over the premise of MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE? Ironically, Val Kilmer seems even more transparent and
uninspired as THE SAINT than he ever did as his short stint as the
aloof BATMAN. His disguise get-ups are somewhat amusing I must admit,
but I'm afraid at this point his Templar doesn't even rise to the
occasion as being good enough to be James Bond's
wannabe-cousin-spy-in-training.  Elisabeth Shue's Dr. Russell is
intelligent enough especially when women roles are suppose to be
seductive and spicy but not cerebral in these types of films. Still,
when it all comes down to it, she is window-dressing as a pseudo Bond
girl who never is convincing as a brilliant scientist. Instead, Shue's
character comes off as an over-achieving cheerleader on the sidelines.
THE SAINT, much like a world atlas, is all over the map. This film is
so riddled with inconsequential vagueness and typical overblown spy-
yarn gimmicks that one has nothing to look forward to but seeing Simon
Templar dress up as a toothy, hair-challenged geek. If only he and the
movie bothered to impersonate a decent coherent action thriller that
made sense then that would have been a "saint"-ly thing to do.
Visit his review site at:  http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Welcome to the rat race - Russian style.  Filthy rich members of
the Russian Mafia are dressed in black.  With their hookers at their
side, they are betting on rats running in tubes.  On the tables are
silver trays with stacks of U.S. hundred dollar bills, and as the loud
music plays, people are sniffing dope.
     "Who are you?"  asks Emma of The Saint.  "Nobody has a clue -
least of all me," he replies.  You will probably feel that way about
this entire movie version of THE SAINT.  A hopeless muddle from
beginning to end.  The convoluted plot challenges even the most
attentive viewers.  Someone has stolen and then hidden all of the
heating oil in Moscow, leaving Muscovites freezing to death.  With
warring factions inside the Russian government, the country stands on
the brink of the second Russian revolution.  Thieves, selling priceless
art, hang out in the sewers.  And the piece de resistance, the secret
to cold fusion is discovered and then stolen.  I could not keep track
of the details even with my trusty notepad at my side.  That everyone
wore black and shot at each other did not help me keep the characters
straight.
     The show starts with the young kid known as Simon Templar (The
Saint) at an orphanage.  He is mistreated so he goes on to lead a life
of crime.  His recurring nightmares of the cruelty of the priests there
will affect his behavior forever.  Unlike the other characterizations
of The Saint, Val Kilmer's rendition is much more heartless and
mean-spirited, that is, until he meets Emma Russell.  Emma, played by
Elisabeth Shue, has just discovered how to make cold fusion work.  Once
he falls in love with Emma, he is a changed man.
     The show is so preposterous that I was stunned.  As a critic, I do
not get shocked easily, but I was aghast at how awful the story was.
Thirty minutes into the show, I looked over at my wife, and we both
stared at each other with our mouths open.  The script by Jonathan
Hensleigh and Wesley Strick and the direction by Phillip Noyce leaves
the audience dazed and confused.  The show has no characters worthy of
our love or hate.  A totally preposterous picture that has so many
logical inconsistencies you will lose track if you try to count them.
Let me just mention my personal favorite.  Randomly, people speak in
Russian with English subtitles, but most of the time the Russians
converse in English.  The inconsistency makes no sense.
     As hopeless as the story is, the acting is much worse.  Sometimes
there are a few bright spots in movies to help pass the time.  This
show has none.  The people around me begin to laugh out loud at the
acting as it was so pathetically bad.  Although the support cast is as
almost as weak as the two stars, let me just stick to commenting on
Kilmer and Shue.
     Kilmer's inconsistency as an actor is well known.  His most recent
disgusting performance was in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU, but he can be
excellent as he was in TOMBSTONE.  Some critics use phrases that I
never do because I feel they are more expletives than critical
commentary.  The word "self-indulgent" is one such epithet.  I do not
believe I have ever used that phrase to describe an actor's work until
this review.  In THE SAINT, Kilmer gives a performance that sets the
gold standard for self-indulgent acting.  He delights in his disguises
from the gay guy who offers to share his lipstick to the dotty
professor with the bad teeth and the overbite.  In all of these he
becomes so infatuated with himself that he insults his audience with
his overacting.  Never does he take the time to develop his character.
     Shue gave a marvelous, Academy Award nominated performance in
LEAVING LAS VEGAS.  She played the hooker with tough realism.  Not for
a minute did you doubt her performance.  In THE SAINT, she gives us a
scientist who makes one of the most important discoveries of the
twentieth century but who acts like a ditzy teenager.  She give us not
a single believable minute in the film.
     THE SAINT, in many ways, resembles another recent remake, the film
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  Although I was only able to a mild thumbs up to
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, it is a cinematic masterpiece in comparison to THE
SAINT.
     I did learn one thing from THE SAINT.  If I ever begin to die of
hypothermia, I want Elizabeth Shue nearby.  The way she saved Kilmer
made it look almost worth jumping in the frozen river.
     THE SAINT runs 1:57, but it will feel like an eternity.  The film
is rated PG-13 for violence, profanity, sexual situations and drug
usage.  I was surprised it did not get an R rating.  The film would be
fine for teenagers, but I do not think it is suitable for younger kids.
Actually, there is no reason for anybody of any age to waste their time
with THE SAINT.  I give it a whole star for reasons which escape me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Oh, where to begin?  This morning-after mess of a movie, starring
Val Kilmer as the latest screen incarnation of Leslie Charteris'
gentleman thief, is billed as a "romantic thriller." Meaning, and when
translated into a language that test audiences can understand, a movie
with an action hero who talks about his feelings.  That's right-- a
roguish, real *James Bond* of a character who mouths "I love you" and
makes goo-goo eyes and, Heaven help us, has a moral crisis before
screwing somebody's brains out.  All of this would be fine, of course,
if we could believe even a minute of any scene starring Elisabeth Shue.
The Academy Award-nominated actress is horribly miscast as the intro-
verted, poetry-sensitive, cold-fusion scientist with, get ready, a heart
condition.  (I'm going to spoil the surprise:  one scene puts the pair
in handcuffs, with Kilmer palming her pills on the sly!  Hilarious!) Her
best worst moments are when she looks in the direction of the camera,
wearing an expression of vacancy as glaring as a neon sign.
     THE SAINT is preposterous in other places.  A couple of Kilmer's
disguises are absolute howlers.  (His long-haired Spaniard is pretty
funny.  As is his buck-toothed Nutty Professor.) Every Russian somehow
speaks English.  A later sewer sequence makes no sense.  (Where in the
Hell did they find those flashlights?) And, in an equally far-fetched
climax, a mob of thousands miraculously understands the significance of
a miraculous energy source.  Oh, and let's not forget that coda!  The
final fifteen minutes of this movie have to be seen to be disbelieved.
More sex.  Another of Shue's laughably vacant stares.  Kilmer getting
cutesy.  An encore presentation of the Jerry Lewis disguise.  And, even,
a botched joke involving the theme to the television series!  (Hint:
listen closely.) Rates higher than lousy, though, for production values
and location photography, both of which are exemplary. 

Author
Michael Redman
Val Kilmer's super spy for hire is one part James Bond and one part
"Fletch" (a decidedly mediocre Chevy Chase film based on an excellent
detective book series) and doesn't succeed as well as even the Chase
disaster.
A master of disguise with a habit of using the names of Catholic saints,
Simon Templar is hired by a Russian crime boss turned politician to find
the secret of cold fusion. In order to do so, he must romance Emma
Russell (an uninteresting and apparently uninterested Elisabeth Shue),
the good doctor with the secret. Although not a part of his plan, he
falls in love with her.
Someone has stolen all of the fuel oil in Moscow and whoever comes up
with a new energy source will rule the country. If you can swallow that
far-fetched plot device, perhaps you'll go along with the rest of the
film. I found almost everything that happens equally implausible.
Kilmer can be a first-rate actor, but it doesn't happen here. The scenes
of his Fabio-inspired long-haired naked lounging are difficult to take
seriously. In all fairness, the two women that I spoke to after the
movie both loved the film...but then they had serious Val Kilmer
blinders on.
[This appeared in the 4/10/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Welcome to the rat race - Russian style.  Filthy rich members of
the Russian Mafia are dressed in black.  With their hookers at their
side, they are betting on rats running in tubes.  On the tables are
silver trays with stacks of U.S. hundred dollar bills, and as the loud
music plays, people are sniffing dope.
     "Who are you?"  asks Emma of The Saint.  "Nobody has a clue -
least of all me," he replies.  You will probably feel that way about
this entire movie version of THE SAINT.  A hopeless muddle from
beginning to end.  The convoluted plot challenges even the most
attentive viewers.  Someone has stolen and then hidden all of the
heating oil in Moscow, leaving Muscovites freezing to death.  With
warring factions inside the Russian government, the country stands on
the brink of the second Russian revolution.  Thieves, selling priceless
art, hang out in the sewers.  And the piece de resistance, the secret
to cold fusion is discovered and then stolen.  I could not keep track
of the details even with my trusty notepad at my side.  That everyone
wore black and shot at each other did not help me keep the characters
straight.
     The show starts with the young kid known as Simon Templar (The
Saint) at an orphanage.  He is mistreated so he goes on to lead a life
of crime.  His recurring nightmares of the cruelty of the priests there
will affect his behavior forever.  Unlike the other characterizations
of The Saint, Val Kilmer's rendition is much more heartless and
mean-spirited, that is, until he meets Emma Russell.  Emma, played by
Elisabeth Shue, has just discovered how to make cold fusion work.  Once
he falls in love with Emma, he is a changed man.
     The show is so preposterous that I was stunned.  As a critic, I do
not get shocked easily, but I was aghast at how awful the story was.
Thirty minutes into the show, I looked over at my wife, and we both
stared at each other with our mouths open.  The script by Jonathan
Hensleigh and Wesley Strick and the direction by Phillip Noyce leaves
the audience dazed and confused.  The show has no characters worthy of
our love or hate.  A totally preposterous picture that has so many
logical inconsistencies you will lose track if you try to count them.
Let me just mention my personal favorite.  Randomly, people speak in
Russian with English subtitles, but most of the time the Russians
converse in English.  The inconsistency makes no sense.
     As hopeless as the story is, the acting is much worse.  Sometimes
there are a few bright spots in movies to help pass the time.  This
show has none.  The people around me begin to laugh out loud at the
acting as it was so pathetically bad.  Although the support cast is as
almost as weak as the two stars, let me just stick to commenting on
Kilmer and Shue.
     Kilmer's inconsistency as an actor is well known.  His most recent
disgusting performance was in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU, but he can be
excellent as he was in TOMBSTONE.  Some critics use phrases that I
never do because I feel they are more expletives than critical
commentary.  The word "self-indulgent" is one such epithet.  I do not
believe I have ever used that phrase to describe an actor's work until
this review.  In THE SAINT, Kilmer gives a performance that sets the
gold standard for self-indulgent acting.  He delights in his disguises
from the gay guy who offers to share his lipstick to the dotty
professor with the bad teeth and the overbite.  In all of these he
becomes so infatuated with himself that he insults his audience with
his overacting.  Never does he take the time to develop his character.
     Shue gave a marvelous, Academy Award nominated performance in
LEAVING LAS VEGAS.  She played the hooker with tough realism.  Not for
a minute did you doubt her performance.  In THE SAINT, she gives us a
scientist who makes one of the most important discoveries of the
twentieth century but who acts like a ditzy teenager.  She give us not
a single believable minute in the film.
     THE SAINT, in many ways, resembles another recent remake, the film
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  Although I was only able to a mild thumbs up to
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, it is a cinematic masterpiece in comparison to THE
SAINT.
     I did learn one thing from THE SAINT.  If I ever begin to die of
hypothermia, I want Elizabeth Shue nearby.  The way she saved Kilmer
made it look almost worth jumping in the frozen river.
     THE SAINT runs 1:57, but it will feel like an eternity.  The film
is rated PG-13 for violence, profanity, sexual situations and drug
usage.  I was surprised it did not get an R rating.  The film would be
fine for teenagers, but I do not think it is suitable for younger kids.
Actually, there is no reason for anybody of any age to waste their time
with THE SAINT.  I give it a whole star for reasons which escape me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 4/3/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:56
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Violence, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Val Kilmer, Elisabeth Shue, Rade Serbedzija, Valery Nikolaev, 
      Henry Goodman, Irina Apeximova
Director: Phillip Noyce
Producers: David Brown, Robert Evans, William J. Macdonald, Mace Neufeld
Screenplay: Jonathan Hensleigh and Wesley Strick from a story by 
      Jonathan Hensleigh
Cinematography: Phil Meheux
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     I can't help but wonder if THE SAINT was given the final go-ahead 
following the success of 1995's James Bond redux, GOLDENEYE.  This film, 
which plays very much like a low-key 007 yarn, began production in March 
1996, shortly after the Bond movie's domestic gross topped $100 million.  
Nevertheless, despite a few taut action sequences, some effective 
chemistry between the male and female leads, and a globetrotting 
storyline (the Far East to England to Russia), THE SAINT can't quite 
measure up to Pierce Brosnan's superspy debut.  The problem, however, is 
more one of history and mystique than plotting and acting.
     That's not to say that THE SAINT doesn't have a history of its own 
-- just that this movie doesn't have GOLDENEYE's cinematic pedigree.  In 
fact, the character of The Saint predates Bond by more than twenty-five 
years (in both written and film incarnations).  Author Leslie Charteris 
first introduced the world to his suave adventurer in 1926, and 
continued writing Saint stories until his death in 1993, compiling a 
list of more than 50 full-length titles and numerous shorter tales.  
During the late 1930s, RKO produced a series of Saint movies (several of 
which featured George Sanders in the lead).  Then, during the 1960s, THE 
SAINT came to television, with future James Bond Roger Moore in the 
title role.
     Now, some thirty years later, Val Kilmer has stepped into the shoes 
once occupied by Moore.  This '90s version of THE SAINT takes its 
inspiration in part from Charteris' books and in part from the TV series 
(including a few notes from Edwin Astley's theme song), but incorporates 
all the latest in technology.  While Kilmer's Simon Templar is a master 
of disguises, he's also armed with an impressive array of miniature 
computers and other assorted gadgets.  He logs onto the Internet at 
will, reads video e-mail, and remotely monitors his swelling Swiss bank 
account.
     THE SAINT purports to tell the origins of the title character, 
something that Charteris never wrote about.  Following a brief prologue 
in a Far East orphanage, where a young Templar's path in life is set, 
the scene shifts to Moscow in the near future.  A former communist 
leader-turned-billionaire capitalist, Ivan Tretiak (Rade Serbedzija), is 
about to make a power play for Russia's leadership.  In order to do so, 
he hires master thief Templar to steal the secret of cold fusion from 
Emma Russell (Elisabeth Shue), the Oxford scientist who developed the 
formula.  With a $3 million paycheck awaiting him, Templar makes contact 
with Emma, but, much to his chagrin, he becomes entranced by her 
combination of beauty and innocence, and discovers that stealing her 
notes and breaking her heart is more difficult than he had anticipated.
     THE SAINT is more of a character-based thriller than a strict 
stunts-and-explosions film, which is a good thing because the action 
sequences are mostly flat and obligatory.  Even when he generates a 
degree of tension, director Phillip Noyce (PATRIOT GAMES, CLEAR AND 
PRESENT DANGER) is unable to sustain it, and the disappointing ending is 
not only long and drawn out, but lacks a sense of closure.  It's nice to 
set up a movie for a sequel, but THE SAINT concludes in such a way that 
the story seems somehow incomplete.
     Acting and character development lie at THE SAINT's core.  While 
Val Kilmer's taciturn Templar may remind viewers of his interpretation 
of Bruce Wayne, the actor is at his best when donning one of about a 
dozen disguises.  Elisabeth Shue's Emma, on the other hand, only has one 
personality, and it's a wonderfully-realized one.  She's a dreamer and a 
romantic who has little experience with men or real life.  She's smart, 
energetic, and extremely vulnerable, and the film's strongest dynamic 
results from what happens when Templar attempts to tap into her 
weaknesses and, in the process, finds his own exposed.  
     Other than Kilmer and Shue, the only actors with much screen time 
are Valery Nikolaev and veteran Rade Serbedzija.  Serbedzija, who is 
known internationally following his appearances in films such as BEFORE 
THE RAIN and BROKEN ENGLISH, plays a fairly standard megalomaniac here.  
He gets to shout lines like "I want to see Russia not cut off at the 
knees, but armed to the teeth!"  As Tretiak's son, Nikolaev, a 
relatively new face in the West, has the rather thankless role of the 
bloodthirsty, revenge-driven sidekick.  Henry Goodman is a physicist 
trying to make sense out of cold fusion and Irina Apeximova is a black 
market operator who sells secrets to Templar.
      The location work is noteworthy.  The scenes filmed outside of the 
Kremlin have an eerie sense of verisimilitude (Russian director Nikita 
Mikhalkov, whose BURNT BY THE SUN won an Oscar in 1995, helped make the 
arrangements that allowed Noyce to film in Red Square).  And, while THE 
SAINT stops short of being a travelogue of Moscow, it does offer a 
number of fascinating glimpses into one of Russia's most historic 
cities.
     Anyone expecting anything remarkable or new about THE SAINT will be 
disappointed.  Simon Templar's latest adventure is fairly standard 
material, although it is brought to the screen with a certain degree of 
style.  Paramount has wisely decided to release the film before the 
summer blockbuster season.  In April, THE SAINT will have more of a 
chance to find an audience than it would ever have during warmer months.  
Big box office returns would still surprise me, however.  THE SAINT is 
lightly entertaining, but there's very little here worth getting excited 
about.
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Nick Schaden
    After watching both "Mission Impossible" and "The Saint" the
similarities are striking. Both are Paramount films, both are
action/adventure/thriller movies, both have an overrated sex symbol as the
main character, both were taken from TV to the movie scene, and both were
hyped as "blockbusters" before release. Sadly, the difference in quality is
also striking. "Mission Impossible" was an enjoyable movie to watch, while
"The Saint" is an easily forgettable dud.
    Problems with "The Saint" emerge barely out of the starting gate.
Instead of throwing the audience headlong into the main plot as most good
action/adventure movies do, director Phillip Noyce instead dwells in a
yawner of an introduction to Simon Templar's (Val Kilmer) childhood.
    This example nails the largest problem with "The Saint" - the plot. In
essence, the movie tries to pull itself in too many directions at once. It
has action, romance, drama, and adventure - all with unsatisfactory results.
First, what should have been the greatest strength of "The Saint" turns into
its biggest fault, the action/adventure. Most scenes tended to lack
intensity and tension, never once did I feel Val Kilmer's character was ever
in severe danger. Further dissolving what's left of the movie's plot is
casting Elisabeth Shue as Dr. Emma Russell (the brains behind creating cold
fusion, a currently impossible task), while Shue's beauty glows throughout
the film she is hardly convincing. Finally, what really blows this movie out
of the water is the incredibly weak motivation for our hero's character.
Simon Templar is essentially a high tech mercenary/thief that works for
almost anyone for a price. Why does Simon do it? Incredibly lame comments
like "I've always broken out of things" and flashbacks to Simon's horrific
Catholic childhood attempt to fit the pieces together with little
comprehensible fashion.
    After "The Saint"'s largely predictable ending, I'm praying Paramount
doesn't have the balls to release a sequel. Even with other passable
elements, the movie's horrible plot destroys any hope "The Saint" had of
getting off the ground.

Author
Walter Frith
Val Kilmer has an alleged reputation of being difficult to work with.  On the
set of 'The Doors' (1991) reports circulated that he didn't want anyone to
talk to him as he was getting in character to play Jim Morrison.  Recently,
on the set of one of his latest films it was also alleged that he demanded to
know the astrological signs of the crew and cast members.  Regardless of
whether or not these rumours are true, it certainly raises some eyebrows.
In 'The Saint', Kilmer plays Simon Templar, a renegade professional thief and
master of disguise whose latest coup takes him to capitalist Russia where a
former communist and now famous oil tycoon wants Kilmer to steal a formula
essential to making cold fusion work in producing energy to substitute the
world's need for oil.  The oil tycoon (Rade Serbedzija) is also running for
the Russian presidency and uses his secret hobby as leader of a Russian Mafia
branch to strong arm his way to his nation's highest office.  The scientist
responsible for developing the formula (Elisabeth Shue) has a romantic fling
with Kilmer and they are eventually forced to run for their lives when things
go awry.
How is 'The Saint'?  It can be best described as protracted, muddled, shallow
and downright boring.  Kilmer has all the savvy of a James Bond stunt double
only stunt doubles don't talk in movies and Kilmer revolutionizes that
theory.  His portrayal of the leading character is terribly inept and Shue
fares no better as a flimsy and helpless character (caricature).  
Director Phillip Noyce ('Patriot Games', 'Clear and Present Danger') is a
director of organization rather than of creativity.  His instructional
authority on this movie looks amateurish and the film is almost entirely void
of action as the plot chooses to focus on the romance rather than the
intrigue.  That's fine but let's not over do it.  
'The Saint' is based on the classic television series with Roger Moore whose
suave, charming persona would later land him the role of James Bond and 'The
Saint' may appeal to the fans of Val Kilmer.  As for being creative and
shrewd filmmaking, 'The Saint' ain't.

Author
Adam Joyce
Based on the 1960's TV series of the same name, but very different from it,
comes "The Saint". The storyline is typical of the action/spy genre. The
lead character, Simon Templar (Val Kilmer) is essentially an executive
criminal and impersonator. He takes requests over The Internet for tasks
such as stealing special Russian microchips, asks millions of dollars per
assignment, and then completes the assignment in disguise. His aim is to
attain $50 million before retiring.
The main component of the story involves an assignment (purportedly his
last) in which Simon must steal the formula for Cold Fusion (limitless
energy from water) for the Russian Opposition Government which wants to
attain political power there. Of course, this Opposition Government is
completely corrupt, is secretly stealing all the heating oil from Russia so
that the people freeze. Without warmth, in the freezing Russian weather,
the people will be incited to revolt (at least according to the storyline),
hence electing the Opposition leader, Sofiya, to power.
There is two quite predictable problems. Firstly, the professor who has
designed the formula is an attractive young female, and therefore Simon
Templar MUST fall in love with her. Secondly, the Russian Opposition plan
to have Simon killed as soon as they have the formula for Cold Fusion (I
never would have guessed!).
Inevitably Simon and Emma Russell (the professor from whom Simon has stolen
the formula) end up in Russia, where Sofiya's evil son, Ilya, tracks them
down to kill them. The police in Russia are of course corrupt, and work for
Sofiya also, meaning that Simon and Emma are in a lot of trouble! It seems
that Ilya has an uncanny ability to track the pair, despite the fact that
they could be anywhere in a city larger than Sydney.
Nothing about this film is particularly surprising. Val Kilmer (who plays
10 very different identities as Simon Templar) gives a reasonably solid
performance, especially given his range of characters. His co-star,
Elisabeth Shue (playing Emma Russell) is equally good. Hollywood newcomer,
Valery Nikolaev (playing Ilya) who learnt English to play his part, is
undoubtably going to be a common sight in Hollywood films from now on,
probably playing equally evil characters who never seem to give up.
However, the storyline gives the actors little to play with. It is very
much a formulaic Hollywood action/adventure film, and although competent
and entertaining, is not original or particularly clever. 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Author
Jun Yan
        I have not seen such an idiotic screenplay for quite a while and
therefore had a hard time adjusting to it in the first half of this movie.
What puzzles me most is that so much money was put in this totally
brainless thing, why couldn't they have written a remotely tolerable
story?!  
        The film starts with an unconvincing and over-the-top of the
origin of Simon the magician as an unhappy and oppressed boy in a Catholic
school.  Years later, this kid becomes not only the best "independent"
international thief around, but the most charming womanizer.  Somehow, he
gets intangled into a sticky Russian business to steal a cold fusion
formula from the beautiful physicist at Oxford.  The bad guys want the
formula and the girl, so does the Saint.  You can guess the rest.  
        Both Val Kilmer and Elizabeth Shue are good-looking people and
dedicated actors, which made their presence on the screen all the more
comical and ridiculous.  I'm not saying scientists cannot be cute blond
young women, but Shue's Emma Russell was so silly and neurotic that could
not pass for a high school freshman girl who desperately tries to fit in.
Her insecurity was so severe that I suspect she realized very clearly how
far her performance was from a real scientist.  The script did not help at
all.  All her speeches about her scientific breakthrough were so
completely stupid that it was just laughable.  Surrounded by all the high
tech toys carried by Val Kilmer (which were not that impressive anyway),
guess where she hid her secret formulas that might solve the energy
problems of the whole world?  They were written on 6 small pieces of paper
and she hid them in her bra!!!  Wow.  She's truly an "old fashioned" girl,
isn't she?                         
        It must have been great fun for Kilmer to switch from one disguise
to another and from terrible British accent to stumbling Russian English.
But the problem is the same as that facing the hero Simon -- sometimes he
was lost as to who he was playing and what disguise to use.  In quite a
few occasions, he appeared to be just as confused as the audience.  
        The portrait of Russia and villains in this movie were totally
ridiculous and implausible as well as the plot.  It's even hard to enjoy
it as a totally bogus fantasy because it seemed to take itself quite
seriously.  The special effects and stunts were just as crude and childish
as the story.  The characters were worse than cartoonish -- they were
dumber than the Jim Carey/Jeff Daniels duo!  There was no chemistry
between them and the relationship was in the least bit touching or
convincing.  I can hardly believe how poor the quality is in every
aspect of this movie.  It's degrading and insulting to Russian people,
scientists, and any viewer who has half a brain.  
        The only two good things about this film were the beautiful views
of Europe and the physical appeal of Kilmer, who was terribly good-looking
here (which you can hardly miss with such a self-indulging performance).
I read somewhere that Kilmer's an extrememly intelligent guy.  Well, I
guess one can't believe everything s/he reads.  
        "The Saint" is like a big, stupid joke that pretends to be
intelligent and stylish.  What can be worse than that?  I'm glad I didn't
pay $7 for this crap.  No choice but to give it an F. 

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Val Kilmer (Simon Templar), Elisabeth Shue (Emma Russell), Rade
Serbedzija (Ivan Tretiak), Irina Apeximova (Frankie), Valeri Nikolayev
(Ilya), Lucija Serbedzija (Sofiya)
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for violence, language, some sensuality, and
brief drug use
THE SAINT was actually a little better than I expected it to be, in some
ways.  In this theatrical remake of the television series THE SAINT, and
its series sequel THE RETURN OF THE SAINT, Val Kilmer plays Simon
Templar, an elusive thief who makes a living by stealing things from
others for others.  This movie closely resembles a James Bond flick.  It
has the classic Bond symbols: a man who can do just about anything and get
away with it, a woman whom the man persues, a villain out to achieve
something for himself who kills anyone to reach this goal.  Kilmer
actually provides a rather good role in this movie, although at times you
are left to ponder how he actually gets out of the many tight situations.
The movie begins in his childhood in a strict school run by Catholic
priests.  As a young boy, Kilmer's character enjoyed magic and would often
journey away from his schoolwork.  That is until his school teacher finds
him reading a book and demands that the young boy proclaim his name, that
of a Catholic saint.  He refuses to do so and instead announces who he
wishes to be.  This leads to a devestating mistake, which is something
that will stay in his mind throughout his life.
Kilmer's first mission that we are shown is to steal a microchip from Ivan
Tretiak, played by Rade Serbedzija.  During a press conference, he must
make his way into a heavily guarded vault area, avoiding guards, cameras,
and many other potential obstacles.  Once his mission is completed and he
is safely home, the fee is paid.  When he logs into his bank account
and finds that he is only a few million dollars short of $50 million, he
decides to carry out only one more mission, then retire.
Dr. Emma Russell, portrayed by Elisabeth Shue, has discovered a way to
produce energy by way of cold fusion.  This new advancement would change
the world and save thousands of lives in the areas of Russia, where
millions are without heat and are freezing to death.  The only problem is,
Tretiak would like to have this for himself and use it to gain power
amongst the people.  This presents the option for Kilmer to achieve his
goal.  Tretiak hires him to steal the equations, small pieces of paper,
from Shue.
One of the enjoyable features in the film is the disguises that Kilmer
dawns to complete his missions.  They are very convincing, not only to the
characters in the movie, but to us.  Kilmer utilizes one such disguise to
lure Shue's character into getting to know him even more, which would
provide him a means of stealing the energy formula.  When the two meet,
and end up having a sensual experience, Kilmer's character is seemingly
falling in love with Emma Russell, as she is falling in love with Kilmer's
alter-ego, a traveling artist.  Yet, he must reach his goal of $50
million, which requires him to steal the energy formula, putting his
feelings aside.
Shue's character is eventually able to track down Simon Templar by putting
the pieces (the names of the Catholic saints) together, something no one
else is able to do.  When she finds him, they are left to team up and
reclaim the energy formulas from Tretiak.
THE SAINT is very action-packed, with few slow points.  The sound was very
well done and added to the many intense moments.  Along the course of the
movie, there are even a few, although brief moments of comedy.  These
moments are almost always thanks to Kilmer's extraneous, very convincing
disguises and personalities.  All in all, a rather enjoyable movie with
nearly non-stop action.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I am told that back in the 1970s a young filmmaker came to the
owners of the rights to the character Flash Gordon and said he wanted
to make a Flash Gordon movie.  They turned the filmmaker down so he
created a brand new hero of his own, calling him Luke Skywalker.
Fortunes are made and lost on such decisions.  But the question is why
would even some of the most talented filmmakers choose to use pre-
existing characters when they can create new ones of their own who are
just as interesting.  One might be that they think they can explore
some new approach to an existing character; the other is to exploit
audience recognition value.  A test to see which is true would be
whether the character would be recognizable with the names changed.
Frequently there are good films made that re-examine Sherlock Holmes.
Almost always these films would be recognizable as being about Sherlock
Holmes even if he were given another name.  One film that definitely
does not pass the test is the new THE SAINT.  Without being told that
this character sometimes uses the name Simon Templar (but usually not)
and without the use of the Saint stick- figure logo toward the end of
the film, there is nothing in Val Kilmer's nameless character that at
all evoke Leslie Charteris's roguish troubleshooter.  And that is
almost surprising since the original Simon Templar is sort of an all-
purpose adventure character.  He might in one adventure be battling
diamond smugglers, in another dangerous spies, and in still another his
opponent would be a mad scientist who has bred an ant the size of a
train car.  Frequently he was suspected to be on the fuzzy edge of the
law, but he never actually was.  He usually used his own name, rarely
used disguises, and probably never used Bondian gadgets though he did
use his own suave personality.  In short, there is just about nothing
in the new Val Kilmer version of The Saint evocative of the character
as written or portrayed before.  Not that this is not an interesting
character.  In fact, this film would have been much better had it not
played on the audience's expectations to see Simon Templar.
     The story opens in what can only be termed "the Catholic School
from Hell."  Because one boy does not take to the Saint's name he has
been assigned, all the girls are locked in their dorms and the boys
will get no food.  This seems like a particularly virulent piece of
gratuitous anti-Catholicism.  Perhaps because the character will later
take the names of saints the filmmakers wanted to make clear this was
not a religious film.  That becomes really clear when the set loose
dogs on some of the children in their charge and one is killed.  This
incident has scarred for life a man of mystery with no name, but who
likes to occasionally use the name Simon Templar.  Flash forward a few
years and the man is a hi-tech cross between Batman and a James Bond
without a British Secret Service to serve.  It is never explained where
his money comes from, but he obviously has a lot to spend on the latest
gadgets.  He gets caught up in a really confused plot by the Russian
Mafia to steal a formula for practical cold fusion from an attractive
American scientist, played by Elizabeth Shue.  The whole convoluted
story builds to an outlandish climax in Red Square.
     Shue is appealing with her slightly geeky touches.  Though somehow
there just does not seem to be much chemistry between her character and
Kilmer's and their romance only seems to bog down the plot.  Kilmer is
just a little over the top in a fun way with his many and varied
disguises.  They are each just a bit exaggerated much like Rod
Steiger's tour-de-force performance in NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY.  The
problem is the story which is so totally artificial and which so often
depends on far-fetched coincidence to get Kilmer's character out of
trouble.  I think I would like to see more of this character, but in a
plot that is much better thought out.  And frankly it still irks me
that they hung this brand new character on The Saint.
     The score of this film by Graeme Revell is not inspiring (which is
probably why the trailers borrowed music from THE SHADOW and CRIMSON
TIDE).  The film is full of scenes that are not well considered.
During one chase the character apparently changes clothes (off camera)
in the middle of a crowded public square with nobody noticing.
It would have been nice to have a new film about Leslie Charteris's
character.  It may even be good to have more stories about this Simon
Templar, but they are not the same and this story has too many rough
edges.  I give this THE SAINT a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount/Rysher)
Starring:  Val Kilmer, Elisabeth Shue, Rabe Serbedzija, Valery Nikolaev.
Screenplay:  Jonathan Hensleigh, Wesley Strick.
Producers:  David Brown, Robert Evans, William J. MacDonald, Mace Neufeld.
Director:  Phillip Noyce.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, violence, drug use, adult themes)
Running Time:  117 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I figure it happened something like this:  in the wake of MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE's impressive box office performance, the development executives
at Paramount were tossing around plot ideas for the sequel.  After coming
up with a couple of promising possibilities, they decided it would be a
shame to let one of them go to waste.  "So what other properties do we
own?" asks Executive #1.  "Um, I think we have 'The Saint'," answers
Executive #2.  So they took the script, recovered Ethan Hunt's
miracle-working PowerBook from the prop room, and lo and behold, when Val
Kilmer opted not to climb back inside Batman's latex, another potential
franchise was born.  That was the idea, anyway, but things tend not to run
smoothly when Kilmer is involved.  Left to his own devices in a story that
was fragmented to begin with, Kilmer turns THE SAINT into two hour
narcissistic orgy.
     Kilmer stars as Simon Templar, an internationally infamous
thief-for-hire and master of disguise who travels the world under the
names of Catholic saints.  On an assignment in Moscow, Simon encounters
Ivan Tretiak (Rabe Serbedzija), a billionaire oil tycoon intent on ruling
a now-unstable Russia.  Tretiak hires Simon to steal a top-secret formula
for cold fusion developed by American scientist Dr. Emma Russell
(Elisabeth Shue), and The Saint begins one of his characteristic
seductions in pursuit of the big payoff which will allow him to retire.
What he does not expect is that he will develop genuine feelings for Emma,
complicating his mission considerably.  When Simon tries to have it both
ways, both he and Emma end up on the Russian most wanted list, running for
their lives through the streets and sewers of Moscow.
     Jonathan Hensleigh's back-story for THE SAINT completely abandons the
character as created by Leslie Charteris, re-creating Simon Templar as a
nameless orphan subjected to guilt and cruelty in a Catholic orphanage.
It is a nice set-up for a story about an enigmatic loner.  Unfortunately,
it has nothing to do with the character as played by Val Kilmer.  There
isn't much haunted, complex history in his characterization; Kilmer spends
most of the film looking tremendously self-satisfied, posing behind each
disguise and purring every accent.  Sure it's fun watching Kilmer play a
variety of eccentric characters, and you can bet that he knows it.  When
the film takes a sudden shift in tone near the conclusion, turning into a
light-hearted caper for the final ten minutes, it actually seems as though
director Phillip Noyce (CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER) threw up his hands and
decided to let THE SAINT become the film Kilmer had been acting in for the
previous 100 minutes.
     Actually, it's never clear what THE SAINT is supposed to be.  For an
action film, it certainly treats the ostensibly primary plot and its
associated action as an afterthought.  It is interesting to see new faces
like Serbedzija and Valery Nikolaev (as Tretiak's son) in the villain
roles, but the roles themselves aren't interesting at all.  The resolution 
of their plotting comes as an anti-climax, with the bad guys apparently
willing to accept their fate with a shrug; in fact, Tretiak seems more
interested in The Saint's exploits than in his own plans, making him
Kilmer's chief rival as Kilmer's #1 fan.
     There are a couple of sharp sequences when THE SAINT actually does
provide some action -- Emma's dash for the American embassy and Simon's
unnerving underwater stay in an icy river are particularly notable -- but
too many other moments fall flat.  Some of the action appears to have been
salvaged from MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE's cutting room floor, with editing that
butchers punch lines, introduces and discards supporting characters, and
leaves plenty of threads dangling and questions unanswered.  If anyone can
explain to me the importance of the microchip The Saint steals from
Tretiak, or why Tretiak never makes an effort to retrieve it, I'd sure
like to know.
     I suppose it might seem hypocritical of me to knock THE SAINT for
spending so much time developing the romance between Simon and Emma after
I have criticized plenty of other action films for spending no time at all
on such matters.  The real problem is that the romantic sub-plot is never
integrated into the story; it runs parallel and runs longer, including an
extended coda involving their reunion which could have (and should have)
ended three or four times before it actually does.  Shue struggles to make
some sense out of a character who has to deliver a lot of exposition and
whose weak heart is magically strengthened by love, but it's hard to play a
romantic scene with someone who seems to love himself even more than you
love him.  THE SAINT was unlikely to be a great film even without Kilmer's
preening, but it would have been a less grating one.  Perhaps the _real_
sequel to MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE should involve someone trying to tame 
Kilmer's ego.

Author
Marty Mapes
** (out of 4) There are very few reasons to see THE SAINT.
One is that it has Val Kilmer. Another is that it has Elisabeth Shue.
Another is that not much else opened this week that's likely to be any
better, judging from current reviews.
Beyond that, THE SAINT is boring and too long (at under 2 hours). There
is very little in THE SAINT that's original or fresh. Here's the plot:
Simon Templar (Val Kilmer) is a thief and a master of disguise. He is
hired by evil Russians to steal the secret formula from the beautiful
young scientist, Emma Russell (Elisabeth Shue). Simon seduces beautiful
Emma and has the secret formula in his hands when he realizes that he
has fallen in love. He tells the evil Russians to buzz off -- he has
found a better offer.
The evil Russians, being evil Russians, demand the secret formula for
double the price, or the girl gets it. Simon Templar steals the secret
formula from beautiful Emma and sells it to the evil Russians -- for her
own protection. But beautiful Emma, not realizing the danger she is
putting herself and her new love in, tracks the elusive Simon Templar
into the lion's den and they both end up in the iron fist of the evil
Russians, who are not satisfied with the lovely Emma's secret formula.
The pair of young lovers manage to escape. Luckily, the beautiful Emma
has not finished the final calculations on her secret formula (she's 2
hours away from finishing it), so Tretiak (Valery Nikolaev), leader of
the evil Russians, in the line that defines the entire movie, proclaims
"Kill him and bring her back . . . alive!" The young lovers,
inseparable, are chased through the rivers, slums, and sewers of Moscow,
hounded by the minions of the evil Tretiak.
Initially, I would say this movie is bad because it is formulaic and
cliched. However, I have defended admittedly formulaic movies (Dante's
Peak). Sometimes, I said,  the formula works. In THE SAINT, the formula
fails.
FORMULA DEVICE 1: THE DAMSEL IN DISTRESS.THE SAINT is condescending to
the lead female character Emma. She is treated as bait by the Russians
(do as we say or the girl gets it); she fouls things up for both her and
Simon when she tracks him to Russia; she is portrayed as an airheaded
ditz at the press conference early in the film (in spite of her being an
alleged expert in her field); the hero calls her very "domestic;" and
finally, the hero valiantly sacrifices his safety for hers at the end.
In light of all this, her being a brilliant scientist is a mere token
gesture by the screenwriters (Jonathan Hensleigh and Wesley Strick).
This device worked well when it was turned on its head in RAIDERS OF THE
LOST ARK. Marion (Karen Allen) is the damsel in distress, but she is
strong. She is not a helpless screaming sex object.
FORMULA DEVICE 2: BAD GUYS DIVULGING THEIR PLAN.The evil Russians are
sitting around having a casual conversation while, unbeknownst to them,
Simon is listening in. In the course of their casual discussion, one of
them mentions how funny it is that nobody knows where they were secretly
hiding the stash. They all have a good laugh.
This device works well in most of the James Bond movies, partly because
the movies are presented tongue-in-cheek (not so THE SAINT), and partly
because the Bond movies popularized, if not invented, this device (THE
SAINT has no such tradition). Also, the Bond villains viewed Bond as an
equal of sorts. They viewed him as a worthy opponent who could
appreciate their diabolical strategies. In THE SAINT, the device is
uninspired and transparent.
FORMULA DEVICE 3: TV REPORT SUMMARIES.This formula device has gotten
lots of exposure from the weekly humor newspaper, The Onion. Basically,
the movie shows TV reports (or, in a corollary, reporters on the scene)
to summarize what's happening, in case you haven't been paying attention
to the plot. THE SAINT is particularly guilty of this condescending
device.
I can't think where this formula worked well, but there are many fine
adventure movies that were better for not having to explain themselves.
If you missed the all the subtleties of the plot the first time around,
a second viewing was a pleasure (TOPKAPI, MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, the
entire Indiana Jones trilogy, the James Bond series . . .).
FORMULA DEVICE 4: LUCK.When the author writes him/herself into a corner,
a stroke of luck will save the hero. There is a scene in which Simon is
doomed. He is unarmed and an evil Russian is pointing a gun at his head.
Luckily, a cop just happens to come by and tells the villain to freeze,
allowing Simon to escape.
This device doesn't work well. What works better is having a scene of
APPARENT luck that is attributable to a virtue of the hero. In other
words, the cop shows up because the hero foresaw the trouble and called
the police in advance, or the cop shows up because the hero is always
helping the cop, and this is an act of reciprocity (though even this is
becoming a formula device).
It is lazy and unfair to criticize a movie solely for being formulaic.
Let me criticize THE SAINT then, not because it follows a formula, but
because it is an unimaginative and half-hearted attempt at storytelling.
It does not borrow from, build on, or wink at formula; instead it uses
formula as the cheapest, easiest solution to the movie's potentially
interesting conflict.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes
