Title
Review for Ski School (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
87 min., R, Comedy, 1990
Director: Damian Lee
Cast: Dean Cameron, Tom Breznahan, Patrick Labyoteaux,
      Mark Thomas Miller, Spencer Rochfort, Darlene Vogel,
      Stuart Fratkin, Charlie Spradling
     A well-known ski school has two divisions that continuously battle.
One is battling to get the other thrown out.  The other is battling to
get revenge on the other one.  Mixed in the battle are the new recruits.
     SKI SCHOOL is done by Moviestore Entertainment and distributed by
HBO home video.  SKI SCHOOL, like the earlier films HOT DOG...THE MOVIE
and SNOWBALLING (I have seen neither film, but have heard that they are
good), attempts to make fun of the skiing industry.  Although this film
seems to try hard, it is inconsistently funny and only worth watching
for below $1.50.  On a scale of zero to five, I give SKI SCHOOL a three.
SKI SCHOOL is rated R for explicit language, female nudity, and adult
situations.
     SKI SCHOOL has many great and hilarious moments; its main problem
is that what is between them either there are boring bits, or gratuitous
nudity which seems out of place and just put in for titillation.  If the
film had filled between the laughs with more laughs, I think it would
have ended up much better.  Many of the jokes are sight gags, so those
who go more for subtle comedy will probably find the entire film too
silly and stupid.  Those of you who enjoy films like THE NAKED GUN 2
1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR will probably find this film worth watching,
once.
     I found this film rather disappointing because it has so much
potential in some areas.  Too often the joke gets lost along the way, or
the joke gets changed and is no longer funny.  The cast is relatively
good, but it shows that they are B movie actors.  Like most B movies,
some of the cast really stand out.  In this film there are two, Charlie
Spradling and the guy who looks and sounds like Rob Scheider of
"Saturday Night Live" (sorry, I couldn't figure out which one he was).
These two deserve more than what this film ended up being.
     Even though the film was made in 1990, my local video store just
recently got it.  I have been waiting a while to see this film and am
disappointed that it didn't reach my expectations.  Oh well, it was
better than the last Moviestore Entertainment film I saw, which was
MEATBALLS 4.  Then again, if I had seen the Moviestore Entertainment
name on the videocassette box, based on my past experiences with their
films, my expectations would not have been so high.
