Title
Review for Hana-bi (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Omar Odeh
Hanna-Bi marked a rude but pleasant awakening for me, introducing me
to the work of Takeshi Kitano.  (I missed KIds Return inspite of a
luxurious one day repertory stint at the Bytowne...) It Hanna-Bi is
linked but not entirely representative of the director's previous
work. It is often in such cases when a filmmaker is marking new
territory that extremely accomplished work is done. The Sweet
Hereafter was an exception for specific reasons, but Lost Highway,
Dead Man or Crash all make the point. All credit here is to Kitano who
wrote, directed, edited as well as stars in the film. This is perhaps
the closest The filmmaker can come to serving as true artist, true
analog to the mode of a novelist or painter, as opposed to some hybrid
of artist-manager. For the most part today, even in cases of
responsible filmmaking, it is not at all clear that a single person's
creative thrust anchors a film. Kundun and Happy Together for
instance, both remarkable, cannot be credited soley to their
respective director's efforts. This is neither good nor bad, although
in a case like Hanna-Bi there is much less ambiguity as to the source
of what is being ennunciated by the film. The result is a level of
coherence that is absent from most films; while Scorcese or Wong are
able to marshall the efforts of collaborators into a unified voice
most films produced via the conventional collaborative model end up
feeling like six people shouting at you and each other.
    Hanna-Bi is well served by this unity of thrust, since it is in
fact a very ambitious project. There are in fact two distinct layers
to the film. The first is the content itself, which is both a yakuza
crime fiilm as well as a melodrama. Nishi, the protagonist embodied by
Kitano is a taciturn policeman who is confronting two sets of
psychological demons. The first is related to a less than smooth sting
operation, while the second centers around the fact that his wife is
dying. Conventional wisdom would suggest that a film with this much
'premise' should set about economically and efficiently relate the
plot until by the end it is hurtling at light speed to as big a bang
as its budget will allow. Instead there is a whole other layer to
Kitano's film where one would least expect to find it; in the formal
devices used. Kitano constructs his shots and by extension his entire
film with razour sharp precision and with absolute disregard to
textbook storytelling. Long scenes are spent in absolutely no service
whatsoever to the empirical events being narrated. And yet it is these
moments that are most articulate in commenting on the loneliness and
alienation that Nishi feel. Kitano foreshadows this method of
revealing truth through form as opposed to content through the first
third of his film. The sting operation referred to is shown several
times and yet it serves only to confuse. Even the source of bullets is
not clear. The viewer is left with recourse only to articulations
between shots, compositions, silence and Nishi's austere stare as the
only legitimate signs of the film's concerns.
    Although a number of sources have emphasized the content-linked
themes of the film, such as sacrifice, identity and in some sense
redemption, these seem to be cursory or at least only part of what
make Hanna-Bi intriguing. What truly is inspiring is the density of
the film's treatment of violence. It is a study of clinical precision
in this regard. In an interview in Film Comment (March-April 1998)
Kitano ws quite specific about the approach he wished to take to
violence in Hanna-Bi. It is an approach not unlike Michael Haneke's in
Funny Games (yet to be released in Ottawa) which exposes the
mundaneity of violence as it is used in conventional cinema. To this
end Hanna-Bi makes use offscreen space to haunt the viewer with
allusions to the acts comitted. We are shown either the brutal and
humiliating aftermaths (in the restaurant early in the film, at the
beach towrds the end..) or the spontaneous outburst. It has become
Nishi's last resort and only known way to express affection. (Not
unlike the protagonists in Tokyo Fist) On this basis the final scene
is one of excruciating compassion.
    It is the evolution that Nishi goes through to get to such a point
that maintains the interest of the content-linked elements of the
film. The perfectionist manner in which Nishi raises money and the
meandering journey it spawns are more literal components of this
evolution.  Throughout there are continuous shifts in tone and
possible motivations that the characters never seem one-dimensional or
just tools in a theorem. There is no easily explicable or definable
scapegoat to which Nishi's behaviour can be attributed and as such the
viewer is forced to confront the possible sources and to begin to
assess the precise effects of the various acts of brutality that are
depicted. These stand in counterpoint to the artwork produced at
intervals by another character in the film (whom I cannot divulge if i
want to limit the amount of plot I explain). These paintings and
drawings serve as perfect punctuation to a film as aesthetically
accomplished as this one. Not to be missed.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Japan may have problems accepting western-style
feminism, but we all believe that it's a land of balance and
harmony, with virtually no crime, with divorce unthinkable. 
But Takeshi Kitano upsets the popular stereotype in
"Fireworks," known also by the Japanese title "Hani Bi"--which
means "flower" and "fire."  There are fireworks aplenty in
Kitano's picture but also a great deal of gentleness, two
virtues which are combined in its principal character, Kitano,
who also wrote and directed.  As a genre-bender, the movie
can confuse viewers who can't place it in the category of
police/action-adventure but also feel uncomfortable calling it a
comedy or a family melodrama.  It's all of these, and in a way
the contrasting assets of its principal performer can be taken
as a metaphor for Japan itself--a country known for the
utmost in etiquette and politeness but one which is no
stranger to the unspeakably cruel wartime acts.
   Handsomely photographed by Hideo Yamamoto and
creatively edited by appropriate flashbacks by Kitano and
Yoshinori Oota, the film--which played at the 1997 New York
Film Festival--centers on Yoshitaka Nishi, a tough guy toward
his many enemies, a sentimental dope when considering his
wife and friends.  Placed at a crossroads by a series of
tragedies which seem to have piled up all at once, Nishi is
exceptionally violent because of feelings of guilt, a kind and
tender husband to his wife when she needs him most.
   Known as a top-grade police detective, Nishi snatched
some time off to pay a visit to his hospitalized wife who is
dying of leukemia on the very day that his partner, Horibe
(Ren Osugi), took a paralyzing bullet in the back.  Confined to
a wheelchair, Horibe is left without a job and, perhaps even
worse, his wife and child have deserted him.  With little to do
to occupy his time, he takes up painting and, in one of the
movie's thrusts at deadpan comedy, he receives a paint set
and beret from his remorseful ex-partner, Nishi.  Nishi has
also left the police force, has borrowed money from a loan-
shark in the yakuzi (organized crime, Japanese style), and
has dedicated himself to caring for his wife during her final
weeks.  His preoccupation is interrupted several times during
the course of the story as the gangsters make incessant
demands on him to pay his debt with interest.  In the picture's
most dramatic scene, he suddenly takes out the eye of one of
the harassing hoodlums with a chopstick while putting the
other hoodlum away with appropriate force.  In a bloody
flashback, director Kitano recreates a scene in which two
detectives are shot by a criminal followed by Nishi's furious
burst of gunfire to the perpetrator's head. For good measure,
Nishi empties his revolver into the corpse.
   Kitano's specialty is shocking the audience, which he does
not only by displaying buckets of blood but by taking us off
balance with Nishi's surprising sensitivity.  In one scene that
could be used by the Japan Tourist Office to enourage winter
vacations in that country, Nishi is shown bringing laughter to
his depressed wife Miyuki (Kayoko Kishimoto) in a lovely
resort overlooking Mount Fuji.  Nishi lights fireworks for her
and helps a child they met on the beach to fly her kite.
   Kitano avoids the cliches of the American-style police film
by stylizing the violence, presenting it without sounds in one
take and in slow motion in another.  His camera does not
dwell on the detached retina of the unfortunate fellow whose
eye is taken out by Nishi's chopstick, but rather cuts away
quickly when the ex-cop makes his jab without a split-
second's warning.
   Nishi is psychotic.  Like many men, he wants to be left
alone.  When he is disturbed, he does not react the way
civilized people to, but strikes out with loathing yet without
fear and without a thought to the consequences of his act. 
When he tells the broken-down owner of a junkyard that he
wants to buy a car and a flashing police light so that he can
rob a bank, he means exactly what he says.  (Incidentally,
Kitano may have spent considerable time on the junkyard with
its array of miscellaneous parts, its burly, slow-minded owner
and his disturbed daughter as a metaphor for a part of
Japanese society which is fraying at the edges.)
   "Fireworks" does not take much time to develop its
characters and explain the actions.  We really have no idea
why Nishi borrowed money from the yakuza or why he robs a
bank with no attempt to hide his identity.  If anything Kitano
reinforces a stereotype that westerners may have about the
inscrutability of the Japanese people, but among his primary
aims is to convey a macabre atmosphere.  He does this with
assurance. Not Rated.  Running time: 103 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As the married couple, Nishi and Miyuki, gather for an evening of
arranging little tiled shapes into various geometric patterns, they
share their common bond of love without uttering a single word.  The
Japanese couple in FIREWORKS enjoy two sinfully rich desserts along
with their tea.  The solemnity of the moment is broken briefly when
Miyuki steals Nishi's cake and leaves him with a single strawberry.
This causes smiles to break out in the far corners of their mouths.
Both of them are making the most of every second these days since
Miyuki is dying of cancer.
     Nishi, admittedly, has even more on his mind.  A police detective,
he is being tracked down by loan sharks who want their interest, or
else.  Moreover, his partner, Horibe (Ren Osugi), has been shot in the
line of duty and lives a life of contemplation and desperation in a
wheelchair.  Horibe, who laments that "work is all I've ever known" and
"all this free time is tough," is as lost as Nishi.  The depressed
Horibe spends his time sitting by the ocean, staring at the waves.
     In an impressive set of contributions to the film, Takeshi Kitano
is the director, the writer, and the lead actor (Nishi).  A very
popular and prolific Japanese actor, his list of credits in the press
kit includes seven current weekly television shows.  With his ruggedly
handsome face, elliptical, dark sunglasses, jet-black hair, black suit
and casual shirt, his presence dominates his every scene.  Knowing
exactly how to direct himself, he lets the camera linger on his
delicate array of expressions.  With only minute variations in his
facial expressions, he manages to convey a wide range of emotions.  A
tour de force performance, his work is almost matched by the equally
impressive and even subtler piece of acting by Kayoko Kishimoto as his
wife.
     In a movie with sparse dialog -- easily half of the scenes have
none at all -- and an absolutely minimal plot, the masterful camerawork
by Hideo Yamamoto becomes the film's glue.  Sometimes paying respect to
the actors, the camera stops and observes without moving as you would
at an art gallery.  Other times, in the scenes of intense violence, we
will have a look so quick that if you blink you may miss it.  In a key,
slow-motion sequence, choreographed like a minuet, two of Nishi's
partners are killed.  We come back to this scene several times in
flashbacks, representing the horrors of their loss in Nishi's mind.
     The overall tone of the picture, thanks especially to Jo
Hisaishi's melancholy music of violins, piano, and flute, is one of
serenity in the face of upcoming loss.  Beneath the characters' almost
stoic look burns a caldron of pent-up emotions that seems ready to
explode at a moment's notice like an overheated boiler.
     The poignant tale has us eavesdropping on lives of pain and joy.
Eventually, it comes to a perfect ending.  With the subtlety of the
rest of the script, the resolution is not shown, but the staging leaves
no doubt.
     FIREWORKS runs 1:43.  Its scant dialog is in Japanese with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be an R for brief scenes of
strong violence and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Michael Dequina
Takeshi Kitano is truly the "King of All Media" in Japan, where he has
conquered the worlds of film, television, radio, newspapers, even stand-up
comedy.  However, if American audiences know him at all, it is likely for
his villainous role in the putrid cyberthriller Johnny Mnemonic.  That
could all change with the near-simultaneous stateside launches of two of
his writing-directing-editing-acting efforts, Sonatine and Fireworks
(Hana-Bi).
Notice I wrote "could" instead of "will" or "should," because Kitano's
poetic, meditative brand of filmmaking will probably be as difficult for
most mainstream audiences to sit through as it is to describe (at the
showing of Sonatine I attended, there were more than a handful of
walkouts).  These two films fit squarely within a genre (in both of these
cases, crime thriller), yet they are made in a stylized, lyrical style more
befitting of avant-garde arthouse fare.  The resulting works are slow and
somewhat difficult, but they prove to be rewarding sits for the more
open-minded viewer.
In 1993's Sonatine, Kitano (billed under his acting moniker "'Beat'
Takeshi") plays an aging small-time gangster dispatched by his boss to go
to Okinawa to help resolve a turf conflict.  After an ambush, a
double-cross is clearly afoot, and he and his crew of rather immature young
men retreat to a seaside cabin.  It is during this section that most people
departed the auditorium, but it's not for the reasons one may think.
Although there are brief bursts of bloody violence interspersed throughout
the film, what (for lack of a better word) "offended" was the attention to
behavior that would normally be deemed too trivial to be shown onscreen.
Kitano spends plenty of time focusing on what these men do to keep
themselves from complete boredom, such as staging mock sumo wrestling
matches.  It sounds kind of boring on the page (and, apparently for some
it's boring on screen as well), but the quirky humor of these scenes give
what could easily be a tired story an unusual air of freshness and humanity.
As expertly made as it is, what I found lacking in Sonatine was any
emotional connection, which diminished the power of the finale.  The same
cannot be said of Kitano's most recent effort, Fireworks (Hana-Bi).  In
this film, Kitano, in a nearly silent role, plays a former cop who takes
his terminally ill wife (Kayoko Kishimoto) on an extended road trip; at the
same time, police tail him for a bank robbery he made in order to pay off a
mob loan shark.  Much like Sonatine, the film moves at a leisurely pace;
there are brief, unsettling bursts of violence; and laughs are derived from
quirky situations and behavior.  But Fireworks is more richly satifying to
the emotions and the senses.  Serving as a counterpoint to the main plot is
the story is of a crippled former partner (Ren Osugi) who searches for
meaning through painting.  His paintings (which, not so surprisingly, are
actually painted by Kitano himself) are extensively viewed in haunting
wordless sequences, which provide the film with a stunning visual framework
that grows increasingly ominous as the quietly poignant conclusion draws
near.  
It is unlikely that the films of Takeshi Kitano will be as widely embraced
by American viewers as those of Hong Kong directors.  But in Sonatine and
Fireworks, Kitano proves to be a gifted cinematic visionary whose truly
unique work deserves stateside recognition, even if that recognition comes
from a fairly limited, though highly appreciative, audience.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: 'Beat' Takeshi Kitano, Kayoko, Kishimoto, Ren Osugi, Susumu
Terajima, Tetsu Watanabe, Hakurya, Taro Itsumi, Makoto Ashikawa, Yuko
Daike
Director: Takeshi Kitano
Screenplay: Takeshi Kitano
Australian theatrical release: September 3, 1998
>From its gentle opening images to the final, terrifying moment, it is
clear that Hana-Bi has skillfully avoided the not so subtle subtleties
of American cinema.  Japanese media star "Beat" Takeshi Kitano wrote,
directed, starred in and edited this film, and this is the first Kitano
movie ever released in Australia.  The screenplay has plenty of guns and
violence, but the counterpart is an emotional element unlike any other
in recent memory.  Its protagonist is often an aggressive, deadly and
obnoxious character, but he also provides the basis for an exquisite
insight into human endeavors of loss, redemption, courage and faith.
Hana-Bi means "flower" and "fire," but when converted into English you
get Fireworks.  That's a pity, because the conversion loses the dual
meaning of Kitano's title.  I have a feeling that the dialogue in
Hani-Bi has suffered from the same loss of coherency; perhaps a little
less so, but it's still evident none the less.  Although, it was a wise
move to edit subtitles into the English version, and not have it dubbed.
John Woo's 1989 thriller Die xue shuang xiong (known in western
countries as The Killer) demonstrated how ridiculously simplistic
converted dialogue can be.
For most of the film, former cop Nishi (Kitano) and his wife Miyuki
(Kayoko Kishimoto) barely speak a word; their silence says more than
anything else could.  Miyuki is dying of Leukemia, and Nishi is
determined to do as much as he can to make sure that her last moments on
Earth are cherished.  Other dramatic elements complicate his life,
including his best friend Horibe (Ren Osugi) becoming a paraplegic after
an unprecedented assault.  "Working is all I have known my whole life,"
Horibe says, now on a wheelchair outside his seaside home.  To pass the
time, Horibe takes up painting, whilst Nishi resorts to crime - robbing
a bank in order to pay for an exotic holiday for him and his wife.
The above synopsis may sound a little wanky and sentimental, but that's
the best insight I can give into a film which cannot be defined or
categorized.  It would be easy to label Hana-Bi as a drama, an
action/drama or an action/drama/comedy, but none prove to be
satisfactory definitions.  Though in Japanese, Kitano has written
Hana-Bi in a universal language.  The language of loss, redemption,
courage and faith.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Dennis Schwartz
FIREWORKS (director: Takashi Kitano; cast: Takashi "Beat"
Kitano(Yoshitaka Nishi), Kayoko Kishimoto(Miyuki), Ren Osugi(Horibe)
Susumu Terajima(Nakamura), Tetsu Watanabe(Tezuka), 1997-Jap.)
Writer-director/acting star-artist, Takashi Kitano, has broken ground
from traditional films, taking risks that defy explaining how to
classify this very violent and tender film, that sways between the two
extremes, and as the critic Joel Hoberman so astutely states, FIREWORKS
is a cross between Ozu's LATE SPRING and Don Siegel's DIRTY HARRY.
Kitano is not noted for plot development and for understanding women.
His forte is in the raw nerve of his films and the stark beauty of the
cinematography. One should expect the unexpected from his films. The
violence is brutal and fast-paced. For his effort, he has won the Grand
Prize at Venice, the first time a Japanese film has done this since
RASHOMON (1950).
Nishi (Kitano), as a detective, is part of a gangster stakeout with his
partner, Horibe (Osugi), and two younger detectives. But Horibe tells
Nishi to visit his hospitalized leukemia-stricken wife, Miyuki
(Kishimoto), and dismisses the other two policemen. This turns out to be
a bad move and Horibe is paralyzed by the gangsters. The narrative is
told in flashbacks, so any part of Nishi's life could pop up on the
screen, and what would seem like a commonplace crime story unfolding,
deceptively turns out to be much more than that, even as Nishi gets
revenge on the yakuma's who did this to his friend, unafraid of bringing
untold graphic violence to the screen. For one of the punk gangsters, he
sticks a pencil in his eye. You better believe that caught my attention.
But, if that was all this film was about, the DIRTY HARRY description
of the film would have been completely apropos.
Feeling responsible for Horibe and grieving for his wife, the film turns
into a road movie as he escorts his wife to the sights she wants to see
for the last time, leaving him to wonder why she would choose to see
snow before dying... He shows great tenderness toward his friend Horibe,
and in his taciturn manner (he is not a man who likes conversation), he
sends him art materials so he can somehow keep his mind occupied during
the suicidal period he is going through, and we see some magnificent
surreal and colorful drawings as a result, which are the actual drawings
of Kitano. In between these grand gestures, he violently confronts the
gangsters responsible for his friend's condition.
This highly original film, that is at times a masterpiece and other
times a grade B- movie, is difficult for me to penetrate what it all
means as far as a commentary on Japanese culture, but the Japanese
critics have been critical of his attacks on Japanese conformity, while
the Japanese public accepts him as a popular performer and stage
comedian, even if his films have not been as well received in Japan as
they have been in foreign countries. As far as I am concerned, I prefer
Ozu, I am more taken with his intellect and perspective, but I can
appreciate the artistic direction Kitano is taking his violent subject
matter to, as I found this volatile film to be something special, but
something I can't completely comprehend because I don't really know what
he is trying to say, as if that really matters. Yet his film is a visual
treat to behold, and for that I am grateful and accepting of his work.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mikhail Zeleny
_Hana-bi_ / _Fireworks_.  Written and directed by Takeshi Kitano.
Cast in the order of credits: Takeshi Kitano credited as Beat Takeshi
(Yoshitaka Nishi), Kayoko Kishimoto (Miyuki Nishi), Ren Osugi (Horibe),
Susumu Terajima (Nakamura), Tetsu Watanabe (Tesuka), Hakuryu, Yasuei
Yakushiji, Taro Istumi, Kenichi Yajima, Makoto Ashikawa, Yuko Daike.
Cinematography by Hideo Yamamoto.  Music by Joe Hisaishi.  Paintings
by Takeshi Kitano.  Costume design by Masami Saito.  Art direction by
Norishiro Isoda.  Film editing by Takeshi Kitano and Yoshinori Oota.
103 minutes.
Awarded the Golden Lion at the 1997 Venice Film Festival, the first
Japanese film to be thus honored since Akira Kurosawa's _Rashomon_.
Selected web reviews:
http://www.cinopsis.com/critics/hanabi.htm (French),
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/2508/ci_hana.htm and
http://luce.it/eventi/venezia/hana.htm (Italian),
http://www.nytimes.com/library/film/032098firewor-film-review.html,
http://magazines.enews.com/magazines/tnr/current/kauffmann040698.html,
http://www.latimes.com/HOME/NEWS/CALWEEK/t000026743.1.html.
"Hana Bi", the Japanese word for fireworks, literally translates its
two Kanji characters as "Flowers (of) Fire", the twin elements that
represent a familiar contraposition of evanescent life with violent
death.  For me, the worst thing about the present version is that it
makes Quentin Tarantino look like a gutless loser that he is.  And I
only saw _Pulp Fiction_ four times in theaters.
The core of the movie is its moral angle.  Detective Nishi evidently
feels himself responsible for the crippling of his partner Horibe,
shot and consequently wheelchair-bound while Nishi absents himself to
visit his terminally ill wife Miyuki at the hospital, as well as the
death of another cop at the hands of an armed robber Nishi was unable
to control.  Overcome by the awareness of failure and the sentiment of
remorse, Nishi quits the force and borrows money from yakuza in order
to enable Horibe to become a painter and help the young police widow
reduced to working at a fast food stand.  And in order to repay the
yakuza he buys a stolen taxicab from a junkyard, paints it as a police
car, dons patrol uniform, and singlehandedly robs a bank with a toy
revolver.  The interesting part comes next.  While Nishi returns the
principal to his exacting creditors, he neglects to pay the interest,
knowing full well that this oversight will oblige them to pursue him.
Thereupon the profit from his heist underwrites his final farewell to
Miyuki on a traditionally sentimental pilgrimage to Mt. Fuji, as Nishi
casually dispatches his relentless pursuers and abruptly flabbergasts
the occasional salaryman interloper or bystander with his exacting
capacity for retaliatory justice coupled with an exquisite disregard
of native decorum, in a quintessentially Japanese way of terminal
rebellion.
Highlights include indirect depiction of ultraviolence, which is both
very Japanese and very revisionist in style.  For example, there is a
fifteen-second scene in Kurosawa's _Red Beard_, where Toshiro Mifune,
who plays a provincial doctor in Tokugawa Japan, is confronted by a
dozen yakuza in a whorehouse yard over a sick little girl he intends
to rescue therefrom.  So we see Mifune, encircled by arrogant louts,
somberly dispatch them in a smoothly flowing sequence, visiting upon
each with his bare hands the most terrible violence possible, only to
survey the therapeutic carnage and express his misgivings about having
transgressed the Hippocratic principle to his ambitious young samurai
understudy.  And now, we have Beat Takeshi boxed in and surrounded by
sneering adversaries in the yakuza Benz, swiftly addressing each of
them in turn with a revolver abruptly confiscated from their hapless
colleague, only to proffer a final posthumous admonition to the inert
body of a thrice-thrashed, yet thitherto twice spared pompadour punk.
Thus the action has been distilled and compressed, whereas the earlier
protagonist's conscientious alter ego has been inverted and mooted.
On a break in their journey, as Miyuki squats at a lake shore to water
a bouquet of dead flowers, a boorish interloper upbraids her about the
futility of her melancholy gesture, whereupon Nishi abruptly shoves
him underwater and colors the lake with blooming petals of his blood,
in a warm-up for dealing with the next batch of yakuza pursuers due to
catch up with them shortly.  The juxtaposition of sentimentality and
ultraviolence exemplified in this scene certainly represents a retreat
from the more tough-minded narratives of Akira Kurosawa and Hideo
Gosha, whose stoic brooding heroes Takeshi Kitano obviously seeks to
emulate.  But the staccato beat of hard action punctuating the silent
contemplative portrayal of the hero's quiet love for his dying wife,
equally well rooted in the chambara tradition and especially evocative
of Tatsuya Nakadai oyabun's generous resignation to the emerging prior
claim on his wife that is left loyally unarticulated by his recovering
amnesiac retainer in Gosha's sublime _Hunter in the Dark_, both in
munificence of spirit and operatic surfeit of painstakingly suppressed
underlying emotion epitomize the Japanese Liebestod suggested by the
title, an indigenous plot device doubtless destined to be imitated but
unattained by callow American filmmakers.
Cordially -- Mikhail Zeleny@math.ucla.edu * MZ@ptyx.com ** www.ptyx.com
God: "Sum id quod sum." ** 7576 Willow Glen Road, Los Angeles, CA 90046
Descartes: "Cogito ergo sum." * 213.876.8234 (fon) * 213.876.8054 (fax)
Popeye: "Sum id quod sum et id totum est quod sum." **** www.alonzo.org
established on 2.26.1958 ** itinerant philosopher * will think for food
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading
