Title
Review for Seul contre tous (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A cartoon in the New Yorker magazine some years ago
features a young American tourist staring up at a disbelieving
guide and insisting, "But I don't want to see the REAL Paris; I
want to see the TOURIST's Paris."  Who can blame her?  If
writer-director Gaspar Noe's image of working-class areas of
Paris and a part of the French countryside in 1980 are any
intimation, this is not the country glorified by Jacques Demy
where most of the women resemble Catherine Deneuve. 
This is down-and-dirty terrain, and Noe portrays its
uncompromisingly bleak topography populated by denizens
who'd be more at home in the digs of Gorky's stories than in
Maxim's.  Taking a clue from Jean-Luc Godard with a nod
toward Bert Brecht, Noe films his drama of devastation with
screen-covering signposts advising viewers what is to come
or ironically pontificating with fortune-cookie slogans like
"Man is Moral." In one of his signposts that leave us
wondering whether to chuckle or bolt, he jackets the screen
with the admonition, "You have ten seconds to leave the
screening of this movie."  In case anyone out there has the
temerity to close his eyes rather than look at the nihilistic
violence, degradation and utter degeneration portrayed in this
hell-raising venture, Noe rouses him with a bang, a noise not
unlike the sound of an automatic weapon.
  "I Stand Alone," which could more literally be entitled "One
Against All" from the French title "Seul Contre Tous," is
narrated by a bankrupt, unemployed butcher who has nothing
to his name after thirty-five years of grinding up the
horsemeat loved by some in French society.  Himself
abandoned as an infant, he has an autistic daughter whom
he has given up to an institution, a fat pregnant mistress
whom he hates, and a despised mother-in-law who lives with
them in a tenement somewhere in the sticks of Lille. The man
is virtually franc-less and so self-destructive that he even
loses a chance to work as a deli man in a supermarket
because he is literally unable to smile.
   While there is some dialogue as the 50-year-old butcher
talks with his mistress, two prospective employers, some
people in a bar and eventually his attractive but mentally
challenged daughter, much of the action takes place in the
man's head as he turns from a reasonably decent person to
an increasingly obsessed and violent beast.  Noe does not
bother to inquire how this lumpen creature became almost
preternaturally frenzied, nor do we need to know much more
than the reality of his unhappy upbringing. We'll have to
accept the man as a representation of what any of us could
be capable of, though few in the audience could picture
themselves even punching their wives' or girl friends' fetuses
to death in a fit of rage.
   His father is said to have been a Communist and the
butcher possesses a view of France that runs the gamut from
Marxism to Fascism without a detour on the way.  He is not
political in the intellectual sense of the word but has visceral
inclinations against people in his country who he feels do not
belong there and against the powerful rich whom he judges to
be all "queer." He parrots slogans that he may have picked
up on TV such as the concept that the law exists simply to
protect the rich and should be ignored by the masses.
   Ideas aside, "Seul Contre Tous" is acted with passion by
Philipe Nahon, whose unsmiling countenance and fiery
surveillance of his limited world reflect a torment leading
rapidly into schizophrenia. The film--which includes hard-core
pornography, and an intensely violent close-up of a woman
spurting blood from the neck as she lay bleeding to death of
a gunshot wound--virtually clobbers the viewers with a vista
of a France so infected with racism, unemployment and
physical deterioration that it looks like a Gallic post-
Armageddon cosmos.  Unlike the Italo-Turkish film"Hamam"--
an optimistic picture which maintains that you can indeed
start out anew by changing your environment--"I Stand Alone"
stands as one of the bleakest, most nihilistic portraits of
debasement, decline and deterioration in memory.  While
some may say, "What's the point?" Gaspar Noe deserves
acclaim for furnishing us with an original piece of cinema
worthy of attention for its sheer audacity.

Author
Pedro Sena

FILM TITLE:       SEUL CONTRE NOUS (I STAND ALONE)
DIRECTOR:       GASPAR NOE
COUNTRY:        FRANCE 1998
CINEMATOGRAPHY:  DOMINIQUE COLIN
CAST:                Philippe Nahon, Blandine Lenoir
SUPER FEATURES:  Is this reality, or neo-realism? Is a live butcher shop on
the stage in the theater the only way we will wake up to "reality"?
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival in Portland, Oregon)
 Several years ago, another film maker came around, and went to work doing
things that no one else did, in a manner that no one else did, with little
regard for how we felt, or how we would react to the picture that he had
made. He became the darling of sur-neo-realism, if there is such a thing, in
that his films were always strange, obscure, but always managed to make a
point by the way things appeared in the film. Not at all because he wanted
to create a philosophy, or a thinking, about anything he did. But his
intuitive side of things, created a harrowing reality for movie go'ers. How
is one supposed to feel about these things?
 No sooner had the director heard us discussing his stuff and us believing
he was making a film because ... , he concluded that he didn't want "...to
make a film about politics. He just wanted to make a political film...",
where the situations and people took on themselves, be them actors or not.
Not a story, not a foolish Hollywood fantasy, but something that might get a
solid reaction out of us. In other words, he DID NOT make film to tell us
how he felt, or how we are supposed to feel. To this day, I believe that
this film really helped define something in film the world over, that few of
us may really understand. This may be the same mentality that gave us the
Reign of Terror, but 30 years later, what has it arrived to? The same, and
more. The film maker was Jean-Luc Godard. This film delivers a Reign of
Terror, but one that we may not wish to deal with.
 I would imagine that for anyone unfamiliar with these kinds of things, a
film like this is a massive shocker. This film never stops at the words, or
just a symbol or an idea. It plunges right ahead, in front of us, and
brutally so. It's hard to fathom that anyone would be this bitter, or
disappointed in life, to create such a film, and such an experience for any
audience to sit through. But it will get your attention if you can sit
through it.
 In the fifties, it took the acting of those now known as giants in the
Acting Studio, and the English Angry Young Men to express the displeasure
that many of us have in the society we live in. In the sixties, it seemed
that drugs and music were the channels for the same thing, of which Godard
also took part, although differently so. The seventies and eighties were
sedate by comparison. Then in the nineties, one sees something like this and
it makes one wonder, if things in France are in such a stupor and such an
edge, that another revolution may be in the offing. A film like this, is a
vicious attack on the social mold that has pretty much destroyed the worker,
or at least this man. It's hard to imagine that this is just a "film", and
that its power stops at "film". How real is all this? How close to reality
is it really? How much of this is the man's imagination? One can hear
psychologists blaming the man's problems on his inability to blah, blah,
blah. And society as a whole can not be at fault. Or one can hear film
critics attacking these things as not films, or the favorite American word
(heaven forbid) - Entertainment.
 The story is simple enough, as if there were any need for a story to be
there at all when one thinks about it. A man that had grown up being a
butcher, all of a sudden finds himself out of work, and not in favor with
anyone. He has just finished serving jail time for an incident, when he
thought that a man had raped his daughter, when in fact it had been her time
of the month. His return from jail to society, was not favorable. He takes
on a mistress, and one day leaves her and her mother, after making an awful
mess of things. As his anger builds, he finds the need in himself to go
visit his daughter and perhaps reclaim her from the institution that she is
in. And the film kinda stops here, though the man's mind doesn't.
 And here is the astounding part of this film, the most difficult thing to
deal with as it is totally uncensored in any way, shape or form -- a film
that would get a guaranteed X rating in this country if it went beyond the
portals of Film Festivals. It's a wonder that it got that far unnoticed,
that's for sure. Right from the start, we are treated to the man's story and
his opinions. The question is where is his temper and mind going to take
him. The inevitable suggestion, is that he is strong and capable of doing
something horrible, and the film seems to make it clear that he does just
that with his mistress, but in the end, it gives us the total opposite.
Maybe he did not do what the film showed he did to the mistress since he
could just as easily have done a similar thing here to his daughter.
 So, in the end, all we can think is that most of it has taken place in his
mind, or at least we hope so, because it is hard to believe that he could
not control himself well enough to learn the harsh lessons that life has to
offer ... well, I imagine that we in the audience want to think so, because
seeing something that brutal usually merits very stiff penalties in the
societies that we live in. He is visibly angry, but it is not like he does
not remember the silly affair that got him in jail. Or that he would be
stupid enough to follow through on his murderous vision and mind.
 Few films, ever, are so powerful, and do not stop pulling their punches for
a minute, so the audience can take a deep breath. It is difficult to think
of this film as bad, since the design and concept is well thought out, and
extremelly well done. It may not be our favorite theme, or film, but it is
very hard to dismiss its obvious points. Most films can only give "opinions"
by comparison. This one punches your gut with it with its realism.
 This is one of those films that is best seen by those that have a stomach
for harsh stuff. This film is harsh and then some. Sort of like the day we
saw Sam Peckinpah do the killing spree in slow motion, so we could witness
the mass orgy of madness that we take ourselves into - that we refuse to
learn, or accept and continually repeat in so many countries the world over.
Our love affair with hate, and destruction. Or our belief that something is
more important than another, to the point where human life is secondary to
the cause. And maybe this is the point that Gaspar Noe wants to make, which
the character mentions. We have become too weak and have no courage to do
something about it as a country anymore. We have resigned, and are left with
nothing but an act of animalistic desire that allows us to cleanse ourselves
for a small period of time. But with all due respect, to this point of view,
could this be a sign of the serious dis-satisfaction with the way things are
shaping up in France? Or in many parts of the world, hidden by toys that we
think make us happier?
Very powerful film that is not for the weak stomach. Very brutal, mentally
and physically so. A film that really could be said speaks for our angers
much more than we care to admit.
4 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1999. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A cartoon in the New Yorker magazine some years ago
features a young American tourist staring up at a disbelieving
guide and insisting, "But I don't want to see the REAL Paris; I
want to see the TOURIST'S Paris."  Who can blame her?  If
writer-director Gaspar Noe's image of working-class areas of
Paris and a part of the French countryside in 1980 are any
intimation, this is not the country glorified by Jacques Demy
where the most of the women resemble Catherine Deneuve. 
This is down-and-dirty terrain, and Noe portrays its
uncompromisingly bleak topography populated by denizens
who'd be more at home in the digs of Gorky's stories than in
Maxim's.  Taking a clue from Jean-Luc Godard with a nod
toward Bert Brecht, Noe films his drama of devastation with
screen-covering signposts advising viewers of what is to come
or ironically pontificating with fortune-cookie slogans like "Man
is Moral."  In one of his signposts that leave us wondering
whether to chuckle or bolt, he jackets the screen with the
admonition, "You have ten seconds to leave the screening of
this movie."  In case anyone out there has the temerity to
close his eyes rather than look at the nihilistic violence,
degradation, and utter degeneration portrayed in this hell-
raising venture, Noe rouses him with a bang--literally--a noise
not unlike the sound of the automatic weapon which the
principal character caresses like a phallic symbol.
   "I Stand Alone," which could be more literally entitled "One
Against All" from the French title "Seul Contre Tous," is
narrated by a bankrupt, unemployed butcher who has nothing
to his name after thirty-five years of grinding up the
horsemeat loved by some components of French society. 
Himself abandoned as an infant, he has an autistic daughter
whom he has given up to an institution, a fat, pregnant
mistress whom he hates, and a despised mother-in-law who
lives with them in a tenement somewhere in the sticks of Lille. 
The man is virtually franc-less and so self-destructive that he
even loses a chance to work as a deli man in a supermarket
because he is literally unable to smile.
   While there is some dialogue as the 50-year-old butcher
talks with his mistress, two prospective employers, some
people in a bar and eventually his attractive but mentally
challenged daughter, most of the action takes place in the
man's head as he turns from a reasonably decent person to
an increasingly obsessed and violent beast.  Noe does not
bother with much inquiry into how this lumpen creature
became almost preternaturally frenzied, nor do we need to
know much more than the reality of his unhappy upbringing. 
We'll simply have to accept the man as a representation of
what any of us could be capable of, though few in the
audience could picture themselves ever punching their wives'
or girl friends' fetusus to death in a fit of rage.  
   His father is said to have been a Communist and the
butcher possesses a view of France that runs the gamut from
Marxism to Fascism without a detour on the way.  He is not
political in the intellectual sense of the word but has visceral
inclinations against people in his country whom he feels do
not belong there and against the powerful rich whom he
judges to be all "queer."  He parrots slogans that he may
have picked up on TV such as the concept that the Law
exists simply to protect the rich and should have no bearing
on the proper moral conduct of the masses.
   Ideas aside, "Seul Contre Tous" is acted with passion by
Philipe Nahon, whose unsmiling countenance and fiery
surveillance of his limited world reflect a torment leading
rapidly into schizophrenia.  The film--which includes hard-core
pornography, and an intensely violent close-up of a woman
spurting blood from the neck as she lies bleeding to death of
a gunshot wound--virtually clobbers the viewers with a vista of
a France so infected with racism, unemployment and physical
deterioration that it looks like Gallic post-Armageddon
cosmos.  Unlike the Italo-Turkish film "Hamam"--an optimistic
picture which maintains that you can indeed start out anew by
changing your environment--"I Stand Alone" stands as one of
the bleakest, most nihilistic portraits of debasement, decline,
and deterioration in memory.  While some may say, "What's
the point?" Gaspar Noe deserves acclaim for furnishing us
with an original piece of cinema worthy of attention for its
sheer audacity.

Author
Atul Khare
"Tour de force", would be classic euphemism for this film which hits
you with the force of a fifteen pound sledgehammer smashing into your
skull.
Well, the movie is about a butcher in Paris (superbly played by
Philippe Nahon) who has been released from prison following a stint on
assault charges (for stabbing an innocent person whom he suspected of
trying to rape his autistic daughter) and finds himself alone, jobless,
angry and depressed. He meets a fat salon keeper, who becomes his
mistress, and they move out to the country, but let's say that things
don't quite work out for them.
So, he returns to Paris in the hope of finding a job, but that proves
to be a futile exercise. All his friends are either destitute or don't
care a damn about him. Thus begins his long and nihilistic journey to
the edge of the abyss, and possibly beyond, but that's for you to judge
at the end of the film. As usual, I won't go into the details of what
transpires as it spoils the experience of people who haven't watched
the film yet.
Suffice it to say the director Gaspar Noé, who wrote, directed (and I
think shot, and edited it as well), has created a brilliant, shocking,
and unforgettable film, certainly one the year's best, IMO.
However, be warned, be very warned, that this isn't a film for the
squeamish, weak hearted and such, and even people who could stand
movies like "Happiness", might have a hard time sitting through it. The
film is disturbing on even on a physical level, and the loud gunshots
that accompany several quick cuts can be particularly unsettling.
