Title
Review for Enchanted April (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ENCHANTED APRIL (UK, 1991)  *** Directed by Mike Newell. Screenplay by
Peter Barnes from the novel by Elizabeth von Arnim. Cinematography, Rex
Maidment. Editing, Dick Allen. Design, Malcolm Thornton. Music, Richard
Rodney Bennet. Cast: Josie Lawrence, Miranda Richardson, Joan Plowright,
Polly Walker, Alfred Molina, Jim Broadbent, Michael Kitchen, et al.  A
Miramax release. 93 min. PG.
An enchanting movie. taken from a novel by Elizabeth von Arnim, who was
born in Australia, grew up in England, married a German Count in 1890,
lived in Pomerania and became a prolific, much respected writer. Debts
forced her husband to sell his estate and move to England in 1908. He died
two years later. Elizabeth, first in Switzerland and then in England,
hobnobbed with major literary figures, married, in 1916, the second Earl
Russell (Bertrand Russellšs brother), soon left , then divorced him. She
lived in America, Switzerland, London and the French Riviera. Died in the
U.S.A. in 1941, at age 75.
In 1921 she rented a medieval castello in Portofino, Italy, and there she
wrote a novel, The Enchanted April(1922) about four women who, in the early
1920s, find (or find again) romance and themselves during a one-month
spring holiday in an Italian castle just like Elizabethšs.
The movie is not only a faithful adaptation of the book but it was filmed
in the very country-house (Castello Brown) where Elizabeth had stayed. The
story starts with Lottie Wilkins (Josie Lawrence, best-known as a stand-up
comedienne) whose husband Mellersh (Alfred Molina) is an opportunistic
solicitor, something of a lout and, like many men of the period, a male
chauvinist pig. Lottiešs eye catches an advertisement for an Italian
rental, gets carried away, decides to use her nest-egg. She finds an
instant housemate in Rose Arbuthnot (Miranda Richardson), whom some
call "a disappointed Madonna." She is the neglected wife of Frederick (Jim
Broadbent). He writes pseudonymous sex novels, and while not a bad sort, is
immersed in the social whirl and his own insecurities.
To share expenses, the two women first enlist old Mrs. Fisher (Joan
Plowright), a curmudgeon and  "a woman of parts and property" who lives in
the past, when she hobnobbed with the Who's Who of England. Then, young,
beautiful and blase socialite Lady Caroline Dester (Polly Walker, the
terrorist killer in Patriot Games ) like a latter-day Penelope, wants to
escape her suitors and the social whirl. She feels out of sorts. Hers is a
more literary case of "ennui" or what Baudelaire called "spleen" or what we
might call "anomie" today.
After the grey wetness of London and the womenšs various mini-slaveries,
the same-sex company, the new-found liberation and the Italian sun and
flowers feel like Paradise. Things get better and better in the castello.
Affectionate relationships are gently formed.  Unexpectedly, Lottie invites
her husband. He comes for the wrong, material reasons but soon, falling
under the placešs enchantment, he turns into an understanding man who
finally finds his wife attractive.
The landlord, Mr. Briggs (Michael Kitchen), a romantic, mildly bohemian
type who plays the oboe, drops in, attracted by Rose who, he thinks, is a
war widow. Why, after all, would 1920's women travel alone?  Finally,
Frederick shows up, first meeting Lady Caroline whom he knows well, then
his wife, whom he will also treat with affection. The trio situation is
gently handled but with the unrealized potential of a farce by Feydeau,
whom, oddly, writer Barnes has adapted for the British stage.
Moviegoers and novel readers are abundantly familiar with the subject of
motley groupings and the theme of sunny Italy transforming repressed
Anglos. Nothing very new here, nothing particularly dramatic. But how
charmingly executed! My only complaint is that whereas I find the four
ladies utterly charming and deserving the best, the two husbands are much
too generously and improbably redeemed.
The actresses are letter-perfect, the husbands a tad grotesque, the deja vu
magic convincing. Beautifully shot, the film balances well its ironic use
of London with the sentimental mood of Portofino. It uses ellipses with
tact and no arty editing, avoids the obvious. (In a remarkable scene, a
lizard simply walks the length of a recumbent, sleeping lady, and leaves
without the usual moment of panic).
The tempo is slow, not recommended to fanatics of action movies, car
crashes or gun play, but slow like a musical movement marked "lento."
Enchanted April is not an "impressive" film that makes transcendent
statements or is fed by a dynamic plot. It is a sweet, un-maudlin,
appealing work. Often, from small movies, big pleasures grow.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I admit it.  The reason I wanted to see this movie was because I wanted
to see more of Miranda Richardson.  No, I wasn't taken with her stunning
beauty.  I just saw her in one film clip in which she had no lines.  She was
only reacting to a conversation between Josie Lawrence and Joan Plowright.
The conversation was funny but Richardson's reactions were priceless.  I
admit it was a silly reason to pay $7 to see a film but nothing else in the
film appealed to me.  And this is a film that turned out to be well worth
seeing.  This film seamlessly bridges the gap between E. M. Forster social
indignation and a Shakespearean romanticism.
     It is a rainy, ugly winter in 1922 London.  Lottie Wilkins (played by
Josie Lawrence) sees a stranger, Rose Arbuthnot (played by Miranda
Richardson) wistfully looking at the same newspaper ad that she had.  It
offered a Northern Italian castle for rent for April ... "wisteria and
sunshine."  Both women are unhappily married, Lottie to a miserly
businessman (played by Alfred Molina) and Rose to a writer of sexy novels
(played by Jim Broadbent).  With four women they might be able to swing the
vacation.  They find a crusty old harridan, Mrs. Fisher, whose father knew
every great literary genius of his generation.  Also there is a world-weary
heiress, Lady Caroline Dester.  Soon the mousey Lottie and Rose find why it
is not good to travel with strangers.  Mrs. Fisher is selfish and nasty,
Lady Caroline is cold and aloof.  Then the warmth and the beauty of
Portofino begins to work a kind of magic on all.
     Mike Newell, who previously directed the horror film THE AWAKENING and
later directed Richardson in DANCE WITH A STRANGER, here directs a
surprisingly magnetic film.  Peter Barnes adapted the 1922 novel by
Elizabeth von Armin.  The film was shot in the same castle where von Armin
wrote her novel.  Each of the four actresses has opportunities to stand out
and Molina's half-serious, half-comic role is also a positive pleasure.
Watching this film is like taking a pleasant vacation.  This is one of the
year's best films.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     ENCHANTED APRIL is a film by Mike Newell, from a script by Peter
Barnes.  It stars Josie Lawrence, Miranda Richardson, Joan Plowright,
and Polly Walker, with Alfred Molina, Michael Kitchen, and Jim
Broadbent.  Photographed by Rex Maidment.  Based on a novel by Elizabeth
Von Armin.  Rated PG, due to subject matter.
     ENCHANTED APRIL is another entry in the ongoing series of costume
pictures based on British novels of the 1920s, especially the ones where
the Britons go to Italy to thaw out emotionally and elsewise.  Unlike
ROOM WITH A VIEW or WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD, the source material here
is not E. M. Forester, but Elizabeth Von Armin, a writer with
considerably less reputation amongst today's readers.  By all reports,
Peter Barnes, who wrote THE RULING CLASS, has trimmed much deadwood from
the novel, the clumsy humor and several subplots, to concentrate on the
recuperative magic of a special place.  In this case, the special place
is a small Italian castle overlooking the sea and surrounded by gardens
and woods of the most exquisite beauty.  The film was shot sequentially
in the same place that Von Armin wrote her novel, St. George's Fortress
(now called Castello Brown), near Portofino.  It may that the actors
were as affected by the place as were their characters, for the change
that comes over everyone is remarkably visible in their faces and body
language.
     The story is slight, even hard to believe due to its sunny outlook,
its familiarity, even its magic.  But it provides a framework for some
lovely ensemble acting by four of Britain's best.  Joan Plowright, the
vinegary old survivor of the Victorian literary set, who want to sit in
the shade and remember better times, takes over any scene she's in,
which is as it should be.  Polly Walker plays the beautiful,
aristocratic leader of London's smart set, who is tired of being the
center of attention, of the empty life.  Josie Lawrence is a rather
fanciful, intuitive London housewife who is bullied by her tightwad
husband (Alfred Molina).  And Miranda Richardson goes against type and
plays a dowdy suburban housewife, who does not approve of her
novelist-husband's books.  He's played by Jim Broadbent.  The third man
in the story is the owner of the castle, Michael Kitchen, who drops in
on the group after they're well ensconced in Italy.
     ENCHANTED APRIL, despite it thinness, its incredibility, is both
magical and very funny.  The actors are superb.  The photography fills
you longing to get on the next plane for Portofino.  The transformation
the place effects is not quite made accessible to us, we are reduced to
taking it on face, but it is good to believe in something so
rejuvenating, so recuperative.
     I can recommend ENCHANTED APRIL to anyone in need of little uplift.

Author
Alan Jay
Capsule: Four Ladies clump together to rent a castle in Italy for the
month of April in the early 1920's.  The film revolves around the four
of them their relationships with men and with each other as they go on
their journey from a rainy London to Italy and their stay there.  (+2).
     This year's London Film Festival opened with the World Premiere of
ENCHANTED APRIL, a film made by the BBC, in conjunction with Miramax,
and in the same series as TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY.  The film is a
delightful little picture that, although not fast in the early stages,
blossoms once the participants reach Italy.
     The performances are exquisite as each of the four leading women
blossom in turn as they find a new facet of their existence.  Although
it was made for television, I would reckon that the film works better in
the cinema where the audience can't switch over before the film takes off
and the beautiful photography of Italy is enhanced on the large screen.
     ENCHANTED APRIL takes place in the early 1920s when four ladies,
strangers at the beginning of the film, decide to rent a house in Italy
for the month of April.  The film is based on the novel by Elizabeth Von
Arnim.
     The film will be getting a theatrical release in the UK later this
year and I thoroughly recommend it as an enjoyable evening's
entertainment.
     The London Film Festival Continues until 21 November at the
National Film Theatre and around London.  For further information call
071-928 3232.
