Title
Review for CyberWorld (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/afcaf18761198d898825696a000bd8db?OpenDocument
The critique of an IMAX film defies many of the standards against which
traditional films are judged, if only because no IMAX picture to date
has attempted anything like real storytelling.  Nevertheless, these are
films and it is our responsibility to give them our earnest criticism.
CyberWorld, brought to us in large part by the good people at Intel, is
a lush visual trip in the spirit of The Mind's Eye and Beyond the Mind's
Eye.  In fact, some of the content appears to have been lifted directly
out of these films.
After a few moments of sincerely awe-inspiring 3D visual effects, we
meet Phig (voiced by Jenna Elfman), our animated hostess, who opens
(with her schmanzy little laser wand) the doors to the various short
animations that make up this mini-odyssey.  Some of these shorts, like
the IMAX 3D rendering of a scene from Antz, will be warmly familiar to
some viewers.  Others, like the IMAX 3D rendering of that tired old 3D
Simpsons episode, will be sickeningly familiar to most viewers.  A few
people around me actually groaned through it at one preview screening.
Still, some of these shorts are so densely packed with visually
thrilling moments that only the most inattentive patrons managed to
leave without a sense of wonder.  Particularly captivating is the first
short, Monkey Brain Sushi, which crams so much psychically resonant
imagery into just a single minute that it takes several screenings to
fully absorb.
Ultimately, though, CyberWorld is limited by its IMAX technology and
provides little substance to compliment its intense visual rush. 
(Unless, of course, you eat a sheet of acid before you go, in which case
you'll no doubt extract infinite meanings from the various metaphorical
movements of the shorts.)  In the end, it is little more than eye candy
and in 48 short minutes it's over.  But, by all means, it is 48 minutes
well spent, and arguably it's the best IMAX experience available today.
Director: Colin Davies, Elaine Despins
Producer: Steven Hoban, Roman Kroitor, Hugh Murray
Writer: Steven Hoban, Hugh Murray, Charlie Rubin
Starring: Jenna Elfman, Matt Frewer, Robert Smith, Dave Foley
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
