Title
Review for On Deadly Ground (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Steven Seagal, Michael Caine, Joan Chen, John C. McGinley.
Screenplay:  Ed Horowitz & Robin U. Russin.
Director:  Steven Seagal.
     Scott's First Law of Hollywood Auteurism reads as follows:
producer/director/star is a bad combination.  Many filmmakers need
someone to be the voice of reason, and that someone is usually the
producer.  The need can be even greater when the filmmaker in question
is a rookie director, which brings us to the First Law's First
Corollary:  be especially wary when the name appearing three times
before the title is Seagal.  ON DEADLY GROUND marks action icon Steven
Seagal's first time in the director's chair, and it looks like it.
Self-indulgent and deadly dull for at least half of its running time,
ON DEADLY GROUND demonstrates why an ego like Seagal's needs something
to keep it in check.
     Seagal's standard issue taciturn butt-kicker is this time called
Forrest Taft, an expert at putting out Alaskan oil well fires.  Early
in the film, Forrest is employed by Aegis Oil chief Michael Jennings
(Michael Caine) to deal with an explosion at one of Aegis' rigs, where
it becomes evident that everything isn't up to specs on the well's
safety equipment.  Furthermore, it appears that the same equipment is
to be used on a massive platform which must meet a start-up deadline in
order for Aegis to retain the mineral rights.  Forrest's life becomes
forfeit when he discovers this information, and Jennings' chief of
security (John C. McGinley) sets him up to die in an explosion.  Of
course, Forrest escapes, and hides out in an Inuit village, learning
Native environmental folklore.  Soon he sets out to make sure the Aegis
1 platform doesn't make its start-up, joined by a native activist (Joan
Chen).
     For those of you who didn't believe Steven Seagal could do
anything more ineptly than he acts, here's evidence to the contrary.
He appears to have learned nothing about pacing and exposition from his
two collaborations with Andrew Davis, turning in an action film
painfully short on action.  The first hour is devoted to an overlong
set-up, briefly interrupted by a barroom brawl so badly edited in
places that they had to dub in exclamations so that it would be clear
exactly where Forrest is kicking his victims.  We are subjected to a
handful of soapbox speeches about environmental degradation, including
one in the middle of a thoroughly pointless dream/vision sequence.
Seagal seems to be laboring under the deluded impression that anyone
who goes to see his films actually wants to hear him speak, because for
sixty minutes he just won't shut up.
     Once it is revealed that (surprise, surprise) Forrest is a CIA-
trained demolition expert, and Jennings sends a pack of professional
killers out to eliminate him, the action picks up.  However, almost
none of it is inspired until Forrest reaches Aegis 1, and almost
invariably the editing is attrocious.  Lots of things blow up in ON
DEADLY GROUND, but there is a "so what" quality to the pyrotechnics.
Still, Seagal at least could have had the sense to end the film with a
bang, instead of with a five minute monologue about the horrors of oil
companies which rivals Kevin Costner's JFK skreed for dramatic
ineptitude.  It isn't even the point that he may be right; he's just
chosen the wrong forum.
     Of course, the ultimate problem with any Steven Seagal project is
that it must inevitably star Steven Seagal.  Where Schwarzenegger
entertains with his comic book persona and one-liners, and Stallone
brings an underdog quality to his action flicks, Seagal's squinting
stoic is just boring.  UNDER SIEGE at least had a chance thanks to
Tommy Lee Jones' lively villain, but Michael Caine is not in that
league, playing a nasty businessman we've seen a hundred times before.
John C. McGinley puts a nice spin on the enforcer role, daring to lose
his cool and admit he's no match for the hero.  If directing ON DEADLY
GROUND is Seagal's idea of stretching himself, I'd offer the words of
Laurence Olivier as advice: "Just *act*, dear boy; it's much easier."

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Steven Seagal, Michael Caine, Joan Chen, John C. McGinley 
Director:  Steven Seagal
Producers:  Steven Seagal, Julius R. Nasso, and A. Kitman Ho 
Screenplay:  Ed Horowitz and Robin U. Russin
Music:  Basil Poledouris
Released by Warner Brothers
     One thing is for certain--the tag lines for this man's movies
aren't difficult to remember.  "Steven Seagal is ABOVE THE LAW."
"Steven Seagal is MARKED FOR DEATH."  "Steven Seagal is HARD TO KILL."
"Steven Seagal is OUT FOR JUSTICE."  "Steven Seagal is UNDER SIEGE."
"Steven Seagal is ON DEADLY GROUND."  How about this for his next
film: "Steven Seagal is UNABLE TO ACT."
     Forrest Taft (Steven Seagal) is an ex-government operative who has
signed on as a troubleshooter and firefighter for Aegis Oil, operated
by the vicious and ruthless Michael Jennings (Michael Caine).  While
Taft is willing to go along to a point with Jennings' unethical and
environmentally-destructive business practices, he eventually arrives
at the inevitable decision that he can no longer continue to work for
Aegis.  So Jennings decides to have him killed, putting his top
"problem solver" (John C. McGinley) on the job.  The hit is botched,
however, and Taft survives to become the local natives' champion in
their fight against the oil company.
     I suppose I should give Mr. Seagal credit for trying to tie the
important theme of environmental rape into ON DEADLY GROUND.
Unfortunately, for a number of reasons, the attempt really doesn't
work.  Generally, the best way to promote a message, no matter what
sort of medium it's being filtered through, is through subtlety.  This
film has clue about such methods, and pushes across its agenda in an
alarmingly-obvious and intrusive manner.  Taft's five-minute lecture at
the end about the evils of poisoning the planet's natural resources
belongs in a public service announcement, not an action film.  This
overdose of political correctness becomes nauseating.
     Oddly, no matter how proper the movie is on the issue of the
environment, it has nothing to say about the flagrant and excessive use
of guns.  The body count in ON DEADLY GROUND is exceptionally high.
This isn't really unexpected, but amidst all the preaching, it seems a
trifle hypocritical.
     Themes and messages aside, ON DEADLY GROUND is moderately
successful in the action department.  The second half, with its
spectacular pyrotechnics and energetic shoot-outs, helps make up for a
sluggish first portion, which features a lengthy sequence delving into
Eskimo mysticism.  The thunderous, pulsing score by Basil Poledouris is
just right.
     One of the problems that I have with Mr. Seagal's movies is that
the main character never seems to be in serious jeopardy.  In part,
that's the difference between a film like ON DEADLY GROUND and DIE
HARD.  Bruce Willis' John McLaine gets beaten and bloodied, but no one
ever lays a hand on Forrest Taft.  The only time he gets injured is
when a massive explosion peppers his back with metallic fragments.
Invincible heroes like this reduce a film's tension to unappealing
levels.
     While Seagal the actor may be ON DEADLY GROUND's greatest problem,
Seagal the director shows a surprisingly deft hand.  I wouldn't want
him in control of a drama, or even a dramatic scene, but he has a flair
with action sequences.
     Sometimes a reasonably-serious actor can take on an over-the-top
villain's role and do a fabulous job with it (Tommy Lee Jones in UNDER
SIEGE, Alan Rickman in DIE HARD).  However, while Michael Caine chews
on the scenery and spits out every line with relish, he's more loud
than menacing.  In the end, he's too unworthy an adversary, much like
John C. McGinley's whiny character.  Mike Starr's barroom bully
radiates more pure nastiness.
     The less said about Joan Chen, the better.  To say that her
talents are wasted is to understate the matter.
     Review or no review, it isn't difficult to identify those who will
and won't like this film.  There's plenty of violence, lots of fights
and explosions, and the miniatures special effects work is impressive.
A sizable portion of the "Seagal crowd" will likely be annoyed by the
environmental message and the Eskimo religious practices because they
interfere with ON DEADLY GROUND's pacing.  In the end, however, there's
probably enough "bang" to overcome these flaws--for Mr. Seagal's fans,
if not everyone else.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     ON DEADLY GROUND proves, without a doubt, that Steven Seagal
directs as badly as he acts.  This environmental actioner is p.u. from
the word g.o. and even co-star Michael Caine, aka Mr.  Will Act For
Food, can't help defuse this bomb.
     The plot is some superior nonsense about a nasty oil mangate
(Caine) and the Bad Things he's planning for the pristine Alaskan
wilderness.  Eskimo environmentalists want him stopped--but they have
no power.  Or hero.  Until the company's head firefighter, Forrest Taft
(Seagal), enters the picture.
     When Taft gets wind of his boss's *real* plans, The Ponytail takes
an armed stance against his employer.  They try to kill him, he tries
to kill them, and it all wraps up with Seagal on a soapbox.
     Pay attention to the opening scene--the first clue that Seagal
doesn't have one--and you have still have time to ask for your money
back.
     At the beginning, Taft arrives in Alaska to "blow out" a "well"
fire.  Yes, a "well" fire!  Anyone who's seen HELLFIGHERS knows that
you can't get much more exciting than this.  But, believe or it not,
Seagal sieves the action right out of this explosive situation.
     His "back up" is fine--production designer Wm. Ladd Skinner,
cinematographer Ric Waite, composer Basil Poledouris--but even *they*
can't compensate for dingbat direction.  With a poorly staged scene, who
cares about Skinner's authentic-looking Eskimo village?  Or Waite's
almost-unreal Alaskan photography?  Or Poledouris energized score?
     Seagal even botches the obligatory bar-fight.  Instead of anything
resembling choreography, he resorts to silly slow-motion to punctuate
his punches.
     The Big Shoot Out is the Big Disappointment.  Even after a middling
midsection, one still hopes for a rousing round-up of John Woo
proportions.  Sorry Charlie, no Grand Guignol here.  Just a sloppy mix
of bullets and bad-guys and immolations and explosions and 101 Other
Ways For Bad People To Die.  Hardly the right reward for having to sit
through Eskimo subtitles, R.  Lee Emery's crewcut, and Steven Seagal
trying to be Kevin Costner.
     Even with a "real" director, ON DEADLY GROUND is still a tough
sell.  Seagal seems to have lost his charisma (there's a relative term,
if there ever was one!); certain supporting players are downright
awful; and the plot has more holes than a bad Schwarzenegger story.
     And, just when you think you can't "stands no more," Seagal wraps
this stinky cheese with a five-minute (cut from fifteen!) environmental
speech complete with stomach-turning footage.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are many mysteries in life. The author of this review
is constantly amazed with the fact that he actually likes
Steven Seagal and his films. It's not because Seagal shows
some great acting skills, nor the quality of those films in
general. Seagal in all of his roles simply radiates the aura
of the man who honestly believes in what he is doing. Such
conviction is the virtue I admire, so, more often than not,
I'm ready to be biased and give Seagal benefit of the doubt.
That happened even in the case of ON DEADLY GROUND, 1994
directorial debut of Seagal, film that was one of the most
despised motion pictures, not just among Steven Seagal's
works, but also in entire movie history.
Plot revolves around Forrest Taft (played by Seagal), expert
fireman who works for Aegis Oil Company, whose corrupt CEO
Jennings (Michael Caine) wants to put into operation oil rig
right in the middle of Inuit tribal land in Alaska. Taft's
friend Hugh Palmer (Richard Hamilton) discovers the evidence
that the oil rig would permanently damage Alaskan
environment, so Jennings orders his killing. Taft is to
suffer the same fate, but instead, he is rescued by Eskimo
woman named Masu (Joan Chen) who gives him shelter in her
father's village. After brief recovery, Taft returns to oil
rig in order to stop Jennings' plans.
Seagal can't act to save his life, but in the hands of even
less capable directors, his charisma and martial arts skills
are enough to overcome such obstacles. Unfortunately, with
Seagal as director there was nobody else to compensate his
obvious lack of talents. The story of ON DEADLY GROUND is
third-grade, in-your-face exercise of "political
correctness" risen to unbearable levels. Seagal's lack of
directorial skills only underlines weakness of the script
with one-dimensional characters and total lack of subtlety.
The lack of Seagal's talent is matched with the lack of
acting ability or inspiration by almost anybody else.
Michael Caine is almost laughable as vicious yet totally
un-charismatic villain, same as Joan Chen who sleepwalks
through her role. Action scenes are fine, but Seagal could
learn a couple things about editing. Of course, it would
unfair to say that film doesn't have few good sides. Alaskan
locations are good to see, Basil Poledouris made nice score,
and the bar brawl scene seems almost surrealistically
unusual. And in the end we have that (in)famous five minute
scene of Forrest Taft holding sermon about ecology,
environment, energy resources and corporate greed. Fact that
Seagal originally wanted the sermon to last fifteen minutes
shows that he still believed in what he was doing and that
he had good intention. But, the end result is still
unwatchable and we are at end only reminded of that old
saying about hell and good intentions.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Steven Seagal
Writers: Ed Horowitz and Robin O. Russin
Starring: Steven Seagal, Joan Chen, Michael Caine, John C. McGinley, R.
Lee Ermey, Billy Bob Thornton
Martial arts master Steven Seagal (not to mention director!) has built a
career out of playing an allegedly fictitious martial arts superman who
never gets hurt in fights, talks in a hushed tone, and squints at any
sign of danger.  He's also the most consistent individual in Hollywood
today, since all his movies suck.  They basically represent his
egotisitical tendencies about his art (that is, martial art).  I'm sure
the guy's good, and he seems like a nice guy on talk shows, although a
tad haughty, but these movies he makes are all the same: a guy who is
basically indestructable, is maybe wounded supposedly mortally, then
comes back with a vengeance and goes buddha on all the baddies asses
(although I kinda liked "Under Siege").  Of course, this one, as a
change, has a "message" that is drilled into our mind...of course, after
he blows up a lot of stuff and kills a bunch of people.
So why do I watch his crap?  I usually don't.  I will never, and you can
hold me to this, I will NEVER pay to see this man's movies, unless, and
only unless, he's in a supporting role (i.e. "Executive Decision") and
I'd definitely pay if he dies (i.e. "Executive Decision").  But this one
has a special place in my heart.  This doesn't mean it's good or that I
even liked it.  This was the last movie I watched with my deceased
uncle, and we had one hell of a time ripping it apart a la "Mystery
Science Theatre 3000," and this was a couple years before I had heard of
"Mystery Science Theatre 3000."
In this one, Seagal plays a worker for a mining factory set in Alaska
and run by the greased-up typical shallow villain, this time played by
an Oscar-winner to give the movie some more clout - Michael Caine.  It
seems that Caine wants to do something with his oil factory that
includes him dumping oil all over Inuit land.  Around the 20-30 minute
point, Seagal speaks up to him in what seems to be the typical speech to
all the vain entrepeneurs (what with his new "Fire Down Below," another
"message film"), and Caine has him bumped off...or does he?
Seagal is rescued by some Inuits, and falls in love with one of them,
played by Joan Chen, who CAN act, hypothetically, but, for some reason,
not here.  One of Caine's cliched henchmen (played here with a lot of
overacting by John C. McGinley) shoots the cheif of the Inuit clan, and
Chen and Seagal go on a voyage to take down the oil factory...literally,
of course.  At one point, Seagal gives a wonderfully hysterical speech
about how he doesn't have any options but blow stuff up.  He even goes
as far as to say, "I don't want to kill someone," and in the same
breath, he asks some guy where the arsenal is.
I have no problem with violence.  I'm a huge John Woo fan, but he paints
his films with suspense, skill, style, depth, characterization, and just
plain cool violence.  In the films of Seagal, the suspense mainly
consists of the baddie attacking him stupidly, and him either wounding
or killing them.  At some points, they use the cliche of the talking
villain, where the villain has the advantage, can shoot Seagal, but
begins talking by either telling him his big secret plan, or saying a
corny line, to which Seagal says something hokey back, and has had
enough time to devise of a way to do away with them, and does.  This
would be okay if there were any suspense or if it didn't take itself
seriously at all, like in the case of this summer's "Con Air."  But
Seagal is serious about his skill, and of course, his message.
I wouldn't mind if this was a message film in the way that they present
it to you with evidence.  But Seagal has no idea how to present a film
where the message is subtle, not pounded into the viewer's mind.  The
villain is totally shallow and cartoonish, thus we can't take him and
his motives seriously, and while Seagal talks about being kind to the
environment, he also goes ahead and blows up a square mile of rig, and
kills some workers who were just doing his job.  Then at the end, he
spends a good 10 minutes giving a speech, just in case you didn't get
the message from the trailers.  What Seagal doesn't realize is that no
one takes his films seriously (although maybe a couple do) and any
message he has is no only redundant, but doesn't comfortably fit in his
film, which is filled to the brim with hokey violence, crap suspense,
stupid melodrama, and characters who have about as much emotional depth
as a petri dish.
As far as Seagal and his acting, he's rather boring.  He squints, he
kills.  Period.  Nothing else.  Oh, yeah, there's corny one-liners ("I'm
gonna reach out and touch someone!").  Of course, he's the star, and
we're supposed to root for him and all, so he makes all the villains
unbelievably stupid and a bunch of jerks.  Michael Caine, who's a great
actor, is just supposed to yell and look cold.  He does it well, I
guess, but this is no "Alfie."  Of coure, no one was expecting that
caliber of performance from him.  His big henchman, John C. McGinley is
kinda boring as well, but is not horrible.  And we even get a small
performance from that god of drill sergeants on celluloid, R. Lee Ermey
(from "Full Metal Jacket") as a hired assasin squad leader who gets to
say the obligatory speech about how dangerous Seagal is, just for the
movie trailers and for Seagal's ego.  And also, look for Billy Bob
Thornton as one of Ermey's assasins.
Anyway, to conclude this all, to judge one of Seagal's movies is to
judge all of them (except for "Under Siege" and "Executive Decision,"
though the latter is not really a "Seagal movie").  They all have this
same formula, they all have the same action, same villain, same plot,
but this one has that message, which makes it more excrucitating to
watch.  I mean, if you do rent it, and I don't reccomend you do, make
sure you just skip the last 10 minutes.  But I have to put it to Seagal
for creating a film so bad, that the last film I viewed with my uncle
was a pleasurable one.
MY RATING (out of 4): * (extra star for the fun it is to watch and mock)
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
