Title
Review for Buffalo '66 (1998)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BUFFALO '66  ***  Written, directed, original story, music by Vincent
Gallo. Co-written by Alison Bagnall. Produced by Chris Hanley. Photography,
Lance Acord. Production design, Gideon Ponte. Editing, Curtiss Clayton.
Cast: Vincent Gallo, Christina Ricci, Anjelica Huston, Ben Gazzara, Kevin
Corrigan, Mickey Rourke, Rosanna Arquette, Jan-Michael Vincent. A Lions
Gate Films release. 112 minutes. Not Rated (vulgar language, strippers, but
no sex)
Vincent Gallo, born 1961 in Buffalo, N.Y., has been a painter, rock
musician, poster boy for Calvin Klein, and an actor in well over a dozen
movies, several of them European, most of them not widely seen in the USA
except perhaps for The Funeral and Palookaville (and Arizona Dream?). Most
of his roles were supporting. His latest appearances are in:  Goodbye,
Lover (by the esteemed Roland Joffe), a thriller with comedy starring
Patricia Arquette, Dermot Mulroney, Ellen DeGeneres, Mary-Louise Parker,
Don Johnson, in which Gallo's credit comes as No 10; and L.A. Without a Map
(by Finland's Aki Kaurismaki) where Gallo is the second male lead.
In some ways, Buffalo '66 is an ego-trip, but an arresting one and
excusable in someone who is seemingly as interesting as Gallo. This is his
first feature as director and almost everything else (se credits above).
He plays Billy Brown, who is released after five years in jail. A
nondescript, hirsute, dirty-haired, intense man in ill-fitting clothes, he
may look at first like someone you'd hate to meet in a dark night, but on
short acquaintance you realize that he is no true aggressor, and on longer
acquaintance you understand that he is a fellow with problems, a sad sack
whose worst enemy may well be his own self.
Billy leaves a Buffalo prison on a cold, snowy day. As he shivers, he acts
like someone who does not know what to do next, except for one crucial,
immediate aim: to empty his bladder. His several attempts to do this may
look comical, unless you've experienced them yourself. He even tries to
seek warmth and urinary relief by asking to enter the jail. Whether
invented by Gallo or unconsciously derivative, this is the first of several
references to older movies (cf. Chaplin's Modern Times) or stories (cf.
O'Henry's The Cop and the Anthem).
Billy's vain search for an unloading site culminates in a tacky tap-dancing
school where he meets tackily dressed student Layla (Christina Ricci), a
buxom petite who'll have to watch her diet as she grows up. With his
bladder still full, Billy improbably finds time to call his Ma. The call is
both funny and pathetic. Then he kidnaps an unresisting Layla, orders her
to accompany him to his parents' house, to pretend she is his adoring wife
and confirm that he, Billy, is a CIA operative who, for reasons of secrecy,
has remained incommunicado for the last five years!
By now, absurdism, comedy and sadness have taken over.Their amalgam works
very well.
The Browns make up an abysmally dysfunctional trio. The parents obviously
couldn't care less about their son. Dad's (Ben Gazzara) sullenness and
flashes of paranoid ire show perhaps where the manic Billy got his genes.
Mother (Angelica Huston) vague and empty-headed, has a sickly passion for
the Buffalo Bills team. She spends all of her time glued to the TV,
watching re-runs of games. She still resents Bill for her having missed the
only game in her life, the 1966 Superbowl, because the child chose to be
born on the day.
Bill's motivation for visiting parents he doesn't love or even like, is not
explained. We can guess, however, that he is trying to come to terms with
his past and that he has a futile, unrealistic hope of belatedly gaining a
family that he never had. Or to show them that he has become someone. The
long section in that tacky home (a copy of the last place where Gallo
himself lived with his parents) is a splendidly inventive buffet of
grunginess,  somberness, comedy and ultimate hopelessness.
While neither Billy or his folks can even begin to relate with each other,
Layla takes her play-acting to heart. The film tells us nothing about her,
except for what we see here and now. It says nothing about her past, her
present, her character, her background, her family. Yet the subtext is
there: Layla dreams of better things and of love. The unreluctant kidnapee
finds herself inventing stories about her "husband," romanticizing him,
charming the parents, and finally announcing that she is pregnant, to the
joy of Pop and Mom who lavish maudlin affection on her while ignoring Billy.
The quartet of actors is excellent. Note that Ben Gazzara was part of the
repertory troupe of the late John Cassavetes, whose style had quite a bit
in common with Buffalo 66's. (I absolutely must plug here Saint Jack
(1979), a masterful, way underrated film by Peter Bogdanovich, with a
terrific Gazzara as a pimp in South-East Asia).
Having failed to get a family, Billy turns his attention to revenge on the
Buffalo place-kicker who, he thinks, had sold out a crucial game, cost
Billy $10,000 and eventually sent him to jail.  Several episodes take place
after this point. They deal with the relationship of Billy and Layla who
gradually falls in love with him; encounters at a Denny's; the slow
rounding up of Billy's psychic portrait; the unorthodox sharing of a shabby
room in what we might call a Motel 3;  a reluctantly happy finale.
Buffalo 66 combines hyper-realism with imagined points of view, wishful
thinking and grim facts, the present  tense with the past. I can find
nothing about Gallo's educational experiences, but watching his movie, I
was increasingly certain that his foreign films, including three with
French director Claire Denis, directly or indirectly gave him European
perspectives which he artfully (instinctively perhaps, but not artsily)
blended with his background in American movies. Repeatedly I was reminded
of several techniques used by the French New Wave.
He shot with reversal film, the kind used in home movies. Here it results
in saturated colors that , among others, capture with power the lonely day
or night in sights of desolate areas within an industrial city. In
flashbacks, somewhat a la Godard or Truffaut, Gallo uses effectively
squarish picture-within-picture inserts which focus the eye while stressing
drama or humor.
A scene in which Layla, out of a blue sky, tap-dances amateurishly, recalls
the equally amateurish. would-be seductive dance of Anna Karina in Godard's
My Life to Live. Also very Godardian are the repeated images of Billy and
Layla taking their pictures inside an I.D. photo booth, the constant
telephoning (see Breathless) and more. There are New Wave-ish dialogues,
abrupt transitions, non-sequiturs and more, but neither cloned nor
copy-catted.
With much of it based on Gallo's own unhappy childhood, the film plays as a
work of revenge on parents by a loser, not so much a born loser but a made
loser. This goes a long way toward explaining its caricatural aspects,
grotesque characters, over-the-top acting, all exaggerations which in
theory could have been liabilities, but in fact make the movie memorable.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Billy Brown is an irritating character who suffers from diarrhea
of the mouth.  Just released from prison, he kidnaps himself a girl to
take home to his parents as his trophy wife.  "If you make me look bad,
I swear to God, I'll never talk to you again," he threatens her.
Regretfully, he doesn't follow through.
     Vincent Gallo, who has appeared in numerous indie films, including
THE FUNERAL and PALOOKAVILLE, directs for the first time in BUFFALO 66.
Gallo also composed the music, co-wrote the script, and stars as Billy,
the story's pitiful loser.
     Starting as a black comedy and eventually dissolving into tragedy,
the movie features well-known actors in unbelievable and unlikable
roles.  Only Christina Ricci as Layla, his fake wife, is a credible and
interesting character.
     Layla, with her sheet-white skin and dressed in a powder-blue
miniskirt with matching stockings, low-cut dress, sequined tap shoes,
shows class in every one of her scenes.  Even when she isn't talking,
her eyes speak volumes.
     Billy, on the other hand, has the wasted look of a skid-row
druggie.  His week-old beard and greasy hair top off his emaciated
look.  His bright red boots anchor his otherwise ragged outfit.
     Billy's parents are cliches.  His dad, played by Ben Gazzara,
wants to keep hugging his sexy new daughter-in-law, when he isn't
lip-synching some old songs for her.
     His mom, played by a hard to recognize Anjelica Huston, is still
mad at Billy.  It seems that the only Buffalo Bills's football game
that she ever missed was because of his birth, and they lost that game.
When he visits, she watches the reruns on television rather than talk
to him.  With remote control firmly in hand, she ignores him.
(Although I rarely watch football, I found myself watching the game as
a way to kill time during the long, contrived family discussions and
staring sessions.)
     Gallo loves staging scenes in ways that reek of too much attempted
cuteness.  In a badly scripted scene at the kitchen table, the family
engages in small talk while the stiffly composed image has them stuck
on the screen like a two-dimensional kid's cartoon.  He lets scenes go
on forever as when Billy and Layla take an enormous number of photos at
a cheap photo booth.
     Typical of the ridiculousness of the plot is the source of the
father's anger at the dinner table.  He screams at the son because the
son's dinner knife is pointing in the father's direction.
     Although the characters' affectations can be maddeningly annoying,
some are so ridiculous as to be campy fun.  At the top of this list is
Christina Ricci's tap dance number.  Looking like something straight
out of a school's hokey talent show, she dances away under a spotlight
at Billy's favorite place - a bowling alley.
     BUFFALO 66 runs 1:50.  It is not rated but would be an R for
profanity, violence and nudity and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Vincent Gallo. Written by Gallo & Alison Bagnall. Running
time: 110 minutes. Rated R (for language, strong violent images and
scenes involving nudity).
What is Buffalo '66 supposed to be anyway? A romantic comedy? A troubled
family presentation? The 90s answer to Taxi Driver? Half the fun of this
movie is trying to figure it out for yourself.
Buffalo '66 is about Billy Brown (Vincent Gallo) who has been imprisoned
for 5 years and is finally let out. He has been lying to his parents
(Anjelica Huston, Ben Gazzara) saying that he was working for the
government and is married. He is asked by his parents to come over along
with his wife. He
thinks he has to our his parents will suspect that he is lying. He
kidnaps a twenty something girl named Layla (Christian Ricci) and uses
her as a fill in.
To relieve any more of the plot (much like Pulp Fiction) would be to
spoil the amazing second half. I'm sorry I can't help you out but you
just have to see the movie.
The film was no doubt constructed on a very small budget. It was a big
hit at the film festivals and it's easy to wonder why. It is a touching
and yet tough as nails representation of the life of a underprivileged
man with a horrible family that cares more about football games then
about their son.
Vincent Gallo wrote, directed, starred, and constructed the excellent
soundtrack to this pet project. He shows greatness that hasn't been seen
since Quentin Tarantino debuted with Reservoir Dogs. Every scene is
fantastic in the storytelling. The images burn into your mind and stay
there forever. The story may sound simple but I didn't say a lot of it.
I'm not the spoiling type.
All members of the cast need to be congratulated on this project. Gallo
explodes into the film world with a beautiful script and acting talent.
Huston and Gazzara are perfectly cast as the two parents who are about
as a bad as they can get. Ricci is also very good as the girl who comes
to love Brown. She is quickly becoming one of the best actresses around.
It's a pity that Buffalo '66 wasn't given a wider release in it's
theatrical run. It would have locked into viewers like the Tarantino
films or like Trainspotting did. Now that the film is out on video it
gives a much easier opportunity for regular film fans to check out this
great movie. Buffalo '66 is easily one of the best movies of 1998 and
should be seen.

Author
James Sanford
"Buffalo '66," a love song to director-star Vincent Gallo by screenwriter
Vincent Gallo (orchestrated, coincidentally, to the strains of music by
Vincent Gallo), is the type of tripe that gives vanity productions a bad
name.
 In fact, there's ample evidence to indicate that "Buffalo" may not actually
have been scripted at all; most of its ambling, formless content looks and
sounds suspiciously like failed improvisation, with a surplus of uneasy
dialogue, wildly shifting attitudes and, most tellingly, the slightly queasy
looks actors like Christina Ricci and Anjelica Huston exchange as they
realize their scenes aren't working. It's some sort of a credit to Gallo
that he managed to rope in names of Ricci and Huston's caliber in the first
place, and how he managed to pull that off must be considerably more
intriguing than "Buffalo '66" itself.
 If Gallo's gaunt, angular face looks familiar, it's probably from his
appearances in the much-condemned "heroin chic" ads Calvin Klein ran a
couple of years ago. As a supporting actor in edgy little films like Abel
Ferrara's "The Funeral," Gallo has proven his meddle as a credible low-life.
But he's not exactly brimming with charisma, a formidable handicap when you
cast yourself as the star of your own movie.
 Luckily, Ricci has an excess of the magnetism Gallo lacks. She looks
ridiculous throughout "Buffalo '66," sporting a brand of sky-blue eyeshadow
that should have been discontinued after 1985, wearing a half-pound of gooey
lip gloss and dressed in what looks like a cheap nightgown underneath a
cardigan sweater. But so determined is Ricci to get inside the mind of her
character Layla, a young woman so desperate for any kind of affection she
willingly goes along with being kidnapped by ex-con Billy (Gallo), no one
will laugh at her appearance. She's generally the only thing on the screen
worth watching.
 Snatched out of tap dancing school and forced to masquerade as Billy's
wife, Layla quickly gets with the program, perhaps sensing this could be
some off-the-wall opportunity to finally find the warmth she's looking for.
She proceeds to charm Billy's parents, and later in a cut-rate motel room
she tries desperately to work her magic on Billy. The result is one of the
most awkwardly played love scenes since John Travolta and Lily Tomlin
struggled to look hot for one another in the classic howler "Moment By
Moment."
 As Billy's football-crazy mom, Huston tries her best to wring comedy from
Gallo's arid writing, but the part will only serve to remind viewers how
much better Frances McDormand played a similar fanatic in director John
Sayles' "Lone Star." Ben Gazzara, stuck playing Billy's closet lech of a
dad, manages to keep his dignity, which is more than can be said for Rosanna
Arquette, who turns up as a goofball former classmate.
 As a filmmaker, Gallo has a certain unpolished charm, and the flat lighting
and grainy look of the picture suit the subject matter. The dropping in of
little scenes within scenes to illustrate memories is also clever, although
director Peter Greenaway used the technique to better advantage in "The
Pillow Book."
 It's Gallo's unfunny, uninspired script that makes "Buffalo '66" a chore to
sit through. Lines are said over and over again, ad nauseum: In one
excruiating sequence with Layla and Billy in a photo booth, the phrase "span
time" must be used at least 20 times. Martin Scorsese can get away with this
kind of repetition; Gallo cannot.
 Supposedly, "Buffalo '66" was inspired by Gallo's poisoned relationship
with his chilly parents, and perhaps Gallo is simply the latest semi-celeb
to jump on the "I had a lousy childhood, so I'm entitled to be an obnoxious
adult" bandwagon initially launched by Roseanne and recently hijacked by
Bill Clinton. The best response to that kind of thinking comes from another,
far superior, Christina Ricci movie "The Opposite of Sex": "Welcome to the
planet Maturia!" one character tells another. "We have much to teach you."
James Sanford

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Buffalo '66" is the type of film that serves as a reminder of those small,
lonely towns throughout America where you don't see or hear much, and the only
excitement to be found is maybe at a third-rate bowling alley or a pool table
at some tavern on a squalid street corner. In other words, a film about the
kind of places you know exist, but would never think of visiting - a place not
unlike Buffalo. Vincent Gallo's directorial debut "Buffalo '66" focuses greatly
on the squalid nature of such towns. 
The scrawny Gallo stars as Billy Brown, a young man released from prison after
six years for a crime he didn't commit. And what's the first thing Billy does
after exiting the prison's front gate? He asks the guard if he can use the
bathroom. This is something Billy tries to do for the first fifteen minutes of
the film, but he can't seem to find one. Finally, he relieves himself at a
tap-dance studio where he abruptly kidnaps a blonde, Lolita-like teenage
student named Layla (Christina Ricci), and threatens her with words like "Don't
wash the front windshield of the car like that!" 
Billy's motive for kidnapping Layla is to make her pretend she is his wife so
he can present her to his parents as a sign of maturity and responsibility. She
calmly agrees, but wonders if his parents will cook meat since she's a
vegetarian. When they arrive at his parents' house, they are greeted with
indifference and the cheerless dinner scene, an absolute riot to watch, is
beset by past humiliations, particularly when Billy is reminded that as a kid
he was allergic to chocolate doughnuts though his mother didn't care. 
"Buffalo '66" captures the seediness and icy coldness of Buffalo better than
any other film could, but it's deficient in the screenwriting department. Gallo
does a marvelous job of developing the hirsute antihero Billy, who is really
just a lost soul in search of something. I also liked the way he wrote and shot
the dinner table scenes, emphasizing the pain and dysfunction between Billy and
his parents by composing a wide spatial distance in the reverse angle shots
(the parents are superbly played by Ben Gazzara and Anjelica Huston). But the
film suffers by not divulging much information about Layla - who is this girl?
Is she a sexpot, a hooker, a forlorn dance student, an angel, or none of the
above? The cherub-like Ricci plays her with great sex appeal and perfect comic
timing, but she is much too enigmatic a character for my tastes - a nobody who
is still a nobody by the end. And the feel-good ending negates most of what
preceded it. 
Still, in an era of bland blockbuster phenomenons and clever post-modernist
horror flicks, "Buffalo '66" is surely different and it has an edge. It betrays
its own edginess and sense of anxiety, but it holds your interest right from
the opening black-and-white title credits to Gallo's imposing presence. He has
one of the more hauntingly expressive faces I've seen in a long time, and it
suggests anything but peace. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Vincent Gallo. Written by Gallo & Alison Bagnall. Running
time: 110 minutes. Rated R (for language, strong violent images and
scenes involving nudity).
What is Buffalo '66 supposed to be anyway? A romantic comedy? A troubled
family presentation? The 90s answer to Taxi Driver? Half the fun of this
movie is trying to figure it out for yourself.
Buffalo '66 is about Billy Brown (Vincent Gallo) who has been imprisoned
for 5 years and is finally let out. He has been lying to his parents
(Anjelica Huston, Ben Gazzara) saying that he was working for the
government and is married. He is asked by his parents to come over along
with his wife. He
thinks he has to our his parents will suspect that he is lying. He
kidnaps a twenty something girl named Layla (Christian Ricci) and uses
her as a fill in.
To relieve any more of the plot (much like Pulp Fiction) would be to
spoil the amazing second half. I'm sorry I can't help you out but you
just have to see the movie.
The film was no doubt constructed on a very small budget. It was a big
hit at the film festivals and it's easy to wonder why. It is a touching
and yet tough as nails representation of the life of a underprivileged
man with a horrible family that cares more about football games then
about their son.
Vincent Gallo wrote, directed, starred, and constructed the excellent
soundtrack to this pet project. He shows greatness that hasn't been seen
since Quentin Tarantino debuted with Reservoir Dogs. Every scene is
fantastic in the storytelling. The images burn into your mind and stay
there forever. The
story may sound simple but I didn't say a lot of it. I'm not the
spoiling type.
All members of the cast need to be congratulated on this project. Gallo
explodes into the film world with a beautiful script and acting talent.
Huston and Gazzara are perfectly cast as the two parents who are about
as a bad as they can get. Ricci is also very good as the girl who comes
to love Brown.
She is quickly becoming one of the best actresses around.
It's a pity that Buffalo '66 wasn't given a wider release in it's
theatrical run. It would have locked into viewers like the Tarantino
films or like Trainspotting did. Now that the film is out on video it
gives a much easier opportunity for regular film fans to check out this
great movie. Buffalo '66 is easily one of the best movies of 1998 and
should be seen.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Actor, part-time Calvin Klein model and all-around greazy-looking guy
Vincent Gallo takes his first shot at directing, in this
semi-autobiographical movie, which he also wrote and provided the original
music. Christina Ricci, best remembered as the character of Tuesday from the
ADAMS FAMILY films, grows up, sloshes on some make-up and a frilly
cleavage-friendly tap-dancing dress, and comes into her own in this hybrid
comedy/drama. Let's all hope that Gallo doesn't call me up and tell me off
because of that "greazy-looking guy" comment now....hehehe.
PLOT:
Frenetic con man gets out of jail and returns home to see his parents.
Having invented an existence without prison and a new wife to his folks, the
man kidnaps a girl to play his wife for his one visit home.
CRITIQUE:
One of the few real independent movies to come out in 1998, this film
combines an excellent troupe of actors, a quirky, humorous and sometimes
serious script, with an amazing new set of visual techniques purposely
orchestrated by the man behind all of the magic, Vincent Gallo. This film's
style blends elements from many an independent director's early works, like
Tom DeCillo's JOHNNY SUEDE (8/10), Martin Scorsese's MEAN STREETS (7/10),
David Lynch's BLUE VELVET (8.5/10) and Gus Van Sant's MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO
(7.5/10). Gallo also wrote a pretty funny screenplay filled with interesting
characters, idiosyncrasies galore, and a decent romance between two very odd
lead characters.
Christina Ricci plays an excellent victim in this movie, and rises to every
occasion to shine whenever her character takes center or back stage. She
comes across as a very sexy, mature and interesting actress, primed to take
off in her career. I haven't seen much of Gallo on film, but he most
certainly does exude a hunk o' charisma despite his character's utter
despicability, and convinces as the double, and triple-talking, prick. One
particularly peculiar scene in the photo booth will have the words "spanning
time" resonating in your head for years to come. Trust me, this guy's nuts
and hilarious. The parents as played by Ben Gazzara and an unrecognizable
Anjelica Huston also come through in spades, and the conclusion in the strip
joint is an eye-full to beware. An overall unique style, with a unique
story, a unique actor and a great supporting cast, and the great Christina
Ricci.
Mind you, if you don't like movies that are different from the norm, don't
see this film. If you enjoy a little paprika in your dinner every now and
again, taste this original spice and watch the low-class dirt from the movie
ooze right down into your gut. Note: Alongside Tony Kaye's AMERICAN HISTORY
X (8/10), this film is one of the most visually stunning movies of the year.
Ironically, both directors are extremely vocal in their displeasure of
anyone who opposes their views.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actors Vincent Gallo and Kevin Corrigan both had parts in the 1990 classic
Martin Scorsese mob film, GOODFELLAS (9/10). Gallo played a member of Harry
70s crew, while Kevin played Ray Liotta's younger brother, Michael Hill.
Vincent Gallo was actually born in Buffalo, NY. His real father's voice,
Vincent Gallo Sr., is the actual voice that you hear during Ben Gazzara's
"serenade" of Christina Ricci.
Gallo has been known to shoot off his mouth in real-life, and even had
conflicts with Anjelica Huston and Christina Ricci on the set of this movie.
Susan Sarandon no longer speaks to him because he called her "an old hag."
He called Leonardo DiCaprio "a good-looking girl" and director James Cameron
"a pig." He turned down roles in both RESERVOIR DOGS (9/10) and BOOGIE
NIGHTS (7.5/10). He claims not to drink, smoke or do drugs, and portrays
himself as a rather right-wing Republican. He also has a personal collection
of over 5,700 videotapes. "Very ordinary, corny movies are ones that I seem
to like the most."
Gallo first wrote the screenplay for the film in 1989, and was satisfied
with a final draft completed with Alison Bagnall in 1996. He apparently
cannot spell or use a typewriter. The film cost $1.5-million to make, and
was shot entirely in Buffalo, NY. He's had 15 one-man shows of his artwork,
and an early Super 8 film of his appears briefly in the movie BASQUAIT (as
does Vincent himself). He has also played in several bands including The
Plastics, Gray (with the real-life Basquiat), Bohack and Bunny.
Christina Ricci was turned down for the role of Claudia in INTERVIEW WITH
THE VAMPIRE (8/10), as well as roles in JURASSIC PARK (7.5/10) and LITTLE
WOMEN.
Review Date:  February 13, 1999
Director: Vincent Gallo
Writers:   Vincent Gallo and Allison Bagnall
Producer:  Chris Hanley
Actors:   Vincent Gallo as Billy Brown, Christina Ricci as Layla, Ben
Gazzara as Jimmy Brown, Anjelica Huston as Janet Brown
Genre:   Comedy
Year of Release:  1998

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Vincent Gallo
 Writer: Vincent Gallo, Alison Bagnall
 Cast: Vincent Gallo, Christina Ricci, Anjelica Huston, Ben
Gazzara, Kevin Corrigan, Mickey Rourke, Rosanna Arquette,
Jan-Michael Vincent
   If you can't get the love you want, then want the love you
get.  This appears to be the central purport of Vincent Gallo's
"Buffalo 66," a quirky, autobiographical tale of the writer-
director's younger days in the cold and snowy town of Buffalo,
New York.  Gallo is unashamedly on an ego trip with this one,
having scripted the story, helmed the production, and even
composed the music (he is a former rock musician).  Billy
Brown (Vincent Gallo), named for the Buffalo Bills football
team by his mother, Janet (Anjelica Huston)--who is a
devoted fan even to the point of obsession--seeks to win the
affection of his parents.  We in the audience see that this
quest is a lost cause and we understand how its pursuit has
affected Billy's life so greatly, but Billy appears clueless.  His
off-putting mannerisms--his tough-guy stance, his
unapproachability, even his fear of being touched by a pretty
girl--are all recognizable defenses for the young man's
insecurity.  But Billy has the luck to meet a delightful young
woman, one who falls in love with him in a single day, making
the entire movie appear to be a typical male fantasy.  
   Nor does Gallo seem to mind that his picture will be treated
as a fabrication.  Calling the production a fable rather than
one which should be taken literally, Gallo has filmed his
sequences with reversal stock, giving Buffalo the eerie look of
a decaying city half buried in snow highlighted by a seedy
motel, a sleazy strip joint owned by a former athlete now
going to pot, and a tap-dance class populated by seemingly
despairing women following the rhythms of a chirpy instructor. 
Photographer Lance Acord underscores the cheerlessness by
filming with a harsh, blue background, frequently jump-cutting
to keep the momentum and resorting to an occasional scene-
within-scene collage as the principal figure conjures up his
past.  
   The story opens as Billy is released from prison, having
served five years for a crime he did not commit.  Having told
his parents that he was actually engaged in a long-time,
secret project for the government, he calls to tell them that
he's on his way home.  In a final pitch to impress them, he
kidnaps a girl, Layla (Christina Ricci) from a dance class and
forces her to accompany him to his parents' home and to play
the role of his wife.  Rather than become terrified, Layla
enjoys the escapade with its opportunity to play the actress,
and charms her "mother-in-law" Janet and Janet's husband
Jimmy (Ben Gazzara) more than their own son had ever been
able to do.  
   We learn the reason the forced confession that sent Billy to
the pen and follow him as he relates to his slow-minded friend
Goon (Kevin Corrigan), to the manager of his favorite bowling
alley, Sonny (Jan-Michael Vincent), and to a woman on whom
he one had a crush, Wendy (Rosanna Arquette).  
   The central scene, a fairly original take on the age-old
theme of dysfunctional family, accommodates the film's lively
and idiosyncratic sense of humor.  As Billy sits at the table
watching his captive "girl friend" Layla tells lies to his parents,
prevarications designed to make him look good in front of his
unappreciative family, dad tries to conceal his hostility with
silence while mom spends more time relating to her TV set
which is showing a game with her favorite team.
   If this movie can overcome a serious implausibility factor, it
would rank as a solid contribution to the low budget family of
films which have been showcased at the Sundance Festival. 
Feminists may be repelled by the implication that women are
just looking to be taken by force.  Billy has enough of a chip
on his soldier to alert any normal person to stay away, and is
able to turn his life around by gaining the instant love of his
kidnap victim.  An unkempt, unshaven guy who is repelled by
the touch of another human being, he is far from  the type
who can attract the affection of Layla, even given the reality
that the girl is as lonely as he. (Why this charming creature
with a kewpie-doll appearance would lack boy friends is
likewise unexplained, nor are we privy to anything in her
background save for her involvement in a tapdance class.) 
Christina Ricci delivers here and is a performer to watch. 
Having turned in roles in "The Addams Family" and "Addams
Family Values" and "The Ice Storm," she is soon to appear in
"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas" while Gallo, known to some
for his part in Calvin Klein commercials, should be able to
parlay his ego into solid movie positions in the future. 
"Buffalo 66" features a few scenes that might have come out
of a film school student's imagination--particularly one in
which Billy shoots a former pro football player in the head--but
compels attention by the sheer chutzpa of its telling.  Rated
R.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Scott Renshaw
     If you've ever seen or read an interview with Vincent Gallo, it's
probably obvious why he decided to make his own movie:  other people seem
to irritate him to distraction.  The man who called Leonardo DiCaprio a
"good-looking girl" and referred to talent agents as "a bunch of creepy
crawlers" isn't exactly playing the mutual glad-handing game that leads to
a mainstream film career.  So rather than make a film with all the folks
he holds in such contempt, Gallo decided to do it all himself.  Already a
successful painter, musician and actor, Gallo decided to add a few new
hyphens with BUFFALO '66:  director, screenwriter, film score composer,
costume designer.  Wearing that many hats should qualify him as some sort
of rack.
     Fortunately, Gallo has the head and the talent to pull it off for the
most part.  A visually provocative if occasionally under-developed
character study, BUFFALO '66 tells the story of Billy Brown (Gallo), a
lifetime loser from Buffalo, NY.  Billy has just completed a five-year
prison stretch for a crime he didn't commit, forced to take a fall for his
bookie (Mickey Rourke) when he can't pay off a losing bet on the 1990
Bills-New York Giants Super Bowl.  Upon his return to the outside world,
two pieces of business drive Billy.  First, he needs to convince his
parents that he has been on a secret government assignment all this time,
as well as happily married.  To the latter end he kidnaps a dancer named
Layla (Christina Ricci), and forces her to pose as he bride.  His second
goal is killing the man he holds responsible for his incarceration:  Scott
Wood, the Bills placekicker whose missed last-second field goal cost the
team the game, and Billy five years of freedom.
     The premise sounds like the set-up for farce or black comedy, but
BUFFALO '66 is actually a sharply-observed character study.  Gallo's Billy
is a portrait in emotional immaturity, his child-like name indicative of
his inability to act like an adult.  The kidnapping of Layla is prompted
by his desperate need for the approval of his disinterested parents
(well-played by Anjelica Huston and Ben Gazzara); his mocking relationship
with is best friend (Kevin Corrigan) is like the friendship of two
8-year-olds.  Most significantly, his reactions to Layla betray an
8-year-old's view of girls.  His idea of a romantic relationship is bereft
of affection; when the pair sit down in an automatic photo booth to take a
picture, Billy cringes at Layla's touch as though she has cooties,
insisting on a solemn representation of a love "spanning time."
     Gallo is superb in front of the camera, but he's just as impressive
behind it.  Typically, actors-turned-directors point their camera at the
actors and let them do their thing.  There's nothing typical about Gallo,
however.  His direction tends towards the showy, but the show always
reaches for a specific emotion.  A spinning dining room table conversation
involving the fragmented family of Billy, Layla and his parents keeps
shifting perspective, never showing all four characters in the same shot
at the same time.  Later, Billy's father jumps into the spotlight
(literally) as he shows off his shattered dreams of being a crooner.
Gallo's boldest decision depicts a violent scene in a series of still-life
tableaux, freeze-framed blood spilling through the air like something in a
horrific wax museum.  With the instincts of a visual artist, Gallo makes
BUFFALO '66 undeniably visual.
     It's only as a screenwriter that Gallo comes up wanting.  As complex
and well-developed as Billy may be, Layla is that sketchy.  The talented
Ricci tries to invest some real humanity in the character, but too often
she's little more than a powder blue baby-doll fantasy.  Her character
seems to exist for one reason only:  because Billy will need the Love of a
Good Woman to redeem him.  That choice only makes sense if BUFFALO '66 is
an elaborate surrealist fable, which would negate much of the compelling
pathos in Billy's character.  Still, it's hard not to notice how much more
Gallo does right with BUFFALO '66.  He may have stretched his diverse
talents thin, but he proved he could do it his way. Lucky thing for Gallo,
since that appears to be the only way he wants to do it.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Buffalo 혩66 is a very rarely known movie that stars Vincent Gallo and Christina
Ricci.  Gallo plays a very troubled man, who was sent to jail for gambling. 
Once out of jail, he must visit his parents, who he told he was married.  The
truth is he isn't married.  To try to impress them, he kidnaps a girl
(Christina Ricci) from a tap dancing class to act as his wife.  The film is
very cheaply made, and it shows it throughout a lot of the movie, but you don't
need money to make a good film.  Buffalo 혩66 doesn't always stay with the
realistic concept, and sometimes goes through outrageous events.
Gallo's parents, played by Angelica Huston and Ben Gazarra, are two very
strange individuals.  The mother plays a football fanatic and the father plays
a quiet man with odd habits.  Gallo and Ricci arrive at his parent's house, and
some extremely funny scenes take place within the house.  Ricci's performance
during the scene at Gallo's parent's home are very well done.  There is
constantly humor involved in the interesting dinner table scenes.  The way the
movie was filmed in this particular part of the movie were interesting and
creative.  They seemed very mediocre, but they worked out just fine.
Gallo's character is developed very well.  The impression that he is very
depressed and confused is very clear.  Gallo gives a performance that makes you
believe what the character is going through.  His character goes through many,
many problems, just like many people in real life.  This character seemed very
realistic to me.  Ricci's character is funny and different.  She doesn't care
much that she has been kidnaped, in fact, she falls in love the man who
kidnaped her!  Ricci is a very wonderful actress and she is starting to get the
recognition that she deserves.
Buffalo 혩66 isn't all laughs though.  Many scenes are very dramatic and
depressing.  Gallo's character was so realistic, he was extremely disturbing. 
Some scenes are supposed to come off as funny, but they actually seemed sad and
real to life.  The film sometimes drags along, not giving much material.  I
really would have liked to see Gallo's parents a lot more, and I would have
liked to see the characters developed more.  Overall, Buffalo 혩66 isn't as good
as some people put it up to be.
The Bottom Line- A few hysterical scenes save this film from sinking to the
bottom.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Vincent Gallo
Writers: Vincent Gallo and Alison Bagnall (story by Gallo)
Starring: Vincent Gallo, Christina Ricci, Angelica Huston, Ben Gazzara,
Kevin Corrigan, Mickey Rourke, Rosanna Arquette, Jan-Michael Vincent
For some odd reason, many filmmakers these days are stearing away from
making what are commonly referred to as the "self-indulgent" films.  The
personal films of the 70s, where directors explored their own insecurities,
fears, hang-ups, et. al. has all but disappeared, even from the independent
and art house films, where they used to flourish.  So when some director
steps forth, who's not Woody Allen, and makes a film that's, well,
self-indulgent, we all gasp at it, and some of us even go ahead and
criticize it for being such a way.  Not me, though.
"Buffalo '66" is a very self-indulgent film.  It's director and co-writer,
Vincent Gallo, has crafted a film that deals with his own hang-ups, and is
done in an extremely personal way, as if we're living inside the mind of
Gallo and being brought his own little insecurities and hang-ups without
any filtration.  We see scenes that go on for what seems like eternity.  We
take little side-steps and visit places that have nothing to do with the
story, and occasionally a moment will pop up when something bizarre will
happen and after awhile just stop.  At one point, the lights dim and the
entire film comes to a screeching hault so that one character can do a tap
dance, as if it were straight out of a Marx Brothers movie where Harpo used
to play his harp for no reason whatsoever.  Why did he put this in?  Don't
ask me.  But I kinda liked it.
As it's self-indulgent, "Buffalo '66" has a very improvisational feel to
it.  It's as if Gallo came up with an idea and then began to just stick
with the first thoughts that came into his head.  Gallo stars in the film
as a man named Billy Brown, and when we first meet him, he's being released
from a multi-year prison sentence.  We wait with him a bit as he lays down
on a bench, and frames are pasted on top of the surface frame, and we see
glimpses of his prison life.  He then gets up and asks if he can use the
bathroom in the prison, but is coldly turned away.  So goes the odyssey of
finding a bathroom in Buffalo, New York.
Yes, the film picks up.  It even adopts what could be called "a high
concept" concept: Billy stumbled into a tap dancing place, and suddenly
kidnaps a blond woman who's tapping there, Layla (Christina Ricci, who's
battling Parker Posey for the title of "Queen of Indies" these days), and
forces her to act as his wife when he goes home to meet his surburban
parents, who have no clue he's been in prison at all.  Unbelievably enough,
she goes along with it, and as Billy's mom and dad (Angelica Huston and Ben
Gazzara) have soon welcomed her into the family that never really accepted
Billy.
But the film doesn't stop here, and we begin to slowly and sporadically
learn a lot about Billy's past via unannounced flashbacks that first appear
as superimposed scenes then take up the rest of the frame.  We learn that
Billy had a horrific childhood, that his mother was too obsessed with the
Buffalo Bills to really care about him, and that his dad has a terrible
short temper.  In one frightening flashback, we see Billy's dad kill his
puppy for peeing on the rug one too many times, and in one darkly comic
flashback, we see his mother feed him chocolate when she should damn well
know that he's allergic to it.
We also discover that Billy made a moronic bet on the Bills, and that his
punishment was to go to prison for someone else at the request of his
Bookie (Mickey Rourke, in a nice cameo).  We also see that the film may
result in a violent finale, one that it plays with dangerously, and it
seems that the film, in the end, can go in two different directions, both
which are contrived, but one that's at least satisfying.
What Gallo's film does that many self-indulgent films don't do is openly
deal with it, and in the end, reach a level of contrivance that saves it
from ultimately being whiny.  The point, it seems, that Gallo is making
here is that sometimes, we're so self-absorbed, so worrying about our
little insecurities, such as what will our parents think of us, or how will
I get my dignity back, that we often to realize that happiness is right at
our fingertips.  The film's true masterstroke is that character of Layla,
who is hardly a realistic person but is more a fantasy for Billy.  Ricci
spends the majority of the movie with an expression of understanding and
un-patronizing sympathy, and when she begins to become enthusiastic about
helping Gallo, we only gradually notice that she's actually falling in love
with him, for whatever reason it may be.
For Gallo, this is not so much a brilliantly-tuned autobiographical study,
which is what is many critics' receptions, but really a very excellent
debut, not to mention a very mature debut.  He has all the flair of an
original director, one which I'd be interested in following because he
never lets anything get in the way of what he wants to do.  He wants to
have a scene where Layla tap dances in a bowling alley?  Why not, let's put
it in there.  He wants to spend five minutes doing an unbroken scene in a
photo booth between Billy and Layla?  What the hell, run with it.  And he
wants to interupt scenes with flashbacks that explain what's going on when
the audience should know it?  Definitely.
I expect there will be more better things from Gallo in the future.  He's
built a tiny career out of working with really experimental and weird
directors, everyone from Abel Ferrara to freaking Kiefer Sutherland, and
now he joins their ranks with a debut that is a little shaky, but
nevertheless extremely engrossing, saddening, and even smarter than the
works of many of the directors he's worked with.  And the reason for this
is that he makes it his own.  He puts his personal stamp on it, and doesn't
care what anyone else will think when he goes totally unconventional on us.
 And the best thing is that he's distanced himself from his film, and made
this a wonderful self-criticism that never becomes annoying or whiny. 
How's that for a concept?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Matt Williams
Buffalo 66 is a quirky independent comedy that's heavy on the quirky and
independent, and light on the comedy.  Vincent Gallo's directoral debut,
the film is a meandering mess that almost comes together at the end.
Billy Brown (Gallo) has just got out of prison after serving time for a
crime (that he says) he didn't commit.  He has a few simple goals:  find
a bathroom, visit his folks (Anjelica Huston and Ben Gazzara), and kill
the one man he believes was responsible for ruining his life.
However, none of those three goals are as easy as they at first
seem...particularly his parental visit.  You see, he never told them he
had been in prison.  Instead, they believe he is a successful
businessman with a beautiful young wife.
To continue the deception, he enlists the help of Layla (Christina
Ricci), a young student he kidnaps from a tap dancing studio.  At first
she is an unwilling accomplice, but she soon warms to Billy, and, much
to his dismay, starts taking charge of the situation.
Billy Brown isn't a very likable character, and he's not interesting
enough to carry the film along with that flaw. Layla is a tad more
sympathetic, but she remains a complete question mark throughout the
movie.  Why is she desperate enough for love that she clings to her
kidnapper?  We never learn.
Billy's parents are amusing when they are first introduced, but they
quickly outlast their welcome.  Unfortunately, Buffalo 66 milks this gag
for much more than it's worth.  As a result, we get to spend extended
time with these one-note characters, and the film suffers almost as much
as the audience.
There are a couple of nearly-redemptive scenes toward the very end. We
start to get a sense of what the film might have been with a little
tighter direction by star Vincent Gallo.  Alas, it is too little, too
late.
With its off-key characters, unusual shooting styles and dialogue-heavy
script, Buffalo 66 seems like the quintessential "indie film".
Unfortunately, it's the type of indie film which gives "indie films" a
bad name:  style-heavy, pointless and just a tad pretentious.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 26 June 1998 with Laura, Michele, and Rob at the Angelika.
The tagline for *Buffalo '66* says, "Billy Brown just got out of jail. Now
he's going to serve some real time. He's going home." This is pretty
accurate. But along the way he kidnaps Layla (Christina Ricci) along the
way to pose as his wife. Billy (Vincent Gallo) has never let his parents
know that he was in jail for seven years. He's masqueraded as on-the-go
guy with a top secret job, and it's interesting to see why. When we do
meet his parents, they are thrilled to meet the total stranger posing as
their "daughter-in-law" and completely distant with their son. It's hard
to figure out why he wants their approval. His mother (the unbilled
Anjelica Houston) is obsessed with the 1966 Super Bowl that the Buffalo
Bills lost because she was giving birth to Billy; his father (Ben Gazzara) 
is a cruel, sadistic jerk who grabs at his new "daughter-in-law" 
leacherously whenever possible. Well, I guess you only get one set of
parents and they are supposed to love you and give you there approval. 
Unless they're insane. Then you figure out a few things, forgive your
parents, and move on.
But not our Billy. He's going to kill the jerk who screwed up the field
goal that lost Buffalo the Super Bowl!
What makes *Buffalo '66* interesting and funny is the hyperbolic reactions
Billy has toward just about everything. He is clearly a loser going
nowhere, yet watching him freak out and talk to himself is very
entertaining. There is something unusual in this; it's not quite
schadenfreude, but it's not innocent either. It's hard not to feel
superior to Billy as we discover how he's clung to little incidents in his
life and magnified them in to defining moments. It's also not hard to feel
sorry for him when you see what his parents are like. 
What is completely mysterious is why Layla is not trying to get away from
Billy as fast as she can. We don't get to know too much about her or her
motivation, or lack thereof. Her character is there to make Billy more
human with an open heart and devotion. But why is she doing it?
We also meet some bit players in Billy's psychodramas and loser stories: 
Mickey Rourke as a malevolent bookie (no relation): Kevin Corrigan as
Goon, his nitwit prison friend; Jan-Michael Vincent as Sonny, who runs the
bowling alley--the only place he is a somebody; and Rosanna Arquette,
who's hilarious as the "love of Billy's life." 
Vincent Gallo, who is famous for something, what I am not sure, directed,
wrote and starred in this movie, where he is basically working out his own
family issues. He also wrote some forgettable original music for the film.
He was even outside the Angelika the night we went to see the movie. He's
everywhere you are, whether you like it or not. Gallo was recently
reported to have berated and threaten critics who panned the film as less
than stunning; he's gone off about critics only like movies with gay
characters. In a completely self-aggrandizing moment, he is cruised in the
bathroom by a man who, as Gallo scripted it, cannot take his eyes off
Billy's member because "it's so big." He promptly calls him a faggot and
assaults him.
Meanwhile Gallo is also quoted as saying he's slept with men and hustled. 
So, go see *Buffalo '66*. You'll enjoy it. Just don't get caught
one-on-one with Gallo in a men's room or pan his movie. You might regret
it. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
W Waffle
For more reviews of independent films and movies that deserve a second chance
on video, check out my site, www.wafflemovies.com.
I really wanted to like this movie. Buffalo '66 stars one of my favorite
actresses, Christina Ricci. She plays Layla, a young tap dancer in Buffalo, NY
who is kidnapped by newly released ex-con Billy (Vincent Gallo). Billy spent
five years in prison for a crime he did not commit and lied to his parents by
telling them that he was working for the government instead of being sent to
jail. He even gets his friend to mail packages and letters to his family to
continue the charade. 
When Billy is released, he wants to see his parents, but has told them that he
is married, so Billy kidnaps Layla and forces her to "make him look good."
Slowly, we learn about the sad life Billy has led. His parents are fanatical
followers of the Buffalo Bills and the only game they ever missed was a
championship game on December 26, 1966, the day Billy was born. Instead of
celebrating the blessed day, his parents hold a grudge. 
His mother (Anjelica Huston) has no recollection of her child's medical
conditions, interests or life in general. His father (Ben Gazzara) barely
speaks to him, and Billy stills holds a torch for neighborhood girl Wendy
Balsam (Rosanna Arquette) who doesn't even remember him. The only happiness
Billy has in life is bowling. 
He turns to gambling and loses $10,000 when Buffalo Bills place-kicker Scott
Wood misses a key field goal in the Super Bowl. Billy can't pay the debt to his
bookie (Mickey Rourke), so he is forced to take the fall for a crime the
bookie's friend committed. For ruining his life, Billy pledges to kill Scott
Wood and begins to hatch his plan upon discharge from prison. 
All in all, that sounds like a good movie. Unfortunately, the movie suffers
from bad structure. The plot to kill Wood doesn't appear until half way through
the movie. The audience would have benefited from a prologue in the opening
scenes explaining Billy's gambling debt and why he went to jail. Then, the
movie could have moved five years in the future to his release. 
Billy lacks sympathy because we do not know about his supposed crime until late
in the movie. The character comes off as a raging lunatic hell-bent on no
particular goal. The audience is left to wonder why he wants to impress his
family after the horrible way he has been treated. It takes too long for us to
learn that he is saying good-bye for the final time. 
The other major problem with the movie is the tone. It starts on a very somber
and dramatic tone. The movie then becomes a comedy when Layla and Billy visit
his parents. It then, once again, becomes a drama when we learn about Billy's
plan. The movie even becomes a love story as Layla falls for this lunatic who
never shows any emotional attachment to her until the movie's final scenes. The
movie would have worked well as a farce or a serious drama, but it can't be
both. 
Buffalo '66 has some good elements. Writer/Director/Star Vincent Gallo performs
well as Billy. He commendably handles comedy when he is supposed to be funny,
and solidly portrays the desperation his character feels. Christina Ricci is
very good, but also suffers from the movie's inability to be a comedy or a
drama. Anjelica Huston is fabulous as the absent-minded Bills fanatic. She and
Gazarra provide hearty comic performances. 
Gallo also makes some very good choices as director and writer. We learn about
Billy's past through flashback sequences that zoom out from the screen and
superimpose over the action to give us the necessary background. There are some
very good shots such as an early scene where Gallo does an extreme close-up of
his character's eyes when he calls his mother to continue the lie about his job
and family. 
Another good choice is a scene where Billy's father sings for Layla. Gallo
shines a spotlight on Gazarra as if he was singing in the concert theater he
envisions in his own mind. The movie also has a gritty, edgy look and feel that
is very much like Buffalo. If you have ever been there, you know what I mean. 
Often, movies written by the star tend to lack sufficient development for other
characters.  However, Gallo creates several meaty parts for his ensemble. 
I wish Gallo could go back and fix the movie's shortcomings, but there are no
do-overs in the movie business. If you are a fan of Ricci or Gallo, you might
enjoy the movie, but I can't recommend running out and renting it. I would
suggest future WaffleMovies.com selection The Opposite of Sex for Ricci fans. 

Author
Bob Bloom
 Buffalo 66 (1998) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Vincent Gallo, Christina
Ricci, Ben Gazarra and Anjelica Huston
 Buffalo 66 is a very odd movie. It features a hero who for nearly 99
percent of the movie seems to be totally alienated and a rather unpleasant
guy.
 Yet in some kind of strange way, Buffalo 66 turns out to be a charming
little love story about two people who find themselves alone in the world.
 Buffalo 66 is different. It's not your mainstream linear type of story as
it makes some curious detours from the focal plot then casually goes back
to its story.
 The movie is the singular vision of Vincent Gallo, who not only stars, but
directed, wrote and composed the score for Buffalo 66.
 Gallo plays Billy Brown, released from prison after serving five years for
another man's crime. He served the time to pay a $10,000 debt he owed a
bookie on a football game lost by the Buffalo Bills because the team's
kicker missed a crucial field goal.
 Upon his release Billy only seeks three things: the first, and most
important, is a place to go to the bathroom. The second is the respect of
his parents, who believe Billy works for the government and has been away
on an overseas assignment. The third is revenge; he wants to kill the place
kicker who missed the field goal, thus ruining his life.
 After a few comic attempts to find a place to relieve himself, Billy winds
up at a tap dance school where he kidnaps Layla (Christina Ricci), a blond,
Barbie-doll-like cutie who doesn't offer much resistance.
 Billy explains that he needs her to act as his wife since his parents
believe he is married. He renames her Wendy and they proceed to visit
Billy's parents.
 The family is from dysfunctional hell. Dad (Ben Gazarra) hardly speaks,
spending most of his time glowering at either his wife or Billy. Mom
(Anjelica Huston) is a rabid Bills fan who complains that the only game she
ever missed was on the day she gave birth to Billy.
 But Billy's parents, while virtually ignoring him, fall madly in love with
Layla/Wendy, who tries to build Billy up in their eyes, all to no avail.
She even tells them she's pregnant.
 Ricci is a sweet innocent as Layla. She seems to immediately have fallen
in love with Billy; how or why is not explained. We need to take it on
faith.
 After all, Gallo's story is sort of a dark, urban fairy tale, and his
Billy is a scruffy, demanding and overbearing prince.
 Gallo's Billy is filled with self-loathing. He won't let Layla touch him.
He bosses her around like a boot camp drill sergeant, and yet she accepts
all the abuse without much complaint.
 The story's suspense hinges on whether Billy will carry through with his
revenge or will Layla's love soften his resolve.
 Gallo has created a rather eccentric movie. It will require patience to
sit through this enterprise, but it will be worth the effort.
 The film features fine performances throughout, from Gazzara and Huston,
Gallo and especially Ricci. At one point in the story, she does a little
tap dance at a bowling alley. Why? Who knows? It's really not important.
 But this fine young actress has seen her reputation soar during the past
year as she has taken up some demanding and interesting roles in both
studio works (The Ice Storm) and independent features such as Buffalo 66.
 If you're looking for something different, a movie that will challenge
you, then try Buffalo 66. It may surprise you.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Author
Andrew Arbuckle
Given: The abduction love story is getting old.  Last we saw, the genre
was getting old enough to produce satire as we saw in A Life Less
Ordinary.  Genres if not redefined, are condemned to die.  However, if
you throw Vincent Gallo into anything, he'll turn it around and make
sure he looks good in the process.  Even with his enormous ego, he has
created something reminiscent of Jim Jarmusch's Stranger Than Paradise
in a hyper-real world of cold cruelty.
A biography.  The first image is a photograph of a young boy and his
dog.  The opening credits are a'la Godard.  Big "contrasty" print
against a neutral background.  Gives the feeling of a newspaper, in the
most bizarre sense.  Vincent Gallo, just released from prison in the
form of Billy Brown, finds himself waiting for the bus into town. 
Surprisingly the filmmaker/actor has chosen to let us see his
butt-crack, and soon you find out just where Buffalo, NY exists in the
anatomy of the U.S. 
The bus lands Billy right in Buffalo, and his predicament slowly
unravels.  As you would expect for someone just out of jail, "he doesn't
have a pot to piss in" so to speak.  After relieving himself, he makes a
call to his parents.  From that point on, something's amiss. 
Supposedly, Billy is married, works for the government and never went to
jail.  At least that's what his parents think.
Here's where Gallo hits his first speed bump.  Dead pan satire of the
genre he's working with?  Relying too much on human sympathy?  In either
case, all at once we meet Christina Ricci's Layla, watch her overhear
his troubled conversation with the parents, and five seconds later she's
the sympathetic abductee.  Funny?  In retrospect, yes. However, Gallo
treads on dangerous ground as he seems to avoid the most questionable
part of the genre, its believability.  Or is that the point?
Formally, the film is quite interesting.  Gallo moves freely between the
"gimicky" and the truly apt.  Comical freeze frames heighten the world
that he has created, while moments of honesty literally punch through
the frame.  
Billy brings Layla home to his parents, asking her to pose as his wife. 
Here is where the real film begins.  Ben Gazzara and Anjelica Huston are
the perfect image of the disfunctional family.  Both parents hardly even
acknowledge their son, but they try their best to make a good impression
on Layla. Gallo does wonderful things with interrupting the dinner
discussion with the starkly objective flashback, giving us a glimpse
into the parents' psyches.  This device rips open the film's surrealism
and adds to the film's biographical feeling.  The result is that you see
Billy in torment as he suffers through the dual nature of his parents. 
Layla is the observer as Billy's life unfolds before her, and her
sympathy for him only grows.
Billy is abrasive and abusive of Layla, yet with few debates she puts up
with him.  She is already in love with him, but he won't let her get
close. Layla seems to have uncannily sensed it from the beginning, but
we start to discover Billy's humanity,.  Billy went to jail after a
$10,000 bet on the Buffalo Bills fell through.  His behavior is hardly a
shadow of what his parents put him through.  We see his need for his
parents to be proud of him as a compensatory reaction to their actions. 
As we get to know Billy he turns out to be someone quite different than
we would've expected.
While in a domestic environment, the camera is a stationary observer,
not unlike Stranger than Paradise.  What Gallo does masterfully here
though is long stationary point of view shots alternating between Layla
and Billy.  The table conversation is hilariously portrayed with the
audience sitting in the empty chair.  Alternately, the world of Buffalo
is portrayed with an immediacy where Billy is making his rounds, taking
care of his business before he moves on.
Layla, unfortunately becomes too much of a shell that the audience can
fill with their own psyche as they learn of Billy being more of a victim
than a criminal, which is a waste of Christina Ricci, who despite her
age shows promise as an actress.  The filmmaker instills the film with a
"Gallo-centrism" as you really feel the center of the film focused on
Billy, with Layla sometimes listening to Billy's monologues with an
unsympathetic profile forcing the eye and attention to focus solely on
Billy's angst-ridden memories.
Despite its pitfalls, Buffalo '66 is an ambitous film that if
unsuccesful at revitalizing the genre, may definitely be its best
eulogy.  Although the genre might be beyond saving, Gallo has put it to
rest.  By using a caricatured look of a dying post-industrial city,
Gallo is able to contrast it with this unlikely love story that leaves
you with a sentimental hope for the two of them.  

Author
Nikki Lesley
Starring: Vincent Gallo, Christina Ricci, Angelica Huston, Ben
Gazzara.
What a load of self-indulgent twaddle! Very few things
depress me more than sitting through a rubbish movie that's
getting good reviews. Who are these people who like Buffalo
66? They deserve a cruel and unusual punishment for making
me believe that I could possibly enjoy that movie. Clearly, I'm
not fit to think up their punishment since the worst thing I
can think of at the moment, is making them sit through
Buffalo 66 and apparently, that's not much of a punishment
to them. 
Where to begin? How about a plot summary? Here goes:
everybody hates me, nobody loves me, I think I'll go sulk. If I
died that would show them. They'd all be sorry then. And I'm
such a wonderful person too. Most of all, it's important that I
let the people know that I have a large penis! Really, I'm not
kidding. 
You think I'm being facetious, but honestly, that's a pretty
accurate summary of Buffalo 66. It's the story of a man (at
least by appearance a man, more aptly a boy) who's life is
rotten and it's all his parents' fault. I think we're meant to
believe that he's a really nice guy (I'm guessing this because
we're told it over and over again; we never see any evidence
of his actually being nice). He's a nice guy who has just had a
bit of bad luck, particularly in his allocation of parents. 
His big complaint is that his parents are awful to him and
treat him terribly. It's hard to tell since they are such
caricatures. Sure, I'll admit that the flashback imply that his
parents were pretty evil but they never come across as real
people: they are nasty creatures built out of the imagination
of a person with a real chip on the shoulder. It's the sort of
picture you build up when you've been sent to your room for
doing something wrong. You lie there, remembering how
cruel the whole world has been to you, recalling every nasty
thing that anyone ever said to you and attributing deliberate
intent to everything. You vow revenge. Most of us get over it.
Vincent Gallo, however, made a movie out of it. 
On balance, he's not exactly nice to them either. Of course,
this isn't important; it's how people treat him that matters.
Again, it's the world of a six year old, who doesn't realise that
his parents are people too, and thinks only of them in terms
of himself. 
As well as this sulking six year old in Vincent Gallo's body,
Christina Ricci plays the role of someone kidnapped by Billy
Brown (Vincent Gallo) and forced to play his wife for the
benefit of his parents. I'm a big fan of Christina Ricci and will
admit that she acts quite well in this, but the role is so horrid.
What is wrong with this woman that she actually thinks Billy
Brown is a nice guy. A couple of times in the movie she states
something like, "I think you're the nicest guy and the best
looking guy I've ever met." At certain times, we get to see
flashback scenes of Billy's childhood that are meant to tell us
that he's had a horrible life; one can only imagine what
torture Layla (Christina Ricci) must have gone through to
actually think Billy is nice. He's awful to her the whole movie.
>From this I can only conclude that men are such prizes that
we've got to be glad when one of them just shows us a bit of
attention! Ugh! 
Add to this really irritating effects, such as the cutting from
one scene to another and the point of view scenes in the
family home, and you have a very painful 110 minutes. In
fact the only thing that makes this movie vaguely watchable
is the calibre of the people performing in it: Christina Ricci,
Angelica Huston, Mickey Rourke. These are all good actors. It
makes one wonder if the script was appreciably different
from the final product. This is the only excuse I can make for
these great people being in such a lousy film. 
I don't mind so much that I actually paid to see this film. I
mind more that the people responsible for such an onanistic
movie get paid obscene amounts of money. Surely there are
talented people out there. I know lots of really clever people.
Why, oh why, are such miserable excuses for movies being
made? 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BUFFALO '66 (director: Vincent Gallo; cast: Vincent Gallo (Billy Brown),
Christina Ricci (Layla), Angelica Huston (Janet Brown), Ben Gazzara
(Jimmy Brown), Mickey Rourke (Bookie), Jan-Michael Vincent (Sonny),
Rosanna Arquette (Wendy), Kevin Corrigan (Goon), 1998)
This self-absorbing, arty film about a lowlife, has Billy Brown
(Vincent) return to the same 1966 Buffalo home he was born in and face
again, though this time as an adult, his same old dysfunctional
homelife. His parents are Janet Brown (Angelica) and Jimmy Brown (Ben).
Janet is a gung-ho Buffalo Bills fan who is more interested in them than
she is in her son. Jimmy is a poor imitation of a Sinatra-like singer,
having once been a professional singer himself but now appears
despondent and lecherous.
Billy is a loser. He bets 10 grand on the Bills to win the superbowl and
when he doesn't have the coin to pay the bookie, he is forced to do jail
time for someone else's crime as payment for his debt. After serving 5
years, Billy returns to Buffalo (which looks vulgar and seedy). He tries
desperately to find a bathroom, and, instead, mistakingly goes into a
dance studio; subsequently, coming up with the idea of kidnapping Layla
(Christina). She is leaving a tap dancing class just as he, comically,
without meaning to be comical, threatens to kill her unless she comes
with him. He tells her, if she doesn't come, he won't be her best
friend. She is told to act natural, like they are married. His plan is
to bring her to his parents, so this way he can cover up his jail time,
since he told them he couldn't see them for the last 5 years because of
a sensitive spy job with the CIA. His hope is that they will now become
impressed with him.
His plan is absurd, of course. But how else can you explain Billy as
anything but absurd. It is something that Layla sees about him for
herself, but she still falls for him. Some people call that love.
The film throws its bowling ball into the gutter a few times, as it
belabors its points about sexual repression and phobias. It focuses too
much attention on the Billy character; we never get to know much about
who this nice young girl is who falls for him and is not alarmed about
the kidnapping, and eventually saves him from himself. She is the best
character in this film. Vincent is excellent when he goes into his
scurvy character routine, but hard to take when he behaves so
obsessively violent.
The comedic edge to the story works well, though at times the film is
too arty. When Billy imagines that he is trying to kill the field goal
kicker who lost the superbowl game he bet on, there are just too many
unnecessary flashbacks of those scenes. It is as if, Vincent, as the
director, is trying to beat us over the head with the point he is making
about Billy's life being a constant foul-up ... In the end, that Billy
is redeemed by the love of this insecure girl, the only one in his
entire life who is able to offer him some kind of love, is a miracle
worth savoring. This is an uneven but successful film debut for Vincent,
both as a director and as a star.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
힋 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
