Title
Review for Rachel, Rachel (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Rachel, Rachel" marked the debut of Paul Newman as a
Director and Producer.  The film, highly acclaimed at the
time but since largely forgotten, stars Newman's wife
Joanne Woodward as the title character, and also features
their daughter (Nell Potts) who plays Rachel as a child.
Rachel is a 35 year old unwed schoolteacher who has grown
tired of her unrewarding life in rural Connecticut.  Since her
undertaker father's death ten years past, she has been a
servant to her manipulative, demanding mother (Kate Harrington,
who may give the film's best performance).  Her best friend
is latent lesbian Calla (Estelle Parsons).  Looking for
an escape from her mundane routine, Rachel first attends a
cultish religious meeting, then takes as a lover cynical
confirmed bachelor Nick (James Olson).
A slow-moving character study, "Rachel, Rachel" is
visually impressive and compelling.  Most interesting
are the short 'fantasy' scenes, the only scenes where
the repressed Rachel is ever able to do what she truly
wants to.  The only comic relief is ironic, but the
characters are credible and well defined.
Stewart Stern was nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay,
which was based on the novel "A Jest of God" by Margaret Laurence.
Newman won a Golden Globe for Best Director, and the
film was nominated by the Academy for Best Picture.
Joanne Woodward and Estelle Parsons were nominated for
Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress.
Despite the success of "Rachel, Rachel", Newman's career
as a director never panned out.  Of course, it did not
need to, since he was one of Hollywood's leading men
from the 1950s through the 1970s and remains a star
today (his current film is "Message in a Bottle").
Like fellow Actor/Director Robert Redford, with whom
his career often parallels, his debut film as a director
became by far his most important.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
