Title
Review for Life with Father (1947)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
M Formlios
This is not a film to be looked at with any kind of modernist perspective.
It was made in another era, and it looks back at an era prior to that.
Whether or not you relate to it, there is much to be said about it still.
The character Clarence Day Sr., as played by William Powell, has a gruff,
pompous, hard to handle exterior countenance. For all of his blustering,
and all of the yelling that goes on within his household, they all
function together as a sort of family unit. This is not the Roseanne kind
of family love, but rather a solid bond of Victorian fellowship, that
careens through the film, veering from the ridiculous involving Clarence,
Jr's wearing his father's suits, to the kinds of male friendships that
Clarence Sr. bestows upon his sons. 
Irene Dunne, as his wife, Vinnie, is a shrewd manipulator, but also
somewhat of an airhead. She loves him as much as he loves her, but she
really knows how to handle him. Due to the time period represented in this
film, New York in 1883, she cannot rise too far above the expected
feminine conventions of the day. She and he frequently argue points of
logic that neither one has a clue about. He tries as hard as he can to
defend himself against her wiles, but it is a no-win situation for him,
for when logic doesn't work for her, she resorts to forming her own kind
of logic to win him over.
Just as Buckwheat cannot be viewed anymore in a fashion relevant to the
present time period, it becomes necessary to discard all preconceptions as
to what should and should not be right, and to simply take the film at
face value. It doesn't matter that we no longer relate to it, it doesn't
even matter whether the New York and home environments created here
reflect actual living conditions, or were just a byproduct of the
Hollywood imagination. What does matter is that the film does entertain in
its own right.

Author
Brian Koller
"Life With Father" is a comedy with a theme.  Men believe
that they are in control of their lives and call the shots,
when in fact their wives and girlfriends are running the
show.  The humor comes from the expressions on the men's
faces when they realize that something is going on
that wasn't planned, and that they are unable to do
anything about it.
The film takes place in New York in the late 1800s.  Clarence
Day (William Powell) is a successful businessman with
a doting wife (Irene Dunne) and four sons.  The eldest,
Clarence Jr, is trying be an adult a bit too soon.
The second son, John, is good natured and interested in science.
The third son, Whitney, is trying to pass catechism but
is more interested in baseball and tormenting the youngest
son Harlan.  
A running gag in the film is that the maids keep quitting
because Powell is impossible to live with.  He is so clueless
that he blames his wife for this.
Powell and Dunne are affectionate to each other, but there is
an undercurrent of tension in their relationship, about who
is in control.  They mostly quarrel about money and religion.
Powell is too practical for religion, and his comments on the
subject terrify his wife, who is afraid she will be alone in
heaven.  Dunne externally obeys, but subtly manipulates her
husband.
There is a visit from Cousin Cora and her daughter Mary
(A teen-aged Elizabeth Taylor).  Cora is a busy-body sterotype,
while Taylor is ever-smiling and says nothing but bland
pleasantries.  Powell tries to tell his wife that they can't
stay, and won't go out to dinner, but is outmaneuvered.
Taylor and Clarence Jr connect, and the oldest begins to
behave unnaturally, trying to impress Taylor with his
dreadful violin playing and contrived "adult" conversations.
Father casually mentions that he has never been baptized.
This leads to a lengthy battle of wills between Powell and
Dunne.  Powell is stubborn in his belief that baptism is
not important, while Dunne is devastated.
A curious story line is that Jr is given father's suit to
wear, and Jr believes that he can't do anything father wouldn't
do while wearing his suit.  This means he can't embrace
Taylor, which leads to an argument between the two leaving
Jr bewildered.  Powell sees this and gives his son advice
about being "firm", advice that is shown useless when Powell
is tricked in a subsequent discussion with his wife over
the household budget.
Dunne's health declines from worry over Powell's refusal to
be baptized.  She becomes more sick after being given patent
medicine being peddled by sons John and Jr.  She only
begins to recover after Powell reluctantly agrees to
be baptized, a promise he tries to back out of as her health
improves.
Dunne goes shopping and buys an expensive ceramic pugdog.
Powell is mortified and has her return it.  But instead it
is exchanged for a new suit for Jr.  The next morning,
the gap between Powell's expectations and reality comes
clear when he learns that he is still out the money for
the pugdog, that Cora and Mary are returning for another
visit, that his sons have been selling poisonous medicine,
and that he is to be taken in an expensive rented carriage
out of town to be baptized.  Exasperated, all Powell can
say is "Gad!" as he submits to his wife's will.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
