Title
Review for Ordinary People (1980)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Walter Frith
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca
In the motion picture industry it's not easy to win an Academy Award for your
first effort on screen, especially if you hapen to be the film's director but
that's exactly what happened to Robert Redford as his emotional and
psychological drama 'Ordinary People' walked away with additional Oscars for
Best Supporting Actor (Timothy Hutton), Best Screenplay Adaptation (Alvin
Sargent based on Judith Guest's novel) and the most distinguished prize, Best
Picture of 1980.
The film starts off simple, almost non-effective and tells the story of an
upper class family whose struggle to stay together is constantly tested after
the eldest son dies at sea in a boating accident.  Donald Sutherland and Mary
Tyler Moore portray the parents and Timothy Hutton is their only remaining
son who was on the boat with his elder brother who died.  Hutton's character
develops a mind bending trauma based on self created guilt and a confusion of
conscience and seeks help from a psychiatrist (Judd Hirsch) for his problems.
As 'Ordinary People' progresses there is a steady deterioration of the
relationship between Moore and Hutton as their mother and son relationship
takes a turn for the worst every time they are forced to be close together as
one example points out when the family is visiting other relatives for a
gathering and Hutton stands with his arms folded in front of his body when
near his mother as she feels uncomfortable about having a picture taken with
her son because deep down, there is unjust resentment towards him for the
accident previously mentioned.
'Ordinary People' becomes a fascinating and grand character study each minute
more its on screen and concludes with what is a debatable ending of whether
or not the characters involved can truly get on with their lives in an
'ordinary' fashion.  One of the truly stunning and deeply moving films of the
1980's.  
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review

Author
Brian Koller
"Ordinary People" was the star of the 1981 Academy Awards.
Best Picture, Best Director (Robert Redford), Best Screenplay
(Alvin Sargent), Best Supporting Actor (Timothy Hutton, 
in his first cinema film).
But there was immediate griping afterwards, which has
continued ever since.  "Raging Bull" should have won Best
Picture, naysayers said.  I have not yet graded "Raging Bull".
I am sure that it is an outstanding film.  But "Ordinary People"
is one of the best films ever, and well deserved its Academy
Awards.  Indeed, I know of only one film that won Best Picture
that is clearly better: "Casablanca".  "Schindler's List"
and "Chinatown" are about equal in quality to "Ordinary People."
While "Ordinary People" is an outstanding film, it is not a
popular one.  Action dregs such as "The Beastmaster" series
get more showings on television.  It is easy to see why many
people (men, in particular) would prefer to watch "Raging Bull".
It's more entertaining watching Robert De Niro play a boxing
champion than watching Timothy Hutton struggle with depression.
But a film shouldn't be judged by how happy it makes you feel.
"Ordinary People" may be difficult to watch, but that only adds
to its quality: it faces truths that people do not want to see.
"Ordinary People" is the story of a troubled upper-middle-class
family.  Timothy Hutton is the guilt-ridden son who survived
a boating accident that killed his brother, and who has recently
been released from a hospital after a near-fatal suicide attempt.
Mary Tyler Moore is his mother, who has repressed her grief and
hostility towards her son, yet tries to pretend that life can
go on as before.  Donald Sutherland is her husband, who finds
himself caught in the middle between wife and son, want to keep
both, but is powerless to repair the shattered family.
There's also an excellent supporting cast.  Judd Hirsch is
Hutton's psyciatrist, who seeks to pry Hutton out from his
emotional shell.  Elizabeth McGovern is Hutton's love interest,
and M. Emmet Walsh is his disbelieving swimming coach.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
