Title
Review for Bewegte Mann, Der (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Germany, 1994
Release date: beginning 7/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, frank sexual language)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     Although Sonke Wortmann's 1994 German film has a few things going 
for it, it's hard to understand why it was such a big hit in its native 
country.  In addition to possessing a plot that approaches sexual issues 
(both homosexual and heterosexual) with refreshing candor and 
unselfconsciousness, MAYBE...MAYBE NOT boasts the presence of Katja 
Riemann (MAKING UP!), one of the best young German actresses working 
today.  Unfortunately, these assets can't bandage the film's fundamental 
flaw.  As a comedy, it's only sporadically funny, and, as a drama, it 
lacks emotional depth.
     MAYBE...MAYBE NOT is clumsily constructed.  It meanders, and 
doesn't seem to have a clear goal, except to say that it's possible for 
a gay man and a straight man to be friends without sleeping together.  
That's not an especially compelling statement, and this isn't an overly-
interesting forum in which to present it.  The conclusion is open-ended, 
and, while that might be okay for a more serious film, it's a drawback 
for something attempting to be a light comedy.
     The film begins with Doro (Riemann) discovering her live-in lover, 
Axel (Til Schweiger), having sex with another woman in the bathroom at 
their workplace.  Doro's reaction is to kick Axel out of her house, so 
he spends the rest of the day looking for a place to crash.  Eventually, 
he moves in with Norbert (Joachim Krol), a gay friend-of-a-friend-of-a-
friend.  Norbert, a shy, nerdy sort of guy, is not-so-secretly attracted 
to Axel, but the hunky hetero either doesn't notice, or pretends not to 
(the film never makes it clear which is the case).
     After Axel has been gone for several days, Doro decides that she 
misses him, and, when a home pregnancy test reads positive, she begins 
searching for him.  In the meantime, Axel is learning about the gay 
lifestyle, although he remains fairly secure in his heterosexuality, 
despite Norbert's attempts to "convert" him.  Ultimately, MAYBE...MAYBE 
NOT becomes a showdown of sorts between Doro and Norbert for who 
captures Axel's affections.
     I think we're supposed to identify with the Axel, although it's 
difficult to say for sure, because he's such a self-centered jerk.  It's 
far easier to relate to the Doro, the neglected girlfriend, or Norbert, 
the lonely gay man, but neither comes close to matching Axel for screen 
time.  MAYBE...MAYBE NOT is his film, but he's the least likable person 
in it.  It's tough to enjoy a movie like this -- especially one that's 
supposed to be a comedy -- when you have to work not to hate the main 
character.  
     Most of the genuinely funny moments arise out of familiar comic 
setups:  the stranger hiding in the closet, a case of mistaken identity, 
and someone arriving home earlier than expected.  Although there are 
laughs to be had from each of these situations, it's easy (bordering on 
cheap) humor.  More interesting are Wortmann's sly observations of how 
the homosexual culture stereotypes the heterosexual one.  Too often, 
however, the jokes fall flat.  It doesn't take much insight to identify 
the numerous failed attempts at humor.
     The acting is good, even if character development is weak.  Outside 
of the main trio, we're given a raft of types, including a drag queen 
(Rufus Beck) who makes the population of STONEWALL seem that much more 
real, and a nymphomaniac (Antonia Lang) who's every heterosexual male's 
dream.  MAYBE...MAYBE NOT certainly has good intentions, but, as every 
movie-goer knows, that's only a starting point.  This film does little 
to build on its foundation.  When it comes to seeing this movie, "maybe 
not" seems the best advice.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MAYBE... MAYBE NOT (DER BEWEGTE MANN) (Germany,1994) 
Written & directed by Sonke Wortmann, based on the 
comic books "Der Bewegte Mann" and "Pretty Baby" by 
Ralf Koning. Photography, Gernot Roll. Sets, Monika Bauert. 
Production manager, Norbert Preuss. Costumes, Katharina 
Von Martius. Music, Torsten Breuer. Songs by Palast 
Orchester. Producer, Bernd Eichinger. Cast : Til Schweiger 
(Axel), Katja Riemann (Doro), Joachim Krol (Norbert), 
Rufus Beck (Waltraud), Antonia Lang (Elke), Armin Rohde 
(Horst), et al. An Orion Classics release. In German with 
subtitles. 93 min. Rated R (most explicit sex talk)
My best friends are Inuit, but among the other best 
friends some are German, of the post W.W.II generations. I 
don't want to hurt them, but it is a well-known fact that, at 
least in the area of cinema,  "German Humor" is an 
oxymoron. The dictionary definition of this word is "A 
rhetorical figure in which incongruous or contradictory 
terms are combined, as in a deafening silence and a 
mournful optimist." Or, as some slanderers put it "military 
intelligence."
Given the huge historical role of pre-Nazi German cinema 
and, starting in the 1960s, the quality of the New or Young 
German cinema, it is amazing that German comedy has 
been so low on the international totem pole. There have 
been very few exceptions, and even then nothing that 
could place German comedy at a rocket's throw of 
American, U.K., Italian, Spanish, Japanese, Yugoslav, Czech, 
Hungarian, Irish, Senegalese, Australian, etc. comedies.
Now comes "Maybe..." which opened in Germany around 
September 1994, became a monster hit there, made 
locally a cult figure of its main actor Til Schweiger ... and 
took two years to cross the Atlantic. Will it finally break 
through the humor barrier for Germany?
The movie opens charmingly. In a cabaret, couples are 
dancing to songs of the 1920s and 1930s, including "Arme 
Gigolo." The sounds, style and ambiance almost fool you 
into thinking that the setting is way back when. Then 
comes the shock of modernization. 
Axel, a hunk of a waiter, exchanges glances with a dancing 
woman.As soon as that song is over, the two of them are 
found in the toilet, copulating with energy. (Interesting 
how the other film I review this week, "Feeling Minnesota," 
has an almost identical scene at the start).  
In the next cubicle, Doro, Axel's live-in girlfriend, hears 
the commotion, stands up on the seat and tells Axel, who 
has cheated on her repeatedly, that this is the end and 
that he's out of her apartment.
Seeking a temporary lodging, Axel fails repeatedly.  His 
quest ends at a homosexual acquaintance's apartment 
during a bull-session of a gay study group discussing 
female sexuality. 
Their talk is graphic, explicit, specific and detailed to an 
extent that I cannot recall from any other film. It also 
Teutonically serious, which, depending on your attitude, 
can make this funny, ludicrous or plain coarse. The movie 
is interspered with very frank language which includes a 
minute descripton of a gay man's one and only experience 
with a woman. The R-rating means a hard R, but on the 
other hand, there are no same-sex visuals anywhere.
Straight Axel becomes immediately the 
not-at-all-obscure object of the gays' desire. Doro, in 
revenge, tries to make out with a man, but cannot (an ugly 
scene where the man insults Doro). Axel is taken to a 
party of drag queens gotten up to the limit.  He becomes 
everyone's dream-boy, takes everything in stride, is not 
especially shocked. On the contrary, he looks around 
amusedly but not ironically, even strikes a friendship with 
quiet, sweet and rather timid Norbert.
The party, like much of the film, is shot in those garish 
colors that German cinema often favors. Drunk by 
evening's end, Axel accepts Norbert's hospitality until he 
finds something. There is no sex between the two. When, 
the next morning, Norbert and his other apartment 
-mates are shown, it's a total transformation. In their 
business suits, and without any queer mannerisms, they 
are just ordinary citizens.
Axel's peregrinations continue while Doro finds out she is 
pregnant by Axel and won't have any of her co-workers 
advice to get rid of the baby. Axel and Norbert go to pick 
up Axel's stuff from Doro's apartment. In an intricate way 
that cannot be described simply,  the two men find 
themselves respectively semi-naked and fully naked. 
Doro's impromptu return (how dumb can the man be?) 
panics the new friends. Discovering Norbert in a closet 
and in his birthday suit, she concludes the inevitable. Yet, 
what with Axel's fumbled protests, the nagging doubt 
remains. Is he bisexual, gay or straight? Maybe... maybe 
not.
This theme is carried to the end. The comics that are the 
source of the film had a gay point of view. The movie 
changed this into making Axel a straight who gets 
embroiled in a sexual farce. In the hard-to- translate  
German title, "bewegt" means "moved," as when someone 
crosses and recrosses the boundary between straight and 
gay. 
The plot thickens in classic bedroom-farce fashion, with 
coincidences,  confusions and quid pro quos that we 
accept willingly. It leads to a reconciliation and to the 
wedding of Axel and 9-month pregnant Doro. New 
complications arise when Axel and former high school 
lover Elke meet and make a date that eventually moves to 
Norbert's apartment. Axel pretends it is his but says 
things like "The bathroom? It is over there -- I think." 
More farce involves vegetarian Norbert's new companion, 
a butcher who justifies the saying "Never ask how sausage 
is made," and other inventions. Predictably, the birth of 
the child (with additional comic mix-ups), brings a happy 
ending. 
The movie has a valid subject, the possibility of 
friendship between straights and gays. It also deals in 
almost documentary, wild but sympathetic fashion, with 
gay life, treated with relative naturalness. But the 
story-line is uneven and meandering, the humor is 
adolescent bathroom stuff.  The new darling of the German 
masses, Til Schweiger, as Axel is pretty much of a dimwit 
stud.
The movie lacks anything approaching subtlety. Acting, 
situations and most characters are broad, done bluntly 
and heavily. Where calming pauses are needed, we get 
near-hysteria. Where mood would do, we get a mysterious 
sexual spray. Where wit is called for, we get a mix of lead 
and concrete. Whether all this is compensated by a 
number of laughs and insights is for each viewer to decide.

Author
Pedro Sena
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.
Like French films, German films have no qualms discussing anyone's sexual
preferences. MAYBE, MAYBE NOT, fits into the category that has the toughest
time getting into the market. Gay films. But as much as there is enough
gaiety to keep many interested, this film is really less about the gay
subject, than it is about how many people make friendships and how some of
these may turn out to be homosexual.
And in between, this film is a comedy of errors, where no one can get their
things right, and they are all over the place. And the gags, are funny, and
add a lightness to the film that otherwise might be considered heavy and
boring.
It is a simple enough story. Boy and girl live together, and work in the
same place. And one day he gets caught in the bathroom having sex with
another woman, by the girlfriend. It breaks the relationship. And he has no
place to go to, and eventually winds his way to a friend's friend who is
gay. And the fun starts. It seems that the whole group of friends are just
all excited about this new one. But he has no interest in the at all and he
sets off an array of jealous bits amidst the group at the place where he is
staying.
And as time goes by, the girl is reconsidering her relationship. Axel is
busy enough and is trying to figure out what he wants to do and get a place
of his own. Norbert, who has provided him with living space, likes him and
would like to do more than just be friends with Axel. Several weeks later,
Axel returns to his old place to pick up a few more things, and ends up
showing Norbert his photographs. And wouldn't you know it, here comes Doro
and she finds Norbert almost naked in her bed, next to Axel.
And the whole thing explodes. It turns out that Doro is pregnant and they
make a go of it. All seems well until one day Axel bumps into another  old
flame, and he tries to set up a date. As it happens, Doro has cancelled her
weekend plans, and all of a sudden there is a problem with the
communication.
Axel keeps his date, at Norbert's place, and that's when the fun starts.
Doro decides to check it all out. And as she gets there, of course, her
pregnancy is hitting the water stage, and Norbert has to take her to the
hospital,  which creates a problem... but Norbert and Doro seem to get along
ok along the way. And as it turns out, Norbert is the one that gets forced
into helping with the birth of the baby, not exactly what excites him.
Norbert's friend, who also had a crush on Axel ends up taking him to the
hospital, and by that time it is too late. Doro has already decided to throw
him out. She thinks that he is having a gay affair. As it turns out the date
he had brought along some excitement and used it on herself  and him. And
when the movie that the boys went to  make room for Axel and his date, goes
awry, they all return to Norbert's. And Norbert's
living in friend, goes to the bathroom where the date is in the bathtub. And
they get it on.... comedy city.
The film ends on a note that does not state, or suggest that Norbert and
Axel will become a pair, but if this doesn't happen, they at least have
become very good friends.
While the film is not great by any means, there are moments that are funny
and weird and keep you going from minute to minute. It is a total comedy of
errors, where nothing seems to work right, even if the end suggests that
here is the right'est thing that has happened in the whole story.
Funny acting all along, although most of the gay men are played for laughs
and have a tendency to over act. it does not take away from the fun that one
can have with this film, even if the subject matter can make many of us
uncomfortable, including this reviewer... but it has funny moments.
Check it out, but be careful with your jealous mate.... 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Til Schweiger, Joachim Krol, Katja Riemann, Rufus Beck.
Screenplay:  Sonke Wortmann.
Director:  Sonke Wortmann.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Of all the things I might claim to understand about movies, I suspect
that what makes a given film popular with American audiences will never be
one of them.  With that in mind, what makes a film popular with
non-American audiences ranks somewhere with "what is the sound of one hand
clapping" on my personal scale of philosophical inscrutability.  Many is
the film which has come to these shores trumpeted as "one of the most
popular films ever in (fill-in-native-country), and it seems that for
every ONCE WERE WARRIORS (a record-breaker in New Zealand) there is a THE
MYSTERY OF RAMPO (last year's Japanese smash which turned out to be a bit
of psychedelic soft-core porn).  Now comes the German hit MAYBE...MAYBE
NOT ("Die Bewegte Mann" in Europe), a silly and fairly aimless sex farce
which provides a sexy star with very little to do.
     That star is Til Schweiger, who plays a randy waiter-cum-photographer
named Axel Feldheim.  Though he lives with girlfriend Doro (Katja
Riemann), Axel has a tendency to stray, and when Doro catches him in the
act, Axel finds himself out on the street.  His search for a place to stay
brings him to the attention of Waltraud (Rufus Beck), a flamboyant drag
queen who longs to seduce the handsome but hetero Axel.  Axel, however, is
on to Waltraud, and opts to stay with Waltraud's more reserved but just as
gay friend Norbert (Joachim Krol).  As it turns out, Norbert is also just
as interested in Axel, and makes his intentions quite apparent.  Thus
begins a series of misunderstandings in which Axel's attempts to patch up
his relationship with Doro are complicated by her believe that he may not
be cheating on her with women only.
     Writer/director Sonke Wortmann has created an erratic comedy which
swings back and forth from being an airy trifle to half-heartedly
attempting genuine character development.  The opening twenty minutes
promise plenty of broad laughs, from Doro's discovery of Axel and a
lady-friend in a bathroom stall to Waltraud's frantic attempts to look
remove his drag costume so as not to scare off Axel.  Gradually, however,
Wortmann begins trying to generate sympathy for his characters.  Norbert,
whose relationships always seem to be disasters, moons over Axel; Axel
himself experiences the other side of sexual predation in the bathroom of
a gay bar.  It appears as though Wortmann is setting up some lessons for
our two protagonists to learn from each other -- Norbert will learn to
make better romantic choices, and Axel will become a more faithful partner
to Doro.
     Then MAYBE...MAYBE NOT makes a jarring U-turn back to unapologetic,
bawdy slapstick, and throws any pretense at character out the window.
That wouldn't necessarily be a problem, particularly because the character
developments were looking fairly obvious, except that the comic situations
of the last half hour are equally obvious, and not very funny.  In one
scene, Norbert, Waltraud and Norbert's extremely butch lover (Armin Rohde)
are annoyed in a theater by three youths who walk into "A Death in Venice"
believing it's going to be "Rambo;" in another, Axel's tryst with an old
flame (Antonia Lang) becomes another chance for Doro to catch him in an
awkward position.  Wortmann directs it all with a sluggish inevitability,
and takes a final turn back to sentimentality which suggests that he was
just making the whole thing up as he went along.
     The chiseled-cheeked Schweiger has become a superstar in Germany as a
result of this role, and outside of his obvious sex appeal, I can't quite
see why.  He tries to give Axel a boyish charm to counteract his
incomprehensible shifts in personality, but he is the prototype pretty
face with little spark.  Similarly, Joachim Krol's award-winning role
seems remarkably shallow, and shows that America doesn't have a monopoly
on befuddling acting honors.  The problem I had with both roles, and with
MAYBE...MAYBE NOT as a whole, was that there seemed to be no point to any
of it, no growth of character, and some unappealing messages.  Every male
character is perpetually horny, Axel is just as big a jerk when the film
ends as he was when it started, and we are reassured that everything will
be fine because Doro will continue to be a door-mat and forgive Axel's
philandering yet again.  Perhaps it's just a cultural gap I was unable to
cross, but MAYBE...MAYBE NOT struck me as only sporadically amusing, and
sometimes flat-out irritating.  Which is why I will never make my living
deciding what movies get made.
