Title
Review for In Dreams (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Lately, many horror movies have been released.  They are all the same-
predictable and gory.  In Dreams is a very different horror movie that doesn't
rely on blood and gore to make it scary.  Annette Bening stars as Claire
Cooper, a wife and mother.  Her husband is Paul Cooper, played by Aidan Quinn. 
Her daughter, Rebecca, played by Katie Sagona is happy.  The three of them live
in a big house, have a housekeeper, and are truly happy.  There is something
keeping Claire from happiness though.  Terrible things, things that she can't
explain.  All her life, she has had dreams of children dying.  She has a
psychological link to a serial killer.  No one believes her, but she knows she
isn't psychotic.
Rebecca stars as the mirror in her school play of Snow White.  She has been
rehearsing her one line over and over again.  Earlier on in the day, Claire had
visions of a little girl being led through an apple orchard by a man.  She
suspects this is the child that has been missing for some days now.  When she
finds out that the remains of the girl were found far from an apple orchard,
she is extremely confused.  Rebecca gets the line perfect in the play, and her
mother and father are very proud.  After the play, all of the kids involved
socialize for a while.  When Claire comes to pick up Rebecca, Rebecca is not
there.  The police are out searching everywhere, but she is nowhere to be
found.  The next day, the remains of Rebecca Cooper are found.  Claire is now
starting to wonder if she is seeing the future of what this brutal killer is
going to do.
She has more visions of what this man is going to do, and tries to inform the
police and her husband about what is going to happen next, but no one believes
her.  She is admitted to a mental home now.  Her psychiatrist doesn't even
believe what she is saying.  The thing is, Claire isn't crazy.  She knows what
she is talking about.  She finds out in her room that the man's name is Vivian
Thompson.  A creepy phrase is written all over the walls- MY DADDY WAS A
DOLLAR.  It continues on and on.  I have chills just thinking of this
terrifying scene.  She tries her best to find Vivian now and see what it is
that he wants.  She escapes from the mental home to track down Vivian.  When
she finally finds Vivian it is not a pretty sight.  One of the creepiest scenes
in any movie I have ever seen follows when she meets Vivian for the first time.
 An ending scene keeps you guessing and on the edge of your seat.  What
happens?  I am afraid you will have to see In Dreams for yourself to find out. 
In Dreams is the scariest, creepiest, eeriest film in a long, long time.  It is
almost impossible to tell what is going to happen in her dreams, and what is
going to happen in real life.  Everything is explained extremely well, and it
was easy to understand what was going on.  There is hardly any blood and gore
in In Dreams, and this just proves you don't need the blood and gore to make a
good scary movie.  Teen audiences will trash this film because of the cast and
the fact that it isn't a trashy slasher movie.  Every scene is packed with
action, the film never slows down.  It keeps your attention extremely well. 
The film was very disturbing as well.  Some of the images and sounds will stick
with me throughout the movie year of 1999.
Annette Bening delivers a wonderful performance as she makes you believe the
pain that Claire is going through.  At times, she overacted a little bit, but
that doesn't take away from her outstanding performance.  Aidan Quinn gives a
great follow up to his role in October's Practical Magic with Sandra Bullock
and Nicole Kidman.  He should get many more roles as the year goes on.  Robert
Downey Jr. is very mysterious and creepy.  He makes the role of Vivian Thompson
interesting, but at the same time extremely scary.  In Dreams is up there with
Scream and I Know What You Did Last Summer.  It may be a different type of
film, but it is just as scary as Scream.  
The Bottom Line- In Dreams will be in my dreams for a while.

Author
Steve Rhodes
As Claire Cooper, Annette Bening has been having some dreams lately, and
they're not of sugarplums dancing in her head.  Asleep and awake, she
has horrific visions of a man who leads little girls to their death.  In
his best creepy style Robert Downey Jr.  plays the serial killer, whose
demonic acts have seized control of Claire's brain.
Written and directed by THE CRYING GAME's Neil Jordan, IN DREAMS wants
to be more than the typical psychological horror film, but it only
partially succeeds.  Jordan is well versed in ways of divulging facts in
bits and pieces so that he can maintain the suspense.  However, the
movie is rooted in the over-the-top horror movie genre, and this proves
to be its downfall.
The plot involves a town that 25 years ago was flooded to make way for a
new reservoir.  The killer claims to have been chained to a bed in the
town when it was flooded.  He's now a grown man who goes around the
thick woods, stealing little girls and then killing them.  Apparently he
wants to stop so he causes Claire to dream his future violent actions.
As is de rigueur in this genre, everyone around Claire thinks she's nuts
when she predicts the upcoming crimes.  Aidan Quinn plays her confused
husband, who thinks the answer to Claire's difficulties is medical help.
As Dr. Silverman, Claire's psychiatrist, Stephen Rea doesn't believe a
word Claire says.  She has a simple explanation for her bizarre
behavior.  "I'm not obsessed; I'm possessed!" Claire with wild, bleary
eyes tells her doctor.
As the movie grinds on, it becomes increasing familiar.  Claire spends
more and more of her time in padded rooms and strapped to beds, while
her doctors drug her to calm her down.  Annette Bening does the best she
can with a role that almost demands overacting.
By the predictable last act, in which Claire finally gets to confront
the man from her dreams, the movie has deteriorated from intriguing to
tiresome.  At least the way in which Claire ultimately gets back at her
tormentor is satisfying.
IN DREAMS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for violence and profanity and would
be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        "In Dreams" is such a strikingly original film that one
is somewhat tempted to forgive its excesses.  A psychological
thriller comprised of equal parts intrigue and phantasmagoria,
the story effectively drenches the audience in shadowy insanity,
even if the characters themselves never really involve us.  It's
a textbook example of style over substance.
        The plot involves Claire Cooper (Annette Bening), a New
England housewife who finds herself mentally linked to a serial
killer, sensing his every thought.  (The name Claire was chosen,
I suspect, as a pun on the word "clairvoyant.")  Slowly going
insane from the experience, Claire attempts to find and confront
the killer, with whom she has a personal score to settle.
        It sounds great on paper, but the film is ultimately
not as satisfying as one might expect.  Despite its promising
start, "In Dreams" loses sight of its surprisingly effective
macabre tone just past its halfway point, eventually collapsing
into a tangled mess of contradictions and confusion.
        Much of the story is standard issue: Claire's husband
Paul (a thankless performance by Aidan Quinn) tries to convince
the police that his wife's psychic abilities are genuine and can
assist them in the search for the killer; they scoff, but
eventually come around.  Claire, meanwhile, is locked up in a
mental institution, but manages to escape with a little help
from that old movie standby, the ventilation ducts.  Soon she's
on the trail of the killer, a deeply disturbed fellow by the name
of Vivian (actor's identity withheld; see below), and things are
wrapped up by not one but *two* tried-and-true staples of
American cinema: the chase scene and the gunfight.  Yawn.  Did
someone forget that the film was supposed to be a psychological
thriller?  Did they think they were making "Die Hard part 19?"
        Since the movie goes to great pains to hide the identity
of the actor playing Vivian until the last possible moment, I
won't reveal the surprise, except to mention that it's a
satisfactory performance, though perhaps a bit too over-the-top
to be truly "great."  On the other hand, Annette Bening's work
here gets steadily better as the film progresses; surprisingly,
she's far more convincing as a lunatic than the smiling housewife
she portrays in the story's opening scenes.  Aidan Quinn's
performance as Paul, however, is given too little screen time to
really become anything more than a fleeting face in the shadows.
        As is so often the case, there's a bit too much story
contained in the movie.  Particularly puzzling is a subplot
involving an affair Paul may or may not have been having with
an Australian woman-- after a brief mention in the story's opening
scenes, the whole issue is completely abandoned.  I question its
inclusion in the film's final cut; it adds nothing but confusion to
the story.  Since the movie clearly thinks Paul is a good guy,
why question it?
        Nonetheless, "In Dreams" has flashes of remarkable
originality, marred primarily by its reliance on a conventional
resolution for a plot that is *anything* but ordinary; director
Neil Jordan deserves credit for even attempting a project of
this nature.  Boldly photographed and directed, the movie
comes frustratingly close to greatness, though in the end its
efforts are undermined by a generic finale and logic gaps that
could probably have been fixed if another draft of the screenplay
had been written.  (Question: if Claire and Vivian are psychically
connected, why can't he find her when she's hiding in the woods?
And why did the hospital put Claire in the *exact same room*
that Vivian had occupied 25 years before?  That blows beyond
mere "suspension of disbelief" and enters into the boring realm
of "plot contrivance.")  And Neil Jordan's bizzare symbolism fills
the frame: what's the significance of the apples?  Are we supposed
to be this perplexed while watching?  Sometimes the director is so
determined to prove that he's clever that coherency and plot are
sacrified in favor of technique.
        But there's still the potential for entertainment here,
especially if you like film noir, a genre that doesn't get much
attention these days.  The movie definitely has some great moments;
the "Titanic"-like underwater scenes at the local reservoir are
haunting, as are many of Claire's hallucinations.  Through them,
we can feel (and share) her madness.
        I screened "In Dreams" with my brother, himself a fine
amateur critic, and his summary of the film says it all: it's like
"Nightmare on Elm Street" meets "What Dreams May Come."
That should tell you all you need to know.  Thanks, Adam; I
couldn't have said it better myself.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Director Neil Jordan adapts the novel "Doll Eyes" into a film starring
Warren Beatty's wife, Annette Bening, Jordan's own acting alter-ego, Stephen
Rea, and the wonderboy of Hollywood excess, Robert Downey Jr. This film
takes another bloody stab at serial killers on film, and borrows hints of
other thrillers including the NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREETS, PSYCHO (6/10), SEVEN
(8.5/10), KISS THE GIRLS (7/10) and THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS (7.5/10).
PLOT:
Woman prophesizes grisly visions in her dreams which ultimately transfer
into real-life fatal occurrences. She believes that a serial killer is
raping her mind, and dropping these dreams into her head. Eventually, the
woman psychologically deteriorates into a basket-case, but keeps fighting to
maintain her weak grasp on reality, and discover the truth behind her
unbelievable psychic apparitions.
CRITIQUE:
I had a dream about this film. I dreamt that it would be a muddled
psychological mess, pureed into several sparks of slick style, incoherent
and unbelievable plotting, and a deja-vu feeling of a deja-vu. I felt as
though the movie would be unoriginal in many ways, including its standard
ending, which would be close to laughable. I felt as though the first 25
minutes of the film would set a decent tone with some original camera work,
and a nice creepy mood, but that the second half of the movie would just
fall apart, and adhere to the blueprint of all other standard bogeyman
movies. I also dreamt that Robert Downey Jr. would barely make an appearance
in the film, despite his mug showing up all over the trailers, and float
through his role without an ounce of dedication to the art of original
character.
The dream continued with visions of a movie that seemed to have the
potential to break through all the standard serial killer movie barriers,
but did nothing less that run through an uninspired story line, with a
fast-cut editing knife, flashbacks, and a host of symbolism slapped in for
amusement. The apparitions that I had, also failed to fully explain any of
the real motives or methods used by the serial killer, consequently
disallowing me from understanding, or even appreciating his character on any
well-developed level.
The dream also allowed me to somewhat appreciate fellow movie critic Gene
Siskel's constant rants on the over-abundance of serial killer movies in
Hollywood, in that I am also getting sick and tired of seeing the same
subject done to death, without any unique or creative perspective. Rule #1:
If you reaaaaally insist on making a serial killer movie, please make sure
that it ain't a retread of a dozen better ones. All in all, the dream ended
on a somber note that remarked upon the film's lack of novelty, casual use
of child murders as a prop for a badly developed script, some very cool
style, and an overly typical ending which explained very little about the
actual mind of the killer, or his capacity to make unreal things happen.
It was only then that the house lights went on, the credit crawl began its
march upscreen, and I realized that none of it was a dream after all. I
clicked and clicked my heels, but I was nowhere to go. It was my reality,
and my chump change wasted on this piece of cinematic repetitiveness, which
turned out to be more of a nightmare than any state of dream.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film was originally titled BLUE VISION.
Robert Downey Jr. lived with actress Sarah Jessica Parker for seven years
during the 1980's. She is now married to fellow actor Matthew Broderick.
Since August, 1996, Robert has been arrested for heroin possession, remanded
to a secure drug rehabilitation center, revoked probation after continued
drug use, jailed 180 days after violating parole and treated for a cut over
his nose, after getting into a fight with a prison inmate. In 1992, he was
nominated for an Oscar as Best Actor for his role as Charlie Chaplin in
CHAPLIN (8/10). Natch!
Director Neil Jordan has used actor Stephen Rea in his last six movie
productions.
Strangely enough, the co-writer of this mediocre script, Bruce Robinson,
also co-wrote one of my favourite films from 1998, RETURN TO PARADISE
(7.5/10), and wrote and directed the British cult classic, WITHNAIL AND I.
Actor Aidan Quinn was Paramount's first choice to play Jesus Christ in their
production of LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST before a storm of controversy forced
them to cancel their plans for the movie. Actor Willem Dafoe scooped up the
posh part, after Universal picked up the film. He has been happily married
to actress Elizabeth Bracco since 1987.
Annette Bening received $3million for her role in 1998's THE SIEGE (6.5/10).

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "IN DREAMS" (DreamWorks)
How awful can a movie starring Annette Bening and Robert
Downey Jr., helmed by writer/director Neil Jordan be? "In Dreams"
plumbs new depths of malevolence, becoming an early candidate for the
Worst Movies of 1999 category. Annette Bening plays a New England
children's book author who is tormented by weird, terrifying
dreams. She's a psychic who can see things before they happen, and she
doesn't know what to make of images of an almost surreal underwater
town, mutilated bodies, and a mysterious man with long hair who leads
a trusting child through an apple orchard to her death. Of course, no
one believes her - not the cops, not even her often-absent airline
pilot husband, Aidan Quinn. After a couple of suicide attempts, she
winds up in a mental institution, where she occupies the same room
that Robert Downey Jr. once lived in. He's a maniacal murderer whose
abused childhood included being left chained to a bed by his mother
when their town was being flooded to make a reservoir. Stephen Rea is
Bening's psychiatrist who tries to make sense of her ramblings. Robert
Downey Jr. overacts so dreadfully that one wonders why the L.A. judge
decided to release him from his jail sentence temporarily last year to
finish this film, which is based on Bari Wood's novel "Doll's Eyes."
The singular redeeming feature is its eerie, underwater
imagery. Jordan built a small town and then flooded it in the same
Baja, California, water tanks where James Cameron shot "Titanic." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "In Dreams" is a tedious,
ludicrous 2. Adding insult to injury, the Andrews Sisters' W.W. II
ditty, "Don't Sit Under the Apple Tree," is used on the sound track to
signal impending doom.

Author
Walter Frith
Director Neil Jordan has never been known to make very good movies
unless they're are products of his own scripts.  His Oscar winning
screenplay of 1992's 'The Crying Game' is an example of his skill as an
excellent writer, as that film had one of the most shocking plot twists
seen in films this decade.  Jordan applied a hypnotic like style of
direction to 'The Crying Game' and does the same on a much lesser scale
with 'In Dreams'.
The film isn't a failure, it just looks weak in many areas but has good
performances from its cast which usually redeems films weak in other
areas.  It has a set up with a social injustice from the past that comes
back to haunt others in the film years later.  
A small town in Massachusetts is flooded in an excavation project in
1965 and one of the town's children falls through the cracks.  Combined
with years of physical abuse at the hands of his mother and his horrific
stay in a mental institution where he received electric shock
treatments, he becomes a serial killer (Robert Downey Jr.) and is able
to form a nexus with a woman who has psychic abilities.  In other words,
he can get inside her dreams and torture her.
The subject of his torture is Annette Bening.  She plays a woman with
psychic abilities who has had the gift (curse) since childhood. 
Sometimes her visions are real and sometimes they are not.  This leads
to many psychotic episodes for her after the vision of her daughter's
murder comes true.  Her life is further complicated by her husband's
(Aidan Quinn) suspected infidelity and she is put into a mental
institution when her dreams are interpreted by a psychiatrist (Stephen
Rea) as those of a disturbed mind.
Rather than elevate the film to a level of dramatic interpretation and
put it across as a complex thriller, Neil Jordan instead relies too much
on the "schlock value" found in numerous slasher films of the past.  His
eerie camera work and deserted forest locations are commendable but this
can't compensate for a rather thin story.  Accompanying Neil Jordan on
his screenplay is Bruce Robinson ('The Killing Fields') who all but
disappeared from the major Hollywood screen writing scene with only five
writing credits to his distinction in the last 15 years and is not
impressive in this effort at all.  
Annette Bening is quite good in the film and Robert Downey Jr., a very
convincing psycho here, has a scene near the end of the film that looks
like 'The Shining', 'Psycho', and 'The Silence of the Lambs' all mixed
together and as it looks all too obvious, it falls short of getting even
a marginal recommendation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 15, 1999
Starring: Annette Bening, Robert Downey Jr., Aidan Quinn, Stephen Rea,
Paul Guilfoyle, Katie Sagona
Directed by: Neil Jordan
Distributed by: DreamWorks Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (violence/terror, language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/indreams.htm
Psychological thrillers, like Neil (INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE) Jordan's
latest film, IN DREAMS, are a scary bunch of movies. They are to cinema
what Edgar Allan Poe was to American literature: a dark and haunting
introspective of what makes humanity tick. Thrillers which leave an icy
cold in your chest hours after you leave the theater are the best kind,
for they are the ones that hit the mark and realize their vision.
Others, like IN DREAMS, make a marginal push toward such a pinnacle, but
never really reach the peak. 
Instead, director Jordan goes for shock value. The imagery in IN DREAMS
haunting stuff, the kind that nightmares are based on. Unfortunately
they're so over the top that they become forced, and instead of being
completely immersed the audience is on the outside looking in. Jordan
*does* make good use of symbolism, and the recurring power of that
cannot be denied. His script, which he co-wrote with Bruce Robinson
(RETURN TO PARADISE), revolves around an apple orchard. Apples appear
frequently to denote chaos or instability, and to great effect. 
Annette Bening is the script's main character, Claire Cooper. Claire is
haunted by nightmares which are fragmented and inconclusive at best -- a
sort of homage to TWELVE MONKEYS. In her nightmares, a girl is lead
through a grove of apple trees by an older man, completely trusting.
It's only days later that she realizes her dreams were a supersomatic
link to serial killer Vivienne Thompson (Robert Downey Jr., in a
wonderfully psychotic role). The dreams become more powerful, the
connection more vivid, until finally Claire abandons her husband (Aidan
Quinn) to track down Vivienne. 
So why doesn't IN DREAMS work where TWELVE MONKEYS did? Perhaps the
imaging in TWELVE MONKEYS was more subtle, and perhaps there the plot
took longer to play out than it did here. IN DREAMS is highly
suspenseful at the movie's open, but two-thirds of the way through, most
of the information is already revealed. It disintegrates into a
rolling-ball movie, wherein all of the plot points that have been built
up are now simply being knocked down by a ball set in motion. There's no
more guesswork. Similarly, the movie calls for a lot of character
buildup, which the script never really provides -- characters are flat,
and scenes are cut too quickly and too often. 
Overall, IN DREAMS is a frightening watch, but one that most viewers are
likely to be put off by. It most likely will become prime Saturday night
rental material. 

Author
Mariane Desautels
In Dreams opens with the flooding of a small town and wonderful music
composed by Elliot Goldenthal. The opening titles blink by, scratched in
a font approximating a child's handwriting, superposed onto the first of
the underwater sequences that likely inspired the film's working title,
'Blue Vision.'
We then meet the protagonist, Claire Cooper, as she is helping her
daughter Rebecca to memorise her line in her kindergarden's production
of a very Disneyan Snow White. The rest of the film has nothing in
common with Disney, and everything to do with Snow White, especially in
the light of the fairy tale's many interpretations. The stage has been
set, and onward goes In Dreams, with its dream-logic and vitality, like
vein blood seen blue through thin skin, and red bloodstains or apple
blossoms.
It is a very beautiful, very flawed, and very memorable nightmare. You
do not need me to tell you anything more about it.
Word to every other critic (Mr Ebert, This Means You): I was left
puzzled by one 'detail' at the end, but I'm going to do something about
it (and verify my educated guess)... *Read the book*
-this review copyright 1999 by mariane desautels-
        http://pages.infinit.net/amneria/7.html

Author
James Sanford
All sorts of wild things are going on in the bedroom of Claire Cooper
(Annette Bening), but not necessarily the kind of action you might
suspect.  For one thing, every time she and husband Paul (Aidan Quinn)
get hot and heavy, Claire zones out and has disturbing visions of
little girls in danger, spooky orchards and menacing strangers, none
of which puts her in the mood for love.
Is Claire a modern-day Cassandra or a garden-variety kook? "In Dreams"
eventually gets around to revealing the answer, but by then it's
doubtful anyone will care, since we've already seen Claire attempt
suicide by driving off a bridge, desperately struggle to push what
looks like 20 pounds of apples down her garbage disposal; answer the
phone with a hysterical "leave me alone!"; hurl a computer monitor out
the window after being spooked by a mysterious message; and cause a
multi-car pile-up after prancing into the middle of a busy road.
Suffice to say, she's not exactly your typical lovable heroine.
Then again, "In Dreams" was directed and co-written by Neil Jordan,
whose movies ("The Crying Game," "The Butcher Boy") usually dance on
the cutting edge. This one, unfortunately, quickly waltzes off into
Looneyville, despite a tantalizing set-up and various themes pilfered
from "Don't Look Now," "Psycho" and "Silence of the Lambs."
After awhile, the picture becomes so patently absurd all you can do is
laugh, as our girl Claire finds herself locked in a padded cell and
telepathically tortured by a cross-dressing mystery man (Robert Downey
Jr.) with a fondness for obscure nursery rhymes and raggedy clothes
that make him look like a refugee from a dinner-theater production of
"Oliver!"  Bening and Downey, perhaps forgetting they're in one of
those new-fangled "talkies," recklessly indulge in the kinds of
outrageous facial expressions not seen onscreen since the last chapter
of "The Perils of Pauline" unspooled.
Though "In Dreams" is easily the worst film Jordan has ever been
associated with - beating out "High Spirits," which featured Daryl
Hannah as an Irish ghost in what looked like a plastic trash bag -
it's full of vivid images: golden Japanese lanterns, emerald-tinted
stained-glass windows, crimson bedcovers. It's a rainbow of ravishing
colors, but the crock it leads to is decidedly not filled with
gold. James Sanford

Author
Matt Williams
Director Neil Jordan takes a gamble and fails with his latest movie, In
Dreams.  He assembles a talented cast, and combines it with some superb
camera work.  But then he applies these paints to a fragmented and
nonsensical story.  Can a movie exist with style, but no substance? In
Dreams is a convincing argument in the negative.
Claire Cooper (Annette Bening) has had psychic visions all her life,
though she never knew what they meant.  However, lately they've been
getting much more disturbing, as she becomes certain that at least part
of what she's seeing involves a missing young girl.
The increasingly nightmarish visions are beginning to upset her husband,
Paul (Aidan Quinn), as well.  He begins to suspect his wife may slowly
be going crazy.  A psychiatrist, Dr. Silverman (Stephen Rea) suggests
that she be hospitalized.
Claire, however, begins to suspect that someone is feeding her dreams.
She fears that her psychic pen-pal may be a serial killer (Robert Downey
Jr.), and that her visions are anticipating his actions.
In Dreams is wonderfully shot by cinematographer Darius Khondji.
Haunting and evocative, the imagery of the film is easily the film's
strongest suit.  The only flaw here is that the film is a little
overreliant on a few questionable motifs (you won't leave the theater
craving any apples, that's for sure).
However, there is not much behind this pretty facade.  What starts out
as a mildly interesting premise quickly becomes ludicrous as the film
descends along its mindless path.  Disjointed and confusing at times, In
Dreams is like a bad dream itself.  Full of none sequiturs and loose
ends, just when you think the movie can't make any less sense, it
somehow surprises you.
There's some good talent here, though, that gives the material a fair
shot.  Annette Bening makes the strongest impression with her descent
into madness.  Aidan Quinn is also notable as her beleaguered husband,
yet the film doesn't quite know what to do with his role. It tosses him
a minor subplot early on, only to forget about it a few scenes later.
Robert Downey Jr. is appropriately creepy as the film's mysterious bad
guy. However, his familiar character seems to be patched together from
the assorted parts of serial killers of films past.
Despite the efforts of the cast, nothing can quite disguise the
hollowness at the film's center.  In fact, it's almost tragic that such
good actors and imagery have been wasted on such a worthless movie.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Neil Jordan.
Cast: Annette Bening, Aidan Quinn, Robert Downey Jr., Stephen Rea, Paul 
Guilfoyle, Katie Sagona, Margo Martindale.
1999 - 103 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed January 20, 1999.
Every great once in a while, a mainstream, big-budget studio picture 
will come along and miraculously restore your faith in Hollywood, due to 
its ingeniously fresh ideas and the courage to not stick with the 
practicalities of any certain genre. After viewing the mind-numbing 
"Virus," I immediately saw "In Dreams," directed by Neil Jordan (1992's 
"The Crying Game" and 1994's "Interview With the Vampire"), which is one 
of the most consistently disturbing, surprising, and visually beautiful 
motion pictures I have seen this decade.
In the eerily gorgeous opening sequence, we are informed that in the 
'60s the town of Northfield was completely flooded out to make way for a 
reservoir as we are shown the now 30-year-old ghost town that a group of 
forensic investigators are exploring underwater. Soon afterwards, we 
discover that they are searching for a little girl who was recently 
abducted by a serial killer. We then meet Claire Cooper (Annette 
Bening), a generally satisfied woman living in New England with her 
husband (Aidan Quinn), who flies 747s for a living, and young daughter, 
Rebecca (Katie Sagona), who is anxiously preparing for her school play 
of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs." For a long time, Claire has been 
having a recurring dream about the missing girl, whom she sees in an 
apple orchard being led away by a person with red hair. She has reason 
to believe that she may, actually, hold the key to the child's 
disappearance until the murdered body of the girl is found nowhere near 
an apple orchard. Since "In Dreams" is so completely unpredictable and 
pleasing from beginning to end, I will have to tread carefully 
concerning what happens next so as not to give away any important plot 
points. Ultimately, a tragedy occurs involving Claire, and as she 
gradually becomes more and more haunted by the killer whom she thinks 
has found a way into her brain, and her dreams, which do hold the 
answers to what will happen in the future, the people around her, 
including her psychiatrist (Stephen Rea), start to believe that she is 
going out of her mind.
Like slasher films, the tried-and-true "serial killer" movie has been 
done to death in the last two decades, but it took a marvelous film like 
"In Dreams" to wondrously rejuvenate new life into the well-worn genre. 
So entirely imaginative and original this film is, I almost wasn't sure 
how to react while watching it. For a person who sees most every film 
that is released, whether it be in the theater or on video, it is easy 
for their senses to be deadened with all of the recycled junk that is 
made these days, but "In Dreams" is the complete polar opposite, with 
enough ingenuity and inventiveness for five movies. Not only that, but 
the film is one of the few I have seen in many years that I could 
actually say is frightening.
The cast in "In Dreams" is uniformly great, particularly Annette Bening, 
who is able to gain our outright sympathy despite her inevitable demise 
into madness. Bening has sparkled before, most notably in 1995's "The 
American President," but this is a new kind of role for her and she may 
very well give her best performance to date here. When Robert Downey Jr. 
finally shows up late in the picture, he comes off as one of the most 
believably menacing villains in memory with his almost "dead," monotone 
speech pattern and ill temper, to say the least.
It may only be the third week in January but I can already firmly state 
that there will not be a superior example of cinematography all year. 
Seldom before has a director of photography shown me such unforgettable 
and devastatingly ominous images as Darius Khonji ("Seven," "The City of 
Lost Children") does in this film. Every single representation is 
brought to glorious light, and some of the best examples would be the 
apple orchard; the underwater ghost town; the school play; and the 
Carlton Hotel. I could easily go on and on, going into great depth about 
these marvelous sights, and others, but I do not want to spoil the 
experience by giving away the smallest detail. For the whole 103-minute 
running time of "In Dreams," I was in a state of awe at everything I was 
seeing onscreen, and then utterly shocked by how little I could predict 
of what was going to happen. One particularly brilliant and intricately 
constructed sequence involves the same thing occurring to two different 
people in two different time periods, with the stories being seamlessly 
intercut with each other.
It is not too often that a film is released that actually has so many 
wonderful ideas, and it is an even rarer occurrence that these ideas are 
actually carried through all the way to the end. There are simply too 
many films to count that have gotten my hopes up, only to crush them 
during the conclusion, but "In Dreams" only got better, with a climax 
that I could never have foretold but that left me with a satisfied and 
unsettled feeling. For once, here is a film that does not condescend to 
its audience in any way, nor does it try to sugarcoat the dark subject 
matter, and as far as director Neil Jordan goes, this is his most 
accomplished piece of work yet. Almost always a film, at the least, does 
not live up to its trailer, which usually makes a picture look better 
than it actually is, but "In Dreams" also lived up to this great 
challenge. On its opening weekend, I was saddened to see that "In 
Dreams" only made about $4.6 million, and was well behind such Hollywood 
"flukes" as "Varsity Blues," "Patch Adams," and "Virus," since this film 
is infinitely more intelligent and creative than all of those films 
combined. "In Dreams" is a nightmarish, extraordinarily harrowing 
experience, and although only January, it is sure to remain one of the 
year's best films.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Dustin
Putman's Film Haven >

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
The worst way to begin a year is with a massive disappointment.  And
yet, DreamWorks has delivered what will likely be one of the most
disappointing films of 1999.  Here we have In Dreams, a thriller
directed by the immensely talented Neil Jordan (The Crying Game, Mona
Lisa).  It has an extremely able cast, led by Annette Bening and
supported by Aidan Quin, Robert Downey Jr., and Stephen Rea.  It also
has my favorite cinematographer, Darius Khondji (Seven, Alien
Resurrection), and one of my favorite music composers, Elliott
Goldenthal.  And, it's been brought to us by DreamWorks, who have
promised to bring out only quality entertainment.
I had forgotten that DreamWorks' first picture was The Peacemaker. 
They are capable of making lousy films, but In Dreams isn't lousy as
much as it's plainly mediocre.  And it's such a shame:  not only is
there limitless talent involved, but the film is actually quite good for
well over an hour.  It's a dark, intelligent film that seems to explore
its possibilities; but, in the final forty-five minutes, it becomes
implausible, silly, and almost unwatchably bad at times.  The conclusion
is moderately satisfying, but nothing can overcome the sloppy way it
reaches its resolution.  
Benning and Quinn play Claire and Paul Cooper; Claire is a woman who
has "dreams" when she's wide awake -- dreams that seem to show her past
events.  Usually, these events are intertwined with crimes:  in the
beginning of the film, she sees a young girl being led through an orchid
by an ill-adjusted man, and she thinks the girl has been kidnapped in
real life.  When her own daughter gets kidnapped, Claire realizes that
the visions she has are actually visions of the future.
When the fate of her daughter is discovered, Claire loses her mind. 
She can't control the dreams, and it becomes clear that she has some
kind of connection with the ill-adjusted man (who turns out later to be
Robert Downey Jr.).  A psychiatrist, Dr. Silverman (Stephen Rae), tries
to evaluate her dreams, but no one really believes her.  Eventually,
after multiple suicide attempts, Claire is committed to a mental
institution.  And, as luck would have it, she's placed in the exact same
room in which her psychotic male counterpart had lived during the early
years of his life.
It really does sound like a silly story.  Credit Jordan for making it
seem so disturbing and intriguing for the first two-thirds of it.  The
background story for In Dreams revolves around a town that had been
flooded twenty years before the events in the film take place; the early
scenes, which explore the deep blue streets of the underwater town, are
extremely eerie.  Khondji and Jordan work well together to create a
dark, silvery-blue mood throughout the film.  There isn't a shot in the
picture that doesn't look great -- the various settings (the Coopers'
old house, the mental institution, etc.) are all very well photographed.
In addition, Annette Bening is exceptional in the lead role.  She
carries the film effortlessly, giving depth and personality to a
character who might not have been very interesting on paper.  Bening
does a fantastic job of showing us Claire's descent into madness; it
never seems overwrought or phony, and it's so believable that in one
particular scene (in which she's trying to convince Dr. Silverman that
her husband is going to be murdered) I became visibly agitated due to
the effectiveness of her performance.  Most of the supporting
performances are less than noteworthy -- Quinn is reliable, as always,
but Rae seems present only because Jordan always has him present.  
The only other performance worth mentioning is that of Robert Downey
Jr., and he is one of the reasons the film becomes so bad towards the
end.  Now, I do realize that it was up to Jordan to make sure that
Downey Jr. didn't overact, but both men are responsible for the
laughable absurdities that take place on screen in the final act of In
Dreams.  I was willing to overlook the fact that Claire seems to
overcome her insanity to turn into a pseudo-action hero.  I was willing
to overlook the ridiculous way in which some of the characters act to
serve the plot.  But I can not overlook Downey Jr.'s performance, and
the purely cliched mess of a character that he plays.
Hasn't the I'm-psycho-because-my-mother-made-me-do-it motif been done
before?  And why is it that all psycho killers have to have problems
with their genders?  Do they all speak like five-year-olds trapped in
thirty-year-old bodies?  In its final thirty minutes, In Dreams explores
nothing but a truckload of cliches; I was too distracted to even immerse
myself in the brilliant image on screen.  It's so profoundly dumb that
it essentially ruins what came before.  At the core, In Dreams is just
another mediocre thriller.  But it could have been something unusually
good:  the people involved are good at what they do, and the first hour
is proof of that.  But what happened with this sloppy conclusion?  I
would rather have never seen the end.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Hamlet contemplates suicide but gives pause when he
questions "what dreams may come when we have shuffled off
this mortal coil."  For him, the Long Sleep might not end "the
heartache and the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir
to."  What happens when the decision to live does not solve
the problem--when the ills we bear include the most dreadful
nightmares that flow on unceasingly?  Claire Cooper (Annette
Bening) faces this plight in Neil Jordan's Hitchcockian, adult
horror tale, "In Dreams," a piece that is edited (by Tony
Lawson) is such an abrupt and choppy style that the
audience cannot avoid being bewildered by the narrative line.
Strange to say, this disjointed mess was directed by a man
whose credits include the sensational "The Butcher Boy."
   "In Dreams" borrows from the usual conventions of the
horror tale--the individual with psychic powers, the concerned
spouse, disbelieving authorities, the deranged killer whose
loneliness leads him to serial murder.  Writer-director Jordan
winnows a measure of innovation but lets it float away like
the detritus of a flood which destroys his New England town
during the 1960s.  The screenplay, which borders on
incoherence, occasionally draws inappropriate laughter from
the audience.  Still, Annette Bening's fleshed-out performance
dares to give some integrity to the film, as she carries
virtually the full load of the fable in the role of a woman
whose recurring nightmares cause disbelief from the police,
skepticism from the medical profession, and an unhealthy
instability to her marriage.
   The fragmented nature of the film begins with the opening
scene, with its images of divers searching the wreckage of a
village which had been evacuated, rendered into a ghost
town by a flood which buried everything in its path.  Neil
Jordan cuts to a present-day vista, a spacious New England
home at the foot of a forest, unnecessarily concealing its
connection to the flood until midway into the movie.  Until
then we wonder whether he has patched together two
altogether distinct tales whose only commonality is its
Massachusetts whereabouts.
   The camera hones in on Claire Cooper whose idyllic life as
the wife of 747 pilot Paul (Aidan Quinn) and loving
relationship with her nine-year-old daughter Rebecca (Katie
Sagona) are sullied by a succession of disturbing dreams. 
She observes an innocent little girl walking hand-in-hand to
an unknown destination with a man whose intentions appear
to Claire to be malevolent.  Her husband, who is home only
sporadically between flights to Australia and other parts, is
annoyed with Claire's obsessiveness, complains that she is
"not there" when he returns, and who feels justified in having
a near-affair a woman he has met Down Under.  As Claire's
recurrent nightmares convince her that her daughter is in
mortal danger and that some lunatic killer is feeding her his
own fantasies, she goes off the deep end, and is hospitalized.
Soon she receives counseling from an incredulous
neurosurgeon, Dr. Stevens (Dennis Boutskikaris), a
psychiatrist, Dr. Silverman (Stephen Rea), and police
detective Jack Kay (Paul Guilfoyle).  The diabolical killer
Vivian Thompson, a character perhaps inspired by Alfred
Hitchcock's Norman Bates, does not appear until the final
one-third of the film, giving cinematographer Darius Khondji
the chance to portray some startling images of hospital
rooms, foggy groves, and a haunted house, as Claire
migrates through a sequence of nightmares so steadily that
we scarcely know when she is awake and when she is
unanchored.
   If Bruce Robinson and Neil Jordan's screenplay were as
carefully structured as the movie's visuals are astonishing, "In
Dreams" would have been that rare find: a genuinely adult
contribution to the genre of horror now dominated by
adolescent piffles like "I Still Know What You Did Last
Summer."  Bening's performance as a woman driven to
psychosis by a madman's exploits and Robert Downey Jr.'s
achievement as a Norman Bates without that psychopath's
charming, other self would have carried the show.  But
Rosco, a burly nurse whose job consists primarily in
restraining raving patients at the psychiatric facility, mirrors
the feelings of the audience. When the authorities explain the
whole situation to him, he looks puzzled and replies, "I'm
lost."

Author
greg king
IN DREAMS (M).  
(Paramount/Dreamworks)
Director: Neil Jordan
Stars: Annette bening, Robert Downey jr, Aidan Quinn, Stephen Rea, Paul 
Guilfoyle, Margo Martindale, Dennis Boutsikaris.
The best films from director Neil Jordan are those set in his
native Ireland (The Crying Game, Michael Collins, etc), while his big
budget Hollywood entertainments (We're No Angels, etc) are bland and
disappointing.  His latest film In Dreams falls into this latter
category.  Co-written by Bruce Robinson (the cult classic Withnail And
I, The Killing Fields, etc) this bleak psychological thriller is
adapted from the book by Bari Wood (who wrote the novel upon which
David Cronenberg's creepy Dead Ringers was based).
The tormented heroine of the piece is Claire Cooper (Annette
Bening), who writes and illustrates fairy tale books for a living.
She is having terrible dreams and nightmares, most of them featuring a
young boy in a room filling with water.  It seems she has established
a psychic connection with serial nutcase psychopath Vivian (Robert
Downey jr), and witnesses some particularly gruesome murders.  The
only trouble is that no-one, including the local cops and her
frequently absent airline pilot husband (Aidan Quinn, in a thankless
role), will believe her.
When her own daughter becomes the killer's latest victim,
Claire has a nervous breakdown and is institutionalised.  It becomes
apparent to Claire that the killer is deliberately passing messages to
her, and she feels compelled to escape from prison and track him down
to end her traumatic experience.  But her dreams increasingly become
blurred with reality.
Jordan deftly establishes an unsettling atmosphere that is
reminiscent of far better thrillers (Don't Look Now, etc), but In
Dreams is ultimately disappointing.  This sort of thing has been done
before (e.g.; The Eyes Of Laura Mars, etc), but unfortunately the
potentially fascinating scenario is never quite convincing.
Jordan borrows much of the film's dark and forbidding
structure from the very fairy tales that Claire illustrates.  Jordan
also imbues the film with plenty of surreal imagery and rich
symbolism, particularly focusing on the colour red and apples, but it
all becomes too messy and obscure.  However, ace cinematographer
Darius Khondji (Seven, etc) creates some memorable and evocative
images.
Bening's performance has a nicely hysterical and over wrought
edge that suits the grim mood of the material.  There is a nicely
ironic touch to the casting of Downey, especially given his recent
legal troubles and his confessions to the tabloids, but he gives a
performance that is enigmatic rather than malevolent and genuinely
unnerving.  Regular Jordan collaborator Stephen Rea is wasted in a
stereotypical role as the haunted looking and sympathetic psychiatrist
who tries to puzzle out the true meaning of Claire's strange dreams.
In Dreams leaves a nasty aftertaste in the mouth, and will
have audiences feeling vaguely unsatisfied.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
IN DREAMS  *  Directed by Neil Jordan. Written by Bruce Robinson and
Jordan, based on the novel "Doll's Eyes" by Bari Wood. Photography, Darius
Khondji. Editing, Tony Lawson.  Production design, Nigel Phelps. Costumes
by Jeffrey Kurland Music, Elliot Goldenthal. Produced by Stephen Wooley.
Cast: Annette Bening (Claire Cooper), Aidan Quinn (Paul Cooper), Robert
Downey Jr. (Vivian Thompson), Paul Guilfoyle (Detective Jack Kay), Katie
Sagona (Rebecca Cooper), Stephen Rea (Dr. Silverman). A Dreamworks release.
99 minutes. R (horror. violence, language)
It's not just Viagra. Every day, the press reports a new chemical product
that promises long-awaited relief, if not cures. But there are no reports
of the best of drugs for insomniacs: films such as In Dreams.
This movie, ripping off a variety of horror flicks and then adding some of
its own tricks, has a first-class actress (Bening), a capable performer
(Quinn), and the occasionally brilliant Robert Downey Jr. who must
currently be in the process of returning to normal (???) Hollywood life,
after having been in substantial trouble.
Irish-born Neil Jordan is no mean director. Among his films are The
Butcher Boy,  Michael Collins, Interview with the Vampire, The Crying Game,
Mona Lisa, and his early, little seen and underrrated, scary fairy-tale The
Company of Wolves (1984), also scripted by him. How he and his cast  got
involved in In Dreams is beyond me.
In a small, graphic New England town, Claire is a book illustrator, her
latest, in this grim story, being Grimm's Tales. Husband Paul flies 747
passenger planes. Their daughter Rebecca is a cutie. Their dog Dobie does
not look like a Doberman to me.
Claire is suffering from terrible, grim visions which she believes are in
the head of someone else,who in turn is in her head, and which announce
horrible events before they even happen. One such is the disappearance and
the killing of a little girl when a nearby town was submerged to create a
reservoir.  Underwater photography opens the film and regularly punctuates
it, with recurring shots of a church front. I expected, but in vain,
strains of Debussy's La Cathedrale Engloutie (The Sunken Cathedral)
When young Rebecca disappears too, Claire goes into her (Claire's) mind and
out her mind too. Hubby has her hospitalized. What follows are such
incoherent, artsy, over the top attempts to inspire fear and loathing in
New England, that they becomes exponentially soporific. The whole is a
hodge-podge that's filmed with good but irrelevant, industrial-strength
photography, symbols galore, surrealism, Kafkaisms, and all the stuff that
(bad) dreams are made of.
Bening is at center-stage and always good, in spite of the nonsense she is
subjected to, such as (one example among one hundred) the screen of
Claire's computer showing her thoughts. Red (as in blood) is the dominant
color. Red, too, as in apples doing strange and unfriendly things.The
computer, however, is not an Apple machine.
A good actor, Stephen Rea, the specialist in dream psychology, stands
around as if wondering what the heck he's doing in this movie. What's
needed here is an exorcist, since Claire is possessed and (neat trick!)
even watches herself dreaming.
Serial-killer Downey, who is Claire's "control" (her visions are his
thoughts), shows up 20 minutes or less before the finale in a part even
more dull than unappealing. It is politically incorrect  (i.e. gay-bashing)
too as Downey's manner and speech clearly imply homosexuality.
The movie makes no sense, has no heads, tails or anything in-between. It
feels as dull and  as long as watching, these days, Washington, D.C. on
television. Let us hope, fervently, that In Dreams will not add to the
dumbing of the public by giving a boost to the so-called psychics who
pervade the airwaves.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Jamie Peck
IN DREAMS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Things start out strong enough, with cinematographer Darius Khondji's 
stunning camera work guiding viewers into the bowels of a underwater 
ghost town during a creepy prologue that establishes a notably grim tone 
right off the bat. This eerie opulence remains a dazzling display of 
showmanship throughout the entire film - there's even something macabre 
about the way Khondji photographs a rustic, seemingly innocent New 
England autumn - but if there ever was a film that didn't deserve so 
good a polish, it's this one. Don't knock the look, but say what you 
will about the foolish plot, underdeveloped characters and flat 
dialogue. 
Annette Bening, another asset "In Dreams" shouldn't be so lucky to 
boast, gives an increasingly effective performance in a role that 
doesn't do much for her in return. She plays Claire Cooper, a 
Massachusetts children's book illustrator who's plagued by terrifying 
nightmares involving kidnaped children. She thinks these visions are a 
warning knell for horrible, soon-to-be-committed crimes, but neither her 
ho-hum husband (Aidan Quinn) nor the ho-hummer police can muster up the 
sense to take her seriously. This being a thriller, we know that she is, 
in fact, on the money, and it's a credit to Bening's acting that she 
delves equally into Claire's madness and compassion. 
But as soon as a body turns up and Claire has given the authorities 
reason enough to believe her claims, "In Dreams" trades in its nifty 
supernatural chills for a long series of allegedly spooky jolts that 
simply refuse to make sense. Scenes pile up like a car wreck with little 
or no explanation or exposition. Subplots appear and disappear. When 
Claire finally comes face-to-face with our evil murderer (Robert Downey 
Jr.), it turns out his name is Vivian, he's clairvoyant and he's got 
some major issues with mama, a la Norman Bates. "In Dreams" reaches its 
absurdist zenith here, and the climax drags with mumbled revelations and 
laughable twists. 
Some questions, then: What's with the garbage disposal retching 
applesauce? Are the drawings on the wall blood or paint? Who cranked up 
the Andrews Sisters on the CD player and caused the swing to move on its 
own? What about the computer? Does Vivian possess the gift of 
telekinesis in addition to his other powers? Why would he continually 
endanger Claire if she was necessary for his ultimate plan? Is the woman 
in Australia integral to anything? And the aforementioned flooded city - 
what function does that _really_ serve? Sigh. At least in my own dreams, 
I can imagine a better movie where certain talent didn't go to waste.

Author
Simon Calloway
Cast: Annette Bening; Stephen Rea; Robert Downey, Jr.; Adain Quinn
 In Dreams is part X-Files, part horror movie, but always interesting.  It's
the kind of movie where you think you know what is going to happen, and, bang! 
The plot twists yet again.
 The film stars Bening as Caire Cooper, a young women who is happily married
and has a daughter who appears in school plays.  They live in a happy little
town in New England.  The town is so quaint, the school play of Snow White is
shown outside, with Prince Charming riding a real horse.
 During this unfaithful show, Claire's daughter mysteriously disappears among
all the kids and parents.  There is a kidnapper out there, and Claire nows
where he is. She begins to pick up psychic day dreams of a little girl in an
apple orchard, a boy tapped in a room the is filling with water, a town
underwater.  These are some pretty horrible images, and Claire can't handle
them, especially now that her child has been taken away from her.
 The story soon has Claire in a hospital and with a psychiatrist (Rea).  She
tells him that the man who took her  daughter is sending her these weird
thoughts and he has also taken other children in the town.  This man is Downey
Jr., and he can play a weirdo at heart.
 In Dreams was directed by Neil Jordan. You can feel the sort of Interview With
the Vampire-esque filming technics he uses.  Atmosphere, suspense is all used
instead of blood and other bodily fluids as most horror films do.  And with
very good acting from Bening, In Dreams succeeds, to a point.  Aside from what
the film has going for it, Dreams sometimes trys too hard at making bizarreness
apparant.  When the kidnapper starts talking to Claire via a computer, the film
relishes X-Files territory, and I liked it.  When Claire literally goes mad and
starts throwing apples into the sank and smashing them while the camera follows
her every movement in dizzying essense, I just thought You don't need to do
that, the film was going smoothly just as a talky thriller.
 In Dreams is a nice, stylish, sometimes scary film, but, it could have used
that "X''-tra something.

Author
Scott Renshaw
IN DREAMS
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Annette Bening, Aidan Quinn, Stephen Rea, Robert Downey Jr.
Screenplay:  Bruce Robinson and Neil Jordan, based on the novel "Doll's
Eyes" by Bari Wood.
Producer:  Stephen Woolley.
Director:  Neil Jordan.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  102 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Somehow, there's something even more icky about an exploitative and
routine horror film that tarts up its exploitation and routineness with
plenty of style.  Such is the case with Neil Jordan's IN DREAMS, a
psychological thriller which lets its atmospheric creepiness disintegrate
into a trite chase-n-terrorize puree.  Annette Bening stars as Claire
Cooper, a Massachusetts-based children's book illustrator with a
picture-book life: lovely rural New England home, loving husband Paul
(Aidan Quinn), beautiful young daughter Rebecca (Katie Sagora) and loyal
dog Dobie.  She also posesses a spark of psychic ability which she has had
all her life, one which seems to be getting stronger as she has visions
connected to the disappearance of a local schoolgirl.  Then Rebecca is
abducted, and Claire comes to believe that she is psychically connected to
a serial killer -- and that the killer is similarly connected to her.
     For a while, it looks like IN DREAMS is going to be a thriller of a
different stripe, something as dramatically and visually compelling as it
is viscerally shocking.  Darius Khondji, the gifted cinematographer behind
SEVEN, gives IN DREAMS the same menacing silver tint and twisted light,
including an eerie opening underwater sequence in a submerged town.  The
story takes Claire on a descent into genuine madness, the kind that makes
a character truly unpredictable and interesting to watch.  Bening is a
superb actress, and she makes the most of Claire fumbling for answers with
the last shreds of her sanity.  The script also presents the idea that the
killer is a tormented soul who wants Claire to catch him, setting up a
potentially complex relationship when they finally do meet.
     Gradually, however, IN DREAMS starts to lose its way.  Partly it
seems rushed, with scenes slammed together too quickly to develop the
necessary foreboding.  Partly it seems sloppy, increasingly depending on
ridiculous contrivances (Claire being confined in exactly the same room
once occupied by the killer, for instance) and the blandly
counter-productive analysis of Claire's psychiatrist (Jordan regular
Stephen Rea, sporting a distracting accent).  And partly it seems
mean-spirited, using graphic murders for shock value or imperiled children
for sympathy value, rather than building interest in the characters.  Over
its final 45 minutes, IN DREAMS begins a slow but steady descent from
potent psychological thriller to careless mess.
     And then, when Robert Downey Jr. finally appears as the killer
Vivian, it careens out of control entirely.  Decked out in flowing red
tresses and whispering in an effeminate drawl, Downey exercises every
ghastly overacting muscle in his body simultaneously.  To be fair to
Downey, the role is a serial killer cliche -- he's a Norman Bates momma's
boy with _serious_ gender role issues -- without a remotely sympathetic
quality, dashing hopes of a mind-game showdown into the rocks.  Instead
it's all guns and sharp objects, running and screaming, until a bleak,
unsatisfying and confounding resolution.  It's a huge disappointment
coming from Neil Jordan, a film-maker who has consistently made films that
defied expectations -- THE COMPANY OF WOLVES, THE CRYING GAME, THE BUTCHER
BOY.  In a sad way, that's exactly what he does here.  Just when you
expect IN DREAMS might turn out to be a memorably disturbing horror film,
it turns out to be a gutless, nihilistic tease.
