Title
Review for Baby, The (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
What did audiences make of this when they saw it in cinemas in 1973?  If you 
think Grant and Hepburn had problems bringing up Baby, then check this one 
out.  Social worker Anjanette Comer drops in on Ruth Roman and her grown-up 
daughters to assess their backward son, Baby.  But no ordinary case, this: 
the son is just as grown up as the rest of the family.  You may find 
yourself giggling with disbelief or maybe just embarrassment as full-grown 
adult David Manzy gurgles and coos in baby-talk and crawls on the floor in 
his diaper, while everybody standing around him acts as if everything is 
completely normal - which it would be after a while, I suppose.  
Nevertheless, watching Baby scrambling around at floor level while a room of 
men and women are going about their own business at a birthday party is 
still hard to swallow, and it's not as if we'd had plenty of opportunity to 
get adjusted to the film's screwy tone by that time.  The sheer excess of 
its sensibilities - look out for that cattle prod, Baby! - pushes it aside 
from any measurable notions of success or failure.  For a start, it's 
unclear exactly what genre THE BABY aspires to be (although the last half, 
complete with a musical score of dragging cellos and tinkly piano, heads 
unsteadily into horror territory).  Then there's the acting.  And the 
screenplay.  And the ending, which in any other film would be plain 
ludicrous, but at least here remains in keeping with the anti-logic of the 
rest of the story.
What makes THE BABY a sort of schlocky-campy classic (and surely a billing 
of 'Strange Film Festivals' everywhere) is its admirable disregard for 
reason.  You can't find holes in a story if there is no rational framework 
for them to exist in.  Nothing makes sense: characters do terrible things 
and earn no repercussions; Baby is an adult but still hasn't figured out how 
to step over the two-foot wall of his play pen; similarly, unless Baby has 
been castrated there's no reason for him to speak in a baby's voice (this 
very grating effect is dubbed in); and I don't see how can it be possible 
for any person in Baby's situation, irrespective of mental ability, not to 
be capable of learning a few words of English  - even kids raised by wolves 
learn to growl, for heaven's sake.  You won't be able to avoid asking 
yourself questions while you're watching, either - for example, what kind of 
babysitter would want to change a grown man's diaper? (not one I would feel 
comfortable trusting, that's for sure).  Manzy gets his expression of infant 
obliviousness down pat, but you have to wonder what was happening between 
takes - he was probably rightly figuring that his career was beginning and 
ending with this assignment.  I don't even want to contemplate the 
attraction this film might have amongst fetishists.  Everyone else should 
see it at least once.

