Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
John Bauer
[Note:  After claiming otherwise, my appetite was indeed whetted by Kenneth
Branagh's HAMLET to search out other attempts to translate Shakespeare to
film in hopes of finding a better mousetrap.  As it happens, it didn't take
long.]
Is there a more romantic director than Franco Zeffirelli?  Known mainly to
American audiences as the man behind 1968's ROMEO AND JULIET (required
viewing for many high schoolers, and as much as most ever learn of
Shakespeare), he is also a favorite at the Metropolitan Opera, where his
achingly beautiful designs further the already lush emotion of many a Puccini
aria.  Last year he gave us his beautifully realized version of JANE EYRE,
one of the twin peaks (with WUTHERING HEIGHTS) of romantic literature.
It might seem peculiar, then, that Zeffirelli ever had an interest in
translating HAMLET for the screen.  At first blush, HAMLET is far removed
from romance.  The hero, though a prince, is depressed, conflicted and
confused.  The ostensible love interest gets little screen time, and her
scenes with her prince are usually as an object of mockery.  The plot is full
of political intrigue and the players are as cursed as the House of Atreus.
It is Zeffirelli's genius, however, that he is able to expose the romantic
core of HAMLET and give the sometimes dry tale an emotional embrace.  In this
Italian master's hands, romance is everywhere -- in a son's worship of his
father, in the bonds of deepest friendship, in the private thoughts of young
lovers, even in the mystery of castles by the sea.  After all, the story
hinges on a ghost, and what could be more romantic than that?
What seemed like a cheap way to sell tickets at the time turned out to be one
of the most romantic gestures of all, namely, hiring then-reigning Hollywood
hunk Mel Gibson to play the lead.  Who could believe that the man who made
his mark playing Mad Max and a "lethal weapon" (in the series of the same
name) would have the skill to succeed in the most famous role in the English
language?  Franco Zeffirelli, that's who.  And it is apparent in every frame
that his instinct was right on the money.
What Gibson brings to the role is a naturalness and ease which makes the
whole story meaningful, not to mention comprehensible.  His line readings
sound spontaneous rather than rehearsed.  His movements and gestures
(excepting his sometimes too active eyes) are totally in keeping with the
character.  This is a Hamlet whose pain we feel, whose struggle we empathize
with, and whose death we mourn as sincerely as Horatio at film's end.
Glenn Close, the other big name in the production, also does well by the
script and satisfies as Hamlet's mother, Gertrude -- though I must confess
I'm still trying to understand the character as written.  (Zeffirelli's
incestuous interpretation of Hamlet's relationship with his mother doesn't
help.)  Alan Bates makes a believably evil Claudius without resorting to the
mannerisms of a Hollywood heavy.  By and large the rest of the cast performs
admirably and comfortably.
Of special note are the cinematography by David Watkin and the score by Ennio
Morricone.  Both support the realistic mood marvelously (as do the sets and
costumes), without any overstated effects that declare "this is important;
this is Shakespeare!"  I particularly appreciate that the words are often
spoken without any music at all:  the melody of a wonderfully wrought phrase
is given its due.
Perhaps it is difficult to call edited Shakespeare "definitive."  And there
are certainly quite a few other filmed versions of HAMLET that I have not
seen.  But if you've ever felt the urge to overcome your fear of the Bard,
this HAMLET is an excellent place to start.

Author
svihla@evax0.eng.fsu.edu
     I saw HAMLET this weekend and was favorably impressed.  It looks
wonderful -- the costumes, sets, and scenery elicited oohs and ahs from
the audience.  The performances are adequate -- Mel Gibson is much better
than I would have expected and Glenn Close is quite good as well.  My
caveats have to do with a certain lack of subtlety and the irritation I
felt at the director's cutting, rearrangement, and truncation of
certain scenes.  Hamlet's "Get thee to a nunnery" scene with Ophelia is
set *before* his "To be or not to be" soliloquy, except that the actual
"Get thee to a nunnery" dialogue is grafted onto the "Murder of Gonzago"
sequence.  I liked the original sequence better.  Hamlet's speech to the
players is cut inexplicably as is the actual leaping into graves which
punches up Ophelia's funeral.  Gibson is adequate when he is charging
around ranting and having swordfights, but he is less believable in more
restrained moments.  The "to be or not to be" soliloquy is
atmospherically set, but Gibson's delivery struck me as that of someone
who is delivering a pretty speech, and not considering matters of life
and death.  The director chose to develop a couple of scenes directly
rather than by exposition through a character, and let me say that the
scene where a disheveled Hamlet has a wordless encounter with a
bewildered Ophelia does not play well.  It elicited hoots of derisive
laughter in the theater, which was probably not the desired effect.
Maybe Shakespeare left it out for a reason -- maybe it didn't play well
in the Sixteenth Century either.  I couldn't detect any real chemistry
between  Gibson and Helen Bonham-Carter who plays Ophelia.
Ms. Bonham-Carter may have one of the prettiest faces on the planet, but I
was not overly impressed with her portrayal of Ophelia.  The friendship
between Hamlet and Horatio is also given rather short shrift.
     In summary, a credible effort, beautifully photographed and
exceedingly  atmospheric.  Well worth seeing, but neither deep or subtle
enough to qualify as a definitive version.  I hope some people who see
it will be tempted to rent Olivier's version or make an effort to see
the entire play somewhere.  ***

Author
Cisco's Buddy
     Zeffirelli's ROMEO AND JULIET was what sparked my interest in
Shakespeare over 20 years ago, so I was looking forward to this very
much.  I thought this film version was more than good but less than
great.
     (For the record, it might be worth noting that I've never seen a
production of HAMLET -- even the Olivier film version! -- though I have
read the play a couple of times and studied it as part of a college
course.)
     The heart of the production is in the performances, and here the
film gets generally high marks.  Gibson was, on the whole, adequate.  It
comes as no surprise that his better moments in the film were those
moments of action and passion (I mean strong emotion here, not
romancing), but I found his quiet moments too dry and uninvolving.  Most
of his soliloquies came off relatively poorly (the most notable
exception in my mind being the "conscience of the King" soliloquy).  The
worst aspect of his performance to my mind was the fact that he almost
always came off as second banana to me whenever he was playing against
someone else.  Even the lesser parts, such as Horatio and Laertes, seemed
better to me than Gibson's Hamlet.  But as I said, in the scenes that
required more "action" and emoting, he worked better, with his best
scene being the aftermath of the play-within-a- play.
     Glenn Close, however, was wonderful as Gertrude, playing her as a
sincere and passionate woman who was, unfortunately, totally without a
clue about anything (which is a nice switch from the usual
interpretation of Gertrude as being co-conspirator with Claudius).  I've
never been a particularly big Close fan, but this is the best of her
performances that I've seen.
     My favorite of the cast was Ian Holm as Polonius.  I'd never
pictured Polonius as the "comic relief" character of the play, but Holm
does a great job of playing it this way.  Paul Scofield has, lamentably,
too small a part (as the ghost of the dead king).  Helena Bonham-Carter
came alive as Ophelia descends into madness, but unfortunately played
the character as so thoroughly dull as dishwater earlier in the film
that I was almost (note: almost) unable to feel much for the character
later.  I think, though, that Zeffirelli purposely had her play it that
way to contrast with the later madness.
     Zeffirelli's direction was pretty straightforward for the most
part, so much so that when he occasionally threw in a "trick," it seemed
totally out of place.  The more obvious examples were the circular
tracking shot around Hamlet and Ophelia during their meeting in the hall
when he "dumps" her, and the exterior shots of her leading up to her
drowning made me feel like I was watching a Swedish "art film" (I was
almost expecting the camera to pull back and reveal Death standing there
in black cloak, right out of THE SEVENTH SEAL).  Still, he did a good
job of "opening up" the play from the confines of stage sets.
     I'm not a purist, so a lot of the cuts didn't bother me overmuch,
other than my occasionally reacting, "Waitaminute ... isn't there
supposed to be a scene with so-and-so here?"  And I was a bit thrown
when the entire first scene of the play was missing (as contrasted to
ROMEO AND JULIET, which starts out exactly as the play).  The only part
that really threw me was hearing Hamlet's "Get thee to a nunnery" speech
during the play-within-a-play scene.  I'd *thought* that it came in the
scene where he "dumps" Ophelia, and flipping through the play after I
got home, I saw that I was correct.  But the cut-and-paste aspects of
the screenplay will most likely affect only the purist.
     Overall, HAMLET is worth seeing, but don't expect to be overawed.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     HAMLET is a superbly-produced version of Shakespeare's play, with
strong performances all around.  Zeffirelli catches the look and feel of
medieval Europe very well.
     Zeffirelli's HAMLET opens at the funeral of King Hamlet, and cuts
quickly to a feast, about two months later, when Queen Gertrude has
married her dead husband's brother, King Claudius.  The old king Hamlet
has been almost forgotten, except by his grieving son, Hamlet.  Nothing
can rouse Hamlet from his stupor, and seeing the ghost of his father
unhinges him.
     Hamlet seems unhinged by more than his father's ghost.  The spectre
of sex also unhinges him.  He's torn by his feelings for Ophelia, his
feelings for his mother, and his convictions that his mother has
dishonored his father.  His madness is more than just a mask---he's
loosing it early in the film, and spends the rest of the movie loosing
it.
     Mel Gibson gives a fine performance as Hamlet.  I particularly
liked Helena Bonham-Carter, who gives a really strong performance as
Ophelia.  Ophelia comes off as a very weak woman in most productions of
HAMLET, but in this version you can hear the passion in her voice.  Glen
Close and Alan Bates portray Queen Gertrude and King Claudius as
love-sick adolescents, but it works very well.  And Ian Holm is
sufficiently dottering as the advice-giving Polonius.
     In HENRY V, Kenneth Branagh kept the frame of a theatrical
production around the film, by starting the movie on a sound stage and
keeping the Chorus (Derek Jacobi) in the film.  Zeffirelli completely
divorces Hamlet from theater, and opens up the play by adding a few
short scenes that had only been described in the original.  While I tend
to be a purist about original material,  the additions keep true to the
spirit of the play.
     My only reservation about the movie is that Gibson's performance is
a little erratic.  His early scenes of madness are a tad too wild-eyed.
He is brilliant late in the movie, particularly in the climatic scene
with Gertrude.  However, Hamlet is a tough role to simply "act" in; it
requires a theatrical performance.
     It's rated PG-13.  I'm not sure why--the killings aren't
particularly brutal, there isn't much in the way of bad language, and
the sex is only implied.  (Actually, the "country matters" speech was
said somewhat more laciviously than I'd seen before, and Hamlet attacks
Gertrude in an almost rape-like manner.)  Our ten-year-old begged to go,
so we took her.  Unfortunately, she was rather bored by it.  (I forgot
to note earlier that she enjoyed AWAKENINGS, but is now worried about
getting encephalitis!)  If your pre-teen wants to go, you might suggest
they watch Zeffirelli's ROMEO AND JULIET on tape first, to see if they can
follow it.
     HAMLET is definitely worth seeing on a big screen.  There are some
lovely sweeping shots that will get lost on TV.  It's also worth paying
full price for.  I'd give it an 8.
Laurie Mann ** lmann@jjmhome.UUCP ** Laurie_Mann@m80.stratus.com
NeXT mail: lmann@vineland.pubs.stratus.com

Author
the Rev. Mom
     Laurie Mann writes, "HAMLET is a superbly-produced version of
Shakespeare's play, with strong performances all around.  Zeffirelli
catches the look and feel of medieval Europe very well."
     I don't know if Laurie's saying the two things are linked, but my
personal taste runs in the other direction; I would have preferred
modern-dress.  We've got too many Hamlet's leaping around in doublet and
hose as it is.
     Actually, I knew from previous experience with Zeffirelli
Shakespearean films to expect huge cuts, Renaissance/medieval
dress/setting, and a more traditional interpretation (I bet 4:1 odds
with myself that Jones' Oedipal interpretation would rear its hoary old
head. :-)   Within these limitations, he does an excellent job; I just
don't like those limitations.  Especially when it comes to knee-jerk
interpretation.  
     "Mel Gibson gives a fine performance as Hamlet."
     Yes, definitely.  I have to admit I underestimated him, and he does
a great job with speaking the lines with understanding, clarity, and
above all, acting through them.  A really good job; I just don't like
the way Zeffirelli set most of the soliloquies away from the rest of the
action.  Helena Bonham-Carter did a great mad scene.  Glenn Close was a
wonderfully sympathetic Gertrude, and Alan Bates had a lot of fun being
a slightly gluttonous and lustful Claudius.
     But, not surprisingly Paul Scofield, and Ian Holm struck me as the
most effective actors in the movie.  Scofield, with the tiny role of the
Ghost nevertheless makes a lasting impression, and Ian Holm steals the
film in his scenes.  The advising of Laertes was wonderfully done
(although we don't get to see Polonius sending Reynaldo to spy on
Laertes in Paris), and I'm fully convinced that the "The very best
players for ..." bit was cut and then stuck back in (where it didn't
belong ) just because Holm was so much fun to watch.
     For the other Zeffirellia Shakespeare watchers out there, John
McEnery has had a bit of a comedown from Mercutio to Osric (and Osric
doesn't even get to blow hot and cold while toad-eating Hamlet with the
hat.)
     "Zeffirelli completely divorces HAMLET from theater, and opens up
the play by adding a few short scenes that had only been described in
the original.  While I tend to be a purist about original material,  the
additions keep true to the spirit of the play."
     Zeffirelli did the same thing in TAMING OF THE SHREW (e.g.  the
Wedding); he's fearless when it comes to adapting Shakespeare for his
needs.  
     And he tends to make good cuts.  I think most of the cuts were
probably necessitated by the commercial need to bring in a film under
three hours.  So, Act I, Scene i goes, because all the action in it is
later related by Horatio and then repeated.  Of course, the joke of
Hamlet saying, "Methinks I see my father" and Horatio yelping "Where, my
lord?!" is then lost, but it's worth it for the amount of time gained.
Even splitting Act I, Scene ii into three or four smaller bits is good,
because it shifts the focus onto the individual characters of Hamlet,
Gertrude and Claudius, which the audience needs to know.
     And naturally, he goes for the more common cuts: Fortinbras, the
dumbshow before the play-within-the-play, and Laertes *and* Hamlet both
jumping into Ophelia's grave in a macho display of I-loved-her-more-
than-you-did! are all gone.
     But by the time Hamlet gets to To Be or Not to Be in a crypt
--entirely divorced from where it's supposed to be (i.e., in a hall
where he knows he's being overheard by Claudius and Polonius, and where
Ophelia is laid as bait to trap him (--which was about three scenes
earlier, in which he *doesn't* launch into "Get thee to a nunnery!"),
and then about four or five scenes later when the play-within-the-play
is just about to start (which by the way, we don't know is of Hamlet's
authorship, because the "Speak the speech" bit was cut) and Hamlet says
"That's a fair thought to lie between maid's legs" (shocking all those
people who thought this was high art :-), and *then* turns to Ophelia
and starts railing "Get thee to a nunnery!" which was from the scene
before which didn't have the soliloquy ... you start to wonder if maybe
there wasn't a little *too* much violence done to the text.
     Call me an anal-retentive Shakespeare snob (I am one, anyways), but
I *missed* "The rugged Phyrrus.."  bit and then the subsequent necessary
line cuts from "Oh what a rogue and peasant slave..."  I *like* the
jokes in HAMLET.  I missed it when Zeffirelli cut "What's his weapon?"
"Rapier and dagger."  "That's *two* of his weapons..." because he
wanted the final scene to look like a bash-em-up fight/duel with big
blades, and then climax with them swinging two big swords apiece, rather
than have anything so finicky as a four-bladed-fencing-match-with-wimpy-
foils-and-daggers.  (I couldn't help snorting, when Laertes, after
*slicing* Hamlet has to tell him the sword is unbated.  Yeah, right,
like Hamlet hasn't figured that it's not a blunt blade.)
     All of Zeffirelli's choices *are* made for a purpose, and this
movie is admirably straightforward and powerful in telling the story of
HAMLET.  But while the movie is undoubtedly HAMLET, it's HAMLET with
most of the texture (all puns intended) rubbed off.  It's fun, it's
worth seeing; but be aware that it's a simplification.
     At least now people are primed to see Stoppard's ROSENCRANZ AND
GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD.  :-)

Author
Ed Arnold
     Before giving you a review of this film, I must tell you that this
review is skewed.  The day before I went to Hamlet, I watched HENRY V on
video.  Now that's quite an adaptation to the big screen!
     As with any Shakespeare play, the key to any production are the
performances.  Face it, the actors are working with the best material
ever conceived by a man.  The only way to blow it is in the performance,
I guess a director could blow it, but that would be hard, most directors
know that the most they can do is bring visual depth to a product rich
in human depth.
     Well, it's sad to say, the performances is this film are definitely
not up to snuff.  Gibson stinks.  He does better in the action scenes,
but that's not the focus, and even in those scenes he lacks the strength
of projection needed for Hamlet.  He never is convincing, especially
when he's considering suicide.  Close's performance is not much better.
She plays Gertrude poorly, you never get the feeling that Gertrude is
evil, just so stupid she falls from one man to another.  Even when she
drinks the wine and dies, her death is overdone and overblown.  Granted
it's easy to take control of the screen when Gibson plays Hamlet so
badly.
     Now on a better note, Polonius (as played by Ian Holm) and the
woman who plays Ophelia are wonderful!  While I've read that others
thought  Ophelia was unconvincing in the first part of the film, I
thought she played it right on.  She was shy and overpowered by the
personalities around her, she was bewildered by the conflicting messages
and back-biting.  I think her performance became apparently stronger
over time because we saw more and more of her.  All in all a performance
worthy of a best supporting actress nomination!
     It's too bad I saw this film after watching HENRY V.  That was an
*incredible* performance.  I hope the actor who played "Harry" will do
another film with Shakespeare!
     Don't go see HAMLET, wait for the video and rent it some night when
you have nothing else to do.  Enjoy the supporting performances, but try
to live with the leads.
     If you want to see Shakespeare done right rent HENRY V or HAMLET as
done by Olivier.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I was really looking forward to this movie.  I thought Mel Gibson
could do a very interesting HAMLET, and he did.
     The problem was with the direction.  It was slow and plodding. I
found it hard to stay awake in parts. Usually Shakespeare is so lively
it is hard to keep up, but not this version.
     Also, I was a bit surprised at how little any music was used.  The
other actors were okay except for Allan Bates who also seemed to sleep
through his scenes.
     Normally, I love Franco Zeffirelli and in fact one of my favorite
movies is his ROMEO AND JULIET which has great intensity and interest
in every scene.
     I would HAMLET give it 2 stars and a thumbs down. I must in
fairness point out that my wife really liked this movie.  Then again,
she would show if Gibson were reading the phone book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Frank Maloney
     Two Shakespeare plays translated to film in one year is my idea of
a good year.  I liked HENRY V despite the staginess and some of other
cavils.  Likewise, I liked HAMLET (with reservations).
     Now I know the movie (and opera) world divides pretty neatly into
those who like Franco Zeffirelli's work and those who abominate him and
it.  Likewise, the world of Shakespeare divides into purists who
sanctify the full and complete received texts and those who don't mind
having a bit a fun here and there and aren't above playing fast and
loose with the Master.
     Zeffirelli's HAMLET is no more Shakespeare's HAMLET than his ROMEO
AND JULIET or his TRAVIATA was anybody's but his own.  What I like about
his work is that he understands the difference between a play and a
movie.  His HAMLET is absolutely, positively a movie and not a filmed
play.  And movies always muck about with the source material, very much
as Shakespeare mucked about with his source material.  Even in the
titles, it doesn't say "Shakespeare's Hamlet"; it says, quite honestly,
"Based on the play by William Shakespeare."
     Zeffirelli has excised scenes, moved scenes around, relocated
scenes.  Almost every fan of Shakespeare's HAMLET will find a favorite
scene missing or altered.  There is even added material such as the
executions of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern and the death of Ophelia.
These edits seem to me to be fully justified in the name of making a
movie out of a play.
     Of course, most of us will agree that Zeffirelli has a vast and
dramatic visual sense, whether or not we can agree that he always uses
that visual sense with the best of taste.  He uses locales, sets, and
costumes with exuberance and care.  And it makes this movie, like his
others, visual feasts.  He also shoots many of his scenes en plein air,
others indoors in something like available light.  His camera is busy,
perhaps busier than is strictly necessary or desirable, but that may be
preferable to long static shots of actors declaiming (no names,
please).
     Another thing to like about Zeffirelli's HAMLET is the diction of
the actors.  They speak their parts more naturally, less hurriedly, and
swallow less of the words than is the general rule with Shakespearean
productions.
     Without a doubt, I understand HAMLET better now that I've seen
Zeffirelli's version.  I've studied it in school and seen live and
filmed versions, but I missed, not being a great Shakespearean scholar
even in my grad school days, some basic structural details that came
through loud and clear this time for the first time.  Par exemple, just
as the play-within-the-play mirrors the major action, so too does
Laertes mirror Hamlet and his situation when he lets Claudius 
manipulate him into killing Hamlet but with the telling difference that
Laertes never questions Claudius's honesty or motives and proceeds
without scruples to do his treachery.  Probably everyone else in the
civilized world knew all about this; to me it came as a revelation while
watching the final scene in the movie.
     And there are some fine actors in this movie.  I don't have the
cast list in front of me so rather than bollix the actors' names as is
my wont, let me just say that the Ghost, Polonius, Laertes, and
Guildenstern & Rosencrantz (one of whom was almost certainly a Maloney,
by the way) were all first rate; the Polonius was especially fine, in my
humble opinion, balancing comedy and an underlying seriousness with
great deftness and precision.  And the Ghost made the most of his small
role with some fine physical shtick, especially one gesture where he
covers half his face by fanning it with a kind of broken wrist movement
as he tells Hamlet he is forbidden to speak of the afterlife: a gem of
acting.
     I was almost as impressed by the acting of the "name" stars, Helena
Bonham-Carter, Glenn Close, and Mel Gibson, in descending order of
impressiveness.  Bonham-Carter brought a knowing strength to Ophelia
that I've seldom seen; her mad scene was disturbing and pathetic.  Close
looked marvelous and her scene with her son that ends with a hint of
incest was strong and moving; it had me in tears.  Gibson, a
Shakespearean dark horse if ever there were one, was surprisingly good
in most of his scenes with other actors; the art of the soliloquy,
however, has eluded him so far.  He moves well, brings a brooding energy
to his part, and did not embarrass.  There were times, though, when I
feared his eyes would pop right out of his head, which is distracting at
the least.  And I have to say that he was too old for the part, at least
as I envision Hamlet the young scholar-prince.
     Part of Gibson's trouble with the soliloquies perhaps derives from
Zeffirelli's direction.  The movie has tendency to pause and almost
clear its throat before launching into a famous speech; at times the
quotation marks were nearly visible.  I think any director has to work
very hard to overcome the Barlett's-Familiar-Quotations aspect of
HAMLET.  Too often, I felt Zeffirelli instead of downplaying this
distracting aspect was playing it up, as if he had just realized "Oh,
that's were that comes from."
     Overall, despite its shortcomings, I don't think you can regret
going to Zeffirelli's HAMLET.

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
Screenplay:  Christopher De Vore and Franco Zeffirelli, based on Shakespeare
     Maybe you did your Master's thesis on Gertrude's libido.  Or maybe you
never read HAMLET and never want to.  Whatever your background, this version
of HAMLET will give you something new.
     Zeffirelli has taken a complex and ambiguous 4.5 hour play and
transformed it into a 2-hour film.  Gone are subplots, political
intrigue, secondary characters, and much of the rich dialog that makes
Hamlet-the-play so fascinating to read.  What's left?  A captivating
tale so visually rich, with such strong characters, you can't help but
be carried along.
     The sets, the costumes, the lighting, the sound: all are perfect.
Faultless.  At a price tag of 15.5 million, producer Lovell got one hell
of a bargain.  The cast worked for pittance; apparently they felt that
the play's the thing.  And just how well did this cast do?  At worst,
moderately well.   At best, phenomenally well.  One thing is clear: the
cast got to experiment and play and create new dimensions within their
characters.  
     Each part--except Horatio--seemed to break new interpretive ground.
Sometimes it worked to great advantage.  For example, Laertes (Nat
Parker) is a younger, more impressionable lad than I'd ever imagined
him.  That fits.  Sometimes, though, the new ground seems unwarranted.
For example, Polonius (Ian Holm) seems more savvy than his lines would
indicate; he only plays the fool instead of being a fool.  This
interpretation doesn't fit, even though Holm does his usual excellent
job in delivering a performance.
     The ghost of King Hamlet, played by Paul Scofield, is less a
frightening aberation than a haggard and sorrowful soul.  Scofield's
rendition is particularly effective, especially since Zeffirelli refused
to use hokey special effects and decided the ghost should appear as a
man.  (Zeffirelli claims to have seen a ghost three times; he says
they're just there.   Guess you could say he plays them as he sees
them...)
     Ophelia (Helena Bonham-Carter) is a stronger, smarter lass than is
usually portrayed.  Her descent into madness is therefore inexplicable
and absolutely does not work.  Also, Bonham-Carter's performance is
unexpectedly weak in spots.  Because Zeffirelli's "screenplay "
emphasizes her importance, this weakens the film.  The only places the
film dragged were her "madness" scenes.  (And there were too many of
those, as long as I'm complaining.)
     King Claudius (Alan Bates) is more a lovesick puppy than a
calculating, power-hungry politician.  This is certainly new ground!
Personally, I found this the most curious of all the portrayals.
Perhaps Bates (and Zeffirelli) felt that all the missing subplots took
the oomph out of Claudius' political maneuverings, but Claudius the
Cuddly never occurred to me as a possibility.  In rereading the play, I
still don't see it.  Does it work in the movie if you've never read the
play?  Yes!  Is that enough?  For those who haven't read it, obviously
yes.  For those who have, probably not.
     Hamlet (Mel Gibson) is a displaced son with all the confusion and
frustration that implies.  Most of Shakespeare's dialog that explored 
Hamlet's displacement from the throne is missing from this version.  
Therefore, the only remaining displacement for Hamlet is as the major 
object of his mother's affection.  While other Hamlets have been 
contemplative and/or indecisive, this Hamlet is a prince of action 
trapped by circumstance into inaction.  
     Queen Gertrude (Glenn Close) is so surprisingly sensual that it'll
catch you off-guard even if you know it's coming, so as to speak.  (No
wonder this Hamlet has trouble weaning himself.)  Yes, yes, yes, the
basis for this interpretation is certainly in the "script", but Close
pushes it much further than it's probably ever been taken before.  This
isn't the regal queen of Elizabethan theatre.  This is a queen for a
lusty king, the medieval King of Denmark.
     Speaking of lust and times medieval, one thing Zeffirelli has most
definitely accomplished is making the story of HAMLET a tale of real
people--folks with hopes and drives and hates and fears.  These aren't
stiff, serious, solemn renditions.  Neither are they one-dimensional.
However, some purists accuse Zeffirelli of creating too simple and easy
a version of HAMLET.
     It is a short version, though.  And rearranged.  Now, it must be
mentioned that there are at least four "original" versions of
Shakespeare's HAMLET.   Scenes are shuffled, lines are changed.  All by
Shakespeare's own hand.  Zeffirelli contends that few audiences of
Shakespeare's time would sit through nearly 5 hours of play, and that
the shuffled scenes and changed lines of the surviving versions are
proof that Shakespeare himself played with the presentation of HAMLET.
Well, yes, but I doubt he left out key characters such as Fortinbras,
and I doubt he ever left Denmark without an apparent ruler in sight.
     For those familiar with the play, the movie may give you vertigo
sometimes as it combines disparate scenes and condenses dialog and cuts
particular lines out only to reinsert them in completely unexpected
places.  It ain't pure, but it sure is interesting.  I suspect that
viewers who haven't read the play recently (or never read it) will find
the film quite fluid and sensible.  
     I saw HAMLET during a Saturday matinee.  The audience was mostly
quiet and attentive.  I say "mostly" because at least three teenage
girls--in different parts of the theatre--giggled at the beginning of
each of Gibson's soliloquies.  Behind me sat a couple in their late 40s
or early 50s who consistently commented at the end of each soliloquy,
"Wasn't that nice."  If it hadn't been for such "bookending" of the
soliloquies, they would have been seamless.  In other words, they were
soliloquies, not Soliloquies.  Although I've heard them delivered
better, I've never heard them as well-incorporated into the play.  When
in doubt, Gibson underplays.
     There are so many good moments in this rendition.  Here's a short
list.  The interactions between Hamlet and Gertrude, Gertrude and
Claudius, and Claudius and Hamlet are more dynamic than I've ever seen
them before.  The "get thee to a nunnery" scene between Hamlet and
Ophelia, although oddly placed in time, is extremely effective.  The
wistful "Yorick's skull" scene is quiet and lovely.  The sporting
contest between Hamlet and  Laertes is done with more humor, then more
temper, then more pathos than any other on film.  The moment Gertrude
realizes she's been poisoned is more poignant than you'll ever see it
again.  And Hamlet's shock at his own mortality is profoundly right.  
     For these moments and more like them, for the thrill of the
spectacle, and for the majesty of the language, get thee to a theatre
and see HAMLET.  The film's the thing.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Unexceptional is really the word for
     the new HAMLET from Franco Zeffirelli.  Gibson is okay as
     Hamlet but is nothing startling.  Glenn Close is the only
     actor experimenting with her role.  The scenery is nice but
     this much-trimmed re-telling is nothing Shakespeare would
     feel bad for missing.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     Generally in reviewing a film, first consideration is given to how good
the story is.  It is a little tougher to review a Shakespeare film because,
whatever the good qualities of the story itself or even the dialogue, it is
pointless to praise the gentleman who contributed them.  HAMLET is a film
that gets no points, positive or negative, for story.  The question is not
whether HAMLET is a good story, but rather whether this is a good HAMLET.
     First of all, this is not so much HAMLET as HAMLETTE.  Every line
that's there is Shakespeare's, but not every line that is Shakespeare's is
there.  Franco Zeffirelli tells the story slowly, taking time to bathe the
viewer in the impressive scenery, then cutting much of the play--half, I am
told--to make it fit into two and a quarter hours.  As one expects from a
Zeffirelli film, it is lushly filmed, though perhaps not so much as some of
his other films, particularly the ones set in Italy.  This film has less of
the soft focus of, say, ROMEO AND JULIET.  The scenery is mostly in stoney
castles shot with a much harder focus.  Some of the exteriors look much like
the real Elsinore, but the Scottish castles used for the interiors has far
too much Celtic-looking decoration. Ennio Morricone's score is not only much
less intrusive than usual, it seems nearly non-existent.  Surprisingly few
scenes have any score at all.
     The important question is whether a popular actor like Mel Gibson can
play a good Hamlet.  In many ways Hamlet is very much a character of the
1990s.  He has horrible family problems, he screws up his love life, and he
has absolutely atrocious audience manners.  Gibson's Hamlet, however, is
surprisingly uninteresting and not particularly relevant to either Hamlet's
time or our own.  Gibson's performance makes no statement about the Dane
that was not on the printed page.  By contrast Glenn Close's Gertrude takes
the incest a step further than Shakespeare's did by apparently being
attracted to her own son.  Alan Bates plays new King Claudius not very
notably and even the great Paul Scofield seems unable to do much with his
role.  Helena Bonham-Carter of A ROOM WITH A VIEW and LADY JANE needs a new
character to play.
     This film has too many problems to become the definitive HAMLET the way
Zeffirelli's is the best known version of ROMEO AND JULIET.  It is simply an
okay retelling of the classic story.  Rent HENRY V instead.  I give it a +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
