Title
Review for What I Like About You (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     Independent romantic comedy is often a sketchy proposition.  The
money put into the production -- hiring great actors, getting enough
takes to catch the nuance of every joke, and having top-notch editing --
invariably makes a big impact on the end result of the picture.  And the
indies don't have money.
     Which isn't to say that having no money means you have no hope.
CLERKS and THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN are probably the two best examples of
no-budget comedies that were smashing successes.  WHAT I LIKE ABOUT YOU
is a far cry from either of these films, but it's a really good try.
There's a whole lot of heart in this picture, and everyone in the
production puts on a good face.  Unfortunately, as a whole, the movie
feels a bit derivative, moderately contrived, and ultimately simplistic
-- while still being a reasonably good time.
     WHAT I LIKE ABOUT YOU is at heart a good-old love triangle.  Ollie
(Marie Black) runs a quaint bookstore with her rich fiancée Michael (Ben
Pascoe).  Michael decides he wants to sell the store to a mall developer
(and big chain Book City), *plus* he is having an affair, thus doubly
crushing poor Ollie's spirit.  Enter Adam (Ryan Wickerham), the nutty
traffic reporter at the local radio station.  When their paths cross,
Ollie and Adam first hate each other, but soon enough they fall in love
and save the bookstore in the process.  Birds sing.  Sun shines.  If
only life were this wonderful!
     Wickerham is the real star of this movie -- his kinetic frenzy
invokes a young Jim Carrey, especially when he is given wide leeway to
ham it up.  Black is less charming in her star turn, coming off as
generally cold and often stilted in her line delivery.  Supporting
characters like the "Unabomber Wannabe," "Accent Man," and "Joe Buck"
(the radio station owner) lend a lot of life to what could have been
dull exposition, and the film blossoms thanks to these little details.
     As a comedy, WHAT I LIKE ABOUT YOU hits and misses.  Fortunately,
it hits slightly more often than not, and any fan of the indie scene
will find this a worthy diversion.
Director: Jeff Stolhand
Producer: Tony Hewett
Writer: Marie Black, Scott von Doviak
Starring: Marie Black, Ryan Wickerham, Cameron Johnson, Ben Pascoe
http://www.whatilikeaboutyou.com/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
