Title
Review for Hard Day's Night, A (1964)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
Movies starring Rock and Roll stars have rarely been treated
seriously by the public.  Usually it is for good reason.
Even the young audience is glad when the dialogue stops and
the artist or group performs a song, back in their element
again.  While establishment artists like Bing Crosby found a
home in the movies, outsiders like Elvis Presley were given
the most trivial scripts and songs, and the goal was to make
the film as quickly and cheaply as possible since the core
audience would attend no matter the quality.
"A Hard Day's Night", starring the Beatles,  did not change 
this perception, but the film demonstrated that musicians 
could act, especially if they just played themselves.
John Lennon is mischevious, Paul McCartney is sunny,
Ringo Starr is sad-faced, and George Harrisson is ironic.
The clever script gives them ample opportunity to lampoon
the establishment that sometimes fawns over, and other
times patronizes them.
Richard Lester directed and stocked with film with excellent
British character actors.  We find little-known Wilfrid Brambell
stealing the show as Paul's grandfather. He may look
"very clean" but he soon proves to be a "keen mixer".
Brambell is fond of causing trouble, and his glasses give him
enormous malignant eyes.  He has a wonderful voice that
is the masculine equivalent of a witch's cackle.
Another find is Victor Spinetti as the stessed-out 
producer of a TV show that stars the Beatles, who won't 
conform to his petty rules.  A classic moment has
Spinetti panicking when Brambell suddenly appears on stage
during an opera telecast.
The plot has the Beatles tightly scheduled by their
managers and gophers, always to and from a show, on
a train or in a hotel room.  It's no wonder that when
they have a moment of free time, they run amock in
a field.  They are rarely seen without a suit and slacks.
Ringo gets the most screen time of the Beatles.
Brambell berates him for reading a book, and gives him the
dubious advice that he should go "parading".  Ringo
takes his advice, disguises himself with a trenchcoat,
and, walking the streets alone, causes mischief,
tailed by a "bobby" (A British policeman, which apparently
lined the streets of London in 1964).  Ringo has
a humorous sequence involving a lady and his raincoat,
which ends with her falling in a hole, and Ringo
held by the police.  At the station he meets Brambell,
who has been brought in for causing a riot peddling
pictures of the fab four.  Brambell is at his best railing
against the policemen, advising Ringo to protect
his "briskets" when he is beaten to the floor, etc.,
when the policemen are so docile that they offer tea.
Both Ringo and Brambell are rescued from the police by the
remaining Beatles, who must make Spinetti's TV show.
Their performance on the show is the one disappointing
part of the film, since they mime to the studio versions.
Turn on the mikes and turn off the tape!  They also
play the same songs that we heard earlier in the film,
although it does help that they still sound great
the second time around.
"A Hard Day's Night" is the Beatles best film, a little
better than "Help" which relied more on physical comedy,
and much better than "Magical Mystery Tour" which was
just plain weird.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Watching A HARD DAY'S NIGHT from 1964, now in re-release in the theaters 
with a newly restored print and sound, is rather like watching an old 
newsreel.  Were we really like that? Did 60s rock really ever have that 
child-like innocence as embodied in the four lads from Liverpool? 
Of course, the answers are: we were, and it did.  But gosh, it now seems 
more like a million years ago rather than just a little over a third of 
a century.  
The Beatles (John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo 
Starr), undoubtedly the best rock group ever, had a popularity then that 
hasn't been rivaled since.  The movie, done in a mock day-in-the-life 
documentary style, shows pre-teen and teenage girls swooning and 
screaming with such intensity that they make themselves sick.  In 
real-life many such fans passed out and had to be carried out on 
stretchers.  The movie, while minimizing the Beatle hype, concentrates 
on the sheer joy of their music.  Whenever they are singing in the 
movie, which is often, the picture soars.  The producers had the now 
radical idea of actually including entire songs, not just choppy 
excerpts, in the film.  Too bad that this technique has long since 
vanished.
Less successful than the musical numbers are the silly little 
non-musical episodes including ones of the boys hamming it up together.  
A major subplot concerns Paul's freeloading, obstreperous grandfather, 
played by Wilfrid Brambell with beady eyes, round glasses and a long, 
thin face.  Put a pair of antlers on him, and he'd be a dead ringer for 
Bullwinkle.  Besides trading off of the family name, the grandfather 
tries to cash in on the boy's fame by selling photos of them with forged 
signatures.
Even though these four working-class blokes charm us with their natural 
playfulness, the reason to see A HARD DAY'S NIGHT is as the best music 
video ever.  Sit back and soak up the songs.  Don't even try to keep a 
smile off of your face and a song out of your heart while watching the 
film.  It's just not possible.  
A HARD DAY'S NIGHT runs just 1:27.  The film is in a handsome black and 
white, which enhances its documentary feel.  It is rated G and would be 
acceptable for all ages.  
My son Jeffrey, age 11, who is 'N Sync kind of guy, thought the movie 
was pretty good, giving it ** 1/2.  He liked the songs the best and 
thought the other parts of the movie were dumb but sometimes funny.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
