Title
Review for Nightmare on Elm Street 3: Dream Warriors, A (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Sean L. Gilley
     I really enjoyed the first of these three movies -- you never knew what
was real and what was not, and you never knew what was going to happen.  The
idea of making the violence that happened in the dreams actually become real --
i.e.  you get burned in a dream, the burn stays around in real life -- was the
most compelling part of the film.
     But in part two, everything got screwed.  Freddie came out into the real
world and thus negated the interesting parts of the story.  It turned into a
simple slasher film with no real interesting parts.  In fact, I didn't manage
to stay awake through the second time I saw it.  Boring.
     But Wes Craven didn't have anything to do with the second film.  He did
with the third.  I can imagine a situation in which the studio execs came to
Wes after the first film and said `We've got a hit here.  Make another one.'
and Wes said no.  So they got someone else to write and direct the film.  Wes
saw what atrocities they had committed to his ideas, and when they asked for a
third film he wanted to regain some of the ideas from the first, so he agreed.
     From what I can tell, the third film is a true sequel to NIGHTMARE I.  The
ideas contained in the first film are continued, the actress playing the lead
returns.  We have an explanation of why Freddie is doing what he does.  But
most importantly, it all happens in dreams, with the affects of the dreams
holding over to real life.  None off this Freddie comes out of a body to kill
people crap.
     The third film nicely ties up the loose ends of the first film.  Even, to
some extent, explaining the ending.  It's not as good,  but it beats all heck
out of part II.  In fact,  if someone had not seen any of the three, I wouldn't
bother to suggest that they see part II.  See one and three, and you've seen
the real story.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Third installment of the infamous NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET horror series
which features a young Patricia Arquette excelling in her role as the
screaming ingenue of the day.
PLOT:
Freddy Krueger is haunting the dreams of the remaining children from
the famous Elm Street. The kids are afraid to fall asleep, and are
placed in a medical facility for evaluation. Unfortunately for them,
the nightmares continue, as Krueger continues to exact his revenge on
the kin of the people who torched him alive many years ago. 
CRITIQUE:
Enjoyable enough for a horror/fantasy film. This movie never bored me
at any point, and has many cool scenes featuring violent and gross
deaths. This is the film that made Freddy cool, and distanced the film
from the real horror flic genre, while simultaneously approaching the
kitchy fantasy realm. Patricia Arquette is perfect as the shrieking
victim, and the rest of the cast is adequate as the stereotypical
misfits wrestling with their unexplained bad dreams. 
This movie explains more of the reason why Freddy became what he has
become, and adds some pretty neat special effects (the first death at
the hands of the "Freddy puppet" is by far the coolest). Having said
that, some of the effects near the end of the film are horrible (when
Freddy's bones "come alive"), and the movie never really terrifies you,
more than anything, it grosses you out! Fun stuff if you're sitting
around the house on a dark Saturday night, looking for a flic to give
you the heebie-jeebies.
Little Known Facts: 
Writer Frank Darabont went on to pen, and direct, the Oscar-nominated
adapted screenplay for SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION (8/10).
"The" Elm Street is located in Potsdam, NY (a small town just south of
the Canadian border, in northern New York). Wes Craven was a student
there at SUNY (State University of New York), Potsdam. 
When Laurence Fishburne was 14, he worked on APOCALYPSE NOW (7/10),
after lying about his age. He also landed a part of Cowboy Curtis on
"Pee-wee's Playhouse".
Patricia Arquette is married to actor Nicolas Cage, and is sister to
fellow actors Richmond Arquette, Alexis Arquette, David Arquette and
Rosanna Arquette 

Author
Craig Good
     Yes, the inimitable Freddy Kroeger is back in NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET PART
III: THE DREAM WARRIORS.  In addition to the awkward title the latest nightmare
from Wes Craven has a few flaws.  The Girl from the first film is back, and
can't act her way through wet tissue.  But her acting is so bad that it begins
to grow on you by the end of the film.  The only other real problem is that the
wires show once or twice too often.
     If you agree that the "Nightmare on Elm Street" series is the OUT OF
AFRICA of slasher films, the CASABLANCA of dead teenager flicks, then you'll
enjoy this trilogy-defining sequel.  Besides learning more about Freddy's
genealogy, physiology and ontogeny, we are treated to an almost endless stream
of imaginative effects.  I mean the practical effects and stop-motion animation
are well executed and just plain fun.  Freddy's incarnation as a television set
(with an enjoyable cameo by Dick Cavett and Eva Gabor), and the tongue-spouting
seductress, were particularly original.  I was also impressed with the clay and
skeletal animation.
     Don't worry that it's formula.  You should *enjoy* the formula.  For THE
DREAM WARRIORS they pull in almost every snatch of ghostie-ghoulie lore in
moviedom except thunderstorms and oak stakes.  Bad acting, stilted dialogue,
shaky plot and all it's still worth seeing, especially in a big room full of
screaming adolescent females.  The person I saw it with liked it better than
Part II, while I think I liked Part II just a little more.  That should give
you a pretty good idea where it rates.

Author
Jerry Saravia
In light of the recent resurgence of horror movies instigated by the success of "Scream" and more respectable fare like "The Sixth Sense," I felt it was necessary to take a trip back in time to my nostalgic years, particularly 1987. This was the year of the Freddy Krueger craze, and everyone was talking about the latest "Elm Street" sequel. I saw it with a friend in Douglaston, Queens, New York, and I was immediately caught up in the hype. Granted, I saw the original "Nightmare on Elm Street" years earlier and it was scary stuff, but this one was so tongue-in-cheek and goofy and thrilling that I found it predated "Scream" by a decade. It was a self-parody but never over-the-top, and it was the first time Freddy was jocose before using his talon glove to slash the sleeping kids. 
The heroine who put Freddy away in the original, Nancy (Heather Langenkamp), is back as a psychiatrist visiting the last of the Elm Street kids at a mental hospital. They all have seen Freddy, and now Nancy will try to help them control their dreams, prescribing sleeping pills much to the chagrin of the hospital staff (which includes Craig Wasson and Laurence Fishburne!). There is also Patricia Arquette on hand (in her debut role) as Kristen, a supposedly suicidal patient who can kick ass when needed. Oh, and how can one forget Jon Saxon reprising his role of Nancy's father, a police captain too keen on alcohol. But Freddy has a way with words...taunting them any way he can.
The first Elm Street is still the best and the most original, but the third has moments of humor mixed with horror and satire that elevates it above similar movies. And do check out Patricia Arquette as the saintly, sweet Kristen - beautiful, dreamy, but she can fight like a true Dream Warrior. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
