Title
Review for Gettysburg (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     I am not a war buff, but I was intrigued by everything I read
about GETTYSBURG, and like the actors cast, so I decided to go.
     It was an incredible example of excellent movie-making.  I started
reading Michael Shaara's THE KILLER ANGELS as soon as I got home, and
really regret not finding that book years ago.
     What else has its director, Ronald F. Maxwell, made?
     What makes this movie particularly good is that it avoids many of
the cliches of "epic movie-making."  There really aren't many sweeping
battle shots, except for a few long shots of maneuvering troops and
some as the South is making its final charge across the field.  The
movie focuses on character in a way I've rarely seen in war movie.  The
ambiguity of fighting against your former comrades is a major theme
throughout the movie.  The movie also focuses in on the claustrophobia
many soldiers must feel in battle.  There is an awful lot of carnage in
the movie, but little gore,
     The performances are uniformly excellent.  Both Jeff Daniels and
Tom Berringer give sterling performances as Col. Chamberlain and
General Longstreet.  Both played men of great foresight and courage,
though Longstreet was just passed his prime as a leader and Chamberlain
hadn't quite reached his peak (or may have just reached his peak at
Gettysburg).  Martin Sheen is wonderful as General Lee.  Special kudos
also to Richard Jordan as General Armistead (who, sadly, died just
after he finished making the movie), Sam Elliott as General Buford, and
Kevin Conway who gleefully steals every scene he's in as Buster.
     The adaptation of the book is remarkable.  I have never seen
characters so well-translated to the film, or an author's vision
rendered so fully in a movie.  I hope Shaara, who'd be 64 this year,
lived to see the movie.
     At just over four hours, the movie isn't particularly long.  I
looked at my watch less often during this movie than I had during THE
AGE OF INNOCENCE (which I also liked ... but it dragged ...).
** Laurie Mann * lmann@drycas.club.cc.cmu.edu * Laurie.Mann@genie.geis.com **

Author
James Berardinelli
GETTYSBURG, Ronald F. Maxwell's re-telling of four hot days during the 
summer of 1863 (based on the Pulitzer Prize winning novel THE KILLER 
ANGELS by Michael Shaara), is a grand movie that gathers power and 
momentum with every moment.  In fact, after having viewed this spectacle 
in a theater, I have difficulty envisioning how its impact could be close 
to the same on the small screen.  This is perhaps surprising considering 
that GETTYSBURG was originally intended to be a TNT mini-series, and 
only after its completion, when Ted Turner realized the quality of the 
material he had on his hands, was the decision made to go for a 
theatrical run first.  Those who are not daunted by the running time 
(two-hundred thirty-four minutes, easily the longest general release 
motion picture in a long while) will be grateful for the decision.
The film is divided into two parts, with an intermission in between (the 
length of the intermission varies from ten minutes to twenty-five 
minutes, depending on theater management).  The first section, which 
begins on June 30, 1863 (the day before the start of the battle of 
Gettysburgh) and ends during the day of July 2 with Col. Joshua 
Chamberlain's legendary defense of Little Round Top, is approximately two 
hours and twenty minutes long.  The second part, which takes up the 
remaining 1:55, concentrates primarily on July 3 and the disastrous 
charge of Maj. Gen. George Pickett and 15,000 members of the Confederate 
Army against the entrenched Union position atop Cemetery Ridge.  
Over 50,000 were killed or wounded during this pivotal battle of the 
Civil War, and GETTYSBURG takes pains to breathe life and logic into the 
reasons for this.  Yet it does far more than that.  Rather than 
functioning as a text book come to life, the film uses its actors to 
flesh out characters from history, giving not only personalities to those 
on both sides of the struggle, but believable causes as well.  We are 
presented with the rare opportunity to see not only the clash of arms on 
the field of battle, but the clash of wills before it.
In what it manages to do, GETTYSBURG is an exceptional motion picture, 
but this is true even moreso for the manner in which it manages to do it.  
Four and a half hours (including the intermission) is a long time to sit 
in a movie theater, yet even towards the end, restlessness is unlikely.  
The film is adept at the tricky art of pacing, and just as the slower, 
dramatic elements of the story threaten to bog down GETTYSBURG, the 
rousing battle scenes start anew.
The film opens with exposition and introduction.  Coming at the beginning 
as it does, this sequence isn't difficult to get through.  Next is the 
initial confrontation between the troops of Gen. Buford (Sam Elliot) and 
the advancing edge of the Confederate army.  Then, with the onset of 
night, there's a lull, and an opportunity for more character development 
and introspection.  With the morning of July 2, there's the defense of 
Little Roundtop under the command of Col. Chamberlain (Jeff Daniels), a 
truly amazing sequence that lasts nearly an hour and keeps the audience 
involved and enthralled for the entire time.  When the intermission 
occurs, it hardly seems possible that the film is more than half over.
Of course, following Little Round Top, there's discussion and planning as 
Gen. Lee (Martin Sheen) prepares his decisive assault.  The disagreements 
of Lt. Gen Longstreet (Tom Berenger) are presented and ignored, and 
Pickett (Stephen Lang) is chosen to lead the charge.  While this section 
of the film may be a little too talky, it is positioned immediately after 
the intermission when the audience is better able to tolerate a slower 
forty minutes.  The climax - Pickett's charge - is even more engrossing 
than the defense of Little Round Top, if that's possible.  Those who get 
a few nape hairs standing on end will not be alone.
Historical accuracy was of great concern to the producers and director.  
They hired a veritable army of advisors to correct even the most minute 
mistakes in the script (if a general given a pale horse in the movie was 
known to have favored a dark horse, the steed was changed), used the 
actual sites in Pennsylvania as often as possible (where hiding war 
monuments became an art), and "recruited" more than 5000 unpaid re-
enactors to fill up the screen during the battle scenes (thus helping to 
keep the budget at a reasonable $20 million).  The result is a movie that 
looks - and feels - real.
Admittedly, the battles are not as stunning or well-choreographed as 
those in GLORY, but this doesn't damage the effectiveness of the film, 
since GETTYSBURG's clashes are still impressive  GLORY's R-rating and 
narrower focus allowed it to have spectacular battle sequences (the same 
is true of the 1700s drama THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS).  GETTYSBURG, a far 
more ambitious project, had two major handicaps:  limiting the brutality 
of its depiction for the PG-rating, and getting far more extras into 
position (the logistics of this picture must have been a nightmare).  
Additionally, the camerawork in Edward Zwick's magnificent drama had a 
more grand scope than Kees Van Oostrum's work here (although, to Van 
Oostrum's credit, there are a number of breathtaking shots - most of 
which occur after the battles, however).
The cast gathered for this recreation is impressive.  There are no high-
orbit names like Tom Cruise or Alec Baldwin to distract the viewer.  
While Berenger and Sheen are certainly known and recognized, their 
profiles, like their performances, are low-key.  Both do solid jobs, and 
are especially effective at bringing out the more human sides of the 
officers.  Sheen's Lee is a brilliant leader who carries a weight of 
weariness and guilt that only the end of the war can lift, and Berenger's 
Longstreet has tears in his eyes when he orders Pickett's charge, which 
he knows beforehand will be a failure.
More impressive than Berenger and Sheen are Jeff Daniels and the late 
Richard Jordan.  Daniels gives a remarkable rendering of Col. 
Chamberlain, investing the legend with all the foibles and failures of 
humanity, and making us understand exactly why his name has been so 
lauded.  Jordan, who plays Brig. Gen. Lewis Armstead, is the standout on 
the Confederate side, and his powerful portrayal is given an added dash 
of poignancy by the realization that the actor is no longer with us.
In epic movies, especially those that feature battles, the musical score 
takes on added significance.  While not a masterpiece of originality or 
modern composition, Randy Edelman's work is loud, triumphant, and 
inspirational - qualities which are perfect for the battle scenes.  Not 
as effective are his themes for the quieter, more dramatic moments.
Could GETTYSBURG have been shorter?  There are probably a few sequences 
that might have been trimmed without doing much damage, but the finished 
product would still have been around four hours.  Further cutting would 
have reduced either the spectacle of the battles or the insight into 
certain characters, neither of which would have been desirable.  All 
things considered, this film is close to the perfect length.
Epic motion pictures are a rarity these days - even more rare than films 
about the Civil War.  GETTYSBURG should satisfy both cravings, at least 
for a while.  This film is perfectly placed in the wake of Ken Burns' PBS 
series (Burns, incidentally, has a small role here as the aide to Union 
Gen. Hancock) for any who have a re-kindled interest in this segment of 
American history.  For those with little more than a passing interest, 
GETTYSBURG is still gripping enough to captivate in its own right.  
Ambitious and successful, it is easily one of the most glorious U. S. 
productions of the year.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This film of military history contains
     more authentic military history than any other film I have
     ever seen.  The film itself is more than four hours and very
     little seems to be fiction.  Perhaps a little is
     speculation, but the highest proportion of time is
     reenactment of the most important battle in United States
     history.  Rating: +3 (-4 to +4)
     As usual when I see an historical film, I will go home afterward and
pick up many historical accounts of the event and pick holes in what I have
seen on the screen.  I have not yet read Shelby Foote's account of the
battle of Gettysburg (which is about 120 pages), but I have read several
shorter accounts.  What I have discovered is that the film contradicts no
account any more than the accounts contradict each other.  And that is not
surprising since by all accounts writer/director Ronald F. Maxwell, after
basing his script on a Pulitzer Prize winning novel, THE KILLER ANGELS by
Michael Shaara, allowed his small army of historical experts to be tyrants
over the production of the film.  What made it to the screen is what the
experts agreed happened.  What STAR WARS was to the special effects film,
GETTYSBURG is to the historical film.  Nobody who sees the film and later
reads account of the battle can come away without the feeling of having
witnessed the battle already and without remembering a flood of images from
the film.  As far as how well the actors look and dress like people of the
Civil War the film gets an A+.  For the degree to which each major actor
looks like the actual person he is portraying the grade is a not-too-shabby
B+.  (The opening credits show the original and the actor and invite
comparison.)  Why not higher?  Well for example at the time of his most
familiar photographs, Lee had a fuller beard than Martin Sheen sports.  That
is the sort of variation you get.  Of course nobody mentions how full Lee's
beard was at the time of Gettysburg so perhaps I am underrating the film.
But if I can find no less picayune quibble than the length of a beard in a
254-minute historical film, I am not just impressed, I am floored.
     The actors are often familiar, if you can make them out under the heavy
beards typical of the Civil War period.  (The presence of women,
incidentally, is limited to a count of two and a screentime of about six
seconds.)  But actors seem to be chosen more for proven acting ability than
for marquee value.  The players include Tom Berenger as Lt. Longstreet,
Martin Sheen as Gen. Lee, Stephen Lang as Maj. Gen. Pickett, the late
Richard Jordan as Brig. Gen. Armistead, Jeff Daniels as Col. Chamberlain,
Sam Elliot as Brig. Gen. Buford, and Kevin Conway (whom I thought had been
dead for at least a couple years) as the what I would guess was an
interpolated character, Sgt. Buster Kilrain.
     Gettysburg was the climax of the Civil War as Midway was the climax of
the war in the Pacific.  And I found myself comparing this film to the film
MIDWAY as I watched it.  MIDWAY is only five minutes longer than half of
GETTYSBURG's length, yet for that film a whole fictional plot of "human
interest" was added about an American commander's son in love with a
Japanese-American woman.  Apparently the filmmakers thought that so much
history was too much for the viewer.  In GETTYSBURG with the exception of a
few conversations to broaden the characters, and a rhetorical speech added
here and there, what we see is all documented history and ironically the
film is more and not less compelling as a result.
     From the point of view of the film five men were responsible for the
South going from a winning war to a losing war with this one battle.  For
the North, Buford created the strategy and Chamberlain defended the weak
flank.  For the South, Jeb Stuart chose to raid rather then reconnoiter,
Ewell failed to attack at a strategic moment, and Lee's ego told him to
fight the battle even on the enemy's terms because winning would almost
certainly bring the end of the war.  Of these the most screen time is
devoted to Chamberlain who, torn with self-doubt, shows himself to
nonetheless represent both heroism and decency.
     GETTYSBURG was reportedly made as a television mini-series and at some
point was redirected to the big screen.  It will certainly lose much of the
impact of its huge cast when translated to the small screen.  In incredible
list of historical reenactment societies apparently volunteered to act as
extras and to reenact the battle.  The men participating in Pickett's charge
form a very long wall that will not be nearly as impressive when the flanks
are cut for television's aspect ratio.  On the other hand, getting the film
on video will allow the stopping of the film and reading from historical
sources about the various actions being depicted.  My initial reaction to
the film was that it must have cut out a lot of what was really happening to
concentrate only on Buford's defense of the high ground the first day,
Chamberlain's defense of the flank the second day, and Pickett's charge the
third day.  The first source I saw that described the battle in any detail
listed three important actions and they were exactly the ones chosen by the
filmmakers.  This engaging film is almost a textbook about the battle and
because at the same time it is so enthralling, this is one of best and
perhaps in some respects is the best historical feature film ever made.
Nothing quite like this has ever been done at this length and done this
elaborately, so it is all the more impressive.  My rating is +3 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
font@stlvm10.sanjose.ibm.com
     If you're looking for another one of those Oscar-worthy "Dances
With Wolves meets Glory" type of movie, you'd better not waste your
time sitting through GETTYSBURG.  I saw it.  It was probably the most
boring movie I have ever seen.  Where does it say that a movie like
this has to be four-and-a-half-hours long?  There is a scene in the
movie, at the start of the final battle of Gettysburg, where the
Confederate army has to make a march of one mile through an open field
to get to the Union army.  This scene is particularly painstakingly
boring and repetetive, as the director chooses to chronicle literally
every step of the march/ charge.  I never thought that I'd ever get
*bored* with realistic battle scenes, but this is one movie that
manages that task.
     It also manages to completely waste a cast of very talented
actors:  Martin Sheen and Tom Berenger have absolutely nothing to do on
screen other than shuffle around and give orders.  This is also the
first time I've ever seen Robert E. Lee (Sheen) played as if he were
some kind of nut.  C. Thomas Howell is miscast, and can't carry a
phony accent for the duration of an entire scene, let alone the whole
movie.  And here's the clincher: I don't like Jeff Daniels.  But in
this movie, his was the only remotely interesting performance.  Perhaps
with the exception of Richard Jordan, whose character should have had
more screen time than he actually does.
     As a historical document, this movie is right on target.  I think
it would have made a much better documentary than anything else, but as
a movie, something that is supposed to entertain, it falls flat on its
face.  In four-and-a-half hours there is very little, if any, character
development.  It's as if the director forgot about the actors and only
focused on recreating battles.  The dialogue is pitiful.  There are no
conversations between characters in this movie, only speeches.  Jeff
Daniels has one near the beginning, as does every other star, even Sam
Elliot, whose performance is little more than a cameo.  Practically
every single actor gets to preach about one topic or another while the
camera moves slowly in to a tight shot and the music plays beneath
their words.  It's enough to make anybody with reasonable taste sick.
     In the end you're left wondering how the hell a movie this bad
gets made without somebody somewhere getting either fired or sued.
This does not deserve a best picture nomination.  It should win all
kinds of awards for costume design, sound, maybe choreography of battle
scenes or whatever the hell.  Other than that, it's a pure waste.
