Title
Review for Kabinett des Doktor Caligari, Das (1920)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Robert Wiene
Writers: Han Jonowitz and Carl Mayer
Starring: Werner Krauß, Conrad Veidt, Friedrich Feher, Lil Dagover, Hans
Heinrich von Twardowski, Rudolf Klein-Rogge, Rudolf Lettinger
It's amazing how older films like "Metropolis" hold up today: even when we
can do pretty much anything with special effects, films like this still
astound us, not just because it's incredible that the filmmakers were able
to do such wild things, but also because they just look amazing.  What
would otherwise be interpreted as "inefficient" by today's standards is
labeled as "moody" and "incredible."
"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" is a simple, subversive film made all the
more interesting because of its style, some of which is due to exactly how
old it is.  For instance, the sets are incredible as they are, but are
given an extra eery tone precisely because of the lack of technology
available at the time of its creation.  Any film which would use lighting
this bright in some cases would be deemed awful and its crew incompetent. 
But here, it creates a great sense of atmosphere which is unavailable
today.
"Dr. Caligari" is also a pretty amazing film, not just be a technological
standpoint, but also becaues the story is so fascinating and creepy.  The
story deals with a crotchity white-haired old man, Dr. Caligari (Werner
Krauß), who gets a booth at a traveling fair to show of a zombie-like
somnambulist named Cesare (Conrad Veidt), who has the ability to tell the
future to any paying customer.  But at night, Caligari sends Cesare out to
kill innocent people.
One of the victims is a friend of a student named Francis (Friedrich
Feher), who becomes obsessed with tracking down the friend's murderer. 
When his fiance (Lil Dagover) is almost killed by Cesare also, the evidence
leads him to Caligari, who, as it turns out, is the director of the local
Insane Asylum.  From here, there's the fantastic finale, and big twist
which concludes this film (which is only about an hour long).
This film, along with such films as Georges Melies' "Trip to the Moon,"
Fritz Lang's "Metropolis," and King Vidor's "The Crowd," is heralded as one
of the best examples of the silent era, and perhaps the best example of
German Expressionism at its most expressionistic.  The sets are some of the
best ever put in a film: every building is designed so it looks crooked,
and everything is grand and wild.  The ligthing, which would be off today,
puts every shadow in the correct place, giving the film an intense
atmosphere.  The costumes and make-up, particularly that of Cesare's, are
out of a nightmare, sticking in the mind long afterwards.  Some images are
just incredible, such as the look of Dr. Caligari, who is one of the
scariest characters ever put on celluloid.
Apart from being visually stunning and ultimately engrossing, the film is a
protest against the government's attempts to control the population like
zombies.  Cesare is the representation of society in the film, blindly
following the mad Caligari, who's thoughts and orders are totally devoid of
contemplation or reasoning.  It's a film that is so angry that it's
difficult to believe that it was ever given the get-go in the beginning.
But, as the story goes, the government interfered with Robert Wiene, the
director, who was then forced to tack on a beginning and ending to his film
where the entire message was supposed to be reversed.  In it, the entire
story, which works as angry, perfect satire against the government, is
revealed to be a lunatic story by a member of the asylum.  But looking back
at it today, especially with that final shot, it actually makes the film
creepier and scarier.  We wonder if the story did or did not happen, and
this the fact that we never really find out is even scarier.
One of the things I like most in films are when they combine a great
stylistic atmosphere and an intriguing story, which holds our attention,
and may even carry a strong political message.  "The Cabinet of Dr.
Caligari" is a perfect example of this kind of film.  Here's a film which
was made when film was still in the pioneer stages, and it takes advantage
of everything it has, turning any kind of fault it may have into an
advantage.
Afterwards, we're left with not only an idea of how many people felt of
themselves being a society as well as their government, but we also see
some of the best example of style ever put on celluloid.  Images like that
of Dr. Caligari looking up at Francis midway through the film, and the
streets of the city are what remain with us forever.  A scene like that
where Cesare tries to kill Francis' sleeping fiance and the following chase
are what we'll always remember.  And "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" is a
film which is not only one of the best films of the silent era (or the
German Expressionist era), but also one of the best films ever made.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
Das Kabinett des Doktor Caligari (1919)
"The Cabinet of Doctor Caligari", a silent film from
Germany, may be the best feature made prior to 1920.
Certainly it is better than the over-ripe "Birth of
a Nation", and nearly as influential.  Perhaps the
first great horror film, "Caligari" is also a
psychodrama, turning the tables on the audience by
changing its perspective.
Dr. Caligari (Werner Krauss) has a booth at a
county fair, where he promotes his sleepwalking
zombie Cesare (Conrad Veidt, better known for his
role in "Casablanca" two decades later).  Patrons
at the fair include protagonist Francis (Friedrich Feher)
and his friend Alan (Hans Heinz von Twardowski), who
are rivals for the love of Jane (Lil Dagover).
Cesare, under the direction of Caligari, murders
Alan and tries to kidnap Jane.  Francis suspects Caligari,
and after some difficulty convinces the authorities.
But in a wild plot twist, Francis, Cesare, and Jane
are all inmates in a lunatic asylum run by the
benevolent Dr. Caligari.
"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" is a very impressionistic
film.  The sets appear to be painted cardboard, but
they give a psychedelic effect.  With its zombies,
mad scientists and lunatics, the film was both
unsettling and inspirational, with its ingredients
used in any number of Universal horror pictures
from the 1920s and 1930s.
Perhaps too much has been read into the film over the
years.  The subplot of a zombie controlled by an evil
man has been called an allegory of World War I,
while the revelation of Francis as a lunatic has been
called the result of censorship, to prevent the
repudiation of authority.  But perhaps the film should
be taken at face value: as an innovative and important
horror film, and not as social commentary about troubled
postwar Germany.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CABINET OF DR. CALIGARI, THE (KABINETT DES DOKTOR CALIGARI, DAS)
(director: Robert Wiene; screenwriter: Carl Mayer/Hans Janowitz;
cinematographer: Willy Hameister; cast:Werner Krauss (Dr. Caligari),
Conrad Veidt (Cesare), Lil Dagover (Jane), Friedrich Feher (Francis),
Rudolf Lettinger (Dr. Olson, Jane's father), Rudolf Klein-Rogge (A
Criminal), Hans Heinz von Twardowski (Alan), 1920-silent-Ger.)
This is a must see film for historical reasons or if you are a film
buff. Its cinematic influence is tremendous on so many great directors
that range from Fritz Lang to Billy Wilder. Because of its dark story
and unique set designs (these were done by artists Walter Reimann and
Walter Röhrig and designer Hermann Warm), where black paint was used to
represent the shadows that were painted on the cardboard scenery of
crooked buildings.  As a result of WW1, the post-war Germany economy was
in a deplorable state and the studio only had one light to use, which
couldn't light the entire set adequately. So they improvised and created
an eerie style that brought the artistic German Expressionist movement
into the film.
This unique film influenced the genres of horror, children's fairy
tales, and crime films from the '20s - '50s, and by using the same style
of lighting and dark mood as these mystery stories, they became known as
noir films after WW11.
The story begins with the tiny but menacing looking Dr. Caligari (Werner
Krauss-he remained in Nazi Germany and later on played the anti-Semite
in "Jud Suss") going to town hall to get a permit to open a booth at the
local fair with his somnambulist act. The painted set of the town hall
is cramped with all the buildings on an angle, with narrow passages, low
ceilings, gray and black shadows covering the white walls, and the
clerks sitting way up on very elongated stools. They react to this mad
looking character by laughing at him, until he finally succeeds in
getting his permit.
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari is the story of murder and intrigue set in
the small German town of Holstenwall. Francis (Friedric Feher), the
narrator, acts as the voice of reason, explaining to the viewer what
really happened during that time, as he relates his horror story to an
older, skeptical man, as they are viewed sitting on a park bench.
Francis is the young lover and friendly rival of the same sweet girl,
Jane (Lil Dagover), of his best friend, Alan (Hans Heinrich). They had
the misfortune of attending the carnival and Alan made the fatal mistake
of asking the somnambulist Cesare (Conrad Veidt), a thin, ashen
appearing man, who is under the charge of Dr. Caligari and awakened by
him after an eternal sleep, "How long do I have to live?" Cesare
responds, "Until dawn."
True enough, before the next day begins, Alan is seen through the
shadows being knifed to death. He is the second murder victim
discovered. The town clerk was also killed on the day Dr. Caligari
arrived. Francis reports his suspicions to the police that it is Dr.
Caligari behind these killings, but the police soon pick up a criminal
(Rudolf ) who is about to knife an old lady and charge him with all the
murders, even though, he admits only to the attempted murder but not to
the other two killings.
Meanwhile, Jane's old man (Lettinger) has disappeared and she goes to
the carnival looking for him. She meets Dr. Caligari there and he shows
off to her Cesare sleeping like a zombie in his cabinet. Jane gets bad
feelings about these two characters, as Dr. Caligari ogles her. So, she
leaves.
This seemingly simple murder plot, of a crazed medieval-type of
Svengali, who orders his somnambulist to do his killings, is much more
complex than that, and it is one of the reasons that this film has meant
so much to so many different people at different time periods. A case
can be made for it, as an example of what happened to the collective
German psyche after the first war and how the degenerate ideals of
Nazism seeped into the German being.
The simple explanation for the film's success, a success that is hard to
deny, is that the subversive story is an allegory for an evil government
(Dr. Caligari) that brainwashes its people (Cesare) to commit crimes it
wants carried out. By its odd style, accented mannerisms, all the actors
wearing grotesque makeup, and exhibiting a stagy acting method, it
becomes a very unsettling film. Through its amazing sets, the film best
expresses the insanity of its theme, and the story enhances this theme,
as the authorities are shown to be either incompetent or uncaring, and
madness proves to be the staple of the film.
It was brought to America by Samuel Goldwyn in 1921 and made an
immediate impression on certain knowledgeable film critics in the U.S..
The odd twist the story takes, just when you assume that you know in
which direction the film is going, is when Cesare, clad-in-all-black, is
ordered into the bedroom of Jane to knife her to death but is instead
attracted to her, with thoughts of rape overcoming his command to kill.
When she screams and awakens her household, he is forced to kidnap her.
This is the story that the narrator is telling.
Francis is convinced that Caligari is behind these crimes, but since he
kept watch on him and had the doctor show him Cesare in his cabinet
asleep, he has to admit that they did not leave their quarters and,
therefore, he reasons, they couldn't have attacked Jane. It will later
turn out that there is a dummy there in place of Cesare. But it is all
so confusing, that the possibility exists the narrator is just making
this whole thing up.
It turns out, there was a mountebank named 'Caligari' in 1612, in Italy,
who had a somnambulist that he trained to commit murder. This asylum
director must have liked what he read about the evil magician, with the
idea that imitation is the best form of flattery, as this book is found
in his desk. Francis discovers this secret when he has access to the
director's office while visiting the asylum and going through the
director's books while waiting for him to return; and, when he sees who
the director is, he takes him for the lunatic killer.
The story remains purposefully unclear and bizarre, and in its supposed
climax, Caligari is put under restraint by the orderlies, as Francis
tells them his story and they find Cesare's dead body. But the story
doesn't end on this note.
The reason for the confusion, is that the German government interfered
with Robert Wiene's film, who was then forced to use a different
beginning and ending to his film where the entire message was supposed
to be reversed. They did not want a film with the message that authority
is not to be trusted and should be subject to severe questioning.
This story is now viewed from the point of view of a "framing device,"
as it appears that  all that previously happened could be derived from
the narrator's deranged imagination.
Francis is now through telling his tale in the park, where he sees his
girlfriend go sleepwalking by, and both men return to the asylum where
they see Cesare alive and Dr. Caligari coming down the stairs and Jane
thinking she is a queen, who refuses his advances by telling him that a
queen can't follow the dictates of her heart when it comes to romance.
When Francis accuses Caligari of being the killer who was in his
fantasy, this time the orderlies, in the film's anticlimax, restrain
Francis in a strait-jacket. The last chilling words coming from Dr.
Caligari, who is now seen as a more benevolent soul, go loosely like
this: boy, have I got a cure for you.
Caligari, however limited in scope, is still a powerhouse of a horror
film, a significant breakthrough in style and in expression: a poetical
vision. Even in its altered story form, the film is still spellbinding
and weird, as its ambiguity makes for many interpretations. It is even
possible, to make a case for Francis as being the deranged killer of his
best friend. Either Francis or Caligari could be the lunatic. This note
of ambiguity, instead of spoiling the story, only adds further intrigue.
Everyone realizes that the world we live in has elements of evil and
mystery in it. This tale of lunacy smolders in our psyches and allows us
to look at this story's skewed world without knowing all the answers. We
are left wondering if there could ever be justice in this world, as
corrupt powers always seem to have a way of covering up their misdeeds.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
