Title
Review for Against the Wall (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
New generations who watch Al Pacino chanting "Attica!
Attica!" in DOG DAY AFTERNOON, are probably less aware what
those words mean than the audience in early 1970s. For those
who used to be around in those times, word "Attica" is
forever associated with the great prison riot in 1971,
tragic event that traumatised the American nation in the
very same way Waco, Oklahoma City bombing and school
shootings are doing today. Hollywood simply ignored that
events, same as those events are ignored now, and left to
the professional yet routine treatment of television
industry. In case of Attica, it happened with the ATTICA,
1980 television movie directed by Marvin Chomsky. The author
of this review used to watch this movie long time ago, and
it was very impressed with it. Fourteen years later, HBO
made a cable version of those events, directed by John
Frankenheimer, director who had made reputation by making
great political thrillers in 1960s and 1970s.
The story is told from the perspective of Michael Smith
(Kyle MacLachlan), young man from Attica, New York, who
follows the family tradition and becomes the guard in nearby
State prison, nicknamed "The Factory" by the local
population. However, unlike his predecessors, including his
father (Harry Dean Stanton), retired guard who now owns the
bar, Smith is the product of its generation - idealistic,
liberal and open for new ideas. Soon, he is shocked to find
that the prison is run like nothing has changed outside the
walls. Guards like sadistic and racist Weisband (Frederic
Forrest) treat prisoners like animals. Smith is, on the
other hand, aware that it can't go for long. The inmates,
mostly blacks like Jamaal (Samuel L. Jackson) are convinced
that they too should have some new political and other
freedoms that the rest of country enjoys under the reforms.
The anger and discontent explodes in the violent outburst
that would leave scores of prison guards, including Smith,
as hostages.
Technically, the movie is well-done. The acting is superb,
which isn't so hard to imagine with excellent character
actors like Forrest, MacLachlan, Jackson, Stanton and
Clarence Williams III (playing prisoner Chaka) around. Also,
the grey photography of John R. Leonetti provides a lot of
gloomy atmosphere, that was essential for this kind of
picture. Unfortunately, Frankenheimer in later years
continues with the series of bland and forgettable movies
that undermine his reputation, and AGAINST THE WALL is not
an exception. It happened mostly because of screenplay; Ron
Hutchinson wrote characters less like a living and breathing
people, and more like a symbols. So, the division between
the guards and inmates seem somewhat artificial, same as the
use of "good vs. bad" stereotypes in characterisation (most
notable in confronting Smith with Maclachlan, and Jaamal
with Chaka). Also, the film is too didactic - the
characters keep telling to each other and audience that the
times are changing, instead of leaving that task to the
director. The ending of the film, with its "symbolic"
message being spelled out, is even worse. However, despite
those serious flaws, and despite the fact that the Attica
prison riot deserved somewhat better depiction, the movie
serves its purpose simply by showing that dark chapter of
American history to the audience of today.
