Title
Review for Three Wishes (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Patrick Swayze, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Joseph Mazzello,
      Seth Mumy, David Marshall Grant, Diane Venora, David O. Sanders,
      Michael O'Keefe
Director: Martha Coolidge
Producers:  Clifford Green, Ellen Green, and Gary Lucchesi
Screenplay: Elizabeth Anderson based on a story by Clifford and
            Ellen Green
Cinematography: Johnny E. Jensen
Music: Cynthia Miller
U.S. Distributor: Savoy Pictures
     Frankly, I'm not entirely sure at what audience THREE WISHES is
aimed.  With its wholesome, politically-correct story, it seems focused
at the under-15 crowd.  Yet, considering the slow pace and relative
dearth of action, adults might be the only ones with the patience to sit
through these two hours.  The result is a film that doesn't have a
strong appeal for any age group.  Some viewers will undoubtedly be
charmed by this mystical, whimsical motion picture, but it's doubtful
there will be enough fans to save it from a quick box office death.
     In recent years, Patrick Swayze has been attempting to broaden his
image, branching away from the hunky, action-oriented roles he
gravitated towards in his early Hollywood days.  (Has it really been
that long since DIRTY DANCING?)  After starting down this less-traveled
road in 1992 with CITY OF JOY, Swayze has continued along the path with
the likes of TOO WONG FOO and now THREE WISHES.  Here, he plays a
drifter without a penny to his name, and there's not a fist fight to be
found.  Hardly a traditional heroic image.
     As the soundtrack, which includes such tunes as "Do You Believe in
Magic?" and "Earth Angel", indicates, THREE WISHES is about dreams and
magic.  Its message, which is all-but-shouted from the rooftops
(subtlety is not the film's strong suit), is that we should all stop
yearning for what we can't have and "find happiness in whatever [we've]
got."  Just because there's a piece missing from the puzzle of the
American Dream doesn't mean that life can't be wonderful.  This is a
very traditional theme, and one that's probably a little too obvious for
a sophisticated movie-going audience.
     Of course, for those not impressed by the message, there's a heavy
element of nostalgia to inhale.  Set in 1955, THREE WISHES is full of
pastel reminders of $13,500 dream houses, old TV shows like OZZIE AND
HARRIET, and two-parent families where the mother tends home and the
father provides.  The story opens on Memorial Day at a cemetery for
veterans of the Korean War, where Jeanne (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio)
and her two sons, Tom (Joseph Mazzello) and Gunther (Seth Mumy), have
come to remember their father, whose plane was shot down several years
ago.  On the way home, an accident occurs which changes the direction of
the fatherless family's life.  A dog runs in front of Jeanne's car and,
when she swerves to avoid running it over, she instead hits a man--a
vagrant named Jack (Patrick Swayze) who is just passing through town.
Feeling guilty about what has happened, Jeanne invites Jack to spend
time at her house until his broken leg has healed.  As it turns out,
however, the man and his dog are more than they seem.
     As relatively pleasant and undemanding as this film is, it runs a
little too long, primarily because the setup takes the first half of the
movie.  THREE WISHES appears to have undergone some fairly heavy editing
to get it below the two hour mark, however, since several minor subplots
are left dangling.  The film opens and closes with brief contemporary
(1995) scenes that might have better underscored the primary theme had
they been given a greater portion of the running time.
     Character development is also on the weak side.  While the primary
four (Jack, Jeanne, Tom, and Gunther) are likable, none of them
possesses amazing depth.  Basically, they're just well-acted stereotypes
with a few interesting lines of dialogue.  The supporting characters
fare far worse--there isn't an interesting one in the whole lot.  From
uptight parents to bullying kids, everyone is lifted directly from
stock, with little attempt made at fleshing them out.
     Darker than Capra, yet somewhat reminiscent of (albeit inferior to)
classics like IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, THREE WISHES has a good heart,
effective direction by Martha Coolidge (RAMBLING ROSE), and solid acting
-- yet the occasional meandering of the script doesn't allow the movie
to be as engaging or enchanting as it ought to be.  THREE WISHES is all
about the supernatural, and, considering the nearly impossible-to-market
nature of the subject matter, it's going to take a major miracle for
more than a handful of people to see this film in theaters before its
quick transfer to video.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THREE WISHES is a totally non-offensive family movie about nothing
much of anything, but one that provides a pleasant, dreamy time at the
local Bijou.  No one attempts anything remotely resembling acting, but
a series of nostalgic images feel your senses as you are transported to
a simpler time.  You get to be a nine year old boy in 1955 exactly as I
once was.  The great lovely and lush cinematography (Johnny E. Jensen)
is full of the saturated colors of the movies of that era.  The sets
are perfect and full of 50's kitsch.  I think the sets are award
caliber.
     Although the movie starts and ends in the present, it is set
almost totally in the summer of 1955.  The mother, Jeanne Hallman (Mary
Elizabeth Mastrantonio), and her two sons, nine year old Tom (Joseph
Mazzello) and three year old Gunther (Seth Mumy) live in a new tract
housing development in California.  The development is set in the
middle of a desert, but the homes all have grass lawns and little scrub
trees.  Behind the houses are cactuses and barren land.  As they drive
up to the development, we see the large billboard proudly proclaiming
these as "The American Dream Homes" and listing the price as $13,500.
Most viewers will remark what a steal that seems.  Since we moved at
that time to a similar development in Texas and paid $8,000, my
reaction was that California was overpriced even 40 years ago.
     The family is trying to find its way since the father was a pilot
who was shot down, killed, and lost forever over Korea three years
earlier.  Some of the early scenes are of the Hallman family going to
visit the military graveyard where the father is not buried.  The mom
makes do with accounting jobs she does not want and for which is not
particularly well suited.
The Hallman's go to a town picnic where Jeanne is told she is "daring"
for wearing shorts.  Tom is humiliated by being the only one not picked
for the baseball game since, as one of the kids told him
matter-of-factly, "we want to win."  Again, this hits home, because I
was a terrible baseball player and was always picked last if at all.
     Jeanne hits a drifter, Jack McCloud (Patrick Swayze), with her
car.  Since she broke his leg, she takes pity on him and invites him to
stay at their home.  As the story unfolds, it seems that he may have a
secret and he may know magic or then again, maybe not.  What is certain
is that he has a Zen approach to teaching baseball and the local little
league team, which is in the cellar, can use all of the help it can
get.
     The best part of the show has nothing to do with the flimsy plot.
The best part is the sets.  We have the 50s lovingly recreated in
turquoise which has to be the color of that era.  We have turquoise
dial phones, refrigerators, china sets, etc.  It feels as if
everything, but Jeannie's hair is turquoise.  It is presented much as
the GE Carousel of Progress did at Disneyland for years until, sadly,
they tore it down.  The only part of the movie that is inauthentic is
the fascination with bomb shelters and the fear of bomb blasts, which
is always over emphasized in movies about the 50s.  Of course, Jeanne
drives a Woody, but the other cars are neat too with salmon and white
two tone Fords and other classic cars.  Little Gunther even has his
Davy Crockett coonskin cap.
     Back to the lack of acting.  Heartthrob Patrick Swayze has never
been much of an actor.  He was fine in DIRTY DANCING, but has done
nothing else worth mentioning.  Here he spends the entire movie with a
single pensive stare and rarely speaks.  Practice a pensive look in the
mirror for an hour, and you could do as well.  Now go to central
casting and get your million.
     Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio has had a few decent pictures, the
last being CONSENTING ADULTS, but I have never been particularly
impressed by her work.  Here she perfects a pleasant little smile and
keeps it unchanged throughout the entire movie.  I think she must have
used Crazy Glue.
     Joseph Mazzello does not show a lot of promise, but he was
superior to any of the adults.  Only first time movie actor Seth Mumy
does a credible job.  His dream scene is full of imaginative acting.
The real hero of the show is a fuzz ball of a dog that Jack owns.  He
is a delight to watch especially in the scene where he mimics Gunther's
fright while watching King Kong on TV.
     The movie has heavy stereotyping.  The dads are all shown as ones
that you would not want for your dad.  They push their kids and do not
really care about them.  They mainly want to drink cocktails and wait
for hunting season so they can kill all the beautiful deer in the area.
The moms are stay at home types who spend most of their time being
busybodies.
     The film moves slowly as is it is in a trance and yet, I was
caught up in it.  It is not a film to analyze heavily or its spirit
will vanish in front of you because of some Heisenberg uncertainty
principle.  It has an aura that is hard to capture in print, but then
again, perhaps it is because I can identify with the era so well.  With
a better director (Martha Coolidge whose only decent film was RAMBLING
ROSE) and a different cast, the film had potential for much more.
     Oh yes, you probably want to know what all of this has to do with
three wishes.  Well, in the last ten minutes of the show, we get to
that almost as an afterthought.  Suffice it to say that it is the only
attempt at seriousness and meaning in the entire film.  It is a partial
success.  The last scene, set in the present, is excellent and a
wonderful way to wrap up a show that had no direction.
     THREE WISHES runs too slow at 1:48.  It is rated R for a one
second glimpse at Swayze's nude rear, a few bad words, and two mildly
scary scenes.  Most kids over 4 should be able to handle it fine.  This
is a show that will bore kids with short attention spans.  Jeffrey (age
6 1/2) liked the show although he did not seem particularly enthused
about it.  He gave it a thumbs up overall, but a thumbs sideways for
the brief monster dream sequence.  The monster turns out to be a good
guy in the dream I should point out.  I can not bring myself to
recommend others see this show, but I actually enjoyed it, and I give
it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
