Title
Review for End of the Affair, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Nick Lyons
  "The End Of The Affair" is a dark and moody romantic period piece, that Neil
Jordan exquisitely writes and directs. Although it's slow and sometimes
confusing to follow, it still manages to give audiences a moving experience.
  Based on Graham Greene's novel of the same name, the film mainly follows 3
characters. There's Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes) who has an affair with
Henry Mile's (Stephen Rea) wife Sarah (Julianne Moore). Sarah finds Henry to be
a bore, because well, he's just a normal guy. It's all work and no play with
him. While Maurice on the other hand falls madly in love with Sarah, and would
do anything for her. Unfortunately the two break up. This is all witnessed in a
serious of flashbacks, so that leads us to the present. It's a few years later,
and they both still think of each other, so Maurice hires a private detective
(Ian Hart) to see what Sarah is up too. While this may sound straight forward
it's not. It's a deep dark tale of the jealousy that lies in the two men,
unhappiness, and the ever lasting love. 
  All this may sound like a drag, but it really captures your interest. With
great performances by Ralph Fiennes (doing another English Patient type of
film, only this movie is better) and Julianna Moore who definitely deserves an
Oscar because out of all 5 films she did in 1999, I believe this was the role,
she had the most passion for, and you can see why. The story was also well
written thanks to Neil Jordan. Even though I didn't read the book, there's no
doubt in mind that it was just as moving and descriptive. What's so moving
about it you ask? The tragedy of it all. It's not the typical romance, in which
a guy finds a girl, they fall in love and all is well, this is more complicated
and depressing. It really shows the complexity of a relationship, because
nothing is ever perfect. Everyone feels a different way and that is what tears
us to pieces.
  Back to Neil Jordan's script, it wasn't only red roses. There were times when
I felt it too be a little slow, but most Romances are. It also tended to be a
bit confusing, especially at the start. It keep jumping around from past to
present, so it obviously took awhile to get a grasp of things. Also a notable
was the superb direction by Neil Jordan. I'd have to say this is his finest
achievement to date, because quite frankly I've never really found his work to
be up to par. It just never did anything for me, until now.
  When it ends, it leaves viewers a little saddened, but provoked nonetheless.
This is definitely one of the best films of 99, and had some of the best
acting, most notably by Moore. Not for all movie goers, but for those who are
film buffs and want something of value.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE END OF THE AFFAIR" (Columbia Pictures)
What a disappointment! Writer/director Neil Jordan, who gave us
The Crying Game, Mona Lisa, and In Company of Wolves, totally misses
the mark with this soggy romantic tale, grimly adapted from one of
Graham Greene's most autobiographical novels. Looking like a leftover
from the '50s, it's a staid, stodgy drama set during W.W.II, when the
Nazis were bombing London and adulterous couples carelessly cavorted
in bed instead of seeking shelter during the air-raids. One such
couple is Ralph Fiennes and Julianne Moore. He's a moody novelist,
tortured by jealousy, and she's a troubled married woman, trapped by
circumstance in a dull, loveless marriage to a career civil servant,
glumly played by Stephen Rea. They enjoyed many lusty encounters
until, inexplicably, she broke off with him. The story explores how
that happened and why. It would be helpful if we cared but we don't,
because neither character is even remotely interesting and, without
revealing too much, suffice it to say that the explanation revolves
around Catholicism, the power of prayer, the existence of miracles,
and the virtue of sacrifice. Julianne Moore spends considerable screen
time cavorting naked, having shocked audiences with her full frontal
nudity in Robert Altman's Short Cuts. She's actress who obviously
enjoys anatomical revelation and seeks roles in which she can show her
body off.  Delicate, skinny Ralph Fiennes, on the other hand, suffers
when his clothes are removed; plus, he seems totally self-absorbed
which renders the love scenes lifeless, even depressing. This same
story was filmed unsuccessfully before in 1955 with Deborah Kerr, Van
Johnson, and John Mills. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
End of the Affair" is a plodding, dreary 4. It's a murky, misguided
melodrama.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Did you ever experience a devastating experience--your
dog gets hit by a car, your lover leaves you, your
grandmother is seriously ill, your plane is descending at ten
times the normal speed, your spouse catches you in flagrante
delicto--and you pray: "God...if you can make everything well
again, I will a) always believe in you; b) never ever leave that
individual's side again; c) leave that person and stop sinning
with him?" Sure you have.  Many of us have entertained
doubts about spiritual matters, particularly about the
existence of a divine being, but to coin a mixed metaphor,
when the chips are down, there are no atheists in foxholes. 
If you experience a crisis more powerful than any you'd
known, you are likely to make the most heart-wrenching
promises to the Almighty if He will make everything right--or,
as the song goes, "Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far
away."
   "The End of the Affair," Canadian novelist Graham
Greene's most autobiographical novel in that it was inspired
by the writer's adulterous affair with the American Catherine
Walston, has been given a second screen adaptation. 
Written in the 1950's, "The End of the Affair" received
cinematic life in 1955 by Edward Dmytryk, featuring Van
Johnson as the Greene stand-in Maurice Bendrix and
Deborah Kerr as Bendrix's neighbor, Sarah Miles.  Filmed
with the slow pace and patient style of the fifties, the movie
was well received despite the feeling of some critics that
Johnson and Kerr were mismatched.  
   Though the theme of adulterous liaisons with the
jealousies, hatreds, and guilt feelings that ensue are universal
themes, the current offering by Neil Jordan ("The Butcher
Boy," "The Crying Game") comes across as too literary, too
uncinematic, too darn old-fashioned for a contemporary
audience.  Nor can we quite understand the attraction that
Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes) has for the bored Sarah
Miles (Julianne Moore) since Bendrix is, after all, not greatly
different from Miles's colorless husband, Henry (Stephen
Rea).  While we can imagine the effeminate Ralph Fiennes in
the role of a man whose principal claim to exertion is a
workout on a smudgy-ribboned typewriter, we simply cannot
see how Sarah could replace the antipathy she feels for her
rising, career-civil- servant-husband with a passion for this
delicate author.
   Further marring the film, the elegant lyricism of the book--
which comes across, now and then in the film's dialogue and
Bendrix's narrative--would serve us better on the printed
page.  On the large screen, the images that the words
convey, best left to the imagination, are ploddingly displayed
for the audience.
   As Bendrix clacks away on the machine in his study, he
tells us that he is a man full of jealousy and hatred, passions
which only once come across toward the conclusion of the
story but which appear to be so repressed in this man that
such sentiments are difficult to believe.  Through a number of
flashbacks, Neil Jordan first shows us a meeting that Bendrix
has in the ever-present English rain with his friend Henry
Miles in 1946.  Miles is depressed, lost in thought, wandering
about the streets lost in thought.  For several years he has
surmised that he was emotionally losing his wife, Sarah, a
woman he feels he cannot live without.  When Jordan takes
us back to 1939, we observe the meeting of Sarah and
Maurice Bendrix at a party which Sarah's husband Henry is
giving.  The two fall immediately in love and begin an
adulterous affair.  During a raid by the Germans, Bendrix's
house is hit by a bomb, knocking the writer down the stairs
where he appears to be dead.  Though Sarah and Maurice
had promised each other that their love would last forever,
Sarah inexplicably ends the affair on that day, leaving
Bendrix hopelessly baffled, enraged, and jealous of the man
who he believes has stolen her affections from him.  
   "The End of the Affair" is a film that takes itself so seriously
that the few comic interludes are much appreciated.  The
light parts, such as they are, are supplied by a Mr. Parkis
(Ian Hart), a private detective hired by Bendrix to follow
Sarah everywhere to determine the source of her alleged new
infatuation.  But the chief rewards of this flawed film are
religio-mystic theme--wonderfully underplayed given the
hysteria that we've come to expect from the likes of
"Stigmata," "Dogma" and "End of Days"--and the literate-
philosophic dialogue produced by the novelist.  "Do I exist for
you when you are with him?" Bendrix wonders in what is
almost a takeoff of the usual metaphysical query, "If a tree
falls and no one witnesses the sound, did it indeed fall?"  For
her part Sarah contributes "People go on loving all their lives
without seeing each other," while Bendrix, disagreeing,
debates the point.  Bendrix draws inappropriate laughter from
the audience when, in adjusting Sarah's hosiery after a bout
of lovemaking he remarks, "I'm jealous of your stockings
because they kiss your whole leg...I'm jealous of your shoes
because they take you away from me."  Later on he
continues the jealous lover bit by exclaiming, "We only made
love: but you shop and cook and fall asleep with him."
   This is heady stuff: a combination of Philosophy 101 with a
basic course in Comedy Corner Improvs.  "Happiness is
harder to write about than goodness," complains the novelist
at one point, to which we say, "Sometimes, writing is harder
to put on the screen than in a book."
Rated R.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE END OF THE AFFAIR
(Columbia)
Starring:  Ralph Fiennes, Julianne Moore, Stephen Rea, Ian Hart.
Screenplay:  Neil Jordan, based on the novel by Graham Greene.
Producers:  Neil Jordan and Stephen Woolley.
Director:  Neil Jordan.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It's entirely possible that a film version of THE END OF THE AFFAIR
-- Graham Greene's novel of passion, obsession and faith -- could be made
without getting into the explicit details of its protagonists'
extra-marital exploits. And in fact it already has, in a weepy 1955 
version starring Deborah Kerr and Van Johnson. Some would no doubt argue
that the more restrained approach has its merits, but there's something
about this source material that demands an approach that couldn't be
filmed in 1955. I can't remember the last time a mainstream film featured
as much intense, forthright sexuality -- of the groping, grinding, gasping
variety -- as THE END OF THE AFFAIR. And I can't remember the last time it
would have been quite so thematically appropriate.
     The story begins in 1946, with a chance meeting between writer
Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes) and his neighbor Henry Miles (Stephen
Rea). Henry is distraught over a notion that his wife Sarah (Julianne
Moore) may be seeing another man, a notion in which Bendrix also has a
certain interest. In flashback, we learn that Bendrix and Sarah engaged in
a passionate five-year-long affair during the war, an affair which Sarah
had abruptly ended with no explanation. Still obsessed with Sarah two
years after the end of their affair, Bendrix decides he must know what
Sarah is now up to, and hires a private detective (Ian Hart) to uncover
her secrets.
     Neil Jordan's approach to much of THE END OF THE AFFAIR is in fact
fairly restrained. Michael Nyman's string score pulses throughout the
film, adding a layer of heightened drama, but the performances play
against the music effectively. Ralph Fiennes' work may be too reminiscent
of his character in THE ENGLISH PATIENT, but it's right for the role, as
is Stephen Rea's hangdog Henry. Jordan also takes a calculated risk by
playing some scenes more than once, after a key piece of information has
been revealed. Though the repetition of those scenes gives the film a
slightly lurching pace, it also shows how easy it is to misinterpret key
moments in our lives. Ultimately, the risk pays off.
     His even bigger risk pays off even more definitively. Let viewers go
in forewarned: THE END OF THE AFFAIR is a steamy affair, the sex scenes a
deft tightrope act between pure animal passion and intense emotion. THE
END OF THE AFFAIR is a story that depends on believing in the transcendent
connection between Sarah and Bendrix, a connection Bendrix feels is broken
any time they are apart. Jordan even manages to use the sex scenes for a
couple of great punch lines (Bendrix, when Henry returns home at the
height of the lovers' passion: "What if he heard us?" Sarah: "He wouldn't
recognize the sound"). THE END OF THE AFFAIR circa 1999 combines the
appeal of old-fashioned tragic romance with Greene's ahead-of-his-time
psychology of irrational desire (whether temporal or spiritual). It may
make you uncomfortable, but you can't deny its honesty.
     The film does begin running out of gas in the third act, as the
relationship between Sarah and Bendrix becomes subservient to the
relationship between Sarah and God. Jordan does an impressive job of
making the novel's philosophical musings solid cinema, retaining all the
thematic weight without too much ponderous voice-over. There's also the
ongoing pleasure of Ian Hart's sharp, understated work as the private
detective who takes tremendous pride in his professionalism. And even when
they no longer fill the screen, THE END OF THE AFFAIR's scenes of illicit
eroticism linger like a memory of addictive high. Jordan does justice to
Greene's 1950s narrative by doing what the 1950s couldn't do -- showing
the middle of an affair that made the end of the affair a tragedy.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Watching the dispassionate World War II romance "The End of the Affair," one is
instantly reminded of "The English Patient" considering it starred the same
lead actor, Ralph Fiennes. Fiennes does not strike me as a romantic lead - he
somehow has an aura that is too cold and stuffy. Thus, "End of the Affair" is a
beautiful film to watch but it suffers from Fiennes's presence. 
The film begins literally at the end of the affair. A well-known, London
fiction writer named Maurice (Ralph Fiennes) coincidentally meets an old
friend, Henry (Stephen Rea), during a rainy evening. Henry, a dour civil
servant, had not seen Maurice in years and invites him back to his house for a
drink. After a while, Henry confesses that his wife, Sarah Miles (Julianne
Moore), may be having an affair and has reluctantly thought of hiring a private
detective. Maurice takes matters in his own hands since he knows Sarah - he
once had an affair with her and may be quite jealous as well. Thus,
writer-director Neil Jordan ("The Crying Game") fractures the timeline by
showing us the affair and its consequences, and its inevitable denouement,
while Maurice walks through the London streets in the present day to uncover
Sarah's supposed infidelity. 
"The End of the Affair" is bold in its time fracturing structure, particularly
in how it takes us back and forth from the present day to the past sometimes
within a single scene. Neil Jordan often cuts away to the past during a scene
in the present that mirrors the past. One notable example is when Maurice first
arrives at Henry's house and walks up the stairs and there is a cut to a
woman's legs being caressed by Maurice as they walk up to the bedroom. Not a
new device of cinematic language to be sure but Jordan handles it with delicate
skill and panache. 
There are a couple of problems with the story, however, that are handled with
less skill. For one, the romance between Maurice and Sarah never quite makes us
feel the passion of their affair, and the casting of the less than smoldering
Fiennes reflects that. Somehow, it never bursts forth with the fireworks one
would expect from a romantic story (one can conclude that Stephen Rea might
have been a better choice since his relationship with "the lady" in "Crying
Game" was far more passionate). To make matters worse, the scene in the
building where after they have one of many earth-shaking trysts, a bomb strikes
and there is a sense of God's intervention, is handled badly and strikes too
many false notes. 
The redemptive stroke of genius in "End of the Affair" is the dazzling Julianne
Moore, who encapsulates Sarah with delicacy, charm and nuance - plus, she makes
a fitting romantic lead. Her British accent is also down pat, but you knew that
already if you saw "Big Lebowski" or "An Ideal Husband." Though I would not
call this one of her best performances, she still manages to hold her own
against Mr. Fiennes.
If "End of the Affair" had a better leading man in the role, someone not so
suffocated with charmlessness, then it might have been a true romantic tragedy.
As it is, it strikes some sad notes but it never breathes with verve or
passion. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
David Bezanson
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/52062df4ccf337588825686f0080bda6?OpenDocument
I was dragged to see THE END OF THE AFFAIR expecting another lavishly
costumed, pointless period romance of the Merchant-Ivory type ... only
based on Graham Greene instead of Jane Austen or E. M. Forster.  The
kind of movie that our wives drag us to.  Instead, I was converted.
 THE END OF THE AFFAIR makes a lot of serious points, and offers a very
modern, psychological drama in spite of the period setting (London
during World War II). Instead of being another revisionist Hollywood
remake, THE END OF THE AFFAIR is the best kind of historical drama: one
that reminds you that history was made of real people and their emotions
--- love, pain, jealousy, and emptiness.
 The film revolves around a wartime affair between Sarah Miles (Julianne
Moore), the wife of a civil servant, and a writer, Maurice Bendrix
(Ralph Fiennes), who becomes her jealous lover.  Bendrix hires an
investigator (drolly played by Ian Hart) to follow Sarah, convinced that
she can't love him as purely as she does.  Ultimately, he finds that the
rival for her affections is not another lover, but something more
unexpected.
 Graham Greene, who converted to Catholicism before writing THE END OF
THE AFFAIR, was one of the last generation of writers (along with
contemporaries like Evelyn Waugh, C.S. Lewis, and William Faulkner) to
seriously consider the implications of religious belief.  Greene's
refusal to resolve his ambivalent faith is transcribed in the movie,
which goes deeper than the fashionable nihilism of most movies these
days.
 Director Neil Jordan returns to form with this work.  Jordan has
brought Greene's novel alive, revealing the conflicted, turbulent
emotions of the survivors of the Blitz.  The cast is excellent,
including Fiennes as the lout and Stephen Rea as the cuckold; but
Moore's sensual portrayal of Sarah, an ordinary individual forced to
struggle with belief, is the most haunting, and worth an Oscar nod.
THE END OF THE AFFAIR offers a much more balanced view of faith than
many supposedly religious movies --- unlike, say, THE GREEN MILE, with
its unbelievable Christ-figure and obvious social-gospel message, or the
whiny, cliched despair of ANGELA'S ASHES.  By holding God accountable
for pain and suffering as well as miracles, the makers of THE END OF THE
AFFAIR capture the uncertainty and passion of people struggling with
real faith.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
James Sanford
     There's an old British saying, "in for a penny, in for a pound,"
which applies perfectly to "The End of the Affair," a demanding,
thought-provoking film adapted from Graham Greene's novel of the same
name. It's a movie built around a theme many will find difficult to
accept, that miracles can happen to perfectly ordinary, non-religious
people.
If you can believe that, you're well on your way to being drawn in
by this story of an illicit WWII liaison between novelist Maurice
Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes) and Sarah Miles (Julianne Moore), the wife of a
perpetually glum diplomat. Sarah is in the tenth year of a joyless
marriage to Henry (Stephen Rea) and if there was ever any fire in the
relationship, it's long since died. "I'm the shadow he walks around,"
she says. Henry, for his part, tries to hold on to her by promising her
a life in the highest circles of London society. "Wouldn't you like to
be Lady Miles?" he asks, trying to get her excited about future
possibilities.
But Sarah would take passion over prestige any day, and that's what
she finds during her stolen afternoons and evenings with Maurice. That
is, until a disaster that comes literally out of the clear blue forces
her to make a dramatic and mystifying change in her life, one which
brings sorrow to all involved.
"Affair" has surface similarities to "The English Patient," the
Oscar-winning 1996 hit that cemented Fiennes' place among contemporary
matinee idols, and director Neil Jordan (who also penned the screenplay)
doesn't skimp on scenes of Fiennes and Moore working up a sweat as they
wrinkle the sheets together to the strains of Michael Nyman's ravishing
score. But in many ways, this is a much more daring and challenging
piece. Sarah's climactic decision and her determination to abide by it
regardless of the pain it causes her make this less a romance than a
study of a woman's capacity for sacrifice. Sarah metamorphoses before
our eyes from a bored, chic housewife into an astonishingly complex and
troubled individual desperate to figure out exactly what she's doing and
why she's doing it.
In short, it's the kind of role actresses dream of tackling, and
Moore runs with it, eagerly trying to sort out the secrets of Sarah's
heart. It's a spellbinding performance, one that's very nearly matched
by Fiennes, who's piercing blue eyes serve as windows into Maurice's
mind. What makes Fiennes such a riveting actor to watch, however, is
what he doesn't reveal. We can always feel him holding just a little bit
back, silently challenging us to pay closer attention to his words and
behavior. As the outsider whose love for his wife is reawakened when he
realizes she's lost to him, Rea conveys fully what it's like to be in
Henry's lusterless shoes. The trio is superbly supported by Ian Hart and
Sam Bould as a father-son detective team caught between the three sides
of the triangle.
"Affair" marks a solid comeback for Jordan, whose last film was
the almost unwatchable "In Dreams," a cartoonish melodrama about a
serial killer (Robert Downey Jr.) and a psychic (Annette Bening). This
film returns him to the kind of character-based drama of his best work,
such as "Mona Lisa" and "The Crying Game." He cloaks the bodies of his
lovers in shadows and rain while exposing their souls. James Sanford

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_End_of_the_Affair_ (R) **** (out of ****)
"This is a diary of hate," is the first line uttered in Neil Jordan's
_The_End_of_the_Affair_.  However, that line could not be a more
inaccurate description of this film, for it is a beautifully passionate
and extremely romantic screen treatment of Graham Greene's novel.
Even though the words "the end" are in the title,
_The_End_of_the_Affair_ is about a love's survival, but--as the words
"the affair" suggest--that love is forbidden.  The film opens on one
rainy night in London in 1946, where writer Maurice Bendrix (Ralph
Fiennes) runs into old friend Henry Miles (Stephen Rea) by chance.  Henry
tells Maurice that he suspects his wife Sarah (Julianne Moore) is having
an affair--words that hit close to home for Maurice: two years ago, he
and Sarah had an affair themselves, and his reacquaintance with the
couple just reignites his obsessive love for her.
Jordan, who also scripted, follows a complex structure that weaves back
and forth through past, present, and future.  The film is held together
by Maurice's aforementioned "diary of hate," which looks back on his
investigation into Sarah's suspicious 1946 doings, not to mention the
origins of his relationship with her.  The two meet at a party to which
Maurice is invited by Henry, and their attraction is fiery and
immediate--as is the electricity between Fiennes and Moore.  The pair
absolutely sizzle together in addition to having a palpable romantic
chemistry, and their steamy yet swoony scenes together show that
eroticism and romance do not necessarily have to exist independently of
one another.
While _The_End_of_the_Affair_ is indeed about a love triangle, it's not
between the parties it would appear to be.  In fact, the film is as much
of a mystery as it is a traditional love story.  The central narrative
mystery is that of the reasons why the affair between Maurice and Sarah
ended in the first place, which gives way into an even larger and deeper
mystery.  Some critics have taken issue with the handling of the latter
turn, but the fact that I was able to accept such a sharp twist so
unconditionally is a tribute to the remarkable finesse of Jordan's
direction; I was caught up in the story enough to accept wherever it was
going.
That, of course, is as much the actors' doing as it is Jordan's. 
Fiennes and Moore are both wrenching in depicting their characters'
soul-aching longing and bringing to life their characters' individual
aspects.  While one does feel his character's pain,  he doesn't downplay
the dark nature of his obsession.  Moore has a perhaps more difficult
task as her character undergoes the most radical shift in the film, but
she pulls off the job without hitting a false note.  Likely to go
unnoticed alongside such rich star turns is Rea, but his poignantly
subtle work is every bit as impressive as that of his co-stars.
_The_End_of_the_Affair_ is indeed, when boiled down to the bare
essentials, a melodrama that employs all the conventional tactics of
emotional manipulation.  What is hardly conventional, however, is how
beautifully and genuinely moving the execution is.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz

END OF THE AFFAIR, THE (director/writer: Neil Jordan; screenwriter: from
the novel of Graham Greene; cinematographer: Roger Pratt; cast: Ralph
Fiennes (Maurice Bendrix), Julianne Moore (Sarah Miles), Stephen Rea
(Henry Miles), Ian Hart (Parkis), Jason Isaacs (Father Smythe), James
Bolam (Savage), Samuel Bould (Lance Parkis), 1999)
It's a rainy night in London in 1946, two distinguished looking men, old
acquaintances, meet, and one invites the other home to talk about
something that is troubling him. That person is Henry Miles (Stephen
Rea), who is a wealthy, high-level bureaucrat in the ministry office.
His friend is a writer, Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes), who knew him in
1939 when he used his character for a story he was writing and was at
the same time having an affair with his wife Sarah (Julianne Moore). The
opulent home brings back to Bendrix the passionate memories of Henry's
wife, whose affair suddenly stopped for no reason that he could
determine in 1944, after London was bombed in an air-raid and the couple
just finished making love.
What has made Henry distraught, is that he thinks his wife is having an
affair, and he was thinking of going to a private investigation service
to have her followed. This arouses a jealousy in Bendrix, who offers to
go to the agency for Henry, after Henry tells him he can't do it and is
sorry he brought it up. Unknown to Henry, Bendrix goes to the Savage
agency and hires the private detective, telling him that he is not the
husband, but the lover who was jilted two-years ago, and is jealous of
her new lover.
Neil Jordan ("The Crying Game"/"The Butcher Boy") has brought to the
screen Graham Greene's very personal and passionate 1951 novel, which is
in many ways autobiographical, a mid-forties period piece, about his
illicit romance that also questions his faith, the Catholic one, in
which he is a convert to. Though in this big-budget mainstream film,
Fiennes' characterization of him is as a Protestant, while Sarah is the
Catholic convert, whose mother gave her that religion hoping that she
would accept its belief in prayers and miracles and not be influenced by
her non-believing Jewish father. Graham, known to be a subtle
anti-Semite, of the T.S. Eliott kind, always tries to get his digs in at
the Jews. The story is really about the battle in Greene's head; on the
one hand, he is the carnal Protestant and, on the the hand, he is the
Catholic (through Moore's character) believing in a non-physical love
with God. There seems to be a war going on inside him that has nothing
to do with the war England is fighting.What is presented onscreen is an
intelligent but somber look at how the three main characters cope with
their uneven lives and manage to act so civilized when feeling so much
pain at finding their lives to be unresolved.
The film is a constant flux between flashbacks and what is current. We
first see Bendrix at his typewriter, writing about hatred. He feels
betrayed that Sarah left him and despite their many happy days together,
he is filled only with pain. When he meets her, on the spiral staircase
of her home, for the first time since she left him, he remembers making
love to her. But, he acts coldly toward her when she goes to greet him
and he hurriedly leaves Henry's home.
When she calls him the next day, they make arrangements to meet at a bar
they once frequented. Their meeting is a troubled one, because he can't
hide his hurt and she can't tell him what is on her mind, and so she
gets upset and darts out of the restaurant, going into the Catholic
church to pray. Bendrix hears about her movements, as he is visited in
his humble but studious abode, by the private detective Savage assigned
to his case, Parkis (Ian Hart). At first, Parkis doesn't recognize that
it is him that he tailed, but when he does, he is apologetic. Bendrix's
gumshoe relates well to him. The gumshoe uses his son (Bould) as an
apprentice. He is an able young lad with a birthmark that covers a whole
side of his face. They do a thorough job of tracking down Sarah,
discovering that she meets with someone called Smythe (Isaacs), whom
they will later discover is a priest .
What transpires, as the director repeats scenes he already shot, hoping
to get each person's perspective, is the reason for her leaving him. The
most momentous day, is the last time Bendrix had sex with Sarah, during
the air-raid, when they just finished having sex and the doorbell rang
in Bendrix's house and he went down the stairs to answer it and the bomb
hit. Thinking he was dead, Sarah prayed to God, promising that if
Bendrix was alive she would thank God for that miracle and leave
Bendrix, and she would only love God. Thus becomes the film's laborious
theme, the war between her Catholic faith and his physical love.
Henry is played by Rea as a good-hearted but joyless soul, whose
marriage is based on kindness and friendly gestures but not on passion.
The ultimate insult the cuckolded husband receives, is when he returns
home and the lovers are into their climax, with Sarah screaming out as
Henry climbs the stairs and Bendrix asks: "What if he heard us?" Sarah:
"He wouldn't recognize the sound."
Fiennes is all carnal love and jealousy, they seem to go together for
him. What counts for him is to touch the one he loves. He plays the role
romantically, in an old-fashioned manner, exhibiting a relish for the
role. Sarah is the woman who was awakened to carnal love, in a role that
calls for open sex, showing the reason for her love affair with Fiennes
being so hard to forget. She has ultimately learned to accept the
religious message of a spiritual love as a higher one, one that is
eternal, where love does not have to be materialized, and is quite
willing to forego earthly love. Miracles are part of her faith, as she
can live contently with her beliefs in religious dogma. Julianne Moore
evoked a special passion to her role, she was able to mix the fire in
her with the serenity, making her performance a sublime one. The film
works mainly because of her. It works because even though she and
Bendrix experience the same hurts and joys, they interpret them
differently and have a different outlook in life. That is why it was
essential to film so many of their scenes over again, to witness how
each viewed the same experience they were having. The problem with that,
is the film seemed to move at a snail's pace, and had too much of a
vacuum between its intellectual messages and heavily passionate scenes.
Overall, it was a rather dull film, despite the fine performances, the
intelligence of the story, the able direction, and the beautiful
cinematography.
Though what's astonishing about Jordan's direction, is the mood the film
sets, being so nostalgic and intimidating, as if daring the viewer to
believe that this old-fashioned kind of genteel love story could also be
so daring in its passions, and challenging in its arguments about
jealousy, carnal love, and religious faith. This is all aided by the
splendidly vivid images and the expressive language of the sensitive
lovers trying to express their inner feelings. It is through Greene's
own words, where he relates how much more difficult it is to talk and
write about happiness than it is about pain, that one can understand how
the Moore role is most likely to be believed only by a true believer,
that words are inadequate to relate the joy she felt.
The film, as well-conceived as it was, was still too laborious of a
process. I think the story would have had more tension to it, if Henry
wasn't such a wimp and put up some kind of fight for his wife.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
Oozing like a maple tree with schmaltz, you'll have to peer over the
grizzlies in the front row lapping it up off their paws. If the director was
going for a look/touch/feel recreation of a movie made during the period
portrayed in this film (1940's) - then he got it. Save for the sex scenes,
which rival even the fleshiest of modern day films. (Perhaps, he made the
exception for Julianne Moore?)
Very watchable, although there isn't much more than an affair film here -
okay, a little bit more. The relationship between the lover and hired
private eye is actually quite sweet. And the ending is touched off nicely
with a truly welcomed surprise to an otherwise predicable piece.
End of the Affair. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Ralph Fiennes, Julianne Moore, Stephen Rea.
Directed by Neil Jordan.
Screenplay by Neil Jordan.
Based on the novel by Graham Greene.
Produced by Stephen Woolley and Neil J. at Columbia Pictures.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on February 11, 2000; certificate 18; 
101 minutes; country of origin UK/USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Neil Jordan; produced by Neil Jordan, Stephen Woolley.
Written by Neil Jordan; based on the novel by Graham Greene.
Photographed by Roger Pratt; edited by Tony Lawson.
Graham Greene once said that he had to read aloud, because he found himself 
unable to read by the eye. No doubt his thoughts were screaming vociferous 
theological debates at each other too loudly for the man to concentrate. Many 
people find a clash between their religion and behaviour; few are so obsessed 
with the problem that they write about it as prolifically as he did.
"The End of the Affair", one of Greene's least well-known but most intensely 
personal novels, inspired by his own real-life dalliance with an American 
lady named Catherine Walston, is about how a pact with God brings misery to 
two of its characters by supplying them with a reason to end their adulterous 
love affair. The desires of their flesh are strong, but the partner who made 
the pact is too afraid to break it, and the other one becomes too frustrated 
to continue being loveable.
The man is Maurice Bendrix, a young novelist whose reputation is steadily 
growing, played in Neil Jordan's film adaptation by Ralph Fiennes. His lover 
is his neighbour Sarah Miles (Julianne Moore), the wife of civil servant 
Henry (Stephen Rea), an ineffectual chap who has never been much interested 
in engaging his bride in physical passion. Maurice and Sarah meet at a 
cocktail party thrown by Henry for his colleagues, and become drawn to each 
other mainly out of need -- the film is set in London during World War II, 
and neither of these people have companions for the cold, the silences or the 
air raids.
It is one of these raids which disturbs the course of their relationship. 
Maurice seems to have been crushed by rubble; Sarah panics, pleads with God 
to save his life, and says that if her wish is granted she will put an end to 
their seedy liaisons. Maurice turns out to be alive, and Sarah breaks contact 
with him.
The book, narrated by the Maurice character as a bitter "journal of hate", 
was quintessential Greene because it didn't have a clear idea of who God was, 
or if He even existed, but still threw strong anger at Him. And it was a 
fascinatingly tragic and pathetic drama because Maurice was using God as an 
excuse for the demise of something that could never have lasted. Affairs 
always deceive someone who won't stand to be deceived, and hence are doomed. 
Maurice refuses to face this, and lays the blame on friends, family, 
onlookers, Henry, Sarah and the Almighty.
The film's first hour is very good, capturing this tone of a poet slinging 
back whiskies as he tells a barman how sickening it is that the good times 
are over. Fiennes's face is unmoving, constricted, sour and angry. The 
surroundings are damp, ominous and dark; cold, lifeless streets plagued by 
rain act as the visual accompaniment to the harsh voice-over.
Such technical proficiency continues throughout, but at some point in its 
second half, Jordan's screenplay suddenly turns into a depressingly 
conventional story of forbidden love. Sarah decides she can't keep her 
promise to God, and her and Maurice reunite! When they are finally separated 
by her death, the movie's conclusion is the same as the novel's -- Maurice 
protesting against the merciless nature of God -- but his reasons are a lot 
less interesting. Sarah's promise is, quite rightly, the cornerstone of 
Greene's story, but it's rather irrelevant under Jordan. He just sees it as a 
handy plot device to cause the lovers' initial break-up.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Ralph Fiennes, Julianne Moore, Stephen Rea, Ian Hart. Directed
by Neil Jordan. Rated R.
Neil Jordan is one of those writer-directors who don't quite grasp the
first rule of literary adaptations: what reads well on the page doesn't
always translate well to celluloid. I haven't read Graham Greene's The
End of the Affair on which this movie of the same name is based, but
the film seems so soulless, the dialogue so archetypically "romantic",
it is fairly obvious that Jordan took Greene's prose to heart. Even the
sex scenes are perfunctory.
The story is actually a beguilingly simple love triangle that could
have worked wonderfully had it not been hampered by a deadly slow pace
and pretentious, irrelevant philosophizing. Maurice Bendrix (Ralph
Fiennes), a novelist, has an affair with Sarah (Julianne Moore,
nominated for a Golden Globe) in 1944. Sarah abruptly ends the
relationship and Maurice doesn't know why. She doesn't love her husband
(Stephen Rea) and her husband Henry doesn't really love her either;
their marriage is a sham, a useless tradition, a habit they find
difficult to drop.
It is now 1946 and on a rainy night Maurice encounters Henry walking in
the park. Henry is worried that Sarah is cheating on him. Maurice
offers Henry the services of a private detective. He staunchly refuses
and Maurice leaves, but on his way out, he passes Sarah on the stairs.
The old flame lights again inside him; out of jealousy he hires a
private detective (Ian Hart, providing the only flashes of wit in this
decidedly humorless drama) to follow Sarah around.
I'm not going to reveal the reason Sarah ended the affair in this
review -- we don't find out until more than halfway through and I
suppose it's one of the secrets the movie has -- but I will say that
it's not particularly satisfying. It introduces a religious subtext to
an already thematically confused script and it gives Jordan the ill-
advised opportunity to insert a second rambling voiceover that tries to
add philosophical meaning to the proceedings. I prefer movies that let
the viewer come to his own conclusions rather than ones that spell
everything out via a convenient narrator. The End of the Affair has two.
Effectively stripping the film of almost all dramatic tension, the
characters deliver their lines with all the spontaneity of a
regurgitated Shakesperean monologue. At any given moment, I was
expecting Fiennes to turn to the camera and start detailing what he was
planning to say next film noir-style. At least Ian Hart as the PI
brings some much-needed air of humanity into the movie; his bumbling
gumshoe is the only clue that we are watching real people rather than
store mannequins.
If I was never emotionally involved, the movie at least kept my
attention, mostly thanks to the hypnotic Michael Nyman score and the
production design -- I have seen nary a more gorgeous "bleak" look.
Jordan, who made The Butcher Boy, one of my favorite films of 1998, is
a superb technical director. Even the otherwise turgid In Dreams was
nearly saved by its top-notch visual style. Here, too, the camera is
always in the right place, slow motion film stock is used effectively
and Jordan just all-around knows what he is doing. Too bad he has what
seem to be malign intentions: to subdue the actors until they come off
as robots.
As if all that wasn't enough, the movie refuses to end. The credits
finally roll after about seven scenes where I thought, "this has to be
the final one." Jordan follows what should have been the ending with a
bunch of pointless sequences that don't tie up loose ends as much as
they unnecessarily drag out the plot.
That said, it's easy to see why The End of the Affair appeals to award
voters and many critics. It's old-fashioned, supposedly representing a
temporary return to the good old days of cinematic bliss when movies
could sweep you off your feet with their sheer romanticism. With so
much avant-garde making a triumphant appearance this past year, the
older crowd's tendency to stick by this movie is understandable. But I
prefer the new over the old if "old" means pretense and soullessness.
It's good to see a filmmaker defy trends, but I'd rather see it done in
new ways rather than resorting to methods used decades ago.

Author
Walter Frith
Film maker Neil Jordan made one of the most controversial movies of the
1990's.  1992's 'The Crying Game' had a secret revealed by the now late
great former movie critic Gene Siskel and Siskel was heavily criticized for
revealing it.  He said that to make his point he felt it was necessary to
give away the secret that was shocking (and in some cases offensive) to many
people.  Jordan ended up winning an Oscar for the film's original screenplay
and stunningly original it was, filled with observations about the IRA, its
volunteers and the rash political and sexual overtones of the film's
characters.  Jordan seemed surprised by winning an Oscar and had to rush up
on stage after a quick trip back from the men's room.
Seven years later, Neil Jordan's 'The End of the Affair' feels like you
bought an old house, cleaned it out and in the process, found and read the
callous diary of an adulteress and you picture it with all of its soap opera
type qualities from stories you've read about and seen a thousand times.
This isn't such a bad thing but the movie's reasoning that it is great film
making is a legend in its own mind.  Actor Ralph Fiennes was said to be very
upset with the adult rating the film received but that rating is justified
as this movie displays acts of sex, violence and repressed feelings taken
during and after World War II.
The story of 'The End of the Affair' is based on an early 1950's novel by
Graham Greene, allegedly about his own experiences during WW II.  Stephen
Rea is a government member named Henry Miles and is married to Sarah
(Julianne Moore).  Writer Maurice Bendix (Ralph Fiennes) is her lover.  The
Catholic faith is used as a metaphor for the story's hidden range of ideas
and any film that combines a dash of religion and heavy doses of adultery
during the backdrop of history's darkest time certainly deserves a look.
It's just unfortunate that this film tries to use repetition to make a point
but makes it in a rather tiresome fashion.
The movie has a point of view from its main characters that is told
separately by each one and the perilous, if perhaps co-incidental fate that
comes to one of them, is rather pretentious and smells like a theme from the
golden age of cinema, unsuitable for many of today's movie buffs, but
fitting for others at the same time.
'The End of the Affair' may be too melodramatic for some.  It was for me.
It had me restlessly shifting in my seat at about half way through but I
found it very authentic looking.  There are three key scenes that glow with
authenticity.  The beginning where two of the male leads meet on a dark and
rainy English night is ripe with authenticity.  The indoor scene at the
Miles' residence is lavishly decorated with authentic props for its era.
There is also a diner scene where director of photography Roger Pratt takes
cues from Neil Jordan and moves his camera to play out the reeling emotions
the two lovers have in wrestling with their conscience.
What is disappointing about the film is the performance of Ralph Fiennes.
His turns in 1993's 'Schindler's List' which brought him instant fame and
stature in motion pictures and a well deserved Oscar nomination, along with
his dry and coldly laced Oscar nominated performance in 'The English
Patient' seem so memorable compared to his performance here.  I don't want
to be too hard on him because he is one of the best in the business but he
just seems to be saying his lines with all the feelings of a daytime soap
opera actor.  The same can be said for Julianne Moore.  Her performance is
better but is still one character we've seen played over and over again with
many of the similar qualities of past adulteresses.
Neil Jordan's direction is inventive at times, stiff at times and too heavy
handed in many places for me to recommend it but  there is an old saying
that goes: "The only thing new is the history you don't know".  'The End of
the Affair' isn't a new theme, it's a film with a historical past seen too
often in motion pictures and is wearing thin at the start of a new century.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Neil Jordan's (In Dreams) latest is a lean adaptation of Graham Greene's
novel of the same name.  There isn't much to the story (some even say
that the book would have been better as a novella) and there aren't many
characters.  But thanks to first-rate acting talent and gorgeously dark
cinematography, The End of the Affair is still a winner.
The story takes place in London during and after World War II, where
Sarah Miles (Julianne Moore, An Ideal Husband) steps out on her boring,
loveless, civil-servant husband Henry (Stephen Rea, Guinevere) to have a
torrid affair with a novelist named Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes, The
Avengers).  Their trysts begin in 1939 and the two carry on unchecked
for years until one day Sarah abruptly calls off the relationship
without even giving Maurice a reason.
Years later, Maurice is still perplexed about the termination of their
affair.  Believing that she left him for another man, he hires a private
investigator (Ian Hart, Enemy of the State) to shadow his ex-lover.
Their relationship is shown in a series of intricate flashbacks, with
the first half of the film from Maurice's perspective and the second
from Sarah's as he reads it from a diary lifted by the PI.
Jordan's unique structure and Roger Pratt's (12 Monkeys) haunting camera
work complement the great performances from Fiennes, Moore and Hart.
The story of jealousy and lust is simple and predictable, yet in the
capable hands of this cast and crew, The End of the Affair is always
entertaining.
1:49 - R for nudity and scenes of strong sexuality

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I felt nothing," the tragic female lead, Sarah Miles (Julianne Moore),
says without visible emotion.  "There was a stone where my heart should
be."
The problem with writer/director Neil Jordan's remake of THE END OF THE
AFFAIR, based on the Graham Greene novel, is that this could easily be
said about the movie itself.  Although Jordan attempts an old fashioned
cinematic weeper, what he gets instead are talented actors reciting
their lines with all of the fervor of someone reading the phonebook.
The camera studies the characters' faces in long close-ups, but they
just look uncomfortable as if they were wearing hair shirt underwear.
These pained expressions vary little, thus showing us how terminally
unhappy everyone is.
Set just before, during and after World War II in England, the movie
chronicles an affair between the morose Sarah and the equally melancholy
Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes).  He's a writer, and she's a wife, but
not his.  She shares a house and a loveless marriage with the dreadfully
dull Henry Miles (Stephen Rea), a civil servant, who appears to be
moving up in the government, not that anyone cares.
As the film opens in 1946, Maurice speaks to us in narration as he
types, "This is a diary of hate."  Whom he hates may come as a bit of a
surprise, and in a movie as glacially slow as this one, having a small
mystery to solve will help pass the time.  There's another, more
important mystery, but it is so easy to figure out that to say anything
about it would give away its resolution.
After the opening, we flash back to when Maurice and Sarah first met.
Although the labored acting and prose give little hint that they have
the slightest romantic interest in each other, they are soon found
dining tęte-ŕ-tęte at a restaurant.  "I'm in love with you," he says as
matter-of-factly as though commenting on the quality of the veal.  "Me
too," she replies just as blandly.  (The show keeps you waiting for an
off-screen director to yell, "Cut!" and come on the screen to admonish
his actors to show some emotional involvement in the material.)
And then there are the film's love scenes.  Oh, they're quite explicit
when it comes to clothing, but the actors keep their passions fully
covered.  They grope each other in all the right places, but their
movements look more like posturing, as if they were paid models at a
sculpturing class.  Jordan tries to compensate by having the earth move
for the couple, as most of their sex scenes take place as bombs fall
outside their windows.  Did I mention the time that Maurice lies down to
have sex with Sarah without even loosening his tie?
The only completely satisfactory part of the story concerns the private
investigator, Mr. Parkis (Ian Hart), that Henry suggests Maurice hire
for him since Henry suspects that his wife is having an affair.
Maurice, whose affair with Sarah appears to have ended, decides that she
must be seeing someone else so Maurice engages the detective himself.
Once Maurice begins to see Sarah again, the detective ends up spying on
his own client.  And it gets even more complicated.  Throughout, Ian
Hart is absolutely delightful, stealing scenes left and right as a
meticulous and awkwardly serious investigator.  Hart even keeps a
straight face, when he has to listen to such lugubriously silly lines
like: "As long as fools like us love, your employment never ends."
Filmed in such dark, gloomy tones by Roger Pratt, the movie frequently
causes people's faces to be indecipherable.  Given the lack of variation
in their expressions, this probably means the viewer misses little.
Even if the audience may not find the story particularly rewarding, one
suspects that Greene found it cathartic.  "Pain is easy to write about,"
the writer Maurice says, "but what can one write about happiness?"
One thing that can be said of the movie is that it makes marital
infidelity seem so incredibly boring, sad and passionless that it makes
a strong argument against adultery as not much fun and a complete waste
of time.  (Actually, everyone in the movie, married or not, appeared
absolutely miserable, but that's another story.)
THE END OF THE AFFAIR runs 1:45.  It is rated R for scenes of strong
sexuality and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
