Title
Review for Urga (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Alan Jay
Capsule:  Set in Mongolia, this film is about love, friendship and a
lost heritage. (+1)
     An Urga is a long pole with a lasso on one end that the Mongolians
use for catching their animals on the steppes.  They also use it as
parting of their mating rituals by catching their wives with it and then
planting it in the ground so that they are not disturbed during their
love making.
     URGA is about a family unit 60 miles from the nearest town who have
already got three children (under Chinese Law they are restricted to
two) and the husband wants another.  Into this situation arrives a
Russian construction worker.
     Within this premise the film show life on the steppe and the
killing and preparing of a sheep for dinner with their guest in graphic
detail.  The husband is sent out to buy condoms and returns to town with
the Russian.
     URGA is a film that slowly and beautifully tells its tale but on
occasions one was wondering if it too long at two hrs for the plot
involved.  There are some wondrous moments and so the film is definitely
worth seeing as a display of the way life was in Mongolia.

Author
Ben Hoffman
This story of a young Mongolian couple, Gombo and Pagma, is set in the
quiet and immense steppes of China's Inner Mongolia.  Although China
allows a maximum of 2 children per family, the Mongols are allowed
three.  There is an infant, a delightful 6-year-old son and a lovely
9-year-old daughter.  Gombo's mother also lives with them in their
"yurt," a circular collapsible tent covered with furs or skin. Their
living is made by tending sheep, horses and cattle for sale and food.
We see one of the sheep slaughtered, skinned, and prepared for
tonight's dinner.
Into this happy family comes a Russian truck driver, (Sergei) a
contract worker, who is helping to build a road in China that will
bring the steppes in closer comtact with the modern world.  When he
falls asleep at the wheel of his truck after having driven for 24
hours, he drives his truck's front wheels into a river.  The next day
he and truck are rescued by Gombo who invites him to join the family
for dinner and a night's rest.  They soon become good friends with
Sergei involved in several funny scenes.
Beautiful photography of the immense sweeping steppes plus a warm and
humorous story make this a most enjoyable film.   Pagma, the pretty
wife, tells Gombo that if he wants to have sex with her he had better
go into town (several hours' ride on horseback) and get some condoms at
the pharmacy.  As she was a city woman before marrying Pagma, she has
to explain contraceptives to him as he looks at her open-mouthed with a
"what will they think of next" look.
Oddly, the town has a disco where nicely dressed young men and women
are dancing up a storm, disco style;  the last thing I would have
expected to find in that part of the world.   When Pagma enters the
pharmacy with a note written by his wife so that he will know what to
ask for he finds the place staffed by a dozen pretty pharmacists, one
of whom asks if she can help.  When he looks sheepish, she says "Did
you come to buy condoms?"   ""Who, me?  Oh, no" and leaves.  His
explanation to his wife's query about the condoms is that they were
"sold out."
In town he buys a TV to bring home to the family.  He sets up the TV
antenna, hooks the set up to the generator and they all gather round to
watch.   After a couple of hours they find the 2 available channels
boring.  (They could lived in the U.S. and have had 50 boring
channels.)
Where Gombo and family used to live there now stands a smokestack
spewing black smoke.  The fourth child (born because Pagma did not get
the condoms) now works at a gas station next to the smokestack.
"Progress" is sweeping that beautiful area.
In Chinese (Mongolian?) and Russian with English subtitles.
