Title
Review for Grand pardon II, Le (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
DAY OF ATONEMENT, 1992 crime thriller directed by Alexandre
Arcady, is just another example how advertisement can create
expectations completely different from the actual products.
Those who watched the trailer for this film expected
low-budget action film dealing with Latino gangsters in
Miami and featuring Christopher Walken as its principal
star. When they watched the complete film, they got
something else - expensive and at times quite spectacular
sequel of French crime epic about family of Algerian Jews in
which Christopher Walken appears just as one of many
supporting actors in rather minor role. Rather complicated
plot (which is in many ways incomprehensible to those who
haven't seen the first film) revolves around Raymond Bettoun
(played by Roger Hanin), former boss of Parisian Jewish
underworld who has just spent ten years in prison for
following old code of honour. After release Bettoun comes to
Miami where he is greeted by his son Maurice (played by
Richard Berry), now a wealthy businessman. Raymond doesn't
need much clues to figure out that the source of his son's
wealth came from money laundering and participation in
booming cocaine trade.
It is obvious that Arcady, inspired by Coppola's GODFATHER
saga, tries to give epic scope to the plot and characters
while giving it a setting similar to de Palma's SCARFACE.
Unfortunately, unlike Coppola and de Palma, he has some
problems handling an material that would work much better in
mini-series than in feature film format. There are simply
too many characters and subplots for two- hour film to
handle it properly. The actors, especially Roger Hanin as
dignified crime lord, are good, photography is fine, some
action scenes are handled very well, but all those elements
fail to connect into coherent whole. As a result, DAY OF
ATONEMENT is a film that, despite of its relatively high
budget and great display of various talents, looks like a
cheap and not very inspired copy of American originals.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
