Title
Review for Three Musketeers, The (1921)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Three Musketeers" is a silent film starring Douglas
Fairbanks Sr.  Although it has the same elements of comedy,
swashbuckling action and romance as the superior Richard
Lester version from 1974, it is not nearly as good.
It is also not as good as some other Fairbanks vehicles
such as "The Mark of Zorro" and "The Thief of Bagdad",
which were also action epics based on foreign language
classics.
"The Three Musketeers" is based on the French novel by
Alexandre Dumas.  The King of France (Adolphe Menjou) is
a weak-minded man manipulated by his sinister advisor
Cardinal Richelieu (Nigel de Brulier).
The Cardinal conspires against the Queen who opposes his
influence.  Fortunately for her, she is aided by
the King's Musketeers, who have just welcomed young
D'Artagnan (Fairbanks) into their ranks.
Fairbanks is truly a hammy actor. He is particularly fond
of sweeping arm gestures.  Still, over-acting is not
necessarily bad acting, and he is fun to watch.
One does gets the feeling that he is always playing the
same character, whether he is dressed as Zorro,
D'Artagnan, or the Thief.  Although the setting
changes with each film, Fairbank's character is always
at the center of attention, and can do the impossible.
The problem with this film is that it lacks cohesion.
While there is much action, it is often muddled, and it
is tough to follow what is going on.  The comic relief
(e.g. a Musketeer is invited to dinner, and four show up,
including a rotund one who looks like he could consume a
whole hog by himself) does not come off.
"The Mark of Zorro", a Fairbanks film from the year
before (1920) is a better film and a lot more fun.
The major differences between the two is that the Zorro
flick had more swordplay and a simpler story, unencumbered
by the heavy plotting and the numerous supporting players
that "The Three Musketeers" had.  Sometimes more can
be less.
By this way, this silent film was not the first adaptation
of the French novel.  According to the ever-useful
www.imdb.com, there are four earlier versions, the first
dating from 1911.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
