Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Jonathan F Richards
     "The Best Man" is a potboiler told with inoffensive slickness and
dependable moral values, and peopled with an attractive ensemble cast.  Its
paperback plot involves Harper (Taye Diggs), whose first novel is about to
be published as he heads for New York to be best man at his best friend's
wedding.  Advance copies are already circulating among the old college pals
who are the core of the wedding party.  Skeletons come tumbling out of
closets as his friends recognize themselves and the things they did in
college thinly disguised in Harper's autobiographical fiction.  Since one
of the things he did was sleep with the bride (Monica Calhoun), and since
the groom (Morris Chestnut) is Lance, a monster running back for the New
York Giants, this ill-timed early sampling of his roman-a-clef is
particularly awkward for Harper, although the alert viewer will be
wondering what the hell he thought the effect of his revelations would be
on his pals if they'd surfaced after the wedding.
First time writer/director Malcolm D. Lee has a terrible weakness for
exposition in the early scenes (which is where exposition traditionally
rears its ugly head.)  "Oprah wants my new unpublished novel *Unfinished
Business*" Harper sings out to his girlfriend Robin (Sanaa Lathan) as he
comes in the door.  When Lance is introduced, Lee gives us a long closeup
of the cross hanging around his neck, to establish his credentials as a
Christian running back, which we will find out anyway soon enough.
But once you get by the exposition, the talented and beautiful cast of
young African-American actors takes over and delivers a story of passions
and friendships and self-discovery that, while far from original, still
makes itself agreeable and satisfying.  Taye Diggs, the hunk from "How
Stella Got Her Groove Back" whose career is justifiably in meteoric rise,
smiles his jaw-to-jaw perfect smile and takes his shirt off and throws in
some good acting to boot.  There's no letdown with the other actors, with
the exception of Melissa DeSousa's gratingly bitchy Shelby, and
particularly good are Harold Perrineau as the sweetly unassertive Murch and
Terrence Howard as the sly, troublemaking Quentin.  There are no white
characters, which seems a little contrived in a group so pointedly
mainstream.  

Author
Mac VerStandig
The Best Man is a film about a gathering of old friends. Ironically, the 
movie is little more than a series of old stereotypes and plagiarized 
plot moments. Above all else, this production is a painful experience 
that can only solicit ideas of ways your $7.50 could be better spent 
(throwing it in the lion's cage, flushing it down the toilet, using it 
to light a fire, etc85).
The Best Man is a story of friends who re-unite one long weekend for a 
wedding. Harper (Taye Diggs) hasn't seen any of his pals in a while and 
looks forward to a pleasant and enjoyable time. What he doesn't know is 
that the whole gang has obtained advance copies of his new "novel," 
which is frighteningly close to the story of their lives. As the reunion 
progresses, the secrets spill out. The only question is how much damage 
will be done. 
One of the ever-so-rare qualities of The Best Man is its soundtrack. 
Songs by Bob Marley, Lauryn Hill and Maxwell oftentimes dominate the 
moment. Unfortunately even this quality proves ominous. Great soundtrack 
music has become nearly synonymous with The Big Chill. Once that 
realization is met the other "similarities" pour on. The idea of a 
revealing weekend bash revolving around a key stage in a friend's life 
(The Big Chill was actually an ending stage, being centered around a 
funeral) that ultimately gives some old pals a perspective on where they 
are is about as original as the supposedly fictional characters in 
Harper's book.
The similarities do not stop with one 1983 film. Before the two hours, 
that seem more like an eternity, end, the audience is treated to scenes 
originally from or similar to several films, including American Beauty, 
Very Bad Things, Your Friends & Neighbors, Love Stinks, A Few Good Men 
and Orgazmo.
Some of the stereotypes exhibited cannot be pinned to just one or two 
films, but rather are so common that they feel like a dE9j=E0 vu that =
you cannot exactly place. The great old line "You love me, don't you?," 
a virgin that perhaps isn't, a man being held over the edge of a 
building, a relationship conflict in an airport and the overuse of 
semi-slow motion at a wedding are highlights of such dE9j=E0 vu.
Even when the stereotypes and plagiarized moments are ignored, The Best 
Man still has more than its due of problems. The film spends a lot of 
time talking about sex and who exactly is or was participating in the 
act. Yet the movie never actually has any intercourse and consequently 
looks like the school bully who talks a great talk but can't even limp 
the walk.
The supporting roles are blurred at the beginning of the film and 
gradually become clearer. Although this evolution may sound interesting, 
it creates a problem for the film: You don't know who is who. This 
transformation finally reaches a payoff point about 90 minutes into the 
film. Unfortunately the production suffers from excess sappiness from 
that moment forward. Too many emotions and slow motion shots get bunched 
together and the already too long film reaches near infinite length. 
This sappiness is highlighted by a scene involving two characters' 
relationship and a bible. It comes as mighty symbolic that the movie 
misquotes the bible. (Exodus 24:10 has absolutely nothing to do with 
adultery as the film claims.)
The Best Man is a film about forgiveness. That doesn't mean that it is a 
film that can be forgiven.      

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Remember Taye Diggs, the actor who played Angela Bassett's
lover in "How Stella Got Her Groove Back"?  Enough people were so
impressed with him that he's got a romantic comedy of his own. Diggs
plays a Chicago-based fledgling novelist whose upcoming book,
"Unfinished Business," about his college experiences, has his friends
buzzing, particularly regarding the steamy sections revolving around
who-slept-with-whom. It's already been endorsed by Oprah Winfrey and
an advance copy is doing the rounds prior to the upcoming marriage of
a New York Giants running back, Morris Chestnut, and his longtime
girl-friend, Monica Calhoun. It's a celebratory weekend in New York
that will reunite the successful African-American college crowd once
again as they face some of life's major dilemmas. Diggs is trying to
dodge making a marital commitment to his current girlfriend, Sanaa
Lathan, primarily because a sexy, ambitious TV producer, Nia Long, is,
as one of his buddies comments, "the best girlfriend you never had,"
while laid-back Harold Perrineau seems to be firmly attached to
domineering Melissa De Sousa, whom everyone knows is wrong for him,
and Terrence Howard continues to be a perennial bachelor as well as a
perennial student. Writer-director Malcolm D. Lee, a cousin of Spike
Lee whose company produced the film, quickly demonstrates that
film-making talent runs in the family, having genuine good fun with
the universality of intimate male/female relationships, at least from
the male perspective. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Best
Man" is an amusing, energetic 7 - and stick around for the
credits. Like "The Blair Witch Project," the hype for this date movie
began on the Internet, building anticipation for a whalloping opening
weekend.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut,
Harold Perrineau Jr. and Terrence Dashon Howard
Director-Malcolm D. Lee
Canadian Rating-14A
Released by Universal Pictures - 10/99
Crafting a slick, enjoyable bachelor comedy while eluding all of the
genre pratfalls is not an easy task, but Malcolm D. Lee has done it with
=93The Best Man=94. The film does get submerged in some formula quicksand=
now and again, particularly en route toward the over-dramatic
conclusion, but Lee handles the elements skillfully. Coupled with a
young, talented African American cast, this makes =93The Best Man=94 a
brisk, highly entertaining comedy that only stutters when it tries too
hard for audience approval.
Taye Diggs is one of the most exciting young actors in Hollywood today.
After his feature debut in 1998=92s =93How Stella Got Her Groove Back=94,=
Diggs rose to electrifying new heights with the psychadelic =93Go=94 last=
year, and -- not including his tedious caricature in the scattershot
=93House on Haunted Hill=94 -- the actor revitalizes familiar material to=
make it seem fresh and exhilarating. Similar praise can be offered for
his performance in =93The Best Man=94. Diggs plays a Chicago-based author=
named Harper, who, after one last erotic rendezvous with longtime
girlfriend Robin (Sanaa Lathan), is headed off to New York to join his
chums for a few games of friendly polker (and etc.) during a wedding day
countdown. Harper=92s latest novel, a romance about commitment and
deception, contains a few elements of real life. For that reason, he is
less than ecstatic about the notion of his buddies discovering the total
contents of the book - and is downright adamant in forbidding a few
friends even to even touch it. There=92s some horrible secret stewing
within the pages, and Harper is regretting ever publishing it.
The bachelor posse of =93The Best Man=94 is a group of fun guys. The groo=
m
is Lance (Morris Chestnut), a hulking but sensitive professional
football player who wants his bride to have a one-man policy, even if he
hasn=92t practiced a one-woman approach over the years. Murch (Harold
Perrineau Jr.) is more of the quiet type; a shy teacher who is hesitant
when it comes to expressing his true feelings. Finally, there=92s Q -- or=
Quentin (Terence Dashon Howard) -- a talented musician who has an
overbearing tendency to be a real prick. The screenplay, by Lee, makes
even the most simplistic conversation involving and intuitive. Some of
the best moments of =93The Best Man=94 occur when the boys just sit aroun=
d
and play poker, where their constant chatter is filled with bright,
fluid dialogue that keeps both eyes attentively fixed on the screen.
This makes character development light and easy, which is instantly
refreshing. =93The Best Man=94 is, essentially, a buoyant and featherweig=
ht
comedy until it dives into more dramatically preachy material as the
clock winds down. But even when it gets marred by comedic sobriety, the
film is still enjoyable.
The romantic portion of the plot is fairly elementary, but later on, the
process opens up to honesty and truthful surprise. Harper=92s love life i=
s
complicated by the resurfacing of old college flame Jordan (Nia Long),
who threatens to stir up trouble before Robin is scheduled to arrive
later on for the wedding. Director Lee, as Spike=92s cousin, has a knack
for writing perceptive dialogue exchanges, and =93The Best Man=94 is
chock-full of those. The characters, both caring and snobby, are
perfectly cast and laid-out in a manner so we can appreciate them from a
distance. This could have been a flaky, straightforward takeoff of =93The=
Big Chill=94, but thanks to proper care.... it=92s fun.
Fun because of the acting abilities of the all-black cast. Playing a
character more complex than at first glance, Chestnut is wholly
believable in juggling his two personality conditions: mean and
delicate. The most extensive showcase is provided for Diggs and Long,
who both oscillate with charming appeal and provide plenty of truthful
and funny moments. While it takes a dramatic detour during segments when
more comic filler would have been adequate, =93The Best Man=94 is still a=
swift, breezy tale of romance and personal discovery.

Author
Rose "Bams" Cooper
"The Best Man" (1999) 
Rated R; running time of 120 minutes
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0168501 
Official site: http://www.universalpictures.com/bestman/ 
Written by: Malcolm D. Lee
Directed by:Malcolm D. Lee
Starring: Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Harold Perrineau Jr., 
Terrence Dashon Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Monica Calhoun, Melissa DeSousa
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbest.html
Remember what I said about "The Wood"?  Well, ditto for this one. Get up,
get out, and get tickets to "The Best Man", NOW.  Sooner than that, even. 
Because as good as "The Wood" was, "The Best Man" runs circles around it.
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
Reminiscent of "The Big Chill", "The Best Man" tells the story of a group
of old college friends who've come together for the weekend for the
wedding of their friends Lance (Chestnut), a professional football player,
and Mia (Calhoun), the love of his life. Complicating matters is the fact
that Harper (Diggs), a writer, has written a book called "Unfinished
Business", a barely-fictionalized account of the group's time together on
campus--including the unfufilled night that the character otherwise known
as Jordan (Long) spent with Harper's character, and more importantly, the
character otherwise known as Mia's tryst with Harper's character. Since
the book wasn't to be published until well after the wedding, Harper
didn't sweat it too much--except unbeknownst to him, up-and-coming TV
Producer Jordan had an advanced copy of the book and shared it with Murch
(Perrineau), a law student who can't keep a secret (not to mention not
being able to keep Shelby (DeSousa) off his tip long enough to straighten
out his spine around her), and Quentin (Howard), a "ne'er-do-well
professional student" (in Harper's eyes, the group member most wasting his
talents), who can't wait to bust on Harper (since Harper constantly
berates him for his life-choices). Further complicating matters is the
Thing that Harper and Jordan still have for each other--much to the dismay
of Robin (Lathan), Harper's girlfriend of two years with whom he can't
quite bring himself to make a full committment. 
The Upshot:
Never--not after "Soul Food", not after "love jones"; not even after the
aforementioned "The Wood"--never have I come out of a mainstream motion
picture feeling like I felt after seeing this one; feeling as if I saw
myself and my college friends again. This movie touched on so many of the
situations we all went through, it was scary. Though it was, of course,
exaggerated (none of us seemed to have wound up with the football star,
and I'm still working on that first novel), "The Best Man" rang true to
me, on a personal level. And the funny thing is, not all of my college
buddies were Black (I'll get back to that later).
Without having the "luxury" of being able to rely on the trickery of "thug
life" or "booty call" flicks, the success of "The Best Man", and movies
like it, depends on a strong, talented cast, writer, and director. This
movie has all three in...uh, abundance. There wasn't a clunker amongst
them, though Diggs (in my opinion, the second-weakest of a strong group)
kept reminding me of both his "The Wood" and "How Stella Got Her Groove
Back" characters. Still, he held his own, as did the rest: Chestnut (who
looked yummy with that facial hair of his goin' on) was not only
convincing as the former playboy baller turned committed groom, who
believed in God and wanted his best man--Harper--to Feel Him too, he was
also very funny in the role. Long's "Jordan" (who reminded me in many ways
of our own Diva!) was on it as the professional Black woman who, unlike
way too many of her sisters, did need a Black man in her life...if only
for one night. Perrineau could swing those locks of his my way, any day;
though he surpassed Diggs in the "needed to stretch the acting chops"
category, his character was quite sweet in dealing with the hilarious
Shelby--and DeSousa should win something for that performance of hers; she
had me rollin'! Calhoun's "Mia" seemed otherworldly, especially in her
first appearance; right away, I knew there was something more there than
meets the eye. And as Robin, Harper's long-suffering girlfriend, Lathan's
plea of "I'm not perfect [in comparison with Jordan]" to Harper, hit home
with me, after all of the arguments I've had on various Black lists about
how some Black men say they want "A Good Black Woman", but mean they want
"The Closest Black Woman With Good Looks And A Slammin' Body That I Can
Find Right Now". 
But by far, my most favorite character was that of the oldest-looking one
of the bunch, Quentin; which is saying a lot, because he was my least
favorite character to begin with. The trash that fell from his lips (see
below), annoyed me--until I realized that it was just much talk and
bravado, covering up the deeper side of Q (the bid whist scene is what
turned it around for me; and that these characters chilled over a game of
bid whist, warmed me all the more to this movie). The more Q made me
laugh, and the more I saw his instigating for what it was meant to be, the
better I understood him (and like Jordan, Q reminds me of a scaalister who
shall remain nameless, but everybody who follows scaalist, knows who I
mean, I bet), and by his closing scene, I found myself wanting to hang
around this great character--and his friends...
...none of whom could've been realized without the writing and directing
talents of Malcolm Lee. Last week, before the movie opened, Lee and some
of the cast members of "The Best Man" were on the campus of Michigan
State, and because of a previous committment, I missed it, to my
detriment. I sure would've liked to have met this man, who has all of the
skills of his famous cousin, Spike, but none of the harsh (and sometimes
misplaced) anger and overzealous storytelling (though you can indeed see
shades of Spike's groove in Malcolm's work. Case in point: during the
bachelor party, when Lance reads the passage in Harper's book that
addresses Harper's and Mia's book character's involvement, the screen
colors shift to a pot-boiling red, and you can see and feel the anger
welling up in Lance without a word having to be said. If that wasn't a
Spike-ism, my name ain't Bammer). Spike, I loves ya, hon, but Malcolm
could teach you a thing or two about telling Our [non-monolithic] story.
And so as not to negate Spike's rightful place in Black filmmaking, I'd
love to see a more collaborative Spike and Malcolm joint; as my son is
wont to say, I bet it'd be tight.
Aside from my personal joy in watching it, this flick told a story that
was good in its own right, without the added "...for a Black movie" that
is bound to come up in various reviews and general chatter about it. From
the very nice opening titles, to the music (more on this in a minute,
too), to the smart, sexy, and real characters and equally smart, sexy, and
real story, "The Best Man" gets my early nod for one of the best movies of
1999. I'll put it this way: "The Matrix" is no longer standing on its "up
there" platform alone.
This is not to say that there weren't problems with this flick, number one
being its overuse of the term "nigga" and "bitches" (especially the
former). Had they kept it to a single character--Q, in this case--I coulda
dug it; but to hear that falling liberally from the lips of Harper (who,
as a professional writer in his chosen genre, should've known better) and
to a lesser extent, Lance, it just didn't fit the general positive groove
of the movie. I also took Issue with the underuse of the extremely
talented Perrineau (oh! the beauty of his locks! I could spend hours
playing in th...oops. Caught digressing again). Surely there had to be
more to him than his lack of balls, Malcolm! The final nitpick I had--that
the wedding reception had a cliched live band "playing" obvious recordings
of (nevertheless great) tunes by Earth Wind & Fire and Cameo--was
completely wiped out by everyone at the reception doing the Electric
Slide. Our audience cheered loudly at that, and I must say, I was amongst
the cheerers. Good thing I stayed around for the credits too; I would
otherwise have missed one of the best scenes in the whole flick.
All of which to say, if you are still reading this and haven't gone out to
see the movie yet, shame on ya. Get up. Get out. Get tickets. NOW.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
    As a Black woman, I see the "Black Factor"--things that affect me as a 
    "consumer of color"--in many aspects of life; movies included. Whether 
    from the standpoint of noting Black (and other "minority") cast and crew
    members (if any), to the (lack of) focus toward "people of color" (dag, I
    hate that term), to the out-and-out antagonistic attitude toward Us 
    (Jar-Jar, anyone?), the "Black Factor" (BF) is something that plays as 
    much a role in my film enjoyment as any other aspect of the movie itself.
The term "...for a Black movie" (along with its cohorts, "the Black
[insert White movie or star's name]" is rife with (not-so-hidden) meaning.
Taken one way, it could be seen as dismissal: "oh, that was good--'for a
Black movie'". Taken another way, it could be seen as pleasant surprise:
"Damn, that did well as the box office--'for a Black movie'" (and while
we're on the subject, I wonder what the pundits will say about TBM being
number one on its opening day? Hmmm...). But a curious thing happened
before this one opened: I had just made mention on the "3BC Scheduled
Reviews" page of how this flick was being favorably compared to "The Big
Chill", when I saw Taye Diggs on one of the entertainment TV shows,
blasting a reviewer for saying that TBM is "The Black 'The Big Chill'".
And it made me pause, because I understand what Diggs was saying, and to a
certain extent, agree with it: why did "The Black" have to be added to
that statement? Does the fact that Blacks make up the majority of the
cast, delegate it to being a "Black" movie (on the same lines as, say,
"Carmen Jones" or "The Wiz", were?) And what of the Whites who enjoyed it?
There were Whites of all ages in our audience; should they not have been
there since it was seen as a "Black" movie? And what does that say about
"White" movies? After all is said and done, as Diggs said, "I thought
we've gotten past all that".
...but you see, on that ubiquitous Other Hand, past that "certain extent",
I think Diggs was either being naive, or purposefully stirring up
controversy to generate publicity for the movie. Because if you're Black
In America (or White, for that matter, not to mention Latino, or Native,
or, or, or...) and don't see that there are experiences that are unique to
the culture in which you were raised, you are blind indeed (and man, do I
hate the term "colorblind", for all that it denotes. "Color Indifferent",
I can get with. But once again, I digress.) That doesn't mean that one
can't appreciate or experience other situations; but that does mean that,
for now, "The Best Man" is seen as "The Black 'The Big Chill'". The extent
to which you say, or internalize, that as being racist or being something
"we've gotten past", is the measure of where We are as a People, and as a
country.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
There's a new Lee in town, and his name is Malcolm. We'll be watching for
more good stuff from you, my brother (and hoping that some of you will rub
off on your cousin).
"The Best Man" (rating: greenlight) 
I have a space on my DVD shelf reserved for this flick--right next to "The
Matrix".

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Pretty weird. Here I was thinking about how much this film reminded me of
BEAUTIFUL GIRLS (8.5/10) as I walked happily out of the movie theatre, and
how great it was that director Malcolm Lee got his first big break via his
more famous cousin's help (Spike Lee ya'll), that I realized that the former
film was also directed by a novice at the game of directing, Ted Demme, who
also happened to have a much more famous uncle in the biz (Jonathan Demme
anyone?). Oh well. Just thinking out loud.
PLOT:
A best man at a wedding comes together with his old college buddies a couple
of days before the exchange of the vows, and is suddenly placed under a
magnifying glass when his first novel (To be launched on Oprah, thank you
very much!) gets premiered by all of his friends. It isn't long before each
friend begins to recognize themselves in the book and learn secrets about
one another which they never knew.
CRITIQUE:
Great film, great script, great premise and great characters. This film was
funny, it was poignant, it was timely (Okay, maybe that's just me, but it's
definitely geared to all twenty-somethings), it was always interesting and
an overall joy to absorb. The film talks about coming of age, career and
love-life sacrifices, accepting adulthood, and even more so, appreciating
commitment. I hope people don't avoid this film because they think it's just
another "black movie" because this film has absolutely nothing to do with
the color of one's skin. It's about love, friendship, trust, honesty, and
forgiveness. But even more than that, it's about a bunch of guys, each of
which I could relate to one or a few friends in my own life, who meet,
drink, play poker, enjoy a certain night of bachelor fun, and who discuss
women, their lives, their hopes, their dreams and once again, their
relationships and impressions of the women in their lives. In fact, a lot of
frank discussion travels along this film, as well as plenty of well-timed
humor and romance.
Girls might enjoy this film a little more for that aspect (Yes, Mrs. JoBlo
loved it!), but guys will remain in the ballgame with plenty of connection
to the lively male characters, all living down something or another in their
lives. Congratulations to director Malcolm Lee for putting together such a
solid effort his first time around the bend, with excellent performances all
around. I especially enjoyed Morris Chestnut's performance as the
over-sexed, but ready-to-settle-down-now football player who wants to get
married so that he could quench his promiscuity. The audience that I saw it
with tonite loved this movie and demonstrated their enjoyment with plenty of
spontaneous rounds of laughter and applause filling the house. They, as well
as me, I must admit, also hooted and hollered at the presence of actor Taye
Diggs without his shirt every so often (Mark Wahlberg: Part Deux?) with
another Oscar-worthy performance by his rock-solid pectorals. Supporting
nomination for his ass? :) Actually, I thought Diggs was okay in this film,
but not as good as his smaller role in GO (8.5/10). Having said that, the
film itself was a complete success, with plenty of fun, interesting twists
and turns, moments of cringing, moments of crying and moments of flashbacks.
A little too clean of an ending for my taste, but hey...I guess some happy
endings do also happen in real life, right? See it with your friends or your
better half, but not both together. It might just get ugly! :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Malcolm D. Lee is director Spike Lee's cousin. Spike was also
producer on this film. Malcolm's only other screen credit before writing and
directing this film was "assistant to Mr. Lee" in 1995's CLOCKERS. Spike
Lee's birth name was Shelton Jackson Lee. He's been married since 1993,
stands 5'5" and was actually born in Atlanta, Georgia (Being such a huge
Knicks fan, folks generally tend to think that he was born there as well).
I know Taye Diggs best from his slick role in one of the best movies of
1999, GO, but many others may remember him from his role of Benny, the evil
landlord in the Tony Award winning stage production of "Rent", or his
re-occurring role as Adrian "Sugar" Hill on TV "The Guiding Light" from 1997
to 1998. Of course, his big break came when he landed the lead role opposite
Angela Bassett in 1998 HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK. He was born in
Rochester, New York and received a BFA degree in musical theater from
Syracuse University.
Actress Nia Long also spent some time on the cast of TV's "The Guiding
Light" as the character of Katherine "Kat" Speakes from 1991 to 1993. Of
course, most of you TV freaks might remember her from her re-occurring role
of Lisa Smith, Will Smith's girlfriend, on "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air".

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Best Man (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Taye Diggs, Nia Long,
Morris Chestnut, Sanaa Lathan, Harold Perrineau, Terrence Howard, Monica
Calhoun and Melissa De Sousa. Written and directed by Malcolm D. Lee
 You know a script is strong and universal when, after seeing a movie, you
believe that the story will work with any group of actors of any
nationality or ethnicity.
 Thus is the case of "The Best Man," an impressive movie debut from
writer-director Malcolm D. Lee. And, yes, he's related to that other Lee -
Spike.
 Malcolm D. Lee has written a romantic comedy that features some very
well-defined, likable, but flawed characters.
 The set-up for "The Best Man" is simple. Harper Stewart (Taye Diggs) has
just learned that his first novel, a fictitious account of his friends and
their times together at college, has been chosen to be an Oprah book of the
month.
 He is headed from Chicago to New York not only to celebrate his success,
but to stand as best man to one of his college buddies, Lance (Morris
Chestnut).
 Unfortunately, Harper also learns that Jordan (Nia Long), another of his
college-crowd friends, has obtained an advance copy of the book and that it
is making the rounds of all his old gang.
 An easy-to-digest premise that could have fallen flat if not handled
correctly. But Lee displays a wonderful ear for dialogue and a deft pen for
characterization that holds the audience and makes them care about these
people.
 What is interesting is despite the fact that all the main characters are
black, color really is not an issue. True there is some talk about the
sexual politics and gender expectations between black men and black women,
but change a couple of words and this story could have been told in Chinese
or Croatian.
 The point is the situations and characters are easily recognizable and are
common to the human condition.
 The cast works together very smoothly, reacting off each other with the
timing and precision of an Army drill team.
 Diggs, of course, is one of the sexiest men in movies today. His Harper is
a man walking a tightrope, waiting for the shoe to drop as his book is
passed from friend to friend, revealing secrets that should have remained
buried.
 He is a man fearful of commitment. Despite being in a two-year, loving
relationship with his girlfriend, Robin (Sanaa Lathan), he cannot take that
final step toward marriage.
 Long's Jordan is a career-driven woman regretting her one missed
opportunity with Harper. She is a goal-oriented, self-assured person who
also is not afraid to reveal a vulnerability.
 Chestnut's Lance is a God-fearing, Bible-quoting football megastar. His is
a character that could have been caricature, but Chestnut fleshes him out,
showing not only his strength, but his pride and his weaknesses.
 Rounding out the cast are Harold Perrineau, Terrence Howard, Monica
Calhoun and Melissa De Sousa. This is the prettiest cast of actors to hit
the screen in a long time. Yet their looks do not obscure their finely
honed performances.
 "The Best Man" is a most enjoyable motion picture, a date movie that will
have you laughing as well as bring a tear or two to your eyes.
 It is lively, it sparkles and is one of the most life-affirming movies to
hit the screen in a long time. "The Best Man" is a gem - treasure it.
 Bob Bloom is the movie critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or a
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
In writer/director Malcolm D. Lee's THE BEST MAN, old college chums are
gathering for a wedding.  Complicating their reunion is a new novel by
one of them, Harper (Taye Diggs), that contains thinly veiled references
to each of them.
Like a pleasant-enough pilot for a new television series, the
good-spirited movie goes down easily, albeit not memorably.  The
exceedingly attractive actors and actresses have well-endowed bodies and
play successful upper middle class professionals.  Most scenes find them
grinning from ear to ear, as they clearly enjoy their roles.
A typical scene has four male members of the cast sitting around a table
as they play poker, drink beer and discuss sex and women.  Although it
may be authentic, the racial and sexist language may make some viewers
feel uncomfortable.  "You can't trust these bitches," Quentin (Terrence
Dashon Howard) tells the others as his take on the female half of the
world.
The good-natured poker fest ends in an argument when Quintin suggests
the possibility that Mia (Monica Calhoun), the bride at the upcoming
wedding, might have had other lovers just like the groom, Lance (Morris
Chestnut), a football star with a famous libido.  Believing in the old
double standard, Lance comes unglued when Quintin suggests Mia might
have experienced some of the same sexual freedom that Lance brags about.
Most of the movie has a light, breezy feel like its dreamy jazz music.
People are always hugging each other and asking how the other is doing.
In a movie that goes on a half-hour too long for a romantic comedy,
these are among the scenes that are badly in need of trimming.
Eventually, Harper's book introduces complications in the friends'
camaraderie.  They accidentally begin to refer to each other with the
names of their characters from his novel.  By the end, the comedy turns
serious as the wedding itself is put in jeopardy by certain revelations.
The movie contains few missteps, but the director never manages to make
the material compelling.  I'm an extremely emotional sort when it comes
to weddings, and I cry at the weddings of people whom I barely know.
But at the big wedding finale in this picture, it was the cast crying,
not me.
THE BEST MAN runs way too long at 1:58.  It is rated R for language,
sex, brief nudity and mild violence and would be acceptable for
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/9859238ec6b1e750882567fe0005c9c7?OpenDocument
The best text for a film to toy with the "emotional heartstrings" of
an audience is undoubtedly the romantic comedy.  Broad in its appeal,
the filmmaker doesn't have to worry about turning away certain
audiences with horror, overblown special effects, or too much action.
Romantic comedies are so successful because they parody our
fascination with love and all its complexities.  They are kind of like
rolling along a roller coaster of emotions poking fun at our society's
mores, twisting and turning towards a morally fulfilling conclusion.
It's a catch 22- despite the fact that we know what's going to happen
in the end, we keep coming back for more, and are continuously
intrigued time and again by the molding of a blissful resolution.
THE BEST MAN, directed and written by Malcom Lee, is a prime example
of an exhilarating love story that will certainly charm its audience.
Well written and fabulously acted, this film hopefully will put some
fresh new faces onto the Hollywood scene.
The story of a group of college friends reuniting for a wedding, THE
BEST MAN chronicles a weekend in the life of Harper Stewart (Taye
Diggs- GO, THE WOOD).  A commitment shy writer who must deal with
marrying off his best friend Lance Sullivan (Morris
Chestnut-G.I. JANE), the hype of his upcoming first novel, and facing
"the gang" again, who will not let him escape some secrets of his
past.  By the end of the weekend, several of those secrets are
indirectly revealed in an advanced copy of his book, which, much to
his dismay, has already gotten around the to the group of friends.
The culprit is an over ambitious bridesmaid Jordan Armstrong, (Nia
Long- SOUL FOOD) who is also a television producer looking for an
exclusive interview, and a maybe a little something else from Harper?
Just what are these dark secrets of Harper's past?  You'll just have
to find out, but when they are revealed, the whole group will have to
reevaluate their relationships with each other, their lovers, and with
themselves.
The most commendable aspect of this film is its amazing cast.  Tye
Diggs is one of Hollywood's brightest young stars and turns in a
brilliant performance in his first feature role.  Quentin, (Terrance
Howard- JOHNS, MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS) one of Harper's main college
buddies, steals the show as a hedonistic lover-boy with no clear
career ambitions despite enormous artistic talents.  Hilariously
funny, his character encompasses a perfect blend of intelligence and
sass.  Another buddy, Murch, (Harold Perrineau- best known as the
narrator from HBO's "Oz") plays an oversensitive soft spoken guy
trapped in a dysfunctional relationship with longtime girlfriend
Shelby (Melissa De Sousa (THE FIRE THIS TIME- a short film).  It's
nice to see him in a role where he's not confined to a dark cell or a
wheel chair as in "Oz."  He's a talented actor with a bright future
and this film shows his versatility.  Sanaa Lathan, (LIFE) Harper's
girlfriend whom he can't quite commit to, also puts in a memorable
performance.  Morris Chestnut (BOYZ IN THE HOOD) must be commended for
his display of emotion in anticipation of his forthcoming wedding
despite the maelstrom of hysteria leading up to the event.  Finally,
Nia Long (STIGMATA) whose character's overzealousness often shades her
good intentions, plays an excellent role.  This cast is one of the
finest I've seen in any film of late.
The only weak points were that the movie ran a little long and several
crucial scenes were a little far fetched. Like when Lance, the groom
to be, steps into the bathroom to read Harper's book while the
strippers are getting it on at the bachelor party in his honor.  Come
on now.  How are we supposed to believe that?
Otherwise, this is definitely a fun first date movie.  A good one for
breaking the ice with that first rendezvous on a Friday night.  By the
end of the film, you just may find yourself with your arm around that
special someone.
Starring:  Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Harold Perrineau,
Terrance
Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Monica Calhoun, Melissa De Sousa
Producers:  Spike Lee, Sam Kitt, Bill Carraro
Writer and Director:  Malcom D. Lee
Year of Release: 1999
MPAA rating:  R
*** and a half stars
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Athan Bezaitis
Accompanied by THE BEST MAN director Malcolm Lee, I spoke with Diggs at
the Pan-Pacific Hotel in San Francisco about his relatively recent
venture into the world of film.  He reflected on his roller coaster ride
to success from his roots as a stage actor at Syracuse University and on
to Broadway where he starred in "Rent" and "Carousel."  He told the
story behind his debut performance in HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK and
reflected upon his status as a budding sex symbol.  Through it all he
spoke with an amazing sense of candor and striking humility.  Those same
sincere emotions that he puts into his characters are reflected in his
cerebral persona, which directors and fans like myself have come to
revere.
filmcritic.com: In the opening paragraph of a recent New York Times
piece they compared you to Fred Astaire in reference to your history
with theater and your gradual transition to film.  How do you respond to
that statement and how do you feel about the state of modern movies?
Diggs: I would love for film to go back to those days where you had to
be able to do everything just to get by. In the forties, fifties, and
sixties they were good singers, good actors, and good dancers. That's
the school that I come from.  I would love for film to go back to that
but nowadays it's too difficult because there's a whole "cheese factor"
involved.  You see someone who sings and you need to know whether or not
they are going to have the mass appeal when they cross over.  I think
that people were just more talented and well-rounded in the past because
they had to be.  Back then the studios had crafted stars like Judy
Garland.  You just don't see the same type of all-purpose entertainers
nowadays.
filmcritic.com: You have done a lot of theater acting, both "Rent" and
"Carousel" on Broadway. Do you plan to return to that?
Diggs: Yes.  Actually from this point on until April I'm going to be
working on a show called "The Wild Card" in New York City at the
Manhattan Theater Club. It's a brand new piece taken from a poem.  I
jump at any chance to go back into theater.  That's what acting is to
me.  That's where I learned my craft.  Whenever I do acting for film
there's always a certain amount of altering I have to do to my style
because it's so different.  I'm always up for going back to the stage.
filmcritic.com: Have you done any stage since your first film HOW STELLA
GOT HER GROOVE BACK in 1997?
Diggs: No.  That was two years ago and I've been extremely busy ever
since. It's been quite a whirlwind.  The only reason I say two years is
because someone else told me.  It's all been a big blur.  Just a
different person shouting cut on a different day.  On the set I never
know what day of the week it is. It's been really crazy.  I welcome it
though.  This is what we all said that we wanted to do when we were in
college and now it has come to fruition.  It's very exciting and
challenging.
filmcritic.com: It always seems like in your movies that you're taking
your clothes off. I'm sure you get asked about that a lot.  Is that just
part of the characters or do they add it because of your status as a
rising sex symbol?
Diggs: They've never added that after I've come on to a film.  Not one
role that I've played has been written specifically for me.  It's just
been the role of the romantic lead.  Brad Pitt and Tom Cruise are always
taking off their shirts.  That's just what you do.  You have to have sex
and take off your clothes.  It has been refreshing that the last four
roles that I've done have not been so blatantly sexual with me being put
on some imaginary pedestal.  I keep all my clothes on in HOUSE ON
HAUNTED HILL, MARY JANE'S LAST DANCE, and THE WAY OF THE GUN.
filmcritic.com: Do you consider yourself a sex symbol?  How do you deal
with all your adoring female fans on a daily basis?
Diggs: I only get bits and pieces of it here and there on the streets.
Publicity really hypes it up the most.  After this movie comes out it
might get a little rougher but until now it hasn't been that bad.  Like
I went out to a predominantly black club last night and nobody said
anything and I was wishing somebody would so that someone would dance
with me.  It's a trip but it hasn't crossed over to the point where
women are throwing their panties at me.  Honestly, when people ask me
these questions it just tickles me because I wasn't like this in high
school.  I mean it was me, but I was thinner and nerdier, and didn't
have as much confidence.  Deep down that person still remains and I just
laugh when I see myself all studded out in magazine articles and films.
I know what the real person is like and it makes me laugh.
filmcritic.com: Is Taye Diggs your real name?
Diggs: It's a nickname.  All my friends from my past would know me as
Scott Diggs.  Taye Diggs comes from Scott-taye.  When I went to college
I liked it because it was so different and I have an infatuation with
nicknames.
filmcritic.com: How were you perceived in LA coming from Broadway?
Diggs: LA is so vapid.  At the time "Rent" was at its peak and most of
the cast was going into the major studios looking for parts.  I actually
got a couple of TV spots from it.  But then all that died down and as
far as casting was concerned it didn't really matter that I had been on
Broadway. Everyone was primarily concerned with screen experience.  I
was lucky enough to land a role where they were looking for a "no name"
actor in HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK.  If they were looking for
somebody famous Wesley Snipes would have gotten to star along with
Angela Basset.  It was truly luck that they wanted to bring somebody new
on the scene.
filmcritic.com: Your supporting performance in GO has received much
critical acclaim.  How important was that role to you and what did you
get out of it?
Diggs: I feel proud because HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK wasn't quite
out yet so I had no "Hollywood buzz" going into my audition.  I really
take pride in being able to say that I would have gotten that part
whether or not STELLA had ever existed because that's the kind of cat
Doug Liman is.  He brought me in.  He read me.  He hadn't seen STELLA.
He didn't really care, and it was the perfect type of role for me at
that time with a cast of gritty young actors.  I'm hyped that he found
something in me and allowed me to be a big part of that.
filmcritic.com: You've had two wedding movies this year with THE BEST
MAN and THE WOOD, how do they compare?
Diggs: THE WOOD was about young people and the other one is more of a
grown up movie.  One is much more light and fun and the other really
goes to the core of adult issues, emotions, and feelings, which is why I
took it.  The large ensemble cast and the fact that it was being shot in
New York, combined with a lot of strong positive images as far as
African Americans are concerned, really turned me on to THE BEST MAN.
It's a movie about black people that deals with issues that cross over
into universal themes that people of all races and creeds can relate to.
filmcritic.com: In THE BEST MAN, why didn't your character (Harper) feel
the need to confess to the people involved before his first novel came
out?
Diggs: I think that subconsciously Harper (Taye Diggs) wanted all his
friends to find out.  That's why he writes the book in the first place.
On the surface his character was ignorant but deep deep down he realized
that they should know about what happened and he felt guilty.  The way
he dealt with his guilt was through writing and he convinced himself
that nobody would ever find out, which is where he went wrong.  We all
make mistakes like that, sleeping with somebody who we shouldn't have or
kissing a girl when we know it is wrong.  Me personally, outside of the
book I don't know that I would have told either.  I'm an advocate of the
old adage, "if it ain't broke don't fix it."  If you realize that what
you did was wrong and you KNOW that it's not going to get back at
anybody, in a lot of ways confessing will aggravate the problem even
more.  I'm not saying I'm not an advocate of being honest, but let's
face it, honesty works best when both parties are understanding.
filmcritic.com: You've already said you love to dance, act, and sing.
Would you ever consider pulling a "Jennifer Lopez" by trying your hand
in the music business?
Diggs: I don't know how it would be taken.  I would have to go about
choosing a label carefully because I wouldn't want to be perceived as
corny in any way.  When you go into that area you have to cope with a
lot of stuff that I don't necessarily want to deal with as far as
selling a certain number of units and what not.  So I don't know that
I'm ready to add all that stress, but I definitely love to sing and if
it were easy then I'd do it.  But everybody would be doing it if it were
easy.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Ross Anthony
A late night card game with the guys would have been nothing short of movie
making perfection (great dialogue, direction, acting, energy) save for
Perrineau, though his character is lovable, he finds himself out-acted.
Also, "an oops" slips passed the directors careful eye: watch the card table
magically reset after it's been overturned. This scene is a microcosm of the
film itself: bouquet-catching actors, committed direction, toast-worthy
dialogue, but an occasionally crazy-chicken story line.
Here's the drama ... Taye flies to New York for the wedding of his
Pro-football playing best bud. The whole college gang is there with all
their past histories with which to build each other up or tear each other
down, and there are still a few secrets left untold. When the cat's finally
out of the bag ... who will end up with whom? Kind of a
"public-relationships" game of musical chairs.
Like "Seinfeld," Nothing really happens in this film. Even a scene in which
one character holds the other over the edge of a terrace seems out of place
and unnecessary. But the good solid humor and unforgettable acting power
keep "The Best Man" fun and ultimately entertaining.
Taye Diggs graced the screen mere months ago in another buddy/wedding film.
"The Wood" was rough around the edges (picture/sound-wise), but excellent on
script and performance. If you enjoy, "The Best Man" this weekend, let me
recommend "The Wood" as a fine renter.
The Best Man. Copyright  1999. Rated R.
Starring Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Harold Perrineau, Terrence
Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Monica Calhoun, and Melissa De Sousa.
Written and directed by Malcolm D. Lee.
Produced by Spike Lee, Sam Kitt, and Bill Carraro at Universal/40 Acres and
a Mule.
Grade..........................Strong B+
--
Copyright  1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures/Forty Acres and a Mule Productions
 Director: Malcolm D. Lee    
 Writer:   Malcolm D. Lee
 Cast: Monica Calhoun, Morris Chestnut, Melissa DeSousa,
Taye Diggs, Terrence Dashon Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Nia
Long, Harold Perrineau Jr.
   Like "How Stella Got Her Groove Back," this film is yet
another story of the romantic woes of members of the
African-American middle class.  None of the characters in
Malcolm D. Lee's "The Best Man" have money problems and
so all can concentrate on backbiting and expressing doubts
about sentimental subjects like fidelity and commitment.  The
movie stars Taye Diggs, who got a fortuitous start in the
business as the 20-year-old med school hopeful being
romanced by a 40-year-old San Francisco stockbroker in
Kevin Rodney Sullivan's aforementioned "Stella."  As then,
Diggs, who appears to have a stellar career ahead of him,
gets plenty of opportunities to display his muscular physique. 
Too much time, in fact, as "The Best Man," at just under two
hours, wears out its welcome considerably before its superior
final third, the point in which all problems are resolved and
the principal couples--kept apart for most of the movie's
elongated duration--are solidly bound together as is the
custom with by-the-numbers romantic comedies.
   The wholly predictable tale, which evokes scant laughter
from situations flattened by repetition, focuses on a group of
educated men and women in their twenties who, as you
might expect, talk endlessly about their love lives and jive
each other on the mistakes made in the past which have
come to haunt them.  The title character at the center of the
tale, Harper (Taye Diggs), has just published his first novel
called "Unfinished Business," which is a thinly disguised
account of the people in his life.  (Strangely enough, though
this is Harper's first contribution to the literary world, the
newly published tome is already in paperback.)  Like many
pieces of fiction, the work simply disguises the names of the
characters but extracts actual circumstances that befall them. 
This is the sort of book that gets the real-life people on whom
it is based downright angry, exposing intimate details of their
lives including the liaisons that they are not supposed to have
had.  The principal revelation that sets Harper's circle of
friends fuming and threatens their love lives involves an
alleged one-night stand that he had had with Mia (Monica
Calhoun, who is about to marry Harper's best friend, college
football star Lance (Morris Chestnut).  
   One gets the impression from Lee's film that the men are
irresistible, judging by the way their women dote on them
despite their straying.  Ironically the person most upset by the
possibility that his fiance has not been faithful to him is a
male, Lance, who can't put Harper's book down once he
realizes the true-to-life nature of the work--especially since it
hints of the relationship that Harper had with the woman he is
about to marry.  
   Some of the genial personalities who inhabit Lee's movie
are Jordan (Nia Long), a workaholic former flame of Harper's,
who calls herself a horny nutbasket and is determined to bed
the upcoming author; Murch (Harold Perrineau Jr.), a shy
member of the circle who gets lucky at a bachelor party;
Quentin (Terrence Dashon Howard), who is quite talented
with the guitar but seems to be aimless; and Shelby (Melissa
DeSousa), a whiner who needs convincing that she likes men
at all.  
   Lee takes us through a swinging bachelor party, a couple
of fights, and a whole lot of rap sessions that the guys hold
about women.  I was surprised to hear how many times the
"n" word gets used--not out of hostility of course, but in the
mocking way that some African-Americans have treated the
word for over a decade.  Considering the level of education of
these fellows, this particular obscenity would seem to have
no place and is particularly annoying even when used in an
obviously playful manner.  "The Best Man" offers nothing new
on the subject of male bonding and the endless roundelay of
discussions of the opposite sex.

Author
Michael Dequina
If you ask me, it's impossible to not like a film that ends with the
entire cast doing the electric slide to Cameo's '80s funk classic
"Candy."  But there's more to enjoy in   _The_Best_Man_ than its
infectious full company closing dance number.  First-time writer-director
Malcolm D. Lee's fresh and fun ensemble comedy is a classy effort that
delivers the requisite doses of laughs and romance along with a fair
amount of intelligence.
As the title implies, the central event in _The_Best_Man_ is a wedding,
that between football star Lance Sullivan (Morris Chestnut) and his
longtime love Mia (Monica Calhoun).  The blessed event reunites a number
of the couple's college friends, including Murch (Harold Perrineau Jr.),
henpecked by longtime girlfriend Shelby (Melissa DeSousa); self-styled
player Quentin (Terrence Howard); successful BET television producer
Jordan Armstrong (Nia Long); and of course the best man himself, author
Harper Stewart (Taye Diggs), who is shy to committing to long-suffering
girlfriend Robin (Sanaa Lathan).   He shakes up what could have been a
smooth and blissful reunion when an advance copy of soon-to-be-published
novel--not-so-loosely based on his and his friends' dirty little
secrets--makes the rounds within this tightly-knit circle. 
This is the film's one aggravating contrivance.  Harper did not see any
harm in airing his personal dirty laundry in the book because it was
scheduled to be released after the big reunion at the wedding and hence
wouldn't have to face everyone about it--or endanger Lance and Mia's
impending nuptials.  In the latter respect, it's understandable why he
would not want his friends did not see the book until its release, but
even once the two are wed, they and the others would eventually get upset
with him anyway.  And Harper is presented as someone who values
friendship, not to mention a great writer; he is mentioned to be set for
an appearance on _Oprah_ for his book.  With the plot of his book so
closely mirroring his real-life past, Harper doesn't appear to be that
imaginative an author.
But one doesn't dwell on the issue since Lee's own writing and execution
is energetic and entertaining.  _The_Best_Man_ may be named for one
character, but this is an ensemble film in the best sense, with all the
characters each given their moments to shine and doing so brilliantly. 
In fact, Harper is perhaps the least interesting of the bunch; far more
amusing are the smooth, smug womanizer Quentin and the shrewish Shelby,
both played to perfection by Howard and DeSousa.  This is not to say that
the two most central players, Diggs and Long, fail to hold their own;
blessed with talent and chemistry to match their good looks, they make
for very captivating and likable leads.
As many times as I laughed during _The_Best_Man_, what I remember most
clearly are the sweet and more serious moments.  While the scandal of
Harper's book is the engine of the film, its heart lies in love and
fidelity--not just to lovers, but also to friends.  The resolution to one
of the plot threads may be a disappointment to some audiences, but it
ends on the right note, and Lee must be commended for not going for the
cheaply crowd-pleasing twist.  In any event, any dissatisfaction is
completely erased by the closing dance number--a perfect delight of a
capper to a perfectly delightful film.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Malcolm D. Lee.
Cast: Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Sanaa Lathan, Terrence Howard, 
Harold Perrineau, Monica Calhoun, Melissa De Sousa, Regina Hall.
1999 - 121 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 24, 1999.
As "The Best Man" unraveled, it became apparent to me that the large majority 
of films made about African-American characters either (A) involve crime, 
drugs, and violence, or (B) are romantic comedy-dramas about family and/or 
friends who come together for a certain occasion. While the latter is 
certainly more appealing because it deals with that middle-upper-class 
section that is rarely dealt with on film, the results are usually botched by 
stereotypical, often juvenile, characterizations, or exaggerated plotting 
devices. Such is the case with "The Best Man," directed by Spike Lee's 
cousin, Malcolm D. Lee, which has so much going for it at the outset that you 
almost feel cheated when everything begins to revolve squarely around a 
wedding (this subject has been so overdone) and a scandalous, secretly 
autobiographical book that one of the character's has written and the others 
have gotten their hands on. Of course, this premise still easily might have 
worked had the screenplay, also by Lee, been written with more depth and 
intelligence, and not resorted to such frequent immature behavior. 
Taye Diggs toplines the bright cast as Harper Stewart, a writer in his 
late-20's, whom has just left his loving girlfriend Robin (Sanaa Lathan) to 
return to his hometown and act as the best man for his college buddy's 
wedding. Robin will arrive a few days later to attend the wedding, but right 
now Harper is most interested in rekindling his friendships with all of his 
confidants from years gone by. The groom, Lance (Morris Chestnut), is a 
pro-football player who is madly in love with his bride-to-be, the angelic 
Mia (Monica Calhoun), and Harper's other best friends from the past include 
Murch (Harold Perrineau Jr.), a slightly nerdy type who is overrun by his 
domineering, ice queen girlfriend Shelby (Melissa De Sousa), and Quentin 
(Terrence Howard), a playful, wise-cracking musician. The plot is set into 
motion when Harper once again meets his old college flame Jordan (Nia Long), 
and sparks instantly fly. Jordan, a television executive, has gotten her 
hands on Harper's upcoming book, "Unfinished Business," and as it gets passed 
around among the rest of the old gang, they slowly discover that the 
fictional character names are only a cover-up of themselves, with all the 
sordid details intact. The pressure is on for Harper, who is propositioned by 
Jordan to spend the night with her (they never "got together" in school), and 
is suddenly under fire from everyone for writing about their most personal 
details, and even some unknown secrets, including a past rendezvous he had 
with the bride Mia.
With such a minor storyline and characters who are far from 
three-dimensionally written, "The Best Man," as has been noted before, plays 
like a distaff version of 1983's classic, "The Big Chill," but without the 
nostalgic memories, sharp dialogue (the phrase, "You DOG!," has to have been 
used at least a half-dozen times), and smooth narrative flow. While a movie 
about friends coming together is all well and good (and was marvelously done 
in 1996's "Beautiful Girls," in which a 10-year high school reunion was the 
catalyst that set the plot into motion), "The Best Man" ruins things by 
adding the insubstantial book subplot into the mix, and not even using it to 
its fullest capabilities.
While some characters remain stereotypes throughout, without any attempt at 
further development (Melissa De Sousa's Shelby quickly comes to mind), others 
are performed with a true-to-life edge that makes them creditable. Taye Diggs 
is adequate as Harper, the character which everything centers around, but he 
made a more lasting impression in his supporting role in last spring's flashy 
"Go." Who should be especially noted, however, are Nia Long, who is so very 
assured as an actress that I wish she'd break out of this type of role she 
plays over and over; Terrence Howard, who has loads of fun with the most 
comedic character of the piece; and Sanaa Lathan, whose neglected girlfriend 
role of Harper's is the one we most sympathize and identify with. Meanwhile, 
Regina Hall makes a more-than-memorable appearance as a bright-eyed stripper 
who Murch is bewitched by at Lance's bachelor party.
If director Malcolm D. Lee really wanted to make a more sophisticated film 
about a large portion of the population who often times go unnoticed in the 
world of films, why did he insist on making some of the characters act so 
childish? At one point, after a dark secret is uncovered by Lance about 
Harper, instead of having a conversation with him and talking the problem 
out, he resorts to knocking over the table, grabbing Harper by the collar, 
and threatening him. When this occurrence takes place in movies over such a 
petty thing, solely to add some interest and further conflict into the 
dwindling proceedings, I immediately lose all respect for the character. I 
know I wouldn't want to be friends with someone who would act like that.
As with 1997's melodramatic, corny "Soul Food," and last summer's "The Wood," 
which also starred Diggs in a story set around a wedding(!), "The Best Man" 
aspires to be something more than it actually is. Kudos to Lee for trying his 
hand at a more knowledgeable picture that all audiences (not just 
African-Americans) might enjoy, but he also gets more than his share of 
debits for its severely flawed treatment. At over two hours in length, "The 
Best Man" thankfully never overstays its welcome and goes by fairly fast, but 
by the time the Electric Slide was carried out by everyone at the wedding 
reception over the end credits, I realized that the actors deserved far 
better. As is, the conclusion plays like an excuse for each of the cast 
members to give themselves a pat on the back, when they really didn't earn 
that pat to begin with.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCritic movie reviews: The Best Man
Rated  [R], [116] minutes
Starring Taye Diggs, Nia Peeples
Written and Directed by Malcolm D. Lee
website: http://www.best-man.com
IN SHORT: A Rockin' African-American targeted date flick.
We begin with Harper Stewart (Taye Diggs), a novelist just months away
from the publication of "Unfinished Business," his first book. Based on
his friends from college, the writing is so steamy that Oprah Winfrey
wants to feature it in her book club. Not only does success beckon, so
does his beautiful girlfriend Robin (Sanaa Lathan), a caterer whose
business, too, is starting to take off. Three pending jobs is keeping
her from journeying from Chicago to New York, for the wedding of two of
Harper's friends. Truth of the matter is, they're his friends. Robin'll
just catch up at the wedding. Besides, she's getting just a bit
discouraged that her beau can't make the slightest move towards either
commitment or saying those three little words.
Those friends, quickly, are: the groom, Lance (Morris Chestnut), a NFL
running back (NY Giants?) who has used his fame to great advantage with
the ladies, if you know what I mean; his save it for the wedding night
bride Mia (Monica Calhoun); Jordan Armstrong (Nia Long), Harper's woulda
coulda shoulda but never did gal; career-phobic Quentin (Terrence
Howard), who plays a mean guitar; equally career-phobic Murch (Harold
Perrineau) who's staring down a six figure legal gig and his controlling
bitch of a girlfriend Shelby (Melissa DeSousa), whom everyone in this
group, save Murch, detests. With Robin away until the day of the
wedding, Jordan determines that she's going to nail Harper, one way or
the other.
The New York weekend means reunion for this crew. Thanks to a
prepublication copy of Harper's book obtained, and circulated among all
concerned, by teevee producer Jordan, old secrets come out in the open.
Each real person sees themselves in the book's fictional characters and
when the groom finally gets his turn, let's just say his eyes are opened
to the fact that his virginal bride may not be. A joyful weekend
escalates into something much more as the groom wants vengeance and each
of the other single men get to reevaluate their own relationships.
That doesn't give anything away as writer/director Malcolm D. Lee
fashions strong characters and the actors make you feel as if this group
had indeed been friends for years. Then again, the African-American
acting community isn't a very large one so they may actually be friends.
And, yes, I may be a middle aged white guy who ears can't follow the
vocal rhythms; I didn't catch half the lingo, but there's enough here
that when push came to shove and the film hit its edge of the seat
climax -- I know, for a comedy that's a bit of a stretch to imagine, but
that's what it was -- I was there, baby.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Best Man, he would have paid...
Much better than the average dateflick. The Best Man is not the kind of
African-American targeted movie that may not be accessible enough to
white audiences to cross over big time, but I'm an old fogey. The
kidlets who speak in rap rhythms may get this with no problem. With
dating couples all around me, and running commentary on the action from
all of 'em (there are advantages to sitting with "real" people), The
Best Man wasn't hard to follow. Just watching the crowd, as I've done at
other A-A starring flicks, left me with the impression that this is
bigger and better than the average flick targeted at them.
The Cranky Critic is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright  1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com
