Title
Review for Very Brady Sequel, A (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As I was flipping through my notes, the first that came up for
A VERY BRADY SEQUEL said, "based on a true story."  Well, this is based
on an old TV series, but it is as far from a true story as can be.  The
notes were from another movie I had seen recently.  Here the people are
pure plastic and the show is either hilarious camp or tedious failed
attempts at comedy.  There was one person in my audience that got it,
but the rest of us stared at the screen waiting for the next little
good line to come along.  The saving grace of the picture is that the
dialog by the writing committee of Jim Berg, Harry Elfont, Deborah
Kaplan, and Stan Zimmerman does have some nice one liners every now and
then.
     I never saw THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, which my fellow critics tell me
was better - I would hope so, or even the television series so perhaps
I am not qualified to review this film, but I will anyway.  My theory
is that if you pay your seven dollars at the box office and drop
another seven at the concession stand, you should be to enjoy a film
without having to have already seen anything else.  Actually, I am not
sure having seen the original or the television series would have made
this lame attempt at film making any more palatable.
     The putative laugh-a-minute story this time opens with the very
Brady kids Greg (Christopher Daniel Barnes), Marcia (Christine Taylor),
Peter (Paul Sutera), Jan (Jennifer Elise Cox), Bobby (Jesse Lee) and
Cindy (Olivia Hack) building a huge house of cards.  Their figurative
and literal house is soon broken up by the arrival of a man named Roy
Martin (Tim Matheson) who claims to be Carol's (Shelley Long) thought
to be dead first husband.  This only mildly troubles her unflappable
current husband Mike (Gary Cole), he being a Brady and all. Housekeeper
Alice Nelson (Henriette Mantel) keeps the household running despite the
changes.
     There are some problems like her ex-husband doesn't sound or look
like he used to.  He easily explains this away since an elephant in
Thailand stood on his face forcing surgery that changed his looks and
his vocal chords.  Sure.  Well, it actually sounds funny when he says
it.
     Soon the cast is off to Hawaii which provides lots of nice
visuals.  It seems the Brady may own a  twenty million dollar statue of
a horse, and in Hawaii is a famous collector Dr. Whitehead (John
Hillerman).  There actually is not much of a plot.  The show and the
scenery are only pretexts for showing off all of the Brady's 1970 style
outlandish bad taste in clothes and to make fun of their syrupy sweet
life style.
     Parts of the little subplots work and others don't.  Marcia is
obsessed with her beauty and everyone else's, especially her sister
Jan's, lack of it.  Marcia brags to everyone about her beauty and
ridicules others.  Most of these put-downs are off-the-wall enough to
be funny.
     In the most out-of-place aspect of the film, there is an
incestuous relationship between the two oldest kids, Greg and Marcia.
Perhaps in another film this would have not been so objectionable, but
in this lighthearted little piece of family drama, it just does not
belong.
     Some of the dialog is worth a chuckle or two.  When Dr. Whitehead
meets Carol for the first time at his out of the way mansion, he
declares, "You're a Jehovah's Witness."  But she corrects him, "No, I'm
a Brady."  Definitely a different dogma.  Her impostor first husband
warns him, "You can't believe her.  Look at the hair, the clothes, the
constant cheerfulness."  He has a point.
     In a funny take off on the bad language of most movies today, the
impostor tells Carol's real husband, "I'm going to kick your Brady
butt."  To which little Cindy is aghast, screaming, "Ooooooh, he said
the B word."
     In my favorite small part of the film Barbara Eden shows up in the
epilogue as Jeannie from the TV show "I Dream of Jeannie."  This
epilogue has no real purpose of course.  Remember the whole script was
written by a committee.
     A VERY BRADY SEQUEL runs 1:30.  It is rated PG-13 for sex related
humor.  This show is fine for teenagers.  If your kids are subteens,
you might want to be careful.  I know one mom of an 11 year old who
thought it got too obscene and took her daughter out of the show.  The
mean time between jokes that work is too long for me to be able to
recommend the film, but I did laugh a little.  I give it * 1/2.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 12, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Shelley Long, Gary Cole, Tim Matheson, Christopher Daniel
Barnes, Christine Taylor, Jennifer Elise Cox, Paul Sutera, Jesse Lee,
Olivia Hack.
Screenplay:  Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan, James Berg, Stan Zimmerman.
Director:  Arlene Sanford.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Seventy-nine weeks -- count them, seventy-nine -- is all that
separates the release of A VERY BRADY SEQUEL from THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE,
in what has to rank as one of the fastest sequel turnarounds in film
history.  Even taking into account the fact that the Brady house sets and
Alice's uniform were already available, that's a tidy 18 months for
writing the script, pre-production, shooting and post-production.  You
might expect a rather perfunctory piece of film-making given those
circumstances, and you would find it.  A VERY BRADY SEQUEL has some cute
moments, but it is lacking the sense of direction which made THE BRADY
BUNCH MOVIE such a guilty pleasure.
     The sequel finds all the BRADY cast members (except for David Graf as
Sam the butcher) exactly where we left them at the end of the last movie,
happily stuck in the 1970s while the world around them spins a quarter
century faster.  All seems typically groovy for Mike (Gary Cole), Carol
(Shelley Long) and the clan until they receive a visit from a man who says
he is Roy Martin (Tim Matheson)...Carol's first husband, a globe-trotting
archaeologist lost and presumed dead many years earlier.  This throws the
household into turmoil.  Carol and Mike are confused over how to deal with
this news, Greg (Christopher Daniel Barnes) and Marcia (Christine Taylor)
are confused over feelings about each other, and Jan (Jennifer Elise
Cox)...well, as usual, she's just confused.  But all of them should be
more concerned about Roy, who primarily seems concerned about the
whereabouts of a horse statue which could be worth a fortune.
     THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE arrived in the middle of a slew of T.V.-to-film
re-treads, so it was easy to overlook the fact that there was actually a
point to it besides gratuitous nostalgia.  Even as the film made
referrence to "classic" Brady plots, it also provided the wonderful
conceit of sealing the Bradys in a bubble of obliviousness while time had
marched on for everyone else, and it made for a genuinely entertaining
remembrance of a simpler time with simpler problems.  A VERY BRADY SEQUEL
misses the boat on both counts.  There isn't nearly enough juxtaposition
between the Bradys and the modern world; most of the film seems to take
place in the Brady house, with only a sarcastic Matheson to react.  There
is one funny bit in which Mike speaks to a police detective ("Homicide's"
Richard Belzer) in a police station where everything around him is filmed
in the unsteady hand-held style of modern crime dramas, while Mike himself
is an island of stable serenity.  Too often, however, the Bradys end up
interacting just with each other, repeating 70s catch phrases and
mimicking their television counterparts.
     As for the echoes of the original series, the most memorable were
already used in the first film.  We do get a detailed re-creation of Jan's
imaginary boyfriend George Glass, and token references to other episodes
like the Hawaiian vacation shows (don't be fooled by ads which make it
look like the entire film is set in Hawaii; the Bradys don't hit the
islands until about twenty minutes remain), but A VERY BRADY SEQUEL
doesn't provide the same warmth of familiarity.  Instead, it spends a lot
of time playing with sexual tension between Greg and Marcia as the
realization that they aren't _really_ related puts interesting ideas in
their heads.  There are a few solid laughs in that sub-plot, but
unfortunately it underlines an over-reliance on sexual double-entendre of
a staggering obviousness.  I suppose a limited time frame to work on a
script can make you leap for the easy gag.
     Still, A VERY BRADY SEQUEL does have the same superb cast to draw on,
and they make for a film which seems more creative than it actually is.
Jennifer Elise Cox again has the showcase role of neglected middle child
Jan, and dumping her psychotic "inner voice" makes her desperation for
attention a bit more fun.  Gary Cole is also priceless -- it's hard to
imagine a more convincingly earnest square, or someone else delivering a
line like, "So what are your plans now that you're alive?" as though it
almost made sense.  A VERY BRADY SEQUEL is occasionally cute, directed
competently by Arlene Sanford, but it's rarely clever.  Someone had an
idea in mind when they made the first film, and that's true of the sequel
as well.  It's just that the idea this time was closer to, "Let's get this
thing out there while the kids still look like kids."

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Shelley Long, Gary Cole, Christine Taylor, 
      Christopher Daniel Barnes, Jennifer Elise Cox, Paul Sutera, 
      Olivia Hack, Jesse Lee, Henriette Mantel, Tim Matheson 
Director: Arlene Sanford
Producers: Alan Ladd Jr., Sherwood Schwartz, and Lloyd J. Schwartz
Screenplay: Harry Elfont & Deborah Kaplan and Stan Zimmerman & Jim Berg,
      based on the TV series created by Sherwood Schwartz
Cinematography: Mac Ahlberg
Music: Guy Moon
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Groovy platform shoes and bell-bottoms, happening floral prints, 
far out leisure suits, and a dreamy Davey Jones -- once again, we've 
been sent time tripping with the Bradys, the stuck-in-the-'70s clan 
living in the '90s.  With the premise firmly established in last year's 
THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, A VERY BRADY SEQUEL offers more of the same:  
sexual innuendo, double entendres, and a truckload of references to the 
original series.  Aficionados of the TV show will probably appreciate 
this film, as will those who enjoyed the first installment.  After all, 
there's nothing new here -- this is just a continuation of the jokes and 
style that made the initial big-screen foray a surprise success.  Even 
though the director has changed (Arlene Sanford replacing Betty Thomas), 
the two movies fit together so well that it's impossible to notice.
     Shelly Long and Gary Cole are back as Carol and Mike Brady, parents 
to Greg (Christopher Daniel Barnes), Marsha (Christine Taylor), Peter 
(Paul Sutera), Jan (Jennifer Elise Cox), Bobby (Jesse Lee), and Cindy 
(Olivia Hack).  In the last movie, the Brady clan faced the possible 
loss of their beloved house.  On this occasion, the threat is a little 
more insidious.  One day, a man claiming to be Carol's presumed-dead 
first husband, Roy Martin (Tim Matheson), arrives on the Brady's 
doorstep. Although he looks nothing like Roy and is six inches too tall 
(he got stepped on by an elephant and stretched on the rack), he is 
immediately accepted, and, because Mike believes that good manners are 
everything, even invited to stay as a guest.  Unbeknownst to the Bradys, 
however, Roy isn't who he says he is, and his reasons for insinuating 
himself into the household have to do with a $20 million statue of whose 
value the Bradys are blissfully unaware. 
     Meanwhile, in some of the film's more amusing moments, after 
realizing that they're not really brother and sister, Marcia and Greg 
are fighting a powerful sexual attraction to each other.  Jan is so 
desperate for a boyfriend that she makes one up.  Peter is struggling 
with career decisions -- does he want to be an architect or an 
adventurer when he grows up?  And Bobby and Cindy are busy playing 
Sherlock Holmes.  
     A VERY BRADY SEQUEL lacks the freshness of the first outing, but it 
makes up for it -- at least as much as it can -- with a slightly better 
plot structure.  Nevertheless, there's only so far you can stretch an 
affectionate parody of the Bradys, and, like its predecessor, this film 
loses its momentum before the halfway mark.  By the end, all the puns, 
"innocent" sex jokes, and nods to the series have become tiresome.  The 
scenes of the Bradys blithely interacting with '90s culture don't have 
nearly the bite they should -- things are played a little too nice, a 
little too safe.  The material in THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE couldn't sustain 
a ninety-minute feature, and neither can that in A VERY BRADY SEQUEL.
     As was true of the 1995 film, the most remarkable aspect of the 
production is how it mimics the feel of the series.  The sets are near-
perfect recreations, and the performers look and act eerily like their 
TV predecessors.  Unlike in THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, there aren't any 
cameos by former cast members, but a couple of witty links to other old 
TV shows (GILLIGAN'S ISLAND and I DREAM OF JEANNIE in particular) make 
up for it.  A VERY BRADY SEQUEL has a light, breezy air that will 
probably appeal to a certain segment of the movie-going population, 
although it's a little too vacuous for my taste.  At half its length,  A 
VERY BRADY SEQUEL would have been fun, but, no incarnation of the Brady 
Bunch, no matter how cleverly satirized, can use up an hour and a half's 
screen time without making the audience feel like they've overdosed.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Stephen Baker
Is it just me or does the sequel of a very successful film seem inferior
to the original?
Well here's a perfect example to that statement.  A Very Brady Sequel
didn't have the freshness or the warpness of the original "The Brady
Bunch Movie"  After coming out of the showing of it, I thought that for
myself.
Here we have a same rehash of some of the original episodes that aired
before most of the people who will see this movie weren't weren't even
born and didn't grow up with the show, even in the first time
syndication.  Although, there was some differences between the original
episodes and this movie.  Carol's so-called husband comes back from the
dead, Greg and Marcia start to explore their sexual feelings about each
other, and Peter loses his deep voice at the end of the original movie
and goes back to the whiny high pitched voice that he had in the
original film.
This is not a movie where you'll be getting any laugh out loud comedy
but you do smile during the film and that must be acknowledged.  I
thought that the movie would have worked better if the Bradys were
portrayed again as freaks as they were in the original movie, but mabye
that's not the point of the film at all.
Ok here's the basic story-line of the film.
Carol's adventurer husband comes back from the dead to reunite with his
wife (and also to steal a priceless horse sculptur). Caorl's husband is
really her first husband's assistant Trevor who knows the second horse
that was auctioned off for $20 million is in the posession of the
Brady's and must get it to Hawaii to collect.  Greg and Marcia fight
over the attic as to who gets it because their both older. They end up
sharing the room and start exploring their feelings for each other. 
Peter becomes a assistant to his dad at his firm for the summer which he
doesn't want to do. Bobby and Cindy look for the Kitty-Kerry-All doll
with a junior detective kit and Jan makes up her imaginary boyfriend. 
After stealing the horse from an auction Trevor kidnaps Carol and heads
to Hawaii and the Bradys follow.  
There is some predictibally in the film and you can almost figure it out
before the final result.  For example Carol gets a hair cut and comes
out the same.
You can tell that this film will transfer to video well since it was
filmed in 1.85 instead of the 2.35 wide screen aspect and it might have
worked better as a straight-to-video release.
This film is for true Brady fans who will sit through 90 minutes of the
rehash of the old tv show.  If you don't like the show, don't see the
movie.
