Title
Review for Family Business (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Robert Dorsett
     FAMILY BUSINESS stars Sean Connery as an elderly burglar in New York.
Dustin Hoffman appears as his estranged son, Dustin Hoffman, and Matthew 
Broderick as *his* son.
     The dynamics of the film are complicated.  Suffice it to say that
Connery's character is a professional burglar.  Hoffman's used to be one as
well, but  gave it up, in favor of "legitimate" business.  There is a conflict
between  father and son.  Broderick is portrayed as a smart kid who
mysteriously  drops out of a master's degree program--to "join the family
business."  His father isn't very happy about that, but his grandfather is
supportive.  The rest of the movie deals with a caper and the various conflicts
among the three men.
     This is a relatively serious movie, with good characterizations all
around.  It's the first "serious" film Connery's been in in a LONG time (he
tends to favor action/adventure films, which he invariably shines in).
Broderick is surprisingly good as the grandson.  Hoffman's well, Hoffman.
Everyone has a nasty side to himself: this isn't a gooey-feel-good Christmas
movie.
     Don't get the impression that this is another THE GREAT TRAIN ROBBERY.
(which was also a good movie)  It isn't.  

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FAMILY BUSINESS ** (1989) Directed by Sidney Lumet. Written by Vincent
Patrick from his novel. Photography, Andrzej Bartkowski.  Editing, Andrew
Mondshein. Production design, Philip Rosenberg. Music, Cy Coleman. Music
director, Sonny Kompanek. Cast:
Sean Connery, Dustin Hofman, Matthew Broderick, et al. A Tri-Star release.
113 minutes. Rated R (adult situations, general immorality.)
Sidney Lumet is an excellent director of the urban scene, and especially
strong at portraying the jungle of New York City ("Network," "Serpico"). He
begins "Family Business" with an array of interrelated ethnicities and the
old trick of showing a part of the city as a village where everyone  knows
everyone else, while zooming in on three generations of one family: Jessie
(Connery)  the 65-year old grandfather, a postwar immigrant who is a free
soul, barroom brawler, con-man and retired thief; his son Vito (Hoffman),
an ex-thief gone straight who has made a fortune in wholesale meats; his
grandson Adam (Broderick), an ace student of molecular biology who has
dropped out of M.I.T. just months before getting his Master's degree.
Adam has come up with a plan for a scientific-industrial heist  suggested
by one of his former professors. This will net one million dollars. Grandpa
is ready to go, but dad Vito, alienated from Jessie,  takes a lot of
convincing--even though the wholesale meat business is not the most kosher
of occupations. At first, flamboyant Jessie , quiet Vito and soul-searching
Adam menace the viewer with that tired old movie cliche of lovable,
colorful characters. In a short second stage one begins to hope that, for a
change, the movie will get away with using lovable, colorful characters.
Soon however, this and the rest begin to disintegrate.
For one thing, we have to keep unscrambling ethnicities. Connery (a
Scotsman) is supposed to be an Irishman who, with his late Sicilian wife
begat  Hoffman, who married Jewish girl Elaine (Rosana DeSoto) and begat
Adam. Both Adam and his papa are proficient at Passover prayers at Elaine's
parents. Then we have to unscramble motivations, morals, structural details
and holes.
Why did Adam quit his studies? (Near the end a dumb, simplistic explanation
is given).Why does Vito yield  to entreaties? Why is  Adam's
overmaterialistic girlfriend (Victoria Jackson) made the focal point of a
sequence yet immediately disappears from the picture? How is it that Vito's
penthouse does not have a dishwashing machine? Why are some court sentences
so phony? Why do so many talky asides diffuse and dilute the movie?
There are amusing touches here and there, like an old pal of Jessie's
selling cheap to the old fellow and his grandson hot goods, designer shoes
"that fell off a truck." But even this effect is soon destroyed at an Irish
wake where liquor flows freely and illegally in the funeral home and the
same entrepreneur brings in a rack of stolen fancy suits which are bought
by the mourners, including a large contigent of Irish New York cops. The
gag becomes unsettling. Much later, at a second Irish wake, the same man
and the same cops are partaking of Japanese electronics which also "fell
off a truck" -- a fact which escalates the unsettling into the
distasteful. By this time too, ethnicity --a delicate thing to handle--
verges on maudlin caricature.
In the meantime the three men have carried out their burglary, with
results, both technical and personal, which my reviewer's credo of
non-disclosure will not let me spell out. It's enough to state that there's
a bit of suspense, a steady loss of  funny effects , a large growth of
pathos, unbelievability and gaps, all matched by the viewer's  growing
indifference as the movie becomes increasingly unpleasant.
Although Sean Connery gives the most picturesque performance, it is sketchy
and overdone, while Hoffman makes the most of his torn-loyalties part and
Broderick nicely underplays his underwritten role. Once before Sidney Lumet
had directed Connery as the mastermind of a heist, in the 1972 "The
Anderson Tapes," and failed, except for the depictions of supporting roles.
Curiously, the same happens here: some portraits of secondary characters
are excellent, from judges to shabby prosecutors. There is an especially
film-stealing actress (unidentified in the press information) who plays a
chillingly cold lawyer.
In the sub-text of this confused movie there's an ethical attitude
represented by Connery. Theft which involves risk-taking is much more
acceptable than "legal" large-scale stealing by some stockbrokers, big
business, banks, politicians and the like. The idea has some merit but is
unexploited. Unexploited too is the clever  twist behind the robbery, one
that involves Adam's professor.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sidney Lumet is one of the best of American directors.  His record
includes films such as TWELVE ANGRY MEN, FAIL-SAFE, DOG DAY AFTERNOON, and
NETWORK.  It would be hard to match for intensity films such as EQUUS or
what may be his most powerful film, THE PAWNBROKER.  But somehow something
went very wrong with FAMILY BUSINESS, a crazy-quilt patchwork that falls
apart at the seams.
     The first and most unlikely matching is of Sean Connery, Dustin
Hoffman, and Matthew Broderick as three generations of the same family.  At
least one review tells me the novel that the film was based on has everyone
being Irish-American.  If that is true, and even if not, it represents an
appalling sacrifice of credibility for box-office appeal.  The whole story
lies under the cloud of this initial foolishness.  Grandfather Jessie is
Irish, his son Vito is Sicilian, and his grandson Adam is Jewish.  It was
left ambiguous but Jessie's mother may have been Cherokee.  Jessie is a
career criminal who led his son Vito into crime.  Vito, however, eventually
broke with his father, married a Jewish woman, ran a meat provision company
that he not so secretly hated, and raised a Westinghouse scholar, Adam.
Adam, however, is rebelling from his father and wants to follow his
grandfather into crime, starting with the unusual robbery of a biological
research facility.
     While the film is marketed as having substantial comedy, nobody seems
to have told director Lumet.  FAMILT BUSINESS is a crime drama without very
much comedy.  Even then the actors are mismatched since neither Broderick
nor Connery is equipped or prepared to match the intensity of a Dustin
Hoffman performance.
     Somewhere Lumet seems to have lost control of the theme of the film.
The film becomes a defense of crime.  It is full of likable criminals who
hawk stolen goods at Irish wakes.  The nasty people in this film are people
who deal in real estate and lawyers, and big corporations, each of whom is
made to look worse than the others.  Lumet seems to be saying that Adam
should go into likable crime because legal professions are all immoral.
     In spite of Hoffman's performance--the only aspect that prevents this
film from getting a much lower rating--I would give this film a 0 on the -4
to +4 scale.  FAMILY BUSINESS is bad business.
