Title
Review for Jésus de Montréal (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
It was a final nominee for best foreign film of the year in the March of
1992 Oscar race, and it didn't win because Journey of Hope was a much
stronger film in the stomach wrenching stakes, where Jesus of Montreal tends
to get to a point where it doesn't know how to end, what begun as a very
nice piece of work by a dedicated Bible scholar and film maker.
This film is not for Christian fanatics who don't like literature and
history, as this film makes sure people know the difference between life and
theatre, and yet, it is this medium which sends this film flying.
It is a reminder, if not a tribute, to the late Joseph Papp, who used to do
Shakespeare around Manhattan, the same way,... by having the actors live it
all out through the whole day, in different locations.  Here, the actors
begin doing a passion play in a local park, at the bequest of a local
catholic church, and end up doing much more through out the city, until its
size becomes a threat to the church officials.  Even the devil is portrayed
as a gung ho agent, lawyer, accountant, who knows much can be made here.
Heck,
with a good promoter, have you any idea what the real Jesus could have done?
Scary premise.  It is a question Jesus of Montreal is asked by this guy.
The play starts out innocently enough, and the actors involved begin to get
into their roles seriously, as the material is indeed, very serious.  When
the play gets bigger than life, the church begins trying to close it,
despite the hypocrisies ( the priest sleeping with the leading actress
playing Mary Magdalene ,... clever,... ) the news media is now enjoying the
dramatic  endeavor and the lead actors strange, and powerful ability.  It
becomes the toast of town, to the chagrin of the church, which closes the
play on the spot, immediately after a very successful outing.  The lead
actor is serious. And
the priest is having anxiety problems.  The actor is killed by an accident
stemming from an over eager police force preventing the public to see the
play. A large pole ( looking like one that would have been used for a
cross ) falls on the actor killing him.  The priest has a heart attack.
They end up  in separate hospitals ( Jesus in a modern day hospital, and the
priest in a catholic hospital ) but the actors' heart ends up in the
priest's body to give him a second chance.  He gets up one day, saying, that
he had a dream  and that he wanted to do a play,... a passion play.  And the
film closes.
The premise is clear.  The church authorities refuse to accept history, as
they feel they wrote it, the way it should have been, with all the miracles
and events.  Scientific discoveries are finding that the writings are far
from the truth, specially now that the Dead Sea Scrolls are available, even
though church authorities have denied its originality, and proceeded to
denounce  those who continue studying it.  There were fourteen books found,
and only three have been translated, forty five years later.  FORTY FIVE
YEARS LATER.  The Vatican libraries have all this stuff buried in their
basement.  Why don't they fess up.  Even their own cardinals don't know what
all of what is down there.  It is a form of work like the Sean Connery film.
The acting is unusual, in that one finds in the early stages a satirical
tone towards theatre in general, with over acting, 'ham'ing, and lack of
general direction.  It ends up taking all those bits, and putting them in
the correct place, and making a heck of a film while at it.
If you are an open minded Christian, this film is for you.  And by the way,
the history does not deny Christianity.  It just validates it as a faith
based on truth and a strong spirit. Not the ideas of man, which was Jesus'
real fight.  The ideas of man meaning the written down doctrines, which had
nothing to do with the real spirit of man.  An idea, is not the same as a
real vision.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In today's Amerocentric world few events can take universal
importance and recognition without being connected to USA in
some obvious way. This is true now, and it was true even a
decade ago, before the end of Cold War and globalisation.
One of the examples is the way Christian communities in the
world reacted to films that were allegedly attacking the
fundaments of their faith. First of them, Martin Scorsese's
LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST got instant notoriety, was
publicly denounced, boycotted and banned in many countries.
However, global anti- Christian stigma branded on this film
could not be explained only by the controversy of the
material. At least part of the reason for such reaction lies
in the fact that it was major Hollywood production, starring
major American stars and being directed by one of the
best-known and most respectable American director. Only a
year later, Denys Arcand, the best known and most respected
filmmaker in neighbouring Canada, also dared to question
fundaments of Christianity in JESUS OF MONTREAL. This time
there wasn't any reaction or major controversy - Arcand not
only got away with this but also got himself prestigious
Cannes Film Award in the process. One of the reasons for
that is the fact that he shot film with cast of globally
unknown actors and with exclusively French dialogues. So,
this film couldn't have impact American or global mass
markets and thus bring unwanted attention and controversy.
This proved to be a mixed blessing for JESUS OF MONTREAL,
because fewer people are aware of something that should be
described as one of the finer films of the last century.
The plot of this film begins with Father Leclerc (played by
Gilles Pelletier), Catholic priest who has been staging
Passion Play in Montreal Catholic Sanctuary for almost four
decades. Knowing that the times have changed and that the
old-fashioned production needs refreshing, he hires young,
talented but relatively unknown actor Daniel Coulombe
(played by Lothaire Bluteau) to stage new, more modern
version. Coulombe takes this job very seriously - he hires
small troupe made out of mostly young or unemployed actors
and actresses, while taking the role of Jesus for himself.
In order to make his portrayal as realistic and convincing
as possible, he spends a lot of time in historical research
of Jesus and his times, and that research includes some new
and controversial findings that would find its place in the
new text of the play. When this modern, innovative and
effective production premiers in front of the audience, the
result is theatrical triumph, but Daniel and his colleagues
have little time to celebrate because Church authorities
aren't very enthusiastic about questionable content. When
Father Leclerc demands that some alterations be made in the
text, Daniel and his actors decide to defend their artistic
integrity but their stand would have tragic consequences.
Whenever a film deals with divisive issues, its makers tend
to take one side, and that, especially among less
experienced directors, can lead to films turning into cheap
propaganda. There are some critics who would undoubtedly
view JESUS OF MONTREAL as nothing more than atheist attack
on concept of religion, especially Christianity. Same as
Coulombe's play within the film, JESUS OF MONTREAL
approaches New Testament without awe expected by other
directors - Jesus is presented as down-to-Earth historical
character who became religious figure decades after his
death; his message and everything else got distorted through
centuries, and now serves only in order to maintain the
power of hypocritical, corrupt and oppressive Church.
However, although Arcand (who wrote screenplay for his film
and appears in small cameo as judge) presents arguments
against religion, he doesn't take clear atheistic stand -
even the opposing, religious, side can find arguments for
their cause. Reason for this near-heretical and yet very
balanced approach is in very clever and effective
film-making that blends serious drama with a lot of humour
and satire. The title itself might explain the secret of
this film - noble, mythical, ancient and religious figure of
Christ is contrasted with glittering and ultra-materialist
setting of Montreal, one of the most modern city of today's
world. Arcand manages not only to utilise this sharp
contrast but also to reconcile these opposing images with
each other, same as the opposing views they are supposed to
represent. This is achieved mainly by characters and events
in modern-day Montreal being equivalent of those in New
Testament; in some other instances all that would look
anachronistic or corny, but here Arcand manages not only to
pull it off but to create some moving scenes and
long-lasting images, and the seemingly anti-religious tone
of the film is compensated with humanist message that should
reconcile atheists and believers alike.
While Arcand as screenwriter filled this film with clever
allegories and multi-layered story elements and character,
Arcand as director filled this film with impressive sights
and sounds. Some of the images in the film are long-lasting
and they have set the tone of the film. One of the greatest
examples is the walking on the water which is performed
twice in the film - once as part of Coulombe's play, and on
another occasion it features half-naked actress Mireille
(played by Catherine Wilkening) shooting perfume commercial.
Arcand never misses opportunity to show majestic skyline and
architecture of Montreal, while, in the same time, he also
never fails to present hypocrisy and corruption that reigns
in that city. The musical soundtrack is also great and
features long range of sources - from Bulgarian folk,
through classics to modern rock'n'roll. The acting - which
should be the pivotal element of this film - is flawless.
Lothaire Bluteau looked perfect for the part of
Coulombe/Jesus and he justified all of Arcand's expectations
while portraying artist who hid strong convictions and
artistic passions bellow seemingly quiet exterior. Catherine
Wilkenning is also great in the role of Mireille, Coulombe's
colleague and love interest, same as Johanne-Marie Tremblay
as equivalent of Mary Magdalene. Gilles Pelletier is great
in the role of imperfect priest, while Yves Jacques is
equally effective as Satan-like attorney specialised in
milking show business clients.
All in all, whatever the audience might think or feel about
issues presented in JESUS OF MONTREAL, this film is one of
the excellent examples of superb filmmaking, which deserved
its awards and which continues to be great viewing and
thought-provoking experience.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov
