Title
Review for Recess: School's Out (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
Help me out with something that I just don't get.  Why would people pay 
movie ticket prices for films that are nothing more than another episode 
of a television cartoon series that they could stay at home and see for 
nothing?  I can understand this if the movie, and the series on which it 
is based, has some edge, as did RUGRATS IN PARIS.  But RECESS: SCHOOL'S 
OUT is about as generic a kids' movie as you're likely to find.  There's 
not much to laugh at and barely enough material even to keep the viewers 
awake.  It's harmless enough, but watching a blank wall is also pretty 
benign, so its lack of offensive material hardly serves as a 
recommendation.
RECESS: SCHOOL'S OUT is the type of movie that sets your mind to 
worrying about the strangest things.  I became concerned that a wind 
might hit the screen.  If it did, the characters, which are drawn to 
look as flat as paper dolls, would certainly all blow down, leaving us 
with no actors for the story.  Now that would undoubtedly upset the 
youngsters in the audience.  Actually the kids in our audience were so 
quiet I began to wonder if they had fallen asleep.
The completely forgettable story concerns a renegade ex-principal, Dr. 
Philliam Benedict (James Woods), who sets up a covert operation one 
summer at Third Street School.  The nefarious Dr. Benedict, with the 
help of a huge laser, has a plan to abolish summer vacation.  Theodore 
'T.J.' Detweiler (Andrew Lawrence) and his buddies are out to thwart the 
evil educator and save playtime for kids all over America.
Most of the script is as bland as Saturday cartoons, but a few lines are 
good ("Technically, after the completion of fourth grade, we are 
pre-young adults." and "I got to warn you.  I'm a black belt in 
origami.").
There is one saving grace for adults: the music -- high-energy, classic 
rock tunes, including "Born To Be Wild," "Dancing In The Street," "Wipe 
Out," "One" and "Let The Sunshine In."  It's about the only thing that 
will keep most of them awake.  Buy the CD.  Skip the movie.  If your 
kids want to see RECESS, let them watch it on television.
RECESS: SCHOOL'S OUT runs 1:24.  It is rated G and has nothing to offend 
anyone of any age.
My son Jeffrey, almost 12, gave the movie ** 1/2.  He thought the plot 
and characters needed improvement.  His buddy Maxim, age 12, gave it **, 
saying that he liked the fighting part the best.  Both of them said that 
they really liked the soundtrack but didn't like the hippie period 
flashback.  (I especially liked that scene, but I was at Berkeley in the 
60s so it brought back good memories.)
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
When films that take place during a specific period of time aren't released
theatrically during that same specific period of time, it's usually a bad
sign.  You know, like a movie about Mardi Gras coming out in September.  Or
a film about a dysfunctional family's Thanksgiving dinner that bows in May.
Or Reindeer Games.  The usual scenario is that the finished film sucks, so
release plans are scrapped, expectations are lowered and fingers are crossed
that nobody will notice anything is afoul.
Even though Disney's new animated film, Recess: School's Out, is set during
summer vacation (and being released in February), there still seemed to be
some potential for quality.  The film is based on a (supposedly) popular
Saturday morning cartoon, and its crew reads like a who's who of smart
animated comedies (director Chuck Sheetz has worked on The Simpsons and King
of the Hill, while writers Joe Ansolabehere, Jonathan Greenberg and Paul
Germain have served time on shows like Daria, Rugrats and Duckman).  And
there's a slew of interesting voice talent on board as well.  In theory,
Recess looked promising.
In practice, it's a whole different story.  Recess is as weak as an
asthmatic second-grader with glasses, a cowlick and a retainer, and it packs
the comedic punch of a devastating Third World earthquake.  The film opens
on the last day of classes at the 3rd Street School, where children and
teachers alike are celebrating their impending freedom.  We're introduced to
the school's principal, Vance Prickly (Dabney Coleman); a mean, old teacher
with sharp, kid-eating teeth (April Winchell); and, most importantly,
Recess' six main characters, who make up the typical cross-section of
Anytown, USA.
There's the fat kid (he's going to opera camp - Robert Goulet provides his
singing voice), the black kid (he's headed for baseball camp), the nerdy kid
(space camp) and the runty kid (military camp).  And then there's the
wrestling-camp-bound "other" kid (you know the one - can't tell if it's a
boy or a girl, Asian or Latino, and it wears a hat like Dumb Donald on Fat
Albert).  T.J. (Andy Lawrence), Recess' cool kid, isn't going away to camp
and, in his boredom, stumbles on a completely ludicrous adventure.
It seems that an evil former principal (James Woods), hell-bent on
instituting a worldwide ban on summer vacation, has taken over the school
and plans to knock the moon out of orbit with a giant laser beam.  If that
sentence made sense to you, perhaps your medication is wearing off.  T.J.,
with the help of his hot older sister (Melissa Joan Hart), smuggles his
friends from their various camps to do battle with the maniacal villain.
Will they be able to save the day?  I've got a feeling things will probably
work out, and the madcap finale will somehow involve the unique talent of
each of the six kids.
In what appears to be an attempt to keep bored parents interested, Recess is
packed full of songs from the '60s (including Goulet's bizarre rendition of
The Lemon Pipers' "Green Tambourine"), but, strangely enough, doesn't
include the Alice Cooper standard that shares the same name as the film.
The animation is shoddy, save the cool opening shot of the town that
descends onto the 3rd Street School playground.  Most of the celebrity guest
voices are over before you know what hit you, which will likely cause a lot
of head-scratching when the closing credits finally (and mercifully) begin
to roll. I totally missed people like Diedrich Bader, Dan Castellaneta,
Andrea Martin, Nick Turturro and about ten others.  What's the point of
getting (semi) famous talent to provide voices if nobody is going to notice?
Come to think of it, what's the point, period?

Author
Michael Dequina
        At one point in this film, an adult character says something
along the lines of, "Even grown-ups know the value of recess." 
Similarly, the appeal of _Recess:_School's_Out_, a big-screen extension
of the popular TV cartoon series, won't be lost on the older viewers in
the audience.  Make no mistake--this is a film made for the kiddies, and
it's the young 'uns who will take the most from the animated antics.  But
there's enough likable qualities displayed here to keep the parents
interested though not entirely bowled over.
        Part of the problem is the film's no-frills animation style, that
makes the film look exactly like what it is: a big-screen blowup of a
Saturday morning cartoon.  Even the _Rugrats_ films exhibited some
greater ambition with its visuals, however slight.  Here, all we get are
a couple of too-obviously computer-generated overhead shots, one for the
very beginning, and one for the very end.  Making matters worse is the
fact that the CG shots hardly feel of a piece with the traditionally
drawn bulk of the film.
        This complaint is of little consequence to the target audience,
who will certainly eat up this amusing kids' fantasy.  As the title
suggests, school is out, and mischievous T.J. Detweiler (voiced by Andy
Lawrence) is looking forward to a summer of fun with friends Gus
(Courtland Mead), Gretchen (Ashley Johnson), Vince (Rickey D'Shon
Collins), Mikey (Jason Davis), and Spinelli (Pamela Segall).  However,
that doesn't appear it will be the case, for he is the only one of the
gang not going to a special camp for the summer.  But when he stumbles
upon an evil plot involving what appears to be a large laser cannon (!)
being cooked up within the closed walls of Third Street Elementary, T.J.
must break out his friends to set things right.
        The kid-aimed story is interesting and fast-paced enough to keep
the adults somewhat amused, but there are also touches in
_Recess:_School's_Out_ blatantly designed to  engage the adults: an
extended flashback to the late-'60s-set early careers of Third Street
Principal Prickly (Dabney Coleman) and the main bad guy, a former
secretary of education (James Woods); and an especially effective running
gag involving Mikey's impressively developed singing voice (provided by
Robert Goulet).  But when it all comes down to it, the comedic fights
(some involving ninjas) and slapsticky chases that make up most of
_Recess:_School's_Out_ were meant for viewers that are in the same age
range as the main characters, and unless you have kids, there's nothing
here that's compelling enough to merit buying a ticket.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "RECESS: SCHOOL'S OUT" (Walt Disney Pictures)
             At "Preview 2001 and Beyond," last week in Manhattan, Disney made it clear that they wanted to "own" President's Day weekend - and this G-rated animated feature is this year's attempt. Based on the popular Disney Channel cartoon, the story begins at the start of summer when a lonely fourth-grader named T.J. Detweiler (voiced by Andy Lawrence) is left behind to pedal his bike alone as his friends go off to camp. But his life suddenly has purpose when he learns that "a rogue teacher" (James Woods) at the Third Street School plans to use a laser-like beam to alter the Earth's orbit and create a permanent winter, thereby eliminating summer vacation entirely. This calls for action! Quickly, T.J. hatches a plan that includes a S.W.A.T. team of pint-sized warriors, armed with Silly String, to battle this villainous former U.S. Secretary of Education who was dismissed for trying to abolish the June, July, August recess in order to raise grade scores. (This character is ob!
viously based on real-life former Education Secretary William J. Bennett and his highly-touted "Book of Virtues.") The sympathetic adult figure is Principal Prickley (Dabney Coleman) who has a history of conflict with the smarmy bad guy and still keeps a '60s peace symbol hidden in his desk. The animation is of the flat TV-cartoon variety, and the soundtrack includes songs by Steppenwolf, Three Dog Night and the Strawberry Alarm Clock.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Recess: School's Out" is a kid-friendly 5 - and don't miss the psychedelic homage to "Yellow Submarine," called "Green Tambourine," sung by Robert Goulet over the closing credits.
