Title
Review for Teenage Bonnie and Klepto Clyde (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Shepphird.
Cast: Scott Wolf, Maureen Flannigan, Bentley Mitchum, Don Novello, Tom 
Bower.
1993 - 90 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, sex, and nudity).
Reviewed November 16, 1998.
"Teenage Bonnie and Klepto Clyde," is an obvious take-off of the 
original, "Bonnie and Clyde," story, about a pair of lovers who went on 
a crime spree, but it is set in modern-day times and involves two 
teenagers.
Clyde (Scott Wolf) is a dull, bored high school student until the night 
Bonnie (Maureen Flannigan) walks into his life while he is working at a 
fast food restaurant. The strange thing is, he is not captured by her 
beauty, but by the fact that he catches her stealing his lighter that he 
allowed her to use to light a cigarette. Clyde persues her constantly 
until she finally gives in, learns that he is also a kleptomaniac, and 
in order to escape their unhappy family lives, decide to go on a crime 
spree, first by stealing various items at small stores. As their 
relationship heats up, they realize that they are running out of money, 
and so they begin to plan a bank robbery.
The arc that, "Teenage Bonnie and Klepto Clyde," takes is more or less 
predictable, and we know from the start that the story is inevitably 
heading for a tragic conclusion. But don't all stories about forbidden 
lovers end in tragedy? 
Watching the film, it strangely reminded me of something that director 
Gregg Araki (1995's "The Doom Generation," and 1997's "Nowhere") might 
have made, as it has many of the same elements: sex between teenagers, 
violence, occasionally exaggerated gore, crime, and an offbeat sense of 
humor. Ultimately, John Shepphird is not as distinctive a director as 
Araki, and the characters and the story did not enthrall me as much as I 
would have liked. While an Araki film always has an air of mystery or 
unpredictableness, "Teenage Bonnie and Klepto Clyde," feels more 
conventional.
The performances by Scott Wolf (currently on TV's "Party of Five") and 
Maureen Flannigan are perfectly realized, if anything. Wolf succesfully 
projects the feeling of vulnerability that is needed for his 
inexperienced character, and is matched wonderfully with newcomer 
Flannigan, as the wealthier, but more streetwise one. Since it is these 
two characters who are in almost every scene, the film is helped 
immeasurably by their charismatic presence, so much so that it was 
almost enough for me to be won over on my overall opinion of the film. 
The happenings around the characters, however, have been done so many 
times before that I really did not see any point for the film to even be 
made. The screenplay, although occasionally entertaining, needed more of 
a focus for it to be as effective as the climax wanted it to be. 
"Teenage Bonnie and Klepto Clyde," is not a bad film, nor is it a boring 
one. It is consistently interesting, to be sure, and is brought to life 
solely due to the two main actors, but when all is said and done, there 
is simply not enough substance left for the film to be partcularly 
worthwhile.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
