Title
Review for Equinox (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
     Two twins, separated at birth, grow into adulthood never knowing
each other, and living lives that evolve along very different paths.
Freddy Ace (Matthew Modine) is a small-time gangster, a cold-hearted
hit man and driver for local Mob boss Paris (Fred Ward).  Freddy's
whole goal is getting ahead, and he has his eyes set on the top
position.  In contrast, Henry Petosa (also Modine) has almost no
ambition whatsoever.  He's a shy, reclusive auto mechanic who has
trouble relating to others, especially members of the opposite sex.
     I have no idea whether EQUINOX is a cleverly-devised satire on
these kinds of "identity movies," or whether it's a bad melodramatic
addition to the genre.  This ambiguity in itself is not a good sign,
since if the director was going for the parody, he should have done
something to tip off the viewers.  Instead, while we get a few hints
that this might be the case, there are at least as many pointing to the
other alternative.
     The characters are all weird.  Not "weird" in a delightful, quirky
sense, but in a way that feels annoying.  There's no one to relate to,
and writer/director Alan Rudolph doesn't attempt to make any of his
principals accessible to the audience.  Freddy is cold-blooded and
aloof, a man who feels like God after committing a murder.  Henry is
emotionally-crippled, unable to relate in normal social situations.
His on-again, off-again girlfriend Beverly (Lara Flynn Boyle) is just
as fragile.  She's frightened of sex and constantly refers to herself
in the third person.  The rest of the cast populating this movie is no
more healthy.
     Except in a few places where Rudolph makes it clear that he's
poking fun at something, the dialogue is atrocious.  Most of the lines
spoken by Henry sound scripted (rather than natural), and Freddy is
constantly spitting out hard-boiled dialogue from a grade B detective
flick.  There are times when it's almost painful to listen to these
people speak.
     The acting is uniformly unimpressive--ranging from pedestrian to
downright bad.  Matthew Modine, around whom the entire film revolves,
does not do a good job.  In pictures like GROSS ANATOMY and WIND, where
he's required to play an annoyingly cocky young man, he does a
reasonably convincing job.  Here, however, he overacts.  He's better as
Freddy than Henry, but neither role is a masterpiece of subtlety, and
it's clear that his grasp of either character is limited.
     Lara Flynn Boyle isn't particularly impressive either.  It seems
that she, like Modine, felt a need to go over-the-top to show the
emotional fragility of Beverly.  There are a few instances when she's
on-target, but those are the exception rather than the rule.  When she
and Modine are together, it's sometimes like a contest to see who can
do the worst job.
     As Henry's neighbor Rosie the prostitute, Marisa Tomei uses her
characteristically energetic style to overcome dramatic lapses in her
performance.  Her scenes (even though most of them include Modine) are
the high points of this film.  Contrast what she does to the hysteria
of Lori Singer, whose half-dozen appearances as Freddy's wife cause
winces.
     A pair of normally-reliable actors, Fred Ward and M. Emmett Walsh,
produce characters with flatter personalities than what they're capable
of, which opens up the question of how responsible the director is for
the work of those acting in EQUINOX.  Ward at least avoids embarrassing
himself.  Not so for Walsh, who is hideous as he goes way
over-the-top.
     It's too bad that EQUINOX is so riddled with problems, because
there's a lot of soil here ripe for tilling.  While there's nothing new
in the premise of twins with radically different personalities, this
has a unique angle that, if produced more coherently, could have been
the foundation for a genuinely worthwhile movie.  Even given all the
problems of EQUINOX, there's something in the concept that encourages
the viewer to stick with it, if for no other reason than to see what
happens if and when the twins finally meet.
     Actually, Henry's life alone is worthy of a movie.  Freddy isn't a
very interesting character, and there are few scenes with him that
provoke more than a passing interest, but Henry has a fascinating
life.  His relationship with Rosie and her baby is sadly
underdeveloped.  More time is spent on his affair with Beverly, but
there's still a lot left unexplored.  A few more scenes with these two
might have helped the movie immensely.
     EQUINOX's basic storyline is interesting enough to have held my
interest for the one-hundred plus minutes.  However, from the
beginning, I was aware of how saturated with problems the film's
execution is.  Beyond the initial draft of the plot skeleton, nothing
appears to have been done right.  Casting is dubious, scriptwriting
sophomoric, and direction contributing to, rather than alleviating,
faults.
     If the viewer chooses to look at EQUINOX as a straight spoof, the
movie still doesn't work, although many of the worst scenes take on a
less embarrassing tone.  Given that perception, however, there's too
much that no longer makes sense, such as why there are so many dry,
straight scenes, including an ending that's designed to deliver a
"powerful" message.  This is a hard film to decipher, and one that's
not really worth the effort.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David N. Butterworth
     In EQUINOX, the new film from chic director Alan Rudolph, Modine
models two different styles--a layered, flowing number in his role as
timid auto mechanic Henry Petosa and a brushed back, heavily-moussed
job as bad penny Freddy Ace.
     Separated at birth, Modine's twin brothers Henry and Freddy live
and work in the same fictional city, unaware of each other's
existence--and each other's hairstyle choices.
     But this is not your typical Hollywood production.  EQUINOX
extends the tradition of many of Rudolph's previous films (TROUBLE IN
MIND, CHOOSE ME, THE MODERNS, etc.), with highly-stylized, atmospheric
visuals; a refreshing sense of humor; and occasional excursions into
the surreal.  It successfully marries themes of identity and destiny in
a fantasy dressed as reality; it's a straight-faced fable that's also
slightly twisted.
     Of course, no Rudolph project would be complete without a diverse
cast of quirky, offbeat characters.
     Henry is a quiet, nerdy recluse who holes himself up in his poky
apartment, watching self-defense TV shows and eating junk food.  When
the local kids bully him and steal his groceries, he seems pleased to
escape with anything--even if it's only a videotape and tin of talcum
powder.  As Henry himself points out, his life seems to be taking place
without him in it.  He's afraid of the real world, afraid to speak to
his girlfriend, Beverly (Lara Flynn Boyle), with whom he's hopelessly
in love.
     Beverly is similarly shy, mousy, and insecure.  She reads Emily
Dickenson aloud to herself, dances with pillows, and takes occasional
slugs of cooking sherry.  It's no coincidence that she lives in an
apartment building called "The Sheltering Arms"--her character is so
fragile that anything firmer than a kiss seems likely to break her into
a thousand tiny pieces.  When Henry forces her to make a decision, she
responds uncertainly "You can't do this to me, Henry.  Can you?"
     By contrast, Freddy Ace is a tough, heartless thug, a driver for a
protection racket headed by crime boss Mr. Paris (Fred Ward).
Ironically, Freddy has a home life with a wife and two kids (although
his idea of a bedtime story is Field Marshall Rommel's biography!).
His ditzy blonde wife Sharon (played by Lori Singer) fawns all over
him, constantly referring to him as "The Best."  "That's very
superficial, Sharon," Freddy comments dryly, "...but true."  Their
scenes together are punctuated by Rudolph's trademark snappy dialogue.
     Supporting characters are equally well developed.  Beverly's
brother and Henry's best friend Russell (Kevin J. O'Connor in an
energetically nervous performance) is obsessed with a waitress in a
local restaurant.  Henry's father Pete (played by the versatile
character actor M. Emmett Walsh) is an aging garage owner, full of
vaudeville shtick and nonsense.  And Henry's neighbor Rosie (Oscar
winner Marisa Tomei), a prostitute with a kid in tow, is also
charmingly flamboyant.
     While the brothers' separate-but-linked stories unfold, the
mysteries of their origins are gradually revealed through the
investigations of an aspiring writer, played by Tyra Ferrell (who can
currently be seen upstaging Janet Jackson in POETIC JUSTICE).  This
exposition, involving grand romance and a blind trust fund, is more
mainstream than one might expect from Rudolph, and therefore less
interesting--Ferrell's Sonya Kirk is well played but she's undoubtedly
the straightest character in the film.
     Matthew Modine's skill at bringing two diametrically opposed
characters to life is commendable.  He's not your typical actor playing
two roles aided by deliberate costume changes, makeup, or vocal
manipulations.  Henry and Freddy are two complete personalities, one
vulnerable, one hardened, both evoking empathy.  Reverse sides of the
same coin.  When light and dark come together and are equal (the film's
title defined), Henry is finally given the opportunity to confront
himself.
     After two disappointing films (LOVE AT LARGE and the
production-troubled MORTAL THOUGHTS), Alan Rudolph has reestablished
himself as a director with a flair for writing moody, colorful
characters into inventive situations.  EQUINOX should not only satisfy
his fans, but garner him some new ones.


Author
Dragan Antulov
Stories about identical twins separated at birth provide
excellent comedy material for millennia. However, when it
comes to drama or similar material of serious nature,
results are usually much worse. One of such examples is
EQUINOX, 1992 drama directed by Alan Rudolph.
Two twins (played by Matthew Modine in dual role) are Freddy
Ace, hit man and enforcer working for the mob boss Mr. Paris
(played by Fred Ward), and Tony Petosa, humble car mechanic
who works in the garage by his adopted father Pete (played
by M. Emmet Walsh). Two twins don't know about each other
and live completely different lives - Freddy is arrogant
gangster with rich apartment and trophy wife Sharon (played
by Lori Singer) who dreams about becoming boss, while shy
Tony has problems in the relationship with his girlfriend
Beverly Frank (played by Lara Flynn Boyle). Connection
between the two is discovered by morgue attendant and
wannabe writer Sonya Kirk (played by Tyra Farrell) who is
convinced that the twins are actually illegitimate children
of European aristocrat and set to inherit great fortune.
While majority of the filmmakers tends to treat audience
like idiots, Alan Rudolph goes to the other extreme. At
least this is the case in this film with plot and characters
understandable only to people with superhuman intelligence
or those ready to spend entire lifetime trying to decipher
its meaning. EQUINOX features plenty of bizarre characters,
some interesting scenes and situations, but only few of them
are actually connected to each other or make any sense. This
problem is alleviated by bad acting, especially by Matthew
Modine whose uninspired performance creates a lot of
confusion in the beginning, since the audience isn't aware
that he actually plays two different characters. Other
characters are either not necessary or not fleshed out, and
because of that EQUINOX is hardly anything else than
overpretentious "artsy" failure of movie.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
EQUINOX (director/writer: Alan Rudolph; cinematographer: Elliot Davis;
cast: Matthew Modine (Freddy Ace/Henry Petosa), Lara Flynn Boyle
(Beverly), Fred Ward (Paris), Tyra Ferrell (Sonya Kirk), Marisa Tomei
(Rosie), Lori Singer (Sharon Ace), M. Emmett Walsh (Pete Petosa), Kevin
J. O'Connor (Russell), Tate Donovan (Richie),Vincent Curto (gangster),
Robert Gould (Mel), Matthew Dudley (pimp), 1992)
Alan (TROUBLE IN MIND, CHOOSE ME, MODERNS) Rudolph's  off-beat film has
the look and feel of bad melodrama, using over-exaggerated action
sequences to spin a convoluted yarn (Maybe a parody) about twins, born
to a ballerina who had an affair with a European aristocrat and is
forced into giving them up for adoption when he wants no part of her.
They are separated at birth, taking different paths in life: Henry
Petosa (Matthew Modine) grows up to be a shy, nerdy, fearful, and
unambitious garage mechanic in his adoptive (he doesn't know that he's
adopted) father's (M. Emmett Walsh) garage, who spends his spare time
watching self-defense programs on TV and pining away for his best friend
Russell's (nervously played by Kevin J. O'Connor) emotionally insecure
sister, Beverly (Lara Flynn Boyle), who reads Emily Dickenson aloud to
herself. He modestly lives in a tenement that happens to be in a bad
neighborhood. The brother he doesn't know exists, is Freddy Ace, also
played by Modine, who is a small-time hood, ambitiously working himself
up the ladder of the protection racket run by a vicious hood, Mr. Paris
(Fred Ward), doing the driving and also doing a cold-blooded hit job for
the boss. He is always seen with a perfectly moussed-hairstyle, and is
married to a beautiful but shallow woman (Lori Singer), having two
children and living in a luxurious apartment; all these things are
status symbols, which show that he has come a long way from the
orphanage he was raised in.
An old bag lady, with a tattoo on her arm, saying "To my dearest
Helena," dies on the fictional city streets clutching a letter stating
that she is the mother of twins and that the father of the children left
$200,000 (it is now worth 4 million dollars) for them in a Swiss trust
fund that can only be accessed by the password "equinox." The title of
the film, as defined, will refer to the equality of the light and dark
sides during an equinox. This symbolizes the qualities the twins must
confront in their nature, which only Henry is able to do.
The letter is found by an ambitious hospital worker, Sonya Kirk
(uninterestingly played by Tyra), who aspires to be a writer and thinks
this will make a great story. She weaves this ambiguous tale or spoof,
or whatever it is, together. As all the quirky characters will somehow
fit into the story and by the end of the film, I guess, there is
supposed to be some hidden message as Henry stands alone, looking down
at the tremendous depths of the Grand Canyon.
There was also a ridiculous scene with a hooker named Rosie (Tomei), who
lives in Henry's tenement and is being abused by her pimp (Dudley). She
will service Henry as a payment for watching her baby. There was one
stupid line she said to him that made me laugh primarily because it was
so stupid, "You're not going to catch nothing from me but your breath."
In fact, the only enjoyment I derived from all the banal dialogue and
its embarrassing story (if it wasn't a parody, then it's a horrible
script, and if it is a parody, it doesn't work, the story is too
ambiguous) was the B- movie one-liners that kept coming throughout the
film. Since that's the only thing I liked about this film, I'll drop a
few of them on you: Freddy to another gangster, "Never miss a good
chance to shut up." One gangster talking to another, "I was so popular
in high school, everybody hated me." I'll mention two quotes Mr. Petosa
gives us from his vaudeville shtick he seemed to be doing for his
characterization, "If money didn't grow on trees, how come banks have so
many branches?" and "Chaste makes waste." Henry tritely says, "My whole
life seems to be taking place without me in it." Freddy, when asked if
he is happy, replies, "I'd be a lot happier with a million bucks and a
full tank of gas." Paris says to Freddy after he knocks off their
associate, Richie (Tate), "Richie had no brains, and he was stupid."
Beverly to Henry, which is the most pertinent line in the film, banal as
it is, "Your whole life is searching for one thing, and all that other
stuff just fades away."
I don't know what the story is supposed to mean; maybe its just a
search-for-identity kind of film; maybe its an updated fairytale about
"The Prince and the Pauper," as one critic suggests. But I found it to
be muddled, unfunny, and the acting is so lame, especially Matthew
Modine's overacting, that it is almost unbearable to watch. But I got a
kick out of those stupid one-liners from all the zanies trying so hard
to be to be zany, and there was something intangible about the film that
made you keep watching it, hoping there was something there that you
missed seeing. So, at least, it's an original film; a passable one, at
that, with a lot of possibility to it; and, it is done in the bizarre
auteur style this filmmaker likes to operate in.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
