Title
Review for Tin Cup (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TIN CUP (1996) ** 1/2  Directed by Ron Shelton. Written by John Norville 
and Shelton. Photography, Russell Boyd. Editing,  Paul Seydor, Kimberly 
Ray. Production design, James Bissell. Music, William Ross. Produced by 
Gary Foster, Ron Shelton.  Cast: Kevin Costner (Roy "Tin Cup" McAvoy ), 
Rene Russo (Dr. Molly Griswold), Cheech Marin (Romeo ), Don Johnson 
(David Simms), Linda Hart (Doreen), Dennis Bickley (Earl) et al. A 
Warners release. 135 min. Rated R (language). 
Readers who make a beeline for the ratings of reviews, please note that 
from a filmic point of view "Tin Cup" rates two stars but for golf 
enthusiasts three. Average: two-and-a-half.
Writer-director Ron Shelton's credentials are first-rate. He is a former 
minor league baseball player who knows his sports and their milieu.  He 
brings to his sports movies technical interest, human interest, humor and 
very good characterizations. He made  "Bull Durham" (with Costner), 
"White Men Can't Jump," "Blue Chips," the underrated "Cobb,"  the wildly 
amusing "The Best of Times,"(script) as well as two excellent but also 
somewhat underrated political films :"Under Fire" (writer, second unit 
director) and "Blaze."
"Tin Cup" is about  Roy "Tin Cup" McAvoy (Costner), the golf pro of a 
driving range in Salome, in West Texas. To call the place seedy, shabby 
or threadbare would be a compliment. Roy, a former golf champion at the 
University of Houston, has fallen into bad times because of his eccentric 
and extreme risk-taking in golf. Now he lives at the range in a decrepit 
Winnebago --outside of which is a child's plastic pool called "The Spa"--
with his friend-mentor-caddy Romeo (Cheech Marin). Roy is surrounded by a 
small coterie of boozing good ole' boys, whose own means of support are 
by and large mysterious.
It's a colorful, Tobacco Road-like setup, but this overlong movie's 
sluggish tempo did make me look at my watch more than once. Another debit 
is that  excessive picturesqueness strains credibility, especially as Roy 
seems to be entirely client-less. Who pays for the gas, beer and 
doughnuts? Until, that is, a Junoesque blonde shows up.  She is Molly 
Griswold (ex-supermodel Rene Russo), no, change this to Doctor Griswold, 
as Molly holds a degree in psycho-something. By coincidence, she's the 
new shrink in Selena. As things develop, especially in a later scene (one 
of the film's best) when she blurts out her own imperfections, she's a 
lousy shrink. By comparison, Ann Landers deserves a Pulitzer Prize in 
counseling.
Molly wants instruction to impress her boyfriend David Simms (Johnson), a 
rising-star pro golfer. By coincidence, David was Roy's colleague and 
competitor at the University of Houston, and apparently a man unburdened 
by ethics. By coincidence, David shows up at the range. Slick and 
self-possessed, he briefly reminisces to Roy about the school and the 
days "where we won all them titles together." The University must have 
done more good to David's golf than to his grammar.
He offers a job to Roy who thinks is as a player but  turns out to be  as 
a caddy. Thereby hang complications and escalations  leading to Roy 
playing in the U.S. Open. They also lead to the inevitable Roy-Molly 
affair, a weak side of the movie. The initial rapprochement is too cute 
and, like much else in the film, exaggerated. The contrast between 
unkempt Roy and perfectly groomed Molly in blindingly virginal white -- 
the stuff Hollywood movies love-- is all the more unlikely since even 
being way downwind from Roy must be an experience in redolence.
On the other hand, on a 1 to 10 scale of expressivity, Costner rates a 5,  
Russo a 2, so they are pretty well matched. They are also matched in age 
(both over 40), in brains (simplistic), in accents (vague). The 
intonations are certainly not Texan. (Both actors and the director are 
South Californians). Molly and Roy are, however, preciously mismatched in 
verbal expression. She is a no-nonsense pragmatist. He is a philosopher 
and mystic who delivers poetic paeans that sound like "Zen and the Art of 
Golfing."
"Tin Cup" is not free from cliches, but the culmination is a good, 
non-Hollywoodian twist. Predictably, it is at the U.S. Open where the big 
duel between Roy and David takes place. The Open is beautifully 
reproduced, edited and photographed, a dead ringer of the real thing, 
including genuine players and network sportscasters. 
There are a few surprises, yet on the whole the Roy-David contrast is 
unconvincing. Roy is a cuckoo idealist, while David, co-opted by society, 
plays not only the game of golf but The Game. But while supposed to be a 
sneaky meanie, he is not unlikable. Around mid-film, Roy challenges 
David, bets his old Cadillac convertible (Caddies for Caddies?), loses. 
Yet  within hours Molly delivers the chariot to Roy saying that David 
(who drives his own fancy ragtop) "has no use for it." It would seem that 
a true villain would love to deprive Roy of his wheels. 
Director Shelton can be very good with supporting characters. First prize 
here goes to Cheech Marin in an original, funny-warm role, cleverly 
exploited. Second prize to Linda Hart as a tough-but-sweet owner of the 
golf range, owner-performer of a thriving strip-joint and ex-amour of 
Roy's. No role however, major or minor, is really developed.
Rene Russo is a tentatively original creation. She is also a problem for 
my spell-checker. It insists that her given name should be "Renee," since 
with just one "e" it is a man's name. True, there is something masculine 
about her face as the camera annoyingly persists in showing it in 
close-up, which stresses a certain lack of charisma. The excess of 
adoring Costner close-ups compounds the trouble. So the best way to watch 
"Tin Cup" is not as a sports-plus-love story, but as a plain sports movie 
with some novelties.

Author
Michael Redman
Kevin Costner and director Ron Shelton have achieved the impossible.
Although I have put in a bit of time chasing and losing the little white
ball, neither I nor any other inhabitant of this planet have ever
suggested that _observing_ golf is the slightest bit interesting.
Costner and Shelton have made the game of golf watchable...well, at
least one hole is.
Roy McAvoy (Costner) operates a run-down driving range in Salome, Texas
while dodging bill collectors. He spends his days drinking and hanging
out with his cronies as he shares a trashed-out Winnebago-turned-home
with buddy Romeo (Cheech Marin). Everything fell apart for McAvoy a few
years back when he went for the spectacular shot rather than the safe
win and lost the opportunity to become a big time golf pro. Nowadays
he's the Zen golf poet in the dusty backwaters of what might have been.
It's all comfortably downhill for the aging McAvoy.  Until, that is, the
new lady psychologist Molly Griswold (Rene Russo) drops by the range for
golf lessons. Our resident swing master falls for her, vowing to give up
strippers and biker chicks. She's not interested because she has a
boyfriend. Said boyfriend turns out to be McAvoy's lifetime golf rival
Dave Simms (Don Johnson).
In order to impress the new babe in town and love of his life, McAvoy
decides to qualify for and win the US Open. From then on, it's a race
between him and Simms for the golf championship and the heart of the
beautiful doctor.
Most of the film is predictable. You know who Griswold is going to end
up with. You know who is the better golfer. You know just about
everything that is going to happen. The ending is somewhat of surprise,
but nothing totally unexpected.
The scenes with Costner and Russo don't ring true. He does his best down
and out sports figure with a heart. She comes across as a ditzy Diane
Keaton, but not as charming. Their chemistry needs a catalyst that never
appears.
On the other hand, the Costner and Marin relationship is the best thing
in the film. Marin's Romeo is thankfully severely underplayed from what
you might expect from a survivor of Cheech & Chong craziness. The two
pals yell and scream at each other, but always return to their
friendship. Romeo might have been a little off target when he gets
McAvoy drunk the night before an important golf meet as a part of his
training, but he makes up for it later.
Like the best sports films, this is not about golf, but about the people
that surround the game. Very little in the plot department, although the
characters and their banter make it adequately entertaining.
[This review appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
9/3/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kevin Costner, Rene Russo, Cheech Marin, Don Johnson, Linda Hart, 
      Dennis Burkley
Director: Ron Shelton
Producers: Gary Foster and David Lester
Screenplay: John Norville and Ron Shelton
Cinematography: Russell Boyd
Music: William Ross
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Saying that TIN CUP may be the best-ever "golf motion picture" 
isn't exactly high praise, considering the competition (CADDYSHACK, 
HAPPY GILMORE), but it's true nonetheless.  In fact, as sports movies go 
(regardless of the sport), this one turns in a respectable showing, 
injecting some intelligence and maturity into a story that easily could 
have succumbed to a flood of "struggling underdog" cliches.  That's not 
to say that elements of the formula aren't here, but they rarely 
threaten to overwhelm TIN CUP's better aspects.
     When it comes to making sports movies, no one has shown more 
aptitude than Ron Shelton, whose writing and directing credits include 
films about baseball (BULL DURHAM, COBB), basketball (BLUE CHIPS, WHITE 
MEN CAN'T JUMP), football (THE BEST OF TIMES), boxing (THE GREAT WHITE 
HYPE), and now golf.  Shelton has structured TIN CUP a little like BULL 
DURHAM, interweaving an adult romance with the story of a man struggling 
to find self-respect through the sport he loves.  However, while 
romantic subplots are frequently used as side dishes for motion picture 
athletic contests, Shelton keeps the two disparate elements of his movie 
on equal footing, which lends a sense of balance to the finished 
product.
     One of the most laudable characteristics of TIN CUP is that the 
script never condescends to either of the main characters.  These aren't 
two mismatched caricatures engaging in a series of familiar romantic 
moves.  Crisp, thoughtful dialogue replaces the empty banter we've 
become accustomed to in screen love stories.  There's a believability 
and depth to both Kevin Costner's Roy "Tin Cup" McAvoy and Rene Russo's 
Molly Griswold, and the understated manner in which they relate to each 
other is a welcome change-of-pace during this season of loud, 
ostentatious explosions.  And, while the chemistry between Costner and 
Russo doesn't sizzle, they work together in a comfortable, relaxed 
manner.  As Roy puts it, they fit like a pair of old shoes.
     The story centers around the title character, an aging club pro who 
lives in a Winnebago in the lonely west Texas town of Salome.  He spends 
his day in the company of his best friend, Romeo (Cheech Marin), working 
for $7 an hour at a deserted driving range.  Once upon a time, Roy had a 
bright golfing future ahead of him, but he blew his cool on the links, 
went for the trick shot instead of the smart one, and failed to qualify 
for the tour.  Since then, he has been hiding out in obscurity, picking 
up cash where he can, and watching bitterly as his old college partner, 
Dave Simms (Don Johnson), "a rich, happy, soulless" man, rises through 
the PGA ranks.  
     One day, Roy's marginal existence is turned upside down by the 
arrival of a woman psychologist named Molly Griswold.  She wants to take 
golf lessons to impress her boyfriend.  To the men of Salome, the 
concept of a female doctor is a revelation, and, in one of the film's 
more slyly amusing scenes, they watch eagerly as Roy teaches her the 
basics of hitting a golf ball, wondering how "such a pretty girl can 
have such an ugly swing."  It doesn't take long for Roy to fall in love 
with Molly, so it comes as a blow when she reveals that her boyfriend is 
none other than Dave Simms.  Roy then decides that a grand gesture is 
needed to win her -- something like qualifying for the U.S. Open and 
beating Dave in front of a national TV audience.
     Although this may sound like a very familiar, traditional sports 
movie, don't worry -- Shelton applies enough tweaks and twists to the 
formulaic story to keep us interested and a little unsure of the 
outcome.  The experience is akin to following a often-traveled road then 
suddenly taking a detour onto a parallel, but nevertheless different, 
course. TIN CUP isn't concerned with blazing new trails -- that's beyond 
its scope or ambition.  Instead, it's content to offer a pleasantly 
likable, gently comic two hours of simple life lessons, with golf as the 
obvious metaphor.
     As the saying goes, you don't have to appreciate the sport to enjoy 
the movie.  Undoubtedly, however, the film makers are hoping that the 
burgeoning popularity of golf will help at the box office.  This is the 
first such movie to boast cameos by top-notch players, including Corey 
Pavin, Fred Couples, and Lee Janzen.  Still, TIN CUP has a broad enough 
appeal that intimate knowledge of the joys and frustrations of playing 
18 holes isn't necessary.  This movie ranks as better-than-par 
entertainment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In their second collaboration together, BULL DURHAM director
Ronald Shelton and actor Kevin Costner turn their comedic attention to
golf in the new movie TIN CUP.  Just as BULL DURHAM was much more of a
comedy than a sports film, TIN CUP can be enjoyed by people who hate
golf.  Personally, I am not a sports fan at all, and I find golf to be
the second most boring sport in the world - only cricket is worse.  All
of that having been said, I found TIN CUP not only funny, but the golf
part fascinating.
     The show is set in the sleepy town of Salome in West Texas near
Midland and Odessa.  As the show starts, an armadillo is meandering
across an old dusty road onto a beat-up golf driving range.  When I was
a youngster, we used to have these lovable little animals show up at
our outdoor chapel at camp so as soon as I saw the little critter, my
heart was already growing warm for TIN CUP.
     Kevin Costner plays Roy "Tin Cup" McAvoy.  His current position is
that of golf pro at the almost abandoned driving range.  Cheech Marin
has the part of Romeo Posar, his buddy, caddie, and roommate in their
dilapidated trailer on the grounds of the driving range.
     One day, a beautiful woman, Dr. Molly Griswold (Rene Russo), drops
in to get golfing lessons to impress her boyfriend, David Simms (Don
Johnson).  Simms is a famous professional golfer and a one-time rival
to McAvoy.  Now, McAvoy is a has been, or more accurately a never was.
He acts like his brains have long since been fried with constant and
massive drinking.  In the carefully chosen costumes by Carol Oditz
(GEORGIA and SMOOTH TALK), McAvoy is made to look like someone who
shops at an Goodwill Store in Hawaii.  Combine this with his slovenly
appearance, and he is easy to write off as hopeless.
     In a break from her normal tough roles as in OUTBREAK and IN THE
LINE OF FIRE, Rene Russo plays a failed real estate agent turned
therapist.  Griswold is a bit of an airhead and not particularly good
at anything she does.  Although Russo has second billing to Costner,
she owns the show.  Costner is great, but scenes with both of them in
it are hers to command, not by dominance but subtly.
     The intelligent and literate screen by John Norville and Ron
Shelton is full great one liners and even better verbal ripostes.  I
regret to say that most of the time when the characters trade barbs
with each other, the lines are littered with unprintable words so I can
not include them here.  I make a point of insuring that all of my
reviews are G ratable.  The foul language is never offensive, is
perfectly natural, and fits the characters like a glove.
     In one of the clean lines, McAvoy first tells the doctor of his
feelings: "Dr. Griswold, I think I'm in love with you.  From the moment
I saw you, I knew I was through with strippers and motorcycle chicks."
How's that for a come on line to a professional woman?
     Later she talks to him about his inner child.  He gives her a
nasty smile and asks, "does my inner child need a spanking?"  The way
she gets turned on by him and yet holds the romance at bay is one of
the more delicate and interesting parts of the story.
     Unlike most comedies, this is one with a strong message.  It can
be summed up as "go for it."  As McAvoy more elegantly puts it, "When a
defining moment comes along, the moment defines you or you define the
moment."  For McAvoy, this bravado is more of a handicap than a
blessing.  He has a history of losing because he wanted to try for the
eagle when a par would have won the match.  Gosh, I can't believe I
just said that bit of golfspeak.  This show is infectious.
     There is a part of the message of the show that I did not care
for.  When preparing for the big match, Romeo has Tin Cup get roaring
drunk the night before so he can loosen up.  Moreover, golfers are
shown as big drinkers.  Perhaps, this is all accurate, but I hope not
and certainly this is not a message I would want to give to the young
adults in the audience.
     If you enjoy shows full of beautiful people, TIN CUP will not
disappoint.  Russo is one of the most gorgeous actresses in the movies
today.  She is certainly the prettiest one over forty.  Costner is cute
as can be, and Johnson looks like a Greek god albeit one with a little
too much grease in his hair.
     The ending is a complete surprise.  The dramatic music by William
Ross during the ending is reminiscent of Miklos Rozsa's music for
chariot ride in BEN-HUR (1959).
     The major failing of TIN CUP is that it is too long.  Comedies
have no business coming in at over two hours.  Editors Kimberly Ray and
Paul Seydor left in lots of long and pointless scenes, particularly in
the first part of the film.  Tighter editing would have significantly
improved the picture.  For example, the stripper character and all of
her scenes should be cut, and many scenes need shortening.  There is no
need for the film to drag so often.
     TIN CUP runs too long at 2:13.  The film is rated R for brief
nudity and lots of quite foul, but to this critic, inoffensive
language.  There is no violence and the film is upbeat and good
natured.  It would be fine for any teenager.  For subteens, be aware
that the F word is used frequently albeit nicely.  I recommend this
sweet comedy to you and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Ron Shelton appears to understand two things better than any other
contemporary film-maker:  sports, and Kevin Costner.  Put a sports movie
in the hands of almost any other director, and you get the feeling that
they're just biding their time until the big climactic game/fight/match;
put Kevin Costner in the hands of almost any other director, and you find
the thin-voiced actor placed in the uncomfortable position of playing
commanding and heroic.  When the two men joined forced previously, for
1988's BULL DURHAM, the result was one of the best and funniest sports
films ever, and probably Costner's best performance ever.  That casually
charming Costner is re-born in TIN CUP, yet another superior Shelton
sports film overflowing with pleasures.
     Costner plays Roy "Tin Cup" McAvoy, a one-time college golf star now
reduced to operating a run-down driving range in the west Texas town of
Salome.  He also gives lessons, and one of his students is Dr. Molly
Griswold (Rene Russo), a therapist newly arrived in Salome who immediately
captures Roy's fancy.  Unfortunately, Molly is already involved with David
Simms (Don Johnson), a tour pro who used to be Ray's college team-mate and
now is his rival.  Roy is determined to win Molly over by playing in the
U. S. Open, but first he needs to overcome the quality which sunk his
professional prospects, his insistence on going for the impossible shot
rather than playing the percentages.  For that he will require someone to
help him with his "head game," and the only therapist in town happens to
be Molly.
     There are a lot of Kevin Costner bashers out there -- I have been
known to be one of them -- who have forgotten that he became a star in
films like BULL DURHAM and FIELD OF DREAMS which allowed him to be warm,
funny and approachable.  That is too bad, but it happened because Costner
himself and plenty of other directors forgot, too.  They keep trying to
turn him into an icon -- witness ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THIEVES, JFK, WYATT
EARP and WATERWORLD -- and he generally winds up looking sour and 
constipated throughout.  TIN CUP is a reminder of Costner at his best,
boyishly handsome and with an equally boyish temperament, and he has so
much effortless fun playing Roy that it is nearly impossible not to have
fun with him.  He is like a Little League player who never out-grew Little
League, always swinging for the fences and always eager to please.
Costner manages to make immaturity incredibly endearing.
     Shelton has given Costner a great character to work with, and has
fashioned a great story around that character.  BULL DURHAM was so
authentic in its detail about minor league baseball that it was easy to
overlook the fact that Shelton made a film that wasn't just about
baseball.  It was about playing a game because you loved it so much you
couldn't imagine doing anything else, and the frustration of seeing a
player with less love (Tim Robbins' Nuke LaLoosh) have so much more
talent.  This time, Costner gets to play the equivalent of Nuke, a player
with "a million dollar arm and a fifty cent head," in a story that is not
just about golf.  Roy's problem is that he understands all too well that
fans don't watch professional sports to see the steady hitter, the guy who
runs the precise receiving route, or the guy who can make all his free
throws; they watch to see the home run hitter, the flashy runner, or the
360 degree dunk.  Roy could never be the steady player because he is too
obsessed with creating that moment of glory, and it is both an
acknowledgment and a subversion of the way sports movies are supposed to
end when Roy finally gets that moment of glory.
     That is what makes a Ron Shelton sports movie better than anyone
else's sports movies:  he has a better understanding of the way fans and
players think.  He also knows how to create scenes which sing with
unexpected wit.  Roy is always willing to take a bet on an improbable
shot, and some of TIN CUP's best moments involve those bets, including one
in which Roy uses a bag of garden tools to play.  Shelton also gives his
actors subtly eccentric characters to play, with tremendous results.  Rene
Russo is sexy and off-center as Molly, Don Johnson is a perfect arrogant
foil, and Cheech Marin does superb supporting work as Roy's friend and
caddy Romeo.  Only the leisurely, golf-like pace of TIN CUP proves
troubling -- at 135 minutes, it has a few too many dead spots, and a
rather unnecessary tangent involving Roy's stripper ex-girlfriend.  But by
the time TIN CUP ends, those moments will have been forgotten.  You'll be
thinking about how smartly and cleverly Ron Shelton can write a sports
film, how good Kevin Costner can be in them, and how many sports might be
left on which they can collaborate.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     We lasted forty minutes in this one.  The mood was right:  Friday
afternoon in a cool theater with a big screen and fully functioning
sound.  The seats were comfy, the attendance sparse, and even the floors
were only slightly sticky.  Thus, we were ready and waiting to enjoy
this already-acclaimed golfing comedy from writer/director Ron Shelton
(WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP, BULL DURHAM).  And while the credit sequence was
amusing enough-- an armadillo wandering across a Texas highway and onto
a dilapidated and nearly-deserted driving range-- we just couldn't get
past the absurd second scene.  Here was an intelligent woman (Rene
Russo, whose character claims to be a doctor) who shows up for a golf
lesson (a.) alone (b.) at night and (c.) without even flinching at the
flirtatious gibberish that her instructor (Kevin Costner) starts
spouting.  Huh?  We gave this so-broad-it's-not-even-funny comedy
another thirty minutes and then left.  On the way out, we passed a
patron who was fast asleep in his plaid shirt and yellow pants.  *He*
knew that the best way to watch a boring golf game was with your eyes
closed.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Christina Nunez
       For all you golf romantics out there, Tin Cup is the movie to see
this summer (presumably the golf Butt-heads out there have already been
satisfied by the release of Happy Gilmore. Brought to you by the same guy
who directed Bull Durham, Tin Cup returns Kevin Costner to his element as
the diamond-in-the-rough women can't resist. Roy McAvoy is a
super-talented golf pro who has a weak follow-through, and of course we're
not talking just about his swing. 
       His run-down driving range out in west Texas gets shaken up by the
arrival of Dr. Molly Griswold (Rene Russo), the first lady McAvoy
considers worthy of more than cheap thrills. But she's not there for the
taking, don't you know. Her boyfriend happens to be an old golf rival,
David Simms, who's in town to promote a tournament. Roy's an endearing
underdog, trying to win Molly and, ultimately, show up Simms in--what're
you, crazy, Roy?--the U.S. Open of all things! Well, you know where the
plot goes from here. That's why you're watching, isn't it? Certainly it's
not for suprises--but the movie delivers in filling this mold with cute,
watchable characters. 
       Kevin Costner, when he's not running around barely dressed with
Native Americans or in some seascape, actually makes an engaging leading
man every once in awhile. His scenery gets stolen more than once by Cheech
Marin as his sidekick, and by Johnson, another likable star with a mostly
regrettable resume. Rene Russo, whose exaggerated but not unattractive
features suggest a younger,
pre-Wayne Flowers Madam, has a pretty straight shot of a role as the uptight
therapist. She may grate occasionally, but she does her best with the role
and with a watery final scene. 
       I would be remiss if I didn't warn non-golf aficionados that, no
matter what you do, no matter how many camera angles you use or plot
twists you wring or strings you swell on the soundtrack, it's still GOLF.
And watching 18 holes, even when Costner's the one swinging, still feels
as suspenseful as watching the Astroturf grow for 9 innings at Wrigley
Stadium. But it remains a "cute" movie, and you can make that your own
endorsement or damnation.
Check t@p online's film section for reviews, clips, and news.
http://www.taponline.com/tap/entertainment/film

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Voltaire said "Le mieux est l'ennemi du bien."  Literally it means
"the best is the enemy of the good." That is just what has kept Roy
"Tin Cup" McAvoy (Kevin Costner) from being a top ranking golfer.  He
has to try for the best shot, the dangerous one rather than looking not
quite so good.  He usually misses it, but at least he tried for the
shot that everybody would remember.  So instead of a well-known golf
pro, he runs a second-rate driving range in Salome, Texas.  It is not a
great living but in a tiny West Texas town like Salome, where the
armadillos outnumber the golfers by hundreds to one, it is amazing he
can even survive.  Even stranger is that the small town supports a
psychiatrist, Dr. Molly Griswold (Rene Russo) and that each has never
heard of the other until Griswold shows up a the driving range wanting
lessons.  McAvoy is attracted to Griswold but she is already attached
to someone.  The plot thickens when an old friend, now a rival and a
top golf pro, David Simms (Don Johnson) turns up and wants McAvoy to
caddie for him in a golf tourney.  Needing the money McAvoy takes the
job, but get himself fired in a grandstand play when Simms goes for a
conservative shot at the tourney.  McAvoy decides to go for another big
one and make a play for Griswold, only to find out her boyfriend is
Simms.  From there you could plot out the rest of the film and with
only a small surprise here and there you would probably be right.
(Think of it as ROCKY with a different sport and cast with prettier-
looking actors.)
     What makes TIN CUP watchable are the characters and the dialog.
These are bright people and their small talk as the plot plays itself
out is more of interest than the plot itself.  McAvoy and Griswold are
likable people as are the circle of people who orbit around them.
First and foremost of the friends is Romeo Posar, as the most
interesting an amiable character  that Cheech Marin has ever played.
The role was likely written for someone of a milder character to have a
little fun hamming it up.  Instead Marin plays the role as restrained
as anybody he has ever played, so that is not the comic bits that
surprise us but the moments of warmth and sincerity.  Another close
friend is a stripper and ex-girlfriend to whom McAvoy owes money.
Making her a stripper seems like it was a calculated move.  At 42 Ms.
Russo probably prefers to show considerably less flesh than say, Susan
Sarandon did in a previous film by director Ron Shelton, BULL DURHAM.
The story asks if this old, but still talented, failure McAvoy can make
something of himself on the golfing advice of his caddie and the pop
psychology of his girlfriend without alienating either too much.
     Ron Shelton's films seem to be falling into a pattern of sports, a
bit of sex, a large dollop of comedy, some well-drawn characters, and
good dialog.  His films are thin on plot and give the audience little
to chew on after the film is over, but they are audience pleasers and
at least the audience when I saw the film were applauding at times.
Considering that golf is a gave that even its most ardent fans usually
give only polite hand-clapping, getting a film audience so involved in
a golf film is no small feat.   With the exceptions of Costner's slight
grunge edge, the characters are pretty and pretty bland.  Johnson
actually is the most believable as the blandest of all.  I think that
the film also sported some golf champions who would have been familiar
to some of the audience, though I would not have recognized them if
they were two feet away.  Some familiar brand names also show up on
things like golf caps and even a blimp and they  too are playing
themselves.
     TIN CUP will not leave you with much to think about other than a
person's reach should exceed his grasp.  This is a pleasant enough
throwaway film you will not remember in the fall.  Rate it a +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
