Title
Review for No Way Out (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Upstill
          Thriller fans and those able to choke back outrage at blatant
     stupidity have the best chance of enjoying this film, which is
     blessed with some fine thriller execution and cursed with some hoary
     thriller cliches.
     NO WAY OUT, the new thriller directed by Roger Donaldson, is a study in
ambivalence.  Rarely have the elements of a movie been so disparate in their
potential to please.  On the one hand, you won't find a better-looking or
-acted movie for grownups offering as many legitimate (or illegitimate)
suspense units.  On the other hand, you have to suffer through some 
astonishingly lame turns of plot (at one point, some of the most powerful
people in the US government decide it would be a keen idea to launch a
room-by-room search of the Pentagon using a pair of witnesses--that's right:
*two* people--to find a Soviet agent) and arguably one of the most arbitrary
surprise endings on record.
     Basically, the film is much, much better than it has a right to be.  The 
script is boilerplate turnabout romantic thriller intrigue at the highest 
levels of power in the US government.  The writing is adequate to the task.
It's the execution that makes it worthwhile.  The movie has as much respect for
the audience's intelligence as I can recall in a major Hollywood picture in
some time.  In particular, the psychological interplay between the characters
and the control of the tone of individual scenes is exceptionally keen.  I 
really LIKE not having every little thing s-p-e-l-l-e-d o-u-t f-o-r m-e in
words of one syllable.  I have to credit the director and the fine cast (Kevin 
Costner, Gene Hackman, Sean Young, and others) for most of what's good here.
     In short, if you can turn off your reality checker, ignore a variety of 
blatant stupidities, put up with several gratuitous chase scenes, and believe 
in the most surprising of surprise endings, NO WAY OUT will definitely give 
you your money's worth.  But the clash of all these qualities keeps my rating 
down to **1/2 out of ****.

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
     NO WAY OUT was billed as a suspense thriller along the lines of Hitchcock.
Let's take a look at the dramatic elements:
     Action?  Yes, there's plenty of action: chase scenes in cars, trains, and
on foot and one that is predominantly horizontal.
     Acting?!?!  Forget it!  There are so *many* actors involved and so much
action (I guess simple movement qualifies) that there isn't any time for
acting.  Although there are a few exceptions:
     Will Patton plays the part of Gene Hackman's aide.  His character appears
to be the most rounded, or at least the most intense.  His performance will get
some Hollywood heads turning.  He may (should) get an Oscar nomination.
     Kevin Costner plays the lead as a naval officer who performs a heroic deed
and subsequently gets involved with the Secretary of Defense.  The only segment
of his acting that was valuable was when he found out about his girlfriend's
death.  Costner's performance in THE UNTOUCHABLES was far more dynamic.  We
will no doubt be seeing more of him.  We hope he will be screening any future
scripts more carefully.
     Sean Young delivers interesting insight to the term "Washington
Socialite."  A very provocative role.   Unfortunately, Susan appears to have
majored in "vaginal gymnastics" at junior college.
     Gene Hackman has taken on a role that hardly suits his capabilities.  His
horror of killing Susan was the only portion of his role that stands out.
     Howard Duff had a very insignificant role.  His was almost as empty as
Gene Hackman's except Gene had 10 times as much camera time.
     The problem here is that writing has failed some very capable actors.
Action (movement) has taken over the movie.  There was a lot of role-playing,
but very little in character development.  Plot has suffered due to logistical
error.  Here are some examples:  A door-to-door search for the elusive bad guy
in the largest building in the world.  Oh...that ought to take a few weeks.
How about this?  The Secretary's aide (who is gay and is in love with the
secretary) hears the secretary (right in front of him) decide to betray the
aide as the murderer of the secretary's girlfriend.  What does the aide do?  He
shoots himself!  It seems to me that if one is about to be betrayed by someone
as omnipotent as the Secretary of Defense, has a gun in possession, and is
within range that he would shoot the secretary.  Worst of all, why is it that a
man who is paid cash for the use of a boat is found as a witness and yet they
never question the secretary's limo driver?  The limo driver would have ended
the movie before the first 60 boring minutes would have ended.  I give this one
1+1/2 *

Author
Peter Reiher
     NO WAY OUT is a splendid example of how to make a good suspense film.  It
has a good plot, interesting atmosphere, first-rate acting, well-chosen
cinematography, tense direction, and, best of all, intelligence.  The elements
are very nicely blended into what has to be one of the finest suspense films of
the decade.
     The key here is "suspense."  NO WAY OUT isn't an action picture.  It's a
lot more like a classic Hitchcock film, with the strongly Hitchcockian plot of
a trapped innocent in over his head to go along with it.  The hero finds
himself caught in a web of intrigue, and, true to the title, it does begin to
look like there is no way out for him.  He has to struggle with all his wits
just to keep disaster from striking immediately, and has little time left to
prevent the seemingly inexorable doom that is about to descend.
     To avoid spoiling the effect of NO WAY OUT, I'll have to be rather vague
about its plot and themes.  NO WAY OUT concerns a US Navy officer who finds
himself unwillingly entangled with Washington politicians in a battle to cut
the funding on a huge military project.  Personal factors further complicate
matters, and the scheming of politicians eventually threatens his very life.
Circumstances leave him without any room to move, about to be crushed in an
impersonal juggernaut.
     Kevin Costner plays the officer, giving his best performance to date.  We
can see him not only thinking of how to escape, we can see him trying to
conceal his thoughts from those around him.  Costner succeeds best in the most
important aspect of his role.  In order for the audience to become truly
worried about his plight, the audience has to truly identify with him.  Costner
gives us a figure who deserves our sympathy.  Costner's previous work has
seemed almost like a prepartion for stardom, and this role, on top of his
success in THE UNTOUCHABLES, may well do it for him.
     Gene Hackman leads a fine supporting cast, giving his reliably solid
performance as the Secretary of Defense.  Credit goes to Hackman, and to Robert
Garland, the screenwriter, for giving this character room to show complexities.
A more typical filming of this story would have presented a figure cut from
cardboard.  This willingness to take the extra effort is representative of the
film.  All of the characters have the opportunity to show themselves as real
people, rather than story-driven placeholders.  Sean Young, George Dzunda,
Howard Duff, and Iman all take advantage of this opportunity.  The best of the
supporting performances is that of Will Patton, as Hackman's fiercely loyal
hatchetman.  Patton's intensity is chilling.  His performance as the underling
who puts his patron's success above all else rings all too true.
     Roger Donaldson, the director of NO WAY OUT, hasn't shown a very special
talent before this film.  A New Zealander, he previously directed SMASH
PALACE, THE BOUNTY, and MARIE, putting in professional efforts on all of them,
but demonstrating little more.  Here, though, his direction is near perfect.
Starting from a quiet pace more typical of a drama than a suspense film,
Donaldson builds to hectic excitement by the end.  He and cinematographer John
Alcott have established a film in which the subtext is claustrophobia.  The
open, airy shots near the beginning of the film wind in to tighter and tighter
compositions as Costner's situation becomes more and more desperate.  The
intent is to make the audience feel as trapped as Costner's character, and it
works superbly.  Alcott, in his last film, shows again that he was one of the
masters of the camera, expressing a strong sense of being closed in without
ever feeling static.  The cinematography of NO WAY OUT does not permit him as
much chance to display virtuosity as, say, BARRY LYNDON did, but Alcott well
shows how a cinematographer can support a film without taking it over.
     Another element of NO WAY OUT deserves special mention--the production
design.  The designer ably abets the claustrophobia built by Donaldson and
Alcott.  His sets, especially the Pentagon interiors that host most of the
film's second half, are both accurate and appropriate.  His Pentagon has very
much the tacky and impermanent look of the real thing.  He plays up the
submarine-like qualities of the building, the long corridors without windows,
the military-drab walls, the feeling that, despite being the largest building
on earth, quarters are rather cramped.  He also gives a feel for the odd
topologies of the building, the interconnecting offices, the concentric ring
construction, the unexpected facilities and occasional decorations.
     NO WAY OUT is, on the whole, one of the best films released this year.  It
is both intelligent and entertaining, and has the additional advantage of
topicality.  Roger Donaldson crafts his film carefully, giving us a film about
people in a suspenseful situation, rather than mere actors going through the
paces.  NO WAY OUT is a suspense film that Hitchcock would have appreciated,
far more than any of Brian De Palma's ripoffs.  One can but hope that audiences
appreciate it, as well.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Hero Navy-boy gets a posh job as a liaison in the Pentagon under the
Secretary of Defense, and soon starts up a secret affair with the same man's
mistress, initially unbeknownst to him. When the woman in question is
killed, our Navy-boy heads up an investigation for the Secretary to find the
other man with whom she was having an affair, also believed to be the
murderer.
CRITIQUE:
A taut political thriller, this film offers us a touch of sex, plenty of
suspense and intrigue webbed inside a cliched 80s soundtrack, a powerhouse
performance by Will Patton, and a fascinating look behind the covert walls
of the US government's big-wigs. Kevin Costner also pulls off his greatest
looking part, while Gene Hackman continues his standout work, chewing right
into every one of his morally-challenged lines with fervor. The film itself
does take a little while to get going, but once the "chase" is on, it
doesn't let up until the very last visually-resounding scene. On the down
side, besides the dated soundtrack, I did not particularly enjoy Sean
Young's performance or the very last two minutes of the film, which seemed
gratuitously tacked on for inexplicable reasons. But even those small
oversights don't take away from the fact that this film comes through on all
cylinders in respect to plot, tension, acting, suspense and intrigue. All in
all, one of the best thrillers to come out of the 80s, and certainly one
that still holds up to the test of time.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ten years after working together as actors, Kevin Costner co-starred and
directed Will Patton in the ill-fated THE POSTMAN.
The character of Nina is played by none other than international model, Iman
(full name Iman Abdulmajid), who happens to be married to the Thin White
Duke himself, David Bowie. She was born in Somalia.
Plot hole anyone? The Pentagon is one of the largest buildings in the world,
with 17 miles of corridors alone. For a single group to search it in two
hours is preposterous. Oh well, it's just a movie!
