Title
Review for Black and White (1999)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Brooke Shields, Robert Downey Jr., Ben Stiller, Allan Houston,
Elijah Wood, Bijou Phillips, Power. Directed by James Toback. Rated R.
I think that in making Black and White director James Toback took all
of the ideas he had and threw them up into the air with his eyes closed
and fingers crossed, hoping to God that they somehow land in the right
place. Indeed, the pieces fit together like a jigsaw puzzle. The film
is about a lot of things and all of them are prevalent in one way or
another. With such a maddeningly large array of themes and subjects,
it's mighty impressive that Black and White works as well as it does.
And yet instead of visualizing a cinematic genius intricately crafting
a complex work of art, the image I got from watching the movie was that
of Toback, sleep-deprived and haggard, desperately attempting the
Herculean task of putting together a magnum opus in 15 minutes and
miraculously succeeding.
There are a lot of overlapping storylines here and in its plotting, the
film resembles a (deliberately?) disorganized version of Magnolia or
Cradle Will Rock. It is being sold as a look at white people obsessed
with black culture, but that is only one of the stories. It involves a
documentary filmmaker (Brooke Shields) shooting a film about the
subject, the group of kids (including a surprisingly convincing Elijah
Wood and Bijou Phillips) who are her focus and her husband (Robert
Downey Jr.), who is obviously gay even though his wife doesn't seem to
realize it.
There is also the story of a star college point guard (real basketball
player Allan Houston), who is approached by a policeman (Ben Stiller)
posing as a gambler. His proposition: throw the upcoming game and get
$50,000 cash. The purpose of this maneuver is to set the nice but
gullable kid up and then blackmail him into ratting out one of his
buddies who is the head of a gang. The policeman also approaches the
district attorney whose son is involved with the gang leader with a
different sort of proposal. And then there is Mike Tyson who, playing
himself, is funny just by showing up.
Aware that a conventional filmmaking method for such unconventional
subject matter wouldn't do, Toback decided to let the actors improvise
a lot of their scenes. He gave them a general direction in which to
head, turned on the camera and let them do their thing. The result is
exactly what he was aiming for: the scenes have a flowing, unforced
feel to them. It doesn't feel like we're watching a documentary but
rather a movie that genuinely reflects real life. And anyway, no movie
in which Mike Tyson gets to say "This is what I'm deciphering from your
vernacular" can be all bad.
The surprise here is Allan Houston who has a real affablility and
screen presence. Unlike fellow basketball-star-cum-thespian Shaquille
O'Neal, Houston may have a real career in store for himself if he
chooses to use his talent wisely and not accept projects trying to
exploit his basketball stardom. In Black and White, Houston's troubled
point guard is the only character I liked as a person.
Not everything works. Not every theme comes through loud and clear. The
Ben Stiller character gets a lot of screen time and the movie makes a
big deal out of him but he's never really explored and we struggle to
understand him. In the end, Black and White works as a gritty slice-of-
life movie, not trying to say anything concrete but simply to show. A
lot is thrown on the screen and most of it hits home.

Author
Tim Chandler
A group of high school kids mix up with a group of hip-hop artists as a
documentarian strives to discover why today's youth seem attracted to
black culture.
    If Black & White, the new film from writer/director James Toback, is
eventually remembered for only one thing, it will be the revelation that
Brooke Shields, Claudia Schiffer, Marla Maples and Mike Tyson can act.
However, this partly improvised gem will be remembered for more than
that. Black & White is a fascinating film; it makes a statement about
America's youth and hip-hop culture without getting heavy-handed overly
serious. Featuring a cast of known commodities (Ben Stiller, Robert
Downey Jr.) and hot newcomers (singers Bijou Phillips), Toback's is a
complex film worth seeing.
    Black & White has multiple storylines that are all related to each
other, a la Robert Altman. There is Dean the basketball player (Allan
Houston) who is asked to rig games for money by Mark Clear (Stiller) in
exchange for fifty grand a game. This eventually spills over into the
life of Dean's long-time friend Rich (Power), a gangsta who controls 20
city blocks of Harlem. Rich has to deal with the imminent opening of a
white-owned club on his turf. Meanwhile, the young white girls who like
to hang around with Rich and his homies get talked into being in a
documentary by Sam Donager (Shields) and her gay husband Terry (Downey
Jr.). Others who make appearances are William Lee Scott as the young
white punk Will, Joe Pantoliano as his District Attorney father, Jared
Leto as a high school teacher, Marla Maples as the mother of one of
hip-hop crazed teens, Claudia Schiffer as Dean's girlfriend, and Mike
Tyson as... Mike Tyson. The stories ebb and flow through the film,
losing and gaining prominence over time. Friendships are lost, lovers
are gained, and there is an occasional burst of violence.
    Originally rated NC-17 in the United States, Black & White features
a lot of sex between black gangstas and young white girls. While the
film was trimmed down to a tamer R rating, viewers will wonder what
could be more explicit than what they are seeing. The three-way sexual
beginning of the film nicely warns viewers of what they are in for, and
several audience members got up and left at that point. The frequent sex
is one of the film's few flaws as the titillation is overdone and at
times completely unrelated to anything else going on in the film.
    To Toback's credit, the level of violence in Black & White is almost
nil. These gangstas and hip-hop artists are given real problems and
concerns, and only become gun-toting crazies when it benefits them to
appear that way. Whenever a character finds himself on Donager's
handheld digital camera, he starts spouting off righteous tirades on
America and proclaims his independence, but not everyone has fully
bought into the idea. Charlie (Phillips) is full of bluster about why
she loves hip-hop, but admits that "in ten years time, I'll be way over
this." These youth know they are going through a phase, and are simply
enjoying it. Toback fills the spaces between these tirades with scenes
that are lightweight and funny. Most of the humour comes from Mike
Tyson, who provides the film's comic relief without really trying. He is
given big words like vernacular to say, and as Rich tries to discuss a
particular street problem with Tyson, he frequently has to ask him to
use smaller words and explain himself better, playing on Tyson's image
as a dimwit. But Tyson also gets the film's scariest moment. As he is
mercilessly hit upon by the very gay Terry, Tyson is a marvel to watch
as he fights to remain calm. The scene is entirely improvised, with
Downey Jr. being told to just keep at Tyson until he gets a reaction.
The reaction he gets, being slapped and then choked is astonishing, as
Downey Jr's face turns a frightening shade of purple.
    Black & White is a film about hip-hop culture, and the film's
omnipresent hip-hop soundtrack strongly supports this. But Toback keeps
things from becoming too serious; by moving from story to story as
quickly as he does, Toback keeps us from becoming attached to any one
character's struggle. Thus Black & White's message about hip-hop becomes
secondary to the film itself. Toback just wants us to have fun and maybe
learn a little about hip-hop along the way. And we do.
e-mail the author: timbit@geocities.com
Adventures in Cinema - http://www.geocities.com/almigtypooba/

Author
James Sanford
         Director James Toback fancies himself a provocateur, and from
the very first scene it's obvious he intends "Black and White" to be a
startling expose of what happens when white teens try to impress the
gangsta rappers they adore. The film opens with rich kid Charlie (Bijou
Phillips) engaged in a tryst with another young woman and Rich (Wu-Tang
Clan's Oli "Power" Grant), a thug who dreams of becoming a music
industry mogul.
 What does Charlie want? She doesn't appear to know -- "I wanna
be black," she bleats when the question is asked -- and certainly
Toback, who also wrote this weird mess, hasn't got a clue. Maybe it's a
bout of adolescent rebellion, maybe it's her idea of true love, or maybe
she's just trying to fit in with her trendy friends.
 At any rate, Charlie's not the only character in "Black and
White" who seems unbalanced. Toback also trots out an airheaded
documentary filmmaker named Sam (Brooke Shields) who's in denial about
her flagrantly gay husband Terry (Robert Downey Jr.); Will (William Lee
Scott), the son of a district attorney who's thrown away his life of
privilege to work as an errand boy for Rich and his crew; Dean (Allen
Houston), who dreams of glory in the NBA but seems to take all of two
seconds to decide whether or not he wants to throw a college basketball
game for $50,000; and Greta (Claudia Schiffer), an anthropology student
who behaves like some kind of double-agent as she betrays all the men in
her life.
 None of these people is remotely likable or particularly
interesting, and only Scott attempts to make his character in any way
credible. Downey flounces around irritatingly, Shields does a lot of
squawking, and the real-life rappers Toback has brought on board to play
Rich's friends seem baffled by the director's free-form style, which
requires everyone to come up with their own dialogue while the camera is
rolling. Realizing viewers can only take so much bad improv before they
tune out entirely, Toback throws in a few gratuitous sex scenes and a
cameo appearance by a dazed Mike Tyson, who must fend off propositions
from both Sam and Terry. "No one ever expressed to me that I was
gorgeous or anything," Tyson blushes before turning down the offers.
 Although he wrote a justifiably acclaimed script for Warren
Beatty and Annette Bening's "Bugsy," Toback has never had much luck as a
filmmaker. Perhaps you remember "The Pick-Up Artist," the movie that
single-handedly killed Molly Ringwald's career? That was another Toback
production. "Black and White," for all its arty pretensions and supposed
shock value, doesn't break his losing streak. James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
BLACK AND WHITE, written and directed by James Toback, is for filmgoers
who like fast-paced movies that assault their senses with a plethora of
stereotypes.  During the opening credits, an interracial threesome
engages in wild sex in the woods while another guy guards the lovebirds
with a big gun.  Most of the blacks in the movie are criminals who
appear to have low IQs.  The young whites, on the other hand, want to
imitate them and try to become black.  Neither race comes off very well.
Given Toback's last film, the insufferable TWO GIRLS AND A GUY, perhaps
one should not be surprised by how atrocious BLACK AND WHITE is.
After the opening sequence, we cut to a scene in which the white teenage
girl, Charlie (Bijou Phillips), from the threesome in the woods, is
having a formal dinner with her family.  As classical music plays in
their Central Park West home and as the mother goes on about the quality
of the quail, the daughter trash-talks her father with a heavy black
accent.  What does her father do?  Corrects her grammar, reminding her
about avoiding double negatives.  Of yes, their servants are black, of
course.
A good cast of thousands is wasted in a movie with a script that feels
like it was torn apart and reconstructed at random.  There are more
subplots and characters than you can count.
Allan Houston plays a basketball player whose sense of morals ends the
moment someone waves a wad of cash in front of him.  Ben Stiller is the
cash flasher.
As documentarian Sam Donager, Brooke Shields is an obsessive filmmaker
who would never think of stopping the camera even when a heavy-weight
champion (Mike Tyson, who proves he can't act) is strangling her
husband.  Robert Downey, Jr. plays her flagrantly gay husband.
Sam's documentary is about white kids who want to be black and part of
the hip hop culture.  The white kids even refer to each other as
"niggas."  Removing the profanity would leave these kids -- black and
white -- with almost no dialog save some filler phrases like "What's
hapnin'?"
"It's all BS," says one of the characters.  (He says the complete
phrase, of course.)  And so is this disgusting and unappealing movie.
BLACK AND WHITE runs 1:39.  It is rated R for strong sex scenes, drug
usage, massive profanity and violence.  (Does anything get an NC-17
anymore?)  The film would not be appropriate for most teens, who will
undoubtedly represent 90% of the audience in most theaters.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
BLACK AND WHITE
(Screen Gems)
Starring:  Power, Ben Stiller, Brooke Shields, Robert Downey Jr., Claudia
Schiffer, Raekwon, Allan Houston, Bijou Phillips, Elijah Wood, William Lee
Scott, Mike Tyson, Joe Pantoliano, Gaby Hoffman, Jared Leto.
Screenplay:  James Toback.
Producers:  Michael Mailer, Daniel Bigel and Ron Rotholz.
Director:  James Toback.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, nudity, drug use, violence,
adult themes)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The title of James Toback's BLACK AND WHITE carries several
meanings. It refers partly to the growing influence of hip-hop culture on
the dress, speech and attitudes of suburban white youth. It also refers to
the dichotomies present in most of the main characters -- between what
they have been and what they want to be, between what others expect of
them and what they expect of themselves. And, sadly, it also refers to
writer/director Toback's presentation of his story. There's nary a scrap
of subtext to be found in his painfully shallow piece of exploration into
a complex cultural phenomenon.
     BLACK AND WHITE winds its way through the intertwined stories of
several New Yorkers over the space of a few days. Rich Bower (Power), a
Harlem crime boss, is trying to diversify into legitimate business,
working to break into rap music along with his buddy Cigar (Raekwon). 
Another buddy, college basketball star Dean Carter (New York Knick guard 
Allan Houston), faces a moral choice when he's approached by Mark Clear
(Ben Stiller) to shave points on a game. Another of Rich's running buddies
is white kid Will (William Lee Scott), the black-sheep son of a New York
district attorney (Joe Pantoliano). Tied into their world are a group of
high school students fascinated with black culture, who become the
subjects of a documentary film by husband-and-wife film-makers Sam (Brooke
Shields) and Terry Donager (Robert Downey Jr.).
     There are plenty of characters for Toback to keep track of in BLACK
AND WHITE, but apparently that's not a matter of great concern to him. And
it's not surprising, since he hasn't got the slightest interest in
developing any of those characters. Toback throws out plenty of scenes in
which we are supposed to understand what a problem it is when people
pretend to be something they're not. The actual people, however, are
absurdly static; there may be one moment in the entire film when we 
glimpse an emotion that's recognizably human. The stunt casting certainly
doesn't help, as Houston, Power and Raekwon do little more than recite
lines competently (Mike Tyson does do a surprisingly effective job of
playing himself, unconcerned about allaying fears that he's a psycho). 
With the notable exception of Stiller -- who brings some pitiable 
self-absorption to his role -- the entire cast of BLACK AND WHITE is used
by Toback as meat puppets to deliver his thoughts on race relations and
sexual politics.
     He might as well have rented a billboard. As cinematic anthropology
lessons go, BLACK AND WHITE is about as clumsy and uninvolving as you
could imagine. When Toback wants to explore why white kids are interested
in hip-hop, he has a teacher (Jared Leto) or Shields' film-maker ask them
to explain, turning the teens into talking heads. When he wants to touch
on the complexities of interracial dating, he has two characters start
chatting about it. When he wants to show that a white recording studio
manager becomes more comfortable renting to black rappers when a white
lawyer is representing them, he has the black rappers comment
significantly on the development. Every theme is laid out in expository
dialogue, crushing the attempt to give the film an improvised urgency. In
the first 15 minutes, Toback has told you absolutely everything he has to
say.
     If you suspect that might turn the remaining 85 minutes into a
pretentious bore, you're right. Most of BLACK AND WHITE consists of
episodes with no sense of consequence: Will Will and his father reconcile? 
Will Bower get nailed by the police detective who's tracking him? Will Sam
and Terry's marriage of convenience last? Will teen lovebirds Wren (Elijah
Wood) and Charlie (Bijou Phillips) stick together through Charlie's
fascination with Bower? Who cares? Toback certainly doesn't, or he would
have devoted as much energy to giving his characters personalities as he
does to giving them speeches and a crossover-ready soundtrack for their
lives. By the time BLACK AND WHITE's "Six Months Later" coda rolls around
-- so abruptly you may be left disoriented by the shift -- you wonder why
Toback bothers to tie up loose ends at all. His notion of keeping it real
means keeping it tedious and pedantic. Everything he has to say is up 
there on the screen in black and white, often underlined just for good
measure.

Author
jabii1
I'm going to keep this one fairly short, folks. In fact, I'm not even going
to attempt a plot summary because there isn't any plot in "Black and White".
James Toback, previously responsible for releasing the atrocious "Two Girls
and a Guy" on unsuspecting audiences back in 1997, has created a true piece
of garbage here. This is the kind of movie that screams for an NC-17 rating,
being filled with fairly explicit sex scenes, constant violence, and more
foul language than you hear in any Quentin Tarantino film. The MPAA rating
system is supposed to keep kids from seeing a movie like this, but the
theater I saw it in was filled with young high school students. I know it's
naive to think that kids won't see a movie like this no matter what kind of
rating it has, yet I can't help but think an NC-17 rating would have
prevented at least a few kids from attending.
First I'll try to cover what I liked about this movie, which shouldn't take
too long. There are one or two slightly comical moments, though I can't seem
to remember what they involved. That about sums up what I liked about this
movie. I don't often award one or five star ratings, but I was very tempted
to give only one to this piece of filth. I knew I was in trouble as soon as
the film started with a semi-pornographic scene involving two of the main
characters (Bijou Phillips, Power) and one minor character in a threesome in
the middle of the woods. I suppose the purpose of this scene was to convey
how messed up these kids are, but it struck me as being present only for
shock value. In fact, there are several sex scenes sprinkled throughout
"Black and White" which enhance the so-called story in no way.
I will hand one thing to Toback, he pulled in quite a cast. Ben Stiller,
Robert Downey Jr., Brooke Shields, Claudia Schiffer, and the great Joe
Pantoliano all make appearances in this god forsaken movie. Stiller
("There's Something About Mary") plays a gambler (a somewhat
autobiographical decision by Toback I think) who appears very few times and
never quite fits in with the rest of the movie. Robert Downey Jr. (the
horrendous "Two Girls and a Guy") plays a gay man, who I believe was
intended to be humorous but was simply vulgar instead. Brooke Shields ("The
Blue Lagoon") and Claudia Schiffer both show up in very minor roles, which
distract the audience rather than add anything to the movie. Last, but
certainly not least, is Joe Pantoliano ("The Matrix", "Bound"), who is
completely wasted as a father of two of the young, stupid characters.
Showing up in a hilariously pointless cameo is Mike Tyson himself.
Allow me to now point out the half dozen or so items which make this a
horrendous movie. One, half the dialogue is completely unintelligble. The
characters banter back and forth, swearing every other word and saying
things which no one over the age of fifteen could possibly understand. Two,
there is no plot to speak of. There are a few subplots involving things like
sports gambling and coping with ones identity, but none of these side
stories are ever developed. Three, I think this was supposed to be a
profound look at racism and life in an inner city, but it succeeds only at
insulting members of both races. Fourth, there is no direction whatsoever.
The movie jumps aimlessly from person to person and situation to situation
without any idea where it is going. Lastly, the film's ending left me with a
sick feeling in my stomach. I normally don't give away plot points, but the
movie's ending seems to imply that family can triumph over anything by doing
things like pulling together to lie and cover up murders. "Black and White"
runs the longest 98 minutes you'll ever experience. I recommend it to
absolutely no one and give it one and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by James Toback.
Cast: Ben Stiller, Brooke Shields, Robert Downey Jr., Allan Houston, Power, 
Bijou Phillips, Claudia Schiffer, Eddie K. Thomas, William Lee Scott, Elijah 
Wood, Gaby Hoffmann, Raekwon, Mike Tyson, Scott Caan, Jared Leto, Joe 
Pantoliano, Marla Maples, Stacy Edwards, Method Man.
2000 - 100 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, nudity, and sexual situations)
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 7, 2000.
Writer-director James Toback's ambitions are clear. In making a film about 
the wall that stands between people of different races, no matter how much 
everyone strives to be the same, and treating his characters not dissimilarly 
from those presented in Robert Altman's 1975 masterwork, "Nashville," all 
Toback has really done is accidentally uncovered the source of his filmmaking 
weaknesses. Mixing his screenplay with improvisatory material between his 
eclectic group of actors, in an expose of over twenty different characters in 
New York City, Toback's latest picture, the aptly-titled "Black and White," 
is consistently fascinating, but doesn't add up to all that much. While one 
can walk away from a theater appreciating that the film actually has more 
than a few fleeting thoughts in its mind, there is rarely, if ever, a clear 
attempt to develop the wide array of characters from being anything more than 
symbolic figures or broad-based stereotypes.
Free-floating in style and without a clear-cut destination, "Black and White" 
doesn't follow, as much as it wanders around the inhabitants on screen, 
before jumping to the next scene. If there is any character that the film 
revolves around, it is NYU film grad Sam (Brooke Shields) who has come to 
make a documentary on the fad of white teenagers who favor acting "black" and 
listening to hip-hop music, with her flamboyantly gay husband, Terry (Robert 
Downey Jr.), in tow. Sam's central subjects are a small group of high 
schoolers, including Charlie (Bijou Phillips), Wren (Elijah Wood), and Raven 
(Gaby Hoffmann), all brought up in wealthy households, who nonetheless rebel 
at both their parents and the present-day society that says kids should all 
conform to act and dress and behave a certain way.
Meanwhile, college basketball player Dean (Allan Houston) is approached by 
Mark (Ben Stiller), a mystery man who offers him $50,000 dollars to botch his 
next big game. Dean is unsure of what he should do, and his scholarly 
girlfriend Greta (Claudia Schiffer), currently writing a thesis on the 
subject of race, isn't much help, only advising him to go with his heart. 
Intersecting with everything is Rich Bower (Power), who is finally starting 
to edge away from his criminal lifestyle and into the world of being a 
recording artist. 
Acquiring a remarkably diverse cast that includes real-life stars playing 
themselves (Mike Tyson, Method Man), actual thespians (Ben Stiller, Robert 
Downey Jr., Elijah Wood), recording artists (Power, Bijou Phillips), 
supermodels (Claudia Schiffer), and NBA players (Allan Houston), the major 
surprise "Black and White" has to offer is that its performances are 
uniformly good. Making a picture that was largely stressed by Toback to be 
improvisational must have been a daunting task for most involved, and 
everyone comes off naturally and in unaffected turns, despite having roles 
that could have used a few deeper shades of characterization. For all of its 
"true-to-life" chit-chat, these people have very few ideas or distinct 
personality traits, and more often than not, do things because the film calls 
for it, rather than because that is what the characters themselves would do.
While everyone works as a unit, and thus, few of the actors get much of a 
chance to stand out amidst the dizzying movement from one character or story 
to the next, a select few should be noted. Claudia Schiffer, of all people, 
is excellent as the supposedly kind-hearted girlfriend of Dean, whose true 
colors abruptly show, unveiling her to be a conniving backstabber. Brooke 
Shields, in her strongest film role in years, is appropriately eager and 
wide-eyed as the documentary filmmaker who is shown to have an extreme 
insecurity of being alone when Terry, played to the comic hilt by Robert 
Downey Jr., finally makes her face the fact that he is gay and has absolutely 
no interest in a relationship anymore. Eddie K. Thomas (of 1999's "American 
Pie") is surprisingly versatile and adept as one of the high schoolers being 
documented, whose father is withdrawn and unconcerned about him, favoring his 
newest girlfriend (Stacy Edwards) over him or his older son, Will (William 
Lee Scott), whom he hasn't seen in two years. And as the platinum blond high 
school history teacher who catches the eye of Terry, Jared Leto sparkles in 
only a handful of scenes.
Whereas the actors are entertaining throughout, and bring what little depth 
there possibly can be brought to such a decidedly one-dimensional display of 
stick figures, "Black and White" stumbles because its messages are never 
reasonably dealt with in any sort of satisfying manner. For example, several 
scenes hint at making a statement about the distressing distance between 
removed parents and their children, but it never reaches any sort of 
conclusion. Nor does anything else in "Black in White;" things just happen, 
simply because they happen, and before you have had time to take it all in, 
you are already onto the next scene. 
The finale is particularly anticlimactic, as we are treated to a bogus "Six 
Months Later" title card, which then reveals what happened to all of the 
characters. This gimmicky epilogue would be tolerable if not for its 
ludicrous payoff. Credit "Black and White" for its occasional flashes of 
storytelling originality, but Robert Altman has done the same thing 
one-hundred times better, and with a remarkable and startling depth that 
Toback cries for, and so unfortunately lacks.

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Power, Bijou Phillips, Brooke Shields, Robert Downy Jr., Ben Stiller,
Jared Leto, Allan Houston, Raekwon, William Lee Scott, Mike Tyson, Eddie Kaye
Thomas, Joe Pantoliano, Method Man, James Toback, Gaby Hoffman, Brett Rattner,
Kim Matulva, Claudia Schiffer, Marla Maples, Kidada Jones
In 1957 a young writer by the name of Norman Mailer composed the infamous
essay, THE WHITE NEGRO, a post-war musing designed as one of many strategies to
shock his way into becoming a major literary figure of Hemingwayesque stature.
Though the essay itself is consciously offensive (heralding the "Negro" as the
definition of coolness), but perhaps in spite of himself, Mailer caught sight
of a trend that was in its zygote stages; the glamorization of the black
lifestyle, a lifestyle that indicates fashionable oppression as its
provocateurist white members see it. The blackness projected by whites who want
to be black (somewhat offensively designated as wiggers) is all surface
hipness, for of course they cannot truly know what it means to be black, they
want to be the black they see presented on that dictator of youth culture, MTV.
They call each other "niggaz" and seek out black sex partners because they see
them as exotic, and they want to make themselves exotic and different. James
Toback's film is mostly about upper middle class whites who take on so-called
black vernacular, adorn themselves in the latest hip hop fashions, and steal
the attitudes of commercialized black culture.
Toback himself (like Mailer) has seemed in awe of this culture ever since the
early seventies when he began his film career. His screenplay for THE GAMBLER
(directed by Karel Reisz) was about a man who gambled, not for the money but
for the utter thrill of that win or lose moment. It wasn't the result that
propelled him but the process and by the end of the film when the gambler
ventures out into a dangerous black neighborhood, we realize that it is nothing
more than another gamble (one with his life). It's seen as the ultimate test of
man hood, and I don't doubt for one second that the gambler is a stand in for
Toback.
He explored a similar character in his directorial debut, my favorite Toback
film, FINGERS, which ended with a sensual menage a trois between two lithe
white women and a big burly black man (played by an eroticized Jim Brown) that
soon turned dangerous. This all while the white protagonist watches as if
viewing an animal make love to, then inflict pain upon his prey. The blackness
Toback gives us in BLACK AND WHITE is similar. At first it's presented as
sensual with ripe exoticism as the ultimate aphrodisiac, then titillation gives
way to fear--the message being one I'm sure Spike Lee would approve of: that
our cultures can never really mix it up without severe repercussions. Sadly,
Toback doesn't explore the issue, he exploits it. With this film he's making a
blaxploitation flick that thinks it's anthropology. He's so enthralled by rap,
by the very essence of soulful ebony sexuality (mostly male) that he forgets to
make an actual movie and by the end nothing is illuminated, except that Toback
clearly has issues.
The writer\director lays his themes out like bumper cars, all his various views
colliding into each other resulting in a mess of provocative ideas. It is
reported that about 85% of the film was improvised, and that certainly shows.
Improvisation is a chancy way to approach film. When it works it can be highly
invigorating as in some of he better Robert Altman films, though when it
doesn't, it can be torturously awkward as in some of the lesser Altman films.
In BLACK AND WHITE we get helpings of both, though I think by the end the
latter response wins out. Most of the invigorating exchanges happen when Robert
Downy JR (as an eccentric gay man, though acting completely different from the
eccentric gays he portrayed in HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS and WONDER BOYS) is on
screen. Much of the film's comedy comes from when he hits on various unassuming
men, one of those being Mike Tyson (who is fetishized here in the same way that
Jim Brown was in FINGERS), who comes across a little brighter than you would
expect, though reacts exactly the way you'd expect. Another terrific example is
a scene wherein a bunch of black gangsters confront a white club owner (Scott
Caan) over salary, with guns instead of negotiating tactics.
But alas, those are like a Janeane Garofalo appearance in a poorly made film
(i.e. just about her entire output). The energy of those scenes only work to
show how good the film could have been had Toback reigned himself in. Much of
the movie becomes repetitive with elliptical conversations that don't lead
anywhere. It's as if Toback blew his load early on and had nothing more to say
so he simply repeated himself. That's a shame because the essential idea, to
explore an identity crisis among white teenagers aching to be black (hip), is
one of great promise.
But Toback doesn't explore these ideas, or points of views, he simply has his
characters yap at us, using such devices as a documentarian who asks the white
kids direct questions (giving them a chance to provide lengthy explanations),
or unfocused conversations between blacks ("What do these white people want
from us"). Instead of exploring the culture, he presents us with diatribes and
monologues (all be it highly improvised, but Toback still controls the content)
given by a crew of actors all in hopes of getting to the "truth". Whatever
truths we get come entirely from these Hollywood actors (from teen idols like
Jared Leto and Elijah Wood to ex-supermodels making an attempt at artistic
credibility like Brooke Shields and Claudia Schiffer) attempting to emulate a
culture I doubt they know much about.
In the Tobakian tradition he intertwines a pulp thriller plot with his
ponderous anthropological explorations. That plot concerns a hyper verbal cop
(Ben Stiller) who offers a college basketball star (real life point guard Allan
Huston in a relatively bland performance) a bribe to throw a game. This plot
doesn't go anywhere interesting, nor does it cohere with the rest of the film,
but Toback has found something interesting in Stiller's character, who isn't
much unlike the James Caan character (Toback's stand in, I'm convinced) in THE
GAMBLER. He's an ex-con (referred to by others in the film as "the gambler")
searching (not too swiftly) for some sort of redemption. The character is so
interesting on his own that I would like to see him get his own movie. Ditto
for Downy and (trust me this was a big surprise) Claudia Schiffer. Though her
character is a typically beautiful, cunning, female fatale (whose motives still
remain unclear to me) Schiffer plays her with such a cold, detached ideation
that she transcends the Sharon Stone-esque similarities and becomes a rather
potent and chilling force. Her final bit (during the end credits) gave me
chills because of there not-so-subtle ramifications. Unfortunately Toback gives
the majority of screen time to the stoical, emotionless Power whose cold stare
never hints at anything beyond coldness.
I know I've given the film a harsh review, but I still applaud Toback for the
effort. He's a true renegade, and it's quite extraordinary that he got such an
eclectic cast to perform with such intemperance. He gets these stars to do
things we've never seen them do and with a terrifically reckless abandon. He's
also exploring the American culture with a kind of film that, at least on the
surface, resembles the inventive cinema of the early 70's. Currently, we
occasionally get Oliver Stone's bombastic ramblings on American institutions,
but those are pandering at best. Even the majority of independent films shy
away from cultural examination, opting instead for gleeful family dysfunction
and cool detached white gangsters. (Though to be fair within the last year
we've seen several films attempting to get back to this). Toback is
unsuccessful, but he clearly had a vision and while he might not have tapped
the pulse of the zeitgeist, he at least hit the wrist, which is something, I
guess. It was reported that Toback ended up with four hours of possible footage
to cut down. I'm willing to bet that there is a truly brilliant film in there
somewhere. Instead Toback fished out a mediocre one.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Jon Popick
Although most descriptions of this film will suggest that Black & White
is primarily about white America's fascination with black culture, there
are actually three additional facets to its story.  People seem to
immediately latch on to the idea of a group of rich, white teenagers
from Manhattan's Upper East Side that fall in love with the whole
hip-hop mentality.  They come from big houses with black servants and,
in their eyes, there is nothing cooler than hangin' wit' the homeboys
down at the crib.  These kids are played by William Lee Scott (October
Sky), Eddie Kaye Thomas (American Pie), Bijou Phillips (Sugar Town),
Gaby Hoffmann (200 Cigarettes) and Elijah Wood (The Faculty).
The second piece revolves around a gangsta named Rich Bower (Wu-Tang's
Power, in his film debut), who desperately wants to shed his criminal
past and become a rap mogul.  This change in lifestyle means that Rich
has to deal with white people for the first time in his business life.
In addition to having the little caucasian kids flock to him, Rich's
crew also includes fellow Wu-Tang Clansmen Method Man and Raekwon, the
latter of whom also serves as the film's associate producer.
Story No. 3 involves Rich's best friend Dean (N.Y. Knick Allan Houston,
Blue Chips), a basketball player dating a genius anthropology grad
student (supermodel Claudia Schiffer).  Dean is approached by a shady
character (Ben Stiller, Mystery Men) that offers him a wad of cash to
shave points off of an upcoming game.
The fourth section in Black & White concerns a sexually ambiguous
husband-and-wife documentary filmmaking duo played by Brooke Shields
(The Bachelor) and Robert Downey Jr. (Wonderboys – that's two films in a
row that he's played a gay character named Terry).  They're crazy about
the idea of making a film about the black-acting white kids, and much of
Black & White is shown through the eyes of their camera, giving the film
a bit of a documentary feel itself.
There are other elements to the story, but these four make up the
majority of Black & White.  The result seems like an ambitious attempt
at remaking Robert Altman's Nashville into a hip-hop flick.  But it's
just not that interesting.  While the film is sort of curiously
unpredictable, the only story that held my interest was Dean and the
point-shaving incident.  I am interested in the phenomenon where white
youth are drawn to the whole hip-hop thing, but Black & White never
takes a stab at trying to answer why.
Much is made of the scene with potential future cellmates Downey Jr. and
Mike Tyson (playing himself).  It deserves the buzz - the improvised gem
is as electrifying as it is frightening.  Tyson does a surprisingly good
job in the film, as does Schiffer, who is somehow believable as a
braniac.  Writer/director James Toback (Two Girls and a Guy) allegedly
picked up random street kids to help him edit the film in an attempt to
achieve a more realistic feel.  It's gritty and all, but there isn't
much meat to it.
1:38 – R for adult language, strong sexual content, violence, nudity and
drug use

Author
Akiva Gottlieb

Black and White
rated R
Screen Gems
98 minutes
starring Scott Caan, Robert Downey Jr., Stacy Edwards, Allan Houston, 
Gaby Hoffmann, Kidada Jones, Jared Leto, Marla Maples, Joe Pantoliano, 
Bijou Phillips, Power, Raekwon, Claudia Schiffer, William Lee Scott, 
Brooke Shields, Ben Stiller, Eddie Kaye Thomas, James Toback, Mike 
Tyson, Elijah Wood, Kim Matulova
written and directed by James Toback
A Review by Akiva Gottlieb
James Toback is no stranger to controversy. In 1998, his brilliant "Two 
Girls And A Guy" was slapped with an NC-17 because of a sex scene that 
contained not a trace of nudity. His latest film, "Black and White", 
also received an NC-17 for a pre-credit sequence involving mE9nage a =
trois in Central Park between a black man and two white teenage girls. 
Both films were eventually cut to receive a more marketable R rating, 
but each one is crafted with the skill of a filmmaker unafraid of taking 
risks.
It's too bad, then, that "Black and White" is as stagnant as it is. It 
is supposed to be an opus about race relations in New York City, but 
ultimately, the film is as inconsequential as any one of the 
underdeveloped caricatures that this ensemble cast attempts to animate. 
However, that doesn't stop it from being an entertaining 98-minute 
diversion.
Toback has fashioned "Black and White" unconventionally. He allowed his 
talented ensemble to improvise many scenes in the film. I'm sure Toback 
made this choice in order to add some realism to his character study, 
but most of the time, the improvisation leads to dialogue that is 
unnecessary, silly and artificial.
The plot of "Black and White" involves a dread-locked Brooke Shields, 
playing a documentary filmmaker out to study the recent phenomenon of 
upper class white kids who pretend to live the hip-hop lifestyle. Along 
with her closeted gay husband (Robert Downey Jr., who starred in 
Toback's "Two Girls And A Guy"), she follows around a group of Manhattan 
teenagers (Bijou Phillips, Elijah Wood, Gaby Hoffmann, Eddie Kaye 
Thomas) on their daily journey to "the 'hood", where they meet up with 
members of the fictional rap group Cream Team (Power, Raekwon, Method 
Man),
Meanwhile, Dean (Allan Houston), a local basketball player, receives 
$50,000 from a mysterious man (Ben Stiller) in order to lose a game. His 
girlfriend (Claudia Schiffer) tells him to "be true to yourself", and 
taking her advice gets him into trouble with the law.
There is an already infamous scene in "Black and White" which finds 
Robert Downey Jr. hitting on a hilarious Mike Tyson (playing himself). 
The fun of the encounter is derived from Toback's clever improvisation 
guidelines. He told Downey to make a move on Tyson, and told Tyson that 
Downey would merely come up and make conversation. After Downey gets a 
little too close, Tyson slaps him across the face. "But what if he kills 
me?" Downey asked Toback. Toback replied, "Look at it this way; firstly, 
I'll get it on camera and we'll have a great scene and secondly, if he 
does kill you, what more dramatic way is there to go?" This is a 
director with a unique vision.
For a while, "Black and White" gets by on the charm of fish-out-of-water 
encounters like the aforementioned Downey-Tyson sequence. But the charm 
easily wears thin since many of the actors give irritating performances. 
NBA star Allan Houston, supermodel Claudia Schiffer, and rapper Power 
all make unsuccessful transitions into acting. Also, Toback's film works 
better when it's not worrying about plot. Towards the end, as "Black and 
White" works toward its weak denouement, it becomes a conventional 
murder story; one that isn't particularly interesting.
Toback is obviously aiming for a dissection of role-playing in society, 
but it rarely works as such. Instead, it's a day-in-the-life journey 
across the respective 'cribs' of those living "the lifestyle", in one 
way or another. To call it a dissection would give Toback too much 
credit, because he never gets under the skin of his characters in a way 
that Robert Altman might have.
The "wigga" phenomenon was explored in last year's critically reviled 
"Whiteboys", and more explorations of the matter seem pointless. "Black 
and White" tells its viewer "to thine own self be true," but it 
glorifies a culture that would contradict the statement.

Author
John Beachem
I'm going to keep this one fairly short, folks. In fact, I'm not even going
to attempt a plot summary because there isn't any plot in "Black and White".
James Toback, previously responsible for releasing the atrocious "Two Girls
and a Guy" on unsuspecting audiences back in 1997, has created a true piece
of garbage here. This is the kind of movie that screams for an NC-17 rating,
being filled with fairly explicit sex scenes, constant violence, and more
foul language than you hear in any Quentin Tarantino film. The MPAA rating
system is supposed to keep kids from seeing a movie like this, but the
theater I saw it in was filled with young high school students. I know it's
naive to think that kids won't see a movie like this no matter what kind of
rating it has, yet I can't help but think an NC-17 rating would have
prevented at least a few kids from attending.
First I'll try to cover what I liked about this movie, which shouldn't take
too long. There are one or two slightly comical moments, though I can't seem
to remember what they involved. That about sums up what I liked about this
movie. I don't often award one or five star ratings, but I was very tempted
to give only one to this piece of filth. I knew I was in trouble as soon as
the film started with a semi-pornographic scene involving two of the main
characters (Bijou Phillips, Power) and one minor character in a threesome in
the middle of the woods. I suppose the purpose of this scene was to convey
how messed up these kids are, but it struck me as being present only for
shock value. In fact, there are several sex scenes sprinkled throughout
"Black and White" which enhance the so-called story in no way.
I will hand one thing to Toback, he pulled in quite a cast. Ben Stiller,
Robert Downey Jr., Brooke Shields, Claudia Schiffer, and the great Joe
Pantoliano all make appearances in this god forsaken movie. Stiller
("There's Something About Mary") plays a gambler (a somewhat
autobiographical decision by Toback I think) who appears very few times and
never quite fits in with the rest of the movie. Robert Downey Jr. (the
horrendous "Two Girls and a Guy") plays a gay man, who I believe was
intended to be humorous but was simply vulgar instead. Brooke Shields ("The
Blue Lagoon") and Claudia Schiffer both show up in very minor roles, which
distract the audience rather than add anything to the movie. Last, but
certainly not least, is Joe Pantoliano ("The Matrix", "Bound"), who is
completely wasted as a father of two of the young, stupid characters.
Showing up in a hilariously pointless cameo is Mike Tyson himself.
Allow me to now point out the half dozen or so items which make this a
horrendous movie. One, half the dialogue is completely unintelligble. The
characters banter back and forth, swearing every other word and saying
things which no one over the age of fifteen could possibly understand. Two,
there is no plot to speak of. There are a few subplots involving things like
sports gambling and coping with ones identity, but none of these side
stories are ever developed. Three, I think this was supposed to be a
profound look at racism and life in an inner city, but it succeeds only at
insulting members of both races. Fourth, there is no direction whatsoever.
The movie jumps aimlessly from person to person and situation to situation
without any idea where it is going. Lastly, the film's ending left me with a
sick feeling in my stomach. I normally don't give away plot points, but the
movie's ending seems to imply that family can triumph over anything by doing
things like pulling together to lie and cover up murders. "Black and White"
runs the longest 98 minutes you'll ever experience. I recommend it to
absolutely no one and give it one and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/da54d7633c37df3e882568b400043295?OpenDocument
A very unique and brutal subculture exists in America these days.  It's
a strange juxtaposition of harsh street life and uber-materialistic
greed tempered with a sense of justifiability from a code of unwritten
ethics.  The world is that of the gangsta rappers, the ghetto boys, and
the thug-life advocators that dominate the world of hip-hop and rap
music.  Black and White, the latest film by James Toback, explores this
subculture that grows stronger with every new generation it affects.
The hardest thing about an outsider trying to infiltrate a subculture
and explain it to the masses is that the truth is often lost in the
translation.  Toback throws together a huge canvas of characters and
actors in attempt to create a clear picture of why white kids are
motivated to impersonate black rappers' lifestyles and why rich whit
guys treat black rappers like Arnold and Willis from Diff'rent Strokes.
Everybody is in this film.  Brooke Shields and Robert Downey Jr. play
documentarians trying to capture the essence behind the influence of the
hip-hop movement on Generation Y kids.  Ben Stiller is a cop trying to
take down one of the hip-hop artists portrayed in the film by Power (of
the rap group Wu-Tang Clan).  A crop of newer faces – Jared Leto, Gaby
Hoffman, Scott Caan, William Lee Scott – appear throughout in the film
in various supporting roles.  But the strangest casting for the film, I
must admit, is Mike Tyson.  The scary thing is that he pulls off a
decent job.  Which is a selling point of the movie: Overall, the film is
filled with actors stretching their acting chops and trying to work
against type and prove they're above their usual mediocre material.
Toback directs the actors in the film to improv their way through a
roughly written script and, in turn, try to make some sense of the
strange plot twists.  Some of the scenes work well, especially one where
Robert Downey Jr. hits on Mike Tyson, but some of the scenes have that
`movie of the week' feeling.  The main fault with the film is that it
fails to make any real statement about its subject matter or explain
much about the actions of the characters.  Was Toback's intent to
explore the hip-hop culture or simply to exploit it like the rich, white
guys in the film?  Then again, that's how he cast himself in the movie.
And you know, I guess that's what he really is.
Director/Writer: James Toback
Starring: Scott Caan, Robert Downey Jr., Stacy Edwards, Allan Houston,
Gaby Hoffmann, Kidada Jones, Jared Leto, Marla Maples, Joe Pantoliano,
Bijou Phillips, Power, Raekwon, Claudia Schiffer, William Lee Scott,
Brooke Shields, Ben Stiller, Eddie Kaye Thomas, James Toback, Mike
Tyson, Elijah Wood, Kim Matulova
Producers: Daniel Bigel, Mark Burg
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BLACK AND WHITE (2000) 
Rated R; running time 100 minutes
Genre: Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0165643 
Official site: http://www.blackandwhitefilm.com/  
Written by: James Toback
Directed by: James Toback
Starring: Power, Raekwon, Bijou Phillips, Brooke Shields, 
Robert Downey Jr., Mike Tyson, Ben Stiller, Allan Houston, 
Claudia Schiffer, William Lee Scott, Gaby Hoffmann, Kidada Jones, 
Eddie Kaye Thomas, James Toback, Elijah Wood, Joe Pantoliano, 
Sticky Fingaz, Method Man, Garry Pastore (Benny Bones), 
Kim Matulova (Kim), Jared Leto (Casey), Scott Caan (Scotty), 
Stacy Edwards (Sheila King), Marla Maples (Muffy) 
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsb&w.html
Not this time: with BLACK AND WHITE having come out so quickly on the 
heels of fellow Ghetto Wednesday Release ROMEO MUST DIE, I decided to 
stage my own mini-protest by not seeing it on opening day last 
Wednesday--holding out until Friday or later--to do what little I could 
toward ending the Ghettoization of American movies.
But by the looks of this mess, maybe I should've extended my protest 
indefinitely.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Of the more clearly defined roles, this is as near as I can call it:
Mike Tyson (as himself) inexplicably hangs around dispensing Wisdom to 
neighborhood Scarface-wannabe Rich Bower (Power) who himself hangs on 
the one hand with rapper Cigar (Raekwon), for whom Rich is trying to get 
a record deal with Arnie Tishman (James Toback, who also wrote and 
directed B&W), who, of course, doesn't take either Cigar or Power 
seriously until they come to see him with a White lawyer-type, to whom 
Arnie laments about thuggish ruggish rappers; and on the other hand, 
with a group of White kids--chief amongst them Charlie (Bijou Phillips), 
Charlie's boyfriend Wren (Elijah Wood), their friend Marty King (Eddie 
Kaye Thomas), and Marty's brother Will (William Lee Scott)--who see 
themselves, and the Black rappers they hang with, as "niggas".  In the 
friendly, familial sense, of course. 
 [End Sarcasm]
But I'm not quite finished: Rich's other pat'na, basketballer Dean 
(Allan Houston), finds himself in a jam at the hands of both his White 
anthropology student girlfriend Greta (Claudia Schiffer) and Mark Clear 
(Ben Stiller), who offered Dean a bribe--and then some.  And on top of 
it all, documentarians Sam Donager (Brooke Shields) and her gay husband 
(yes, you read right) Terry (Robert Downey, Jr.) follow the 
self-proclaimed "niggas" around with a video camera, to try to gain some 
Understanding of just what makes these White kids want to imitate Thug 
Life.
The Upshot:
The tone was set early on in the movie; or at least, it could have been: 
moving from the opening scene of Charlie and her friend Raven (Gaby 
Hoffmann) being "used" (with their consent) by Rich as stone freeks, to 
a more staged-feeling scene with Charlie confronting her white-bread, 
upper-middle-class parents with her "Black" talk, dress, and lifestyle, 
you get the sense that there something Important was about to be 
addressed.  What would Mommy and Daddy do if they knew what their 
daughter was doing in the middle of the park just before she came home?
Had Toback chosen to stick with this part of the story, or even done a 
true documentary on the White kids, B&W would've struck a true chord in 
these times when Black culture - or more precisely, the sub-culture of 
hip-hop - is co-opted more by middle- and upper-class White youth than 
by Blacks (many of whom, like Kidada Jones' character Jesse, are trying 
to get out of the very way of life these White kids strive to emulate).  
Charlie and her cohorts were the most poignant part of the movie, and 
truly exploring their stories might have gone a long way towards really 
getting down to the brass tacks of Black and White life, at least the 
portion of it represented by those on screen.
Instead, Toback chose to take the easy, patronizing way out, by 
trivializing the White kids, ignoring most of the "Black story" except 
to (unintentionally) laughably attempt to paint Rich and his crew as 
mobster-lite thugs, and by inexplicably casting "names" such as Brooke 
Shields, Ben Stiller, and Claudia Schiffer, in roles that were downright 
painful to watch.  Shields was good in THE BACHELOR as a high-society 
type played full-bore; here, she just looks damned goofy in 
pseudo-dreadlocks and nose ring, which works against her attempt to come 
across as an outsider only minimally trying to be accepted.  
Half-stepping on her part just didn't work; her character should've 
either been all the way Down, or woefully short of the mark.  Stiller, 
obviously slumming, was just as wasted; his character's entire subplot 
could've been jettisoned, to no ill-effect, taking Dean and Greta down 
the drain with him.  And every time Schiffer opened her mouth, I wanted 
to slap it shut; her mere presence offended me in a way that's only 
understandable when you hear her character's ridiculous advice to 
Dean--"just be who you are"--not to mention her scene with Stiller.  It 
grinds my gizzards just to think about that tripe again.
There were surprises to be found, however, pleasant and unpleasant.  On 
the down side, I felt sorry for Joe Pantoliano, as District Attorney 
(and Will and Marty's father) Bill King; throughout his excruciating 
scene with Stiller, "Joey Pants" looked like he was looking for the 
quickest exit out of this flick.  On the up side was a triple threat: I 
never thought I'd say this, but Mike Tyson has a future in acting, even 
if it's just acting as himself.  As he did in WONDER BOYS recently, 
Robert Downey Jr. continues to rise above poor material given to him.  
And as hoodie-rat Charlie, Bijou Phillips stole the show; full of the 
gruff and bravado that Power should have been displaying, Phillips' 
Charlie was the one character who remained consistently worth watching 
throughout this movie.
Three decent performances out of a movie of tens of bad ones, though, is 
never A Good Thing.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I'll set my own intolerance of the ignorance behind propping oneself and 
ones friends up as "niggas", aside for a second.  Above and beyond that, 
the true shame of this film is that Toback didn't listen to his own 
words, said through his characters Charlie, Cigar, and Dean: Charlie 
spoke of wanting to be something other than she was, but realized that 
it was probably "just a phase" that she'd grow out of; Cigar complained 
about being treated by the White kids as "animals on display" (as did 
Tyson, of Sam); and Dean, in a reasonable voice just before his 
character went stoopid, told Real Truth about Whites and Blacks 
(paraphrased): "there's no one single type of 'Black' or 'White' person; 
we're all different".  
And I'll go out on a limb here by saying that Toback needs to get a real 
education in Ghetto Life before attempting something like this again.  A 
good schoolin' might lead him to asking the tough questions of his 
mimicking White kiddlet characters, like, "Do you also imitate the 
fellas when they're pressed for Driving/Shopping/Breathing While 
Black?", or "How quickly do you pick yourself up off the ground after 
you're slapped upside the head by the first Black person who doesn't 
take too kindly to your liberal use of the term 'niggas'?".  Inquiring 
minds want to know, Mr. Toback; were you too caught up with the hip-hop 
banter to do more than treat your characters as displays in a zoo?
Maybe it's Just Me, but I'm thinking that those sentiments could be made 
into a good film.  Toback, unfortunately, doesn't seem to be up to the 
task.  John Singleton, anyone?
Bammer's Bottom Line: 
If you just must see Black And White - and I'm sure there will be more 
than a few of you who just must - don't go into it expecting to Learn 
anything, save this: knuckleheads come in all colors.  But you knew that 
already, eh?
BLACK AND WHITE (rating: yellowlight): 
Here's a free clue for writer/director Toback: when you look at the 
world only in terms of Black and White, you often miss the greyshades.  
Or didn't you hear what "Dean" said?

Author
Mac VerStandig
---Please note, a copy of this review will be posted to
http://www.moviereviews.org/black_and_white.htm ---
Imagine Larry Clark's Kids with big name stars and a director conflicted
about what can and cannot be shown on screen. The shock value is lost. That
is exactly what Black and White is, an honest look at the streets of New
York City that has little effect on the viewer.
The film opens with a certain sexual act involving two Caucasian girls and
an African-American guy in the not-so-thick woods. Little kids look on as
their presumably virgin-eyes are corrupted. This is undoubtedly the film's
most effective scene because a) the three actors are unknown to most
audiences, which provides a certain reality, and b) it is the most graphic
that the movie has to offer. From there on, everything is downhill.
Director James Toback attempts to tap one of Generation X's most peculiar
traits: upper-class white teenagers attempting to infiltrate lower-class
black society. His characters can be divided into three basic groups:
trust-fund teens that meet the above criteria, poor black teens that want to
make a better life for themselves and poor black teens that seem to
altogether lack such drive. He also includes a freelance documentary
filmmaker (Brooke Shields), her gay husband (Robert Downey Jr. who is one of
the film's highlights), boxer Mike Tyson (as himself) and a disgruntled
undercover detective (Ben Stiller).
The language used in Black and White is, in a way, very revealing. A
classroom scene shows that the teenagers' teachers care. Yet their
vocabularies are a dense version of broken English perhaps most similar to
Ebonics. Although the infamous language of Mark Furman is considered
derogatory, a similar word, `niga,' apparently isn't. In the aforementioned
class, kids swear and no one flinches. Yet when such language is used at
fancy dinner tables, the teens' parents are outraged. There is a great
contradiction between street settings and home settings, yet the movie's
subjects haven't figured that out.
Mid-film finds one of the few actual plot moments;  a murder is committed.
The most surprising thing about this scene isn't that the New York City
District Attorney's son commits the murder or that the victim dies almost
immediately, but rather the tame nature of how this is shown. For a film
that apparently seeks to shock, a little blood might have been appropriate.
The same can be said of the sex, or lack thereof. Other than the
aforementioned opening, no such acts are shown on screen. The characters
constantly talk about it, and much happens off screen, but Toback seems to
have gotten scared for reasons unapparent to this critic. Perhaps it is that
big name stars like Elijah Wood, Claudia Schiffer and Gaby Hoffman aren't
willing to show themselves on screen; an argument for a lesser-known cast.
The ultimate goal of Black and White is to make the viewer ask him or
herself questions. Here's one to start with: `What else is playing at the
local theatre?'

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Screen Gems/Palm Pictures
 Director: James Toback
 Writer: James Toback
 Cast: Scott Caan, Robert Downey Jr., Stacy Edwards, Allan
Houston, Gaby Hoffmann, Kidada Jones, Jared Leto, Marla
Maples, Joe Pantoliano, Bijou Phillips, Power, Raekwon,
Claudia Schiffer, william Lee Scott, Brooke Shields, Ben
Stiller, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Elijah Woods, Mike Tyson, Brett
Ratner
   In Warren Beatty's far superior (if obviously more
commercial) picture "Bulworth," the title character ends up
with a philosophy about race relations in America.  To
paraphrase Bulworth's view without the vulgarity, "If blacks
and whites would just get together and make babies, one with
the other, the race problem could be solved in a generation
or two."  "Bulworth" was permeated with a rap score just like
James Toback's decidedly indie film "Black and White," but
Toback's somewhat improvised and disappointingly edited
commentary on race relations is so pretentious and
convoluted that the viewer could not be blamed for thinking
that his principal motive in making it was simply to get down
with the 'hood.  Featuring an impressive cast including Elijah
Wood, Mike Tyson, Ben Stiller, Brooke Shields, Jared Leto,
Robert Downey Jr. and supermodel Claudia Schiffer, "Black
and White" wastes them one and all with dialogue that
pushes for comedic and sometimes poignant effect, but the
director's reach far exceeds his grasp.  
   Toback appears to believe that racial relations are not
going to be solved Bulworth style but that there may be hope
for relief from prejudice and hatred in the way the current
generation of young people are erasing geographical, sexual
and racial boundaries.  In this belief he appears to amend
New York Times political writer Thomas Friedman's view that
even national boundaries themselves are swiftly being
ignored in an increasingly globalized world.  Yet there are
indications even within the film that what the young white
people are doing is nothing more than a phase, and that the
more prescient among them know that they're just kids who
will inevitably shuck off their fascination with hip hop and with
their emulation of black dress, walk and talk.
   Featured at the 1999 Toronto Film Festival where as least
some in audience considered "Black and White" one of the
pleasant surprises, the movie is an ensemble piece in the
Robert Altman tradition but without much of that great
director's talent in evidence.  Opening with an attention-
getter--an interracial threesome getting it on in the park (with
the women kissing each other while caressing a black male)--
the film shifts hither and thither to embrace various scenarios. 
One such scenario recalls August Wilson's play that takes
place during the 1920s, "Ma Rainey's Black Bottom," except
that in this case the white record producer is not interested in
exploiting a black group's talents but rather in questioning
whether he should deal at all with a guy who has a criminal
background.  Rich Bower (Power) enjoys the central role if,
indeed, there is a hub, as a gangster who is trying to make
an honest go of things via his talents with rap.  But when a
white dude sets up a night club on his uptown turf, he gets
mean (if not lean) and demands seventy percent of the take--
a command that he and his group back up with guns.  
   Robert Downey Jr. appears as Terry, a bisexual who is
married to a woman who wears the family pants, Sam
(Brooks Shields).  While Sam gets brashly into people's faces
filming a documentary about the convergence of black and
white culture among the young, Terry comes on to several
males--including Mike Tyson, who plays himself--in displays
that are meant to be hysterical but which are obvious and fall
flat.  The only absorbing action in the 100-minute movie--
which pushes fiction about as far as it will go before it
crosses the border into documentary--involves a police
detective (Ben Stiller) who was once a gangster but who
seeks redemption behind a badge and even a new name. 
Trapping a star basketball player, Dean (Allan Houston of the
New York Knicks) into accepting a bribe with the aim of using
him to get the goods on gang boss Rich Bower, he finds that
his action leads not to his redemption but to the murder of a
young man he had grown to like.
   Teachers in the audience may envy the role of Casey
(Jared Leto, who looks dashing in his platinum blond hair and
black sweater), as he instructs a highly articulate class in
what appears to be a great learning experience but is, in fact
nothing more than the standard sort of rap session that
passes for education in some of New York secondary
schools.  All in all the film--which in a brief time tries to
embrace sexuality, experimentation with identity, and humor--
succeeds in none of the above thanks to limp direction and a
script that's as mushy as a scoop of overcooked grits.
Rated R.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "BLACK AND WHITE" (Palm Pictures/Sony Screen Gems)
  There are not too many films that attempt to give viewers an
insight into contemporary American society like Spike Lee's "Jungle
Fever" and "Get on the Bus" along with Warren Beatty's "Bulworth." But
now there's James Toback's "Black and White," which delves into race
relations and hip-hop music in New York City.  Toback sets the stage
in an early classroom scene in which a young black girl talks about
how all the white kids she knows romanticize the ghetto life, while
all her black friends just want to get out of it. There are several
intersecting plotlines. Brooke Shields and Robert Downey Jr. play
documentary film-makers examining privileged white teens who are
obsessed with street life. That's Elijah Wood, Gaby Hoffman, Bijou
Phillips (daughter of John Phillips of the Mamas and the Papas), Eddie
Thomas and Kim Matulova. Then there's the rap mogul/gangsta, played by
Oli "Power" Grant from Wu-Tang Clan, and Joe Pantoliano as a District
Attorney with family problems. Ben Stiller is a crooked cop who bribes
a college basketball star, played by Allan Houston of the Knicks, plus
Mike Tyson as - who else? - Mike Tyson. Claudia Schiffer surfaces as a
grad student. Even Donald Trump's former wife, Marla Maples, shows
up. James Toback obviously improvised much of the fragmentary action
as he went along with no sense of cohesion or purpose, so this is not
a smooth, evenly edited picture, but perhaps it isn't supposed to
be. And the most authentic buzz about deceit and treachery comes from
the recruited performers, not the professional actors. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Black and White" is a complex, sexually
energetic, fast-paced 4.  It's a risky, interesting concept but not a
very good movie.
