Title
Review for Suicide Kings (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie review and trivia, go to http:/surf.to/joblo/
Christopher Walken re-enacts his role as the low-talkin', wise-cracking
mobster he twice played in Abel Ferrara's KING OF NEW YORK, and my
personal favourite TRUE ROMANCE (9/10). This film blends some of the
camaraderie of the gangsters from THE USUAL SUSPECTS (7.5/10), with the
hipper-than-thou Tarantino undertones of the RESERVOIR DOGS (9/10)(see
Little Known Facts below for an homage to DOGS in this film), and comes
up with another cinematic cocktail served via slick characters. 
PLOT:
Five rich friends kidnap an ex-mob boss in order to get him to help
them retrieve the kidnapped sister of one of the guys. The mobster is
handily tied up to a chair and forced by said fellas, to attempt a
recovery of the snatched lass, despite him having nothing to do with
the actual caper. Soon enough, the friends all start suspecting each
other of being involved in the sister's kidnapping, while the cool
mobster gently massages their collective brains for relevant
information.
CRITIQUE:
Interesting ensemble piece that features plenty of good actors doing
their stuff, in a script obviously written within the Tarantino
universe, this film offers some cool dialogue, cooler characters, but
an overall flawed plot line, that finally falters in its ambiguous
conclusion. I don't want to be blunt about this whole thing, but the
fact of the matter is that a gentleman by the name of Christopher
Walken just rocks!! And I'm not talking about in this film alone. I'm
talking about the man's legacy of playing extremely creepy, warped,
dangerous, but always interesting characters with the Walken twist of
lime always stuffed in on the side. If you like this man's acting
abilities, his skill to consistently project fear across a movie
screen, his capacity to convey fierce emotion by simply drawing his
eyelids to a close, his charismatic smile and blinding jet-black hair,
you will enjoy him in this film.
Admittedly, the rest of the cast also rack up some brownie points in
their respective roles, with Denis Leary drumming up some of the
funniest lines this side of his jellyfish boots. But all in all, the
film lacked the originality needed to make it a good film. It had some
of the elements, some wired scenes, some great actors, but it was
missing the key element that made all of the previously mentioned films
re-watchable over and over and over again: a great story. You could
slap all the bells and whistles you want around Christopher Walken's
chicken-like neck, but you won't garner half the nacho-munching film
geeks that the others would, unless you manage to lasso a great script
into the molten mix. This film has some of the pieces of that
mish-mash, but can't complete the magic puzzle because of its lack of
originality, uninspired soundtrack and weak ending. Walken and Leary
alone deserve salsas for being the awesome ball-busters that they are,
but the film as a whole works particularly when served as an
after-dinner divertissement, or a pre-supper aperitif. Fun enough to
watch and be playfully amused, flawed enough to forget once the last
melted morsel of cheese is scarfed off the proverbial nacho plate.     
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
There is an obvious homage to Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS in
this film (His influence is palpable in the screenplay), in the one
scene where the two kidnappers are watching said classic motion picture
on the tube (Blink and you'll miss it.) It's the scene in which Mr.
Pink is hauling ass from the cops via a stolen vehicle.
Christopher Walken's real name is Ronald Walken. He was director George
Lucas' second choice for the role of Han Solo in 1977's STAR WARS
(8.5/10). He has been married to the same woman for over 25 years. One
of his most famous quotes, "I make movies that nobody will see. I've
made movies that even I have never seen."
Denis Leary is the cousin of TV's late night talk show host himself,
Conan O'Brien.
This film is based on a short story written by Don Stanford, called
"The Hostage." 
Henry Thomas is better known for his childhood role as Elliot, the
lucky kid who befriended E.T.
Sean Patrick Flanery is a triathlete with a black belt in karate.
Jay Mohr was a performer on TV's "Saturday Night Live" for a few years.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Don't go dying on me," the old mobster's attorney tells his
client.  "Don't forget, I'm a lawyer.  I've got friends in hell."  The
lawyer, who has just used his money to pay the mobster's ransom since
the banks don't open until morning, doesn't want any untimely demise
until he gets his loan paid back.
     Dark comedies are among the most overused genres in Hollywood.
Many directors think that all they need to do is to turn down the
lights, get a bunch of angst-filled actors, find an outlandish script
and, voila, they've got a film noir a la Quentin Tarantino and a recipe
for instant riches.  Although many have failed, director Peter O'Fallon
manages to make an intelligent and funny picture out of well-worn
materials.  SUICIDE KINGS, which has nothing whatsoever to do with
suicide, delights sheerly through the strength of its execution rather
than the freshness of its plot.
     The lead in the strong ensemble cast is a raspy-voiced Christopher
Walken as the aging mobster known as Charles Barrett - Mr. Barrett to
the rich, college-age kids who make the mistake of kidnapping him.
They know who they are abducting, but they do not quite appreciate his
cleverness or his tenacity.  Walken, who manages to shine in movies
good and bad, is at the top of his form here.  Although he spends
almost the entire picture lashed to a chair, his words and his devious
smile command our complete attention.  This fast paced film is a lot of
fun, and Walken seems to be enjoying every minute of it.
     A subplot has Denis Leary playing Barrett's hit man, Lono Vecchio.
In a scene reminiscent of PULP FICTION, Vecchio argues in his car with
his sidekick about a wide variety of issues from why Vecchio paid $1500
for a pair of "fish skin" boots to why he gave $500 to a bum with a
bucket.  Leary, in a beautifully controlled performance, keeps the
repartee going without ever missing a beat.
     The "kids" are played by Henry Thomas as Avery Chasten, Sean
Patrick Flanery as Max Minot, Jay Mohr as Brett Campbell and Jeremy
Sisto as T.K.  Johnny Galecki plays a fifth kid, Ira Reder,
accidentally along for the ride since the other four use his parents'
big summer house to hold their hostage.  The setup for the story is
that Avery's sister has been kidnapped.  The kidnappers have demanded a
two million dollar ransom and will be cutting off parts of her anatomy
until they get it.  It seems she has already lost a finger.
     The spoiled kids devise a plan whereby they'll hold Mr. Barrett,
cutting off identical pieces of his body, until he uses his connections
to get rid of the kidnappers of Avery's sister.  In addition, they want
him to pay the ransom since they figure their rich parents are too
cheap to come up with the loot.
     The already complicated plot gets even more so when Barrett finds
out that there's an "inside player."  As the kids try to figure out who
it is, their camaraderie begins to implode.  I figured it out who it
was right away, but that isn't important.  It is the dynamics and the
tension that ensues that creates rewarding viewing, not the mystery.
     At one point, Barrett, taped to the chair, fusses to his
incompetent hosts that he's about to die of boredom.  Although his
complaint turns out to be a ruse, boredom is a calamity unlikely to
afflict the audience.
     SUICIDE KINGS runs 1:46.  It is rated R for profanity and
sporadic, strong violence and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Matt Williams
Kidnapping thrillers seem to be the rage these days, and Suicide Kings
is a film that's so eager to join the trend that it has not just one,
but two!  But more doesn't necessarily equate to better, and the only
thing that holds the film together is a rock solid performance by
Christopher Walken.
Rich student Avery Chasten (Henry Thomas) has a problem that his friends
are trying to help him solve. His sister, Lisa (Laura T. Harris), has
been kidnapped by some goons who are demanding $2 million in ransom.
Avery's dad doesn't have that kind of liquid cash, so Avery's pal Brett
Campbell (Jay Mohr) has come up with this brilliant scheme:  kidnap
mafia don Charlie Barrett (Christopher Walken), aka Carlo Bartolucci,
and force him to pay the ransom.
Assisting Avery and Brett in this crime are Lisa's boyfriend Max Minot
(Sean Patrick Flannery), med student T.K. (Jeremy Sisto), and the
constantly worrying Ira Reder (Johnny Galecki). Meanwhile, Charlie's
hitman/driver Lono (Denis Leary) is on his boss' trail.
The first thing that jumps out at you about Suicide Kings is its
ridiculous premise. What type of brain-dead scheme is this?  I mean, are
we supposed to believe that the characters fully expect Charlie to pay
$2 million and forget about it?  True, this is supposed to be a
last-ditch effort, but the "Suicide" in the title would be a simpler way
out.
But, incredulous premise aside, Suicide Kings hums when Christopher
Walken is onscreen. Even though he spends most of the movie taped to a
chair, he's still the strongest presence in the room.  The mental games
he plays with his five kidnappers are intensely interesting, and nearly
make the movie worthwhile.
Of the five kidnappers, the only one who nearly holds his own against
Walken is, surprisingly, Jay Mohr (if only he launched into his superb
Walken impersonation...). That's not to say that the other four do a bad
job, but they all seem to wither when next to an actor of Walken's
caliber.
Unfortunately, the movie retreats from its main story too often.  Each
character seemingly has one story to tell, and as the movie mechanically
plods along, he tells it (usually in some sort of contrived one-on-one
with Charlie).  But not one of these digressions is either entertaining
or interesting.  Even the usually lively Denis Leary is subdued and
bland in his wandering subplot (which never makes that much sense).
The film's climax does contain a few good twists, but nothing an
observant viewer shouldn't expect.  However, the ultimate resolution of
those twists is disappointing.
"Disappointing" is a word that is apt to describe the whole film as
well.  Walken gives a terrific performance, and it's too bad he's duct
taped to the rest of the film like Charlie to the chair.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Christopher Walken, Denis Leary, Jay Mohr, Henry Thomas, 
      Sean Patrick Flanery, Jeremy Sisto, Johnny Galecki, Laura Harris, 
      Nina Siemaszko, Laura San Giacomo
Director: Peter O'Fallon
Producers: Wayne Rice, Morrie Eisenman
Screenplay: Josh McKinney, Gina Goldman, Wayne Rice based on the short 
      story "The Hostage" by Don Stanford
Cinematography: Christopher Baffa
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: Live Entertainment
     Ever since PULP FICTION blazed its way into the spotlight in 1994, 
countless films have attempted to re-capture the heady mix of violence, 
snappy dialogue, and dark comedy that Quentin Tarantino tapped into.  
Thus far, it has proven to be a difficult brew to distill, as countless 
lackluster attempts have proven.  SUICIDE KINGS, from first-time feature 
director Peter O'Fallon, is one of the few motion pictures to come 
close.  And, while the narrative is a little too erratic to ascend to 
the PULP FICTION level, the tone and style are on target.  For those who 
aren't offended by extreme profanity and violence, SUICIDE KINGS offers 
a kinetic and surprisingly funny two hours.
     Once upon a time, in another life, Charlie Bennett (played by the 
always-delightful Christopher Walken) went by the name of Carlo 
Bartolucci.  Under that identity, as the head of the New York City 
Mafia, he was one of the most feared men in America.  But times change, 
and Charlie has gone legit.  Now, he's just an average, tax-paying 
businessman.  His wits have grown dull and he lets down his guard too 
easily -- as he discovers when he makes the mistake of trusting a group 
of apparently-harmless, rich, college-age kids that he meets at his 
regular restaurant.  They are Brett (Jay Mohr), Avery (Henry Thomas), 
Max (Sean Patrick Flanery), and T.K. (Jeremy Sisto) -- and their goal is 
to kidnap Charlie and hold him hostage.  But, although the former 
organized crime kingpin nearly foils the attempt, he is eventually 
subdued and drugged.  When he awakens, he finds himself tied to a chair 
inside a New Jersey mansion, and notices that his captors have cut off 
one of his fingers. 
     Charlie is quickly informed why he has been snatched.  Apparently, 
Avery's sister, Lisa (Laura Harris), is the victim of an unrelated 
kidnapping, and the men holding her are demanding a $2 million ransom.  
Avery and his friends have decided that Charlie is an important enough 
underworld figure that he can use his old connections to free Lisa.  
And, not willing to leave anything to chance, they decide that force is 
the most viable form of persuasion.  However, while Charlie may be out 
of practice, he's no dummy, and, as the tension mounts, he plays his 
captors off against each other, widening fissures in their 
relationships.  Meanwhile, his faithful henchman, Lono Vecchio (Denis 
Leary), is closing in on the place where his boss is being held.
     If you can get past some of the film's basic setup 
implausibilities, SUICIDE KINGS is a lot of fun.  It's more of a dark 
comedy than anything else, and several scenes are borderline-hilarious.  
The film is somewhat less successful in its attempt to develop a mystery 
(which of Charlie's captors, if any, is in on Lisa's kidnapping?) -- 
there are a few unnecessary red herrings and at least one plot twist too 
many.  Nevertheless, this is just one facet of a clever and involving 
storyline, and the real meat of the movie is the verbal chess match 
between Charlie and the others, who treat him with mixture of fear and 
awe.  The dialogue is well-written and director O'Fallon brings an 
element of tension to the quirky atmosphere.  With all of the guns, 
knives, needles, and frayed nerves, it's difficult to guess what's going 
to happen next.
     I also enjoyed the subplot featuring Denis Leary, who plays the 
most Tarantino-esque character in the film, a hitman who wears $1500 
shoes and offers a homeless person $500 to better himself.  His 
interaction with his sidekick is reminiscent of the Travolta/Jackson 
exchanges in PULP FICTION, only here the subject matter is shoes, not 
burgers.  There's also an odd-but-effective scene in which Vecchio 
chastens a man with a penchant for beating up women.  
     Given his track record, it should come as no surprise that Walken 
steals the movie.  While the role of Charlie isn't new territory for the 
veteran actor, there are a few twists, since he's essentially the "good 
guy" here (at least in as much as an ex-mobster can be a "good guy").  
In one of his most impressive outings in recent years, Walken never goes 
over the top -- for him, this is a subdued portrayal, but it's fully of 
dry, self-deprecating wit and subtle menace.  Charlie is constantly 
joking with his captors, but none of them forgets how truly dangerous he 
is, and what the consequences could be if he gets free.  The other 
bravura performance belongs to Denis Leary, who was born to play a part 
like this with this sort of clipped, rapid-fire dialogue.  It suits him 
perfectly, and, while Vecchio is far from a well-developed character, 
he's always a pleasure to watch.
     The actors playing the young captors are less charismatic, and 
their characters are not as interesting.  The best of the bunch is Jay 
Mohr (the rival agent in JERRY MAGUIRE), who radiates hubris and 
contempt.  Sean Patrick Flanery (POWDER) gives a pleasantly relaxed and 
unforced turn as the most laid-back of the group.  I was not, however, 
all that impressed with either Henry Thomas (E.T.'s friend, who grew up 
to be in LEGENDS OF THE FALL) or Jeremy Sisto (CLUELESS).  Both are 
lackluster, although, in Thomas' case, he's playing an introvert.  Comic 
relief is effectively provided by Johnny Galecki as Ira, the unwitting 
fifth kidnapper, who becomes involved because his friends are using his 
parents' house.  ("Who tracked mud across the floor??")
     SUICIDE KINGS is a promising beginning to director Peter O'Fallon's 
big-screen career.  It isn't a perfect motion picture, but there's 
enough here to earn an enthusiastic recommendation for those who enjoy 
this genre.  While the approach isn't new, the style is invigorating and 
the storyline boasts at least a few original ideas.  The result is a 
deliciously demented comedy/thriller that will leave Tarantino fans 
applauding.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Peter O'Fallon
Cast:  Christopher Walken, Denis Leary, Jay Mohr, Henry Thomas, Sean
Patrick Flanery, Jeremy Sisto, Johnny Galecki, Laura Harris
Screenplay:  Josh McKinney, Gina Goldman, Wayne Rice
Producers:  Wayne Rice, Morrie Eisenman
Runtime:  107 min.
US Distribution:  Live
Rated R:  profanity, nudity, drug use, violence
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Suicide Kings is an entertaining, gritty crime movie about a bunch of
rich kids who kidnap a powerful mobster.  It features a lot of colorful
characters, buckets of expletives, pointless scenes that are included
strictly for entertainment value, and numerous moments of intense
graphic violence.  It's not profound or deep, or even that original, but
director Peter O'Fallon and his talented cast force the standard
material into a sly and elusively clever film that will placate even the
most picky Quentin Tarantino fans.
The film centers around four guys somewhere in their twenties:  Brett
(Jay Mohr), Avery (Henry Thomas), T.K. (Jeremy Sisto), and Max (Sean
Patrick Flanery).  We learn that Avery's sister, Lisa (Laura Harris),
has been kidnapped, and that the kidnappers are demanding two million
dollars.  Their plan is to kidnap Charlie Bennett (Christopher Walken),
and get the money that way.  They hold Charlie hostage in the home of
their friend Ira (Johnny Galecki), whose parents are out of town; Ira
gets very upset because everyone is drinking his parents' booze and
dropping priceless antiques on the floor.
What makes a film like this good are the characters and the acting. 
Walken is, of course, fantastically fun to watch as the mob guy who has
softened a bit in his later years.  Walken is a veteran actor who can
get away with playing himself, but he also manages to alter little
aspects of his personality each time to make all of his performances
subtly different.  Also great is Denis Leary, who is another actor who
usually plays himself.  Here, he's a superviolent hitman for Charlie;
he's the kind of guy who will shoot two thugs without flinching, but
decides on a whim to hand five hundred dollars to a homeless guy who
tries to wash the windows of his car.
I was also impressed with all of the younger actors.  Jay Mohr is doing
an excellent job of proving his worth as an actor, for I can't think of
a young performer who has more flair and presence as this guy.  Henry
Thomas (yes, the same Henry Thomas from E.T.) is quiet and brooding, and
handles a lot of the scenes here very well.   Sean Patrick Flanery
(Powder) is adequately interesting, as is Jeremy Sisto (who was great as
the psycho in Hideaway).  The one exception is Johnny Galecki; it's not
completely his fault, for I'm sure Ira is supposed to be an irritating
character.  But he's also supposed to be funny, and I didn't find him
particularly funny.  That's okay -- there are plenty of other characters
to divert my attention.  Not all of these characters are totally
developed, but there are a lot of them and they're interesting enough
that a little bit of missed development is hardly noticeable.
The film, because of the sharp dialogue and O'Fallon's eclectic
direction, moves swiftly and easily to its conclusion; the pace is
certain and the story never feels forced.  It seems to me that films
like this should be more common, but they aren't -- not good ones, at
least.  Certainly Suicide Kings is not as original or ingeniously
conceived as a film like Pulp Fiction, but there is enough talent at
work here to make it a ridiculously entertaining two hours.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Live Entertainment
 Director:  Peter O'Fallon
 Writer:  Wayne Rice, Gina Goldman
 Cast: Christopher Walken, Dennis Leary, henry Thomas,
Sean Patrick Flanery, Jay Mohr, Jeremy Sisto, Johnny
Galecki, Laura San Giacomo, Laura Harris, Cliff De Young
   Imagine an actor giving one of his greatest performance
while spending most of a movie taped to a chair!  The sizzling
dialogue and heart-pounding action of "Suicide King," Peter
O'Fallon's dark comedy about kidnapping evokes a
dazzling performance from Christopher Walken while
highlighting an appearance by four 20-something actors in a
film that is alternately jocose and jarring.  Moviegoers who are
fans of the work of Quentin Tarantino will take to "Suicide
Kings," but so will theatergoers who enjoyed Lyle Kessler's
"Orphans," about a middle-aged man taken hostage by young
people he refers to as the Dead End Kids.
   The kids in "Suicide Kings" are hardly dead-end, though. 
All rich--one even the son of a doctor who considers himself a
pre-med student--they are ironically desperate for cash.  The
charming Lisa (Laura Harris), sister of Avery (Henry Thomas)
and girl friend of Max (Sean Patrick Flanery) has been
kidnapped, an amputated finger sent to Avery, and a random
demand for two million dollars posted.  Unable to raise the
money on their own, the young men put together a daring and
risky plan that soon involves them way over their heads. 
They will abduct the semi-retired Mob figure, Charles Barrett
aka Carlo Bartolucci, and demand that he get his friends in
the Organization to dig up the cash.  
   The movie is loaded with breathtaking action that contends
with its broad humor, keeping the audience wide awake and
involved in scipters Wayne Rice and Gina Goldman's bracing
exchanges.  It becomes clear even in the scene involving the
chloroforming of their hostage in a madcap drive through a
New York City tunnel that these kids are as much in the game
for the sheer delight as for the money.  Brett Campbell (Jay
Mohr) is particularly convincing as the one kidnapper who
adamantly refuses to cozy up to the quartet's captive,
delivering a fully three-dimensional performance in his best
appearance to date.  Shedding his image as a stand-up
comic on Saturday Night Live and his unimpressive role as a
clueless accomplice to Jennifer Aniston's machinations in
"Picture Perfect," Mohn is captivating as the conspirator who
is opposed even to untying one of his victim's hands even
while the mobster is bleeding to death from an dismembered
digit.
   "Suicide Kings" becomes one of the year's great mobster
flicks largely by the way the rich kids are treated as
individuals with their own, distinct personalities.  The most
amusing fellow is Ira (Johnny Galecki), a nerdy guy whose
father's home is used by the gangsters as their headquarters
completely unbeknownst by the bespectacled young man who
expected nothing more than a game of poker and a few
beers.  Having a father who marks the levels of liquor in his
bottles, Ira is concerned more with cleaning up the blood on
the carpet than on the consequences of the crime, and uses
the opportunity to take revenge on the pals that must have
put him down not infrequently for his fussy ways.  Jeremy
Sisto comes across as the kid who hopes the AMA will not
look harshly on his activities when the time comes for him to
begin practicing medicine in about seven years.  A drug
addict equally adept at giving his prisoner sedating IVs as
with injecting himself with heroin, the young man known as
T.K. shows a side more concerned with most of the others
with his client's welfare, pointing out that the mobster is
probably an alcoholic whose liver is unable to process Vitamin
K and is therefore prone to bleeding freely.
   While "Suicide Kings" has a plot with enough twists and
turns to keep the audience unnerved, it features also the
comic side of Barrett's enforcer, Lono (Denis Leary), who can
shoot people without the slightest concern and yet show
remarkable defensiveness about the alligator boots for which
he paid $1,500.  
   The title "Suicide Kings" comes from the game of poker, in
which the titled monarchs are a wild card, but the best feature
of the movie is the virtual chess game in which Barrett tries to
outmaneuver his captors and save his own life by using his
wits.  Convincing the boys that the kidnapping is an inside
job, that at least one of the five affluent kids has a direct hand
in the kidnapping of Max's girl friend, Barrett demonstrates the
adage that the pen is mightier than the sword.  
   "Suicide Kings" features several scenes of intense brutality
including the bloody, bandaged hand of the captive, a
baseball-bat bashing by Lono of an abusive pimp, and an
intense tunnel ride involving the pile-up of motor vehicles
filmed with style, even poetry.  The narrative moves
relentlessly, sidetracked only once during a throwaway scene
featuring a long-haired Christopher Walken during the hippie-
influenced 1970s, a winning action piece edited sharply and
designed to appeal to an audience craving both visceral
particulars and clever colloquy.  Rated R.  Running Time: 106
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SUICIDE KINGS (director: Peter O'Fallon; cast: Christopher Walken (Carlo
Bartolucci/Charlie Barrett), Denis Leary (Lono Vecchio), Jay Mohr (Brett
Cambell), Henry Thomas (Avery Chasten), Sean Patrick Flanery (Max
Minot), Jeremy Sisto (TK), Johnny Galecki (Ira), Lisa (Laura Harris),
1997)
Another film skewed for Tarantino enthusiasts, and this one is just as
conversationally maddening, filled with vulgarities and street talk, but
no sex. It pays to be the first one on your block to do it, because
imitation is always second-hand stuff, and this film has the feel of
something already done by many other copy-cats. But it was a funny
movie, in a perverted way, even if the story line just didn't add up.
But, then again, life doesn't make sense, as Carlo Bartolucci aka
Charlie Barrett (Walken), the retired crime boss knows, and he is the
main man and reason this film comes up looking good. He gets kidnapped
by a group of rich young men: (Avery (Henry Thomas), Max (Sean Patrick
Flannery), TK (Jeremy Sisto), Brett (Jay Mohr) and Ira (Johnny
Galecki).They chloroform him, duct-tape him to a swivel chair in the
isolated, shuttered summer house in Long Island of Ira's father, and cut
off his ring finger. Ira is the only one in the group who didn't know
what was going on, as the boys showed up at his house with Charles when
he thought they were coming to play poker. He is the only funny one
among the boys, berating them for drinking his parents' liquor and
messing up the place, as he acts the part of the nerd and butt of their
jokes.
When you hear the reason why they did this, you'll know for sure that
this film doesn't make sense. It goes like this, Avery's sister, Lisa
(Harris), gets kidnapped on a date with her steady squeeze Max (Sean)
and supposedly has one of her fingers cut off. There is a ransom note
for two million dollars, which the family can't afford to pay. The boys
figure that by kidnapping the crime boss (The logic being, he's a bad
guy anyway and deserves what he is getting), they can get him to put up
the ransom and use his underworld contacts to find the kidnappers.
This is Peter O'Fallon's feature film debut, as he chugs out all the
slickness he could muster to make this film seem like its happening,
including glittering credits that seem to be dancing on the screen. Even
the title is slick, as it refers to the king of hearts (the one with the
sword through his head). But it also could refer to the ill-advised
nature of the mission the boys are on, because what they are doing is
surely suicidal.
Denis Leary as Lono, the wiseguy lieutenant in Carlo's mob, who has a
constant dialogue going on about his $1,500 boots, and is the
temperamental strong-armed enforcer of the mob, is brilliant in this
role, providing enough wise cracks and controlled violence to make you
forget about the craziness of the story, as he keeps contact with
Carlo's lawyer and zeroes in on both sets of kidnappers. His encounter
with the dopey kidnappers of Lisa, shows how he goes about his business,
pulling the film into the gangster genre for a few minutes before going
back to its satire of that genre.
Suicide Kings has its share of surprises and plot twists, as it becomes
evident from Charlie's contacts that there was an insider on this job,
who is one of the boys who kidnapped Charlie, as he starts playing
mind-games with them, telling them that the difference between winning
and losing is being able to read your opponent. This is done while the
boys are playing poker, and it passes for about as much wisdom as you
are going to take away from this well-acted, dark comedy/suspense film,
that is absolutely ridiculous, but it is entertaining as escapist-fare.
There is one more priceless pearl of wisdom dished out, that I feel
should be mentioned, because it highlights the confusing messages the
film sends out, it was also uttered by Charlie during his confinement,
and for no particular reason it made me laugh aloud-- "Everybody lies:
But word on the street, that's solid."
This film is anything but solid, but it had a weird flavor to it, that
sometimes seemed natural and other times forced. But the performances of
Walken and Leary, kept me in this one, sometimes wondering what's the
story with this film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
With its cast of up-and-coming non A-list stars, Suicide Kings
profoundly succeeds where other all-boy ensemble casts (like The Newton
Boys) generally fail.  It is a wickedly dark comedy that revolves around
dual kidnappings, one the daughter of a wealthy New York family and the
other of an ex-Mafia boss.
The first abduction is of Lisa Chasten (Laura R. Harris), who is scooped
up whilst in the throes of parking lot passion with her secret boyfriend
and doctor wannabe, Max Minot (Jeremy Sisto, Clueless).  Max is the only
witness to the crime, but can offer precious few details.
Although he is affluent beyond my wildest dreams, Lisa's father can't
get his hands on the two million-dollar ransom and misses the first
payoff deadline.  Then, one of Lisa's digits is delivered, so the
picture shifts to a backup plan.
It seems that Lisa's brother Avery (Henry Thomas, Niagara, Niagara)
decides to befriend and kidnap Charles Barrett (Christopher Walken, The
Prophecy).  Why Charles Barrett?  Well, here's one clue – his name used
to be Carlo Bertolucci.  Charles decided to change it when he retired as
the head of the New York crime family syndicate, on the road to the
straight and narrow.
Avery, Max and their bratty socialite schoolmates, Brett (Jay Mohr,
Jerry Maguire) and T.K. (Sean Patrick Flannery, Powder) figure if they
can get Charles attention, he can help locate Lisa's captors and quickly
resolve the whole incident.  They befriend him at his daily dinner digs,
convince him to take a little car ride through his `old neighborhood'
and hit him with the chloroform once the trip begins.
Dragging him back to a summer home of the Chasten family, the rich kids
demand assistance from the drugged Charles.  Enter comic relief from
geeky worrywart Ira (Johnny Galecki, Roseanne) and shoe fetishist Lono
Vecchio (Denis Leary, The Ref) and that's when real fun begins.
Suicide Kings is wryly written by Wayne Rice and Gina Goldman, the
latter a producer of the television series The Wonder Years.  It is the
feature film debut of Peter O'Fallon, an Emmy award winning director
best known for his work on such shows as Northern Exposure,
thirtysomething and Party of Five.  His stylish and highly entertaining
filming can only lead one to hope that frigging television naysayers
will shut the hell up about my second favorite medium.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Christopher Walken, Jay Mohr, Dennis Leary, Sean Patrick
Flannery
written and directed by Peter O'Fallon
Walken stars as a mobster who is kidnapped and held for ransom by four
bratty rich kids.  It seems that a woman has also been kidnapped--she
is the sister of one of them (E.T.'s Henry Thomas) and the girlfriend
of another (Flannery)--and the asking price is $2 million, which said
snots are unable to cough up alone. They even cut off Walken's finger
to show they mean business, because they are desperate to save the
woman's life.
Suicide Kings is a terrible film. Walken aside, there isn't a single
appealing cast member. O'Fallon creates characters that are functional
types without any resonance. In an amusingly unironic scene, Walken
plays poker with the foursome and describes each of their
personalities to a tee--it's as if he was reading the summary sheet
for a casting director.
The plot is another issue entirely. O'Fallon is someone whom I'm
betting has seen Reservoir Dogs and The Usual Suspects too many times,
for not only does his story veer off on bizarre tangents from whence
they never return (do we really need the scene where Dennis Leary
beats up an abusive father with a toaster, which is entirely unrelated
to both the story and Leary's character, or the numerous anecdotal
sequences?), but the central plot itself is a serpentine mess, filled
with crosses and double crosses and triple crosses...  By the fourth
big revelation/twist, I had completely tuned out, wondering what on
Earth attracted these actors to the material.
Recently a peer, a fellow young filmmaker, informed me that he had an
idea for a movie about four guys, the mob, and the FBI. It occurred to
me then what's wrong with indies like Suicide Kings: I suspect
O'Fallon has never met a mobster, is not a rich man, doesn't deliver
endless "clever" monologues to his friends about his favourite types
of boots... In short, these guys are just riffing on other movies, and
in doing that, making the same film over and over and over
again. Tarantino found his niche and now hundreds of GenXers with
movie cameras are trying to find Tarantino's niche instead of carving
their own.  -Reviewed at the Toronto International Film Festival
