Title
Review for Sick: The Life & Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SICK: THE LIFE & DEATH OF BOB FLANAGAN, SUPERMASOCHIST (director: Kirby
Dick; cast: Kathe Burkhart (Interviewer), Kirby Dick (Interviewer), Rita
Valencia (Interviewer), Sheree Rose (Herself), Bob Flanagan (Himself),
1997)
SICK begins with Bob reading the obituary he wrote, "I was promised an
early death, and here I am, 40 years later, waiting to die ..." Thus
begins the uplifting and bewildering story of Bob Flanagan, a truly
amazing person, unfortunate to be born with cystic fibrosis, "a
children's disease marked by fibrosis of the pancreas and frequent
respiratory infections." It's considered a children's disease because
most of the babies born with it don't live to adulthood. Bob Flanagan
was the oldest living person known to have had that disease. He died
while the movie was being filmed, as a video camera followed him around
for the last days of his life, at 40 years of age. The camera crew
mistakingly took the day off when he died, but we do get to see his
decayed body, besides already seeing how sick he looked just before his
death.
The story is uplifting, strangely enough, because Bob was able to live
with the constant pain and discomforts of the disease, finding his own
identity and exhibiting a gallows sense of humor that allowed him to
joke about himself, sharing with the audience the most personal details
of his life, such as his lack of ability to produce much of a discharge
when he masturbates. He became a person who went beyond the perversities
that marked his adult life, the S & M he credits with giving him a will
to live, into someone who can't be judged by those who have not felt his
pain, who performed on stage acts of self-mutilation that is
mind-boggling, such as putting a nail through his penis. That was one
part of the movie that was too much for my squeamish eyes, as I chose to
look away.
Since I did not know what to expect upon seeing this documentary, not
really giving much thought beforehand to what goes through the mind of a
masochist, only thinking that a masochist must be someone with a screw
loose somehere. But the astonishing thing about this brutally honest
film, that was no easy chore to watch, no matter how insightful or
hilarious the film was, or how sympathetic I might have felt about Bob,
was that I still felt myself self-consciously measuring my responses to
what he was going through, wondering how I would bear up to such
travails, but all the time taking comfort that Bob did what he had to do
in order not to let the bad body he was born with make his life a total
mockery. And by the end of the film, I was able to look clearly at him
and see him as another being on a journey, just like others have taken,
knowing full-well that fear of death is a fact of life, and its mystery
is something that leaves us searching for answers about why things
happen to us in a certain way or trying to put off thinking about it
until we can't put off thinking about it any longer... and, who can say
for certain what it is about their life that they had to experience in
order for them to find peace.
In many ways, what Bob was going through was a religious experience, as
he questioned his beliefs and what his feelings were all about. It
seemed to make sense, when he said, that Christ was the most famous
masochist of all time. I was beginning to think that Bob's agonizing
illness and his high tolerance for pain that he couldn't help having
from cf and the satisfaction he received from being a so called
"Performance Artist", and having pain voluntarily inflicted upon him,
was something that gave him an inner strength, a sense of being that he
felt he couldn't get any other way but this way, and that it all seemed
right. I would not have felt this way, if I hadn't seen the film.
Watching him in agony, might be a lot like watching Christ, that is,
without the religious implications that the apostles gave to that event.
His suffering was solely his trip, he wasn't about saving the world,
though he was shown to be a role model for others with cf, sadists or
not, and he acted as a counselor for many years for children in a cf
camp. As a child he was the poster boy for cf.
Bob had a comedy and poetry routine on stage, as well as his
self-mutillation thing, that he seemed to love to perform, though
curiously enough, he told his girlfriend, the dominatrix, Sheree Rose,
that he would give up everything, including his artistic work, just to
have a girlfriend. Fortunately for him, he found someone who would keep
him submissive, whipping him and keeping him under her strict rules, so
he wound up with the best of the two worlds, a girlfriend and an ally in
his exhibitionism... Some of his later poems are in the style of an
Allen Ginsberg or a Bob Dylan rant, as his work took on a greater
meaning from his earlier work. Here is one of his better poems:
Supermasochistic Bob has cystic fibrosis
He should have died when he was ten but he was too precocious
How much longer he will last is anyone's prognosis
Supermasochistic Bob has cystic fibrosis
HumdiddleiddleiddleI'mgonnadie, humdiddleiddleiddleI'mgonnadie...
The film ends with his performance of a song entitled "Fun to Be Dead".
That comes after we see him for an extended period of time, as he
suffers in the hospital.
Everything about his life was extra-ordinary and beyond speculation. His
relationship with his parents and his homosexual brother are reviewed,
showing no unloving signs. Though his parents expressed surprise about
his masochism, he never revealed to them that he felt this way. What
astonished them more than the fact that he is a masochist, was that they
thought they knew him better than anyone else.
There is also an interesting clip from the old Steve Allen show, where
he appeared as a child guest in the audience, saying he wants to be a
doctor when he grows up, not an artist.
Much of the video, comes from Sheree's home movies of him and her
performing, showing them in many different moods, and to her credit,
showing stuff that is not always flattering to her, like when he was
terribly sick during those last days and she still wanted him to be
submissive to her. Submission seemed to be more important than love for
her. Or maybe, it was the only way she could love someone. She was too
perplexing a character to make head or tail of in this movie. It was
tough enough to try to come to grips with Bob's story.
To say that this film is unusual, is to mean that it really is not quite
like any other feel good movie I have ever seen before. I was glad that
I saw it, though I can't honestly say that it was a totally joyous
experience. I think those who would avoid this film, thinking it is too
depressing to see, might be depriving themselves from seeing a film that
belies any rationalization of it. This film is definetly not for a mass
audience, but it is for those who are curious about things that are not
that familiar to them. They will be rewarded by observing how the sheer
power of a human being coping with a painful and unbearable disease for
his entire life, still has the will  to live a creative life. That is
enough of a reason for me to recommend this film.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Wallace Baine
Most of us are determined to get through this life without witnessing a man
nailing his johnson to a board. So it is with extreme caution and deep
respect for the public's gag reflex that I recommend `Sick: The Life and
Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist.'
Certainly, this startling documentary will be one of the most unpleasant
experiences you're likely to have in a movie house not involving Walter
Matthau and Jack Lemmon. But at the same time, it is a luminous statement
about art's ability to trump death. In the end, it's hard to determine
what's more difficult to watch: a man mutilating his own body or the same
man facing the very real specter of death.
Bob Flanagan is the kind of man who would give Jesse Helms a stroke. One of
the longest known survivors of cystic fibrosis -- a fatal disease of the
lungs that usually takes its victims in childhood or early adulthood --
Flanagan discovered the joys of sado-masochism in his teens. By the time he
reached 40, he had become an icon of the perverse, an artist locked into a
weird one-upmanship with the disease that was destroying his body.
Filmmaker Kirby Dick does not flinch from Flanagan's excesses. That nifty
demonstration of Flanagan's carpentry skills mentioned earlier is deeply
revolting, but it is only one in a long list of Stupid Human Tricks he
performs. He is spanked, cut with blades, burned, pinched, buggered, bound,
strangled, humiliated, mostly at the hands of dominatrix Sheree Rose, his
long-time lover and torturer. If Rose treats Bob like a giant steak in need
of tenderizing, she does so with an skewed sense of gratitude and motherly
devotion.
As an artist, Flanagan used a deadpan, at times morbid wit to express his
day-to-day misery, evoking the horror of his disease by illustrating its
principal by-product, i.e. the fluids that filled his lungs and gave him an
everpresent menacing cough (Wait till you see `The Visible Man'). One of
the film's more twisted visuals is taken from the opening of one of
Flanagan's New York art shows. While most artists would be sitting in the
corner in a nice sweater sipping chardonnay, Bob is hanging aloft, naked,
by his feet from the ceiling like some prized marlin. Whatever turns you
on, guy.
As a jarring and sad contrast, Flanagan's aging parents, the picture of
cozy middle American domesticity, are also interviewed. Despite living with
the dread disease through their children (Bob's two sisters also died of
CF), they seem perplexed about Bob's, uh, unusual lifestyle. `Where was I?'
asks Mom, shaking her head in sorrow.
`Sick' takes an astonishing turn when Flanagan's disease finally seizes the
upper hand. Director Dick was given full access to Flanagan's life even
when both knew that he wouldn't survive much longer. It is mesmerizing and
profoundly moving to see this S&M exhibitionist turn into a bewildered
child at death's doorstep. Flanagan's death is recorded with a tenderness
and dignity you wouldn't expect after seeing him utterly destroy the
mystique of physical pain.
An important collaborator was Flanagan's tormentor/lover Sheree Rose who,
as Bob's Yoko, had originally decided not to allow Kirby Dick to make the
movie. Eventually, she came around and made available many of her own
private videos of Bob, including some astounding footage in which Bob
painfully tries to persuade her that he is simply not up to taking her
punishment anymore.
Rose, it should be noted, does not come off like a monster, despite her
severe attitude toward Flanagan. In the end, she is genuinely
grief-stricken and, at this point it becomes apparent that the harsh
language of S&M they used between them was indeed a lovers' dialogue.
`Sick' is full of agony, disease, pain and more than enough stomach-turning
scenes of mutilation. To watch it is a small act of courage, which is
fitting considering the monstrous courage Bob Flanagan was able to summon
to live like he did. Only, don't ever expect to be able to hammer a nail
again without a flutter of fear in your belly. That you would be your Inner
Bob speaking.

Author
Fernando Vallejo
 Sick: The Life and Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist
 Starring Bob Flanagan and Sheree Rose. Interviews by Kathe Burkhart, Kirby
Dick and Rita Valencia. Produced and directed by Kirby Dick. Running Time: 90
mins. This film is not rated.
 __________________________________________________________
  The central themes of "Sick: The Life and Death of Bob Flanagan,
Supermasochist" are pain and love, and its subsequent effect on a person's
life. Its protagonist, Bob Flanagan, who died at the age of 52, suffered from
cystic fibrosis, a mortal disease which debilitates the lungs by saturating
them with thick coats of mucus, preventing him from normal breathing. 
 The movie is about much more than recouperating ( or attempting to ) from
this disease. 
 An audacious, fabulously triumphant docudrama, "Sick" chronicles the life of
Flanagan and his vicious, unthinkable acts of sadomasochism conducted with his
mistress of 15 years, Sheree Rose, who amazingly provided much of the footage
for the film. 
 Flanagan's idelogy crosses the realms of rebelliousness and becomes
transcendental, similar to Terry Zwigoff's brilliant 1994 "Crumb", which also
explored the dysfunction of an artist by painting not a sympathetic portrait,
but a realistic one. Both Crumb and Flanagan revelled in their defects. But
Flanagan was not only a man content on enduring the pain via lungs, he
inflicted acts of pain on himself at a very young age, courageously defying
God ( he was an Irish Catholic )
and turning his body into a work of art, which he unraveled in museums and
lectures.
 Behold these works of physical art. Among them is a metal ball inserted
inside his anus, and, --the most disturbing scene of the decade--, nailing his
penis to a board. 
 Flanagan was a man of great intelligence, wit and humor, as well as adopting
a sense of candidness scarcely seen in modern filmmaking. Not only did he
approach his disease with humor, peforming burlesque acts in front of an
audience, he was also revitalized by his approachment. Most with cystic
fibrosis do not make it past their earlier  twenties ( there's also a subplot
involving a female devotee who knew death was awaiting her. )
 But the most outstanding thing about "Sick" is Flanagan's relationship with
Sheree. Brimming with honesty, sensual stimulation and unapologetically sad
moments of pain, their powerful bond lifts "Sick" into a rare cinematic high,
where we forget we are in an auditorium and become a part of these people.
 The last scene, where we see the hero murmuring the last words to his wife in
a hospital bed, as he struggles for his last moments of life, is raw, tender,
hideous. It goes a step beyond cinematic intimacy.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Sick: The Life and Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist" is the most
disturbing, nauseating documentary ever made about a man who I am grateful to
have never met in person. This film is probably the closest you'll ever want to
get to such a freak with a predilection for pain; a man with a debilitatingly
painful disease who needs more pain to endure his own. 
Bob Flanagan is indeed a supermasochist. From an early age, he was diagnosed
with cystic fibrosis, a disease that causes the lungs to fill with phlegm and
mucus. Most people who are diagnosed with such a disease die at an early age,
some reach the age of twenty-four. Bob lived to be forty-three, the
longest-known survivor of cystic fibrosis. His way of enduring such a disease
was to punish his own body - to show God that he can do worse things to himself
than the disease He had wrought upon him! Bob becomes a member of an S & M club
where he chooses different torturous techniques such as stitches, nails, steel
balls, and the list goes on. There's a truly unwatchable moment where he nails
his penis to a wooden board! 
The main impetus of the film is Bob's own masochistic relationship with his
girlfriend of fifteen years, Sheree Rose, a dominatrix. He agrees to be her
slave, and she takes full advantage of his submissive behavior. Whenever he
wanted to have sex, he would have to write about in his journal, at Sheree's
insistence,  or there would be no sex.         Bob Flanagan is a noted
performance artist and writer, and his masochistic rituals through video
installations have become well known in most art communities. In essence, his
body has become a decorative sculpture for others to look at, e.g., "Bob and
Sheree's Contract" where Sheree carves an S into Bob' chest. Bob even inspires
a teenage girl from the Make-a-Wish Foundation, also diagnosed with cystic
fibrosis, to meet him and...start some piercing. Sheree privately admits to Bob
that maybe the girl's supposed fantasies should be fulfilled. 
"Sick" won Best Documentary at the 1997 Sundance Film Festival, and it is the
most honest documentary I've ever seen. The irony is that its uncompromising
honesty is its main fault: we never get to know Bob as well as we should.
Here's a man who says that the masochism and body modification were a way of
containing the disease, but he never truly explains how. Why is the agonizing
pain of masochism (he deeply feels it in many scenes pleading Sheree to stop) a
method of relieving his own pain? And how does any of this constitute as art,
or his need to be viewed as an "art object"? The film's best, most powerful
scene is when a bloated Bob is nearing the end of his disease, and Sheree
wonders why he will not submit to her. This scene, however, says more about
their dependent relationship than anything about Bob's personal nature.
 "Sick" is certainly fascinating and involving, but it never truly reveals
anything about Bob Flanagan, or offer any insights into his behavior. Instead,
we get a major dose of "shockarama," and some slight tidbits on Bob's family
and his needy relationship with Sheree, but not much else. "Sick" is
occasionally haunting, elegiac and lurid, but it says nothing more about this
supermasochist other than that he is sick. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com
