Title
Review for Art House (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Dan O'Donahue, Chris Hardwick, Amy Weber, Adam Carolla, Michael A.
Goorjian, Luigi Amodeo, Cheryl Pollak 
Written by: Leigh Slawner and Dan O'Donahue 
Directed by: Leigh Slawner 
Running Time: 88 minutes 
True independent films rarely seem to work because they're always
completely disjointed and so darn serious about whatever their subject
is.  Art House comes along as a very pleasant surprise when I was just
expecting another sloppy mess of depressing ideas. 
Dan O'Donahue stars (he also co-wrote the script) as Ray McMichael, a
writer-director whose previous effort called Beach House (he wanted to
make the best film in the worst genre) was unable to find a
distributor.  He's written a new script called Art House, which he gives
to his hipster friend Weston (Chris Hardwick) to do a rewrite.  During
all this, Ray tries to find love, is forced to room with a porno actor
(Luigi Amodeo), and hangs out with an new acting superstar (Michael A.
Goorjian from SLC Punk!)... the usual life of someone in an independent
film of course. 
Art House is smartly written and the performances are engaging.  While
the film contains all the randomness and familiar situations of most
indie films (characters hang out in a cyber cafe, talk about the
Hollywood system being evil, have pointless conversations about The
Cartoon Network, etc.), it's tied together cohesively enough to be not
only entertaining but also very funny.  At one point, in response to the
popularity of swing music, Ray tells his ex-girlfriend that it'll only
be six months until a new bandwagon is jumped on and the film "Breakin'
3:Cosmic Jubilee" is made.  It's a great line, and it even has a pay off
joke later in the movie.  Even the obligitory indie film cameo from porn
star Ron Jeremy is well done. 
Dan O'Donahue's character is refreshingly original... he's a ordinary
guy with a good head on his shoulders.  Several times in the film his
character is faced with a choice, and while the majority of movies would
have him making the wrong one, Art House does it right.  Donahue and
Michael A. Goorjain (who gives a good performance as an big shot actor
who knows he's actually talentless) should be faces to watch for in the
future.  Even Chris Hardwick and Adam Carolla (both from MTV, among
other things) do fine jobs. 
To make this film even more intriguing, I discovered during my research
that Leigh Slawner and Dan O'Donahue actually MADE the movie Beach House
back in 1995.  So if what I read was correct and not just a clever
internet marketing ploy, the film receiving constant mention in Art
House actually exists... it's a genuine full-length movie and was indeed
unable to find a distributor.  That's got to be a first.  Very clever
guys... I applaud you.  And now I really want to see Beach House, which
must be the Citizen Kane of beach party movies. 
Art House is available on VHS as a part of Hollywood Video's "First
Rites" program.  Hollywood Video is now distributing low budget indie
films exclusively to its rental stores.  The video includes an
entertaining introduction from the director as he wanders the aisles of
a local Hollywood Video trying to get people to rent his film. 
So the next time you're at Hollywood Video and you're convinced you've
seen everything on the new release wall but aren't sure if you'll like
that independent film you've passed by six times now... take my word for
it.  If you like low-key, smart, and entertaining comedies then pick up
that copy of Art House.  [R]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
