Title
Review for Endless Summer 2, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) The Endless Summer II, 1994, Bruce Brown. 
THE ENDLESS SUMMER was made in 1966, almost as a home movie. Brown and
two companions spent one year surfing, switching hemispheres as the
seasons changed, and circling the globe in the process. The year of the
endless summer was clearly the best year of his life, and thanks to his
16mm camera, we got to see it all. 
Nearly three decades later, Brown arranged for the once-in-a-lifetime
adventure to happen again. Even if this movie were less interesting on
its own, the comparison between the two would make it worth watching. 
The most apparent difference in production is that the sequel is shot in
35mm color widescreen. This time, Brown had a budget and sponsorship,
making the experience less personal than the home movie of his previous
journey. Because of the previous trip, Brown and his new companions knew
more what to expect, so the tone of the sequel is less awestruck and
more anticipatory. 
(Leonard Maltin reminds us that an important difference between the
films is that in this one, you get to see some breasts. Thanks,
Leonard.)  
Surfing has changed in 28 years, too. A few major developments have
arisen. The "short board" allows surfers more maneuverability so they
can ride bigger waves, and the "boogie board" allows beginners to get
their feet wet without mastering the balance needed to surf. The
composition and manufacture of surfboards has also gone high-tech,
making use of lighter and less brittle materials. 
In 1966, when there were only "long boards" the best waves were little
curly ones that don't collapse, and great surfing meant long rides. Now,
especially for shortboarders, the best waves are the biggest ones you
can find, and great surfing is as much determined by the size of the
waves as by their shape. 
Two new companions "star" in The Endless Summer II. "Wingnut" is a
shortboarder who exactly fit my stereotype of a surfer, and Patrick is a
longboarder, identifiable because he's not "Wingnut." 
This film, like the previous one, starts off on shaky ground. Because
the first movie was so personal, the bright colors and wide screen made
me think that this would be a cheap ripoff. Also, because Wingnut fit my
surfer stereotype so perfectly, I thought I would hate the smug,
shallow, airheaded dude. But once the world tour started, I got swept up
in the story, and I realized my stereotype was as shallow as I thought
the surfers would be. 
Brown and the surfers follow the same route as before, traveling along
Africa's coastline, hopping to Australia and Fiji, and ending in Hawaii.
They didn't make a point to visit all of the same spots, because not all
the spots had good surfing (especially by the standards of 1994). But
they DID revisit the best spot on the globe for surfing: the little
beach in South Africa that they found in 1966. 
This time, as they made their way over the sand dune, they found not a
beach but a housing development. Because the development had changed the
nature of the dunes, the sand no longer blew so easily into the ocean,
which changed the terrain of the ocean bottom, which changed the
structure of the waves. The surfers gave it a try for old times' sake,
but it just wasn't the same. 
This scene made me appreciate the footage from the first visit even
more. Because Brown made that trip in 1966, we all got to see a
beautiful little spot, the best in the world for a short time. (If a
wave breaks on the best surfing spot in the world and nobody rides it,
is it still the best spot in the world?) 
The new best spot for surfing seems to be on an island in Fiji. Near the
end of their world tour, Wingnut and Patrick follow a rumor to Fiji,
where the waves are supposed to be awesome. For several days, our tour
guides don't surf at all because the weather and the waves just aren't
cooperating. After a few days they are ready to head to Hawaii, when
finally, the waves come up. 
The brightly lit blue of the 8-foot waves mix with the green of the
island and the neon of the wetsuits to form some beautiful pictures.
Brown's camera is waterproof this time, and we get to see the surfers
close up. We get to ride along with them. We get eaten by waves. And the
exuberant photography matches the mood of the surfers, who after
jonesing for days on end, spend nine hours playing in the water without
even realizing it. 
The last stop in Hawaii showcases some of the best surfing (and surfers)
in the world. The footage is great but the story has lost its focus. The
sequel ends more with a sigh of relief than an exclamation of wonder.
The world is smaller now than it was 30 years ago, so the accomplishment
isn't as great. And with sponsorship comes the responsibility of
completing a film, whereas before, the film was a labor of love. 
All of this serves not to detract from the sequel, but to embellish the
original. The second movie succeeds but it is more apparent how much
work goes into a project like this. To have accomplished it the first
time with two friends and no backing is an amazing feat. 
Two times around is probably enough for Brown and his audiences. But
there's no doubt that the second time was worthwhile. Even if you don't
like surfing, there are lessons to be learned about how people and
places and customs change over a span of 28 years. 
Brown was a wonderful tour guide for two of the most interesting tours
on film.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
