Title
Review for Just Looking (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
It was a more innocent time, a time when teenagers weren't bombarded 
daily with sexual images from multiple media sources.  Although it may 
have been a more naive era, it was one brimming with sexual curiosity.  
JUST LOOKING, set in the New York City boroughs in 1955, tells a coming 
of age story about a fresh-faced Jewish kid named Lenny (Ryan Merriman) 
in the summer before he begins ninth grade.
Actor Jason Alexander (George from the "Seinfeld" television series) 
lovingly directs JUST LOOKING with passionate attention to detail.  The 
sets, the cars, the costumes, everything about the production is 
authentically nostalgic.  Well, everything save the cheesiest lightning 
storm this side of an Ed Wood movie.
Lenny is a man on a mission, or given his age, one might better call him 
a boy bound for adventure.  He vows to one and all that this summer he 
is "going to see two people 'doing it' -- no matter what!"  A similar 
story set in modern times would have his ambition be to lose his 
virginity, probably after a surreptitious bout of drinking.  But back 
then, the mere vicarious pleasure of witnessing sex provided more 
titillation than a young teen could even imagine.
Lenny's quest begins when he is sent to "the country" for the summer to 
live with his Jewish aunt (Ilana Levine) and her decidedly non-Jewish 
husband (Peter Onorati).  Leaving his city home in the Bronx, he moves 
all the way to New York City's version of the country -- 133rd Street in 
Queens, which features actual, albeit tiny, backyards and even a small 
and overgrown vacant lot that could serve as a temporary park.
In the sticks, Lenny is invited by neighborhood kids, Johnny (Joey 
Franquinha), Alice (Amy Braverman) and Barbara (Allie Spiro Winn), to 
join their -- now whisper this -- "sex club."  No, it's not at all what 
you think.  It turns out to be something akin to a sex education class, 
but run by students, that is decades ahead of its time.  Although 
obsessed with finding and sharing sexual information -- Alice fancies 
herself a Nancy Drew-style detective -- they would never practice any of 
the stuff themselves, especially since the girls frequently point out 
that they are Catholic, very Catholic.  Alice, who once accidentally 
witnessed her parents having sex when she was 10, describes it to the 
other eager pupils.  It is "like a wrestling match on TV, but they're 
not two men and it's not TV."  Well, that certainly explains it all.
The opportunity to turn their dry discussions into a laboratory course 
comes in the person of a fetching young adult named Hedy (Gretchen Mol).  
She is a nurse who was once an underwear model.  To be specific, she 
wore bras while photographers took her picture for lingerie catalogs.  
Lenny feels like he has died and gone to heaven when he hears about her.  
There is no one whom he would rather catch in the act of doing it than 
the gorgeous and affable Hedy.  The beauty of the story is the way in 
which he ends up abandoning his desire for cheap thrills.  He truly 
comes of age that summer.
JUST LOOKING runs 1:37.  It is rated R for sexual content and language 
and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Jason Alexander
 Writer:  Marshall Karp
 Cast: Ryan Merriman, Joey Franquinha, Peter Onorati,
Gretchen Mol, Amy Braverman, Ilana Levine, Rich Licata,
Patti LuPone, John Bolger, Robert Weil, Alex Sobol
   What does a 14-year-old think of every other minute of his
day? School?  Ha.  Sports?  Yes, every alternate minute. 
You guessed it.  Sex.  One of the great ironies of our
civilization is that the subject most important to adolescents is
ignored or repressed by their parents, or at least this was
true during the boring ol' 1950s before the old music died to
be replaced by Bill Haley's "Rock Around the Clock" and later
by the more hardened forms of rock music.  Jean
Doumanian, who had produced small, amusing movies in the
recent past such as "Small Time Crooks" and "Sweet and
Lowdown" carries on her interest in the modest things of life
by hooking by with a semi-autobiographical tale by Marshall
Karp ("Everything's Relative") who teams up with Jason
Alexander as the director of "Just Looking."
   This is a diminutive movie that could have barely fit on an
old 19 inch TV tube or on an off-Broadway stage but despite
its attributes appears lost on the big screen.  Nor can too
many adolescents in this everything-goes age relate to the
story unless they consider it camp and get some chuckles out
of the way that a Pleasantville community in Queens, New
York goes about its love and work.  
   Lenny (Ryan Merriman) is at the yarn's center, an
appealing young Jewish kid with the buzz cut common to the
decade who despises his butcher stepfather Polinsky
(Richard V. Licata) so much that he becomes a vegetarian at
the nightly dinner table.  Nor does he go for the edict of his
newly-married mom, Sylvia (Patti LuPone) to send him from
his tenement-style apartment house in the Bronx to the
"country" borough of Queens during his fourteenth summer to
live with his aunt Norma (Ilana Levine) and her Italian-
American husband Phil (Peter Onorati).  Making friends with
John (Joseph Franquinha), he immediately joins John's sex
club, which is dominated by the prescient teen Alice (Amy
Braverman) and her shy but curious friend Barbara (Allie
Spiro-Winn).  Since the girls are Catholic, they insist that they
do not "do it" but boy, do they love to talk about sex.  When
Lenny meets the fetching 20-something Hedy (Gretchen Mol),
he falls for her and devotes the season to trying to discover
her "doing it" with her doctor boy friend, Flynn (John Bolger).
   The best aspect of the film is its fifties ambience, one
which in Jason Alexander's vision is just like the stereotyped
view of the era mined by "Pleasantville."  While performing
sex is just a dream for the teen boys, some of the more
liberated adults such as the lovely Hedy indulge freely
(though in my own view as one who came of age during this
period, one didn't go all the way until marriage).   Ryan
Merriman is the sort of kid that any parent would enjoy: cute,
curious, appealing in every way, willing to work hard,
socialize freely, and absorb the lessons taught to him by his
parents, his relatives, his friends and his love interest.  In
short, "Just Looking" bears looking at if you keep your
expectations narrow and do not expect the screen to be
splashed by the likes of Michelle Yeoh and Zhang Ziyi in
"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon."
Rated R.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2819bc86bb9f79e28825697700216a56?OpenDocument
Director: Jason Alexander
Producer: Jean Doumanian
Screenwriter: Marshall Karp
Stars: Ryan Merriman, Joseph Franquinha, Peter Onorati, Gretchen Mol,
Patti LuPone, Amy Braverman, Ilana Levine
MPAA Rating: NR
-------------------------------------
Growing up can be difficult no matter what era you are from.  Of course,
how many of us have heard the old "when I was your age..." speech from
someone older than you?  But even though the years may move forward, the
more things change, the more they can stay the same, as evidenced by
this self-proclaimed "semi-autobiographical" look at growing up in the
50's, presented by screenwriter Marshall Karp.
Just Looking is the story of Leny (played perfectly by Ryan Merriman)
who is a boy like any other 14 year old, curious about sex.  So much so
that his goal for the summer of 1955 is to see two people "engaged in
the act of love" as he puts it.  But his innocent curiosity ends up
getting him caught and his mother (Patti LuPone) and stepfather decide
to ship him off to "the country" (also known as the Bronx) where he
meets a new set of friends who just happen to share a similar interest.
Lenny teams up with the local neighborhood kids who have formed what
they call a "Sex Club."  It's not that they have any of it, just that
they talk about it a lot.  Lenny meets an older woman named Hedy
(Gretchen Mol), a beautiful nurse that just happens to be a former
brassiere model, and he places his odds that she'll be the one to
satisfy his goal.  Hedy's promiscuous lifestyle with a doctor "friend,"
combined with the Sex Club's numerous discussions on how things
supposedly work only fuel Lenny's desire to see his goal (which has now
become an obsession) into a reality.
Directed by Jason Alexander of Seinfeld fame, the film is expertly made
-- to some surprise.  Joseph Franquinha is ideal as Lenny's uncle, and
Ryan Merriman does a great job of stumbling through the clumsy but
inevitable stages of adolescence.  The entrancing Gretchen Mol is truly
a treat to watch.  Overall, Just Looking has perfect casting all the way
through.  The story is there, too: It's a delightful film with some
tender and thoughtful moments, being an altogether witty, funny,
charming, and intelligent look at adolescence and growing up.  It
honestly entertained me the entire time.
Just Looking takes place at a time when parents would rather spell s-e-x
than say it in front of their kids.  Times have changed, but the
adolescent fascination with sex has not.  This is a timeless coming of
age comedy that will ring as true for the teens of today as it will for
their baby boomer Moms and Dads.
http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/justlooking/index.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
