Title
Review for Dream Catcher, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
This is America.  Didn't we used to be king of the road?
Once upon a yesteryear, weren't the roads of this country our domain?
Pontiac, Kerouac, Sissy Hankshaw one can easily make the claim that the
American Road belongs to the public psyche.  And, although no economic
journalists are chronicling the loss of the American road movie to the
overseas market, I certainly am.
It used to be that one would associate the road movie with long shots
overlooking vast expanses: a sense of vastness that is as Quaker Oats
American to Rush Limbaugh as it is to a San Francisco Hippie.  But we
started transforming the road into the realm of schlock with Spielberg's
Duel and, ever since then, have been on the way down.  It's gotten so bad
that road movies are no longer coast to coast:  They're within a few states
(such as The Hi-Line, which goes from one end of Montana to another).  And
with this lessening in distance somehow comes a lessening of IQ.  I guess
that, when traveling a six hour drive, you just don't have time to be
pensive, have nice cinematography, be romantic, and stop to pee.
So then it's highly refreshing that Ed Radkte came along and delivered a
drug-free version of `On the Road' in The Dream Catcher, an incredibly
pensive road trip that features two off-the-beaten path people, Freddy
(Maurice Compte) and Albert (Paddy Connor), each on their own quest for
their parents.  Freddy, who runs from the probation officer and a pregnant
wife, searches for the father that ran out on him.  Albert, dejected, dumb,
and a kleptomaniac, searches for his mother.  Meeting in a rest area and
starting to hitchhike together, Freddy and Albert make their way
cross-country, developing a complex relationship, and learning to deal with
each other.
The Dream Catcher uses this modus operandi to make its way through 99
minutes of waxing philosophical and getting to a pleasant, albeit ambiguous
ending.  In fact, ambiguity is the largest trouble that The Dream Catcher
has.  It goes through its running time, makes you think a helluva a lot, and
leaves itself so open ended that you will either sit back and appreciate its
brilliance or shrug in confusion.  For me, The Dream Catcher was the former.
For many theatergoers, however, it will probably be the latter.  But, as
with other narrativly experimental films such as Spring Forward, it's hard
to criticize The Dream Catcher on its own grounds.  The script is solid
(although not teriffic), and the acting works.  The title was a mystery to
me until the director explained it, but the movie as a whole is better left
unexplained a philosophical mist floating through the ether, waiting for a
hapless person to intersect with it an be enlightened.
Director: Ed Radtke
Producer: Julie Reichart, Steven Bognar, Ed Radtke
Writer: Ed Radtke, M.S. Neison
Starring: Maurice Compte, Paddy Connor, Jeanne Heaton
James' mailing list: http://filmcritic2000.listbot.com/
James @ epinions: http://mk2k.epinions.com/user-mk2k
SHORT STUFF: http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/
