Title
Review for Emploi du temps, L' (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pete Croatto
Laurent Cantet effectively captures difficult feelings in Time Out, a
French film about a family man who pretends to start a prominent job. 
Vincent (Aurélien Recoing) drives around Switzerland, pretending to be
useful, trying to put up a successful façade while he crumbles inside.
Ennui and discontent aren't exactly propelling forces, which is why Time
Out falls a bit flat.  It isn't that the film is inadequate -- far from
it.  Like a long stretch of unemployment, too much dissatisfaction can
lose its charm.
As part of his lie, Vincent tells his wife Muriel (Karin Viard) that his
new job with the United Nations will require stretches of time in
Switzerland.  While Vincent spends his time aimlessly driving, he visits
old friends and convinces them to make huge investments that he pockets
instead.  He also takes a sizable check from his father (Jean-Pierre
Mangeot) under the guise of finding an apartment.
Recoing is perfectly cast in the lead role.  With his soft features and
receding hairline, he looks like any working class joe.  Even better,
Recoing delivers a passionate and heartbreaking performance, which is on
full display when he tells Viard that he can't take his new "job"
anymore.  We realize how badly he's trapped.  Even when he reveals the
truth, he can't set himself free.
Cantet also peppers his film with little moments that show Vincent's
situation with painful clarity.  As he counts his ill-gotten gains,
Vincent sees a young couple, a reminder of why he's on this latest
path.  A security guard politely tells him to leave an office building's
lobby, unless he has a reason for being there.  We keep seeing him
asleep in his car; the film opens with that scene.  We even hear Vincent
reading material about the job he doesn't have, so he can better
convince his friends and family.
The movie also has some welcome comic relief in the form of a shady
businessman (Serge Livrozet) who sees through Vincent's investment
scheme, but still offers him a job transporting overseas merchandise. 
The character is a humorous contradiction: He looks like a gangster, but
has the temperament and goodwill of a saint.  Vincent also gets himself
an unlikely mentor, which leads to a funny scene when the boss and
employee -- both pretending to work at the UN -- have dinner with
Vincent's family.
Cantet makes a few missteps, including not fleshing out Vincent's
conflict with his teenage son (Nicolas Kalsch).  Also, scenes of Vincent
talking to his friends about his investment plans are drawn out and
somewhat out of place, especially when Cantet focuses the most screen
time on one young couple willing to invest all of their savings.  The
most pressing problem is the film's length (132 minutes).  Time Out
would have been phenomenal had Cantet been willing to trim some unneeded
material here and there.  My guess is that he wanted the audience to get
the full effect of Vincent's aimlessness and desperation.  It's just not
necessary, and it takes the sting out of the movie's sharp message.
According to the folks at the New York Film Festival (where this was
screened), Cantet's movie doesn't have a distributor, but I'm sure it
will find one.  This is an intelligent and sobering look at a person's
self worth, and the measures he or she will take to restore it.  Someone
has to see the movie's value.  Let's hope that happens soon.
Director: Laurent Cantet
Producer: Caroline Benjo
Screenplay: Robert Campillo, Laurent Cantet
Starring: Aurélien Recoing, Karin Viard, Serge Livrozet, Jean-Pierre
Mangeot, Monique Mangeot, Nicolas Kalsch
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
