Title
Review for Disclosure (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Michael Douglas, Demi Moore, Donald Sutherland, 
          Caroline Goodall, Roma Maffia 
Director: Barry Levinson 
Producers: Barry Levinson and Michael Crichton 
Screenplay: Paul Attanasio based on the novel by Michael Crichton 
Cinematography: Tony Pierce-Roberts 
Music: Ennio Morricone 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     Recently, Barry Levinson's career has been on the skids.  After
two critical and popular disasters (the overblown, overbudgeted TOYS
and the lackluster JIMMY HOLLYWOOD), the director is in need of a
success. With this adaptation of Michael Crichton's novel, he
apparently has found the tonic for his woes.  Regardless of what the
critics say, DISCLOSURE has the earmarks of a major winter hit.
     As a thriller, this movie is effective and gripping, if
occasionally contrived as a result of overplotting.  However, as an
examination of a pervasive societal problem, DISCLOSURE's success is
questionable.  The woman-sexually-harassing-the-man situation seems
suspiciously like a male knee-jerk reaction to the issue rather than
the unique "twist" it is set up to be (imagine the likely differences
in a DISCLOSURE penned by a female author).  An incident of relatively
"benign" harassment of a woman by a man is thrown in almost
gratuitously.
     Tom and Susan Sanders (Michael Douglas and Caroline Goodall) are a
well-matched couple.  Affluent and co-supportive, they have a nice
house, two children, and prosperous careers.  Tom is expecting a
promotion when his company, Digicom, enters into a corporate merger--a
merger made possible in large part because of one of Tom's projects:
Arcamax, a stand-alone CD ROM player that works twice as fast as any
commercially- available product.
     Tom doesn't get the raise, however.  Instead, his prospective
position is given to Meredith Johnson (Demi Moore), an outsider who
coincidentally used to be Tom's lover.  Worried that his job might be
eliminated, Tom agrees to an evening meeting alone with his new boss.
Once there, he discovers that she's more interested in renewing a
personal relationship than discussing work.  Apparently unwilling to
take "no" for an answer, Meredith threatens that if Tom leaves her
unsatisfied, she'll ruin him.
     The advertisements for this film play up the sexual harassment
issue, but that particular element of DISCLOSURE is really little more
than a plot device.  It's crucially important to the story, but there's
little new or surprising in its method of presentation, and certainly
nothing to spark the kind of controversy that swirled around David
Mamet's OLEANNA (moreso the play than the film).  Ultimately, this
movie is a sort of FATAL ATTRACTION in the workplace (Douglas has made
a career out of getting involved with "dangerous" women).  Sexual
harassment is almost a red herring--the real focus of DISCLOSURE is
office politics, corporate back-stabbing, and greed.
     Demi Moore, often cast in "nice" roles, enjoys this opportunity to
bear her claws.  She slinks and struts her way through the role of
Meredith, drawing audience hatred the way a magnet collects iron
filings.  Even as bland as Michael Douglas' Tom is, it's impossible not
to sympathize with him because of the forces, spearheaded by Meredith,
arrayed against him.  Donald Sutherland is suitably oily and
distasteful as the corporate exec who is determined to emerge clean
from the scandal--no matter which way it breaks.  Roma Maffia plays
the abrasive, savvy lawyer hired by Tom to handle his case.
     DISCLOSURE is a great crowd-pleaser, scripted by men who
understand exactly how a typical audience likes to be entertained.
Together, Crichton, Levinson, and screenwriter Paul Attanasio create a
situation, present a sympathetic protagonist and a
thoroughly-dislikable villain, bend and twist the plot, then come up
with a resolution that has everyone clapping.  At one-hundred
twenty-eight minutes, the film is long, but its crisp pacing keeps it
moving through the entire length.  And the use of sexual harassment
serves the dual purpose of giving Meredith her fangs and getting the
audience on Tom's side.
     Dramatically, DISCLOSURE isn't especially potent, but it isn't
drama that Crichton and Levinson are striving for.  On its own
terms--the fear of lost security that many thrillers prey
upon--DISCLOSURE works, and that's all that anyone can reasonably ask
from this kind of motion picture.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily 
those of Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Sexual harassment is the subject of DISCLOSURE, a broadly played
thriller that may do more to goose the career of the director than to
educate the masses on the subject matter.
     Meet Tom Sanders (Michael Douglas), a stable family man at the
Seattle computer firm Digicom.  He loves his wife, he loves his job,
and he's expecting a promotion before the big company merger.  What he
gets, instead, is a new boss who's an old girlfriend (Demi Moore).  The
situation quickly comes to a head following an after-hours
tete-a-tete.  Tom refuses her advance, she files for harassment, and
thus begins the plot.
     What sounds like a neat twist on a stereotypical situation really
isn't; writer Paul Attansio (of QUIZ SHOW fame) has simply swapped
genders.  Big deal.  Like the book, the film has bigger fish to fry.
DISCLOSURE is more than just a story of sexual harassment and that's
all I'll reveal here.
     For sheer people-pleasing power, rank DISCLOSURE alongside
Crichton's other novel-to-film, JURASSIC PARK.  The script is smart,
the direction is tidy, and the cast knows their roles by heart.
Michael Douglas makes a solid, sturdy hero, while Demi Moore is
surprisingly effective as the hissable villain.  Her calm dismissal of
Douglas made at least one patron in *my* row talk back to the screen.
     There are many many more reasons to like this film, but my
favorite has to be the way DISCLOSURE depicts a high-tech computer
firm.  Come on, Dennis Miller as a developer?!?  They get some stuff
right, but watch out for those VR sequences!  Did somebody say
LAWNMOWER MAN?
NOTE:   Gripes to the management of Durham's Wynnsong 10, who delayed
        the film by fifteen minutes to help seat stragglers.  The film
        was also out of focus when started and the management didn't
        correct the error for at least five minutes.  Sigh.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     DISCLOSURE has Michael Douglas essentially reprising his roles
from FATAL ATTRACTION and BASIC INSTINCT; for some reason he seems to
be incredibly attractive to successful, dangerous women.  Here his
pursuer is played by Demi Moore.
     The film is badly miscast.  It is supposed to be taking place in a
high-tech company developing virtual reality technology, but no manager
in it is anything like a person who would be involved in such a
company.  Demi Moore particularly stands out as an oddball.  Tight
skirts, aggressive attitude, polished manner reminiscent of someone
selling real estate--this is nothing like what these companies are
like.  Donald Sutherland is also similarly odd.
     Michael Douglas is also oddly not suited to his role.  He can
certainly play the object of desire, but as a technical manager he
doesn't make sense.
     Dennis Miller has a small, promising role.  I think he has good
potential as an actor.  His sardonic style leavened with flashes of wit
gives him quite a bit of range.
     But I think the most glaring error in the film is in the
direction.  Certain things are simply not established well, or are
allowed to run on in the wrong way; the interaction between Douglas and
Moore in particular, and the relationship between Sutherland and
Moore.  Is she being promoted simply as a replacement for Douglas, and
why--since she is demonstrably incompetent?  Certain behaviors do not
make sense, like Douglas's secretary continually turning around to see
what's going on in her boss's office.  A competent secretary would not
do this.
     It wasn't until after the film was over that I realized that I had
no idea why what happened happened.  Was Demi Moore's attempted
seduction a calculated attempt to get Michael Douglas fired and, if so,
how?  Was she put up to it by Donald Sutherland?  What was really
supposed to be going on in this film?  Either the direction or the
editing left something seriously missing from this film.
     The preview for the film gave me the impression that there was
some nifty high tech secret underlying the main plot; this is not
true.  The surface plot is all there is, with some fairly vanilla
high-tech virtual-reality stuff thrown in.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DISCLOSURE is the latest of the Michael Crichton's (the dinosaur
guy's) novels to be made into a movie.  It stars Michael Douglas as the
department head hoping to be made a VP and to get rich off of the stock
options of the computer company for whom he works.  His old flame
played by Demi Moore comes out of the field to get the promotion and
become his boss.  She is promoted by the CEO played by Donald
Sutherland.  The CEO wants to make a $100,000,000 from a buy out that
is scheduled to happen in four days.
     In the beginning of the movie Moore attempts to rape Douglas in
her office the first night after she becomes his boss.  The rest of the
movie is about the sexual harassment charges and countercharges, but
there is much more going on in the plot that just that.
     This is one of those can you suspend disbelief or not movies.  You
have to believe or ignore that in a meeting of mixed sexes in a modern
computer company you could have constant explicit conversations about
sex including explicit--very explicit joking.  You have to believe
that a boss would rape an employee in his or her office on their first
day.  Finally, you have to believe that women can be guilty of rape in
an office setting.  I managed to just ignore the plausibility of most
of it and accept the rest as well maybe it could happen.  If you can
get through the first ten minutes, you are in for a great show.
     The movie moves with the speed of a freight train that is
accelerating toward the big merger in 4 days.  The movie has the days
of the week printed in stark white sans serif letters on a totally
black background as the days switch making you feel like you are
reading one of those exciting books that you just can not put down as
it races to its conclusion.
     The three leads in the show are all great and perfectly cast.
Originally Annette Bening was to play Moore's part, but Bening got
pregnant.  I cannot see Bening doing near as good as Moore - who had a
tough part to play and did it extremely well.  Sutherland was great as
a classic slimeball type CEO who cared not a whit about his employees.
His sole goal in life was to become a billionaire.
     Douglas was the real star of the show.  I thought he was good
enough to deserve consideration for an Oscar nomination.  You could
feel the panic in him.  Okay, it was similar to some other parts he has
played, but he was, nevertheless, terrific in his role.
     The script was very funny in parts.  Lots of loud laughter in the
theater.  There is a two word piece of dialog at the end that Douglas
whispers that had the audience applauding, laughing, and cheering at
the same time.  One of the other many memorable lines was when Moore
said that their company's "technology was so good it gave people what
religion was always promising, but never has been able to deliver."
     There was no need to have the implausible beginning.  They could
have gotten rid of the non-believable constant explicit office sex
talk, and they could have had Moore come on to Douglas in a more
believable fashion.  This is my only criticism of the film, and the
only reason it did not get my top rating.
     The movie runs lightning fast and 2:00 long.  It is rated R for
sex and profanity.  I think it would be okay for some of the older
teenagers.  I recommend the movie strongly to adults especially those
who like mysteries because that is what it ultimately turns out to be.
I give DISCLOSURE *** 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: December 9, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Barry Levinson's big-budget, star-studded film adaptation of
Michael Crichton's novel DISCLOSURE has been promoted as a social drama
that turns the issue of sexual harassment on its side through the use
of a gender reversal.  In reality, the harassment issue really is just
a plot point in a glossy, high-tech thriller about corporate politics.
The resulting film is somewhat short on meaningful social commentary,
but it is still a fast-paced and extremely entertaining crowd pleaser.
     Michael Douglas stars as Tom Sanders, the head of manufacturing
for a fictional computer company called Digicorp.  Sanders is up for a
major promotion but is passed up in favor of Meredith Johnson (Demi
Moore), who coincidentally used to live with Sanders (who is now
happily married with children).  When Sanders turns down Johnson's
attempt at seduction during an after-hours meeting, each accuses the
other of sexual harassment.  The stakes are raised by the high amounts
of money that both Sanders and Johnson stand  to make from a planned
merger between Digicorp and another company.  The merger is in danger
of being derailed if Sanders cannot find a reason for major
manufacturing problems with Digicorp's new high speed computer CD-ROM,
a product that is the major selling point in the merger.
     Of course, the big hook in this story is the gender switch of
having a man being sexually harassed by a female boss.  Even more than
in Crichton's novel, screenwriter Paul Attanasio leaves little
ambiguity about the harassment scene.  The dialog explicitly reminds us
that sexual harassment is really about power instead of about sex and
it is made very clear that Sanders never had any power over Johnson.
The majority of the film is told directly from Sanders' point-of-view
which serves to further underscore the audience's view of him as a
victim.  This lack of ambiguity hammers home the belief that sexual
harassment is likely to originate with either gender, but it doesn't
really explore that view with much depth.
     As with Crichton's novel, this idea is likely going to surround
the film with some controversy.  Some may call the film sexist based
primarily on the negative portrayal of a female executive and on the
simple suggestion that a woman could sexually harass a man.  An attempt
is made to alleviate these accusations by including several strong,
sympathetic women in supporting roles.  As in the novel, Sanders hires
a female attorney (Roma Maffia of the TV series "Chicago Hope") to
represent him in his sexual harassment claim. The film also beefs up
the role of Sanders' wife (Caroline Goodall), keeping her actively
involved in more of the story.  The film also includes a few strong
scenes with other female executives at Digicorp, including one
particularly effective sequence in which one of Sanders' peers asks him
to think about why she wasn't even *considered* as a likely candidate
for the promotion.
     The sexual harassment case is actually dispensed with surprisingly
early in the film, revealing that is was just a small component in a
more complicated story of corporate politics.  The latter half of the
film essentially turns into a high-tech detective story as Sanders
struggles to learn Johnson's true motivations in order to hang on to
his job.  This is actually the most interesting aspect of the film.
Director Barry Levinson keeps this part of the film moving at a very
rapid pace and most of the plot details are revealed in a logical and
believable manner.
     Michael Douglas is good in the role of Tom Sanders, although he
isn't really required to stretch much as an actor.  This role is
essentially another variation on the characters that he played in FATAL
ATTRACTION and BASIC INSTINCT.  Crichton has a bit of a tendency in his
novels to seemingly describe the actor that he is thinking of for the
lead roles.  Reading the novel, it is *very* easy to picture Douglas as
Tom Sanders.
     On the other hand, Demi Moore is probably *not* the first person
that most people would imagine in the role of Meredith Johnson.  Her
past roles have never really showed the ruthless edge that the
character calls for.  Moore shows some surprising versatility in this
role and manages to play the role quite convincingly.  Unfortunately,
Attanasio's script draws the character somewhat two-dimensionally.  In
an effort to streamline the story, the film eliminates a couple
subplots from the novel that served to make Johnson's motivations
clearer.  In the film, she ends up seeming more incompetent while in
the book she seemed much more in control.  The fact that the character
works at all is very much due to the strength of Moore's acting.
     The streamlining of the script also reduces the significance of
Bob Garvin (Donald Sutherland), Digicorp's CEO.  The film constantly
keeps the audience in the dark about his motivations and about how much
he is aware of what is going on.  Sutherland does the best he can, but
the role turns out to be rather thankless.  Some of the other
supporting roles are more interesting.  Particularly strong
performances are given by Roma Maffia as the lawyer, Caroline Goodall
as Sanders' wife, Dennis Miller (in a semi-serious role) and Nicholas
Sadler as techies on Sanders' staff.
     As is usually the case in Michael Crichton's stories, technology
ends up playing a major role in DISCLOSURE.  Characters are constantly
using computers to communicate or gather information.  Electronic mail
and computer-based video conferencing are major forms of communication
in Digicorp.  One of the film's highlights is a big climactic scene
involving a virtual-reality based filing system. This sequence features
some very impressive computer graphics effects created by Industrial
Light and Magic.  While some of the technology is a bit futuristic
(particularly the Virtual Reality sequence) to be commonplace in
today's business, nothing is shown that is entirely beyond the
capabilities of today.  The various computer interfaces shown do tend
to be more photogenic than practical.
     While Attanasio's screenplay does muddy some of the motivations
behind the story, it is still a generally effective adaptation.  He
streamlined Crichton's story by eliminating a few unnecessary
characters and subplots.  He also managed to introduce some appreciated
touches of humor which were absent from Crichton's generally humorless
novel.  The writing isn't quite as intelligent as Attanasio's earlier
script for QUIZ SHOW, but it still does manage to inject some moments
of insight.
     After seriously misfiring with TOYS and JIMMY HOLLYWOOD, Levinson
is essentially working as a hired hand on this film.  The direction is
very slick and confident, though, and the film moves along at a very
rapid pace.  In a departure for a Barry Levinson film, this one is shot
in Panavision (by Tony Pierce-Roberts) and the widescreen frame is well
used to highlight the impressive sets created for the Digicorp offices
as well as some of the high- tech special effects.  Ennio Morricone's
score is unmemorable but not intrusive.
     DISCLOSURE doesn't really succeed as the controversial morality
play that is promised in the advertising, but it does work as a very
entertaining corporate thriller.  The movie isn't nearly as deep as it
would like to be, but it does manage to be a lot of fun.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael Douglas, Demi Moore, Donald Sutherland, Roma
Maffia, Caroline Goodall.
Screenplay:  Paul Attanasio.
Director:  Barry Levinson.
     You know that Angry White Male we've all been hearing so much
about since the November election?  Well, I've just figured it out:
he's Michael Douglas.  Ever since FATAL ATTRACTION in 1987, Douglas has
seemed to be there every time a film exploded into an infuriating
zeitgeist phenomenon, and Douglas himself has mastered the role of the
somewhat-less-than-innocent victim.  Team him up with a novel by
cautionary tale king Michael Crichton, and you have DISCLOSURE.  What
you don't have is anything nearly as controversial as it might first
appear to be.  While it is well-paced and generally entertaining, it
tries so hard to be everything for everyone that it misses the chance
to be genuinely incendiary.
     Douglas plays Tom Sanders, an executive in a Seattle computer
company with a wife, two children and--he believes--great career
prospects.  However, on the day that he thinks he is to get a big
promotion, he finds that the position has gone to Meredith Johnson
(Demi Moore), an ambitious young exec who also happens to be a former
lover of Tom's.  He is bothered by the slight, but nowhere near as
bothered as he is when an after-hours meeting with Meredith gets
extremely steamy.  Tom ultimately resists temptation, but Meredith is
not pleased.  The next morning, Tom learns that Meredith has accused
him of sexual harrassment, and that the company president (Donald
Sutherland) wants him to take a transfer quietly.  But Tom will have
none of it, and hires a media-savvy attorney (Roma Maffia) in an
attempt to make the tough case that a man has been sexually harrassed
by a woman.
     Those familiar with other Michael Crichton works (JURASSIC PARK,
RISING SUN) will not be stunned to learn that the characters in
DISCLOSURE are stick figures; I somehow suspect that if Crichton could
figure out a plot that didn't require human beings, he'd jump on it in
a minute.  A Crichton plot is a Plot with a capital "P," and DISCLOSURE
is no exception.  It's dense with twists, turns and intrigue, perhaps
too dense for a screen adaptation ever to cover thoroughly enough.
Discoveries which Tom was able to make in the novel through his own
resourcefulness are reduced to conveniently (and absurdly) overheard
conversations in the film.  Because there is so much ground to cover,
director Barry Levinson keeps the film moving like a rocket, and it
could leave some viewers struggling to keep up.
     Credit screenwriter Paul Attanasio (QUIZ SHOW) with making it work
as well as it does.  While there is very little he can do with
Meredith's character, he does give Tom a slightly shadier personality
so that his experience becomes something of a comeuppance.  He also
creates some marveous dialogue which may be DISCLOSURE's strongest
asset.  Donald Sutherland gets some of the choicest lines, such as
dismissing the notion that Tom would accept a transfer to a division
rumored to be on the chopping block:  "That would be like a duck
accepting a transfer to a l'orange."  Comic Dennis Miller is also sharp
as one of Tom's co-workers, but I suspect that many of his best lines
were his own creations.  Attanasio's work is efficient and clever, and
it makes DISCLOSURE engaging most of the time.
     Unfortunately, Attanasio also appears to have been given orders to
give every possible side of the story equal time, and it is when
DISCLOSURE becomes a high school debate that it becomes tiresome.
Crichton's novel was unapologetic about the role-reversal in the sexual
harrassment story, since to him it was simply a plot device in a
corporate thriller.  The film, on the other hand, both tries to be
*about* sexual harrassment and to avoid appearing as reactionary as
Crichton, and gives everyone a chance to make a speech.  In a story as
tightly constructed as DISCLOSURE, the dueling pontifications are a
real time drain.  DISCLOSURE is a slick, well- photographed film, and
it's nice to see Levinson directing a winner after the twin bombs TOYS
and JIMMY HOLLYWOOD.  Still, it could have been much more effective had
it spent less time chewing its nails over how politically correct it
wanted to be.
