Title
Review for Browning Version, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE BROWNING VERSION is a wonderful character study of an older
teacher of classical languages at an English bordering school in
Dorset.  The teacher, marvelously performed by Albert Finney, is
retiring under some sort of mysterious circumstances although it is
nominally because of his health.
     Finney plays the quintessential mean and strict teacher that
almost every boy hates.  He is called "the Hitler of the lower fifth"
by the students.  Actually one boy does admit to liking him, and it is
because of something this boy does that the movie gets its title.
Finney's character reminded me of my Advanced Math teacher in high
school who was as tough as nails and everybody, except me, was scared
to death of her.  I thought she was great.
     The other part of the story is a love triangle between Finney, his
wife (well played by Greta Scacchi) and the science teacher (acceptably
acted by Matthew Modine).  Greta Scacchi is a gorgeous actress who also
played someone having an affair in A MAN IN LOVE (1987), which is one
of my favorite little known movies.  In A MAN IN LOVE, it is hard not
to want to run away with her.  In this movie however, you feel sad for
her and even a little angry at her for cheating on such a great
husband.
     I can not say enough about Finney's performance.  He plays a tough
character who turns out to be vulnerable and human after all.  It would
have been easy to cry for him.  An extremely touching performance.  His
slow character development is a testament to his acting ability, to
some excellent direction by Mike Figgis, and to Ronald Harwood's script
that is in no hurry.  It is a slow movie, but a well paced one.  It is
a sad and touching movie, yet ultimately a life affirming one.  It has
a particularly well done ending.
     If you like serious and touching shows, if you like well drawn
characters, and if you don't mind shedding a tear or two, then I
heartily recommend this to you and award it ***.  It runs 1:37.  It is
incorrectly rated R.  Actually it is almost PG material except for two
uses of the F word.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence of any kind.
I think most teenagers would love it.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 28, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The film is an adaptation by Ronald Harwood of the Terence
Rattigan play with some small changes.
     It is announced that Andrew Crocker-Harris (Albert Finney), a
classics professor for more than twenty years at the Abbey School is
resigning.  Despite his strong desire to instill in his students an
appreciation for the great works of literature, he is being let go.
Many of the students in the Lower Fifth refer to him as "Old Hitler."
     Crocker-Harris has another problem: his young wife, Laura, (Greta
Scacchi), who with little attempt at secrecy is carrying on an affair
with the physics teacher (Matthew Modine).  The hardship of living with
a young wife who despises him, Andrew now finds himself with a life
that has been wasted.   His replacement is coming in with some new
ideas about how to teach literature.
     Entirely literate, it is a touching film.  Add to that the fine
acting of Albert Finney in a somewhat different role than that with
which he is usually associated, and we have a very worthwhile film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Albert Finney, Greta Scacchi, Matthew Modine, 
           Ben Silverstone, Michael Gambon, Julian Sands 
Director:  Mike Figgis 
Producers:  Ridley Scott and Mimi Polk 
Screenplay:  Ronald Harwood based on the film by Terence Rattigan 
Cinematography:  Jean Francois Robin 
Music: Mark Isham 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
"THE BROWNING VERSION is the story of a man and his wife and the 
school--a triangle set in a beautiful prison.  It is a film about a man 
finding the courage to transcend all the things in his life that conspire 
against him." 
            - Mike Figgis, director of THE BROWNING VERSION 
     Call it Merchant/Ivory Lite.  Mike Figgis' remake of the 1951 film
(which, in turn, was based on a 1939 one-act play by Terence Rattigan)
has the look and feel of something that the HOWARDS END
producer/director duo is noted for doing.  In fact, THE BROWNING
VERSION has more than superficial similarities to last year's THE
REMAINS OF THE DAY.
     The title refers to Robert Browning's translation of Aeschylus'
AGEMEMNON, a story which has both symbolic and concrete significance to
the film's plot.  AGEMEMNON happens to be the favorite tale of the main
character, Andrew Crocker-Harris (Albert Finney).  Through the years,
his passion for this book, as well as for other classics, has kept him
in teaching.  Now, as a forced retirement (the result of failing health
and perhaps a fossilized soul) approaches, he sees in his own life
similarities to Agememnon's--most notably the faithlessness of his
wife.
     He has been married to Laura (Gretta Scacchi) for fifteen years,
but it's been a long time since they have been happy together.  She has
entered into an affair with visiting American science professor Frank
Hunter (Matthew Modine) while Andrew continues to ferret away his
emotions.  Despite a coldness that earns him a reputation as the
"Hitler of the lower fifth," there is an occasional student that he
makes an positive, lasting impression upon.
     THE BROWNING VERSION does not lack substance, but it is
somnolently-paced and goes virtually nowhere.  Much of the character
interaction is shallow and perfunctory, and almost all the subplots not
directly connected with the main story are unappealing.  Jean Francois
Robin's exemplary camera work can't hide the script's basic
deficiencies.
     The greatest asset of THE BROWNING VERSION, and the man who
singlehandedly rescues this plodding production, is Albert Finney.  His
is a performance to laud, even though it has no chance of a deserved
Oscar nomination (too few people will see THE BROWNING VERSION).  Like
Anthony Hopkins in THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, Finney perfectly captures
the frustrating essence of a repressed man with all of his pent-up
emotion bubbling just beneath the surface.  We in the audience have an
irrational urge to shake Andrew until he acts.
     Greta Scacchi is solid, although vastly overshadowed by her
co-star.  Unfortunately, the rest of the cast isn't as eye-opening.
Matthew Modine is the personification of blandness and the venerable
Michael Gambon is far from stellar as a stereotypical doddering
headmaster.  Julian Sands, in a small role as Andrew's replacement, is
ineffectual enough to blend with the scenery.
     Figgis is adept in fashioning several heartwrenching moments
during THE BROWNING VERSION, all of which are lent their potency
through the strength of Finney's acting.  The climactic speech, which
is meant to be cathartic, verges on a SCENT OF A WOMAN-like overkill.
Figgis and Finney, however, manage to keep things barely on the right
side of the "cornball" line, allowing the scene to accomplish what is
intended.
     Though set in the 1990s, THE BROWNING VERSION has the feel of a
period piece.  Without Albert Finney, no amount of upper class British
posturing would have made a difference to the final product.  With him,
however, we are treated to a rare example of transcendent
characterization--an individual who can make a mediocre motion picture
worth a look.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
