Title
Review for Before Sunrise (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Joan Ellis
     BEFORE SUNRISE is almost terrific.  Filmed with deftness and
delicacy, it catches the essence of young love.  Jesse (Ethan Hawke)
and Celine (Julie Delpy), each alone and unencumbered, meet on a train
as it rolls toward Vienna.  In a burst of spontaneity, they decide to
spend the night together.  Jesse will take the morning plane to
America; Celine will return to Paris.  Between now and then, they have
one night to fall in love.
     The connected strangers stroll the night away on the streets of
the unfamiliar city in a marvelous conversational courtship that is
free of competition and full of trust.  The sweetness of this movie
springs from their quiet resolve to know each other.  We are listening
in on the wondrous process of discovery, and we believe them.
     Jesse's reaction to a riverside poet and an itinerant fortune
teller is purely American: There can't really be anything to this; if I
can't see it, it can't be real.  In lovely contrast, Celine is open
entirely to the romance and fantasy of the moment.  She is full of
quiet charm and mystery, asking questions without needing answers.
     They notice what they happen to see--the Ferris wheel, two actors
on a bridge, a small cemetery--but they don't seek out the sights.
Vienna is merely a backdrop for their wandering.  They are unhurried.
A whole night, after all, is long enough for a good conversation.
     Director Richard Linklater had a mite of courage to think a
two-hour conversational ramble can sustain a movie.  He was right.  By
dawn, the gentle American with the slouchy gait and the quietly saucy
Parisian know what they need to know.
     Neatly avoiding the sentimentality trap, Linklater never lets his
romance turn to sugar.  He does not promise love ever after.  But he
does convince us that 24 hours of love in a country far from home
should be the stuff of universal fantasy.
     Julie Delpy, an actress who can be both wise and innocent, strong
and kind, is the real charmer in this movie.  Her simple sophistication
throws Ethan Hawke into bold relief as a very nice American with a flat
voice; nevertheless he is appealing and vulnerable in his honesty.
Both actors have soaked themselves in their director's mood.  Richard
Linklater has written and directed the film with a light, winsome
touch.  So what's missing?
     If there is no dark side to this tale, there is a bit of an
empty-vessel problem.  At 23, innocence and sweetness go a very long
way, but not quite far enough to make compelling two people who haven't
experienced much of anything.  It would be great fun to see this pair
meet on a European train a couple of decades from now.  But why
quibble?  The romance of a European train and the freedom to say, "Yes,
let's get off and fall in love tonight in Vienna," is irresistible.


Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Ethan Hawke, Julie Delpy.
Screenplay:  Richard Linklater and Kim Krizan.
Director:  Richard Linklater.
     Slacker.  Generation X.  Twenty-something.  There, now that I
have dutifully trotted out all the terms that are *supposed* to
apply to BEFORE SUNRISE, perhaps we can talk about what it really
is.  That is increasingly difficult to do with relationship-based
films about characters in their 20s, which seem to come with
generational baggage by the ton, and even harder to do when the
director of the film in question is Richard (SLACKER) Linklater.
But leave your pre-conceptions at the door, and you will be rewarded
with a nearly perfect romance, a sweet, funny and poignant character
study which, if there is any justice, will make Julie Delpy a star.
     BEFORE SUNRISE is the story of a chance meeting between two
people on a train in Europe.  Jesse (Ethan Hawke) is an American
touring the continent; Celine (Julie Delpy) is a French student
returning to the Sorbonne after a summer holiday.  The two strike up
a conversation which both enjoy, but which seems destined to end
when the train reaches Vienna, Jesse's destination.  Jesse, however,
has another idea:  for Celine to join him wandering through the
city while he waits for his flight back to America the next morning.
Celine agrees, and the next several hours become a whirlwind of
discussion about life, death, family and falling in love.
     BEFORE SUNRISE is likely to be a very polarizing kind of film,
because it consists almost entirely of conversation between Jesse
and Celine.  There is a certain segment of the viewing public which
will be driven to distracion by such a structure, and they should do
themselves a favor and avoid it.  I could argue with these
individuals all day, and not convince them to see what I saw in
BEFORE SUNRISE:  two complex characters developing as genuine a
relationship as you could hope to see on the screen.  Linklater and
co-screenwriter Kim Krizan allow Jesse and Celine to unfold slowly,
so that the characters we think we have figured out early in the
film turn out to be something very different by the end.  Jesse at
first appears to be carefree and confident, but as he lets his guard
down he displays a deeply rooted cynicism and insecurity; Celine,
whose early discussions focus on death and her very practical
parents, becomes someone torn between the romantic she wants to be
and the pragmatist she feels obliged to be.  Even in isolation, I
found getting to know these characters fascinating.
     Together, I found them even more remarkable.  Ethan Hawke and
Julie Delpy both deliver marvelous performances, developing an
affection and connection which always seems absolutely real.  Some
of their tentative early scenes were so perfect that I had to look
away, particularly a hilariously uncomfortable moment in a record
store listening booth where they refuse to make eye contact.  While
both are impressive, it is Delpy who commands the camera's
attention; every reaction is on target, and every line seems
spontaneous.  It is difficult to choose one moment in her
performance above the others, but one will linger in my memory:  the
look of giddy uncertainty on her face when she steps off of the
train in Vienna.  In that one look, Delpy says as much about what
this film is about--the risk of romance--than all the dialogue.
     I keep returning to certain terms when thinking about and
describing BEFORE SUNRISE--perfect, genuine, real.  If that is so,
it is because I have seen film after film over the past few years
try to pass itself off as a romance without demonstrating the most
cursory understanding about the way a real relationship develops.
Linklater does so many things right, but I would like to bring
attention to things he *doesn't* do.  He doesn't wait until the
final reel for Jesse and Celine to kiss, accompanied by a full
orchestra; he doesn't manufacture pointless conflict; and most
astonishingly, he doesn't ever have them say "I love you."  BEFORE
SUNRISE is about a single night which will become a perfect memory,
and I am beginning to believe that is what the film will become for
me.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Put aside reality and put on a cloak of romantic make believe.
Pretend that everything that happens in the film could really occur and
then sit back and look at Jesse (Ethan Hawkes), the handsome American
traveling on Eurail.  Nor will you have any problem keeping your eyes
on French student Celine (Julie Delpy), perhaps the loveliest face in
movies today, who sits opposite him in the train.
     It takes only a few moments of idle conversation before he tells
her that he is leaving for the U.S. tomorrow and how would she like to
postpone her trip back to Paris and school and spend the next fourteen
hours sightseeing with him?  After a slight (ever so slight)
hesitation she agrees.
     The camera follows them through Vienna and other cities until the
following morning when, at the railroad station, it is time for them to
say "Goodbye."  Does that mean forever?
     If such an adventure could happen to anyone (and people do have a
tendency to leave behind some of their conventional behavior when they
are traveling many miles from home) Jesse and Celine would be the
ones.  What a handsome, lovely pair they make.

Author
Jules N. Binocula
     When Irish author James Joyce (1882-1941) chose to immortalize his
first meeting with his wife Nora, he wrote ULYSSES, a dictionary-sized
comic parody of Homer's ancient epic ODYSSEY--compressing the account
of the 20-year wanderings of Odysseus into *one single day* in
Dublin--preserving for world history, a menagerie of stray thoughts and
actions from June 16, 1904.
     Shortly thereafter, Joyce left Ireland with his then-to-be
lifelong companion (and wrote all of his works in Italy, Paris, and
Zurich)--vowing never to return to his homeland.
     When Texas-bred Director Richard Linklater made his third film,
BEFORE SUNRISE--about the events in a single-night's romance in
Vienna--guess which date he chose to dramatize.  And why not?  If it
didn't make any money, he'd be in good company.
     There's a scene in Linklater's first film, SLACKER, where a
character called PRODDER, reads from ULYSSES while inducing another man
to throw a typewriter into a stream to cleanse himself from a woman's
adultery:
     "... If he had smiled, why would he have smiled?  To reflect that
each one who enters imagines himself to be the first ... last, only, and
alone...."
     In SLACKER and BEFORE SUNRISE, Linklater steals from literature to
be cute.  He realizes that transplanted cerebral ironies must be kept
on ice to keep from spoiling--but he knows how to serve them fresh
before they curdle.  As one male protagonist points out (quoting
another of Linklater's favorite philosophers): "All answers must be
found in the attempt."
     Once the director sells the idea that anything is possible--when
everything is permitted--he's off to the races.
     The races, however, turn out to be a partially disjointed
quasi-enchanting escapade between two attractive, perceptive, and
ingenuous travelers on their way to somewhere else.
     Linklater drops so many cinematic and literary dollops into his
stories, he risks putting his audience into mythic insulin shock.  Yet
miraculously, BEFORE SUNRISE is a nutritious entertainment: when all is
said (and little done), you're ready to visit a bookstore, call your
travel agent, and share your favorite libation with the next person who
excites you.  Life could be worse.
     In SLACKER, the camera mirrored the queasy conscience of the
audience, following dozens of superficially developed geeks in fuzzy
epiphanies of mere drifting through lives with no future.  So, if a
"Slacker" is *all talk and no walk*, then "Before Sunrisers" are
*mostly walk and endless talk*.  But this talk is pleasantly
contagious.
     Like Homer, Linklater follows characters through dead-end episodes
in strange places; and like Joyce, he bathes them in radiantly
incidental banalities.  But even a near-perfect night with someone new
isn't always perfect: we're perpetually waiting for these whimsical,
rambling, under-written souls to settle into more precise psychological
subtext.
     Yet, the viewer-friendly story never implodes, using informal
inflections to trace a tenuous path around weird, pathetic, and
ordinary locals on an ordinary night in Vienna.
     Technically, the camera perspectives are inconsistent, but somehow
interesting--dog-eared with low-budget technical flaws, redeemed with
laid-back rhythms.
     Despite its relentless emphasis on pure surface reality, BEFORE
SUNRISE lingers resonantly in the mind--a curiously satisfying
moment-to-moment adventure, peopled with uncertainty and
awkwardness--signifying nothing-in-particular.  But, that's the point.
In the words of yet another nameless philosopher recruited for
SLACKER:  "... my loves, what are they now?  But the more pain grows,
the more this instinct for life somehow asserts itself."
     Following boldly in the large footprints of his mentors,
Mr. Linklater coolly alchemizes his literary conceits into a minor
masterpiece of the mundane.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ethan Hawke, Julie Delpy Director: Richard Linklater Producer:
Anne Walker-McBay Screenplay: Richard Linklater and Kim Krizan
Cinematography: Lee Daniel
An American boy meets a French girl on a train in Vienna. They 'connect'
and decide that they must do several things before sunrise.
Talk a lot. Childhood dreams. Grandmother's ghosts. Visit a graveyard.
Smile and laugh. Watch a birth dance performed by a non pregnant woman.
Men vs. women. Read a love poem. Dance at a night club. Change scenery
on numerous occasion (train, bridge, park, fountain, side street, river,
back to the train) to give their romantic chit chat some dimension.
Now for something to help pass the time. The Time's special edition on
Princess Di looks interesting. Could it really be a conspiracy to escape
media attention when there's a body in the casket already?
Now for a cup of Milo, and a browse through the sports results on the US
open. I say Chang in five come Sunday.
The article on Type I insulin diabetes mellitus looks interesting in
this months issue of 'Current Therapeutics'. Now if they could only
prevent the destruction of those beta islet cells.
My goodness they're shagging in the park. When did this eventuate with
so much conversation? REWIND.
Yep. They sure are shagging in the park. Something about how she doesn't
want a one night stand, so he doesn't force the issue. She wants it to
be meaningful, so he pretends to understand by leaning over her. She
tries hard to resist, but we now she's playing a game, so they do it.
The proof - lots of rolling about on the grass, and the next morning
she's topless (singlet gone but dress still there).
Gosh. How very shallow. So much focus on conversation and relationship
building, then a sudden burst of eroticism. It's not as if the viewers
paid to watch a movie called 'Before Sunrise' just so they could see two
kids jerk off. Honestly, whoever wrote this silly script, why bother
going to such enormous lengths to build intellectual companionship
(which will deepen with time), and then confuse the issues with a single
night of gratuitous sex in the park? Believe me, no one talks as
intelligently or fluently as this unless they've memorised a script.
Anyway, Ethan Hawke's goatee is annoying and sleazy. The French girl
giggles and laughs like a French Girl. Some sensible advice. This boy
and girl should not be wandering the streets of Vienna at such a late
hour; but be sound asleep under the watchful eyes of their parents.
Silly romantic notions like this movie suggest, will only lead to a
longer list of missing persons on the trans-continental Eurorails.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Richard Linklater, the creator of SLACKERS and DAZED AND CONFUSED, 
has succeeded where many before him have failed--in fashioning a 
modern-day romance that is both original and enthralling.  BEFORE SUNRISE 
is nothing short of movie magic, and the kind of film that deserves to be 
remembered one long year from now when 1996's Oscar nominations are 
handed out. 
     Even the best romantic comedy/dramas tend to be formula-driven, 
frequently relying more upon actor chemistry than plot.  Surprises are 
about as foreign to this genre as a pacifist hero is to a shoot-'em-up.  
Somewhere along the way, a storyteller originated the basic love story 
structure.  Film makers have religiously followed this roadmap, rarely 
taking more than an occasional minor detour.  With BEFORE SUNRISE, 
however, Linklater not only travels an entirely different route, but 
heads for a new destination. 
     Frankly, this is not the sort of film one usually expects to find in 
multiplexes.  In fact, if it weren't in English, it might be possible to 
mistake this for the work of someone like Eric Rohmer.  The plentiful and 
varied dialogue has a richness that few screenplays manage to capture.  
Most of BEFORE SUNRISE is talking.  The characters touch on subjects 
ranging from language and reincarnation to sexuality and cable access 
shows. 
     Jesse (Ethan Hawke) meets Celine (Julie Delpy) on a train traveling 
through Europe.  His destination is Vienna, where a flight back to 
America awaits him the next morning.  She's on her way to Paris, where 
she starts classes at the Sorbonne next week.  From their first moment of 
eye contact, they're drawn to each other.  They share a meal in the 
lounge car, savoring the conversation more than the food, and when they 
arrive in Vienna, Jesse persuades Celine to disembark with him and keep 
him company wandering the streets until the time comes for his plane to 
depart.  Thus begins an unforgettable screen romance. 
     One of the first things to notice about BEFORE SUNRISE is how 
completely natural it all seems.  Credit both director Linklater and his 
two leads.  The rapport between Jesse and Celine is so lacking in 
artifice that at times the viewer feels like a voyeur.  We are privy to 
everything, including the sort of "unimportant" dialogue that most films 
shy away from.  Here, its inclusion is just one of many fresh elements. 
     Hawke (the American grunge actor who starred opposite Winona Ryder 
in REALITY BITES) and Delpy (the French actress from EUROPA EUROPA, 
WHITE, and KILLING ZOE) are nothing short of perfect.  For this film to 
work, they have a threefold task:  embrace their characters, attract each 
other, and connect with the audience.  Needless to say, all are 
accomplished flawlessly.  From the first stolen glance, there's never any 
question about their chemistry, and it takes no more time for the 
audience to be enraptured by Jesse and Celine than it does for them to 
fall for each other. 
     BEFORE SUNRISE is about life, romance, and love.  It magnifies the 
little things, paying scrupulous attention to the subtleties and 
mannerisms of body language.  There's one scene where Jesse has to 
restrain himself from brushing away a stray lock of Celine's hair, and 
another wonderful moment in a music listening booth where the characters 
nervously avoid eye contact. 
     This film is an amalgamation of such memorable scenes, yet, as they 
saying goes, the whole is more than a sum of its parts.  Questions about 
fate and the transitory nature of relationships are raised, then left 
open for the audience to ponder.  There are moments of unforced humor, 
and times of bittersweet poignancy.  BEFORE SUNRISE speaks as much to the 
mind as to the heart, and much of what it says is likely to strike a 
responsive chord--a rare and special accomplishment for any motion 
picture. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BEFORE SUNRISE(1995) ***1/4 . Directed by Richard Linklater. Produced by
Anne Walker-McBay. Written by Linklater & Kim Krizan. Photography, Lee
Daniel. Editing, Sandra Adair. Cast: Ethan Hawke, Julie Delpy. An
American-Austrian production released by Castle Rock. 101 min. Rated R
(unjustified).
The siren song of Europe is getting to many of our younger Independent
filmmakers. The current American New Wave, even more than its predecessors,
to a great extent owes a debt to the talky styles of the old French New
Wave, especially Jean-Luc Godard and Eric Rohmer. Now some American
writer-directors are also transporting the action of their films to Europe,
physically and in spirit.  Like much of Jim Jarmusch=B9s =B3Night on Earth.=
=B2
Like Whit Stillman=B9s =B3Barcelona =B2 and Richard Linklater=B9s =B3Before =
Sunrise.=B2
The earlier works of those writer-directors , including  Linklater=B9s first
two major features (=B3Slacker=B2 and =B3Dazed and Confused=B9), were
quintessentially American.  But in =B3Before Sunrise=B2 he has the Old World
and the New World meet on the Budapest-to-Paris train, in the shape of two
23-year olds, Vienna-bound American Jesse (Ethan Hawke) and Paris-bound
=46rench Celine (Julie Delpy)
There=B9s almost instant electricity, so that when the train pulls into
Vienna, and Jesse, broke and flying back to the States the next day,
proposes to Celine that she interrupt her trip and spend with him the next
14 hours going around in the Austrian city, she accepts.
In a bold and uncommercial move for an American director, instead of action
or heavy breathing, Linklater has his entire film follow the pair as they
wander about town and talk,talk, talk...
In the train, Jesse had told Celine his pie-in-the-sky idea for a =B3A Day i=
n
the Life Of...=B2 TV   program, where 100 cameras throughout the world would
each follow a person around the clock. Now, in Vienna, Jesse becomes
director Linklater=B9s stalked subject.
The twosome=B9s conversations are careful facsimiles of genuine youth talk,
one that eager, mutually attracted new acquaintances  would engage in any
time, any place. There=B9s soul-bearing, small revelations, tidbits and the
many banalities that go with  mutual discovery. In a park,  for instance,
Celine exclaims  =B3Hey, there=B9s a rabbit!=B2  Jess; =B3Hi, Mr. Rabbit!=B2=
 Celine:
=B3He=B9s so cute!.=B2
They jabber away, with the man sometimes chatting up the woman, as they
meander by streetcar or on foot. They see sights, visit a record store, an
amusement park, a grungy bar with awful music, a string of cafes. They get
their palms read and watch street nightlife that includes a terrible
belly-dancer. They meet briefly some people (amateur actors,  a post-hippie
poet panhandler) but without the systematic encounters of =B3Slacker.=B2 No
matter what they do, Jess and Celine=B9s adventure is one long tete-a-tete.
And they keep talking...   Hawke and Delpy speak lines carefully but not
blatantly scripted. These ring true and originate in part from
improvisations during rehearsals.  The Godard-Rohmer influence is
crystal-clear. As in Godard,  in a mixture of trivialities and serious
items, Jesse and Celine jump from subject to subject, keep up a barrage of
questions, comments, anecdotes, micro-lectures, irrelevant information.
Celine contributes some skeptical Gallic views, like feminists being mostly
invented by men, in order to tell women =B3You are now free. Let=B9s hop in
bed.=B2
We still get only fragments of who Jesse and Celine are. One thing is
certain, that he is no M.A. in English as, on-screen and in interviews
Hawke keeps repeating =B3... for her and I.=B2
All this is punctuated by clever little non-verbal touches, some quite
well-digested Godard characteristics, like a pinball machine, ambient
noises, the pair =B3photographing=B2 each other without a camera or admittin=
g
their mutual attraction in a lovely scene of imaginary phone calls.
As in Rohmer they explore thoughts and feelings, though without approaching
the complexity of Rohmer=B9s strategies, the intelligence, didacticism and
ambitiousness of Godard=B9s dialogues and monologues, or, Louis Malle=B9s
analytical gabfest in =B3My Dinner with Andre.=B2 The Linklater-Krizan scrip=
t
was not written for profundities or rhetoric but for realism and romance.
At times this difference can make the appealing =B3Before Sunrise=B2 slightl=
y
tedious for viewers who have experienced saying and hearing it all before.
Yet the originality, authenticity and fidelity to real life add up to a
freshness uncommon in American cinema.
The hours pass. The original 110-Volt electricity between Celine and Jesse
increases to 220 Volts, the European standard. Stronger current brings
bigger problems. Brief encounters between people from distant lands can be
heartbreaking. Linklater keeps his characters seemingly gay and insouciant,
yet as they get closer to each other you begin to ache for some way to make
this nice twosome a real, lasting couple.
The scenario=B9s solution is straight out of =B3Love Affair,=B2 =B3An Affair=
 to
Remember=B2 or  Rohmer=B9s =B3A Tale of Winter,=B2 films that the two young =
people
must have missed, since, like the lovers in those movies, they make no
contigency plans.
In =B3Before Sunrise=B2 there=B9s charm, humor, un-treacly warmth and an
effective use of classical music. The movie does not fall into the old trap
of the naive American vs. the sophisticated European, and it also takes an
intelligent, un-cliched and un-touristy advantage of the city of Vienna.
Hawke has somewhat ridiculous facial hair but a pleasant personality that=B9=
s
at the juncture of callowness and maturity. Attractive and intelligent
Delpy speaks flawless English, very cannily observed. Like many foreigners
who, consciously or not, want to show off their command of a foreign
language, she uses four-letter words instead of =B3stuff,=B2  =B3thing,=B2=
 or =B3make
love.=B2  This, I am sure, is what made the unreliable and illogically
prudish judges come up with a rating of =B3R=B2 rather than =B3PG-13.=B2
PS. April 1997. The French New Wave is also present as an homage to
filmmaker Jacques Rivette's "Celine and Julie Go Boating." It is not by
accident that the couple here are named Celine and Jesse ... and go
sightseeing.
Original review , copyright Edwin Jahiel 1995, 1997

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
R, 1994, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[romance/drama]
starring: Ethan Hawke (Jesse), Julie Delpy (Celine), written by Richard
Linklater, Kim Krizan, produced by Ann Walker-McBay, directed by Richard
Linklater.
Is it possible to fall in love in one night? Or in one minute? What about
love at first sight? I'm not sure about the latter two, but I do believe the
first notion, mostly because "Before Sunrise" proves it can happen. Finally,
a film has completely captured the essence of falling in love.
Ethan Hawke stars as Jesse, an American GenXer vacationing in Europe, who
meets a cute French girl Celine (Delpy) on a train to Vienna. The two hit it
off, and it is obvious they are attracted to each other. Just from their
glances and their immediate chemistry we can sense that attraction. When
Jesse must deboard for his stop, he manages to talk Celine into coming with
him by using the greatest "pick up line" I have ever heard (it really must be
seen to appreciate).
And so the two wander the streets of Vienna, encounter some locals, and tour
the city. But they do not get into any kind of conflicts, all they do is be
together and talk. At first, the awkwardness is evident, and their first kiss
is definitely uncomfortable, but after awhile they start to loosen up as they
get to know each other better. 
Linklater and Krizan's dialogue is fantastic, it is so realistic and
believable it's almost as if they had gone through the motions of these
characters and brought a tape recorder with them. Then wrote the screenplay
based on the tape. 
Because the atmosphere is so realistic, vivid, and believable we identify
with the characters and almost become them. I obviously identified with
Jesse, as I have gone through similar situations and could tell what he was
thinking. Hawke and Delpy's chemistry and individual performances are so
outstanding, I felt as if it was me who fell for Celine. I think women will
equally identify with Celine and fell for Jesse. Meeting a person you really
like is one of the greatest joys in the world, and this is an entire film
that plays upon that emotion. 
By the end of the night and the next morning the two have discussed many
topics, such as sex, religion, feminism, family, and everything in between.
When we realize they are probably never going to see each other again it's
realistic, but not fair. 
"Before Sunrise" is a wonderful story. The dialogue combined with the
chemistry between Hawke and Delpy is just so realistic and believable, you
feel like you're spying on two actual people. 
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BEFORE SUNRISE is a romantic talkfest.  It celebrates the joy of
conversation between two people who have just met and who are rapidly
becoming enraptured with each other's conversation and presence.
     It is a two character movie featuring Julie Delpy (last seen in
WHITE) and Ethan Hawke.  They play two people in their 20s who meet on
a European train.  The movie happens almost in real time since it all
takes place in less than 24 hours.  The movie has a realness to it that
approaches almost a documentary feel.  This is not surprising since it
was written and directed by Richard Linklater whose first movie was the
black and white avant-garde SLACKER.  BEFORE SUNRISE, on the other
hand, is a main stream movie albeit one with a wonderfully fresh
approach.
     Hawke is an American who speaks only English.  It opens with him
listening to a couple arguing in German on a train from Hungary.  He
wonders what they are talking about.  As one who has traveled on trains
where I was constantly overhearing conversations in languages I knew
little of, this was so familiar.  At any rate, he meets a French woman
(Delpy) who speaks excellent English and with whom he strikes up a
fascinating conversation.
     They talk about everything as the script is written bright,
interesting, and extremely natural.  Many lines were worth remembering.
When they are discussing the fighting German couple Delpy says she read
that as people get older men can no longer hear high notes and women
low notes, and this mean they lose their ability to communicate.  Hawke
says that they are sort of canceling each other out and maybe nature
did this as a way to keep older married couples from killing each
other.
     Hawke convinces Delpy to get off the train in Vienna with him and
spend the day and night with him wandering the city until his plane
leaves the next morning.  The scene of him asking her to go with him is
precious.  His logic is beautiful and his body language perfect.  I
could see this scene again and again.  The train part is the first 10
minutes of the movie, and the rest is their adventure in Vienna.
     If you love trains and Vienna, as I do, this movie will be a
special treat for you.  You get to see the Prater amusement park, the
Opera House, Demels coffee house, and many other landmarks, but the
movie is no travelogue; it is about conversations and romance.  Notice,
I said romance as in infatuation and kissing.  Whether anything more
transpires between them, you will have to see the show.  The scenes
where they discuss how far to take their friendship that evening are
natural, honest, and a lot of fun to eavesdrop on.  Through out the
show, I laughed out loud many times at the sort of natural things that
can happen in romantic conversation.
     What would I change about the show?  Almost nothing.  I do think I
would have him lose that goatee.  It was too 50s beatnik looking.
     The acting was terrific.  It was easy to identify with the
characters, and you certainly cared a lot about both of them.  You
really wonder when you leave the show what are they doing now and then
you pinch yourself and remember that it was fiction.  The largest
amount of credit has to go to the writer/director who was confident
enough of his script and cast to let the two leads just talk constantly
for the entire movie.
     BEFORE SUNRISE runs a well paced 1:40.  It is incorrectly rated R.
This is without a doubt a PG-13 show.  It has absolutely nothing to
offend other than some uses of the F word.  Any aged teenager could see
it by themselves.  I recommend it to anyone, but especially to
romantics and to lovers of the English language.  If you have to have a
lot of action or a strongly driven plot, you may be disappointed by the
movie as it has neither.  It easily won a *** 1/2 rating in my book.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 29, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Tobias
     There's a key line of dialogue about halfway through Richard
Linklater's bittersweet romance, BEFORE SUNRISE, where Julie Delpy
explains that  the only real magic in the world exists in the space
between two people.  Much of the spaces in the film are filled with
dialogue but the most affecting and telling moments are the silent gaps
in between.
     The premise is disarmingly simple.  Ethan Hawke plays an American
touring Europe on a train, his last stop being Vienna, where he is to
fly home to Texas.  He meets a charming French woman (Delpy) on her way
to Paris and they start talking.  By the time the train stops in
Vienna, they've already made a connection and she gets off the train
with him for a romantic day and night, after which their future
together is uncertain.
     Like all great romances, BEFORE SUNRISE straddles the line between
romantic projection and reality.  We love CASABLANCA not just because
of the endearing connection between its characters but also because, in
the end, we know that this connection is so fleeting.  Even though
reality finally steps in, our memories of these emotions will stay with
us.  We'll always have Paris.
     Linklater leaves us with plenty of memorable scenes: from that
first awkward silence in a listening booth to the scene at the top of
the giant ferris wheel from "The Third Man" to an exchange of feelings
when the two pretend to talk to their closest friends over the phone.
The physical gestures of the two actors (particularly Delpy) also
linger in the mind long after the credits have rolled.
     Linklater's philosophy comes across better there than in his
previous films, SLACKER and DAZED AND CONFUSED.  He uses the train as a
perfect metaphor for time.  Before we reach our final destination, it's
these detours, these moments out of the rush of time, that are really
important.  Perhaps it's the greatest argument for this "slacker"
mentality.  We are far too preoccupied with moving forward in time that
we never stop to take the detours that make life worth living.
     BEFORE SUNRISE is a beautifully observed romance that really
distinguishes Linklater from his peers.  His film radiates with
emotion, not simply the cleverness of the Coen Brothers or the energy
of Quentin Tarantino.  It announces him as a major American talent, one
whose fascination with the connections between people holds infinite
possibility.

Author
Pedro Sena
There is an attraction for this film, and it isn't the actors, although they
do very well.  It is Vienna.
The story centers around Jessie who seems to have lost out on a romantic
marriage with a Spanish woman.  He borders a train to Vienna where he is to
take a less expensive flight to the United States ( haven't heard this one
before.. ) and return home.  While en route he meets a young lady who is
also moving on.  Situations get strange on the train with a couple who is
having a bad day.  She switches seats and meets Jessie.  And he is in the
mood for something different, and romantic, before he leaves.  She accepts,
and despite her wants, they eventually decide that sex is not in the best
interest of the situation.
And they spend the whole night walking around Vienna talking about
themselves and their lives.  Nothing fancy. The film, here, takes on the
attitude of a spectator, and merely shoots the two as if they were another
monument in this city. And their discussion, while lacking the usual
dramatic stance of conflict, just seem to get along.  They manage to become
very good friends and perhaps meet again next year at a specified time. If
they do, that's when the story really will start.  Until then, this whole
thing seemed like a nice exercise in preparing actors for a performance.  It
doesn't feel ad-libbed, but it also does not  feel rehearsed.  The freshness
is nice, and the chemistry between the two comes off as very pleasant, and
enjoyable, making for a nice film, but one that may bore many a viewer, if
they are
expecting something to happen.
Beautifully filmed, and with a very nice touch for the background, this film
walks, much like the Kieslowsky films, but the comparison ends there.
3.5 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Moderator of Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Eric Vormelker
Director:  Richard Linklater
Starring:  Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy
Written by:  Richard Linklater and Kim Krizan
     I attended the world premiere here in Austin, and I don't know when
it will be appearing elsewhere, but it will be soon.
     I have to say that, right off the top, I have loved all of
Linklater's movies so far.  Maybe it's because I find his characters
speaking with my own words in situations that I remember, or maybe it's
because he is my own age, and lives here in Austin, and so the
experiences he's dealing with are such strong echoes of my own.  Or
maybe it's because the people in the film talk like real people, with
nerves and facades, startling honesty and stupidity, and absurd
solipsism.
     So I honestly have no idea how other people outside the dip
between GenX and Boomers where I am will respond to this movie.
     But Linklater and Kruzanne, Hawke and Delpy (they did have
influence) have drawn such strong characters, written such strong
dialog, that, as I look back on it, it felt to me like a romance like
the old Hollywood romances, a sharp, clean blend of innocence and
wisdom, but with a voice like my own.
     As I watched the film, I tried a couple times to step out of
myself and observe things from the woman's perspective, because I found
myself identifying very strongly with Hawke's character, and wondering
whether Delpy's character was developed so well.  But in talking with
my girlfriend afterward, it seems that she wasn't.  So if there was any
weak point, it was that.
     What most impressed me about the film was the way in which,
through dialogue and space, and choice of scene, they managed to bring
to life the experience of meeting someone, and, in the space of
fourteen hours, connecting so closely and deeply that you will remember
the event forever.
     What strongly reinforced this was the way Linklater used Delpy's
looks.  When the two first meet on the train, my initial reaction to
her was "This woman looks pretty average."  And through the film, she
slowly became more attractive, until at the end, she appeared
stunning.  It was as if we were seeing her through Hawke's character's
eyes.
     One little touch that just cemented the film for me was at
sunrise.  Just a filler clip Linklater had, of a sky that was that
color of blue that only happens about mid-dawn, that color that only
looks that way after you've just been up all night.  It defined the
event, and resonated with me, reminding me of those times, which have
been some of the most precious bonding experiences of my life.
     Early on in the film, Hawke's character talks about an idea he has
for an "All Day in the Life" cable channel, in which, for a full day,
the camera just follows a person's life.
     In the after-film discussion with Linklater, he admitted that that
was not a bad way to describe his filmmaking:  looking at the story of
the everyday, and bringing out the art of it.
     And as far as I'm concerned, he succeeded brilliantly.
