Title
Review for Star Is Born, A (1937)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
A Star is Born (1937, William Wellman)
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
"A Star is Born" tells the story of small-town girl Esther Blodgett
(Janet Gaynor) who aspires to become a movie actress.  She travels
to Hollywood and is discovered by screen star Norman Maine (Frederic
March) who convinces his producer (Adolphe Menjou) to sign her.  She
adopts the stage name Vicki Lester, falls in love with and marries
Norman.  Soon Vicki's career rockets while the boozing Norman's
crashes.  If this sounds familiar, it is: The film has been remade
twice, in 1954 with Judy Garland, and in 1977 with Barbara Streisand.
I am especially fond of the original version of this film.  The
screenplay was written in part by Dorothy Parker.  The 1994 film
about Parker, "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle", directed by Alan
Rudolph and starring Jennifer Jason Leigh, reconstructs the filming
of "A Star is Born" in its opening scenes.  Parker was a key figure
in the Algonquin Round Table, a group of second-string New York
literati who wrote some of the best light humor of the first half of
the 20th century.  Parker's book reviews, penned under the name of
Constant Reader, are some of the funniest literary put-downs in print.
Example:  "'Daddy, what's an optimist?', said Pat to Mike as they
walked down the street one day.  'An Optimist', replied the absent-
minded professor as he wound up the cat and let out the clock, 'Is
someone who thought Cosmo Hamilton wasn't going to write any more
books.'"
Parker (along with many from the New York literary scene) was
lured to Hollywood in the early '30's as a screenwriter. She
discovered that Hollywood wasn't nearly as literate a place as New
York, but the money was good.  She stayed on, teamed up with her
then husband Alan Campbell, and with Richard Carson to deliver the
final, credited script to "A Star is Born" that had also been worked
on by Ben Hecht, Ring Lardner, and others.  The film sparkles
throughout with gems of Parker's witticisms: "OLIVER NILES:  I'm now
going to turn you over to my demon press agent, Libby.  Don't allow
Libby to frighten you.  He has a heart of gold.  Only harder."
The story is as much about Norman Maine's self-destruction resulting
from alcoholism and egomania as it is about Vicki Lester's rise to
stardom.  Norman provides a dark and tragic bass note to an otherwise
lighthearted story, and Frederic March is absolutely believable in the
role.  Dorothy Parker knew about the effects of alcohol abuse
first-hand.  If you believe Rudolph's 1994 film, then you believe she
was responsible for introducing her tea-totaling friend, writing
partner, and fellow Algonquinite Robert Benchley to drink which
eventually killed him.
The film represents with brutal honesty how Hollywood operates.
Menjou plays producer Oliver Niles as a pragmatic businessman who is
happy to tolerate Norman Maine's drunken escapades while Maine
remains a star, and in order to keep his new star, Vicki, happy.  But,
soon the theatre marquees are replacing "Enchanted Nights starring
Norman Maine" with "Enchanted Nights starring Vicki Lester", and
it's obvious that Niles will cut his losses over Norman.  Lionel
Stander is excellent as Matt Libby, the Press Agent from Hell.
"A Star is Born" was a big production in 1937.  Janet Gaynor was by
then a Hollywood veteran, having won the first ever Oscar for Best
actress in 1929 for her roles in F. W. Murnau's "Sunrise" (probably
the most romantic silent film ever made), and in "Street Angel" and
"Seventh Heaven".  Adolphe Menjou and Frederic March were big-name
stars in their own rights, and the film was produced by David O.
Selznick, the Stephen Spielberg of the day.  It was shot in Techicolor,
which at that time was the expensive and difficult 3-strip system.
"A Star is Born" was nominated for Academy Awards in the Best Picture,
Best Director, Best Assistant Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and
Best Screenplay categories; it won the Oscar for Best Original Story,
and it won a special award for color cinematography.
For everyone out there who loves classy, smart, bittersweet old movies:
This is a classy, smart, bittersweet old movie:  Well written, well
directed, and well acted.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
