Title
Review for Taking of Pelham One Two Three, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Taking of Pelham One Two Three (1974)
Rating: 5.0 stars out of 5.0 stars
Cast: Walter Matthau, Robert Shaw, Martin Balsam, Hector Elizondo, Earl
Hindeman, James Broderick, Dick O'Neill, Jerry Stiller, Kenneth
McMillan, Tony Roberts 
Written by: Peter Stone 
Based on the novel by: John Godey 
Directed by: Joseph Sargent 
Running Time: 104 minutes 
This early precursor to Die Hard stars Walter Matthau (that's right,
he's the Bruce Willis character) as the transit chief of security for
the New York subway system,  who must contend with a group of terrorists
(led by Robert Shaw, in a ruthless performance) who have hijacked a
subway train.  The hijacking essentially shuts down the entire subway
system, and Shaw demands one million dollars to release the train and
his hostages.  If his demands are not met, one hostage will be killed
every minute. 
Filled with tense situations and some very funny dialogue, The Taking of
Pelham One Two Three is one of the best films of the 70s.  The thing
is... you ask anyone about this movie and no one has ever heard of it! 
Matthau gets the best lines as the frumpy, worn down transit chief...
although everyone in the film has a darkly comedic foul attitude that
makes for some great dialogue conversations (much like how all the
characters in Conspiracy Theory were on edge about something or other). 
In addition to Matthau and Shaw, the rest of the superb cast is filled
out with familiar faces from the 70s.  Also the film has one of those
ridiculously catchy 70s scores, making the soundtrack album a must own. 
The Taking of Pelham One Two Three is available on DVD from MGM Home
Entertainment.  The disc contains the film in its original theatrical
aspect ratio of 2.35:1 and features the original theatrical trailer. 
Also included with the disc itself is a color booklet featuring
materials from the original press kit.  Only fault I have with this DVD
package: the running time listed on the disc and on the case says 124
minutes... why are studios always getting this wrong?  Other than that I
have no REAL complaints, as this is a great DVD release of a great
forgotten movie. [R]
Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
