Title
Review for Single White Female (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
2fatguys@tdis.icpsr.umich.edu (Too Fat Guys)
Roger:  So, another Evil Lesbian movie, Roger?
Roger:  As I mentioned earlier, Allie and Hedy's relationship seems
        initially to have strong lesbian overtones.  Fortunately, this
        is no BASIC INSTINCT.  The director, Barbet Schroeder, seems to
        explicitly push the apparently lesbian theme.  However, we find
        out fairly quickly that Hedy is a surviving twin and is using
        Allie as a surrogate sister.
Roger:  So, that's two thumbs up, a first here, for SINGLE WHITE
        FEMALE.  That's all for now -- the tty is closed.
-- 
For the latest review by the Too FAT Guys, finger roger@icpsr.umich.edu.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
110 min., R, Suspense, 1992
Director: Barbet Schroeder
Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Bridget Fonda, Steven Weber,
      Peter Friedman, Stephen Tobolowski
     Bridget Fonda catches her fiance Steven Weber cheating on her with
his ex-wife and kicks him out of her house.  To avoid being lonely, she
puts an advertisement for a roommate in the paper.  Fonda picks Jennifer
Jason Leigh, a seemingly quiet girl, to be her new roommate.  Fonda
finds out later on that Leigh might not be the person that Fonda thought
Leigh was.
     This is a great suspense film that is definitely worth the ticket
price.  The one major problem with the film is that it seems to be a rip
off of THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.  It just seems to me that the
plots are relatively close and that maybe somebody should have tried to
make this film a little more original.  Both films have a psychopathic
girl who is trying to take control of the people in their lives (for
different reasons) and are willing to kill to get what they want.  Then
again, this is the basic plot line for all the movies in this genre.
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE is rated R for female nudity, adult situations,
violence, and explicit language.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE a five.
     The film moves along smoothly as it progresses.  It doesn't
suddenly jerk into a new situation.  It slowly builds to it, which adds
suspense.  I feel that anybody who enjoyed THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE
CRADLE will most likely enjoy this film.  The actresses are great.
Jennifer Jason Leigh has definitely raised herself above the FAST TIMES
AT RIDGEMONT HIGH level with her current films, RUSH, LAST EXIT TO
BROOKLYN, and SINGLE WHITE FEMALE.  Bridget Fonda, the daughter of Jane
Fonda I believe, also does a great job.  The only male in this film
that I think gives a great performance is Stephen Tobolowski, who plays
Fonda's scummy boss.  The other two males, Steven Weber, and Peter
Friedman who plays Fonda's good friend, both did passable performances.
Fortunately their poor performances didn't hurt the film too much and
the film is still great to watch.
     There isn't really too much to say about this film, other than the
fact that it is a great film and I highly recommend that you don't miss
it.  I think the film will be much more spectacular on the big screen
than on video tape, so I suggest going to the theater to see it if
possible.
