Title
Review for 2by4 (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Strand Releasing
 Director: Jimmy Smallhorne
 Writer: Terry McGoff, Jimmy Smallhorne
 Cast: Jimmy Smallhorne, Chris O'Neill, Bradley Fitts, Joe
Holyoke, Terry McGoff, Michael Liebman, Roman Carr, Leo
Hamill, Seamus McDonagh, Kimberly Topper, Conor Foran,
James Hanrahan, Marian Quinn
   You've got to hand it to Jimmy Smallhorne, who directed
and is the principal performer in the low-budget indie "2 by
4."  He assembled a cast of both professional actors and
ordinary men on the street and combines them so well that
you can't tell the ringers from the Joe Sixpacks.  Far more
important, he tells a story that might have been the subject of
"Confidential" magazine if that publication were still around
today, a tale that the people of a particular ethnic community
would rather keep buried.  According to Smallhorne, not all
Irish in America are as pure and innocent as Leprechauns,
singing "Danny Boy" and Clancy Brothers folks songs as
pursue the good life in America.  At least one fringe group
composed largely of recent immigrants from the Emerald Isle
are settled in New York's north Bronx region, spending their
night snorting coke and engaging in homosexual encounters
with hangers-on, squandering their days on low-wage
construction jobs for which they are not qualified.  The title of
the movie comes from a standard measurement of the
sheetrock that Smallhorne's particular gang put together on a
construction site, work for which many have had no
experience and for which they may not get paid even that pittance.
   Unfortunately, "2 by 4" suffers from its own strained
budget, its indoor scenes for the most part insufficiently lit,
its dream sequences generic and unenlightening, and its
flashbacks unsophisticated.  The drama focuses on Johnnie
(Jimmy Smallhorne), who is the foreman of a construction
crew working under a contract secured by  Johnnie's uncle,
Trump (the late Chris O'Neill).  Jimmy has a nice enough girl
friend, the pixie-like Maria (Kimberly Topper), who one day
surprises him with a present of a pair of tight-fitting leather
pants.  It's as though Maria suspects that her man, who has
been experiencing dreadful dreams and periods of silence, is
bi-sexual as she prods him to wear the trousers to the local
bar.  During the day, Johnnie tries unsuccessfully to get his
inexperienced work crew to speed up their work on the
sheetrock, as uncle Trump is under pressure from the trio of
Hasidic men who have hired him as their builder.  By night,
Johnnie falls under the influence of cocaine, alcohol, a seedy
dance establishment, and has a surprising encounter with
Christian (Bradley Fitts), a gay, vulnerable street man who
becomes a clinging vine to Johnnie.
   By the movie's conclusion we become aware of the source
of Johnnie's nightmares and his sexual confusion, but the
scene displaying his encounter with the basis of his troubles
is anticlimactic and acted out almost casually as though the
confrontation were nothing more than the sharing of a cup of
tea.  Jimmy confronts his demon but appears unlikely to
change his behavior.
   If the Susan Sarandon-Natalie Portman film "Anywhere But
Here," opening at about the same time as "2 by 4" is a chick
flick, then "2 by 4" is something for the guys.  When I read
that the critic for the German web publication known as
"Queer View" finds this film to "unparalleled" and "by far the
best gay film since 'Lilies'" and even "one of the three most
important of the decade," I couldn't help doing a double take
and asking that old rhetorical question, "Did we see the same
movie?" 
   Granted: the film is refreshingly raw.  The men speak
working-class Irish with such heavy accents that English titles
must be used throughout--and that's to Smallhorne's credit. 
But the trajectory is muddled, the story tumbling from one
incident in the life of a confused, self-destructive dude to
another. 
