Title
Review for Bad Day at Black Rock (1955)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the great paradoxes of American history is in the
fact that Hollywood in 1950s - era usually associated with
Cold War hysteria, McCarthy witch hunts, demonisation of any
nonconformist thought and Hollywood blacklists -brought many
great, groundbreaking films that actually challenged
self-righteous view of USA as the greatest nation in the
world. Those films exposed some dark, unflattering truths
about American society by pointing towards some burning
problems previously swept under the carpet. One of those
problems was, of course, racism as most visible violation of
noble American ideas about equal rights for all of its
citizens. Racism was also responsible for the most shameful
episode in the American involvement in WW2 - forced
internment of Japanese Americans. One of the first Hollywood
films to speak about this embarrassing issue was BAD DAY AT
BLACK ROCK, 1955 thriller directed by John Sturges.
The film begins in 1945, few months after the end of WW2.
Black Rock is small Arizona town, so small and insignificant
that passenger train never stops there. When it stops it is
big news, especially when the passenger stepping off is
mysterious one-armed stranger named McCreedy (played by
Spencer Tracy). McCreedy's presence alone is enough to cause
suspicion by townspeople and open animosity by local cowboy
goons. McCreedy would earn even more hostility when he
starts inquiring about Japanese farmer who used to live in
Black Rock before the war. Reno Smith (played by Robert
Ryan), rich farmer and the only real authority in town, is
especially upset over stranger's inquiry. McCreedy is being
told that the Japanese farmer was "relocated" after the war,
but he suspects something more sinister and that some
townspeople, including Smith, had something to do with it.
His suspicions are validated when he realises that Smith and
his goons don't want him to leave Black Rock alive.
BAD DAY AT BLACK ROCK is often referred as companion piece
to HIGH NOON. Those two films have many things in common -
setting in small Western town, populated with hypocrites and
cowards; lone protagonist who would risk his life over noble
principles; suspense created with certainty of inevitable
showdown; relatively short length. Unfortunately, John
Sturges could hardly compete with directorial skills of Fred
Zinnemann while screenwriter Don McGuire couldn't repeat the
complexity of Carl Foreman's HIGH NOON script and its
characters. BAD DAY AT BLACK ROCK looks promising in the
beginning, though. Sturges withholds information from the
viewers. When McCreedy steps off the train, dressed in
black, his presence is menacing and his motives unclear.
Spencer Tracy excellently plays this character by slowly
building our confidence with grace, dignity, intelligence
and confidence. It is real pleasure watching how Tracy
outsmarts those who want to trick him and how he handles
those who want to intimidate him. By showing growingly
hostile reaction of the people like Smith and always
reminding us of the hopelessness of McCreedy's situation,
Sturges slowly builds the suspense. Unfortunately, it all
begins to fall apart in the second part of the film, when
the mystery is revealed and all sides begin preparations for
inevitable final conflict. Instead of action, we are given
sermons and McCreedy, who is shown as man who can take care
of himself, actually talks his way out of bad situation.
Some of the lines spoken by characters are powerful, but
unrealistic, hardly expected from people who spent all their
lives as ordinary, blue-collar inhabitants in small desert
towns. That is especially so with character of Smith, played
by Robert Ryan, who seems somewhat too refined for simple
redneck bigot. Final showdown is also ruined with
unnecessary melodramatic plot twist.
Perhaps the worst flaw of BAD DAY AT BLACK ROCK is lack of
courage in handling whole embarrassing affair with Japanese
Americans in WW2. Don McGuire uses euphemism of "relocation"
for the event that was actually nothing less than
state-sponsored ethnic cleansing (Interestingly enough, when
Croatian and Serbian intellectuals in early 1990s propagated
ethnic cleansing as the only solution of Yugoslav crisis,
they also used euphemism called "humane resettlement").
Racism, that was the prime motivating factor of such event,
is never attributed to the system itself; instead, racism
and bigotry is something that should be attributed only to
few rotten individuals like Smith. General population, which
gave tacit support to ethnic cleansings and holocausts of
this world, either by looking the other way or enjoying the
fruits of someone else's dirty work, is actually forgiven in
this film. McGuire, on the other hand, redeems himself by
using this opportunity to expose rarely seen economic
motivation for racial, ethnic and religious hatred - Smith
did what he did because he wanted someone else's property.
What is really sad about this film is the fact that the
events portrayed in it don't belong to dark pages of history
- BAD DAY AT BLACK ROCK can still teach us a lot about the
world we still live in.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Louis Proyect
Last night while rummaging through Blockbusters trying to find a movie
to rent--an experience I always find dismayingly similar to picking
out a novel at an airport newsstand--I spotted "Bad Day at Black
Rock," the 1954 adventure saga directed by John Sturges, who is no
relation to screwball comedy's Preston Sturges.
This stirred up old memories like the tea-soaked madeleine in Proust's
"Remembrance of Things Past." All I knew about the movie was that it
starred Spencer Tracy as a stand-up, two-fisted guy who confronts a
bunch of villains during a 24 hour time period in a tiny western town.
Although the flick is second cousin to "High Noon," I seemed to recall
that it left most people with a feeling of disquietude back in 1955,
as if they were trying unsuccessfully to digest a piece of tough meat.
The movies had a much more important place in people's lives in the
mid-50s before TV took over. Nearly everybody went at least twice a
week and almost every night included a double feature, with a cartoon,
travelogue and newsreel lead-in. On Thursday nights, there was a
raffle. You put your ticket stub in a drum and the theater manager,
Mr. Balducci, would rotate it and pick the winner. The prize was
usually something like a set of dishes.
Mr. Balducci lost a leg during WWII, when his merchant ship was
torpedoed. He didn't put up with any nonsense in his theater and would
throw you out for whispering too loud. I can't imagine what he would
make of today's Manhattan audiences who treat the movie theater as
their own living-room. Not only do they often talk at the top of their
lungs, you risk getting shot if you try to shush them. When Mr.
Balducci headed down the aisles to administer justice, you could hear
him coming from 30 feet away. Ker-plunk, ker-plunk, ker-plunk, as his
wooden leg announced his coming. As soon as you heard that, you sat
upright in your seat, took your feet off the one in front of you, and
kept your mouth shut.
That's exactly the kind of impression that Jim McCreedy (Spencer
Tracy) makes when he gets off the train in Black Rock. World War II
has just ended and McCreedy, like Balducci, has lost the use of a limb
in combat, in this case his right arm. When McCreedy shows up at the
local hotel and announces that he is looking for Kimoko, a Japanese
farmer who lives nearby, he is met by stony silence.
The more he persists in finding out about what happened to Kimoko, who
has vanished from his property, which is now a burned-out rubble, the
more hostile the local denizens become. They are led by Reno Smith
(Robert Ryan) who is the ringleader of a bunch of no-goods including
Ernest Borgnine and Lee Marvin, cast according to type. Borgnine picks
a fight with Spencer Tracy at one point and gets beaten to a pulp.
While he has lost the use of one arm, he is still an expert in judo.
At this point, the bad guys decide that nothing short of murder will
do.
They are desperate because they fear that McCreedy will uncover their
secret: in a fit of racist anger, a mob led by Reno Smith had killed
Kimoko the day after Pearl Harbor. And just as was the case in the
internment of Japanese-Americans during WWII, there were economic
motives involved. Smith had leased the land to Kimoko after lieing to
him that there was ample water. What Smith did not know is that there
was water indeed, that the resourceful Kimoko had discovered drilling
60 feet under his land.
McCreedy came to Black Rock to present him with the medal that his son
had won posthumously fighting side by side with him in Italy. After
catching on that the father had been murdered, McCreedy decides to
administer justice in the good old-fashioned American way.
What is amazing, however, is that this sort of justice did not really
fit into the contemporary American scene, which could only be
described as a Black Rock from coast to coast. The Korean War had just
ended and fear and hatred of the "gooks" ran deep. Nineteenth century
fear of the "yellow peril" were now wedded to anti-Red hysteria. The
Rosenbergs had been executed two years earlier and the judge delivered
a xenophobic speech that practically blamed the two leftists for all
the dead American soldiers on the Korean battlefields. He said, "But
in your case, I believe your conduct in putting into the hands of the
Russians the A-bomb years before our best scientists predicted Russia
would perfect the bomb has already caused, in my opinion, the
Communist aggression in Korea, with the resultant casualties exceeding
50,000 and who knows but that millions more of innocent people may pay
the price of your treason. Indeed, by your betrayal you undoubtedly
have altered the course of history to the disadvantage of our
country."
The more typical movie of the mid-50s was "The Bamboo Prison," of
which I have vivid memories. It is about American GI's in a Red
Chinese prison camp. One scene depicts them being "brainwashed." They
are seated in a classroom, where a Communist instructor drones on and
on about the injustices of class society. One can imagine how
laughable that might have seemed to an American audience in that
period, especially after having been eligible to win a raffle for a
new set of dishes. Because the GI's will get beaten if they fall
asleep during a lecture, they paint eyeballs on their eyelids so as to
be able to nap safely.
Now why didn't John Sturges elect to make movies like that? There is
absolutely nothing in his background that would suggest he would make
such a contrarian film. The last thing that American audiences in 1954
wanted to be reminded of was mob violence against the Nisei. Sturges,
who made films for the US Army Air Corps during WWII, was no
Communist. He just liked to make straight ahead action films. His
other credits included "Gunfight at the O.K. Corral," "The Old Man and
the Sea" and "The Magnificent Seven."
In a 1975 NY Times interview, Sturges likened pictures to "a chattel
mortgage" financed by bankers or other sources of wealth. The only
difference between an amateur and professional director is that the
professional "finishes the film," paying off the mortgage. His
pictures, he added, were to explain "why our side won." 
The memorable thing about John Sturges is that at least in the case of
"Bad Day at Black Rock," our side is the human race.
