Title
Review for Bridges of Madison County, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Joan Ellis
     The fun of THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is to figure out why a
badly written book that has now become a decent, if implausible, movie
has captured the imaginations of millions of Americans for the last
three years.
     The answer can only be that all who read or see it are projecting
a deep piece of their emotional lives into the story.  Robert James
Waller's style is irrelevant; what he did, it seems, is create a blank
page for the collective fantasy.  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is an
invitation to consider what might have been, permission to think about
what was missed or what was lost.  As Robert Kincaid and Francesca
Johnson, Clint Eastwood and Meryl Streep become the vessels for the
inner lives of their audience.
     After overcoming some awful overacting in the opening scene by
Victor Slezak as Francesca's son, Michael, they go on to play out a
gentle, tender affair that is rooted in decency.  With her family away
at a four-day farm show, Francesca's fires are kindled by Robert, a
National Geographic photographer enticed by the bridges of the small
Midwestern farm town.  Forget the faint likelihood of Meryl Streep as a
farm wife or Clint Eastwood as an unattached lover who is free to ask
her to run away with him.  It's O.K. this time; they are merely our
surrogates in this dream.
     "How sad it is," Francesca says, "to leave this earth without your
children ever knowing who you were."  You can feel the audience melt
into sadness.  And over the whole looms the probability that this
concrete realization of the universal need for connection will
evaporate, because "the minute we leave this place, everything will
change."
     Eastwood and Streep play in gentle understatement, where the
question, "Would you like some iced tea?" carries all the loneliness of
their lives.  It is a story about falling in love far more than about
acting out lust, and it cries out the sadness that so much love has to
take place in secrecy.
     The movie propels itself slowly with a lot of meaningful staring
and long silences while Francesca decides whether she can abandon an
entire life to start a new one. "When a woman marries and has children,
love begins and love stops," she says with a clear grasp of her "life
of details."  When her family returns to show her their triumphs, the
life she leads for others stares her full in the face.
     It is not a stretch to say that romantic love is short-lived
inside or out of marriage.  Whatever wrongful, sad, or transcendent form
it later takes, the initial period of discovery and passion is a joy
that lodges in the soul.  Carrying it off with a lovely, gentle
chemistry, Eastwood and Streep invite us to reinvent our lives.  They
touch the need in the collective unconscious to connect with another
human being.  That bad book has come a long way.


Author
Heather Leone
     Whether or not THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY becomes the next
CASABLANCA of our generation is something else altogether.
     Somehow, the story touched me more when it peeked back through the
mementos and the hurt confusion of Francesca's children than when it
opened up and gave us the four days which changed her life.
     I don't mean to belittle the romance, although at first it did
seem slightly ludicrous for this frumpy housewife to go lustfully
goggle-eyed for this lone, over-the-hill photographer.  But soon they
caught me with their laughter and their human frailty, and I ceased to
be embarrassed by their growing relationship.  Except that's the
thing--I can accept that they fell in love and that love fulfilled them
and changed their lives, but to a cynic like me, four days just doesn't
amount to a relationship.
     So it turns each look/emotion/treasure thereafter into a plot
device.  Everything serves to make the loss more poignant, the regret
more bittersweet.  They succeed beautifully, mind you, but it still
amounts to a plot device.
     Clint Eastwood's style has slowed these past years; he tells
stories without so much gunfire as introspection.  I couldn't help but
compare the gentle lover he'd become to the impatient one he had been
in TWO MULES FOR SISTER SARAH, where he shucked (only) his gun before
climbing on top of Shirley Maclaine in the tub.  His one response to
her request that he at least remove his hat was, "I haven't got time
for that."
     So there I was as the lights came up, with Meryl's beautiful new
accent ringing in my ears and searching frantically for a tissue in my
purse, listening to the row of ladies behind me bitch that the film was
torture to watch.  I don't know if it was because of the pace which
refused to be rushed, the less than perfect spread of the bodies of the
leads, or the nuances of the novel (which all the women behind me had
obviously read) lacking in the film.
     I haven't read the book and cannot speak for the translation.  I
only know that I found the whole of it endearing, even when my
attention began to wander.  What I took away was the desire to know my
own parents and have my children know me.  I took away a contentment in
the knowledge that desire doesn't have to fade.  I took away the idea
that some moments ripen and become a touchstone which gets us through
the rest.
     A classic film?  Probably not.  Some people are going to be
disappointed.  A few might even hate it.  I wasn't.  I didn't.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY asks the question is there love life
after 40/60?  It answers in the affirmative.  For the 40+ set we have
an Iowa farm woman named Francesca Johnson (Meryl Streep) who has been
married to a local Iowa farm man so long that she can not count the
years and yet retains her heavy, (theoretically) Italian accent.
Representing the 60+ crowd we have a National Geographic photographer
by the name of Robert Kincaid (Clint Eastwood).
     The screenplay by Richard LaGravenese is based on the novel by
Robert James Waller that the entire Western world except me has read,
reread and cried themselves to sleep with.  The script starts with a
grown sister and brother in their 40s opening their mother Francesca's
will.  It seems she wants to be cremated and have her ashes dumped by
one of the local covered bridges.  Her children are shocked until they
discover her diaries.  The movie is then told as a long series of
flashbacks based on the diaries.
     Francesca falls into a deep, romantic love with Robert while her
family is off to the county fair for four days.  The movie is the story
of this affair.  We are talking serious, romantic, long lasting stuff
here, not your usual sexual fling that Hollywood is so fond of.  Saying
they fall head over heels in love, does not do it justice.  Hmm, so you
had a four day business trip planned?  Rethinking your plans now are
you?
     Most of the plot is predicable after the initial setup and that is
okay.  The point is not to guess the next plot twist, but to identify
with the characters and vicariously live their romance and have that
illicit fling you subconsciously always wanted.  I thought the plot
outline was wonderful, but I found the writing pretty leaden most of
the time with sporadic poetic or more lively parts.  I think I would
have hated the novel, but maybe not.
     The cinematography by Jack N. Green, whose best previous work was
in the UNFORGIVEN where he got an Oscar nomination, was lovely.  The
outdoor scenes were easy to make picture card perfect and serene.  The
tricky part, and where the artistry came in, was the indoor scenes at
night.  Wonderful, radiant glows filled the house.  Watching it was
like drinking a warm cup of Earl Grey tea.  It filled your body with
contentment.
     The directing (Clint Eastwood) and the editing is of the slow and
dreamy school of movie making.  Lots of silence or throw away dialog so
that the characters can just sit around and stare romantically into
each other's eyes.  The pacing found me checking my watch frequently.
I would not recommend the late showing, you may fall asleep in the slow
parts.
     There are several precious scenes in the show.  There is a
romantic walk after dark that has a great mood to it.  The chirping
crickets really add to the ambiance.  As a contrast, the scene in the
local coffee shop is quite an eye opener and nicely done.
     The acting by Eastwood is the best in the movie.  He is major
handsome with his thick salt and pepper hair and his rugged good looks.
He plays a more quiet and sensitive character than I have ever seen him
play before.  He was natural and believable.
     Streep, on the other hand, was constantly and visibly acting.  Her
accent was unnecessary and a major detraction.  Her morose
characterization of Francesca was overdone.  It was a parody of
Sophie's Choice, but with a different European accent, except they both
sounded the same.  Whereas Eastwood's performance was convincing, I did
not buy Streep's.  All this notwithstanding, you can count on her
getting an Academy Award nomination for it.  The Academy members will
be in awe of it.  For a much better performance by Streep having an
affair, see FALING IN LOVE.  In it, she has genuine chemistry with
Robert De Niro and does not use her one-size-fits-all European accent.
     The minor characters were good.  The sister was perky and
interesting in a small part.  She had a trust in her mother's judgment
that was sweet.  The actor who played Streep's farmer husband was
appropriately simple and boring.  Afterall, the way Francesca described
her husband was that he was good to the kids and was "clean".
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY runs an extremely long 2:15.  Better
editing would have vastly increased my enjoyment as would having Streep
lose that fake accent.  The movie is rated PG-13 for subtle lovemaking.
It is fine for teenagers and probably kids 10 and up.  For many special
scenes, I give the picture a mild thumbs up regardless of its
irritations, and I award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Eric Grossman
     As one of the four or five people who actually did not read Robert
James Waller's hugely popular novel, THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, I
can't answer the "was it better than the book" question.  I can tell
you that the film adaptation, starring Clint Eastwood (who also
directs) and Meryl Streep, is a very moving, thought provoking story
that deals with the themes of love and choiceless choices.
     Eastwood plays Robert Kincaid, a photographer assigned by National
Geographic to shoot the covered bridges of Madison County, Iowa.  Meryl
Streep is Francesca Johnson, a wife and mother of two who is home alone
while her husband and children are at the Illinois state fair.  Robert
shows up at her house, lost, and she quickly finds herself intrigued by
this polite, solitary man-of-the-world.  After she spends some time
with Robert, showing him the bridges and inviting him for dinner,
Francesca begins to discover passion and romance, two elements that are
painfully missing from her adequate but dull life.  The romance turns
to a love affair and as the end of the four days draws closer,
Francesca must choose between Robert and her family, a new life filled
with excitement or her duty to the life that she already chose.
     Eastwood, with a superb screenplay by Richard LaGravenese, has
created a unique, romantic story that is more haunting than it is
sentimental.  There is an incredible feeling of emotional truth in
this film which essentially eliminates the fourth wall (the term for
that imaginary barrier between us and the what is up on screen) and
allows us to feel as if we were flies on the wall, watching a real
relationship unfold.  Cinematographer Jack N. Green, editor Joel Cox,
composer Lennie Niehaus (who all worked on Eastwood's Oscar winning
UNFORGIVEN) and production designer Jeannine Oppewall help Eastwood
create such an enveloping environment that the we are completely
engulfed into the picture.
     For those of you who are still skeptical about Eastwood acting
without a gun in hand, don't be.  His Kincaid character combines his
powerful presence with a deep sensitivity that was hinted at but not
seen in his previous work.
     As far as Streep's performance is concerned, why don't we just
give her the Oscar now?  Her Italian accent is perfect (big surprise
there) and her use of non-verbal looks and gestures brings a depth to
her character that cannot be written in any screenplay.  There is no
doubt about it, there are many great actors and actresses working today
but Streep is in a class by herself.
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY will stay with you long after you
leave the theater.  It forces us to not only think about the film's
characters, but of our own lives, choices and consequences as well.

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by Clint Eastwood
Starring: Clint Eastwood and Meryl Streep
Produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Steven Spielberg
Cinematography by Jack N. Green
     When it was announced that Clint Eastwood would make THE BRIDGES OF
MADISON COUNTY, many fans of the harlequin romance novel went up in
arms.  "How could he, he's Dirty Harry?".  Many thought Eastwood didn't
have the subtle touch that a Director needs when making a romance.  I'm
here to tell you Eastwood has proven all those who doubted him wrong.
He has crafted an instant classic, and probably the best American
romance in the last ten or so years.
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is told in a story in story
fashion.  The children of Meryl Streep's character congregate back in
Iowa for their Mother's funeral, and in reading her diary finds out
about an affair she had much earlier in life.  Streep, in probably her
best performance since SOPHIE'S CHOICE, plays an Italian immigrant
Francesca Johnson.  Obviously repressed, she is married to an Iowa
farmer and is seemingly set in her role as housewife.  Francesca's
family leaves for four days to go the Illinois State fair, leaving
Francesca for what would normally be a few days of work around the
house. Enter Eastwood.  Playing National Geographic photographer Robert
Kincaid, Eastwood drives into this small Iowa town and right into
Francesca's life.  What starts as simply a request of where the local
covered bridges are, turns into a four-day passionate romance filled
with beautiful nuances and gentle expression.  Fighting it at first,
Francesca eventually follows her obvious attraction for Kincaid and is
rewarded with the love she only dreamed of.  Along with Francesca, we
are all rewarded with many memorable scenes of passion and warmth.
Along with these many scenes are some captivating moments of dialogue
between the characters.  Francesca and Robert connect like no other
couple I've seen on screen in a long time.  We are seeing people, and
because of that their story is far more moving.  Eventually Francesca
must decide between her family and security, and her passion for
Robert.
     Simply, the most outstanding part of this film is Streep's
performance.  I think she is probably the best Actor/Actress working
today!  Her mastery of an Italian accent here is quite astonishing, as
is her ability to communicate with a simple look or smirk.  She was so
good that I not only wanted to find out what would happen with her
affair, but also just to follow her character and any path she took.
Eastwood is extremely good also.  He is very convincing in his
sensitive role and beams on screen when he is in the presence of
Streep.  His ruggedness is a good counterpart to Streep's timid
countenance.
     As he did two years ago with UNFORGIVEN, Eastwood proves he is
becoming one of the best Directors in America.   With a deft touch, he
portrays a passion filled yet gentle affair.  Again Eastwood's long
time collaborator Jack Green fills the screen with gorgeous images
also.  Whether the film stays faithful to the book or not is not
important, this film is moving and a joy to view.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 6/2/95 
Running Length: 2:15 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, brief nudity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Meryl Streep, Annie Corley, Victor Slezak, 
      Jim Haynie 
Director: Clint Eastwood 
Producers: Clint Eastwood and Kathleen Kennedy 
Screenplay: Richard LaGravenese based on the novel by 
            Robert James Waller 
Cinematography: Jack N. Green 
Music: Lennie Niehaus 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     Cast against type, Clint Eastwood plays Robert Kincaid, the male 
protagonist in the motion picture adaptation of Robert James Waller's 
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY.  Kincaid is a sensitive loner, and while 
the actor is certainly known for his portrayal of independently-minded 
individuals, one would be hard pressed to describe Dirty Harry as a 
model of sensitivity.  Nevertheless, this is not the first time Eastwood 
(who directs, as well as stars) has successfully stretched his range.   
     As good as Eastwood is, however, it's his co-star, Meryl Streep, 
who really shines.  After taking a break from drama with the popcorn-
munching adventure thriller THE RIVER WILD, she returns to the kind of 
role that made her famous, and gives perhaps her best performance since 
SOPHIE'S CHOICE.  Streep is Francesca Johnson, a lonely housewife whose 
eyes and heart are opened to true love when Robert arrives in Iowa to 
take pictures of Madison County's covered bridges. 
     Francesca's husband and two children are away for four days at the 
Illinois State Fair, leaving her home alone when Robert stops for 
directions to the Roseman Bridge.  Since the roads are unmarked, she 
guides him there in person, and the pair end up spending the rest of the 
day -- into the evening -- together.  They start as friends with an 
endless capacity for conversation, but less than 24 hours later, they 
are in love. 
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is a beautiful film, not only in the 
way it was photographed, but for the manner through which the characters 
are revealed to us.  Eastwood will not be hurried, choosing a relaxed 
pace for the unfolding of this romance.  There's a lot of dialogue -- 
some mundane and some touching on the quintessential aspects of the 
human experience.  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY presents a richly-
textured emotional tapestry.  It's the kind of movie you know is going 
to be special before much of the running time has elapsed. 
     In the book, Francesca is not an especially strong character -- 
things happen around her and she's swept up in the current.  Richard 
LaGravenese's screenplay rectifies this, creating a dynamic personality 
for Streep to work with.  In fact, the actress commented that she was 
"blind to the book's power" but thought the script was "beautifully 
crafted." 
     There aren't many intelligent motion picture romances.  Besides THE 
BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, the only other one (thus far) this year is 
Richard Linklater's BEFORE SUNRISE.  And, as in that film, there's a 
profound sense of inevitability permeating the atmosphere, a realization 
that this magical time must come to an end -- and soon.  In THE BRIDGES 
OF MADISON COUNTY, we know the conclusion before we learn the beginning 
(the story is presented through flashbacks), and this lends an air of 
poignancy to the proceedings. 
     It's easy to believe that Francesca and Robert's love is deep and 
special, but perhaps the real test of the film's power is whether the 
statements, situations, and characters transcend the screen to leave a 
lasting impression.  Not many pictures are created with the necessary 
skill to challenge our perceptions and beliefs, but THE BRIDGES OF 
MADISON COUNTY is a rare exception. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Sharon Connolly
     Not having read the book, I cannot comment on its transfer to the
big screen, but THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is certainly a film worth
seeing, if not just for Meryl Streep's mesmerizing performance alone.
True, the film has its flaws like poor character development of Robert
Kincaid but the essential theme is relative to most anyone especially
those of us who have taken marital vows.  Yes, it's possible to fall in
love again, feel young again and experience that sexual huner and
yearning no matter how old we are.
     Someone mentioned having a problem believing this frumpy housewife
could begin lusting after this world-traveled photographer.  Well, I'm
51 years old and I'm sure I'm regarded as a frumpy housewife and yet,
what I felt at 20 has not disappeared.  Why do some people think only
the young and beautiful have cornered this market on sex?  We saw this
happen to another ordinary English housewife in BRIEF ENCOUNTER.  In
fact, the more ordinary the woman, the more meaningful the story.
     I will admit it's much more a woman's film.  The emotional content
is highly volatile and will perhaps provoke some sentimental and sad
memories as well as some happy ones.  How many of us go through life
feeling we could have had more?  There are always an infinite number of
"if only's" in our lives.
     Meryl Streep certainly became Francesca to her audience over the
135 minutes we watched her.  Her accent was superb - as usual.
(Remember OUT OF AFRICA?)  Even her physical appearance seemed
changed.  Yes, Meryl carried the film.  She was well directed by Clint
but I agree with many others that he didn't fit the role.  He could
have more easily played the quiet and laid back husband.  Don't we know
Clint as a man of few words?  I envisioned someone with a really sexy
voice and it was ironic that someone mentioned Sam Elliot though I
prefer the likes of Peter Coyote.  Now there's a man you could think
about bathing with by candlelight!!
     Most men will probably find this film very dull, much too long and
not too relevant.  Women, however, love romanticism and never seem to
get enough and never lose their yearning for it no matter how realized
it is in their own lives.  If you feel unfulfilled, you'll leave the
theater feeling a little better in the way you related to Francesca or
if you're like me and  was fortunate in finding a "soulmate" in a
husband, then you'll feel really blessed.  (But I'm still going to
dream and yearn)
