Title
Review for Jude (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity, violence)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
     If JUDE strikes you as not at all typical of what you expect when you
think about films based on "classic British novels," it is only because it
is quite faithful to its source material in its subject matter.  Thomas
Hardy's _Jude the Obscure_ was one of the most controversial novels of its
time, one which inspired outraged reaction against its portrayal of
adultery, atheism and marital sexuality.  JUDE's still-relevant theme of
the consequences of non-conformity make it a natural for cinematic
treatment, and Michael Winterbottom has directed a beautifully filmed and
beautifully acted adaptation.  It is somewhat unfortunate, then, that JUDE
is so true to the narrative thrust of Hardy's novel yet falls short in
plumbing its thematic depths.
     Christopher Eccleston stars as Jude Fawley, a working class
Englishman of the late 1890s who is inspired by his schoolmaster Richard
Phillotson (Liam Cunningham) to dreams of becoming university-educated.
While teaching himself the classics, Jude works as a stone-mason, but he
is distracted from his plans by Arabella (Rachel Griffiths), a farmer's
daughter he marries when he believes he has gotten her pregnant.  The
marriage is not made in heaven, however, and Arabella leaves Jude,
allowing him to return to his educational pursuits in the university town
of Christminster.  There Jude meets his cousin Sue Bridehead (Kate
Winslet), a beautiful but highly unconventional young woman who becomes
Jude's close friend.  The friendship grows into something more, but the
circumstances of their lives contrive to keep them apart, and produce
terrible consequences when they reject societal expectations.
     It is often a kind of critical laziness to tick off discrepancies
between a film and its source material, but in the case of JUDE certain
omissions create gaps of logic.  Hossein Amini's script does a largely
superb job of selecting where to condense scenes and delete sub-plots,
losing little relevant narrative information, but there are problems with
the development of character motivations.  Both Arabella and Phillotson
are reduced to minor supporting players, and we don't understand enough
about what their decisions mean to the story.  One pivotal sequence
focuses on Jude's young son, who acts in a manner dependent on Hardy's
characterization of him as almost supernaturally mature and fatalistic.
Ross Colvin Turnbull, the young actor who plays Little Jude, can't quite
muster that quality, and his actions, while startling, don't seem
plausible.  Lost also are many of the contradictory facets of Sue's
personality, particularly her almost phobic aversion to sex.  Hardy's Sue
jumps out a window to avoid sleeping with her husband; Kate Winslet's Sue
becomes Jude's lover in a scene which is played almost as comic.
     That is not to slight Winslet's performance, which is captivating.
She makes Sue a vibrant, intelligent object of desire, a woman who refuses
to accept the roles anyone else imposes on her, and the force of her
spirit makes her fate all the more tragic.  Eccleston is impressive as
well as Jude, whose pursuit of his dreams results in a series of
disappointments but not in the breaking of his will.  Both are well
directed by Winterbottom, who gives JUDE a kinetic energy, though his
rush to include all the critical events in the story might leave you a bit
dizzy.  Also outstanding is the cinematography of Eduardo Serra, both in
the stark black-and-white of the prologue and in the muted colors of the
body of the film.
     JUDE is certainly effective film-making, but it could have been more
_affecting_.  This is a story of people challenging the social order at
their own peril, and once Winterbottom establishes that fact, JUDE is
quite compelling.  It simply takes a terribly long time for him to
establish that fact, and as a result JUDE is an appealing but fairly
conventional star-crossed love story for much of its two hours.  Winslet
and Eccleston are always able to make you care about whether or not Sue
and Jude will find happiness, but Amini and Winterbottom should have been
able to build the understanding that it was impossible.  There are enough
powerful moments and intriguing performances in JUDE to hold your 
interest, and the story still feels daring a century removed from its
publication.  There is just that small missing link that leaves JUDE's
fundamental tragedy a bit too obscure.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Director Winterbottom says of Thomas Hardy's classic novel, "I
think the most impressive thing about Hardy is that he takes very
ordinary people in very ordinary circumstances, puts them through the
most extraordinary experiences and transforms them into heroes and
heroines. "
     When Jude Fawley was a teenager (Ross Colvin Turnbull)) his
ambition was to go to a good college.  This was encouraged by a
professor Phillotson (Liam Cunningham) .  (As an adult, Jude is played
by Christopher Eccleston.)   This was in the eighteen hundreds when a
good education was looked upon as the way out of one's humdrum life
which, in the case of Jude, was that of a stone mason.
     As nothing ever goes smoothly, Jude is seduced by Arabella Donn
(Rachel Griffiths), the daughter of a local pig farmer.  He and
Arabella, with whom he really has nothing in common, marry. . . and
the marriage ends in failure.   Jude decides to leave for
Christminster, a prestigious school, where he can study and still earn
some money as a stone mason.   There he meets a cousin, Sue Bridehead
(the lovely Kate Winslet) and he falls for her charm, wit and beauty.
     That should have made everything wonderful for them but Sue loses
her job and Jude makes the big mistake of introducing her to
Phillotson in the hope that he will employ her as an assistant in his
school.   But soon Sue and Phillotson are seeing a lot of each other.
Although she really loves Jude, when he tells her that he had been
married it puts a crimp in their relationship.  Remember this was not
the 1960s and thereafter.  What follows  is the story's tragic
denouement and a real tragedy it is..
     Fine acting all around.  Directed by Michael Winterbottom.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If human conditions were patentable, Thomas Hardy would have the
original patent for hopelessness.  His characters begin with moments of
utter desperation and then their lives get worse.  Momentary happiness
in a Hardy story is only an illusion soon to shattered by some
unexpected, but plausibly cataclysmic event.
     As Woody Allen said, "More than any other time in history, mankind
faces a crossroads.  One path leads to despair and utter hopelessness.
The other, to total extinction.  Let us pray we have the wisdom to
choose correctly."  Hardy novels are like that.  Although you don't
read them to have a good time per se, you do gain a greater
understanding of life and of your fellow man.
     The few Hardy novels made into films for theatrical release, TESS
(1979) and FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD (1967), have been excellent, and
this year's JUDE joins that elite list.
     Director Michael Winterbottom with the help of screenwriter
Hossein Amini makes a literal adaptation of Hardy's "Jude the Obscure."
Yes, the shocking parts are there, but they are not sensationalized,
and the film is so realistic that had I not known the story and it was
presented as a true story, I would not have questioned its veracity.
     Usually the press kits you get at the screenings are fairly
honest, but this one did have a whopper of a claim.  As one of my
fellow critics pointed out to me, it says that Winterbottom's previous
film BUTTERFLY KISS was "a tender and touching love story."  BUTTERFLY
KISS is a story of a vicious serial killer and although I recommended
it, it is anything but tender.  Nevertheless, I am even more impressed
by Winterbottom's talents after viewing JUDE.  It is his direction that
makes the film.  The acting is good, but not on par with the direction.
Actually, a cogent argument could be made that the real genius is in
the photography, but more on that latter.
     The show opens in the 1860s in a muddy hamlet filmed in black and
white reflecting its bleakness.  Young Jude Fawley (James Daley) is
told by his father that he must go to Christminister if he is to seek
his fortune.  Shown as a Xanadu on a distant hilltop is Christminister.
     The show switches to the glorious colors of an English forest and
Jude (Christopher Eccleston from SHALLOW GRAVE and LET HIM HAVE IT) has
now grown up.  He meets Arabella (Rachel Griffiths from MURIEL'S
WEDDING), and they arrange an assignation.
     As all things in poor Jude's life, his affair with Arabella will
turn out bad.  No matter how hard he tries he becomes an unsuccessful
outcast.  He crams Latin and Greek into his brain until his head will
surely burst, but the university rejects him since he is too working
class for them.  His love life is not much better.  He lives a bitter
life of rejection.
     To reinforce the protagonist's despondency, there is a scene where
a pig is killed and his innards removed.  Although it is completely
authentic, it serves as a metaphor for the desperation Jude feels.  It
may also give rise to an increase in vegetarianism as it is candid and
gory.
     One day, into Jude's life walks his beautiful cousin Sue Bridehead
(Kate Winslet from SENSE AND SENSIBILITY and HEAVENLY CREATURES), and
he is immediately smitten.  To keep her near him he secures her a
position as an apprentice teacher to Mr. Phillotson (Liam Cunningham
from A LITTLE PRINCESS).  With Jude's usual bad luck, Phillotson begins
to fall for his Sue.  His ongoing love for Sue even after she marries
Phillotson gets them both in a lot of trouble, and they become
society's outcasts.
     The dialog is terrific.  Amini has a deft touch knowing how to
adapt the novel for the screen.  "You are the timid sex," Sue tells
Jude in an intimate fireplace scene.  She plays him like an old rag
doll telling him that men can do nothing until women give them that
little look of acceptance.  Where this scene leads is quite
unpredictable, but not the result - more grief for both of them.
     Much later when Jude again comes on to Sue, she spurns his
advances and then taunts him with, "promise me you'll never stop
trying."  Needless to say he views this as extremely cruel.
     "We'll move on again and again as long as it takes for the world
to change.  We've done nothing wrong," Jude resolutely tells Sue when
their fortunes take yet another turn south.  Later Sue asks "Haven't we
been punished enough?"  In a line that sums up Hardy's view of life,
Sue tells Jude, "It's right that I suffer."
     In scene after scene, the audience has to be in awe of the beauty
of the cinematography by Eduardo Serra.  I lost track of the number of
phenomenally gorgeous images.  Among my favorites are the one of the
snow that looks like cumulous clouds that is lit by the early light of
day.  Another has a cottage at dusk with the upper floor encased in
fog.  All of the interior scenes lit with gaslights have a wonderful
warmth.  I certainly hope and expect to see an Academy Award nomination
for Serra's work here.
     The sets by Joseph Bennett II are a cornucopia of late nineteenth
century English life.  From the simple pleasures of a faire to basic
rustic row houses, it feels totally authentic without ever being
overdone.
     Adrian Johnston's lovely music is full of haunting flutes and of
the sad strains of a wailing violin.  People should always stay through
the credits.  In this show you will learn than Mel Gibson had a part.
He did the make-up and hair styling.  Perhaps it is not the same
person.  Then again, ...
     For those who do not remember the novel be forewarned that this
beautiful but consistently morose tale reaches a surprisingly and
horrible conclusion.  It is one that is consistent with the characters
and is genuine, nevertheless, if it doesn't put you in tears, I'd be
surprised.
     JUDE runs 2:03.  It is rated R.  There is sex, full frontal female
nudity, graphic depiction of birth, death, and animal slaughter, but no
bad language.  I am usually conservative when I say which age group a
show is appropriate for, but I am going to go out on a limb on this
one.  I think it would be okay for most teenagers since they would
learn from it.  I have a single test for parents.  If you would let
your kids read the book, then this movie should be okay.  Yes, life is
frighteningly depicted, but it is always realistic and never
sensationalized.  JUDE gets a strong recommendation from me, and I
award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Writer: Hossein Amini (based on the novel "Jude the Obscure" by Thomas
Hardy)
Starring: Christopher Eccleston, Kate Winslet, Liam Cunningham, Rachel
Griffiths, June Whittfield, Ross Curvin Turnball, James Daley
No, I did not read the novel by Thomas Hardy, "Jude the Obscure," his
final novel (final because this film created such an outrage that he
never wrote again - see: I did do some research on it) about a man who
is plagued with bad luck throughout his entire life.  But, after
watching the movie, I can imagine how incredibly depressing it is. 
"Jude" is a satirical film from start to finish about society's way of
spitting out and chewing up those unwanted in its system, but what's
remarkable is how timeless this film is.
The film takes place in the late 19th century (or early 20th - wasn't
really sure), but its story could even be retold today in modern form,
although it'd be kinda different (a given).  It tells the story of Jude
(Christopher Eccleston - the psychotic accountant from "Shallow Grave")
- a simple, dim-witted young man with big dreams.  In its bleak,
foreboding opening, shot in grainy black and white, he gets a lesson
from Phillotson (Liam Cunningham), his teacher: as they stand upon a
mountain, looking upon a city in the distance, he says all you have to
do is work hard and you can have anything in the world.
After marrying and divorcing an immature woman named Arabella (Rachel
Griffiths) because they frolicked in the hay (literally) but did not
ultimately share anything in common, he moves away to a town with a
giant university, with a chance to learn more, and get ahead in life. 
Taking a welding job, he works hard while studying constantly for his
college bars, reciting latin over and over again, and training himself. 
But when he sends his application for the school in, he is bluntly told
to just remain a worker.
Another reason for going to this town was because someone in his family
lives there: Sue (Kate Winslet), his cousin and a very intelligent but
kinda mischevious young woman who wants to be a school teacher.  She and
Jude click eventually and become very endearing friends, so much that
when she spends the night at his flat after running from her apprentice
teacher job (for none other than Phillotson at the local school), there
are rumors that she and Jude did some nasty business (nudge nudge).
Several twists turn in the storyline, and eventually Jude and Sue do do
some nasty business (an interesting scene, to say the least...), and are
soon born into a controversial non-wedlock, as she eventually gives
birth to their baby, and Jude inherits his son from Arabella, who turns
up again after awhile.  Because they aren't married, and because they're
cousins, they run into problems with every place they go to, carrying
around two children everywhere, and only staying in lodges for a very
brief period of time, then moving on.  If you didn't think this was
harsh enough, wait till you see what happens later on...
The sad truth is that Jude is one of the miserable people who can never
get any luck in this world.  He will never gain any true happiness, and
any happiness that happens to him will be fleeting, and will probably
bring more horrible instances to his life.  Part of it is his fault -
he's too optimistic, and too gullible.  But society has a way of taking
these people, and hurting them until their death.  The ending of "Jude"
is bleak because it has to be (although I hear the ending of the novel
is even worse - guess I'll have to read it now).
"Jude" offers a satirical view on society's cruelties, but shows no way
of curing this, and thank heavens it doesn't.  There's no way to
relinquish the selfishness of society, and any solution would be too
small to cure such a mass problem.  Satire has always been one of the
few ways of changing certain people's minds, and that's what "Jude" is. 
Sure, it's one hell of a downer, but it needs to be.
The film also posesses two fantastic performances from its two leads,
and some good supporting work along with it.  Christopher Eccleston
(slightly resembling Richard Edson with his new look and dumb
expression) plays Jude wonderfully, sometimes bringing a big dumb smile
to his face, and making him kind of child-like at other times.  Kate
Winslet, in a pre-"Titanic" performance, is brilliant, nailing every
psyche of her character, and creating someone who's troubled but very
seductive with her personality.  Kate may be the best actress in her age
group (if you don't believe me, see "Titanic," Branagh's "Hamlet,"
"Sense and Sensibility," and "Heavenly Creatures," the latter one being
my favorite performance of hers).
In the supporting roles, Liam Cunningham is a wonderfully flawed
teacher, exposing all his bad parts, but ultimately being a pretty good
person; and Rachel Griffiths is wonderfully immature as Jude's wife,
whom he never divorces.
"Jude" moves at a very slow pace, and keeps taunting its viewers with
chances of happiness for its protagonists, which would drive some people
nuts.  But those who appreciate good social commentary with their films,
no matter how slow or downright depressing they are (this one is both)
will appreciate "Jude," though I doubt anyone truly enjoys it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
UK/US, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 10/18/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:02
MPAA Classification: R (Nudity, sex, animal slaughter, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Christopher Eccleston, Kate Winslet, Liam Cunningham, 
      Rachel Griffiths, June Whitfield 
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Producer: Andrew Eaton
Screenplay: Hossein Amini based on JUDE THE OBSCURE by Thomas Hardy
Cinematography: Eduardo Serra
Music: Adrian Johnston
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     One hallmark of great cinema is that, even when the story is 
tragic, a viewer can leave the theater both reflective and satisfied.  
JUDE, Michael Winterbottom's ambitious, big-screen adaptation of Thomas 
Hardy's heartbreaking classic, JUDE THE OBSCURE, fits perfectly into 
that category.  This is a film of tremendous scope and emotional depth 
that uncovers the soul of a novel and brings it to life on the screen.  
     In every way that matters, JUDE is faithful to its print 
inspiration.  The rhythm of some of the dialogue has been changed to 
make it sound more natural to contemporary viewers, and a number of 
minor characters have been deleted, but the story arc is rigorously true 
to Hardy's vision.  One of the great strengths of the novel is that it 
centers on two believable, sympathetic characters.  JUDE effectively 
captures not only their humanity, but their uniqueness, fashioning a 
delicate rapport between them and the audience.
     For a widescreen period piece, JUDE is surprisingly subtle in 
presenting its setting.  Any time you study the background, you'll be 
confronted with all the appropriate late-19th century surroundings, but 
the film is so deeply character-oriented that its easy to forget that 
we're looking back in time.  With one very important exception, there 
are no scenes designed to specifically highlight time and place.
     That lone exception happens early in the film.  Young Jude (James 
Daley) has accompanied his beloved school teacher, Phillotson (Liam 
Cunningham), to the top of a hill outside his town of Marygreen.  
Phillotson is traveling to Christminster to become a scholar, and, with 
Jude by his side to bid him farewell, he points out the distant place, 
shimmering and gleaming on the horizon like Camelot.  This vision 
becomes a driving force in Jude's life.  Though he grows up to be a 
stone mason by trade, his dream is of scholarship, so he spends long 
hours studying, hoping eventually to follow Phillotson.
     Years later, in the wake of a failed marriage to a pig farmer's 
daughter (Rachel Griffiths), Jude (now played by Christopher Eccleston) 
finally journeys to Christminster.  And, although he fails in his quest 
for admission to a university, he meets his beautiful, young cousin, Sue 
Bridehead (Kate Winslet), a modern woman who refuses to be governed by 
religious superstitions.  As she and Jude spend time together, they fall 
hopelessly in love.  But, because they can never marry, the pressures of 
society doom their relationship.  (In fact, it was Hardy's harsh 
condemnation of society's intransigence, in addition to his sexual 
frankness, that caused such a stir when JUDE THE OBSCURE first reached 
the public.)
     JUDE couldn't have been more perfectly cast.  Christopher Eccleston 
(SHALLOW GRAVE) develops Jude as a somewhat naive dreamer who is forever 
chasing an elusive image of happiness.  For a while, that's the 
existence of a scholar, then, for the bulk of the film, it's a life with 
Sue.  Eccleston gets us to care about Jude, a development that is 
critical to the film's success.  His chemistry with his leading lady, 
Kate Winslet, is electric.  When Phillotson says of Jude and Sue, 
"Sometimes I think [those] two are one person split in two", we believe 
him.  Their initial sexual encounter is both funny and touching.
     For her part, Winslet is luminous.  The film makers indicate that 
they chose her because she's "easy to fall in love with", but the 
strength of her performance far outstrips her natural charisma.  Winslet 
was nominated for a Best Supporting Actress Oscar for her role in 1995's 
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY; what she does for Sue in JUDE is both more 
sublime and more noteworthy.  
     Liam Cunningham (A LITTLE PRINCESS) plays Phillotson as a tragic, 
but never pathetic, figure.  Rachel Griffiths, who won international 
attention and acclaim for her role as Rhonda in MURIEL'S WEDDING, brings 
a similar zest to Arabella, the partner in Jude's ill-fated marriage.  
Veteran actress June Whitfield (of the British sit-com ABSOLUTELY 
FABULOUS) is delightful as Jude's aging aunt, who's never short of 
advice.
     The emotional intensity of JUDE rivals that of films like 
CARRINGTON and THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  The honesty of the story and the 
faithfulness of the production are two key factors why.  But top notch 
production values and strong performances aren't the only reasons for 
JUDE's success.  More important than even these critical elements is the 
universality of the sad, unforgettable love story that Thomas Hardy 
first told, and Michael Winterbottom has so effectively re-interpreted.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
Adapted from the classic Thomas Hardy novel "Jude the Obscure":
In the late 19th century young Jude Fawley (Eccleston) sets his
mind upon becoming a scholar.  However his working class
background and two romances he is doomed to continually revisit -
first with Arabella (Griffiths), an earthy working girl, and
later with his cousin Sue (Winslet), a rebellious free spirit, -
drag him away from this dream.
Two admissions to start with: (1) Having never read the Hardy
novel, I cannot vouch for how close this is to the original.
Comments in the publicity and the fact that Eccleston appears on
the movie poster wearing a beard that he never has during the
movie makes me suspect there may be wild divergences.  (2) "Jude"
is not a terrible movie.  It is just terribly disappointing.
Ready for four hours of unmitigated misery? This is it.
Admittedly the running-time is closer to two hours - it just
feels longer - but "Jude" is an movie looking for a statement to
make.  Despite its protests that it weighs the questions of
dreams versus realities and destiny versus chance, "Jude" the
movie is like the life of its eponymous character: one long
disappointment.  Jude and Sue, his companion in misery for most
of the film, do not so much rage against injustices as just lie
down and let themselves be kicked to death.  We do not need them
to win, but to simply grind them down without respite is
pointless.  "Jude" has little emotion or message invested in it.
Conversely there is merit. After a series of period movies
that stepped straight out of a postcard (or haberdashery), "Jude"
looks like a un-glamorous portrayal of its times, from the torn
edges of Jude's coat to the mud-splattered streets.  Eccleston,
looking almost anatomically gaunt, is a strangely charming lead
with a subdued natural acting style.  When he finally weeps at
his misfortunes, his pain is palpable.  The supporting actors
give appealing performances, although Winslet is not nearly as
luminous as she is in every other film she appears in.  There is
a nicely eerie soundtrack and the director shows a keen eye for
capturing scenes from the bleak distances of farmland to the
crowded interiors of urband gaslight.
But the bottom line is - why see a film that has nothing to
say?  What it really lacks is a sense of not pace but urgency, an
sense that it is going somewhere or say something.  Put it this
way - if you were watching this one on TV, after a hour you'd be
channel-surfing between tragedies.  [*/misfire] and a ski holiday
without snow on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
