Title
Review for Denise Calls Up (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is an original way of telling the story of how many
relationships are started and conducted today.  We are talking about
the computer age, BBSing, e-mail, and the telephone.  We talk to each
other, we get to know each other real well, all because of the
anonymity the computer communication allows.  Because of that daily
contact and "conversation" there is little we eventually do not know
about the other party/parties, nor they about us except what they look
like.
     Denise (Alanna Ubach) is on the phone constantly, frequently
interrupted by Call Waiting.  So are Frank (Tim Daly), Barbara
(Caroleen Feeney), Martin (Dan Gunther), Gale (Dana Wheeler Nicholson),
Jerry (Liev Schreiber) and Linda (Aida Turturro).  The whole film is
about talking, gossiping, rumors, constant interruptions with Call
Waiting, more ringing.
     The conversations lead to intimate relationships, never
consummated; they don't even meet but can they ever talk.  And what
they talk about is usually utter trivia until we learn that one of the
women has become pregnant via a sperm donor.
     The film opens the morning after a party, tables laden with food
because no one showed up last night. . . but they all have great
excuses.  The fact is everyone is afraid to meet in person; keeping it
a phone thing is more relaxing and make believe than the real tbing may
turn out to be.  Every time something is arranged, such as a lunch, no
one shows up.
     Having experienced on my computer much of what goes on in the film
(even if it is exaggerated with dramatic license), I can vouch for its
authenticity.  I mean it COULD happen and among the millions who are on
BBSes and Internet's e-mail, it surely happens many, many times a
day.  It would have been perfect if the film left out the telephone
and somehow utilized the computer for the whole film but that may have
been too tricky to accomplish as a movie.  Nevertheless, especially to
those of us who love our computer communicating, this is a film not to
be missed.  It's billed as a "cyber-comedy."

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is an original way of telling the story of how many
relationships are started and conducted today.  We are talking about
the computer age, BBSing, e-mail, and the telephone.  We talk to each
other, we get to know each other real well, all because of the
anonymity the computer communication allows.  Because of that daily
contact and "conversation" there is little we eventually do not know
about the other party/parties, nor they about us except what they look
like.
     Denise (Alanna Ubach) is on the phone constantly, frequently
interrupted by Call Waiting.  So are Frank (Tim Daly), Barbara
(Caroleen Feeney), Martin (Dan Gunther), Gale (Dana Wheeler Nicholson),
Jerry (Liev Schreiber) and Linda (Aida Turturro).  The whole film is
about talking, gossiping, rumors, constant interruptions with Call
Waiting, more ringing.
     The conversations lead to intimate relationships, never
consummated; they don't even meet but can they ever talk.  And what
they talk about is usually utter trivia until we learn that one of the
women has become pregnant via a sperm donor.
     The film opens the morning after a party, tables laden with food
because no one showed up last night. . . but they all have great
excuses.  The fact is everyone is afraid to meet in person; keeping it
a phone thing is more relaxing and make believe than the real tbing may
turn out to be.  Every time something is arranged, such as a lunch, no
one shows up.
     Having experienced on my computer much of what goes on in the film
(even if it is exaggerated with dramatic license), I can vouch for its
authenticity.  I mean it COULD happen and among the millions who are on
BBSes and Internet's e-mail, it surely happens many, many times a
day.  It would have been perfect if the film left out the telephone
and somehow utilized the computer for the whole film but that may have
been too tricky to accomplish as a movie.  Nevertheless, especially to
those of us who love our computer communicating, this is a film not to
be missed.  It's billed as a "cyber-comedy."

Author
Christopher Null
     I finally had a chance to see DENISE CALLS UP after it had pretty much
made its art-house rounds, but I thought I'd write a short review anyway.
     The one-joke premise is this:  seven friends in New York basically
live their lives without ever really meeting.  Instead, they talk on the
phone.  Dates are set, parties are planned, sex is had, even children are
born -- but no one is there, in the physical sense.
     For 80 minutes, we are treated to variations on one of the above
scenes, often with funny-ironic results.  The film is never really
funny-ha-ha, but it never bores the viewer at all thanks to Hal Salwen's
direction.  I found myself hoping it would speed along at times, but that
was basically because I had to (ironically) leave my apartment to meet some
people in person -- and you can only watch so much of people talking on the
phone.  Still, it was a fun movie to watch, and I feel it would be great
"just to have on," making it an excellent video purchase.
     Stars Tim Daly, Caroleen Feeney (not a typo), Liev Schreiber (also not
a typo), Dana Wheeler-Nicholson, Dan Gunther, Aida Turturro, and Alanna
Ubach (who plays Denise, also not a typo), are all B- or C-list actors, but
everyone does a fine job.  No Oscars here, but no raspberries, either.
     If you live one of these ultra-busy lives and never leave the house,
DENISE CALLS UP is the film for you.  If not, you may get a kick out of it
anyway, but don't expect much more than a protracted phone call.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Release Date: beginning 3/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:20
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Alanna Ubach, Timothy Daly, Caroleen Feeney, Dan Gunther, 
      Dana Wheeler-Nicholson, Liev Schreiber, Aida Turturro, Syvia Miles
Director: Hal Salwen
Producer: J. Todd Harris
Screenplay: Hal Salwen
Cinematography: Mike Mayers
Music: Lynn Geller
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     It's the era of e-mail, call waiting, answering machines, and 
cellular phones -- a time when impersonal communication has replaced 
interpersonal communication.  Nights spent hanging out have given way to 
electronic chat group get-togethers.  Generation X'ers live their lives 
in comfortable isolation, never having to face friends or enemies.  At 
least that's how Hal Salwen presents things in DENISE CALLS UP, and, for 
a certain segment of the population, Salwen's scenario doesn't 
exaggerate much.
     If talking on the telephone is a weak surrogate for real human 
contact, then the men and women of DENISE CALLS UP are seriously 
deprived.  None of them ever congregate.  They spend their lives in 
front of a computer and on the phone.  They date, fall in love, fall out 
of love, have sex, and even die with a receiver pressed to their ears.  
Whole relationships begin, climax, and end without either of the parties 
ever knowing what the other looks like.
     DENISE CALLS UP is basically a seven-character, two story play.  
Both of the main plotlines involve characters developing relationships 
with people they've never met.  There's Jerry (Liev Schreiber) and 
Barbara (Caroleen Feeney), a couple who goes on a blind phone date.  
After a few awkward, getting-to-know-you calls, they discover that they 
like each other, and, while neither has time to meet the other in 
person, they spend steamy nights engaging in phone sex.  Then there's 
Martin (Dan Gunther), who one day gets a call out of the blue from 
Denise (Alanna Ubach).  It seems that he once donated a sperm sample to 
a bank, and Denise was the recipient.  Now, she's eight months pregnant 
with his child, and, having learned the father's identity, she has 
decided to contact him.  Hovering around these characters are three 
friends -- Frank (Timothy Daly), Gale (Dana Wheeler-Nicholson), and 
Linda (Aida Turturro) -- disembodied voices offering advice and support.
     One of the problems with DENISE CALLS UP is that it takes its 
excesses to excess.  As intriguing as the premise is, I'm not sure it 
can support a feature-length movie (even one as short as eighty 
minutes), and the second half of DENISE CALLS UP (with the exception of 
a riotous conference call) is far less fresh than the first half.  In 
addition, Salwen's presentation is often cynical, sometimes bordering on 
cruel, and this attitude makes it difficult for viewers to care about 
the characters.  The last scene rings hollow because the people involved 
don't mean that much to us.
     On the other hand, there's no doubt that Salwen conveys his 
message.  DENISE CALLS UP isn't a vacuous comedy -- it has something to 
say, and the humor, some of which is quite funny, represents Salwen's 
method of preaching.  Special mention should also be made of editor Gary 
Sharfin's work.  Much of DENISE CALLS UP's best comedy involves quick, 
expert cuts as the camera shifts back and forth between as many as six 
characters using call waiting to stay on the phone at the same time.
     DENISE CALLS UP is light enough that it doesn't demand much range 
from the performers, all of whom are fine for their roles.  The actors 
do their best to mold likable characters, but sometimes the script's 
glibness defeats them.  So, while Salwen has formed an interesting 
portrait of modern social interaction, his cynicism works against the 
movie's success.  DENISE CALLS UP might have been more effective if the 
writer/director had taken the time to create characters imbued with more 
than token traces of humanity.  As things stand, everyone in this film 
is little more than a voice on the other end of the phone.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DENISE CALLS UP is a claustrophobic, but carefully executed one
joke movie.  Within the strict confines of the show's unusual format,
writer and director Hal Salwen creates a movie that does the most
possible given the script's rigid adherence to its design.  Even given
its inherent limitations, it is interesting, unique, and thought
provoking.  Still, I feel I should warn you that its repetition and its
circular story may make all but the most dedicated cinema buffs a
little dizzy.
     DENISE CALLS UP takes place solely in the world of the
telecommuters.  Remember the scene in BYE BYE BIRDIE where everyone
talks on the telephone in individual rooms?  Well, in DENISE CALLS UP,
everyone is in their own homes working and periodically chatting with
their friends.  What they never ever do is actually leave to meet any
of them.  They promise to meet, they throw parties, and they arrange
blind dates, but they all fashion different excuses so they can all
stay within the safe confines of their homes.
     The movie is populated by a world of troglodytes who are afraid of
human contact.  They like talking, but actual human interaction is too
frightening, better to stick to intimate relationships with their
phones and their computers.  Besides Homo sapiens, the picture is
filled with every type of phone and computer imaginable.  All of the
phones have call waiting and much of the show consists of A talking to
B, who then gets a call from C causing B to put A on hold.  C then gets
a call from D.  You get the idea.  In order to arrange blind dates with
each other they fax around pictures of the last time they have actually
seen each other, which is in school.
     They take calls while on the toilet.  Sometimes they read while
talking on the toilet, but other times they work on their laptops while
there.  Barbara (Caroleen Feeney) hangs up on potential blind date,
Jerry (Liev Schreiber), because she does not mind talking with her
coworkers or business clients while on the toilet, and using her
laptop, but she draws the line at non-business people whom she does not
yet know.
     There is no central character, but the name of the show comes from
a scene where Martin Wiener (Dan Gunther) is called by a woman, Denise
(Alanna Ubach), on a bus on her cell phone.  Although he has never met
her, it seems she is having his baby since she got his sperm from a
sperm bank.  The on-going joke is whether they or any other of the
couples in the show ever meet or will they confine their relationship
to words spoken on the phone.
     The quick cuts by editor Gary Sharfin and the tone set by the
director make the movie feel highly improvisational.  This means some
silly lines will be followed by some excellent ones.
     Gale (Dana Wheeler Nicholson) has Frank (Tim Daly) as an
ex-boyfriend whom she is always going to see again, someday.  She plays
matchmaker with Barbara and Jerry, but they keep putting each other
off.  In a classic line, Barbara is talking on her car phone to Jerry
and trying to convince him that is the reason she can't actually set a
date for their date.  She says, "I'm on  Park Ave.  See.  [She beeps
her horn.]  I don't have my schedule.  I mean my primary schedule.  I'd
hate to pencil you in and then find I have a discrepancy."  Barbara
does not understand it when her romance with Jerry doesn't work like
she would like and so she sours on him proclaiming, "He was so sweet in
the beginning, sending me little love faxes."
     The shallow and meaningless lives these people live consists of
conversations, phone sex, fear of commitment, and most of all, an
absolute phobia about physical human contact.  A phone is much safer.
Better to have never actually met someone than be disappointed.  When
there is a death, you may be able to guess how, Frank consoles Linda
(Aida Turturro) with, "Don't feel bad.  Death is well, not for
everyone."  These people have long since hung up on life so I am not
sure why death is so hard for them to deal with.
     Although the acting is fine, the reason to see this experimental
show is to see how long they can keep these characters from ever
meeting.  Will the whole show go on and every room have just a single
character?  Will anyone risk meeting face-to-face?  Is having a baby
enough to bring the parents together?  Will anyone come to Frank's
party or will it be like Linda's where everyone promised to come and
not a single one showed?  I'm not telling.
     DENISE CALLS UP runs just 1:21, but even shorter, it would have
been better as the show does wear out its welcome a bit.  It is rated
PG-13.  There is no violence, no nudity, almost no bad language and the
sex is strictly over the phone.  The picture is fine for teenagers and
probably for some kids a little younger.  I give the film a thumbs up
and rate it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Clarissa Oon
Ever feel you're spending your whole life on the Net (ouch!), eating,
breathing and excreting web sites ? That your most meaningful
relationships are being formed on the Net? That you get your best sex
on the Net ?
If first-time director Hal Salwen could shoot an entire movie of
characters typing at their computers, he would. As it is, he settles
for characters talking on the phone. DENISE CALLS UP is a movie for
and about the electronic generation, where characters are too caught
up with their work and insecurities prefer to live out their
relationships and fantasies on the phone. It's a satire - and a
sometimes funny one - about how we let handphones, call-waiting and
answering machines run our lives.
The problem: DENISE CALLS UP is a movie about an idea. A darn good
one, but still an 80 minute-long idea. And despite Salwen's attempt at
plots and sub-plots, despite some genuinely funny moments, you can
predict the movie's outcome within the first fifteen minutes. You get
the drift after a series of shots of characters explaining over the
phone why they all couldn't make it for a party - nobody is going to
be meeting anybody in this film, they would rather be talking on the
phone.
Here's Salwen's plot: while all the characters are in a dysfunctional,
telefixated limbo, loud quirky stranger Denise calls up Martin to
announce that she is pregnant with his child, courtesy of the sperm he
donated to the local bank. As Martin progresses from slamming the
phone on her to long phone conversations over the baby's name, his
friends - and his friends' friends - get involved, courtesy of
call-waiting and double-lines.
In the tigher and more tantalizing sub-plot, Barbara and Jerry are set
up on a blind date that neither turns up for. Both profess to have too
complicated schedules to ever meet, but they get it going over the
phone. With repeated phone sex comes a glitch; what if the other
person is simply faking it?
DENISE CALLS UP scores with some inspired moments. Mousy Barbara
metamorphoses into a vamp over her cordless, everyone shares the
excitement of Denise's delivery through a conference call to her
handphone, and Barbara's best friend Gale is killed in a car accident
while taling animatedly into another friend's answering machine. (As
Gale's overly-chatty aunt recounts, her cordless was knicked into her
ear and lodged in her brain.)
But these moments are not enough to sustain the movie. The pace sags,
the dialogue drags and not much acting appears to be required of the
telephone-touters. And the ending is literally a non-event as
expected, everyone is too chicken to turn up for the party Frank
throws in Gale's memory despite promising over the phone that they
will. We get the point.
The movie appears to be intent on flogging its terribly-'90s statement
until they have it coming out of your ears. Pun intended. There's even
a on the movie's web site where you can win cellular phones (as if we
haven't had enough of these things already). Watch the movie only if
you find it philosophy compelling enough for a earful.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
* Wait for the video.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
Carrie A Gorringe
"Denise Calls Up".  Written and Directed by Hal Selwyn.  Starring
Tim Daly, Caroleen Feeney, Dan Gunther, Dana Wheeler Nicholson,
Liev Schreiber, Aida Turturro, Sylvia Miles and Alanna Ubach.
        In Hal Selwyn's new film, "Denise Calls Up", one of the central
characters, Gail (Wheeler Nicholson), in a telephone conversation
with her ex, Frank (Daly) pinpoints the central problem that all of
the characters are having.  She tells him, "Work can swallow you up
if you let it."  His response:  "And we let it."  But even this
realization isn't enough to shake any of these young New York
professionals out of their interrelational torpor;  being "zenned out
on work" is the excuse for limiting their communications to
telephone calls;  when they require visual reminders of what
someone looks like, they resort to faxes.  Their entire lives consist
of almost nothing but electronic interfacings.  While this is not an
unusual affliction in the modern era, their problems go deeper than a
mere dependence upon technology;  rather, it is the convenient way
in which technology has allowed them to forego the "messy" nature
of face-to-face meetings, with their inconvenience, demands and
potential for pain.  Laptops and telephones ever at the ready, they
break luncheon and party dates while pouring a never-ending, if
unvarying, stream of post-facto platitudes through their
mouthpieces.  A funeral for one of their group brings out only one
mourner, who consoles one of the nonattendees named Linda
(Turturro) with one of the most ironic lines in the film, "Death isn't
for everyone."   Even their sexual relationships have an aseptic
quality to them;  one couple, Barbara (Feeney) and Jerry (Schreiber)
meet, and conduct a torrid affair without ever once experiencing
physical contact. But, of course, that's exactly the point, since all of
them have become little more than mere extensions of their
electronic equipment (underscored, with a delectably nasty touch, by
the manner in which their friend is found dead).
        Into this emotionally sterile existence bounces Denise (Ubach),
the outsider who literally takes advantage of one of the group during
one of his weaker moments.  It seems that Martin (Gunther) decided
to "do his bit" for society by donating to a local sperm bank.  One of
Denise's friends, who works at the sperm bank, made the donor's
identity known to Denise, who begins to flood Martin with phone call
after phone call with details of her pregnancy while travelling on
various forms of public conveyance (unlike the others, she is not
afraid of the outdoors;  whenever any of them venture outside of
their individual spheres of influence, bad things seem to happen to
them).  Everyone in the group becomes involved in the pregnancy's
progress, and its effect upon the group's dynamics, or lack thereof.
        "Denise Calls Up" is the type of film that will either cause you
to laugh knowingly, but uncomfortably, at your own plugged-in
existence, or it will set your teeth on edge at the monotonously
self-indulgent antics of a group of immature people who, deep down,
are  not only afraid of having a life, but of even getting one.  As if to
underscore just how much, the film cleverly maintains the rhythm of
their short and essentially meaningless communications through
considerable amounts of cross-cutting;  the audience never gets to
see each individual for much more than a few seconds on-screen.
After a while, it becomes quite obvious that, if technology did not
exist as their excuse, it would become necessary for them to invent,
something -- anything -- to take its place.  When these people use
words like "responsibility" and "commitment", you can hear their
voices choking on the terminology.  They have more than a good idea
as to what those terms mean for them:  a relationship equals
compromise which equals a loss of self.  And, although you can't lose
what you never had, that is one fact that they all keep safely at a
distance.  Unfortunately, the more willful forms of self-delusion
have never been a trait exclusive to any era.
        To his credit, Selwyn has assembled a marvelous cast to
conduct his broken-telephone comedy of errors.  Standouts include
Gunther and Ubach as the unlikely expectant parents, whose budding
relationship (in more ways than one) becomes a necessary fulcrum
for balancing the almost farcical solipsism that embodies the rest
of the film.  Sylvia Miles is unhealthily funny as Gale's yenta of an
aunt.  So, if you've been staring at a computer screen too long,
"Denise Calls Up" just might be the recharge you're looking for.
