Title
Review for Circus (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Warner Village (Birkenhead Conway Park)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on May 5, 2000; certificate 18; 95 
minutes; country of origin UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Rob Walker; produced by James Gibb, Alan Latham.
Written by David Logan.
Photographed by Ben Seresin; edited by Oral Norrie Ottey.
The writer of "Circus", David Logan, has such an ability to create 
convolutions that some day he may give us a great gangster picture. This is 
not it. His screenplay features too many twists and turns, from too many 
unexpected angles, for too damn long, and after a while we just groan at 
every new 'surprise'. It's suspenseful in a story when anything can happen. 
It's kind of ridiculous when everything does.
"Circus" is a British movie starring John Hannah as a hit man who is asked by 
an old crime-boss friend (Brian Conley) to run his Brighton casino. Before 
Hannah can take him up on the offer, though, he must take care of one piece 
of unfinished business -- the assassination of a rich man's wife (Amanda 
Donohoe).
We see the killing carried out. Then it transpires there is much more to the 
story. At first we think Hannah's client is entrapping him, but there's 
actually a whole pageant of double-crossing, blackmailing, double-dealing and 
scamming going on behind the scenes. It's far too complicated to go into 
here. When my companion leaned over and said "I've lost the plot!", it wasn't 
a confession of madness.
Actually, it's simple in one sense -- everyone's screwing over everyone else. 
That lets Logan turn out twist after twist, but we soon realise what he's 
doing, and so none of his tricks have the ability to shock us. The plot has 
low credibility anyway, because most of the characters' secret schemes are 
dependent on coincidence, guesswork and chance.
A movie like this needs more than complicated puzzles to keep us involved. It 
requires characters who inspire our fascination. Just look at the colourful 
ensemble in "The Usual Suspects". The people in "Circus" are distinctive, all 
right -- they include a gigantic bodyguard who drives a Mini; a fidgety, 
screw-loose accountant with eccentric dress sense; a debt collector who sings 
all his conversations in the rhythm of old pop songs; and a bank robber who 
dresses in cowboy clothing and experiences coitus interruptus with a hotel 
receptionist who'll "suck you off for twenty quid". But this troupe belongs 
in a comedy sketch show, not a thriller that expects to hold our attention. 
And Hannah, such a soft-spoken everyman, is far too bland for the lead role.
What can I say? At least the film tries hard, is sincere, and has ambition. 
It's better than the ads make it out to be, and if you really can't fight the 
urge to see a gangster film in the cinema this season, "Circus" is a much 
better bet than "Love, Honour and Obey".
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
