Title
Review for Hunt for Red October, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Anna G. McDougald
     When John McTiernan's film of THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER opened in
the spring of 1990 early reactions were mixed.  Those who had read Tom
Clancy's novel were upset at the way the story had been edited down.
Those who had NOT read the book wondered how the tale could retain any
relevance given the ongoing collapse of Soviet military power.  And
English speaking audiences everywhere were puzzled by the selection of
Sean Connery as the movie's lead.
     Nonetheless, the film became--and remains--a success, attracting a
world wide fan following which it continues to enjoy.  Many who admit
to repeated viewings cite the superb acting, acting, direction, and
sound as the picture's chief attractions, along with a spellbinding
quality not quite so easy to explain.
     What exactly casts that spell becomes more and more obvious as the
Cold War fades into history.  Today's viewer discovers more than just
another "geopolitical thriller."  For Tom Clancy's story, as adapted by
the able John McTiernan, emerges as a clever retelling of the most
famous submarine epic of them all.
     When Alec Baldwin is seen as the ingenuous Professor Aronnax,
Scott Glenn as the cynical Ned Land and Courtney Vance as a compelling
and very hip Consuelo the choice of Connery as the moody Master of the
Deep is revealed as a stroke of genius.  Even the glittering hardware
and vast scale of the Red October--in contrast to the dark and
claustrophobic sets normally presented in submarine movies--make sense.
For the menacing, mysteriously-driven Red October is, from this
perspective, the re-incarnation of Jules Verne's Nautilus, and her
Commander, a latter-day Nemo.
     (Physically, Connery is a virtual double for Nemo as Verne
describes him.  In one of the more charming passages, Nemo--having
amused himself by testing poor Aronnax's facility with foreign
languages--informs the Professor that though his books have made for
good reading they could, in Nemo's opinion, stand improvement!)
     How McTiernan moves his story to a thunderous denouement while
remaining faithful to both Clancy *and* Verne delights and astonishes
audiences to this day.  But not content to simply update the Verne
tale, McTiernan--aided by Connery's unforgettable portrayal and by
Basil Poledouris' rich and highly anthemic orchestral score--adds to
the film a spiritual dimension that cannot fail to resonate with even
those who have never heard of Tom Clancy, or of a Nautilus far older
than America's atom-powered version.
     The ambiguous tone of the film is established at the very outset,
as the mixed choir's haunting and evocative "Dosvedanye, Rodina"
("Farewell, My Homeland") contrasts sharply with the all-male chorus,
extravagant in its praise for the destructive capabilities of their new
weapon.  The film itself is filled with allusions to martyrdom and
resurrection.  The grouping of officers in the wardroom shortly after
the Red October sails echoes da Vinci's "Last Supper"; Ramius' bunk
fits him uncannily like a coffin while a "lift" from Melville allows
Sam Neill to play Starbuck to Connery's Ahab; a small cross appears
briefly amid the geysering spray of a submarine explosion; and the
finale aboard the Red October calls to mind an old sailors' metaphor
for passage to a better life--making Ryan's closing line both
poignant and prophetic.
     For all these reasons, increasingly apparent as the Cold War
continues to fade from memory, John McTiernan's HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER--far from becoming another piece of nostalgic
propaganda--stands revealed at last as a brilliant reworking of a
masterpiece, capable of standing as a classic on its own.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some author's works, John Grisham's for example, are easily
adapted to the big screen.  Although many of Tom Clancy's novels have
been successfully made into motion pictures, they are so intricately
and carefully composed that keeping them within the confines of a
standard length movie without disturbing their elaborate structure is
tricky.  Clancy, who is a stickler for absolute devotion to detail,
painstakingly researches his books to ensure their accuracy and
plausibility.
     Clancy's first novel, THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, started off his
movie franchise in 1990.  Screenwriters Larry Ferguson and Donald
Stewart approached the material as assiduously as Clancy himself with
the result being a screenplay that truly does justice to the book.
Later screenwriters have been equally diligent in Clancy adaptations -
although no one has ever attempted his complicated second novel, "Red
Storm Rising" - but none have equaled the cinematic power of THE HUNT
FOR RED OCTOBER.
     In his best performance ever, Alec Baldwin, an actor whose emotive
range is highly limited, plays Tom Clancy's classic hero, Dr. Jack
Ryan.  (Harrison Ford was picked as a much more bankable star to do the
follow-up films, and he is indeed a better Jack Ryan since he seems so
much more vulnerable.)  Jack's neither a spy nor a military man, per
se, he just writes books for the CIA.  But, like the everyman role so
popular in movies from Capra to Hitchcock, he rises to the occasion
when called.  In Clancy stories, it's in the service of the entire
United States that his hero is summoned.  Adm. Jim Greer of the CIA,
played with his usual forceful presence by James Earl Jones, is the one
who appeals to Jack's sense of patriotism to attempt the impossible.
     In THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER the Russians have invented a submarine
so quiet that it is virtually undetectable - we are told that we tried
to make this technology work but had no luck.  This means the Russians
could park subs just a few miles off our shore so that they can fire
their nuclear missiles before we can retaliate.  The boat's stealth
makes it a first-strike weapon and hence feared by our military.  On
the maiden voyage of the first such invisible vessel, named the Red
October, the captain slips away from both sides in the nuclear chess
game.  Is he defecting, is he lost, is he engaging in hostile maneuvers
or what?  The U.S. and the Russians distrust each other, and one of the
best series of scenes has the political operatives of both sides
engaging in boldfaced lies with each knowing the other is lying and yet
not being quite sure what the real truth is.
     As Capt. Marko Ramius, the clever skipper of the Red October, Sean
Connery brings such perspicacity to the role that he sets Ramius at the
head of the film's intellectual food chain.  The characters, especially
Jack, try to outguess him, but Ramius generally stays one step ahead of
them.
     The wonderfully intricate story asks many questions.  What, for
example, would Ramius do if he did defect?  And, for a change, the
story pays respect to all the military leaders.  The usual idiots and
megalomaniacs are thankfully absent.
     Scott Glenn, who all too often gets such inferior roles as his
recent disastrous one in FIRESTORM, plays an important one here as
Capt. Bart Mancuso, the captain of the American sub tracking Ramius.
Mancuso is a cool-headed skipper who's willing to take incredible risks
in his war games with Ramius.  Senator Fred Thompson plays another
battle-wise American admiral.
     The entire cast down to the smallest role is meticulously chosen.
Courtney B. Vance is wonderful in the small part of the cocky but
friendly sonar technician.  He manages to hear the undetectable,
proving once again that a persistent man can win in the battle against
technology.
     Tensions mount hard and fast as the Russians launch their entire
Atlantic fleet to destroy the Red October.  And the Americans aren't
sure whether to save the sub or sink it.  The story builds as the
combatants try to out psyche each other.
     The ever-bold Ramius sends a message to the Russian high command
to reveal his intention to defect.  This means that his fellow
defectors are unable to abandon their plans to travel to the New World.
"When he reached the New World, Cortes burned his ships."  Ramius
explains as his reasoning for revealing his strategy.  "As a result his
crew was well motivated."
     Sam Neill, in a moving performance, plays Ramius's second in
command, who has a simple dream of living in Montana and being able to
travel from state to state in an recreational vehicle without a travel
visa.
     Cecelia Hall and George Watters, winners of the Academy Award that
year for sound effects editing, gives the picture a heart-throbbing
intensity and enough deep bass to blow your subwoofers.  This is
coupled with the beautiful and impressive underwater scenes of the big
blue steel masses slinking by, all filmed handsomely by Jan de Bont,
who would go on to direct TWISTER and both of the SPEED movies.
     With its crisp editing by Dennis Virkler and John Wright, who were
nominated for an Oscar, the picture maintains maximum sustained impact
and tension.  As we learned in the classic film DAS BOOT, there is no
place of higher tension than the claustrophobic confines of a
submarine.
     THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER runs 2:15 without a minute of fat.  It is
rated PG for tension and mild profanity and would be fine for kids
around 9 and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, thought it was a good movie.  He said he
especially liked Connery's acting and the way Jack Ryan was really
smart.  He admitted he did get a little bit confused by the story.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Tom Clancy created a new market for the techno-thriller genre of
story-telling with his 1984 novel THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  This genre is
intended to tell a crackling good story about the military and at the same
time include a lot of "executive summary" explanations about what equipment
is used, how strategy is determined, and anything else about defense that
comes up in the course of the story.  There was enough technical detail--
though its accuracy has since been questioned--that the book became the
first fiction publication of the Naval Institute Press, whose usual fare was
dry reference material on subject matter such as tides.  The book quickly
became that rarity today, a book that was not just a best-seller by its own
admission, but also in the public's perception.  When THE HUNT OF RED
OCTOBER made it to paperback, you saw *a lot* of people reading the
paperback.  (Personal note: shortly after the paperback came out, I read it
on a boat with less than a hundred passengers and I saw at least three other
copies being read.)  Now that best-seller has been filmed.
     Part of the irony of the film coming out now is that while the source
was greatly popular, it was all about the Cold War defense chess game that
the NATO countries play with the Soviet Union.  It is quite possible that
the genre that the book fostered is itself going to be the victim of new,
friendlier relations with the Soviet Union as, at least in the public
perception, the Cold War seems to be coming to an end.  I have yet to hear
anyone say that the nuclear submarine fleet is being dismantled or that
anyone has backed off of the edge-of-nuclear-war defense routine, so there
may still be material for new techno-thrillers that work as something other
than restricted period pieces.
     The reason that THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER could still be filmed is that
the plot did not include anything the public would have known about at the
time so the film could still take the stance that this whole story is true
and the proof is that both the Americans and the Soviets deny that it ever
happened.  However, some of the edge is taken off the story because the book
gets its real tension from the ever-present possibility that the events told
will lead to a nuclear strike on the United States.  Read as a contemporary
novel in 1984 or shortly after, that was a real possibility for what could
take place in the story.  That Sword-of-Damocles tension is missing from the
film because--and I say this as only a minor spoiler--there do not appear to
have been any nuclear strikes on major American cities at any time in the
early 1980s.
     "On November 13, 1984, approximately four months before Mikhail
Gorbachev took power in the Soviet Union" (the story begins), the Soviets
had a new super-submarine, the Red October, which featured a nearly silent
underwater jet-propulsion system.  This nifty little gimcrack has but one
conceivable use.  It is unstoppable as a first-strike device that undetected
could nuzzle up close to the American coastline and then start firing
nuclear missiles.  And for the maiden voyage of the super-sub they had
chosen to command their top submarine commander Marko Ramius (played by Sean
Connery).  Their joy at this great Cold War victory was short-lived,
however.  Ramius steals the Red October and heads it for parts unknown.  Now
both sides desperately want to get their hands on the Red October and
neither side knows for sure what Ramius intends to do with the submarine.
     It is, of course, impossible to take all of the action of a novel such
as THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER and put it into a film of standard length.  It
is even more true with this novel than it would be for most novels, since
the original was very heavy with military aircraft of many different sorts,
very few of which made it to the film adaptation.  They seem to have
whittled down the novel with a very large knife.  One of the most lamentable
deletions was Ramius's actual motivation for doing what he is doing.  In the
book that made the character what he was and added a very tragic dimension
to his character and at the same time said something worth saying about life
in the Soviet Union.  Perhaps in an efforts to make all its negative
statements about the Soviets applicable *only* to the pre-Gorbachev years,
the film blunts its social statement that still might be applicable.  The bad
guy of this film is a Soviet point of view that is seen as being strictly
pre-Gorbachev.  Another lamented deletion, if only because I would have
liked to see Industrial Light and Magic's visual rendering, is that there is
no nuclear meltdown on a Soviet submarine. This scene was a descriptive
centerpiece for the novel and it should have been a visual centerpiece of
the film.
     That brings us to the visual effects that were in the film.  They were
sufficient to tell the story and occasionally very nice indeed but
surprisingly shoddy in other places.  One in particular that did not work is
showing a torpedo coming at the viewer.  The technique they used, harkening
back to effects of the 1960s, is to superimpose a picture of the torpedo on
the background and then just increase the size of the inset picture.  You
see this technique in films such as ROBINSON CRUSOE ON MARS, which had a
budget a small fraction of that of THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  In truth, it
is done better here but it still robs the scene of some of the three-
dimensional effect.  The film also had a problem with some obvious matte
lines.  I suspect, however, the films needs to take some liberties with
visual effects if for no other reason than that seeing actual submarine
fights at the proper depth it might be difficult for the viewer to see very
much or to tell what is going on.  The underwater visuals probably told the
story more clearly than was realistic for them to tell it.
     Also adding to the effect is a score by a master film composer whose
work is all too rarely heard, Basil Polidouris.  He has scored at least two
films before on the them of American-Soviet relations, RED DAWN and AMERIKA,
though his masterpiece was his rich and varied score for CONAN THE
BARBARIAN, by far the best thing about that film.  In THE HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER, his score seems to have been influenced by the music of the Russian
Army Chorus and Band.  And while it may not have been a very original or
creative choice, it certainly was a proper one and the choral pieces do make
for magnificent sections of music.
     Finally, some mention should be made of the casting.  Sean Connery, of
course, was not the first choice for Ramius.  That choice was German actor
Klaus Maria Brandauer whom Sean Connery defeated in NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN
and whom he beat one more time in the casting of THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.
I suspect Brandauer could have done Ramius a little better since he does not
have a Scottish accent.  And perhaps to the ears of the public a German
accent sounds more Russian than a Scottish one does.  However, if the public
thinks that Edinburgh-raised Connery does not sound sufficiently Russian,
the producers could counter that he really is not supposed to be.  Ramius is
not Russian--he is Lithuanian!  Actually, accents brings up one of the
film's major implausibilities.  It is hard to believe that any Biblical
passage, no matter how powerful, could make an entire Soviet submarine crew
speak English and not even realize they were doing it.  (That's an inside
joke for people who have seen the film.)
     Second lead went to Alec Baldwin as CIA analyst Jack Ryan, a continuing
character in Clancy's novels.  Baldwin, who played the somewhat simpy
ghost-husband in BEETLEJUICE, is actually a very good Ryan, a family man
with a fear of flying who also has just a bit of Sherlock Holmes in him.  He
has a very winning combination of high competence and vulnerability.  Like
Ramius, he is also a renegade with very strong opinions.  One of the nice
touches of the script (and counter to the cliche) is that while Ramius has
actually read Ryan's books on military history, he does not think very much
of them.
     THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER has a heavy sprinkling of familiar faces in
other roles.  Scott Glenn is crisp as submarine captain Marcuso.  Sam Neill
is a little too sugary as Ramius's second-in-command.  Then there is James
Earl Jones, Joss Ackland, Richard Jordan (in a role as a wily politician
that is somewhat of a departure for him), Peter Firth, Tim Curry (as the Red
October's goggle-eyed surgeon), and Jeffrey Jones.
     While this seems more a Readers' Digest condensation of the Clancy
novel, much scaled down for the big screen, it certainly is a good adventure
yarn, particularly welcome because it was not saved for a summertime
release.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Randy Parker
        If you're the type of person who goes on the submarine ride every
time you visit Disneyland, you're going to love THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.
You'll also love the film if you enjoy cat and mouse military tactics, or
if you're a Sean Connery or Alec Baldwin fan, or if you admired director
John McTiernan's earlier films, DIE HARD and PREDATOR.  In fact, the only
people likely to be disappointed with THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER are those
who have read the book, since films almost never live up to the novels
which inspired them.
        THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER is an epic thriller, adapted from Tom
Clancy's best selling novel.  Set in an era before Glasnost, the movie
revolves around a top-secret Soviet submarine, called the Red October.  The
nuclear sub has a revolutionary propulsion system, which makes the vessel
silent and allows it to escape sonar detection.  The Red October embarks on
its maiden voyage under the command of Captain Marko Ramius, played by Sean
Connery.  Ramius has strict orders just to test the submarine, but he has
other ideas.  He takes the sub and its crew and disappears into the
Atlantic Ocean.  Is he planning to start World War III?  CIA Analyst Jack
Ryan doesn't think so; he's convinced that Ramius plans to defect to the
U.S.  Ryan, played by Alec Baldwin, is given three days to prove his theory
and find the missing sub.
        The characters in THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER are paper thin, but the
performances, thankfully, are rock solid.  Baldwin and Connery anchor the
film with their customary vigor.  Sam Neil gives a sturdy performance as
Connery's somber first officer.  It's ironic to see Neil and Connery
playing Russians, since they are both best known for their roles as British
agents, Connery as James Bond and Neil as Reilly, "Ace of Spies."  The
large cast also includes Scott Glenn, James Earl Jones, Tim Curry, and Joss
Ackland, plus Richard Jordan as the smooth U.S. national security adviser.
        The special effects are remarkable, but more than anything, THE
HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER is distinguished by its water-tight plot.
Screenwriters Larry Ferguson and Donald Stewart have gracefully navigated
RED OCTOBER through a story line full of twists and turns.  They keep us
involved in the action by unveiling plot strands at just the right moment.
        The movie doesn't get as sweaty or breathless as DIE HARD, because
it would rather tell a good story than hit you over the head with non-stop
action.  The finale is rousing and suspenseful, but essentially, THE HUNT
FOR RED OCTOBER is a superior potboiler.

Author
Brian Koller
This movie stars Sean Connery, as the Lithuanian-born captain
of a Russian submarine who wants to defect to the U.S., bringing
his prototype sub (The Red October) with him.  Alec Baldwin also 
stars as a government analyst who is a complete expert on Connery 
and what he will do next.
Connery is cast, apparently, because Americans can't tell a
British accent from a Eastern European one.  He kills a
KGB agent on his newly-launched sub in cold blood, because
the agent will get in the way.  While a surprise, the audience
is supposed to approve of the murder because the victim is
after all a KGB agent and therefore not a human being.
The Russian sub has prototype engines that are nearly silent.
Yet the Americans learn how to track this submarine, while
the Russians can't.
Connery sends a message to the Soviets, telling them that he
is defecting.  He fails to inform about the Americans that he
is defecting!  This leads to the entire Soviet fleet after
him.  The Russian ambassador to the U.S. eventually requests
that the U.S. also hunt down and destroy the sub, using the
pretext that Connery will fire his missiles on the U.S.
The Americans are extremely rude to the Soviet ambassador,
apparently for dramatic purposes.
Baldwin briefs government officials on Connery.  He knows
everything about him except what he had for breakfast last
Wednesday.  While the other officials argue stupidly,
it dawns on Baldwin that Connery is going to defect.
In addition to being the best-looking and most impassioned,
it happens throughout the movie that Baldwin is the only one 
who knows exactly what Connery will do.  This makes it almost
believable that everyone will do, despite orders, whatever
he asks, including that he be flown by helicopter to
a submarine (the Dallas) in the North Atlantic ocean, since 
he has figured out that is where Connery will defect.
Connery fakes a nuclear accident on the sub, as a pretext
to abandon the crew in rafts on the surface, so his
staff can turn the sub over to the Dallas.  Baldwin boards
the Red October, and we are surprised to learn that he speaks
fluent Russian.  One of Connery's loyal staff turns out to be
a pro-Soviet saboteur.  Baldwin, of all people, goes after
him with a handgun and gets him. Meanwhile, a Soviet sub 
has located the Red October and fires missiles at it.  
Fortunately, Connery is so clever that the missiles
end up turning around and destroying the Soviet sub.
"The Hunt For Red October" is based on a Tom Clancy book.
But if I did not know otherwise, I would have presumed that
the plot of this movie was the winner of a contest for
being most unbelievable.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1989, PG, 134 minutes [2 hours, 14 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Sean Connery (Captain Marko Ramius), Alec Baldwin (Jack Ryan),
Scott Glenn (Captain Bart Mancuso), Sam Neill (Vucily Borodin), written by
Larry Ferguson, Donald Stewart, produced by Mace Neufeld, directed by John
McTiernan, based on the novel by Tom Clancy.
"The Hunt For Red October" is a very technical, almost mathematical story
about the modern cold war, and amazingly it is more exciting and suspenseful
than most movies of the genre because it never sensationalizes. This is one
of the definitive examples of what real thrillers should be, as it depends on
the viewer's intelligence to put the pieces together and doesn't become
confusing despite its complexity.
Sean Connery stars as Captain Marko Ramius, a Russian submarine commander
who is taking out their latest typhoon - The Red October. Immediately the
film surprises us, as we witness Ramius do something tragic that seems
without reason... we can only guess what his motives are and what is going to
happen.
We learn more about Ramius and his ship through a conversation between CIA
analyst Jack Ryan (Baldwin) and CIA executive Admiral Greer (James Earl
Jones). The Red October is an enigma to them, it has a new design that
frightens them because they can't figure it out. It's little things like this
that make the film great. Just the fact that everything seems so realistic,
like this might have  actually happened (or could someday) gave me goosebumps
because it is a "scary" idea. 
As Ryan further investigates, he learns the Red October could carry hundreds
of nuclear warheads and cruise through the Atlantic undetected because of its
technology. We already know something strange is happening aboard that ship -
has Ramius gone insane? Does he plan to use the ship for its intended
purpose?
Another great aspect to the film is its dialogue, as certain words are
emphasized to make the situation seem intense, especially during a meeting
with Ryan and the Joint Chiefs. Ryan believes Ramius intends to defect, which
seems crazy, but perhaps the solution is just this simple.
>From here on the film is a complicated story of a delicate situation in
times of unspoken hostility. Ryan heads into the Atlantic trying to convince
people Ramius is trying to defect, but no one believes him. At the same time
aboard the Red October there seems to be a saboteur at work, this only
complicates matters more. Sometimes it's difficult to tell if things are
happening because of the saboteur or if it's just part of Ramius's plan.
The final act concludes with a great underwater battle. Commanders from the
U.S.S. Dallas, along with Ryan, board the Red October and work together to
save themselves from another Russian typhoon. Even during all this fighting
we are never given a straight story, and this is how the film acts as a
whole. We have learned so much about naval tactics it becomes exciting even
through its technicality.
"The Hunt For Red October" is a great education in military diplomacy. I
never knew submarine warfare could be so exciting. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
