Title
Review for American Friends (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
If one was a Monty Python fan, one still follows the footsteps of the many
actors and writers it had in its midst.  And it is easy to see why they made
it, since they are indeed a group of good actors that are interested in
doing their work very well, albeit off the wall. Michael Palin is excellent,
and like A FISH NAMED WANDA, is very smooth and believable.  And this film,
is actually very nicely written and rather subtle in how the story comes
about.
And in the process it drops a scathing attack on one of England's oldest
institutions of higher learning and its idiotic belief that men must live
with men in order to preserve higher education.
This makes a good theme for Palin, who is well educated and read of a
gentleman.  The story is actually based on the memoirs of his father who
left the chance to become president of the Oxford college in order to take
up with an American girl whom he has come to like very much despite the fact
that the new president is the hypocrite that got her pregnant, and violates
the rules of the college many times.
On a holiday, into the Swiss alps, this educator (Palin) takes a vacation
and comes to meet an American girl (Trini Alvarado) and her mother (Connie
Booth).  The mother is making the rounds trying to find a husband, and in
doing so, the daughter is left behind at times, although the mother does
mean well.  In the process the young girl is the one who is falling in love
with the educator, as is the mother, but their situation seems hopeless
until they visit the college and get taken up by another educator (the new
candidate) who proceeds to take advantage of the desperate young girl, while
the mother is trying to land the best suitable candidate for the job. But it
is an impossible situation because the college does not allow the men to
marry, or to get involved with women, one of the old rules that stands to be
dropped.  Palin's stand is a bit on the old traditional values, and he is
afraid of making a decision.  But in the end he makes the right one, because
we have a Michael Palin and a wonderful story to tell.
Very nice film. slow at times, because the old institution is dusty and in
need of a good shakedown, but a real nice little film.
