Title
Review for Money Talks (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Scott Renshaw
     As a public service, I'm going to provide a simple conversion formula
to help potential viewers decide whether or not they should see MONEY
TALKS:
     1) Begin with a base of zero on a 1-10 scale.
     2) If you found Chris Tucker a riotous comedic presence in films like
FRIDAY and THE FIFTH ELEMENT, add 10 points.
     3) If Tucker's every moment on screen during THE FIFTH ELEMENT made
you want to tear out your own central nervous system with a shrimp fork,
subtract 250,000 points.
     Those individuals blissfully unfamiliar with the Chris Tucker oeuvre
may be confused at this point.  I envy such sweet naivete.  Tucker may be
the most actively annoying screen presence since...well, "ever" comes to
mind.  Blessed with a shudder-inducing nasal whine of a voice, Tucker
dares the audience to tolerate him by playing characters who simply refuse
to shut up.  In MONEY TALKS, he plays a motor-mouthed ticket scalper named
Franklin Hatchett who gets busted after investigative reporter James
Russell (Charlie Sheen) does an expose'.  Franklin then ends up in a
prison transport with a French smuggler (Gerard Ismael), whose operatives
kill both cops and cons in the course of rescuing him.  Naturally,
Franklin is suspected of being part of the escape plan.  Naturally, he
seeks out James, though there is no good reason for him to do so when his
friends include a major arms dealer.  Naturally, James is about to marry
into a wealthy family, giving Franklin plenty of opportunities to shake up
the upper crust.
     And naturally, almost everyone Franklin deals with is a complete
idiot.  Franklin spends most of MONEY TALKS taking shots at all the
corrupt, vennal, brutal and/or criminally stupid white people he
encounters.  That includes and goes double for Charlie Sheen, whose sole
purpose in the film is to stay near Tucker so there is always someone
close at hand for him to insult.  Considering the number of times Franklin
comments on James' posterior -- its narrowness, its whiteness, or its need
to be kicked -- you'd think he might have a little crush on the fellow.
Of course, just to make sure we know that's not the case, there is a scene
in which Franklin rebuffs an aggressively affectionate gay man with whom
he shares a jail cell. In an "urban comedy," you'd better make sure the
audience knows you find "queers" even more obnoxious than white people.
     The amazing thing about MONEY TALKS is that Tucker _still_ manages to
play the stupidest and most obnoxious character in the film.  There is
nothing remotely sympathetic or likeable about Franklin, unless it is that
he actually seems to care about his pregnant girlfriend (whom he
sweet-talks with a good-natured threat to kick _her_ ass).  Apparently
Tucker's fans find his routine hysterical; the crowd roared its
appreciation at every profanity-packed sentence (Tucker uses over 200
choice epithets during the 93 minutes of MONEY TALKS).  They also seemed
thrilled every time something blew up, or every time someone got shot.
Perhaps that is why watching MONEY TALKS was such a doubly depressing
experience.  Not only did I have to stomach Tucker's grating presence in
the kind of wretched buddy comedy which makes other wretched buddy
comedies look inspired, but I shared it with an audience which found high
entertainment in the equivalent of RAMBO starring Jerry Lewis with
Tourette's syndrome.
     Make that triply depressing:  if MONEY TALKS is a success, I could be
sitting through another Chris Tucker project real soon.  When you refer
back to the conversion formula above, please amend item #3 to read
"subtract 500,000 points."  Anyone have a shrimp fork handy?

Author
Steve Kong
It's hard to review a movie like Money Talks. The movie to aim itself at a
mass audience, but the audience for the film is actually more limited. Not
because of its formula buddy/comedy/action script, but by its lead actor,
Chris Tucker.
The formula for Money Talks is pretty simplistic. A reporter (Charlie
Sheen) setups up a ticket scalper (Chris Tucker) to be arrested. After the
scalper is arrested, he escapes, but not before hearing about some super
secret lucrative dirty dealing. Now that the scalper has escaped, he goes
and finds the reporter who put him away. The scalper is now being hunted by
the cops because they thing he is a cop killer. His last chance? The
reporter maybe able to clear his name. The reporter who put him away feels
guilty and helps the scalper out. Along the way we run into really bad
guys, cops, and gangsters. Throw in a wedding, some stunts, and a few
comedic lines and you have the formula for Money Talks.
The limitation of this film is Chris Tucker. Tucker is a nasally voiced
fast talking cheap knock-off of Eddie Murphy. I think some will find it
hard to watch Tucker for more than five minutes. I've gotten used to him
after seeing him in The 5th Element, so he wasn't so bad. His annoying
screen presence though is what carries the film. His presence far
overshadows that of Charlie Sheen. Sheen gives a very bland performance in
this film, but it's probably expected by looking at Sheen's last few films.
The action is rather bland. Most of it consists of car chases and gun
fights. Director Brett Ratner shows that he is a rookie at shooting and
editing action. Most action sequences are chaotic, badly edited, and end up
losing the audience. The comedy of the film is much better than the action,
I found myself laughing out loud many times during the film.
Overall, Money Talks is a formula film that does entertain. While I
recommend this film, it is a weak recommendation, see it during a matinee
showing or on video. And keep in mind that Tucker is pretty obnoxious and
annoying, if you can't tolerate an actor like this, then this film is
definitely not for you. 

Author
James Sanford
         No single performance in any movie this year has divided
audiences like Chris Tucker's ultra-swishy DJ Ruby Rodd in ``The Fifth
Element.''
  To some, it was the most daring acting stunt since Nicolas
Cage's squeaking Romeo in ``Peggy Sue Got Married.'' To others, it was
either A) a disgusting gay stereotype that ruined the movie, or B) an
aggressively irritating caricature that wore out its welcome after
five minutes.
  Tucker was not the main attraction of ``The Fifty Element,''
but he's the whole show in ``Money Talks,'' a self-congratulatory
showcase he also executive-produced.
  Like the worst Eddie Murphy movies, ``Money Talks'' serves
up a crude blend of flip comedy and jarring violence. Tucker plays
Franklin Hatchett, a car-wash worker who scalps tickets on the
side. Busted by TV reporter James Russell (Charlie Sheen, still
charisma-free after all these years) for no real reason other than to
get the story rolling, Hatchett soon becomes embroiled in a scheme by
some none-too-slick French thieves to get hold of a cache of diamonds.
  How dumb are these crooks? The rocks are hidden inside the
dashboard of a rare Jaguar that's about to go up for auction, and
instead of stealing the car, these guys bid on it.
  Tucker again uses the Michael Jackson-on-helium voice he
employed as Ruby Rodd, and for good reason: It seems to be the only
trick in his bag.
  Whereas Murphy, even on a bad day, can hit you with a
devastating impersonation or some inspired ad-libbing, Tucker's comedy
consists entirely of him screeching profanities.
  Tucker's limited act is easier to take if it's being played
off someone like Bruce Willis in ``Fifth,'' but Sheen's glowering
pseudo-intensity gives Tucker nothing to react to. The lamebrained
screenplay eventually has Russell sheltering the fugitive Hatchett two
days before Russell's wedding, meaning that Russell must drag Hatchett
along to the rehearsal dinner at his future in-laws' Beverly Hills
estate, and guess what Hatchett does there? He steals things! Fresh
idea, huh?
  Heather Locklear, in a miniscule role as Russell's fiancee,
looks like she was dragged to the set after a sleepless night. The
gifted Elise Neal has nothing to do but scold and scurry about as
Hatchett's pregnant girlfriend.
  At least both women were spared participation in the fatuous
finale that finds Hatchett and Russell being chased by bad dudes all
over the Los Angeles Coliseum, which someone has thoughtfully left
wide open and unguarded at 3 a.m. While helicopters explode, rockets
fly into the stands and villains shoot holes through one another,
Tucker squeals loud and long.  Here's hoping he gets the Ned Beatty
part when ``Deliverance'' is finally remade.

Author
Jamie Peck
New Line / 1:30 / 1997 / R (language, violence)
Cast: Chris Tucker; Charlie Sheen; Paul Sorvino; Heather Locklear; 
Gerard Ismael; Paul Gleason; Elise Neal; Veronica Cartwright; David 
Warner 
Director: Brett Ratner 
Screenplay: Joel Cohen; Alec Sokolow 
Chris Tucker is one of those guys you immediately get a reaction from -- 
you either find his helium voice, crazy eyes and jerky mannerisms funny 
or annoying. I think I fall into the former category (I'm one of the few 
who thought his turn in "The Fifth Element" as a prancing, Prince-like 
deejay was complete inspired lunacy and not the least bit aggravating), 
but his new vehicle "Money Talks" just doesn't do him service. Tucker is 
good in the movie -- and this is the kind of film that, if people see 
it, could make him a big star -- but he's also really the only thing 
good about the movie. In fact, if you see "Money Talks," it should shock 
you beyond recognition that two of "Toy Story"'s writers penned the 
sloppy script. 
Tucker's role here is that of Franklin Hatchett, a petty Los Angeles con 
artist whose carwash scams get him dogged by investigative reporter 
James Russell (Charlie Sheen). After being busted on the job for some 
illegal business involving counterfeit passports, Franklin finds himself 
on a bus to the county jail and handcuffed to slick international jewel 
smuggler Raymond Villard (Gerard Ismael). But Villard's thugs blow up 
the bus in an attempt to free their leader (never mind that the 
explosion could have instead killed him), and because he and Franklin 
are joined at the wrist, Franklin is allowed to escape as well, but not 
before overhearing some important information regarding a diamond stash 
that -- for some reason or another -- is being hidden in a vintage 
roadster waiting to be auctioned off at an upcoming auto expo. 
The local media mistakenly puts the prison break-out blame on Franklin, 
which is where James comes back into the picture. He makes a deal to 
protect Franklin if, in turn, Franklin gives him an exclusive interview. 
This means James must present his new "friend" in the stickiest of 
situations -- a formal dinner party for he and fiancee Grace (Heather 
Locklear), also attended by her uber-rich parents (Veronica Cartwright 
and nicely game Paul Sorvino). And of course the bad guys track Franklin 
down and try to knock him off, all the while he spars and forms an 
unlikely bond with James. "This ain't no buddy movie," claim the print 
ads. Yeah, right. 
Actually, for the better part of, oh, 20 minutes, it appears "Money 
Talks" has the momentum to cover entertaining ground, and this is mostly 
due to the presence of spastic motormouth Tucker. This is Tucker's first 
leading role, and if you imagine a slightly lankier, African-American 
Jim Carrey with a reliance on wild R-rated raunch rather than PG-13 
physical comedy, you have a good idea of the conviction with which he 
assaults the role. But you realize all too quickly that Tucker's 
overstated liveliness is the only thing "Money Talks" has going for it. 
And a lively actor alone does not a successful movie make. 
It's all too easy to pick out everything wrong with "Money Talks." The 
plot is recycled buddy-buddy comedy-thriller tripe that seemed overused 
even when "Nothing to Lose" employed it last month. Everything is 
paint-by-numbers, especially the Los Angeles Coliseum finale, which 
finds not one, not two, but three separate enemy factions firing at 
Franklin as they pursue him through the bleachers. The villains, as many 
as there are, are dull. Certain story elements are too coincidental. And 
too much of the film's dramatic agenda is played too straight. A scene 
where Grace confronts James after learning Franklin's true identity 
("You brought a killer into my parents' house!") is extremely silly. You 
get the picture. 
Obviously, I did not have a pleasant experience at "Money Talks." But 
the people around me appeared to be having a rip-roaring good time (one 
gentleman several rows behind me chortled with such expressive 
conviction I began fearing for his health). But Tucker, at least for me, 
is a pretty funny guy, and aces the movie's best scene, where Franklin 
passes himself off as Vic Damone's son at James and Grace's engagement 
bash and toasts the couple with Barry White lyrics. Tucker's audience -- 
and he does have one -- will probably like "Money Talks." Those who he 
irritates, however, will have a more productive day staying home and 
scraping the gook out from under their toenails. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Irritante komieken. Je hebt ze in alle soorten en maten. Wat Jerry Lewis
in de jaren '60 was, is Jim Carrey nu in de jaren '90: de meester van de
gekke bekken. Helaas (of gelukkig, het is maar hoe je 't bekijkt) krijgt
hij nu concurrentie van Chris Tucker, beroemd geworden met z'n
opmerkelijke rol in "The Fifth Element". Net als z'n voorgangers is
Tucker hyperactief, irritant, niet te stoppen en erg grappig. Dus
verstandig van hem om een nieuwe film te maken. Dat is "Money Talks"
geworden, een comedy waarbij Tucker het licht in de duisternis is. Dat
zegt al genoeg over de rest van de film... 
Franklin Hatchett (Chris Tucker), gluiperd eerste klas, verdiept zich
vaak in duistere zaakjes. Op een dag komt James Russell (Charlie Sheen),
reporter van Channel 12, bij hem langs om een reportage over z'n
criminele praktijken te maken. Russell, wiens carriטre niet naar wens
loopt, krijgt van Hatchett te horen dat hij geen gesprek hoeft te
verwachten. Om toch nog een reportage te maken, besluit Russell Hatchett
te laten arresteren. 
In de politiebus wordt Hatchett naast schurk Raymond Villard gezet.
Villard heeft ervoor gezorgd dat z'n handlangers hem binnen een korte
tijd komen ophalen. En ja hoor, even later wordt de bus opgeblazen en
Villard weet samen met Hatchett te ontsnappen. Even later wordt Hatchett
gedropt en is vanaf dat moment voortvluchtig. Hatchett is radeloos en
ziet maar ייn oplossing: James Russell, de reporter. Russell, vanwege
slechte reportages ontslagen, ziet Hatchett als het ideale
kijkcijferkanon en laat hem in z'n huis onderduiken. 
Is het een actie-film met een paar grappen of een comedy met een flinke
portie actie? Die vraag dwaalde door m'n hoofd na het zien van "Money
Talks". Te weinig actie voor een actie-film en te weinig leuke grappen
voor een comedy, dus in beide genres is de film mislukt. Jammer, want
het eindresultaat kon veel beter geworden zijn. 
Gelukkig is Chris Tucker met z'n hyperactieve en erg grappige optreden
de reddende(b)engel. Elke seconde dat Tucker in beeld is, gaat hij over
de top met z'n gladde praatjes en improviserende gesprekken. Dat Heather
Locklear als barbiepop gebruikt wordt, clichיs in overvloed aanwezig
zijn en het verhaal volstrekt ongeloofwaardig is, vergeet je snel met
zijn energieke optreden. Niet dat de film er beter op wordt, want
Tucker's humor is net zo hoogstaand als die van Jim Carrey. Maar hij
zorgt tenminste voor een paar glimlachen, in tegenstelling tot de rest
van de film. 
'Filmpje!' is located at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/
where you can also subscribe to my mailing-list!
And you can find my film reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Martijn+van+Turnhout

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Apparantly money talks . . . and uses quite a bit of obscenities doing so!
I've always considered myself pretty open about the gratuity a film can
possess, whether in language, violence, sex, or what have you. I find that
this fact gives me a little more leverage to complain when a movie goes
overboard, and MONEY TALKS definitely does! It's not so much that the movie
swore nearly constantly (and I mean constantly!), but it swore SO MUCH that
it seemed overly prominent and way too staged. Perhaps if one character were
foul mouthed, but in this film, EVERYBODY swears nearly every other word.
MONEY TALKS is about a black ticket scalper named Franklin Hatchett (played
less annoyingly than expected by Chris Tucker). Franklin is your typical
con-man and ends up with more than one person out to get him. When the plot
finally gets underway, there's no less than three people (or groups) that
want him, dead or alive. The Frenchman who's somewhat responsible for
Franklin's escape from a prisoner-packed bus, a hoodlum whom Franklin owes
seven grand, and the cops who wrongly suspect him of murder.
Franklin's only hope: James Russell (Charlie Sheen), an investigative
reporter for the local news who's out to prove himself a worthy journalist.
James offers to help clear Franklin's name if Franklin will just allow him an
exclusive report to help channel 12 conquer sweeps week. Both of these
elements are completely lost along the way however, and never do reappear.
As expected, the odd couple of Franklin and James do wind up friends at the
end, which is another wasted element seeing as how they show no signs of
becoming friends at any point along the way. There is just nothing original
or intriguing about this film, and so many developments are either
non-relevant, or just plain forgotten about. MONEY TALKS is a
paint-by-numbers movie that lacks any real involvment with the audience.
Frivilous dialogue, a predictable, flat storyline, and two-dimensional
characters make MONEY TALKS a reason to save your money.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Oh, what they've tried in the fifteen years since 48 HRS:  young
cop/old cop (STAKEOUT), young cop/really old cop (THE ROOKIE), young
cop/old cop/district attorney (ANOTHER STAKEOUT), good cop/ crazy cop
(LETHAL WEAPON), good cop/crazy cop/witness (LETHAL WEAPON 2), good
cop/crazy cop/she cop (LETHAL WEAPON 3), American cop/Russian cop (RED
HEAT), American cop/Japanese cop (COLLISON COURSE), hungover cop/hapless
citizen (DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE), smart cop/slob cop (TANGO AND
CASH), real cop/fake cop (THE HARD WAY), real cop/alien cop (ALIEN
NATION), tall cop/short cop (BAD BOYS), silly cop/sillier cop (NATIONAL
LAMPOON'S LOADED WEAPON I), young cop/old convict (THE ROCK), old cop/
young convict again (ANOTHER 48 HRS.), young cop/young convict (BULLET-
PROOF), bail bondsman/convict (MIDNIGHT RUN), convict/convict (FLED),
and, now, convict/reporter, with Chris Tucker and Charlie Sheen as the
respective abrasive personalities thrown together for the duration of a
weekend.  Or maybe longer, but I can't be sure, because I walked out
after about a half-hour.  Mr. Tucker, so good in THE FIFTH ELEMENT, has
enough energy for *four* films, but his limitless enthusiasm is really
no match for a cliched plot, witless profanity, and a co-star who won't
stop scowling.  And what's David Warner doing here? 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chris Tucker, Charlie Sheen, Paul Sorvino, Heather Locklear, 
      Gerard Ismael, Elise Neal, David Warner
Director: Brett Ratner
Producer: Walter Coblenz 
Screenplay: Joel Coen and Alec Sokolow
Cinematography: Russell Carpenter, Robert Primes
Music: Lalo Schifrin
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     It's getting so that it's hard to see a movie without being 
distracted by some star or another's off-screen antics.  Now, just in 
time for the release of his latest picture, Charlie Sheen has joined a 
list that includes names such as Martin Lawrence, Robert Downey Jr., and 
Christian Slater.  Of course, Sheen has never been a poster boy for 
clean living, having allegedly been one of many names in Heidi Fleiss' 
black book, but his latest leap to tabloid prominence (supposed 
girlfriend abuse) has arrived just in time to coincide with the opening 
of MONEY TALKS.
     All things considered, however, it probably doesn't matter much, 
since Sheen's screen presence in this film is virtually nonexistent.  
This is a classic "pick up the paycheck and run" performance from 
someone who doesn't seem to be enjoying himself or the role he's 
playing.  As a result, Sheen's co-star, stand up comic Chris Tucker 
(last seen prancing around a space station in THE FIFTH ELEMENT) steals 
nearly every scene.  In fact, Tucker's in-your-face outrageousness is so 
pronounced that it's easy to forget that Sheen is even in the movie.  
     MONEY TALKS is billed as an "action comedy", and I suppose that's 
what it is.  The problem is, while some of the comedy is inventive, and, 
at times, downright hilarious, there's nothing remotely interesting 
about the film's generic fight, chase, and explosion scenes.  The thin 
plotline that binds all of MONEY TALKS' elements into one cohesive whole 
is a little too hard to swallow, even for a movie that makes no pretense 
of being remotely serious or grounded in reality.  
     That plot has small-time hustler and con artist, Franklin Hatchett 
(Tucker), going to prison after being set up by ace TV reporter James 
Russell (Sheen) in a ticket scalping scam.  On the way to the pen, 
Franklin inadvertently becomes involved in a jail break orchestrated by 
the evil Villard (Gerard Ismael) and his personal army.  One problem:  
the cops think Franklin is behind the whole scheme.  Not knowing whom to 
turn to, Franklin gives James a call.  The two make a deal:  James will 
hide and protect Franklin for a weekend in exchange for an exclusive 
when Franklin turns himself in.  There are a few complications, however.  
First, Villard wants Franklin dead.  Second, James has just been fired 
from his TV job after being described by his boss (David Warner) as 
"another walking headshot" from the "John Tesh school of journalism."  
Third, this weekend, James is scheduled to marry Grace (Heather 
Locklear), the beautiful daughter of the very wealthy Guy Cipriani (Paul 
Sorvino).  
     It's not hard to determine the source of MONEY TALKS' inspiration.  
This film is a virtual regurgitation of 48 HOURS, with Tucker doing his 
best to out-Eddie Murphy that film's star.  Unfortunately, given MONEY 
TALKS' weak, derivative script, uninspired direction, and bland 
performance by Sheen, this movie has more in common with 48 HOURS' 
horrid sequel than with the original.  Take out MONEY TALKS' three funny 
scenes (the best of which takes place during a car auction), and there's 
not much left.
     For a while, I thought MONEY TALKS was going to be a great deal 
more clever than it turned out to be.  At the outset, it looks like it 
might be shaping up as a biting satire of action films, but, as the 
reels unspool, it becomes obvious that first-time director Brett Ratner 
is more intent upon joining the ranks of the genre than spoofing it.  
There are two long car chases in this film -- both are routine and 
neither shows more than a hint of parody.
     At least Chris Tucker is enjoyable.  His performance may be a re-
harsh of Murphy's, but he keeps MONEY TALKS somewhat watchable.  If only 
the same degree of brashness and energy had been evident in other 
aspects of the production.  By playing the action sequences largely 
straight, MONEY TALKS uses a safe approach.  Unfortunately, in this 
case, "safe" equates to "dull."  We've seen it all before, and this 
time, about the most excited reaction it's likely to provoke is a yawn.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
