Title
Review for Crew, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Robin Clifford
Bobby (Richard Dreyfuss), Bats (Burt Reynolds), The Brick (Dan Hedaya) and Mouth
(Seymour Cassel) are four retired wise guys from New York who retired a while
back to the sunny comfort of Miami Beach. But, inflation and rising real estate
values have put their golden years in jeopardy when they find out their hotel,
the Raj Mahal, is being "renewed" and they are about to be put out on the
street. They hatch a plot involving a corpse and a faked mob hit to save their
homestead, but things do not go as planned in "The Crew."
Director Michael ("The Wonder Years") show his TV chops in the breezy little
comedy about an over the hill gang of wise guys who refuse to let the system
push them around. When their hotel is about to be yanked from beneath them, they
realize that they need to do something pretty quick or else. Mike "The Brick"
Donatelli, it so happens, works at a mortician's as a hobby, making up the
deceased for display to friends and family. The four goombas decide to steal one
of the bodies - an unclaimed one - put it in the lobby of their hotel and shoot
it to make it look like a mob job. Great idea. One problem. The body turns out
to be the missing elderly father of a prominent drug lord in Miami.
The pat set up for the twisty, turny tale that ensues has the look and feel of
an hour long TV sit com. Problems are presented to the four former Mafioso
musketeers and they use the knowledge gained during their shady pasts to over
come each one. In true situation comedy style, new troubles balloon out from the
old and the guys have to dig deeper into their pasts to overcome each new
obstacle. It comes as no surprise when the fab four wins in the end. There is
some good fun in watching them get there, though.
The large cast works in true ensemble fashion, with no one stealing the show and
all getting a chance to showcase their stuff. Richard Dreyfuss as Bobby "I never
got a nickname" Bartellemeo, also doing double duty as the narrator, is the
hinge pin of the film, playing the smarter of the quartet and, if you can call
it that, the voice of reason for the four. Burt Reynolds gets to reprise his
tough guy persona as Joey "Bats" Pistella. The "Bats" nickname suits him for two
reasons - it was (and is) his favorite tool of his former trade and he is a
little loopy (bats in the belfry). He's the muscle for the crew.
Dan Hedaya is sweetly goofy and a little simple as the Brick. He may not be the
brightest bulb in the circuit, but he is a good and loyal friend to the others.
Seymour Cassel rounds out the little gang of elderly mobsters as Tony "Mouth"
Donato. Years ago, Mouth decided that he had nothing to say and has remained
silent since - until his libido gets the better of him and he beds
stripper/hooker Ferris Lowenstein (Jennifer Tilly, "Bound"). Mouth, it turns
out, does like talk after sex and he spills the beans to Ferris about their
clever plot to keep their home. The sexy stripper uses the info to blackmail the
crew to whack her mother-in-law Pepper Lowenstein (Lainie Kazan). This new
challenge to the fearless four is met in amusing ways, resulting in further
trouble for drug lord Raul Ventana (Miguel Sandoval) when they accidentally burn
his palatial house down.
There are subplots, mostly unnecessary, that involve Bobby searching for his
long lost daughter after years of separation and a broken romance between two
cops investigating the guys' capers. The tagged on feel of Bobby's search and
the romance between Det. Olivia Neal (Carrie-Anne Moss ("The Matrix") and her
partner Steve Menteer (Jeremy Piven, "Very Bad Things") detracts from the main
plot, only clouding the picture with too much going on. The screenplay, by Barry
Fanaro ("Kingpin"), tries to pack way too much into the under 90 minute flick,
diluting the premier portion of the yarn.
The steady downward spiral of one event upon another threatening the four are
all met with humor and energy that belies their aged status. (Not once did one
of them need a nap or complain about his prostate.) There is a lot of pro-senior
citizen philosophy contained in the story that empowers the aged. The "you can
do it" attitude for seniors is a message that came up in the recent "Space
Cowboys" and is readily prevalent in "The Crew." All in all, not a bad thing.
The tech credits - photography by Juan Ruiz-Anchia ("Mr. Jones), costume by
Betsy Cox ("The Muse"), production design, by Peter Larkin ("Get Shorty"),
direction by Dinner and the work of rest of the production crew - help give the
Miami and Miami Beach locales an energy that complements the bright colors,
beautiful people and dazzling sunshine of the area.
"The Crew" is like good popcorn. You're satisfied while you are stuffing your
face, but, a little later, you're still hungry. This aging "Goodfellas"
satisfies while your there, but it doesn't stick with you like a real meal. I
give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Old wise guys don't die; they just wheeze away.  
In Michael Dinner's THE CREW, Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt Reynolds), 
Bobby Bartellemeo (Richard Dreyfuss),  Mike "The Brick" Donatelli (Dan 
Hedaya) and Tony "The Mouth" Donato (Seymour Cassel) are four old 
geezers who call themselves the Crew and who used to be made men in the 
mob, but now they're slowly dying of boredom in the rusty, run-down Raj 
Mahal Hotel on a beach in Florida.
Friends since childhood, they were used to living together in the laps 
of luxury as consummate criminals.  "You said the good times were going 
to last forever," Bats complains.  "I thought we'd be dead by now," 
Bobby tells him.
Now in their declining years, they have been relegated to working 
minimum wage jobs to earn enough to the pay the rent.  Apparently, the 
investments of the mob's pension fund must have gone sour.  The 
hot-tempered Bats works in the fast food industry as an order taker at 
Burger King, not exactly a job well suited for his fiery demeanor.  
"Lady, I know what the commercial says, but special orders do upset us," 
he angrily tells one customer who dares suggest adjustments in her 
burger's preparation.
A rise in the rents gives them just the opportunity they need to put a 
little of the old zest back into their lives.  Figuring that the rents 
will go down if someone is murdered in their hotel, they decide to shoot 
a corpse from the morgue, where The Brick works.  Worse than the gang 
that can't shoot straight, the Crew can't even bring themselves to plug 
an already dead man.
The man does end up shot, and the Crew gets a drug lord and his gang 
after them in the process.  In addition, Detective Olivia Neal 
(Carrie-Anne Moss from THE MATRIX) starts investigating the murder.  
Moss, in an underwritten role, turns in one of the film's best 
performances.  Neal makes mincemeat of her fellow cop and former lover, 
Steve Menteer (Jeremy Piven).  Suffice it to say that you don't want to 
mess with her feet.
In low-cut dresses that make her breasts look like huge cantaloupes, 
Ferris (Jennifer Tilly) is a member of "the leisure profession."  
Reeking humorous sleaze, Ferris hires the Crew to whack her stepmom, 
played by Lainie Kazan.
This geriatric group and their colorful fellow travelers come up with 
several nice laughs and funny scenes, but too often the jokes themselves 
are nearly dead.  Writer Barry Fanaro (KINGPIN) just doesn't come up 
with quite enough good stuff for me to be able to recommend the picture.  
Older audiences, however, will likely be as pleased with it as were my 
parents.  Based on the volume of their laughter, the line that resonated 
with them the most was: "As you get older things that happened 30 years 
ago seem realer than things that happened today."  
THE CREW runs 1:30.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual content, violence and 
language and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, said that the movie was pretty good and gave it 
** 1/2.  He complained, correctly, that the film's trailers give away 
the best lines.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Those hazy, crazy, lazy days of summer are sure taking their toll on
Hollywood.  Take a look at the stars they're slapping up on the screen.
Just this month, we've already seen four wrinkled asses in Space
Cowboys, four unhappily married comedians in The Original Kings of
Comedy and a fifty-year-old rubber suit yanked out of the mothballs for
an appearance in Godzilla 2000.  Yup, that's right - the bright,
powerful sun is actually aging Hollywood before our very eyes.
The latest offering of geriatric entertainment comes in the form of The
Crew, a blandly entertaining tale of four New Jersey wiseguys enjoying
their retirement in South Miami Beach.  Over the years, they've gone
from worrying about witnesses, snitches and moles, to making sure they
show up on time for the early bird special.  But The Crew isn't all
bingo and bladder jokes  there's also an asinine story involving drug
lords, crooked cops and family reunions.
More on that later.  First let's meet the four geezers:
Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt Reynolds, Mystery, Alaska) earned his
nickname by maniacally wielding a baseball bat back in his Jersey
heyday.  Bats, who has eyebrows thicker and blacker than Star Jones, is
currently between jobs, but has been fired from most of the Burger King
restaurants in the greater Miami area.
Mike the Brick (Dan Hedaya, Shaft) never worried about the condition in
which he left his victims in his previous line of work.  But now the
Brick (as in `dumb as a') fixes up the stiffs at a local mortuary.  The
Brick also keeps in touch with numerous retired mobsters from all over
the country.
Bobby Bartellemeo (Richard Dreyfuss, Krippendorf's Tribe) doesn't have a
cool nickname, but he gets to narrate the story.  A Miami tour bus
driver, Bobby longs to find the daughter he lost contact with when he
was sent to the clink several years ago.  Don't worry, Bobby.  She'll be
easy to find.  There's only one female character in the film that comes
close to being your daughter's age.
Tony "The Mouth" Donato (Seymour Cassel, Max's father from Rushmore)
gives dancing lessons to the love-deprived senior citizens of South
Miami Beach.  Despite his nickname, the Mouth doesn't say much, except,
as it turns out, after he has sex.  Which is how the four codgers get
into trouble.
After The Crew introduces its characters, the Mouth blabs to a
prostitute about a phony hit he and his friends staged, and she
blackmails the men to whack her mother-in-law.  Like you'd expect,
things spiral out of control and wind up in a madcap, shoot-em-up
finale.  The best moment of the film is a send-up of GoodFellas, where
the four silver foxes are led through the kitchen of their favorite
restaurant while they greet each cook and waiter with a smile and a
nod.  Nobody at my packed screening seemed to make the connection, but
they all broke out in laughter and applause when the set piece reached
its inevitable conclusion.  Go figure.
The Crew was directed by Michael Dinner, a television director who
hasn't helmed a feature film since 1988's Bobcat Goldthwait stinker Hot
to Trot, which is widely regarded as on of the worst films of that
decade.  The mediocre script was penned by Barry Fanaro, who co-wrote
the much funnier Farrelly brother's flick, Kingpin.  In terms of
gangster flicks, it rates somewhere between GoodFellas and the
ill-advised spoof Mafia!, but that's kind of like saying a woman is less
attractive than Charlize Theron, but better looking than Janet Reno.
There's also a lot more nudity than you'd expect in a PG-13 film.
1:29 - PG-13 for brief nudity, sexual content, violence and language

Author
Laura Clifford
Now that we've had our of fill of mob shrink comedies, it's time to movie
on to the senior set in "The Crew."  Narrator Bobby Bartellemeo (Richard
Dreyfuss, Casey Siemaszko in flashbacks) fills us in on his and his mob
buddies' pasts and present.  Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt Reynolds) is the 
muscle of the group with a hair trigger temper that's just cost him his
job at Burger King.  Mike "The Brick" Donatelli (Dan Hedaya) is the sweet
but dim one who loves his new profession as a corpse cosmetician.  Tony
"Mouth" Donato (Seymour Cassel) is the ladies man who doesn't say much, but
still wows them on the dance floor where he makes his living as an instructor.
Bobby himself was the brains and leader of the group and is responsible for
leading them all to retirement in South Beach.  Bobby lost his wife and
small daughter Olivia over his mob ties and had heard that they had moved
here.  Now the foursome need to cook up a plan to save their homestead -
the ramshackle Raj Mahal retirement hotel is in danger of being converted
into pricey condos.
They fake a mob hit in the lobby with one of Brick's clients to drive away
potential business and it works!  The landlord even decreases their rent to
get them to stay.  But things quickly get messy.  The corpse turns out to
be the father of a notorious drug lord (Miguel Sandoval).  Mouth blabs all to
stripper Ferris (Jennifer Tilly) who blackmails them into putting a hit on
her mother-in-law Pepper Lowenstein (Lainie Kazan).  The detective on the
case turns out to be Bobby's long lost daughter (Carrie-Anne Moss, "The
Matrix").  Comedic capering ensues.
The screenplay by "Golden Girls" writer Barry Fanaro is just too loud,
messy, overly ambitious and overly reliant on coincidence.  This type of
senior crime caper was handled far better over twenty years ago in "Going 
in Style."  There's so much plot you begin to lose the sense of why
certain things are happening.  A subplot that has corrupt cop Steve
(Jeremy Piven) trying to win back Olivia is totally superfluous (as if
having Bobby's daughter turn out to be the law wasn't hackneyed enough).
The cast can't be faulted, however.  The four leads are all
endearing, particularly Hedaya's Brick who keeps in homey touch with mob
guys all over the country via Christmas cards ('What are you - the yearbook
editor?' barks Bobby after Brick updates them on former colleagues).
Lainie Kazan is amusing as a hostage who turns happy when her abductors
discover she's the owner of the deli they frequent.
The film tries to be a little different with a couple of slick editting
moves (a morgue drawer is closed and segued to a file cabinet being opened) 
and a comedy bit right out of "Mouse Hunt," but the techniques are used
a couple of times then dropped, making the film stylistically muddled.
"The Crew" is an OK piece of fluff to kill an hour and a half, but on the
whole, the film lets down its talent.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE CREW (2000)  *  Directed by Michael Dinner. Written by Barry 
Fanaro. Photography, Juan Ruiz-Anchia. Editing, Nicholas C. Smith.. 
Production designr, Peter Larkin.Music,  Steve Bartek. Cast: Richard 
Dreyfuss (Bobby Bartellemeo),Burt Reynolds ("Bats" Pistella), Dan 
Hedaya ("the Brick" Donatelli), Seymour Cassel ("Mouth" Donato), 
Carrie-Anne Moss (Detective Olivia Neal), Jennifer Tilly (Ferris 
Lowenstein),Lainie Kazan (Pepper Lowenstein), Miguel Sandoval (Raul 
Ventana) and Jeremy Piven (Detective Steve Menteer). PG-13.
Fact. American cinema is increasingly youth-oriented as well as 
youth-depicting. Fact. The increase of independent films keeps adding 
to "youthism" in subjects, characters and film-makers.  Fact. Mature 
characters are getting more and more rare. Fact. Older characters are 
even rarer. Fact. Among the summer flicks of 2000 A.D. "Space 
Cowboys" was a relative rarity for its starring a bunch of old (and 
well-known) actors.
Fact.  On slim evidence, the addition of "The Crew" and its senior 
citizens has caused many to speak of a tendency-- which is a non-fact.
Though not too numerous, movies starring old people have always 
existed. Think of geezer films (several with George Burns or Walter 
Matthau, whether together or not) such as Kotch, The Sunshine Boys, 
Going in Style, Where's Poppa?, Wrestling Ernest Hemingway (with 
Robert Duvall and Richard Harris), Going in Style, Grumpy Old Men, 
the recent (1999) The Straight Story, etc.. plus action movies --from 
cop stories to classic, elegiac westerns like The Man Who Shot 
Liberty Valance, Ride the High Country or John Wayne's swan-song The 
Shootist.
In conclusion, "The Crew" is not as noticeable for its cast's age as 
it is for being a truly bad film about old fellows. These are a 
quartet of four wiseguys (gangsters) from New Jersey, old pals and 
collaborators whom the too- lengthy opening sequences (with other 
players) first depict as they were in their prime.
Those scenes make the mistake of trying to show them both as jolly 
goodfellows and as ruthless killers,  two ingredients that simply do 
not blend. Then the  film jumps ahead to today. The foursome, oddly 
still together,  is in unhappy retirement at Miami's South Beach. 
They all have physical and pecuniary problems aggravated by the 
contrasts with the swinging, shapely and moneyed youths of the place. 
Dreyfuss (whose real age is 52) is somehow the unelected leader of 
the group, where the others' ages run from 60 to 65.
Their day-to-day life includes touches often lifted from other movies 
and, in the new context, not especially funny. (Yes, I forgot to 
mention that "The Crew" is , in theory, a comedy). When the shabby 
hotel they inhabit becomes a candidate for going upscale --disastrous 
news for the four --the group takes measures which escalate and 
involve quid pro quo. These, in turn, lead to Latino drug lords, the 
local police, and other complications,  not the least of which is 
that Dreyfuss's long-lost daughter is now a cop who just happens to 
get in touch with the crew.
There are some possibilities of acceptable comedy, but the overall 
movie lacks that minimum coherence which -- if you follow my drift -- 
can make  incoherence funny. Instead we get the equivalent of 
disconnected scenes by mediocre standup comics. The  individual gags 
which, in theory, might have worked, get lost in the plethora of 
confusion or forced situations.
Among its capital offenses the movie is steadily vague about its 
characters. These are supposed to be Italian-American hoods as their 
names (plus other signals) indicate, but they come through as vaguely 
Judeo-Italian or Italo-Jewish, down to mannerisms, body and language 
English, expressions, vocabulary, references and so on. The makers 
must have tried very hard to attain this messiness.
Expensive scenes and sets are also wasted, as are, without
exception  all the main characters,  all one-dimensional, from 
headliners to most of the supporting cast. Jennifer Tilly plays a 
prostitute (" the leisure profession " she calls it) with a 
formidable decollete which may be by now her tiresome trademark. 
Laini Kazan, looking wonderful at age 60, has the best of the 
supporting roles.  Though also forced, her performance recalls (very 
distantly) her scene-stealing in 1982's My Favorite Year.
If all sexagenarians were like Lainie, life could be beautiful. But 
what the movie suggests more than anything else is that when you 
reach 60 the best thing you could do is vanish from the face of the 
earth.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
A great premise that shoulda been done a long time ago: so what happens to
all of these mobsters once they make it past their salad days and wander
into the realm of senior citizen? What would Tony Montana be doing in his
late 70s? What about Henry Hill, Jimmy and Tommy from GOODFELLAS? Would they
still be "busting" each other's balls, foggeding abouddit and talking about
whacking out this and that guy? Great premise for a comedy, right? Well,
unfortunately these old-timers only succeed about halfway.
PLOT:
Four mobsters have run into an enemy that they could never turn back: old
age. Past their mafioso prime and living in a condo down in Miami Beach,
these four friends just don't know what to do with themselves anymore. But
when faced with an eviction from their comfortable little abode, the
four-some decide to wrangle up some of their old school techniques so that
they could stay in Florida. Deed done, the crew fall back into their mobster
ways, but not without many blunders, whoopsies and screwups.
CRITIQUE:
A cute movie featuring some fun performances from its stars which gives
plenty of nods to its primary source of inspiration, GOODFELLAS, but not
enough full fledged humor to complete its intriguing premise. I was hoping
that this movie would be funnier, more interesting and better paced, but the
whole of the film provided for a few good laughs, an unnecessarily
convoluted plot and way too many characters for its own good. For example, I
loved Burt Reynolds' character. The guy was a badass in the day and older
now, still refusing to allow his age dictate his way of being.
Unfortunately, we don't get enough of the guy. A few cutesy scenes of him
getting pissed at people and that's that! I wanted more Burt!! (I never
thought I'd ever hear myself say that). I also liked the Columbian drug
lord, played delectably by Miguel Sandoval, a man who knows that he's a
walking cliché of a drug lord and even says so in the movie! Funny stuff.
But most of the humor in the film is just too sporadic and weak. I was
waiting to laugh, but the laughs did not come, as the film involved itself
in way too many shenanigans and characters. There was no real need to put in
a shmaltzy "dad looking for his long-lost daughter" side-story (that's
another movie, fellas!) and waste more time with a couple of cops bickering
about the mistakes that were made in their past relationship. The film is
called THE CREW and I wished the filmmakers had stuck more with them, and
tried to make the script funnier and tighter for the audience. But enough
wishing! For what it was, the film did have a nice feel, some groovy "old
school" tunes, solid performances from the top four, some funny jokes,
plenty of cool camera tricks, and enough GOODFELLAS references to put a
smile on my face (see below for specifics). On the downside, the film didn't
live up to its potential, slowed down at several points and didn't provide
enough "funny" for the money. In the end, I would say that this is the
perfect "video movie" for those who appreciate the gangster genre, want to
see Jennifer's Tillies as a stripper and enjoy easy-going humor. In fact,
the older generation will more than likely enjoy this one more than the rest
of us, since many of the jokes are somewhat generational. And with the
success of SPACE COWBOYS, who knows...this might just be the perfect timing!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Maybe it's because GOODFELLAS is one of my favorite films of all time, but
here are only a few of the obvious references/nods that I noticed in this
film:
1) The film starts off with a voice-over from one of the characters telling
us about how "from as long as he could remember, he always wanted to be a
wiseguy". Check!
2) One of the characters in this film mentions how he's now turned into a "9
to 5 schnook", a person who Henry Hill (the lead in GOODFELLAS) never wanted
to become. Check!
3) A character mentions the Luftansa heist at one point in this movie. That
heist is the one performed by the GOODFELLAS gang back in the 70s. Check!
4) The film is packed with several of Scorsese's trademark camera moves with
freeze-frames and swooping camera shots galore. Check!
5) Frank Vincent, better known as Billy Batts in GOODFELLAS (the guy who
gets the crap beat out of him by Tommy and the gang) shows up in this flick
hawking guns. Also to note, Reynolds' character is nicknamed "Bats". Check
once more!
6) Finally, and easily the most obvious homage to Scorsese is the scene in
which the crew slip a guy some dough to get into a restaurant and are taken
through an entire kitchen with us following them the whole way with a
hand-held camera. Very cool. Checkmate! The screenwriter obviously knows his
GOODFELLAS.
If you know of any others, please let me know and I will add them to this
list.

Author
JONATHAN F RICHARDS
With Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds
What is it with all these movies about four old guys? Has someone made 
off with the SAG pension fund? Space CowboysB8 a yarn with wit and =
style and four old geezers recapturing their youth, is still live meat 
in theaters. Now along creaks The Crew, which has everything but the wit 
and the style.
The cut-rate oldsters here are Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds, Dan 
Hedaya, and Seymour Cassell, and they're not astronauts, they're retired 
wise guys. As far as we can tell they've been inseparable since they 
were young wise guys, which does make you wonder a little. They're all 
living together in the South Beach section of Miami (think of them as 
Beach Cowboys) rocking away their dotage (Dreyfuss is all of 53, but the 
mob must have a generous retirement plan) on the front porch of the Raj 
Mahal, a seedy waterfront apartment building, when a rent hike forces 
them into action. They rub out a corpse in front of the building to give 
the appearance of a mob hit and cause a scandal that will force down 
property values. A Colombian drug lord and the Miami cops get involved. 
So does a hooker (Jennifer Tilly) and her stepmother (Lainie Kazan).
That's more plot than you need to know. There's a contrived 
tug-at-the-heartstrings subplot involving Drefuss's long-lost daughter 
(Carrie-Anne Moss). What there isn't is the substance and character and 
inventiveness that comedy needs to work. It really is not enough having 
Reynolds doing his bad-boy leer at sexy babes or asking Dreyfuss, a very 
good but not very Italian actor, to say "that dumb scavoots" or, god 
help us, "fuhgeddaboudit." Hugh Grant did it more convincingly in Mickey 
Blue Eyes. These actors have all been good, but here they provide an 
object lesson in the importance of script and director to the film 
process.
This is one of those movies where the creative team began a lot of 
brainstorming sentences with the word "see." As in "See, we got these 
four old mobsters.." Or "See, the corpse turns out to be.." The idea is 
that we're so desperate for entertainment that we'll settle for 
manufactured plot, ersatz emotion, second-hand inspiration, and tired 
humor that can't work up the energy to appear effortless.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CREW, THE (director: Michael Dinner; screenwriter: Barry Fanaro;
cinematographer: Juan Ruiz-Anchia; editor: Nicholas C. Smith; cast:
Richard Dreyfuss (Bobby Bartellemeo), Burt Reynolds (Bats Pistella), Dan
Hedaya (the Brick Donatelli), Seymour Cassel (Mouth Donato), Carrie-Anne
Moss (Detective Olivia Neal), Jennifer Tilly (Ferris Lowenstein), Lainie
Kazan (Pepper Lowenstein), Miguel Sandoval (Raul Ventana), Carlos Gómez
(Miguel), Jeremy Piven (Detective Steve Menteer); Runtime: 88; 2000)
Michael Dinner's geezer mobster comedy has a funny premise but falters
on the execution part, as the yuks come, but not often enough to sustain
the predictability and staleness about the film. The film tried hard to
be funny and genial, but this idea for a film has been done too often in
recent times to appear fresh. Whatever went wrong, must be blamed on the
poor direction and poor script. The most unbearable part of the film for
me, was having to listen to Richard Dreyfuss' voiceover, which was
sprinkled with ethnic slang expressions such as "mooks," "fahzools," and
"fuhgeddaboudits," as he droned on in a nasal voice throughout, telling
about the four wiseguys who gew up together in New Jersey and who are
now unhappily retired in Miami Beach. This film needed such an intensive
voiceover like I need to have sand kicked in my face at the beach, it
just ruined the flow of the story and prevented the story from being a
movie experience rather than an exercise in trying to cover up the
film's inability to tell a story.
The four senior citizens featured were embellezers, arsonists,
enforcers, and lower echelon mob types, who are now living in a South
Beach hotel for the elderly, where they hunt for bingo games, a free cup
of a soup, and act geriatric like all the other seniors in their golden
years down here do. But things are changing since Madonna mentioned it
as a hip spot and the yuppies are coming around to gentrify it, as the
old timers are dying out and being replaced by the young. The four aging
retired mobsters, with three of them having colorful nicknames that
depict their emotional temperaments -- Bobby Bartellemeo (Richard
Dreyfuss), Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt Reynolds), Mike "The Brick"
Donatelli (Dan Hedaya) and Tony "Mouth" Donato (Seymour Cassel) -- all
try to earn some extra money by working at a regular job for the first
time in their life. The only one to get any satisfaction from his job is
The Brick, who works in the morgue dressing the dead up before they
depart the earth.
The wiseguys don't have the money to keep up with their rising rent
payments and they are seen seething, as they sit on the hotel's
streetside porch and listen to the passers-by say that they expect them
to die soon. The hotel management just wants to get them out so that
they can really raise the rent sky high for their ocean view apartment.
So they come up with a cockeyed plan, cooked up by the volatile Bats.
When he gets knocked unconscious, that is the only way he can think up
such plans, which becomes a running gag throughout the movie. The plan
is to get a body from the morgue and then shoot the dead body to make it
look like a gangland execution and then dump it in the lobby of their
hotel. This way the public will consider the hotel a dangerous place to
live and their rent will go down, as no one will want to live there.
The plan works and they get the desired outcome, but for one problem,
the dead man's head they blew off was the senile nursing home resident
who is the father of a vicious Hispanic drug lord (Miguel Sandoval),
who's determined to get his revenge on those who did this to his father.
This results in a couple of the drug lord's enemies turning up dead. As
the police think they have a full-scale drug war on their hands, they
send two detectives to talk to the four old-timers and warn them to be
careful.
This turns out to be a coincidence, since Bobby, the brains of the four
wiseguys, moved to the Miami area primarily because he wants to locate
his missing daughter. She was taken there by her mother, who divorced
him when he did some prison time and he never was able to locate her
again. Ironically, the wiseguy's daughter turns out to be one of the
detectives investigating the crime, Olivia Neal (Carrie-Anne Moss).
Another running gag is that The Mouth never talks much, he is only
interested in chasing girls. But when he has sex with his hooker friend,
the busty Ferris Lowenstein (Jennifer Tilly), he starts talking nonstop.
He thereby tells Ferris of the hit, and she then turns around and
blackmails the boys. She tells them that she won't tell the drug lord
what happened if they whack her rich step-mother Pepper Lowenstein
(Kazan), whereby she will collect the insurance money.
The film keeps adding on sub-plots and the comedy keeps getting stifled
with the added weight of the new sub-plots. It isn't enough to make the
four of them out to be mobsters, but they also must now be deemed as
good guys, so the film goes to unneeded lengths to show how wonderful
they are. They can't kill Pepper, so they fake her death. But she lives
next to the drug lord, and they burn down by mistake his house along
with hers. Meanwhile the detective partners, Olivia and her
ex-boyfriend, the shifty-eyed Steve (Jeremy Piven), can't get back
together anymore because she doesn't trust him, but they still work
together. Their relationship gets woven into the ongoing story, further
filling the story with unnecessary fodder.
The director had a barrage of proven comic material to work with, an
able cast (except for Burt Reynolds-he was terribly miscast), yet the
film falls flat on its face. Everything about it seemed like a mistaken
pratfall. The comic timing was off, the story sagged, and the characters
had nothing up their sleeves but old jokes and comedy routines that
weren't even funny most of the time, ones that seemed out of place.
Laine Kazan could flatten a kreplach with this old joke about Tilley's
father, as she blurts out, "It would kill her father if he knew what she
was doing to me, that is, if he weren't already dead." With yuks like
that, all I can say is "oy gevalt," give me a break, get some fresh
material already!
For those who are film buffs, there is one throwaway scene to kvell on,
where the director pays homage to Martin Scorsese's GoodFellas, as the
wiseguys get ripped off by an Hispanic kitchen worker, as he gets bribe
money from them for letting them sneak through his deli's kitchen so the
boys can get served the early-bird special, otherwise they would be
stuck waiting outside on a long line. It might have been the funniest
scene of the film, just to see their silly expressions as he leads them
out a back door onto the street. I also left the theater by way of the
rear door, and I also had a look of consternation on my face, wondering
how easy it would have been to make this a much better film with just a
little better effort in working the script.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Chad Polenz
It's mean to laugh at old people, unless they act like they're young - then 
it's okay. The problem is it's difficult to make a movie on this concept, you 
have to have a certain niche to center the story around. "The Crew" is a 
rather generic modern comedy that follows this rule to the letter, but that's 
fine by me because the result is a geniunely funny film that is actually 
entertaining for the entire running time. 
You might remember 1999's "Analyze This" - a comedy starring Robert De Niro 
as an aging gangster who finally starts to let his feelings show and thinks 
about retirement. "The Crew" is the next progression of that - it's what 
happens after the gangster has retired and moved to Florida and is now just 
like every other senior citizen there. 
The movie stars Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds, Dan Hedaya and Seymour 
Cassell who don't exactly look like retired mobsters, but their attitude is 
pretty close. Except for Reynolds' character, they've all gone rather soft in 
their old age to the point where they actually exchange greeting cards with 
other retired gangsters. They're not still involved in "the life" so why 
would they be enemies anymore? 
The story starts rolling when we see the four old guys sitting on the porch 
of their beach-view apartment complex watching all the hot babes in bikinis 
and the guys with the huge pecs go by ("everyone on the beach has giant 
breasts," the Dreyfuss character narrates). The problems it's those same 
people who want to seize all the vacancies in the hotels and condos formerly 
occupied by the seniors. Management realizes this and through a series of 
events that aren't explained in much detail it appears our four heroes are 
going to be evicted and have to find a new place they can afford just on 
their social security and leftover savings. 
They hatch a plan to mimick a mob-style hit in their building's lobby which 
proceeds to drive all the tenants out and land the men some reward money for 
agreeing to stay. One thing leads to another and suddenly they feel like 
they're back in the life and even get an offer to "whack" someone. They 
refuse and instead just try to fake it via arson but that backfires when the 
accidentally burn down the biggest drug lord's house in Florida. 
You can pretty much imagine where the story will go from here and what it 
took to lead up to this. However, this is where the film surprises you - the 
screenplay doesn't come off as a sitcom extended to feature-length status, 
and although there's quite a few coincidences on top of coincidences it's 
buyable. The writers don't use short-cuts and I'm sure the fact Barry 
Sonnenfield was a producer had something to do with the movie's quality. 
There is a good sense of character here, not only of the four "crew" members 
but also of the drug lord they've miffed, two detectives who are on to them, 
and a stripper and her step-mother who also get pulled into the fray. 
I have to say I liked pretty much everything I saw. The comedy has many 
laughs and quite a few belly laughs here and there. The tone keeps everything 
sane and it doesn't go overboard as another zany goofball picture and there's 
a dash of black comedy to give it some zing. I mean, when you've got a comedy 
about four retired gangsters trying to get back into the life you can expect 
some funny stuff - do you think they know how to handle a gun anymore, or how 
to fake a murder or how to kidnap someone properly anymore? 
"The Crew" works as a comedy not trying to be anything it's not. There is a 
sub-plot about Dreyfuss's character who's looking for his long-lost daughter 
that plays for some cheesy moments, but it's not so trite as to become a 
stumbling stone for the rest of the film. Everything's lighthearted enough to 
keep that tongue-in-cheek attitude alive. 
-------------------------------------- (here's where my e-mail ends and my 
signature begins)---------
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1044787cd5ee75be8825694600045c29?OpenDocument
Whenever studio executives try to combine the successful formula of two
blockbuster films, the end result is always a mess of a script, acting,
directing, and generally a waste of time for any audience with an
average IQ above 40.  The latest movie morass from Hollywood, The Crew,
appeared equally destined to fail, a strange combination of Grumpy Old
Men and GoodFellas tossed together with the likes of Richard Dreyfuss
and Burt Reynolds helming the ship.  The scary thing is that it's
actually entertaining and a breath of fresh air in this otherwise stale
month.
The Crew works for several reasons.  The clever script is reminiscent of
an old Billy Wilder movie, following four "past their prime" wiseguys
from Jersey who now live in the Raj Mahal Apartment House in Miami
Beach.  The wiseguys find themselves being evicted from their "golden
paradise" by greedy landlords bent on raising rents for new beach
bunnies and boys looking for beachfront property.  The four mobsters,
Bobby Bartellemeo (Richard Dreyfuss), Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt
Reynolds), Mike "The Brick" Donatelli (Dan Hedaya), and Tony "Mouth"
Donato (Seymour Cassel) decide to hatch a scheme to plant there a dead
body heisted from the morgue in order to drive out the new tenants and
keep their home.  This "simple plan" suddenly goes screwy, of course,
and the boys become involved with a stripper named Ferris (Jennifer
Tilly) who wants her stepmother killed, a paranoid Latin drug lord who's
convinced a mysterious rival is out to get him, and a rat with its tail
on fire.
The Crew  works as a strong comedic vehicle driven by a great ensemble
cast of talented character actors and subtle leading men.  Instead of
concentrating on Bobby's search for his daughter, the film gives equal
screen time to all four wiseguys, balancing the production.  The acting
talents of such screen veterans as Dan Hedaya, Seymour Cassel, and the
great, great Burt Reynolds are brought out by each character's
uniqueness and synergy within the wiseguy circle.  A strong supporting
cast including Jeremy Piven as a philandering boyfriend/cop/partner and
Miguel Sandoval as the paranoid drug lord provide the most laughs.
The film was produced by Barry Sonnenfeld and carries a hint Get Shorty
with its energetic camera work by Michael Dinner, Emmy Award-winning
director of The Wonder Years.  The quick script written by Barry Fanaro,
screenwriter of Kingpin, is carried by plenty of subtly dry humor and
wit.
The Crew is a prime example of how simple and dry-witted a comedy can
get these days.  The great thing is that this comedy does not need to be
punctuated by bodily fluids, phallus symbols in the head, or
grandmothers giving head in a spa.  In the steady flow of "extreme"
comedy these days flowing from Hollywood like a broken water main, it's
the elder statesmen like Dreyfuss, Reynolds, and Hedaya that can carry a
comic arc with only a few weapons of choice - a decent script and good
acting.
Director: Michael Dinner
Producer: Barry Sonnenfeld, Barry Josephson
Writer: Barry Fanaro
Starring: Burt Reynolds, Richard Dreyfuss, Dan Hadaya, Carrie-Anne Moss,
Seymour Cassel, Jeremy Piven, Miguel Sandoval
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
John Beachem
Bobby Bartellemeo (Richard Dreyfuss), Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt Reynolds), 
Mike the Brick (Dan Hedaya), and Tony "The Mouth" Donato (Seymour Cassel) 
are a bunch of wise guys. You know the type, these guys used to break things 
for gangsters back in the forties because they were too stupid to run their 
own gang. The problem is, now it's the nineties and they're still wise guys; 
they're just too old and feeble to break things. The group lives in the Raj 
Mahal Hotel in Florida, the last place the old folks have. The landlord has 
decided to raise the rent so the old people will leave and he can bring in 
the new, young clientele. So the wiseguys decide to take a corpse from the 
morgue (where The Brick works), shoot it, and place it in the hotel so the 
young people will stay away and the rents will drop. The problem is, being 
the numb skulls these guys are, they shoot the body of a Cuban drug lord's 
(Miguel Sandoval) father. The drug lord thinks his father was still alive 
when the wise guys shot him, so he starts trying to track them down. Thrown 
into the mix are a stripper, named Ferris (Jennifer Tilly), who wants her 
step-mother (Lainie Kazan) killed; Detective Olivia Neal (Carrie-Anne Moss), 
a cop who is slowly figuring the whole thing out; and Bartellemeo's search 
for his long-lost daughter, whose name just happens to be Olivia.
Mobster comedies seem to be quite popular in Hollywood these days. They've 
thrown us dreck like "Mickey Blue Eyes" as well as the occasional hilarious 
movie like "Analyze This". Then we get movies like Michael Dinner's (tv's 
"Chicago Hope") "The Crew". This is your typical August comedy; not all that 
funny, but not incredibly bad either (the really bad movies get saved for 
January and February). "The Crew" follows that trend of the past few years 
where two similar movies are released within a few weeks of each other 
("Armageddon" and "Deep Impact" in '98, "Sixth Sense" and "Stir of Echoes" 
in '99). I'm not sure just why 2000 was chosen as the year of old guy movies 
("Space Cowboys" anyone?), but who am I to argue with Hollywood. So, you're 
no doubt wondering if "The Crew" will make you laugh. Well, you'll no doubt 
chuckle quite a few times, but there isn't a single good belly laugh. The 
biggest problem with "The Crew", as compared to "Space Cowboys", is that the 
cast doesn't appear to be having all that much fun. In "Space Cowboys", the 
actors appeared giddy with excitement over what they were doing. In "The 
Crew" you'll want to check the cast members' pulses from time to time.
Richard Dreyfuss is used as the glue to hold our aging cast together, but 
Dreyfuss can't quite pull this task off. How can that be, you ask? Well, of 
all the cast members, Dreyfuss appears the most bored out of his mind at 
being in this movie (though it's still better than his last so-called 
comedy, "Krippendorf's Tribe"). Burt Reynolds delivers his usual display of 
ineptness at playing a comic role (or a dramatic role, or an action role, 
etc.), though he does get one great scene. Working in a Burger King, he gets 
one of those irritating customers who asks for a thousand and one special 
instructions on a hamburger. He leans forward and hisses: "I know what the 
commercials say, but special orders DO upset us." Dan Hedaya ("Clueless", 
"The Hurricane") can't help but be great in everything he appears in (even 
his brief appearance in "Alien: Resurrection" was good), and he's one of the 
only good things about "The Crew". While his cohorts sleepwalk their way 
through the film, Hedaya is having a grand-ol time playing the brainless 
Brick. Seymour Cassell, who was wonderful as Max Fischer's father in 
"Rushmore", isn't even given dialogue in "The Crew", so it's hard to blame 
the man for looking bored. Carrie-Anne Moss ("The Matrix") gives an adequate 
performance, but it's nothing special. Finally we have Miguel Sandoval ("Get 
Shorty") as the Latin druglord who knows he's a cliche (too bad Barry Fanaro 
didn't realize his movie was as well). Sandoval gets all the funniest 
moments (a scene where two bodies hang from the ceiling behind him while he 
gives a speech to his troops) and lines, and he delivers then with comic 
timing bordering on perfection. Too bad he's not on screen very often.
I complain and complain that the actors weren't having any fun with their 
script, but I truly can't blame them. Every old, cliched joke in the book is 
used in "The Crew". Granted, old and cliched jokes can be funny, but not 
when they're used repeatedly. Fanaro uses every joke till it's been ground 
into the dirt and then finally starts on a new one. The constant jokes about 
the characters having to go to the bathroom all the time get really old, 
really fast. I suppose the question you really have to ask yourself before 
going into "The Crew" is: how much do I like jokes about old people acting 
like old people? If those sorts of jokes are hysterical to you (for whatever 
bizarre reason), you'll have a great time. That's because there's no other 
kind of joke in "The Crew". We get traces of jokes about the Latin 
druglords, and one or two involving Carrie-Anne Moss and her ex-boyfriend 
(played by the incredibly irritating Jeremy Piven), but everything else is 
us laughing at people for being old. The elderly in my audience seemed to 
find many of these jokes hysterical. Most of the younger people just stared 
blankly at the screen.
A lot of the film's problems come from the fact that the jokes are all 
shoved in your face. I've always felt that a great comic film will feature 
jokes which occur in the background, or very quickly, so that only the 
careful watcher will notice them (The Dude filling out a check for a few 
cents in "The Big Lebowski" is a great example). In "The Crew", Michael 
Dinner leaves every joke lingering on screen in plain view till you just 
want to stand up and start shouting that you get it already (or maybe that's 
just me)! The other extreme is long, drawn out segments with no laughs. 
Under normal circumstances these types of scenes are present in a comedy to 
further the plot. In "The Crew" these scenes seem present because Barry 
Fanaro couldn't think of anything else to do. Let's face it, the film's plot 
isn't going to sustain much of a running time (which is probably why the 
movie only runs 88 minutes), but if Fanaro was going to throw filler into 
the mix, he could at least have made it funny filler. As for the soundtrack, 
well, it's not much to write home about. In fact, I honestly can't remember 
very much of it. I'd recommend "The Crew" to people who think old guys 
lusting after young women (a fairly major part of this movie) is funny and 
give it a slightly generous three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE CREW
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds, Dan Hedaya, Seymour Cassel,
Carrie-Anne Moss, Jennifer Tilly, Lainie Kazan, Jeremy Piven.
Screenplay:  Barry Fanaro.
Producers:  Barry Sonnenfeld and Barry Josephson.
Director:  Michael Dinner.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, sexual situations, brief nudity)
Running Time:  88 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Some concepts are funny on paper, even if there's no way they could
ever be classic comedies in reality. THE CREW has such a concept. Is it
funny envisioning a quartet of aging mob tough guys trying to regain their
swagger in their sunset years? Sure it is. There have been other comedies
about seniors turning to a life of crime rather than going gentle into
that good night, like the 1979 George Burns/Art Carney/Lee Strassburg
vehicle GOING IN STYLE, but a wiseguy twist sounds promising. It may not
be chock-a-block with rapier-sharp witticisms, and there may be a prostate
gag or two to wade through, but there should be a few laughs, right? 
There's only so much you can do to screw up a solid concept. Right?
     In fact, THE CREW screws up its solid concept so badly, and in so
many provocative variations, that it's practically a road map for
misbegotten film-making. The four aging Mafiosi -- Bobby Bartellemeo
(Richard Dreyfuss), Joey "Bats" Pistella (Burt Reynolds), Mike "The
Brick" Donatelli (Dan Hedaya) and Tony "Mouth" Donato (Seymour Cassel) --
are residents of a Miami retirement hotel that's about to become the
latest victim of South Beach gentrification. Faced with the prospect of a
skyrocketing rent for their newly-chic digs, the boys decide to make their
home a less appealing place to live by setting it up to look like a
gangland murder has taken place there (though the body they use is already
dead). The fake hit has the desired effect of scaring off prospective
tenants, but there's an unfortunate side effect: The dead body whose head
they blew off was the father of a drug lord (Miguel Sandoval), who's
determined to wreak vengeance on the responsible parties.
     Ah, the wacky complications that are possible with the inclusion of a
pissed-off drug lord. And imagine how many more wacky complications are
possible when you include a sub-plot involving a Miami detective
(Carrie-Anne Moss) trying to fend off the advances of her colleague and
philandering ex-boyfriend (Jeremy Piven). And still yet even how many more
wacky complications are possible when a stripper (Jennifer Tilly, who's
beginning to resemble Divine above the neck) learns of the boys'
involvement in the fake killing, and blackmails them into killing her
delicatessen heiress stepmother (Lainie Kazan in full "oy gevalt" mode),
but the boys only kidnap her and fake her death instead, only in so doing
they manage to piss off the drug lord even further? Can you feel your
sides splitting at the crazy goofy hilarity? And can you feel a tear
trickling down your cheek because Bobby is really a sensitive guy,
searching high and low for the daughter he hasn't seen in 30 years?
     The reason THE CREW stinks -- or at least the main reason -- is that
it's not about what it's about. A movie about geriatric mobsters could be
funny. You could have them interact with their modern counterparts to show
them how it's done old school, like a Scorsese version of SPACE COWBOYS,
or focus on what kind of rackets they could run in their senior-heavy 
milieu. There's good character stuff there, too -- what happens when
you're left to fossilize after once being part of a culture of macho
action? 
     But THE CREW isn't about any of that. It isn't about anything,
really, because there's so much garbage thrown into 88 minutes of script
that it never develops anything remotely resembling comic momentum. The
personalities of the four principles are inanely simplistic, leaving the
actors to overact madly in compensation (Reynolds in particular is
wretched beyond all description). Director Michael Dinner, meanwhile,
over-directs madly in compensation, operating under the delusion that you
can somehow make a terrible script funny by filming everyone in fish-eye
close-up. Even the editing chops gags into such minute shreds that set-ups
are separated from their punch lines. Something this fundamentally
incompetent should carry a government warning sticker.
     There are exactly two moments in THE CREW when the experience of
watching it is remotely tolerable. One involves a silly homage to
GOODFELLAS, with our protagonists strutting through the kitchen of a
buffet restaurant after paying off a busboy. The other involves Sandoval's
drug lord growing frustrated at dealing with his incompetent underlings. 
For the other 84 minutes, THE CREW isn't simply unfunny; it's a test of an
audience's good will, practically an exercise in making every wrong
narrative, performance or technical choice possible. It's a good pitch
turned into a terrible script turned into a godawful film. Actual humor
from a solid concept? Fuggeddaboutit.

Author
Susan Granger
 First "Space Cowboys," now another quartet of cranky, old
geezers gear up for a final mission. No, they're not saving the
planet; they're saving their sanity. It's been too many years since
Bats (Burt Reynolds), Brick (Dan Hedaya), Mouth (Seymour Cassel) and
Bobby (Richard Dreyfuss) had anything to do but sip slurpees and ogle
bikinis from the verandah of the Raj Mahal, a ratty retirement hotel
in South Beach, Florida.  Once they had it all - money, power, women
and respect - but now they're facing eviction from the semi-squalor of
their suddenly trendy, ocean-view apartments when Bats comes up with a
plan. They steal an unclaimed corpse from the mortuary where Brick
works and shoot the dead guy in the lobby of their hotel. Predictably,
their anti-gentrification scheme works. Squeamish yuppies flee the
crime scene and their landlord relents, offering a rent reduction and
hefty bonus for signing long-term leases. They're into heavy-duty
celebration until they discover the corpse was the senile father of a
paranoid South American drug lord (Miguel Sandoval) - and that Mouth
spilled the story to a stripper/hooker (Jennifer Tilly) who threatens
to blab unless the wiseguys bump off her wealthy, widowed step-mother
(Lainie Kazan). Chaos reigns when this crime caper goes sour, much to
the consternation and confusion of a police detective (Carrie-Ann
Moss) who has more than a passing interest in Bobby. While I didn't
find the gang-whiz along the side of the road particularly funny,
Barry Fanaro's screenplay, directed by Michael Dinner, contrives to
elicit chuckles if not belly-laughs. And why not? Fanaro used to write
and produce TV's "The Golden Girls." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "The Crew" is a satirical 5, a genial geriatric Goodfellas.
