Title
Review for Versprechen, Das (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE PROMISE (DAS VERSPRECHEN) tells the fictional but realistic
story of a romance that starts with the building of the Berlin Wall in
1961 and ends with its destruction in 1989.  At a dance in the Fall of
1961, five young East Berliners leave to escape using the sewers that
go under the newly constructed wall.  One, Konrad (Anian Zollner as the
younger Konrad and August Zirner as the older one), slips and falls.
He runs home before being caught.  His friends, including his
girlfriend Sophie (Meret Becker as the younger Sophie and Corinna
Harfouch as the older one), escape successfully.  They go to Sophie's
Aunt's (Tina Engel) West Berlin house which they say is a "villa" since
afterall it has two bathrooms.
     Her aunt is a fashion designer thus providing a natural contrast
between the wealth of the West and sparseness of the East even though
the trams in the East proclaim in bold banners that the "DDR is the
Industrial Leader of the World."  The parents of the escaped kids are
forbidden by the East German police from ever sending or receiving mail
from their kids.
     Konrad first becomes a guard on the wall, but eventually becomes
an astronomer at the University.  Because of this he is permitted
limited travel and sees Sophie a few times over the thirty years.  One
of these times is 1968 during the Prague Spring.  They have undying
love for each other, but for various reasons he is never able to come
to her in the West until the wall falls.  The movie is about their love
and torment and about the turmoil and repression of the Communist
governments of the East.  It is a sad and melancholic film full of
great dramatic music (Juergen Knieper) filled with violins that added
immensely to the intensity of the emotions.
     When Sophie is in Prague and declares she will stay with him, the
people there laugh at her saying, so "you believe in socialism with a
human face?",  which was the theory of the time and soon to be
discredited.  When the tanks roll in, your heart drops.  Waitresses
serve their customers crying, to which the audience goes along.  The
skillful editor (Suzanne Baron) knows just when to mix stock historical
footage in with the movie for maximum effect.  Some bide their time and
go along with the events without protest.  As Konrad's Professor Lorenz
(Otto Sander) tells Sophie, "Outrage is quantitative.  It gets used
up."
     Through the years whenever Sophie and Konrad see each other, it
becomes increasing sad.  In the early 80s Konrad asks her, "Can a woman
love a man she has only seen three times in twenty years?"  He knows
that there never will be anyone for him but her.  He is shown making
one deal with the devil (Communists) after another in attempts to be
with her.
     Konrad's sister Barbara (Susanne Uge as the younger Barbara and
Eva Mattes as the older) is a Protestant minister who fight against the
regime no matter how costly it is to her and to her family.  Refreshing
to see religion as a force for good albeit her attempts were all total
failures.
     The ending when the wall comes down is incredible.  Lots of misty
eyes in the audience.  The director and the cinematographer (Franz
Rath) knew just how to handle it in a simple and controlled fashion.
One of the East Germans is interviewed at the wall.  Confused, lost and
depressed at the upheaval in her life she feels that "when the cage
opens after thirty years, you can't fly anymore."
     The acting by the four actors playing the two leads is phenomenal
as is the direction.  I was very moved by this picture.  It forms
wonderful images in your subconscious that stay with you.  This is a
movie about love kept.  Although it has many a tragic scene, the
ultimate message made me feel like I had just heard Beethoven's Ode to
Joy being sung - very uplifting.
     The fine script (Felice Laudadio, Peter Schneider, Margarethe Von
Trotta) develops what could have easily been a complex and long movie
into an accessible and standard length film.  The characters are all
ones that the audience cares about, and by the end, dry eyes are to
come by.  And yet the script never manipulates the audience, rather it
approaches the story in a remarkable low key fashion.  The East is
shown to be full of Orwellian logic.  When border guards hesitate to
kill potential escapees, their officers accuse them of being "against
peace."  There are simple scenes of people staring with binoculars
wistfully across the border from their balconies.
     When I was at Berkeley getting my doctorate in the late 60s, one
of my friends and fellow student got out of Czechoslovakia right after
the Prague Spring.  His brother was a writer who spent a lot of time in
jail so all of this repression there rang true to me.  By the way, his
brother later became Czechoslovakia's first president.  So there too
was a happy ending.
     THE PROMISE reminded me somewhat of THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF
BEING which is certainly a compliment, but THE PROMISE is a unique show
thanks to the script and the artful direction of Margarethe Von Trotta.
She is in total control.  The casting is excellent.  I did not realize
for quite a while that the older Sophie was not the same actress as the
younger one.  Konrad was not quite as close, but very similar.  In an
American production, we would have spent a ton of money and had the
actors spend hours every day getting made to look older through makeup.
I liked Von Trotta's different actors approach.
     THE PROMISE runs just 1:59 but manages to cover thirty years with
perfect pacing.  You will never be bored nor will you feel cheated that
they are trying to cram too much stuff in.  The film is in German with
easy to follow English subtitles, and it is rated R.  Although it does
have brief nudity and a little sex, I can not remember any violence.
It would be fine for absolutely any teenager.  I strongly recommend
this film to you.  If you are at all interested in love or history, you
must see this film.  It will touch your heart as it did mine.  Finally,
I award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Meret Becker, Corinna Harfouch, Anian Zollner, August Zimer
Director: Margarethe von Trotta
Producer: Eberhard Junkersdorf
Screenplay: Peter Schneider
Cinematography: Franz Rath
Music: Juergen Knieper
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
In German with subtitles
     Sometimes lovers are separated by race.  Other times, it's age.  On
still other occasions, it's religion.  But in THE PROMISE, Sophie and
Konrad are the same nationality, the same age, and the same faith.  What
divides them is an ugly construct of stone and barbed wire that becomes
a symbol of the cold war.  In Berlin during the 1960s, nothing was more
tragic than the reality of families, friends, and lovers kept apart by
what became known simply as "the Wall."
     The Berlin wall was erected in the summer of 1961, mere months
before the start of this film.  Back then, in the early days, a crossing
was less difficult than it eventually would become.  As THE PROMISE
opens, Sophie (Meret Becker), Konrad (Anian Zollner), and two friends
have planned an escape to the West that relies on a hastily-sketched map
of miles of underground sewers.  When the time arrives to climb through
a manhole and a passing guard troop passes dangerously near to the
escape route, Konrad stays behind to cover the others' tracks.  He
promises to join his girlfriend and her pals later, but he never does.
The script leaves it carefully ambiguous whether it's circumstances or
his own reluctance to leave behind his family that keep him in the East.
Regardless, the Wall now divides Sophie and Konrad, whose love for each
other holds them both in misery.
     By 1968, Konrad has become a respected astronomer, and is allowed
to travel to Prague for a seminar.  After receiving his letter, Sophie
meets him there.  Recriminations give way to passion, and the two spend
joyous weeks together, full of bright promises for the future.  Shortly
after Sophie becomes pregnant, however, events split the couple, with
Konrad again in the East and Sophie in the West.
     Their next meeting occurs twelve years later.  This time, the lead
actors have been seamlessly switched (Corinna Harfouch now plays Sophie;
August Zimer, Konrad).  By now, Konrad is married and has a daughter,
and Sophie is living with someone.  Their common link is their son,
Alexander, and Konrad, as a top-level scientist, is allowed visitation
privileges, until a rash act on his part earns him the displeasure of
the Stasi.
     The final segment is in November 1989, at the fall of the Wall.
Equally full of promise and poignancy, this sequence not only gives the
film closure, but highlights its principal differences from Hollywood
romances.  THE PROMISE ends on an ambiguous note, allowing the viewer to
draw his or her own conclusions about what comes next.
     Director Margarethe von Trotta effortlessly weaves history and
personal events into a tapestry full of emotion and irony.  Sophie and
Konrad are likeable and we, as an involved audience, can't help but root
for them to reach each other, even while recognizing that their
different values and goals make a lasting union unlikely.  Von Trotta
doesn't cheat either side of her story, West or East.  People and
politics mix, but nothing is black or white in exploring one of many
tales about the Wall.
     Individual scenes stick in the mind.  A man opens a stepladder near
the Wall, climbs to the top, and waves to relatives (a daughter and
granddaughter?) watching from a facing apartment window in the East.
Near him, vans blaring propaganda wage a war of words across the
barrier.  Later, a boy in the West throws a ball over the Wall.  Moments
later, unseen hands return it.  When he is asked how it comes back, he
responds that he doesn't know, but it always happens that way.
     The scope of THE PROMISE is ambitious--an allegorical tale of
love and loss spanning three decades in the heart of a country sundered
by an unnatural boundary.  Because von Trotta has only two hours to work
with, she cannot accomplish everything needed to explore the subject.
The results of such time constraints are that some subplots, and even
certain aspects of the main story, don't get their deserved exposure.
THE PROMISE mines a motherlode, but there's no way the full potential
can be unearthed in a single film.
     Nevertheless, there's more than enough here to satisfy a viewer
with a penchant for history, politics, or love.  In movies, romance is
often treated as a frothy thing, so it's rare to find the emotional
highs and lows of THE PROMISE.  Constructed with obvious care, this film
is filled with the little details that differentiate a very good picture
from an average one.  With this movie, at least, von Trotta delivers on
the promise of her ability as a film maker.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
