Title
Review for Six Degrees of Separation (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Stockard Channing, Donald Sutherland, Will Smith, Ian McKellen,
           Mary Beth Hurt, Bruce Davison, Heather Graham
Director:  Fred Schepisi
Producers:  Fred Schepisi and Arnon Milchan
Screenplay:  John Guare, based on his play
Music:  Jerry Goldsmith
Released by MGM
     Ouisa and Flan Kittredge (Stockard Channing and Donald Sutherland)
live and move in the upper echelons of New York society, enjoying the
fortunes gleaned from their business ventures--brokering art objects
for exceptional profit.  On a night when they're entertaining a South
African millionaire named Geoffrey (Ian McKellen), Paul (Will Smith)
enters their lives.  A con man from the streets of Boston, Paul is
looking for an easy mark, and finds it in the Kittredges and their rich
guest.  He sells them a story about being the son of actor Sydney
Poitier, cooks them dinner, and ends up being invited to spend the
night.  From that moment on, Paul becomes one thing to Flan--an
anecdote to tell friends, but something different and more important to
Ouisa--a mirror in which she can see the emptiness of her own
existence.
     Even if I hadn't known beforehand that SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION
was adapted from a stage play, the script makes it obvious.  This is a
"talky" motion picture that splits its time between skewering the
vacuous lives of people like the Kittredges and examining the forces
that mould Paul into the person he becomes.  Chameleon-like, he is not
just an imposter, but a man who literally becomes the person he claims
to be--and during SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION, he pretends to be a lot
of people.  However, there are certain elements of Paul's basic
nature--namely his homosexuality and insecurity--that follow him
regardless of which identity he dons.
     The dialogue is the best part of SIX DEGREES; it absolutely
sparkles with wit and intelligence.  Sometimes it gets a bit too
pretentious--the discussion between Paul, Ouisa, and Flan on
imagination is one such example--but overall it's a biting and
satirical indictment on those who possess ideals as high in the sky as
their social standing.  Paul may be the con-man, but it doesn't take
much insight to see that Ouisa and Flan are no more "real" than he is.
     The title SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION refers to the theory that
every man or woman is separated from any other man or woman by no more
than six people.  It's an appropriate title for the film, since the
themes of identity and relationships are integral to the plot.  Ouisa
makes a telling comment when she remarks that Paul has done more for
her in one evening than her children did in a lifetime.
     There are several hilarious moments, each of which requires
understanding of the characters and the author's motives.  Especially
memorable is a scene where various parents confront their collegiate
students, and we get to see just how silly are the ideals held dear by
the people inhabiting SIX DEGREES' world.
     For all that most of the movie is well-scripted and
crisply-directed (Fred Schepisi keeps things moving at an amazing
clip), the ending is a letdown.  Not only does it lack the depth and
sparkle of what came before, but its attempt to hammer home a message
already delivered seems unnecessary and tedious.  At best, Ouisa's
final decision is weakly motivated, and chimes a dissonant chord.
     Acting-wise, this is Stockard Channing's movie, and her
performance, a reprisal of the role she played on stage, is far above
that of any of her co-stars.  The only other player of note is Will
Smith, who shows that he can do more than the silly comedy of a weekly
television program.  Smith's Paul doesn't have the impact or strength
of personality of Channing's Ouisa, but he never gets lost in the
background.
     Ultimately, SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION will succeed or fail for the
individual viewer based on their expectations and preferences.  This is
an "offbeat" movie, and its presentation of universal themes is far
from mainstream methods.  It has quite a bit to say, and gets most of
the messages across while entertaining the audience.  The greatest
fault of SIX DEGREES is assuming a level of intelligence throughout,
then abandoning that belief at the very end.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
W Waffle
If you like this review, check out WaffleMovies.com where I review independent
films and big studio pictures that deserve a second chance on video.
Six Degrees of Separation
Starring Will Smith, Stockard Channing, Donald Sutherland and Heather Graham
Before he tamed the Wild, Wild West and she became the world's most shagadelic
superspy, Will Smith and Heather Graham starred in this true story of a young
man living on the hospitality of rich New Yorkers while claiming to be the son
of Sydney Pottier. This tale of vanity and the phoniness of the upper crust of
society is a wonderful rental for those who need their Will Smith fix, but
can't get into the Wild, Wild West. 
The movie opens with a business dinner between Geoffrey (Ian McKlellan),
Flanders (Donald Sutherland) and Ouisa (Stockard Channing). Flanders is an
ethically challenged art dealer who desperately needs to complete a deal and
must have a $2 million investment from Geoffrey to succeed. The evening takes
an unexpected turn when young Paul (Smith) shows up at the door claiming to be
a friend of his children and suffering a knife wound from a mugging. Paul
claims he is the son of famous actor Sydney Pottier and needs a place to stay
until he meets his father the next morning. Paul charms the group with his
intelligent conversation, masterful cooking and stories of his father. The
evening is perfect, until Ouisa catches Paul with another man in their
apartment. 
The next day, Flanders and Ouisa must hurry to a wedding and are excited about
the chance to tell the magnificent story to their snooty friends. However,
Ouisa and Flanders soon run into Larkin (Bruce Davison) and Kitty (Mary Beth
Hurt) who the same remarkable story. The group goes on a mission to find out if
this mysterious stranger really is the son of Sydney Pottier. Along the way,
they must confront their own strained familial relations and the emptiness of
their own lives. 
This is a true story that occurred on New York's East Side in the eighties. It
was soon turned into a play starring Stockard Channing, who justifiably had the
opportunity to star in the movie version. She is joined by a stellar ensemble. 
Will Smith shows that he is a wonderful actor. While his most famous parts are
in action/adventure movies, he has great range, which is on display in this
movie. Smith is able to glide gracefully between scenes where is character is
charming and amiable to other scenes where he shows his steely dark side. 
Another actor who surprises is eighties teen movie idol Anthony Michael Hall.
Hall plays a crucial role to the plot, so I won't give too much away. However,
I will tell you that you won't recognize the same Hall you are accustomed to in
movies like The Breakfast Club. He transforms himself into this darker role.
Along with his recent performance in TNT's Pirates of Silicon Valley, Hall has
a strong resume to shop around Hollywood as he looks to revive his career. 
Sutherland and Channing put in the type of solid performances you would expect
from these venerable veterans. Their characters exemplify the phoniness of the
East Siders who are so wrapped up in dinner parties that they don't notice
their families and life passing by. In a strange way, they are excited that
this event has taken place because it is great fodder for cocktail conversation
and it has brought some life into their dull, empty existence. 
Of course, I must mention Heather Graham, who you might not even recognize as
young, midwesterner Elizabeth. She puts in a great performance as the naďve,
but quickly maturing victim of a scam. Along with her performance as Roller
Girl in Boogie Nights, she also shows an acting ability that should be nurtured
even as she becomes the latest "it" girl. Hopefully, she will wisely choose her
next few projects as she becomes Hollywood's hottest starlet. 
Director Fred Schlepisi does make some costly mistakes. Early in the movie, he
includes strange dream sequences and quick shots that don't make any sense.
Thankfully, he quickly drops them, and the movie becomes stronger until the
ending sequence, which seems a little too drawn out. He does wisely put
together the movie as a serious of flashbacks as each character tells their
story of involvement with Paul. It is a strong job that he can be proud of. 
Like the famous Kevin Bacon game (where I am a mere 3 degrees from Kevin
Bacon), the movie tries to make the point that we are all just six degrees of
separation from anyone else, so we should try to treat each other in a more
civil and caring way. While the overall theme is lost in the movie, it is a
great evening of entertainment and a chance to see some of the greatest actors
in Hollywood. 

Author
Jon A. Webb
     The home of a wealthy, culturally sophisticated New York couple is
invaded by a man who says he is Sidney Poitier's son.  They are charmed
by him, their lives entwine with his, and the continuing series of
incidents become dinner party fodder that ultimately changes their
lives.
     This film has two very strong performances, and several more than
adequate ones.  Stockard Channing is great as the rich wife.  She's
witty and interesting and her performance leaves you wanting to know
more about her.
     Will Smith is remarkably impressive as the young man who claims to
be Poitier's son.  His work here is especially impressive because his
most prominent past work was on a television series.  He manages to
stay right on the edge of either portraying a somewhat theatrical but
real person, or a remarkably good pretender -- you can't be sure.
     The direction (by Frank Schepisi) is what carries the film.  Not
all the performances are as great as Stockard's and Smith's, but they
are carefully entwined by someone who has obviously spent a long time
observing people of this class, and who knows exactly how to portray
them, their children, and their lives.
     Performance by Donald Sutherland and Anthony Michael Hall (nice to
see he's grown up now) are more than adequate.  Sutherland has always
annoyed me a little, with his fakery and choice of roles.  Here he is
less annoying than usual, because his air of insincerity fits the role
so well.  Hall is quite compelling as an intense gay MIT undergrad.  I
think this role will finally revive his career.
     The central point of this film is somewhat similar to that in
Kasdan's GRAND CANYON--something about the interconnectedness of all
humanity ("Six Degrees of Separation" refers to the six mutual
acquaintances that one study has said relate any two people in the
world), how small incidents can change lives, and how love can triumph
over all.  It's an interesting theme, hopeful without being
sentimental.  It's intriguing to me that these films are coming out
now, at the beginning of a new political era; are moviemakers
responding to that, or am I simply noticing it more?

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Stockard Channing, Will Smith, Donald Sutherland.
Screenplay:  John Guare.
Director:  Fred Schepisi.
     There are few greater cinematic challenges than adapting a stage
play for the screen.  The two media are so different -- one primarily
of words, the other of images -- that some plays just don't lend
themselves to a film rendering.  For every AMADEUS, a play which was
opened up into a grand period drams, there is one A FEW GOOD MEN, too
talky and stagy to succeed fully.  That is the problem I fear many
viewers could have with SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION.  Thematically, John
Guare's play is quite rich, as it is in character.  However, its
rapid-fire dialogue and exaggerated acting will strike those unfamiliar
with live theater as too stylized and unrealistic.
     SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION unfolds primarily through flashbacks, as
wealthy Manhattan art dealer Flanders Kitteredge (Donald Sutherland)
and his wife Ouisa (Stockard Channing) describe a unique encounter to
friends.  One evening, a young man appears at their door, apparently
the victim of a mugging.  The fellow (Will Smith) claims to be Paul
Poitier, son of actor Sidney Poitier, as well as a friend of the
Kitteredge's children at Harvard.  He dazzles the Kitteredges for the
evening, but they soon discover there is more to Paul than the story he
has told.  They learn that he has had a similar encounter with a doctor
and another couple, each also beginning with an apparent mugging.
Gruadually, as they investigate the connection between their incidents,
Ouisa begins to wonder about connections in general, and to examine her
life.
     The characters at the heart of SIX DEGREES are marvelously
intricate, tying together an examination of the vagaries of fortune.
On one side is Flanders Kitteredge, a high roller whose gambles on art
deals leave him perpetually one step away from poverty, and
consequently obsessed with the trappings of wealth.  On the other side
is Paul, forced to the margins of society for the threefold sin of
being poor, black and gay, and wanting to do more than just look in
from the outside.  In the middle is Ouisa, who realizes the fragile
links between every human being.  "Every person on this planet is
connected to every other person by a chain of six people," she tells
her daughter, "six degrees of separation," and in her consciousness of
this chain she reaches out to Paul.  Where this theme could have come
off as a liberal social manifesto, SIX DEGREES treads lightly, making
the obsession of the Kitteredges and their cronies with finding the man
who had duped them comic but clear in its message: their world is
threatened if just *anyone* can appear to be one of them.
     The snag in SIX DEGREES is that even with its clever editing, even
with its location photography, it still feels far too much like a stage
play.  Don't misunderstand, I love live theater.  It is just that
acting styles and narrative choices which work when a performance is in
real time by actual size human beings one hundred feet away don't work
when those same human beings are twenty feet high.  Scenes involving
college-age children berating their wealthy parents come off as
ridiculously overacted, with staccato epithets overwhelming each
other.  Will Smith's genteel Paul Poitier persona seems too forced and
phony for anyone to accept, even the star-struck Kitteredges, and the
problem is that he's giving a big, broad performance much better suited
to the stage.  As a result, although I was intrigued with what SIX
DEGREES had to say, the staginess of the production didn't allow me to
get caught up in it.
     To be fair, not all of the performances have that quality.  Donald
Sutherland does an extremely sharp reading of Flanders, never
permitting him to appear stupid, which it would have been exceedingly
easy to do.  His sense of outrage grows as his facade crumbles, and he
conveys that tension with subtlety and style.  Stockard Channing, who
played Ouisa on Broadway for three years, clearly knows her character
inside out, and her telephone conversation with Paul late in the film
is fantastic work.  SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION provides some very funny
human comedy in an extremely well-constructed story.  It's also a story
which works much better on stage.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I worried when SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION started because for a few
brief moments I thought I had walked into a Neal Simon comedy, which I
hate.  Not to fear, it turned out to be non-stop intriguing dialog.
The words per minute rate for the first part of the show is exceeded
only by SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA and maybe by MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.
     The script by John Guare deserves an award - witty and very
bright.  You don't want to cough and miss a word of it.  The movie is
based on a play which I believe has the same name.  There are many
memorable lines.  My favorite has to do with what to give rich people
and how simple it is.  See the movie to find out.  You never know when
you may want to send Bill Gates a little something.  Best to be ready
at a moment's notice.
     There are three award quality performances.  Donald Sutherland as
the art dealer, Stockard Channing as his wife, and, most of all, Will
Smith as the con artist.  Note: Channing is nominated for an Academy
Award for best actress for her part.
     The movie is a comedy in a way, but even more it is an evolving
mystery.  Most of all, however, it is a character study and some
fascinating characters they are.  I am not giving any of the plot away
- much better to be surprised.  The direction by Fred Schepisi of the
ensemble cast has them all in perfect rhythm.  The sets by Patrizia Von
Brandenstein show the elegance and yet coldness of rich people's lives.
     SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION was bursting with energy.  The editing
keep a good pacing and the show ran 1:51.  It is  rated R for reasons
which escape me.  I think it would be fine for teenagers to see by
themselves.  It gets *** 1/2 in my book and a strong recommendation to
go see it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     BACKGROUND:  Humanity is like a group of people walking around in a
fog.  Nobody is very far from anyone else, but you can see only the people
nearest to you.  And they can see only the people immediately around them.
So everybody sees just a small part of the crowd.  People drift closer in
the fog and you see them for a while, then they move further away and cannot
be traced.  That, I think, is a big piece of what this film is about,
thought I admit a certain fog between me and SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION.
That is not a lot for a film to be about, but an odd and convoluted mode of
storytelling makes this film entertaining and at the same time enigmatic.
Whatever else the film is about is really in the eye of the beholder.
     Our story is told in large part through flashbacks as several groups of
friends, families, and acquaintances tell each other about a mysterious
young black man Paul (played by Will Smith) who has insinuated himself into
their lives and then has gone back out of it.  Primarily we see the stories
through the eyes of Ouisa and Flan Kittredge (Stockard Channing and Donald
Sutherland).  They are wealthy pseudo-intellectual members of the upper
crust.  Flan makes his money through dubious trading in fine art.  On a
night that they are having an important dinner with a friend who might
finance their next big deal, Paul shows up on their doorstep claiming to be
the a friend of the Kittredge children and the son of Sidney Portier.  The
refined Paul makes an immediate hit and helps Flan to swing his deal.  They
invite Paul to stay the night only to have him hire a male hustler and bring
him to the house.  They throw Paul out.  Almost immediately they start
hearing that others of their friends have had run-ins with the same person.
Soon they decide that they have to learn more about this young man who seems
to know so much more about them than they know about him.
     The people in this film are much like adult versions of the young
people in METROPOLITAN.  The have superficial conversations on profound
subjects.  While what they are saying seems erudite, it is only banality
phrased well.  What Paul says to keep up his end of the conversation
occasionally does border on profundity, which makes him all the more
enigmatic to the people he visits.  Conversation and how things are
expressed is very important to this film since so much of it is carried on
by social conversations, often recounting other conversations.  This slows
down the plot development, but eventually this 111-minute film tells a
nearly complete story that could have been told in twenty or thirty minutes.
In the final analysis film is a light fantasy.  The story is contrived and
very unlikely to occur in the way it was told.  I think that credibility is
not the point here.  Even the title is never clearly explained; it seems to
refer to some idea that there are at most six intermediate people between
anybody and anybody else in the world.  Considering how isolated some tribes
are to this day in the Amazon and other parts of the world, it seems very
unlikely.  Also it is not clear what counts as a direct adjacency.
     This is a film with a terrific cast and a lack of characters.  Will
Smith is actually fairly charismatic as Paul, but the characters played by
Channing, Sutherland, Ian McKellan, Mary Beth Hurt, Bruce Davison, Richard
Masur, and Anthony Michael Hall are all quickly forgettable as indeed John
Guare's screenplay based on his Broadway play would have them be.  Perhaps
like "Cats," this is just a play that cannot be done on the screen."
     The film is a departure for director Fred Schepisi, but will not be one
of his more memorable accomplishments.  I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Sturdy filmmaker Fred Schepisi follows up his delightful
MR. BASEBALL with the equally enjoyable SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION.
Though so-so as social commentary, this is cunning comedy when it
works.  Which is most of the time.
     SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION is based on the award-winning stage
play, which, in turn, is based on the real-life story of a young man
who conned several members of New York City's "upper echelon" by posing
as the son of a famous actor.
     The film opens on Flan and Ouisa Kittredge (Sutherland and
Channing), a posh Fifth Avenue couple with an incredible story to tell
(via flashback).  The night before, a wounded young black man, Paul
(Smith), arrives at their door.  He claims to know their children at
Harvard. He also claims to be the son of Sidney Poiter (!).
     To the insulated couple, he certainly looks and sounds the part.
He says he's in town to make a film of "Cats."  He say he's in charge
of hiring extras.  And he says he was mugged and his thesis--on
CATCHER IN THE RYE as a hate doctrine (!)--was stolen.
     Soon, Paul's poise and charm has his hosts hanging on his every
word.  And, after serving them up a spectacular meal, the couple
insists that he stay the night.  Which leads to disaster on the
morning-after.  Paul is kicked out, the flashback ends, and the
Kittredges become the talk of the town....
     The first 45 minutes of SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION is brash,
unpredictable fun.  The dialogue is a stitch, the pace is lively, and
the gullibility of Fran and Ouisa radiates like sunshine.  Watching
Paul worm his way into the controlled lives of the Kittredges is
classic comedy.  But it ends when the flashback does.
     Once the con is gone, the film deflates a bit.  The plot becomes
more conventionally paced as everyone struggles to understand the hows
and whys of what happened to them.  Comedy takes a breather as social
commentary rears its ugly head.  The whole things goes on
twenty minutes too long and wraps with an embarrassingly literal
finale.
     SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION strives for the subtlety of Woody Allen.
But even with all the high-brow humor, this is really just pop comedy
with class.
     That said, there's a ton to enjoy in this film.  Great gags, great
lines, and a cast that's perfect.  Sutherland is droll fun, playing
comedy for the first time in who knows when.  Channing is wide-eyed and
wide-open and the real anchor of the film.  She's Oscar-nomination
good, even when saddled with an awful closing speech.
     Then there's Smith.  The young actor/rapper continues his upward
spiral as a rising talent.  He shows a nice range of emotions in the
film's most dimensional role.  And watch the supporting cast for a
surprise turn from former John Hughes habit Anthony Michael Hall.
     Though seemingly a "light" comedy, SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION does
a boast a strong sexual content that may surprise some viewers.  But,
after all, it *is* New York.  -:)
