Title
Review for Another Stakeout (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David N. Butterworth
     A Hollywood production office--plush, swank, business-like.
Interior.  Day.
     Writer Jim Kouf is pitching his idea.  He draws an imaginary
theater marquee in the air and announces proudly, "STAKEOUT II.  It's
perfect.  Think.  It's six years later.  We'll pick up the story where
the first one left off.  We'll get Richard back, and Emilio.  And maybe
even John would be willing to direct again.  The thing'll write
itself."
     Producers Cathleen Summers and Lynn Bigelow look skeptical. 
     "Hell yes.  We'll stick Rosie O'Donnell in it.  Anything she
*does* is funny.  We'll blow up some real estate at the beginning and
blow away some people at the end to satisfy the action fans.  It'll be
something new, yet something familiar.  Audiences loved the first one.
It can't fail."
     The producers seem sold.  "Just one thing," says Bigelow.  "That
title.  It has to be punchier.  How about...  How about ANOTHER
STAKEOUT?" Kouf agrees.
     ANOTHER STAKEOUT is the sequel to the 1987 film, STAKEOUT.
Richard Dreyfuss and Emilio Estevez reprise their roles as Chris Lecce
and Bill Reimers, two Seattle police detectives who once again pull the
worst assignment on the duty roster.  This time they are joined by
Assistant District Attorney Gina Garrett (Rosie O'Donnell), and the
three pose as an average American family in order to locate a key
witness in a Las Vegas mob trial who has gone underground.  It's a
dubious domestic arrangement at best, with Lecce as Dad, Garrett as
Mom, and Reimers as their grown son.
     A comic battle of wills ensues as this dysfunctional trio attempts
to play house whilst keeping an eye on the home of their unsuspecting
neighbors.
     What made the original STAKEOUT so popular was a combination of
two things.  First, the on-screen magnetism of its two male
leads--likable characters that shared a believable chemistry.
Secondly, a deft blend of comedy and real suspense contributed to
making the film a surprise hit.
     Unfortunately all those elements are missing from the sequel.
Because he assumes we know these two characters, writer Kouf never
takes the time to develop them, and they spend most of their time
mugging shamelessly to the camera.  There is very little tension, and
the film plays more like NATIONAL LAMPOON'S SEATTLE VACATION than a
comedy/drama about undercover cops.
     After a promising opening scene that is truly explosive, ANOTHER
STAKEOUT quickly deteriorates into childish physical humor and stilted
wisecracking.  Lecce battles a crook in a dumpster filled with rotting
vegetation and winds up with a mackerel in his gun holster.  Ha ha.
After having to shave off his moustache, Reimers whines about how he
has a special relationship with his facial hair.  Ho ho.  Garrett's
stupid-looking rottweiler chases a rabbit through the pine trees and
drags her after him.  Hee hee.  It's yuck-a-minute kind of stuff.
     Dennis Farina and Marcia Strassman play the O'Hara's, the couple
whose palatial family home is under surveillance.  They play things
pretty straight, but there is one hysterical scene in which they
attempt to leave a dinner party early.  Too bad it's the *only*
genuinely funny scene in the film.  Cathy Moriarty, who looks
strikingly like Faye Dunaway in this picture, plays Lu Delano, the key
witness in question.
     The film seems to have had its share of production problems.
Madeleine Stowe, who played the object of Richard Dreyfuss' desire in
the original film, has a fairly substantial part as Maria, but her
appearance is uncredited.  Then there's a scene with another neighbor,
Barbara Burnside (played by Sharon Maughan), involving a baseball and a
broken window that ends abruptly.  Her son Ronnie, presumably the
culprit (and a role attributed to Taylor Estevez in the closing
credits), never appears in the finished film.
     ANOTHER STAKEOUT is director John Badham's first sequel, and he
should have left well enough alone.

Badham Badham's Butterworth Cathleen Dunaway Estevez Faye Followup Hee Kouf Lecce Lu Maltin Maughan Mom Newsgroups O'Hara's Reimers Rosie Rottweiler STAKEOUT Stowe Strassman a1.mscf.upenn.edu butterworth cbnewsj.att.com dumpster ecl hee r.a.m.r rec.arts.movies rec.arts.movies.reviews thing'll whilst
.


Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 8.7 out of 10 (A-, *** out of ****)
Starring:  Richard Dreyfuss, Emilio Estevez, Rosie O'Donnell, 
           Cathy Moriarty, Dennis Farina, Marcia Strassman
Director:  John Badham
Producers:  Jim Kouf, Cathleen Summers, Lynn Bigelow
Screenplay:  Jim Kouf
Music:  Arthur B. Rubinstein
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     The original STAKEOUT, directed by John Badham, came out in 1987,
and was one of my favorite movies of the year.  It was a film that
skillfully blended its mixture of action and comedy into an
entertaining whole.  The chemistry between the three leads--Richard
Dreyfuss' Chris, Emilio Estevez' Bill, and Madeleine Stowe's Maria--was
as good as it comes in movies.  STAKEOUT ended up being more than just
another cop/buddy film.
     Now, six years later, John Badham is back along with Dreyfuss and
Estevez (and the entire production team, including the writer, Jim
Kouf, and the score composer, Arthur B. Rubinstein).  The relationship
between Chris and Bill hasn't changed much over six years, and neither
has the mingling of action and humor.  This time, Chris and Bill, along
with Rosie O'Donnell's assistant DA, are looking for a witness on the
run who's going to testify against the mob.  Posing as a family, they
move into a house next to the couple with whom contact may or may not
be initiated.  Another stakeout is under way.
     When I first received the credit list for this movie, I skimmed
through it to see who from the original would be returning.  Much to my
chagrin, Madeleine Stowe's name did not appear.  This, in my opinion,
was a huge mistake.  While Estevez and Dreyfuss worked well together,
it was the inclusion of Maria's character that lent an extra spark to
the movie.  It was hard to imagine how a STAKEOUT movie could function
well without her.
     Fortunately, however, Stowe's Maria is present in ANOTHER
STAKEOUT, albeit in an uncredited performance.  It's more than a cameo,
however.  She's in four scenes and has more screen time than at least
two of the actors whose names appear in the opening credits (Dan Lauria
and Sharon Maughan).  And yes, her scenes with Dreyfuss are still as
well-played as ever.  She may not have a major role in this
installment, but her inclusion is an especially nice tip of the cap to
continuity and what made the original movie effective.  Now, on to what
makes this film work.
     If done together well, comedy and action can make an excellent
pairing.  This has been proven many times, most notably in LETHAL
WEAPON and the original STAKEOUT.  It is evident here.  If anything,
this movie leans more towards outright humor than the first, and the
action is consequently toned down.  More importantly, ANOTHER STAKEOUT
doesn't try to copy the first.  The scenario is entirely different, as
are the gags and the tempo.
     The inclusion of Rosie O'Donnell, comedienne-turned-actress, is a
brilliant move.  Without her presence, this movie wouldn't have worked
nearly as well.  She forms a quick rapport with Bill and Chris (of the
love/hate variety), and the movie is off and running.  O'Donnell is
rapidly making an name for herself, and with good reason.  Unlike Rita
Rudner, another veteran of the stand-up routine who is venturing into
movies, O'Donnell can act.
     Dreyfuss is as solid as ever, and seems to genuinely enjoy playing
Chris.  He steals a fair number of scenes, but that's true of almost
any movie that he has a part in.  Emilio Estevez, never one of my
favorite actors, does a decent job.  He's much better in the scenes he
shares with Dreyfuss than those he has to carry on his own.  Of course,
that's not a big surprise.
     Miguel Ferrer is not as charismatic or successful a villain as
Aidan Quinn (whose performance as Maria's escaped convict ex-boyfriend
galvanized STAKEOUT), but he's good enough for the purposes of this
movie.  Dan Lauria is on hand again, reprising his role, although in
the interim spanning the two films, his character has gotten promoted
to chief, and he's just itching to find some way to stick it to his two
least-favorite detectives.
     ANOTHER STAKEOUT is tremendous fun.  There's a lot of highly
amusing (bordering on hilarious) humor, and the action scenes are
handled with an eye for pacing and tension.  If people find this gem in
the midst of so many bigger name motion pictures, this is likely to be
a huge crowd- pleaser.  Because of the uncertainty of whether it will
be noticed, I question the wisdom of releasing ANOTHER STAKEOUT at this
time.  Perhaps, like FOR LOVE OR MONEY, it should have been put off to
the autumn.
     In general, I don't think the second STAKEOUT is as good as the
first, but it is a worthy successor.  Since virtually everyone involved
in the 1987 picture is back for this one, the sense of continuity is
seamless, both in big and little things.  More importantly, because it
actually has an entertaining story to tell, this is not one of the
ever-growing number of sequels that should never have been made.  Fans
of the original movie will almost certainly be happy with ANOTHER
STAKEOUT, and those that didn't see it won't be lost.  This movie is
well worth a look.  It's one of the summer's best at providing
unfettered enjoyment.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
