Title
Review for Mystic Pizza (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  The lives of two sisters and a friend,
     pizza parlor waitresses, is not original and the individual
     stories are predictable, but as a whole it is a satisfying
     slice-of-life film and worth seeing.  Rating: low +2.
     MYSTIC PIZZA is a sort of a THE BEST OF EVERYTHING for the Eighties.  I
guess that in itself is something of a surprise: that someone is making a
THE BEST OF EVERYTHING in the Eighties.  It is not a film with much flash.
It is just a quiet (dare I say it?) soap opera about three young women who
waitress together in a pizza parlor and share each other's lives.  There are
the two sisters Kat and Daisy and their friend Jojo.  Kat is the serious
sort.  She is holding down several jobs to try to earn enough to take
advantage of a scholarship from Yale.  Her sister Daisy is affable,
attractive, and shoots a mean game of pool.  She is looking to have a little
bit of fun and to live a little.  Jojo wants to be like Daisy.  Having
canceled out on her wedding day, she wants sex with her boyfriend but no
commitments.  MYSTIC PIZZA is really three stories, one for each woman,
braided together into a single story.
     Of the three stories the film concentrates mostly on the sisters'
stories; neither is particularly original.  Kat babysits for the daughter of
a handsome young architect who happens to be a Yale graduate and whose wife
is off in Europe.  You can plot this one yourself.  Daisy has a relationship
with a rich law student with a checkered past and a bigoted family.  Perhaps
you cannot plot this one yourself, but it is unlikely you will be very
surprised either.
     So the individual stories are not much to see the film for.  But this
is one of those films where the whole is considerably more than the sum of
its parts.  For one thing, there are few enough films that show women who
are friends and how their friendship works, and at times does not work.
     MYSTIC PIZZA is not one of the year's best films--though I think at
least one critic was claiming that it was--but at a time when so many films
look alike it is a surprisingly satisfying film to watch and enjoy and
hopefully is a sign of more adult films (no, I mean *literally* adult films)
being made.  Rate it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     (Oh, a side note: New York City restaurants offered a dinner to go with
viewing BABETTE'S FEAST, but it was about $100 a plate.  After seeing
TAMPOPO I could not find a Japanese noodle house nearby.  For those of you
who want to coordinate a movie and dinner, this is the film!)

Author
Randy Parker
        If you have a hearty appetite for a warm and sentimental slice of
life, then MYSTIC PIZZA should be just your cup of tea.  The movie centers
on three young women, two of whom are sisters.  The three friends live in
Mystic, a small coastal fishing town on the Eastern Seaboard, and they work
together in the local pizzeria.  The movie follows the trials and
tribulations of their respective love lives, alternating between the
viewpoint of each character.
        Kat, having just graduated from high school, is working to raise
money toward her tuition at Yale.  Her romantic interest is a 30-year-old
architect who hires her to baby-sit his daughter while his wife is in
Europe.  Kat, who is sexually-inexperienced, develops a strong crush on
him.
        Daisy--Kat's stunning and shapely, but less intellectual, older
sister--attracts the attention of a rich, high society law student.  They
have that classic problem of being from opposite sides of the tracks.  Jo
Jo is involved with Bill, a local fisherman who desperately wants her to
marry him.  Although Jo Jo truly loves Bill, she is not ready to make such
a big commitment.
        At the heart of MYSTIC PIZZA are three fine performances by three
relatively unknown, but extremely well cast, actresses who seem very
natural in their roles.  Kat is the most compelling character in the film;
Annabeth Gish gives her just the right touch of vulnerability and
innocence.  Her heartache as she comes of age is touching and painful.
Lily Taylor and Julia Roberts are equally moving as Jo Jo and Daisy.
MYSTIC PIZZA's supporting cast also delivers the goods.  Vincent D'Onofrio,
William Moses, and Adam Storke play the three romantic interests; each
actor gives his character a sufficient sense of depth.
        MYSTIC PIZZA successfully integrates the three characters and story
lines into one thematic whole.  The movie is filled with moments of comic
yet poignant drama, such as the scene in which Daisy spills buckets of fish
over her boyfriend's Porsche because she thinks he is cheating on her.
MYSTIC PIZZA's impact lasts well beyond its 90 minute duration.  The movie
has lingered in my mind, and my appreciation for it has grown with time.
Gish, Taylor, and Roberts have created in MYSTIC PIZZA three characters who
are quite memorable and endearing; in fact, I want to know what has
happened to Kat, Jo Jo, and Daisy since the end of the film.  Hopefully,
there will be a sequel entitled MYSTERIOUS PASTA that will satisfy my
curiosity.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     There's certainly nothing new in the plot behind MYSTIC PIZZA:  Three
girls working as waitresses in a pizza parlor in Mystic, Connecticut, and their
romantic entanglements during the summer and fall of one year.  One is just on
the edge of matrimony with a fisherman, but can't quite cross the line;
another, a vivacious local who wants to leave Mystic and gets involved with a
rich out-of-towner; and her younger sister, about to go to Yale and falling in
love with a married man.
     However, the film makes its mark from the first shot with its infectious
sense of humor and the collection of local characters it showcases.  The actors
are given dialogue they can really get laughter out of, and they soon have
developed characters who you are like quite a bit (especially the three lead
actresses).  Finally, not all of the plot is cut-and-dried -- I was surprised
several times with where the plot headed, and for those points where it wheeled
around predictably, it did so with style and enthusiasm which belayed the
cliche situations.
     A good full-price film, and something of a surprise.  The Mystic Pizza in
MYSTIC PIZZA resembles the film; the elements aren't revolutionary, but they're
full-bodied and the mixture is just right.
