Title
Review for Small Soldiers (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: July 10, 1998
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Gregory Smith, Phil Hartman, Jay Mohr, Denis
Leary
The Voices of: Tommy Lee Jones, Frank Langella, Sarah Michelle Gellar,
Christina Ricci
Directed by: Joe Dante
Distributed by: DreamWorks Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (violence, brief language, thematic elements) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/small.htm
Certain movies can be marketed for one demographic and made for another.
And often, that same movie may be suitable for neither grouping. When
that happens to a movie, there's an awful, sinking feeling that occurs
while watching it. And you get that feeling when watching the story in
SMALL SOLDIERS unfold. The movie runs 110 minutes long, but somewhere in
the middle it becomes very apparent that this movie was not made for
anyone over twelve years of age. The dialogue, story, and setting are
very childish, and only the spectacular special effects and sometimes
on-target humor make this movie a tad worthwhile. 
The movie begins at, conveniently, the beginning, when GloboTech
Industries president Gil Mars (Denis Leary) licenses his weapons
technology to toy makers (headed up by Jay Mohr). Two lines of these
super-smart, self-aware, "living" toys are introduced: the Commando
Elite - G.I. Joe wannabes - and the Gorgonites - STAR WARS alien extras.
These opening scenes are a bit ponderous, and they spend too much time
on characters that aren't important. The most miscast of all is Denis
Leary, whose character is too confined for him to make use of his
cynical comedic talent. Eventually, though, they do introduce the main
plot. A shipment of the toys makes its way to a small-time toy store
owned by Alan Abernathy (Gregory Smith) and his father (Kevin Dunn). The
first time the toys come "alive," they overrun the store and escape
before anyone notices. This is Alan's fault, because he was supposed to
be watching the store that day. 
Alan's got a rocky relationship with his family because he once
graffitied the wall of a school he was at and pulled the fire alarm.
These seemingly superfluous bits of knowledge about Alan's character are
extracted tediously, and to no effect. The biggest result of all of the
development of his character is that his parents don't trust him, which
is the setup for many formulaic scenes. Alan gets caught doing something
that has an explanation, but they won't believe him. This, along with
the very out-of-place love story between Alan and his next-door neighbor
Christy (Kirsten Dunst), are nothing but lopsided lampoons of
prepubescent cinema. There's nothing here that hasn't been done before,
and it's up to the toys to save the day and the integrity of the pic.
Which they do, with varied success. 
After the toys escape from the toy store, they fight the battle to end
all battles at Alan's house. There's a lot of unnecessary violence in
this scene and at other points throughout the movie, making it largely
questionable as a children's movie. On one side, the good guy toys - the
Gorgonites - aren't really that likeable. As Alan says, they're "losers
with self-esteem problems." They're programmed to lose, and their
monotonous, defeated voices don't really help. On the other side are the
Commando Elite, which really are the most fun in the entire movie. Tommy
Lee Jones voices the lead Commando, Chip Hazard, with great success, and
if not for the violence included, they would be a fine source of comic
relief. However, that final fallback - the comedy - also fails largely.
Phil Hartman is very underused, and the only jokes that work are
none-too-subtle jabs at the Spice Girls and TITANIC. This movie is just
too off-balance to be much fun, and the target audience is never really
honed in upon. Seeing it is a very gutsy movie.
FINAL AWARD FOR "SMALL SOLDIERS": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
Matt Williams
If Toy Story told the story of what would happen if everyone's favorite
childhood toy came to life, then Small Soldiers tells the story of what
would happen if today's violent action figures sprung to life.  The
result is a violence-filled kids movie, which has its moments of creepy
fun.
The mayhem begins when a defense contractor, Globotech, buys up the
Heartland Toy company.  Toy designers Irwin Wayfair (David Cross) and
Larry Benson (Jay Mohr) use the latest military computer chips to design
the ultimate toys:  fully interactive action figures called the Commando
Elite, and their monstrous enemies, the Gorgonites.
However, Globotech never foresaw the consequences.  When the Commando
Elite leader Chip Hazard (voiced by Tommy Lee Jones) activates, he will
stop at nothing to destroy the Gorgonites and anyone allied with them.
That anyone happens to be young Alan Abernathy (Gregory Smith) and his
neighbor Christy (Kirsten Dunst).  Alan's dad owns a small toy shop, and
Alan manages to talk his way into getting the first shipment of Commando
Elite and Gorgonite action figures.  However, soon he has an all out war
on his hands...a war which could turn deadly for his family and friends.
Director Joe Dante, who also directed Gremlins, has applied many of the
same touches to this movie.  The general theme (peaceful suburbia
destroyed by violent little creatures) is the same, and there are
several other little details which add to the same feel.
The animation is simultaneously well done and crude.  The integration of
the action figures into the real world is done superbly.  However, the
action figures themselves (made of rigid plastic) have very few
expressions.  As a result, the characters never truly come alive as in,
say, Toy Story.
The filmmakers did a good job in voice casting.  In addition to Tommy
Lee Jones, Frank Langella is cast as Archer, the lead Gorgonite.
Rounding out the Commando Elite are Ernest Borgnine, George Kennedy,
Bruce Dern, Jim Brown, and Clint Walker.  Spinal Tap's Christopher
Guest, Michael McKean, and Harry Shearer provide additional Gorgonite
voices.
The humans are mostly secondary characters.  Gregory Smith and Kirsten
Dunst are somewhat bland as the leads.  However, Kevin Dunn and Phil
Hartman add some levity as the kids' respective fathers.
But let's not kid around...the center of a film like small soldiers are
the toys and the havoc they wreak.  At times the film is a bit
subversive in its humor, and a little violent for the youngest set, but
mainly it is just plain fun.
The violence is mostly toy violence (hence no blood and guts).  However,
there are a few intense scenes here and there (but all tamer than
Gremlins).
Small Soldiers doesn't pack as much ammo as some of the bigger action
flicks this summer.  However, it has a bigger punch than a few I could
mention.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Scott Renshaw
SMALL SOLDIERS
(DreamWorks/Universal)
Starring:  Gregory Smith, Kirsten Dunst, Jay Mohr, Kevin Dunn, Phil
Hartman, voices of Tommy Lee Jones, Frank Langella.
Screenplay:  Gavin Scott, Adam Rifkin and Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio.
Producers:  Michael Finnell and Colin Wilson.
Director:  Joe Dante.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  104 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Some films are so bald-faced in their attempt to have it both ways
that you just have to hand it to 'em for their chutzpah.  On one level,
for instance, it's obvious SMALL SOLDIERS wants to skewer gung-ho
militarism.  The set-up finds defense contractor Globotech purchasing a
toy company with the cheerfully all-American name of Heartland, attempting
to diversify before post-Cold War down-sizing down-sizes it right out of
existence.  Instructed by Globotech boss Gil Mars (Denis Leary) to create
state-of-the-art action toys, designer Larry Benson (Jay Mohr) slips a
prototype weapons system microprocessor into the new Commando Elite and
Gorgonite action figure lines, creating intelligent, interactive toys
designed "with the same rigorous standards demanded by the U.S. Defense
Department" (perhaps the film's best joke).
     The kicker is that the Commando Elite figures, led by Chip Hazard
(voice of Tommy Lee Jones), are the merciless and vaguely racist bad guys,
programmed to seek out and destroy the gentle, noble, home-seeking Archer
(Frank Langella) and his insecure fellow Gorgonites (no one explains why
the Gorgonites couldn't have been programmed as slightly more challenging
antagonists than the therapy group from "The Bob Newhart Show").  When
troubled teen Alan Abernathy (Gregory Smith) allies himself with the
Gorgonites, he too becomes a Commando target, along with his New Age-y
parents (Kevin Dunn and Ann Magnuson) and his would-be girlfriend Christy
(Kirsten Dunst).  As Chip rallies his troops against the enemy, framed
Patton-like by the U.S. flag and spouting a succession of non-sequitur
patriotic cliches, it becomes clear that director Joe Dante and his team
of writers want us to nod knowingly at how the destruction to come will be
the result of hard-wired hyper-hawkishness.
     Those same folks also know that the destruction to come will be
considered bitchin' cool by a contingent in the audience which might be
inclined to by SMALL SOLDIERS merchandise.  In an era where action figure
tie-ins are as much a part of popcorn movie-making as plastic fast food
cups, SMALL SOLDIERS bypasses the inconvenient middle step of figuring out
how to turn the characters into toys.  It also bypasses the inconvenient
middle step of explaining why we should side with the peace-loving
Gorgonites when the film makes the Commando Elite's assault (complete with
flaming tennis balls, nail guns and make-shift helicopters) look like so
much fun.  In many of his previous films (including GREMLINS, which is the
most obvious model for SMALL SOLDIERS), Dante was able to give a dark edge
to his invasions of suburban serenity.  He loses that edge early on in
SMALL SOLDIERS to meet the demands of marketing.  It's almost as though
the checks Mars (the God of War, get it?) passes out to every one at the
end to buy their silence bought off the film-makers as well.
     It would be easier to dismiss SMALL SOLDIERS if the result weren't so
entertaining, not to mention frequently amusing.  For adults, it will be
clever mostly in an in-jokey sort of way, from references to GREMLINS'
Gizmo to the use of he-man icons like Ernest Borgnine, George Kennedy and
Clint Walker as voices for the Commando Elite.  The rest of the voice
talent -- Spinal Tap alums Christopher Guest, Michael McKean and Harry
Shearer re-united as Gorgonites; Sarah Michelle Gellar and Christina Ricci
voicing mutant versions of a Barbie-style doll -- isn't too shabby either.
The humans may be a pretty boring lot (excluding Phil Hartman, in his last
film role as Christy's consumer electronics-obsessed dad), but the
combination of Stan Winston's animatronics and perfectly-integrated CGI
versions make the toy story a fairly lively one.  
     SMALL SOLDIERS is just weird and twisted enough to be worth a
matinee.  It's also a poorly-concealed version of the same action worship
you find in a film like ARMAGEDDON, though it's almost better when the
worship is thoroughly unironic.  The token attempts at satire
notwithstanding, SMALL SOLDIERS plays most like a juiced-up feature-length
commercial for _real_ Commando Elite action figures, available now at a
store near you.

Author
David Wilcock
Dreamworks, after Mouse Hunt, again try to break into children's films with
this comedy. While better than Mouse Hunt, and having Joe 'Gremlins' Dante
on board to direct, it still dosen't exactly set the silver screen alight.
The 'story' is that a toy company has released toys (Commando's and
Gorgonites, strange alien beings) which have a chip stored inside them so
advanced they are able to think and act for themselves. Alan Abernathy
(Smith) manages to get hold of both types, and they soon escape from their
boxes and go on the rampage. It's up to Alan and love interest Christy
Fimple (Dunst) to stop the Commando's who are know hell bent on destroying
the Gorgonites, and anyone who tries to help them (including Alan and
Christy!)
Although Small Soldiers has an interesting premise for a children's film, it
is sadly underused, and is reduced to a generic, 'Home Alone' style film by
the end. This movie could of been the new Toy Story, thanks to impressive
CGI effects, a story that appeals to children (their toys could be alive)
and Joe Dante has shown before he can add a dark comic underside to a
seemingly normal film (e.g. Gremlins.) But, the writers, Ted Elliot and Zack
Penn, have added little inventiveness to the script. There's enough in here
to keep kids amused, but the premise is hopelessly underused. Their are a
few interesting set pieces, including a terrifying attack from 'Barbie' type
dolls, but there's nothing here that is startlingly new. To add insult to
injury, Dante insists on directing the film in a rather dull story. The
movie is also incredibly slow paced, with a huge amount of padding to help
fill out the running time.
The players try to offset this with some good performances. The two child
leads are likeable, and there's some chemistry between them. They both have
some goofy charm to them, and act how kids would act. Although what they say
is sometimes cliched. The adult actors are two bad here. There's no major
stars in the film, so everyone is given the chance to deliver a good
performance. Kevin Dunn (Hot Shots!) is fine as Alan's dad, playing the
father figure quite well, even if he does look too much like Al from Home
Improvement. The late Phil Hartman also pops up as Christy's dad, and is
luckily quite funny in what turned out to be his last on-screen appearance.
Dante regular Dick Miller pops up as Joe the lorry driver, and he gives the
film some bounce at the start. Finally, Jay Mohr and David Cross are kooky
enough as the scientists who create the toys.
The voices of the soldiers themselves are perfect. The producers got the
cast of 'The Dirty Dozen' to voice the commando's, with Tommy Lee Jones
playing the leader. Each one fits perfectly with their character. For the
Gorgonites, the cast of Spinal Tap (Christopher Guest, Harry Shearer etc.)
were used, and again they suit their characters perfectly. Finally, the
soldiers themselves are beautifully created by Stan Winston, who bought us
the dinosaurs in Jurassic Park.
But despite the good performances, the film suffers from weak directing, a
poor script, and dull set pieces. Although the ending does have some life to
it, and the film is not totally dull, Small Soldiers is slightly dull. For
kids, it's fine, if somewhat violent, but sadly there isn't enough here that
appeals to adult. A missed opportunity.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Small Soldiers (1998)
Gregory Smith, Kristen Durst, Kevin Dunn, Phil Hartman, Jay Mohr, Denis 
Leary, David Cross, Ann Magnuson, Wendy Schaal, Dick Miller, Robert 
Picardo. Voices of Tommy Lee Jones, Frank Langella, Ernest Borgnine, Jim 
Brown, George Kennedy, Bruce Dern, Christopher Guest, Michael McKean, 
Harry Shearer. Directed by Joe Dante.
PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Entering a teenage girl's bedroom, a group of renegade toy soldiers spot 
her collection of Barbie-style dolls on the shelf. "Ooooh, fully poseable,
" leers one of the plastic warriors, "Permission for R&R, sir!" 
Based solely on its trailers, "Small Soldiers" has been dismissed by some 
as a "Toy Story" rip-off, but they're mistaken. Actually, it's a 
"Gremlins" rip-off, directed by Joe Dante, who also helmed both of the 
"Gremlin" films. Packed with comic mayhem and loads of pop culture 
references, "Small Soldiers" is enjoyable lightweight summer fare, 
despite its threadbare storyline and anemic characters.
Set in the same beatific small town where all the people in Steven 
Spielberg productions live, "Small Soldiers" deals with action figures 
run amuck. Implanted with computer chips pirated from the military, two 
groups of toys go to war, with the Commando Elite soldiers determined to 
eradicate the peaceful Gorgonites, and any humans who help them.  
It's a simple, but cute concept that pays off with some big laughs, 
although the finished product doesn't live up to its potential, due to a 
number of poor choices from the filmmakers. 
The human cast is painfully bland, just another group of sit-com 
stereotypes. There's the bumbling teen hero, his preoccupied father and 
ineffectual mother, the beautiful girl next door, her boobish parents, 
etc., etc. They're all sketchy as can be, making it difficult to care 
when they get in trouble. Only the late, greatly missed Phil Hartman 
makes any impression, adding what bite he can as the neighbor girl's 
loutish dad. 
Okay, since we don't care about the humans, what about the toys? Here's 
where things really get odd. The appeal of a film like "Small Soldiers" 
comes from the wish-fulfillment notion of seeing the toy soldier battles 
we staged as children come to life, but it doesn't play out quite the way 
you might expect. 
The Commando Elite soldiers are actually the bad guys, little military 
psychopaths out to defeat the enemy at all costs. And the Gorgonites, 
monster action figures with peaceful hearts, have been pre-programmed by 
the toymakers as timid losers. Their characters are sympathetic and 
appealing, but we don't get a chance to know them, because their 
programming ordains that they stay out of sight as much as possible. 
Why would a toymaker program one of its armies to lose? I certainly have 
no idea. Why would Joe Dante make a film without sympathetic characters? 
Now, that one's easy. It's because Dante is far more interested in satire 
and mayhem than in people. As with both of the "Gremlin" films, he loves 
to fixate on funny, nasty little monsters, while whipping up colorful 
ways to destroy them. 
Ultimately, comic mayhem is all that "Small Soldiers" delivers. 
Thankfully, Dante is pretty good at it. He uses the Commando Elite 
soldiers to send up countless war movie stereotypes. Look for satiric 
nods at everything from "Apocalypse Now" to "The Dirty Dozen." 
Speaking of the "Dirty Dozen," don't be surprised if you get a strong 
sense of deja vu, as several veterans of the 1967 World War II flick turn 
up here. Ernest Borgnine provides the voice of Commando Kip Killagin, 
with Jim Brown as Butch Meathook, George Kennedy as Brick Bazooka and 
Bruce Dern as Link Static. Tommy Lee Jones heads the troops as leader 
Chip Hazard.
Keep your ears peeled for another mini-reunion, with "Spinal Tap" stars 
Christopher Guest, Michael McKean and Harry Shearer providing voices for 
the Gorgonites. Frank Langella plays Archer, the spokesman for the gentle 
monsters.
"Small Soldiers" virtually bursts at the seams with pop culture 
references. Standing over a fallen comrade, leader Chip Hazard solemnly 
intones, "his battery has died, but his memory keeps going and going and 
going." A doorbell rings the key notes from "Close Encounters of the 
Third Kind," one of several nods to executive producer Steven Spielberg. 
Dante even makes references to his own work, with "Gizmo" turning up as 
an online password.
Seamlessly blending computer graphics with live action footage, the film 
has a number of well-done set pieces. Particularly striking is a creepy 
sequence where the Commandos fit the neighbor girl's "Gwendy" dolls with 
computer chips, leading to a nightmarish Barbie-goes-berserk scene where 
the young woman finds herself under attack from her own dolls. "Let's 
give her a makeover," says one psycho-Gwendy ominously, while another 
horribly mutilated doll coos "Don't hate me because I'm beautiful."
There's a lot of clever moments in "Small Soldiers," but ultimately the 
film still feels like a warmed-over "Gremlins." Joe Dante has a real 
knack for cartoonish sadism and light satire, but he's covered this turf 
before. Had the human characters been less bland, or the Gorgonites less 
timid, they might have provided the spark to ignite this story's 
potential. As it is, "Small Soldiers" is another sterile summertime 
trifle, frenetic, funny and quickly forgettable.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Gregory Smith, Kirsten Dunst, Kevin Dunn, Phil Hartman, Denis
Leary, Ann Magnuson, Wendy Schaal, Jay Mohr, David Cross, voice of Tommy
Lee Jones, voice of Frank Langella
Director: Joe Dante
Screenplay: Ted Elliott, Zak Penn, Adam Rifkin, Terry Rossio, Gavin
Scott
Get ready, get set, go: it's the Commander Elites versus the Gargonites.
The Elites, a group of allegiant US soldiers and the Gargonites, a
collection of mutated monsters from another planet. But this ain't no
battle in space or the future - it's Winslow Corners, Ohio, and the
troops are no more than ten inches tall.  They're toys, you see, and
their elaborate minds kick into high gear to create a bad-ass Toy Story
on steroids.  With all reasonable credibility stacked against it, Joe
Dante (of Gremlins fame) makes it work.  And never since we saw Buzz
Lightyear and Woody on the screen have action figures actually generated
some sort of emotion, mar the fact that all the Elite bastards want to
do is destroy every and anything allied with the Gargonites.
If it all sounds a little childish, a little predictable and a lot
unrealistic, rest assured - it is.  But heck, it's all about fun, and it
comes in bucket loads when you watch the manufactured toys slug it out.
Although it as first seems that Dante is unsure of whom he wants us to
barrack for, the "there will be no mercy" Elites become poised as a
splendid group of baddies, who think that they're the heroes of the
story.
Two bumbling employees of Globe Tech, presumably some sort of high tech
and omnipotent organization, design a new set of toys to impress the
boss.  In order for the toys to think and react by themselves, state of
the art military chips are inserted into them.  The Commando Elites are
programmed to destroy the enemy at any price, and the Gargonites to hide
and search for their home planet Gargon.  Thus a memorable bunch of
misfits are created but with no specific originality - the cliché
characters are well and truly evident, especially in the hard-hitting
leader of the Elite's (voice of Tommy Lee Jones) and the set of bumbling
(but lovable) Gorganites.
I guess it goes without saying that the team from Industrial Light &
Magic have once again created some splendid animation eye candy; the
toys don't move like cartoon characters, they move like toys.  Their
voices are played by a wide range of quirky counterparts: Jones, Frank
Langella, Christopher Guest, Harry Shearer, Sarah Michelle Gellar, and
Christina Ricci amongst others.
The human cast, given the tough job of reacting to our little
instigators, are a fairly lifeless bunch.  The only actor who breathes
much needed energy into his character is the late Phil Hartman, in his
last screen role.  And although Hartman is at his best only when he is
the instigator (take his hilarious character in News Radio, for
example), this is certainly a worthy final performance for someone who
was one of the true funnymen on TV.
The only really discouraging aspect of Dante's unique creation is the
poorly written, poorly executed battle sequences.  The framework for
these scenes is too simplistic and repetitive, as we find our baneful
Elites doing everything possible to strike miniature amounts of terror
into the audience.  They squirm, wriggle and twist their way into vapid
scenarios, which mostly involve a large catapulting device or a speedy
flying contraption.  Not even the addition of hundreds of aggressive
Barbie dolls manages to give the scenes more credibility. But in all
fairness, the final moments make some great viewing - who would have
thought that a showdown between two toys on top of a telephone pole
would be one of the most memorable action sequences this year?
Despite the fact that Small Soldiers might well be one of the most
grisly kids flicks in recent years, Dante seems unclear whom to market
it for, with its childlike moments of super-happy-fun and its
particularly gruesome end to the team of Elites.  But still, he does
make it work, and in an industry where action figures can be a huge
slice of the market, it's refreshing to see a film which subtly parodies
the commercialism of mainstream cinema.   Or perhaps, Dante is just
having some fun.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Mark O'Hara
At the cineplex on Sunday, the sexes were segregated.
My wife took our ten year-old daughter to see MADELINE, while I 
accompanied our 13 year-old son into the theater showing SMALL SOLDIERS.  
The separation was as predictable as Happy Meals:  who would want the 
mini-Barbie, and who got the slick Hot Wheels?
The film does have parts interesting to boys and girls alike.  The early 
teen Alan Abernathy (Gregory Smith) develops a fast infatuation with 
Christy Fimple, the girl next door who happens to be dating another, 
older boy with a motorcycle.  The boy-meets-and-then-rescues-girl 
scenario is one of the more engaging subplots in the film.  Dunst 
delivers a smooth performance, whether she is watching her little 
brother or fighting off her own "Gwendy" dolls, which have been 
transmogrified into half-melted, hair-raising drones.  Smith is also 
very likable in his role, especially when he is careful not to overact 
when an action figure he's brought home begins impossibly to interact 
with him.  Characterization is the aspect in which Alan Abernathy falls 
short.  The writers decided to add to his character a dimension that 
does not work.  Alan has a questionable history;  he's been expelled 
from two schools and his parents apparently have moved here to escape 
the ignominy.  But we see no motivation for the boy's past behavior;  we 
never understand what has caused his mischievous history, so the honor 
and bravery he ultimately shows never change the viewer's mind about 
Alan.  We always like him.
My son had the most fun watching the "Elite Commandos," the grotesquely 
grinning grunts hopped up on Defense Department microchips, the gimmicky 
toys that Dreamworks SKG hopes will sell well in stores and fast-food 
joints.  In the film the figures come alive at their owner's voice. We 
first meet the intelligent toys when Alan cons his friendly delivery man 
to leave a complete set (six Commandos, six "Gorgonites") at his absent 
father's toy store.  Not until he brings home Archer does he realize 
that, when you play with these toys, they play back.  Soon the Gorgonite 
leader Archer, speaking in Frank Langella's deep and gentle voice, shows 
us that these monsters have been cast against type.  They may be 
hideous, but they are also goofy and lovable, rascally and noble.  And 
they are the targets of the programmed wrath of the soldiers.
Chip Hazard (voice of Tommy Lee Jones) leads with an amoral abandon I 
have not seen since Robert Duvall's army officer in APOCALYPSE NOW.  
What is interesting in the depiction of these G. I. Joes for the new 
century is their dual nature.  They seem like cool, all-time exciting 
toys, while they also subtly attack the sensibilities of violence.  If 
the movie makes any political statement, it is that our culture demands 
entertainment (including toys and movies) that glorifies violence, while 
we simultaneously admire justice and gentleness.  But I give too much 
credit.  The special effects are seamless, as good as those in TOY STORY 
because of the added facet of live action.  They work because they bring 
off the wonderful exaggeration of the plot:  playthings turned bad, 
searching Dad's workbench for weapons, adapting Black and Decker and 
Craftsman into war machines.  The voices under Lee's command are 
masterful, albeit part of an inside joke.  Ernest Borgnine, Jim Brown, 
Clint Walker, George Kennedy - fragments of "The Dirty Dozen"!  If only 
we got to hear them more!
As Gil Mars, owner of Globotech, Denis Leary is cold but not sinister 
enough.  His company has gobbled up Heartland Toys and caused the 
creation of the Commandos and Gorgonites, along with the conflicts that 
will no doubt affect the humans around them.  What Mr. Mars teaches 
young viewers is that, if you cut a big enough check, you can appease 
the anger even of decent people, including Alan's father.  Director Joe 
Dante should have instructed Leary to act more menacing and less 
indifferent.  Or cast one of the original "Dozen" in person to show us 
how badness is done.  Perhaps Borgnine could have reprised his role in 
FROM HERE TO ETERNITY.
When Joe Dante worked on GREMLINS in the early 80's, he oversaw one of 
the early films rated PG-13.  I can recall seeing a need for the rating 
when I noticed too many small children in the theater.  They loved the 
violence, the frenetic action and irreverent potty jokes.  It was easy 
to notice the way the movie, before our very eyes, desensitized the 
children to these examples of crudeness.  It was probably then that my 
wife and I recognized the rating system meant what it said about age.  
The darkness of many scenes in SMALL SOLDIERS, paired with the violence 
and a few obscene phrases, makes the film unsuitable for a ten year-old, 
male or female.  Unfortunately, it is easier to shush loud movie-goers 
than it is to scold parents who have dragged their twin four year-olds 
to a PG-13.


Author
Louis Proyect
It should be recorded that Stephen Spielberg was involved with one
solid antiwar film in 1998. That film is Dreamwork's "Toy Soldiers,"
not the flag-waving "Saving Private Ryan." "Toy Soldiers" received
some praise for the animatronic designs, which give the toy soldiers
life-like motion and three-dimensionality, but the underlying story
will last with you much longer than the special effects.
"Toy Soldiers" is a clever satire on the culture behind the
testosterone-laden combat toys hawked to little boys on Saturday
morning television. Denis Leary plays the head of a huge conglomerate
that began in the munitions business, but is now gobbling up new
companies left and right in order to diversify. The latest acquisition
is a toy company run by a couple of naďfs. He tells them to come up
with a toy soldier that will really do the sort of things that you see
on the television commercials: climb up hills, swim across rivers,
jump from airplanes. Most importantly, this toy soldier must destroy
its enemy, a companion toy called the Gorgothon. Desperate to please
his new boss, one of the toy company executives decides to use a
special artificial intelligence microchip from the munitions division
of the conglomerate to satisfy the big boss's demands. To everybody's
shock, the chip does this and much more.
The toy soldiers and their Gorgothon prey end up at a "warm and fuzzy"
toy store, where violent toys are prohibited by the owner who is away
on a business trip. Alan Abernathy , his teenage son (played ably by
Gregory Smith), is watching the store and decides to sell the toys
since business has been so slow.
On the very first night, the toy soldiers bust out of their boxes and
gather around their leader, Chip Hazard (voice by Tommy Lee Jones),
who delivers a hilarious speech to his assembled troops. He manages to
include just about every bloody cliché ever heard in a war movie,
while pacing back and forth in front of a huge American flag. To leave
no doubt, the film score quotes the musical theme from "Patton." The
gist of Hazard's speech is that the Gorgothon must be killed because
they "are the enemy." This injunction, just as the ones that are given
to raw recruits in the wars of our 20th century, is all that is
necessary.
Meanwhile, the Gorgothons, while unlovely to the eye, are about as
gentle and lovable a group as one can imagine. Their leader is Archer
(voice by Frank Langella), who has the head of a lion and a quiver of
arrows on his powerful back. There is a striking similarity between
this toy monster and the extraterrestrial killer in "Predator," who is
pursued and destroyed by a Chip Hazard-like Arnold Schwarzenegger in
the jungles of Central America. The movie subverts these identities,
however. The solider becomes the insane pursuer, while the monster
simply desires to live in peace. Why are the monsters hated? The toy
soldiers have the answer. They are DIFFERENT. They have been
programmed to hate the OTHER.
After the Gorgothons take refuge in Alan's home, the toy soldiers
decide to take his girl-friend (Kristen Dunst) as hostage. She will be
returned safely if he turns over the Gorgothons. His refusal to do
this leads to a riotous climax that owes much to the movie "Gremlins."
Since Joe Dante directed both "Gremlins" and "Toy Soldiers," the
combination of slapstick and violence is immediately recognizable as
his signature. What makes "Toy Soldiers" different, however, is that
our fear ultimately is not of some green creature from outer space,
but our own military culture.
Hollywood's ambivalence about military culture goes to the roots of
our dilemma as a people. The Hollywood moguls grouped around
Dreamworks are solid liberals who can deplore war toys in one movie
and then turn around and make another that glorifies America's
military exploits. The reason for this is obvious. "America," as James
William Gibson, author of "Warrior Dreams" states, "has always had a
war culture, and that long history of martial adventures provides a
crucial background for understanding the post-Vietnam warrior."
"Warrior Dreams" is a study of the film iconography of the Reagan era,
one that "Toy Soldiers" is a pointed footnote to.
The Minutemen of the American Revolution were warrior heroes, who set
an example not only for the Indian killers of the nineteenth century
but Teddy Roosevelt's "harum-scarum Rough Riders" as well. The legend
of Roosevelt's victory at San Juan Hill was actually recorded by
Vitagraph. To make a more exciting newsreel, the Vitagraph
photographers and the Rough Riders staged a mock battle at Santiago
Bay after the real fighting was over. World War One and World War Two
replenished the mythology of the warrior hero. So by the time the
Vietnam War started, millions of young American men had already been
acculturated to violence and domination, as Ron Kovic put it in "Born
on the Fourth of July":
"Every Saturday afternoon we'd go down to the movies in the shopping
center and watch gigantic prehistoric birds breathe fire, and war
movies with John Wayne and Audie Murphy. Bobbie's mother always packed
us a bagful of candy. I'll never forget Audie Murphy in To Hell and
Back. At the end he jumps on top of a flaming tank that's just about
to explode and grabs the machine gun, blasting it into the German
lines. He was so brave I had chills running up and down my back,
wishing it were me up there. There were gasoline flames roaring around
his legs, but he just kept firing that machine gun. It was the
greatest movie I ever saw in my life."
This scene not only inspired Ron Kovic to join the Marines and lose
his legs in Vietnam, it is also very similar to the blockbuster finale
of "Saving Private Ryan," a movie that might inspire the next
generation of Ron Kovics to go off to distant lands in pursuit of
warrior dreams. It is a sign of the peculiar divided consciousness of
late 20th century American capitalism that it is simultaneously
producing its own most dedicated propagandists and social critics,
often combined in the same individual. Such a tension can not remain
permanent.
(For Marxist discussion: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html)

Author
Homer Yen
Forget about GI Joe.  Those action figures are now a thing of the past.
Today, a new generation of fighting toys are more gruff, rough and buff.
They have scowls a mile long.  And, they possess a sophisticated
microchip that enables them to talk, move about, and display other
characteristics that makes them seem alarmingly alive.  These are the
Commando Elite, led by Chip Hazard (voiced by Tommy Lee Jones).  Barking
out a melange of patriotic clichés ("ask not what your country can do
for you, but that you have only one live to give"), he leads his troop
of warmongering-named soldiers like Butch Meathook, Nick Nitro, and
Brick Bazooka on their one and only mission.  They are to destroy the
Gorgonites, an odd assortment of drawing board rejects whose greatest
talent is finding places to hide.  Gorgonites are also equipped with
these sophisticated microchips, but are programmed to lose in battle.
Led by the majestic lion-like Archer (voiced by Frank Langella), their
mission is to find freedom.
Young Alan Abernathy (Gregory Smith), son of a toy store owner, manages
to get his hands on these figures before the rest of the world.  But
once the Commando Elite and the Gorgonite action figures are unpacked
within close proximity of each other, the toys take on a life of their
own.  The miniature military men begin to hunt down their prey.  Archer
appeals to Alan for help, who agrees to protect the Gorgonites.  This
alliance infuriates Chip Hazard, and he and the Commando Elite begin to
formulate a plan which involves building lots of small-scale yet
surprisingly harmful weapons, transforming skateboards and wagons into
military vehicles, and a plot to kidnap Alan's love interest (Kirsten
Dunst).
This movie is a little boy's imagination running wild.  The Commando
Elite use tremendous creativity to construct weapons such as a bomb made
from aerosol cans, a helicopter that launches bottle rockets and weapons
that fire staples and nails.  They are also genuinely threatening, which
may make this film somewhat frightening for the little ones even though
this movie about toys.  These soldiers are menacing and even ruthless at
times.  Trying to carry out their mission using any and all means
possible, there is a lot of destruction and mayhem in this film.  Not
much time is devoted to the interesting relationship between Archer and
Alan.  It's basically an all-out blitzkrieg of toy soldiers programmed
to annihilate the Gorgonites and their human allies.  Consequently, it
seems that only teenage boys would really like this kind of film.
Despite it's narrow appeal, this film is something of an enjoyable
curiosity spawned from the recesses of someone's inner child.  It's not
family-oriented affair such as Toy Story.  And it's certainly not
adult-oriented action fare either.  It falls somewhere in the murky
middle.  "Small Soldiers" is for the rebellious little kid that once
lived inside of us who enjoyed little green army men, raced Hot Wheels
and Matchbox cars, and loved the Autobots and Decepticons.

Author
Walter Frith
This film marks the last screen appearance by comedian Phil Hartman who
died in May of 1998.
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Director Joe Dante is darned if he does and darned if he doesn't.  He
was criticized somewhat in 1984 for his fantasy film 'Gremlins' in which
a cute and fuzzy little pack of creatures that sort of resemble a cross
between puppies and bear cubs, became bizarre little trolls if they were
fed after midnight or if they got wet.  For those who haven't seen
'Gremlins', 'Small Soldiers' will do nicely because Dante uses the same
pace, camera lighting effects and elementary school level action climax
that 'Gremlins' had.  Dante's film 'Small Soldiers' is receiving
criticism for many of the mean spirited antics seen in 'Gremlins' while
others are saying that 'Small Soldiers' isn't mean enough to pass as a
convincing movie where danger looks certain for its cast of human
characters
Perhaps appealing to children more than any other target audience,
'Small Soldiers' will undoubtedly inspire an entire line of merchandise
that will pick up where the box office left off.  By now, life in the
1990's is one big marketing blitz where subliminal ads are seen in
movies and audiences better get used to it because it isn't leaving big
screens anytime soon.
In 'Small Soldiers', a toy manufacturing company owned by a corporate
honcho with little human emotion (Denis Leary), is obsessed with the
idea that a proposed new line of toys, in the form of mighty military
men can be built and be so smart that when kids play with them, they can
play back.
The chief designers of the new wonder toys (Jay Mohr and David Cross)
are intimidated by their boss and are determined to satisfy his desire
for these misguided material play things and Mohr orders highly
sophisticated military chips to be implanted in the head of the action
figures.
500,000 units are shipped consisting of two factions.  There are the
soldiers whose leader is Chip Hazard (voiced by Tommy Lee Jones) and his
elite squad of goofy henchmen some of whom are voiced by such veteran
actors as George Kennedy and Ernest Borgnine and there are the
Gorgonites whose leader Archer (voiced by Frank Langella) make for the
best toys as they are docile and peaceful but are the main target of the
military toys for a humourous confrontation later in the film.
The human hero in 'Small Soldiers' is Alan (Gregory Smith), a rather
bland and lifeless young man much like his 'Gremlins' colleague Zach
Galligan and Alan desires the girl next door named Christy (Kirsten
Dunst).  Alan convinces a local delivery man to leave a shipment of the
toys, meant for a rival toy super store, at his father's toy
neighbourhood store so he can sell them and make a little money for the
store which has fallen somewhat on hard times.  The toys get loose and
begin acting up with predictable results.
First of all, 'Small Soldiers' uses some ingeniously clever gags to sell
its shortcomings.  The soldiers put together gadgets made from ordinary
household items such as cheese graters, fishing rods, chain saws and cds
and they power up a collection of female dolls to act as their
counterparts in mischief and some of the attack scenes are really
convincing.  It's a fun film which isn't action packed as much as it is
introductory in its presentation of multiple play things similar to the
many characters seen in 1995's 'Toy Story', although 'Toy Story' is far
superior to this film.  Another thing that 'Small Soldiers' has going
for it is its benign presentation of the film's cartoonish violence
which is tastefully presented and appropriate for children comparable to
a Coyote and Road Runner cartoon where the violence is so absurd, you
know it isn't perceived as reality.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
Walter Frith's Top 100 Movies Of All Time Are Now Online At:
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/wftop100.htm

Author
James Brundage
Featuring the voice of Tommy Lee Jones
Once again good intentions are ruined by bad executions.
If I had a dime for every time that happened in movies, I could make a movie
where that didn't happen, but instead I'm a poor, unpaid slob who ends up
doing nothing but being your humble servant watching film after film so you
don't have to.
Small Soldiers yet again shows that Hollywood is just one giant limbo
contest, and, although Small Soldiers isn't as low as they come, it's got
its ear near the floor. To sum the movie up, you have a bunch of
hyperviolent action figures manufactured by a toy company bought out my an
arms conglomerate (??), and the suck up of the company accidentally puts
artificial intelligence chips in the toys, which go wild and start attacking
the other toys, and, then, the humans.
If you're not yet convinced by the implausibility, ludicrosity, and insanity
of the plot -- and I know you skeptics aren't -- then I'll go on. You have a
toy maker unwilling to carry violent toys who goes away for the weekend,
having his son end up putting the hyperviolent toys on the shelves. Of
course they start trying to kill each other and their violence only spills
over into the realm of hurting humans.
Yeah, the toys use chainsaws, nailguns, flaming tennis balls, Frankenstein
barbies, and just about anything else that isn't in a plausible arsenal and
try to kill everyone who helps out the other toys, which are peaceful little
buggers who just want to get home. (E.T. HELLO!)
Having gotten this far and not gone to the bathroom to puke, I'll say the
only review I really need to give you about this limbo movie, it's by far
the most violent PG-13 movie I've ever seen. And it's not wacky violent,
it's not funny violent. It's just stupid violent.
I vote we strangle the movie makers with the limbo pole. Who's with me?

Author
Andrew Hicks
        There are some movies marketed toward kids that I watch 
and think, "Boy, that would have scared the crap out of me when I was 
six." This Joe Dante film is one of those. He made GREMLINS, which 
was one of my favorite movies as a kid, that featured a lot of 
cartoonish violence and mayhem. SMALL SOLDIERS features a lot more of 
the same, but with a weird mix of minimum believability and 
maximum plot convention and twisted violence. How many other 
movies can you see a toy soldier shoot several corn cob holders into a 
kid's leg?
        Many of the scenes in SMALL SOLDIERS are the kind of thing 
you shouldn't push off as kids entertainment. The toys in this movie 
machine gun nails at people, make bombs out of household chemicals, 
lust after Barbie dolls and tie up small children, not to mention an 
adolescent protagonist who climbs a giant telephone pole and sticks a 
metal object between the transformers. For older kids, though, there's a 
lot to laugh at, both intentional and unintentional. The sick fantasy 
violence of killer toys would work as a horror movie for an older 
crowd, but it's too harsh to mix with the sickening sweetness that 
Dante throws at us. It doesn't take a rich Hollywood executive to see a 
bastard offspring of TOY STORY and CHILD'S PLAY isn't a brilliant idea.
        It's an interesting premise, though. A toy company is bought 
out by a huge conglomerate, and the CEO (Denis Leary as Denis 
Leary) demands "toys that actually do what they do in the 
commercials." That means toys that bust out of their packaging, have 
artificial intelligence and wage war with their toy enemies. Faced with 
these demands, the designers (David Cross and Jay "I Think I Just 
Sold Out" Mohr) power their soldiers with a surplus military 
intelligence chip. Gee, that's not going to backfire on them, is it?
        Meanwhile, there's that androgynous dork of an early 
teenager who always serves as the lead in movies like these. Here it's 
Gregory Smith as Alan, a so-called troublemaker who would actually 
get beaten up for his lunch money in real life. No such luck in the 
movies, where he manages to steal ex-vampire girl Kirsten Dunst 
away from her older jock boyfriend. We know the boyfriend is a pussy 
because he drives a motor scooter, and this opinion is corroborated 
later when he runs away from the small soldiers in his boxers.
        Alan's dad owns a small toy store that stocks goody-goody 
toys, not those fighting action figures that give kids bad role models. 
But when Dad goes out of town, Alan manages to talk the toy delivery 
guy (played by Mr. Futterman from GREMLINS, one of many inside jokes 
Dante includes -- Cross' password is "Gizmo") into giving him a few 
boxes of the new toys headed to a large chain store. The toys are 
divided into the Commando Elite and the Gorgonites, the former a 
war-loving bunch headed by the voice of Tommy Lee Jones and the 
latter a peaceful people. Both sets are programmed to be enemies, and 
the war begins shortly after Alan opens the shipment and leaves the 
store.
        SMALL SOLDIERS has the plot elements you'd expect -- underdog 
Alan attracts Kirsten without question, Phil Hartman is a one-note jerk 
who is later proven wrong and no one believes Alan when he tries to 
explain away damage to his house and his dad's shop. Strangely, 
though, no one seems that much surprised to see themselves under 
seige by a bunch of toys. During the climactic final battle, when an 
army of toys surrounds a house, none of the neighbors think to alert 
the police to the noise of gunfire and explosions. The continued 
implausibility and the fact that the movie is too horrific for children 
and too juvenile for adults keeps SMALL SOLDIERS from living up to its 
claim of being a "big movie."
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Gavin Scott, Adam Rifkin, Ted Elliott, and Terry Rossio
Starring: Gregory Smith, Kirsten Dunst
Ingredients: 
Toy soldiers that attack parents and children, families under siege 
Synopsis:
When a military-industrial conglomerate swallows Heartland Toy Company,
a bungling toymaker (Jay Mohr) incompetently puts advanced military
computer chips into two groups of toy action figures. The pacifistic toy
extraterrestrial Gorgonites led by Archer (voice of Frank Langella) are
programmed to hide and surrender, while the Commando Elite toy group led
by Chip Hazard (voice of Tommy Lee Jones) are programmed to attack and
kill Gorgonites and their allies. The military chips accidentally give
the toys the ability to think and act like living creatures.
The toys escape into a suburb and wreak havoc. When a boy named Alan
Abernathy (Gregory Smith) befriends Archer and the Gorgonites, the
Commando Elite toy soldiers categorize humans as Gorgonite allies and
mount a lethal attack on Alan's family and the family of next door
neighbor Christy Fimple (Kirsten Dunst), whom Alan has a crush on. The
evil soldiers also insert military chips into Christy's Barbie-type
dolls to turn them into soldiers.
The Fimple and Abernathy families find themselves surrounded by an army
of toys with nail guns, flame throwers, attack helicopters, and buzz
saws. Will they survive and defeat the aggressive hordes of small
soldiers?
Opinion: 
Although SMALL SOLDIERS' marketing tie-ins suggest that it is a
children's movie, the type that little kids (young enough to buy plastic
dolls) would love to attend, it is not. If children under ten actually
did attend the movie, they might wonder about the sporadic profanity and
about all those nude Barbie-doll-types running amok. Or they could mimic
the kid, Alan, who climbs up a telephone pole and shorts a piece of
metal between two live power cables. And they would find that their
beloved doll hero Chip Hazard is actually the bad guy. In short, parents
of young children should be warned that SMALL SOLDIERS is not the type
of material found in TOY STORY, BABE, or 101 DALMATIONS. The glib,
bland, and predictable SMALL SOLDIERS has good special effects, a happy
ending, and preaches a good moral (don't judge a toy by it's cover), but
it is inappropriate for younger children, who should not be watching the
quality of movie where boorish characters make catcalls at nude Barbie
dolls or use cuss words.
A superior toy-horror movie for a wide general audience should be at
moments suspenseful and chilling, but funny and bitingly satirical with
multi-generation appeal. It should contain action for the kids as well
as well-timed, story-related inside pop culture allusions for adults. It
should contain interesting characters, accommodate the audience's gut
sense of justice, deliver a few unexpected twists, and escalate to a
satisfying moral-laden conclusion. 
SMALL SOLDIERS doesn't fall into the superior category because its human
characters lack dimension, the movie is predictable, and its pop
references lose comic impact because they fly thick, but are peripheral,
rather than story-related. On the other hand, special effects and pop
culture trivia fans might be pleased by elements of SMALL SOLDIERS. The
toy effects by JURASSIC PARK's Stan Winston are well done and lifelike.
As for trivia buffs, director Joe Dante serves up a cornucopia of hidden
cultural references. (Example: "You're from Jersey? What exit?") Even
the voices and music refer to previous movies (DIRTY DOZEN, SPINAL TAP
etc.).
On a side note, fans of the late actor/comedian Phil Hartman will enjoy
seeing him in a small role as Mr. Fimple. It was his last movie role.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Gregory Smith, Kirsten Dunst, Jay Mohr, Kevin Dunn, Phil Hartman,
voices of Tommy Lee Jones, Frank Langella.
Screenplay: Gavin Scott, Adam Rifkin and Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio.
Producers: Michael Finnell and Colin Wilson.
Director: Joe Dante
What promised to be entertaining kids fun, in the name of TOY STORY,
turned out to be a disappointment, with a scary twist. What if your
favourite toys - Care Bears, Barbie dolls, G.I. Joes, Power Rangers or
Transformers were to come to life and start attacking you?
The story begins with a group of toy soldiers who have been
electronically designed to interact with children and each other.
Unfortunately, state-of-the-art military-defence CPUs, are mistakenly
introduced into the toys. So it is not surprising that they take a life
of their own, and begin World War III in your backyard. This is where
safety ends and mayhem begins, as small soldiers make weapons of
destruction that can kill a human being  nail guns, bombs and vehicles
wielding sharp utensils. It's surprising that no one actually gets
killed in this movie. It's no longer as simple as a kid choking on a
lego block - these toys fight back. It is sad that SKG has to resort to
guerrilla tactics and the abuse of toys, in order to gain an audience.
Changing a toy into a weapon and representing it to a child is highly
irresponsible. It is one thing to make toys in the image of warfare and
quite another, to make it workable.
If I were a child, I would have nightmares about my toys coming to life
and hurting me. The prime example, is when a girl's collection of
Barbie' dolls, come to life and attack her. If you ever had an
inclination to pull a doll's head off, think again, these miniature
demons can do the same to you! There isn't a strong moral lesson at the
end of the movie - the bad toys are destroyed and the good toys sail
away into the horizon. Unfortunately, because this movie needed a good
explanation in order to give some meaning to the mayhem it causes. Not
recommended for young, sensitive mind's who want to keep their sanity
about user friendly toys.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Joe Dante
Cast:  David Cross, Jay Mohr, Alexandra Wilson, Denis Leary, Gregory
Smith, Kevin Dunn, Frank Langella, Tommy Lee Jones
Screenplay:  Ted Elliott, Zak Penn, Adam Rifkin, Terry Rossio, Gavin
Scott
Producers:  Michael Finnell, Colin Wilson
Runtime:  110 min.
US Distribution:  DreamWorks/Universal
Rated PG-13:  violence, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
When I first saw the trailers for Small Soldiers a few months back, I
didn't understand the appeal.  Now that I've seen it, I still don't
understand.  I think this film is being aimed towards children, but I
can't imagine why:  sure, it's about kids and stuff, but it's also about
numbing action and violence.  It features long, seemingly endless scenes
featuring human-like toys being maimed and mutilated, crushed and
flattened, eviscerated and dissected.  In addition, the film attempts to
satirize the military, our culture's obsession with violence, and the
world of advertising.
That's a little too much for what is essentially and overlong and
ridiculously violent kiddie movie.  There are scenes in Small Soldiers
that truly horrified me, and if I had kids, I would not have wanted them
to watch this film.  I can't be too hard on it, because it does, in
fact, try to harness a little bit of intelligence and wit into its story
(see Doctor Dolittle for a film that isn't so bold).  And it's made with
great technical competency by director Joe Dante and crew.  But the
intelligence is misguided, and the special effects are hollow -- Small
Soldiers is just a mean-spirited little movie.
There are a lot of characters, and a lot of subplots.  The film opens
with a couple of company men (David Cross and Jay Mohr) making a sales
pitch to the president (Denis Leary) of a company called Globotech. 
They decide to create war toys that actually talk and fight back.  In
one of the film's many attempts at satire, Leary's character goes on a
tantrum in which he states his desire for toys to actually do what they
can do in the commercials.  It's funny, but never followed through with
any degree of completeness.  The toys are called the Commando Elite, and
are fitted with special chips created for military intelligence.
Cut ahead three months time, and we meet Alan (Gregory Smith), our
hero.  His dad (Kevin Dunn) owns a toy store, and Alan stocks the store
full of Commando Elite toys, despite his father's rule against war
toys.  Naturally, the toys escape, but it turns out that the American
Commandos, led by Chip Hazard (voiced by Tommy Lee Jones), are the
villains, and are hell-bent on destroying the Gorgonites (whose leader
is voiced by Frank Langella), who are peaceful, nature-loving beings. 
What ensues are a series of technically superb and horrifyingly violence
action sequences.
As I said, I can respect the entire package to an extent, for it does
have traces of intelligence.  I like the satire involving the nature of
the war toys, and the speech Chip gives to his troops against the
backdrop of an American flag.  And I like the anti-tech themes running
throughout the film, and how Alan's father is violently opposed to tech
stuff, while their neighbor, Phil (Phil Hartman), is cutting down trees
to get clear reception with his satellite dish.  
It's enough to make me utterly confused as to the film's intentions.  I
was instantly reminded of Starship Troopers, which is another film that
satirizes its subject while banking on the very principles it attacks. 
The difference is that Starship Troopers always has that comical edge,
and is aimed primarily at adults and teens old enough to understand the
material.  Small Soldiers is PG-13, and I warn all parents to take that
rating seriously -- there are scenes and images in this film that just
aren't appropriate for younger kids.
The scene that bothered me most has the Commandos stealing a bunch of
Barbie dolls and bringing them to life to create a surplus of troops. 
What results are armies of female toys which end up horribly disfigured
(the film has a strange fixation with some of the themes explored in
Shelley's Frankenstein).  They stalk their opponents and swarm like
cockroaches, uttering valley girl lines like "It's a bad hair day" and
"I broke a nail."  Later, most of them are viciously destroyed by a
lawnmower-wielding young girl.  None of this is pleasant, and it's stuff
I'd expect to see in a horror film.  The absence of human blood fails to
keep the material from being harrowing.
Small Soldiers is always impressive to look at, and Joe Dante
(Gremlins) has explored this material before (actually, Gremlins is a
similar film in many ways).  Stan Winston and Industrial Light and Magic
are responsible for the effects, and the image brought to screen is
convincing and impressive.  But I wasn't thinking about those things --
I was thinking about the blatant hypocrisy in every scene.  How can an
anti-war movie utilize such extreme violence and expect to show it to
the youngsters in our society?  Isn't this the kind of stuff that makes
kids think that violence is a great solution for their problems?  The
producers of Small Soldiers should worry about instigating another
tragedy in an elementary school yard.  

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Joe Dante
Writers: Ted Eliott, Zak Penn, Adam Rifkin, Terry Rossio, and Gavin Scott
Starring: Gregory Smith, Kirsten Dunst, Jay Mohr, David Cross, Kevin Dunn,
Ann Magnuson, Paul Hartman, Wendy Schaal, Denis Leary, and Dick
Miller...with voices by Tommy Lee Jones, Frank Langella, Ernest Borgnine,
George Kennedy, Jim Brown, Bruce Dern, Clint Walker, Harry Shearer,
Christopher Guest, Michael McKean, Sarah Michelle Gellar, and Christina
Ricci
"Small Soldiers" is probably the first film to actually satirize the entity
known as kiddie violence, at least on a major scale, and therefore it kind
of grabs our attention when it skewers the way we are sometimes fed
different kinds of propaganda via cartoons and various other kinds of child
entertainment just because it's the first to really hit it hard.  Luckily
enough, this isn't a "message movie," and it's not naive enough to totally
blame characters like G.I. Joe, the epitomy of right-wing,
moral-yet-immoral, John Wayne-esque propaganda; it's really just an
extremely entertaining film with an outrageously wonderful premise with an
eerie, unsettling edge that at once freaks you out and leaves you in
stitches.
No shock that this is from Joe Dante, the hilarious wizard who directed one
of the all-time great kiddie horror films, "Gremlins," a hilarious film
that is all the more hilarious the older you get...and, to a slightly
lesser extent, "Gremlins 2: The New Batch," which skewered Ted Turner-esque
media all while wreaking totally hilarious havoc.  He takes the same kind
of approach to his story that he did with the latter one: this is a film
that almost gets off on mocking military "intelligence" by telling the
story of a bunch of gung ho soldier toys with a microchip that allows them
to act like real army guys, including attacking humans.  Only they're
smaller.
The story behind it deals with a huge company owned by the deliciously
inhuman CEO Gil Mars (Denis Leary), who orders his two toy division heads,
Larry Benson and Irwin Wayfair (Jay Mohr and David Cross, the latter who's
half of HBO's "Mr. Show"), to create a line of action figures who can
really act and talk like all they do in all the commercial ads that make
toys look incredibly exciting.  By getting a special army microchip off the
web, they are able to make their toys respond like human beings, and gives
them each set standards.  There's the Commando Elites, a group of
overly-patriotic soldiers led by the Patton-esque Chip Hazard (voiced
brilliantly by Tommy Lee Jones), and featuring the supporting voices of
cast members of "The Dirty Dozen," as well as Bruce Dern, tossed in for
good measure; and then there's the wimpy monster Gargonites, led by the
stoic Archer (voiced by a now-British Frank Langella), and featuring the
voice talents of...well, the three chief members of "Spinal Tap" (Harry
Shearer, Christopher Guest, and Michael McKean, just for the record). 
These two are at war with one another, though the odds are totally in favor
of the soldiers.
Cut to a little town somewhere where a young kid named Alan (Gregory Smith,
from "Krippendorf's Tribe") is running his dad's collapsing old-school toy
shop while he's away on a business trip, and who mistakenly steals a box of
these toys from the friendly truck driver (Dante regular, Dick Miller) to
sell quickly so that the store makes some money for a change.  Soon enough,
the toys have escaped, ruined the store, and are about to wreak havoc on
Alan, his almost-girlfriend Christy (a glowing Kirsten Dunst), and the
homes of their parents (played by Kevin Dunn, Ann Magnuson, Wendy Schaal,
and the late Phil Hartman in his last performance) as they war against
eachother.
The obvious reason to see this film is for its wonderful sense of humor,
which, for the most part, is how the film is played out.  Instead of an
un-subtle attempt at really trying to overturn cartoon violence and its
affect on youth (which would have made for an annoying right-wing
crapfest), "Small Soldiers" decides to use that as a way of mocking
patriotism and basically the whole military as a concept.  The Commando
Elites are all portrayed as being the bloodthirsty villains of the film,
who attack anyone who merely stands up for the Gargonites, who are all in
hiding for fear of defeat.  And the film never wastes a moment at really
just digging deep and making fun of war movies.  We have two really
hilarious standouts, other than the obvious parody of "The Dirty Dozen," a
film that actually mocked military intelligence as well.  Those are a
hilariously inspired scene that is straight from "Patton," complete with
the theme music, a giant jig-saw American Flag consuming the background,
and even lines lifted directly from the opening speech in the film; and a
laugh-inducing parody of the chopper scene from "Apocalypse Now," complete
with the Wagner music and "I love the smell of polyurethane in the
morning."
Dante has always loved to parody other movies, but he also parodies
sociological things as well, like America's obsession with war (hands-down
funniest line, said by Phil Hartman: "I think World War II was my favorite
war"...at least I laughed, no one else did), and even some post-"'burbs"
satirization of suburbia, complete with the on-going battle between the
beauty of nature and the beauty of a 12-foot satellite dish sitting in your
lawn and the horror of having a tree block its reception.  When this film
sticks to parody and satirizing, it's one of the most entertaining
experiences in a real long time.
However, when the film shifts to the melodrama of Alan's parents not
understanding him, or even the required love story of the film between Alan
and a way-more-mature Christy (I'm sorry: he looks like he's 12, and she
looks like she's 17 - doesn't work).  It's not that this truly a bad thing
and the film is never unwatchable, but these scenes serve as distractions. 
It'd be nice if the script or the actors, especially the by-the-books
Gregory Smith as the lead, had as much umph in their delivery as Kirsten
Dunst does (she's just lovable), these scenes wouldn't be so hard to intake
after the high satire of the idea of toy soldiers attacking real people
with nail guns and flame throwers.
It just doesn't help that the Gargonites aren't really that interesting
either, save for a couple of moments when the rest of them are finally
allowed to do their schtick.  It's here where the film only makes attempts
at deepening itself with questions of humanity in these characters, and the
obvious depth it brings to the military plot (the heroic soliders are pure
evil while the ugly monsters are pure good), but other than that, there's a
little to much started that isn't finished by the end.  It's like some of
this film is played straight, yet the rest of it is played totally for
laughs.
It's the second part that really works.  The comedy of the two toy creators
scrambling around to avoid a lawsuit.  Phil Hartman trying to get the most
out of his satellite dish.  The numerous incarnations of toys coming alive
(the whole barbie subplot, featuring voices by Sarah Michelle Gellar and
Christina Ricci, is definitely a howler).  Anything featuring the soldier
toys.  And la grande finale, an exciting, vicious battle between the two
families and legions of toys armed with deadly weapons that may be too much
for younger children, but would pretty much be fine for older children
(hey, it's PG-13 for a reason, okay?).  These are the things that really
work for this film, and luckily enough these great parts greatly outweigh
the more mediocre parts of the film.  What we have here is a return to form
for Dante, who has been kinda slumming it since the 80s, but is now back
again making kiddie films for the older crowd who can still take their
older children and probably laugh and have a better time than they will.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Small Soldiers" is director Joe Dante doing his latest Gremlins confection, and it's mean-spirited fun, once the movie gets its engines rolling. 
"Small Soldiers" stars Gregory Smith and Kirsten Dunst as two MUCH TOO CUTE kids with raging hormones who end up battling various reanimated toy soldiers. Chip Hazard (voiced by the typically gruffly Tommy Lee Jones) leads this platoon of robot action figures, and they are equipped to kill rival toys called Gorgonites, led by their soft-spoken leader, Archer (voiced by Frank Langella).
"Small Soldiers" begins badly with a lame introduction about how these toys are created and who their target audience is. The business meetings are led by Denis Leary as a rich tycoon, but all these scenes are unnecessary. What if we never knew how these soldiers were created or what their purpose was? Some things are better left to the imagination. 
Once the movie shift gears to suburbia where the toys are sent, it gets better and better with inventive gags and superbly staged cartoonish mayhem. Two of my favorite examples: Chip Hazard searching for the human characters in a helicopter with Wagner's "Ride of the Valkieres" playing in the background, and the Barbie-like dolls who are brought to life in Bride of Frankenstein fashion (complete with the original score) and uttering lines such as, "She's gone postal." 
"Small Soldiers" is light fun and frequently funny, though not at the same breath as "Gremlins." It says something about 90's kiddie fantasies, though, when the toy soldiers and monsters are more three-dimensional than the thin human characters on display here, including the late Phil Hartman as an obnoxious neighbor.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or comments at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It's war out there as toys fight toys along with any hapless
humans who get in their way.
     The rag-tag and gawky Gorgonites, programmed to hide and to lose,
are led by a sad but heroic figure named Archer, voiced movingly by
Frank Langella.  In contrast, the invincible Commando Elite, a DIRTY
DOZEN version of G. I. Joe-type action figures, have a commander, Chip
Hazard, who would make General Patton proud.  ("We are the Commando
Elite.  Everything else is just a toy!")  A fast-talking Tommy Lee
Jones, the voice of Chip, delivers hilarious speeches that are
slice-and-dice amalgamations of famous patriotic and military
aphorisms.
     The Commando Elite are after the "Gorgonite Scum," and they show
no mercy to them or their human helpers.  In a movie filled with
references to older films, the voices of many of the commandos are done
by Ernest Borgnine, Jim Brown, and others from THE DIRTY DOZEN.
     Joe Dante, the imaginative director of GREMLINS and INNERSPACE,
turns his creative talents to the world of action figures in SMALL
SOLDIERS.  The resulting dark comedy, while likely to scare the
daylights out of the more impressionable younger viewers, will delight
most audiences as it pushes the limits of what is expected and
acceptable from a live-action movie featuring toys that come to life.
The soldiers, designed by JURASSIC PARK's Stan Winston, look like live
toys rather than animatronic or computer-generated figures that mimic
toys.
     It all starts when a take-no-prisoners CEO (Denis Leary) of a
sophisticated electronics conglomerate buys a toy company.  He wants
toys that are as real as those shown in television commercials - ones
tough enough to break out of their own boxes with their bare hands.
Toy designer Larry Benson (Jay Mohr) accepts this challenge and, with
the help of some company military surplus, soon has the toys speeding
to stores everywhere.  His nerdy sidekick Irwin Wayfair, played by
David Cross, is aghast when he realizes what Larry has done.  "You put
munitions chips into toys!" Irwin exclaims.
     When the first batch of Gorgonites and Commando Elite go to the
little "Inner Child" toy store owned by the Abernathy family, all hell
breaks loose.  The Commando Elite start their own war in a big
cat-and-mouse game to find the fleeing Gorgonites.  Using
ever-increasing firepower built from everyday household items and
tools, they manage to wreak havoc on everything around them.  From
metal-pronged corncob holders to nail guns to aerosol flame-throwers,
their arsenal is impressive and imaginative.
     The Abernathy's teenage son Alan, played by Gregory Smith from
HARRIET THE SPY, takes Archer home while the other Gorgonites hide.
Alan, an ex-trouble maker, is more interested in girls than toys.  He
has fallen hard for his fellow classmate and next-door neighbor,
Christy Fimple (Kirsten Dunst), but she only dates older guys.  (Her
father is played by comedian Phil Hartman in his last film before his
death.)
     The Commando Elite establish an assault base in Christy's bedroom
and conscript her dolls into service, giving Alan lots of time to be
with his would-be girlfriend as they fight together.  In the darkest
scene in the story, nude Barbie-like dolls mix trite teen talk with
fighting slogans - "If you can't accessorize, pulverize!"  - as they
attack in droves in a scene reminiscent of THE BIRDS.  Sarah Michelle
Gellar and Christina Ricci are devilishly good as the lead voices for
the vicious dolls.
     SMALL SOLDIERS borrows scenes and soundtracks from other movies.
>From APOCALYPSE NOW, a commando pilots an attacking helicopter as "The
Ride of Valkyries" blasts away.
     One of the funniest sequences is an homage to real life.
Patterned after the siege in Panama of General Noriega, the commandos
commandeer the Fimple's huge stereo speakers to blast their opponents
with music certain to drive them mad - The Spice Girls.  (For the
record, like Mrs. Fimple, I too confess that I like their music.)
     SMALL SOLDIERS runs 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and
profanity and would be fine for kids nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, thought the movie was great and gave it
****.  He liked everything in it from the songs to the toys - both
sides.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        In 1984, Joe Dante made a modest little film called "Gremlins," in
which a boy's cute little alien pet spawned a legion of very nasty
creatures that devasted a picture-postcard perfect town.  In 1998, he made
exactly the same picture, this time calling it "Small Soldiers."  That's
about it.
        "Gremlins" had some decent ideas, but its creativity was undermined
by in-jokes, sappy side characters, and too much repetitive violence.
Since "Small Soldiers" is essentially the same picture as "Gremlins," the
same criticisms apply.
        "Small Soldiers" starts out promisingly enough.  The new hard-line
head cheese at toy manufacturer Hartland Play Systems seeks innovation.
Toys that do what they appear to do in the commercials.  Talk.  Move.
Shoot.  Kill.  With today's technology it shouldn't be a problem, right?
He gives his remaining two employees three months to revamp their latest
product ideas.
        The merchandise is a collection of action figures called the
Commando Elite, headed up by Chip Hazard (voiced by Tommy Lee Jones).
They're a super tough rabble of  Rambo-like mercenaries with Jay Leno
chins; their incessant motto is "There will be no mercy."  Since action
figures need adversaries, the toy makers also conceive the Gorgonites, a
race of various alien creatures who look like rejects from the bar scene in
"Star Wars."  Emissary of the Gorgonites is a reptilian humanoid called
Archer.  His voice is supplied by a very polite sounding Frank Langella.
        In order for these toys to look and feel like the real thing, their
creators seek out a super microchip (using the Boolean arguments
"microcomputer chip," "state-of-the-art," and "surplus" via that darned
Internet), discovering the X1000 courtesy the Defense Department.  One
thing proves to be key about the X1000 munitions chip, however: it's
defective (perhaps "surplus" was an infelicitous search term to use?).
        Before the Commando Elite and the Gorgonites can be recalled, a kid
called Alan Abernathy (Gregory Smith), whose father has left him in charge
of the company store, helps a shipment fall off the back of a truck, so to
speak.  Before you can scream "Gremlins 2" (better make that "Gremlins 3,"
since Dante is already credited with an official sequel), the pumped-up
plastic commandos have busted out of their shrink wrap and are tracking
down their arch enemies.  Unfortunately the passive Gorgonites have been
programmed only to hide and lose.
        At this point in the film we're well into "Gremlins" territory,
with the Commando Elite causing much twelve-inch mayhem courtesy Stan
Winston's animatronic and computer effects.
        Not all of "Small Soldiers" is a bust.  Tommy Lee Jones is
appropriately "cast" as Chip, who talks in a plethora of (often mixed-up)
military clichés, and Denis Leary, in a small role as the cut-throat CEO,
is typically dry and effective.  Also, the idea behind creating toys that
actually perform like they do in the TV spots, without explicity showing
the kids doing all of the work, had some potential.  But Dante and his four
screenwriters trash the interesting possibilities behind the concept as
quickly as their diminutive militia trash the town.
        By all means remake a bad movie and improve on the original.  Or
remake an old, good movie for the benefit of today's audience.  "Small
Soldiers" does neither.  It takes a mediocre movie and makes a mediocre
movie out of it.
