Title
Review for Inventing the Abbotts (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "My brother and I were born strangers."  The bittersweet drama
INVENTING THE ABBOTTS chronicles the coming of age of two brothers,
Doug and Jacey Holt, played with touching sincerity by Joaquin Phoenix
(TO DIE FOR) and Billy Crudup (SLEEPERS).  Set in 1957 in Haley,
Illinois, the show is reminiscent of several old movies, but the story
remains fresh and relevant.
     Doug has fewer social graces than his slightly older brother
Jacey.  Doug will try anything, including painting on fake sideburns,
to impress the girls.  Jacey, on the other hand, attracts female
companionship like honey attracts flies.  As much as they profess their
differences, they are remarkably similar in looks and tastes.
     The boys are bound together in a close knit family run by their
grade school teaching mother, Helen.  Kathy Baker plays the widow with
a natural grace.  Her husband died during a childish bit of bravado
before Doug was born.  Baker's minor, but crucial, role has its biggest
impact in a small revelation scene at the dinner table.
     Although the story centers on the boys, equally interesting are
the girls who live in the town's mansion.  Jennifer Connelly
(MULHOLLAND FALLS) plays the middle sister Eleanor Abbott, Liv Tyler
(THAT THING YOU DO) is her younger sister Pamela, and Joanna Going
(WYATT EARP) is her older sister Alice.
     Jennifer Connelly gives a strong performance as the sexually
promiscuous sister.  She unabashedly loves sex and views sleeping
around to be as natural as eating.  Her no-holds-barred role even
includes one of the few comedic scenes in the show.  As partially shown
in the film's trailers, when Doug tries to look up her dress in the
library, she has both an enticement and a surprise for him.  Connelly
steals her scenes in INVENTING THE ABBOTTS.
     The older sister Alice has a child and is about to be divorced.
Alice is trivially older than the others, but the extra two years means
she is the only one that can buy the beer.  Alice's role is small, and
Going's acting diminishes rather than enhances its importance.
     The story focuses more on Pam than on the other sisters.  Pam
looks and walks an ostrich.  The costumes by Aggie Guerard Rodgers and
the makeup, transform a normally radiant Tyler into a gawky teenager --
the mirror image of her looks in STEALING BEAUTY.  Unlike her sexually
active sisters, Pam wants to take it slow, real slow, when it comes to
sex.  She draws the line at kissing, which drives Doug's raging
hormones wild.  Tyler's acting is convincing during this part, but not
later when Pam has supposedly matured some.
     The Abbott family, like the Larrabee family in SABRINA, uses
parties as a form of control.  They throw them constantly as largess to
buy off the town.  The Abbotts are run with an iron glove by the father
Lloyd (Will Patton).  Patton (THE SPITFIRE GRILL) outlines his part but
little more, happy to keep it pure formula.  Lloyd's wife Joan (Barbara
Williams) shows up but has nothing to do.
     Screenwriter Ken Hixon creates a movie full of poignant and
realistic vignettes.  Typical of these is the simple scene of Doug and
Pam horsing around on the family sofa.  He wants to go upstairs and
have sex with her, but she resists.  They end up having non-sexual fun,
just kidding around with each other.  Their play comes to a halt when
her big feet hit him in the groin.
     The film's major difficulties stem from Pat O'Connor's direction.
O'Conner, who gave us the delightful CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, seems incapable
of weaving Hixon's vignettes into a compelling whole.  The film drags
frequently and the actors are allowed to let their voices taper off
into incomprehensible, low mumbles.  The film's pacing and energy level
too often sag.  The good parts are so insightful and strong that they
easily carry the picture, but the interludes can be quite frustrating.
     INVENTING THE ABBOTTS runs 1:50.  It is rated R for sex, nudity,
and some profanity.  It would be fine for teenagers.  The film's high
points make the movie well worth recommending, but its droughts make me
able to give it only ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Phil Curtolo
Adapting the story of Inventing the Abbotts into a film is a risky and
doubtful move. The story possesses a genuine sense of everyday mystery
that Hollywood doesn't easily tolerate-not exactly the stuff from which
spring blockbusters are made. What the film does offer is a slew of hot
young actors playing period of the 1950s, and engaging in a fair amount
of unnecessary sex. The lead performances from Liv Tyler and Joaquin
Phoenix (who both co-starred in That Thing You Do!) are youthful and
vibrant, but they deserve a better film in which to throttle their
engines. 
Set in a small Midwestern town dominated by the wealthy Abbott family,
the film revolves largely around Doug (Phoenix) and Jacey Holt (Billy
Crudup, Sleepers), two poor sons of a widowed mother (Picket Fences'
Kathy Baker), who covet the Abbott lifestyle. As directed by Pat
O'Connor (Circle of Friends) and scripted by Ken Hixon, Inventing the
Abbotts turns into a uproarious coming-of-age tale infused with
fistfights, tragedies, and a gushy happy ending. The culprit here may
actually be one of the producers (director Ron Howard),  who has been
known to drain good material of texture and potency. 
The character Jacey (Billy Crudup), who runs through the Abbott girls
one by one to acquaint himself with their family, is a narcissistic
menace. As the middle sister, the obscenely devilish Jennifer Connelly
(Mulholland Falls) plays a serviceable tramp; as the eldest and divorced
daughter, Joanna Going (Nixon) is all morose and gloomy.
The real show is Phoenix and Tyler as the youngest and most sensible
Abbott girl, Pam. Their playful childhood friendship morphs into a
traditional "I-loved-you-but-didn't-know-it" movie romance, but O'Connor
is smart enough to just let them hang out and be normal. 
Burdened by a narration that reminds the viewer too much of The Wonder
Years, Inventing the Abbotts is so full of dull, character write-ups,
that the only interesting points revolve around the relationship between
Doug and Pam. There's a definite sense that Howard, O'Connor, and
company go off on the wrong foot in creating this film and made
something they didn't intend to, even though it was enjoyable, none the
less.
Grade: C+, *** out of *****

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Joaquin Phoenix, Billy Crudup, Liv Tyler, Joanna Going, 
      Jennifer Connelly, Will Patton, Kathy Baker, Barbara Williams
Director: Pat O'Connor
Producers: Brian Grazer, Ron Howard, and Janet Meyers
Screenplay: Ken Hixon
Cinematography: Kenneth MacMillan
Music: Michael Kamen
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     INVENTING THE ABBOTTS begins in the sleepy little town of Haley, 
Illinois, as the narrator tells us, "The end of my innocence and 
childhood began in 1957."  Frequently, openings like this are not 
promising, more often than not heralding overwrought coming-of-age 
melodramas of the most unremarkable sort.  Occasionally, one such film -
- a REBEL WITHOUT A CAUSE, for example -- strikes a nerve, but that's 
more the exception than the rule.  
     No one is going to mistake Pat O'Connor's new film for 
groundbreaking cinema, but, for what it is, INVENTING THE ABBOTTS does a 
more-than-acceptable job.  It's certainly better rounded than O'Connor's 
last feature, 1995's CIRCLE OF FRIENDS (another romantic drama).  
Nevertheless, I can't shake the feeling that this movie's reliance upon 
familiar, formula-driven plot elements keeps it from reaching its full 
potential.  INVENTING THE ABBOTTS has the cast and characters to be 
something special; the script just isn't ambitious enough.
     The film centers around two brothers:  The older is Jacey Holt 
(Billy Crudup, from SLEEPERS) and the younger is Billy (Joaquin Phoenix, 
from TO DIE FOR), our narrator.  Through a superfluous voiceover, we're 
given a quick rundown on the boys.  Jacey is hard-working, obstinate, 
and gets all the girls; Billy is less sure of himself or where his life 
is going.  The Holt boys are devoted to their mother, Helen (Kathy 
Baker), who brought them up on her own -- their father died before Billy 
was born.
     Next door to the Holts live the upper-class Abbotts.  There are 
three daughters:  Alice (Joanna Going), the "good girl" eldest child; 
Eleanor (Jennifer Connelly), the "bad girl" middle child; and Pamela 
(Liv Tyler), the youngest, who describes herself as "the one who sort of 
gets off the hook."  Jacey is madly in lust with Eleanor, but it's a 
match that the Abbott patriarch (Will Patton) regards with ill-disguised 
contempt.  Billy is friends with Pam, but, although theirs is a platonic 
relationship, it's clear that Pam would like it to go further.  Billy, 
however, is wary, telling us that "I witnessed enough of my brother's 
social agony early on to know that I would never let the Abbotts matter 
to me."  We in the audience, having experienced many such movies before, 
know better.
     INVENTING THE ABBOTTS is a routine Hollywood drama, which is to say 
that it doesn't take any chances and adheres rigorously to certain time-
honored romantic conventions.  The boy and girl appear fated to get 
together, but not until the last reel, and only after all sorts of 
social and emotional roadblocks have been cleared.  The main story -- 
Billy's relationship with Pam -- is arguably the least interesting 
aspect of the film.  In fact, the most compelling characters aren't 
necessarily the central figures.  Jennifer Connelly's confident 
portrayal of Eleanor crackles with open sexuality; it's a shame that the 
film discards her so quickly.  Likewise, Billy Crudup's Jacey is far 
more complex than his rather bland brother.
     Watching INVENTING THE ABBOTTS is a comfortable experience.  For 
the most part, the characters are effectively realized by a group of 
attractive young actors.  Writer Ken Hixon's screenplay, while not 
remarkable, includes a number of nice touches that keep us interested in 
the characters and involved in their lives.  The broad strokes of the 
plot may be overused, but the emotions and details are on a higher 
level.  The relationship between the brothers, which combines the right 
mix of friction and affection, is developed with enough depth to be 
convincing.  When one of the Holt boys is troubled, the two of them sit 
quietly together or go out to the garage to play a few games of ping-
pong, but when Billy announces his intention to follow Jacey to the 
University of Pennsylvania, the older brother, who wants freedom from 
his family and roots, reacts angrily.
     INVENTING THE ABBOTTS would have been a better movie without the 
voiceover, a redundant and intrusive piece of prose that detracts from 
rather than adding to the story.  Like most voiceovers, this one greatly 
underestimates the intelligence of the audience.  That particular 
narrative contrivance aside, however, INVENTING THE ABBOTTS comes across 
a genial, undemanding tale of love and life in the late '50s.  And, 
while it's hard to get worked up about such a low-key motion picture, 
that doesn't diminish the simple enjoyment that the movie is capable of 
offering.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4)INVENTING THE ABBOTTS is a nice period piece that doesn't
reach too far back into the past. The setting is Haley, Illinois, 1957
and great care was taken to get the look and feel of that time and
place. 
The scenery doesn't just set the time and place. It defines a world in
which the movie can take place. In a worse movie, we could see that the
year was 1957, with a vintage car here, a haircut there. INVENTING THE
ABBOTTS instead goes to great lengths to bring us to the world of 1957.
Production Designer Gary Frutkoff deserves credit for making "Illinois,
1957" into a real place and time. 
For example, at the high school, the parking lot is full of cars. Not
just a car here or there, but lots of them. One of the characters works
at a gas station. We don't just see the building and then lots of
closeups; the garage is filled with vintage equipment. There are one or
two long shots of wide-open fields or a silo and a barn, which, without
any specific reference, somehow evoke an America of the past. 
Set against this backdrop is the story of the Holts and the Abbotts, a
story a bit like Romeo and Juliet. The Holt family (the Montagues, if
you will) is middle class. Doug (Joaquin Phoenix) and his older brother
Jacey (Billy Crudup) live with their mom (Kathy Baker). Their neighbors,
the Abbotts (or the Capulets), are at the pinnacle of Haley society and
they are always throwing some sort of big party for one of the Abbott
girls. 
There is some unspoken tension between the families, but all the kids
are at least on speaking terms and their paths often cross at the high
school. Jacey starts courting Eleanor Abbott during his last year of
high school. Mr. Abbott frowns on their relationship, and when he learns
the youths have been having sex, he sends Eleanor away. 
The tension between the families grows until Jacey is persona non grata
at the Abbott parties. 
All of this proves to be very difficult for the youngest siblings, Doug
Holt (our Romeo) and Pamela Abbott (our Juliet). Doug and Pam are not
passionately in love with each other, but they do have a relationship.
When the families start drifting apart because of the behavior of the
older siblings, the fallout lands squarely on the younger siblings, who,
though disappointed, handle  the situation with dispassionate
acceptance. 
The characters in INVENTING THE ABBOTTS are well defined. Doug and Jacey
look, act, and dress like brothers until each grows up and becomes his
own man. (There is a scene of the two brothers fighting about their
individuality. Each is wearing a white shirt and dark pants, and in all
the commotion, we can't tell which one is which.) Mrs. Holt is one of
the wisest mothers to grace a movie screen. Each of the Abbott girls has
a distinct personality. We can easily see each character's role within
his or her family and how each family fits into the social order of the
town. 
The story has as much action as any romantic comedy, but in addition the
plot is advanced by revelations of information that some of the the
characters have always known, but that we the audience (and other
characters) aren't privy to right away. This is a great device for
keeping up a movie's pace and for giving the audience a fresh
perspective on the action and the characters. This technique was used
extremely well in SECRETS & LIES. 
There were only a few things I disliked about INVENTING THE ABBOTTS. One
is the title. Much was made of the title; characters hypothesized that
if the Abbotts didn't exist, Jacey would have invented them. This whole
notion felt forced somehow. Jacey was rebellious and sex-driven, but
this story would have been completely different with another family. I
understand the point but it doesn't seem strong enough to make the
title. 
Another was that the movie started going in several different directions
near the end. I suppose life was getting more confusing for the
characters, but after a certain point more plot twists and conflict just
get in the way of finishing the story. 
I had low expectations for this movie. I anticipated that it was going
to be a gray '50s drama-comedy. Even afterwards, these expectations
color my view of the movie, and I tend to think more about the confused
ending than about the great shots and the subtle comparison to Romeo and
Juliet. 
But objectively, I can see that it is well made, well written, and well
designed. Maybe this movie will prove to be just average on a second
viewing, but it does deserve a second viewing. 
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Scott Renshaw
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Liv Tyler, Joaquin Phoenix, Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly,
Joanna Going, Will Patton, Kathy Baker.
Screenplay:  Ken Hixon, based on the short story by Sue Miller.
Producers:  Ron Howard, Brian Grazer, Janet Myers.
Director:  Pat O'Connor.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, nudity)
Running Time:  108 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Picture, if you will, the final moments of THE GODFATHER:  Michael
Corleone is greeted as the new Godfather by his underlings, and his wife
Kay, played by Diane Keaton, stands outside the door of his study.  As the
door closes on Kay and on the film, a voice-over by Keaton intones, "At
that moment I realized that there was a part of Michael's life I would be
shut out of forever."  Voice-over narration is a common cinematic device,
particularly in nostalgic period films, yet I can think of few narrated
films in the last thirty years which wouldn't have been better without it.
Narration tends to be a crutch, an attempt by a film-maker to be more 
"literary" which instead suggests that he lacks the patience to reveal
the characters' psychology without short-cuts.  INVENTING THE ABBOTTS is a
pleasant period drama for a while, until the episodic story grinds to a
halt as the actors sit around waiting for the narrator to tell us how they
feel.
     INVENTING THE ABBOTTS opens in 1957 in the fictional Illinois town of
Haley, and focuses on two families from different social circles.  Doug
Holt (Joaquin Phoenix) and his older brother Jacey (Billy Crudup) are
working class teenagers living with their widowed mother (Kathy Baker);
the Abbott sisters -- Alice (Joanna Going), Eleanor (Jennifer Connelly)
and Pamela (Liv Tyler) -- are the daughters of office furniture
entrepreneur Lloyd Abbott (Will Patton).  Though class divides the Holts
and Abbotts, family history connects them -- Doug and Jacey's father was
Lloyd's business partner, and Jacey believes that Lloyd cheated the Holts
out of their rightful share of the business.  Jacey's bitterness leads him
to a fling with the rebellious Eleanor, but Doug is also fascinated with
the "bad girl."  Further complications develop when Pamela confesses to
feelings for Doug, and when Jacey's obsession with the Abbotts leads him
into conflict with the protective Lloyd, as well as with his own brother.
     The opening half-hour of INVENTING THE ABBOTTS is by far its best,
energized by the awkwardness and buzzing hormones of its teen-aged
principal characters.  Doug is established as a good-hearted square,
showing up at a fancy Abbott party with a greased pompadour and India-ink
sideburns in honor of Elvis, while brother Jacey flirts confidently with
Eleanor.  It is Jennifer Connelly's funny, sexy and sly performance 
as Eleanor which provides the real spark to the first act of ABBOTTS, her
every scene punctuated by a wicked smile, a glimpse of underwear (her own)
or a grab of the crotch (not her own).  She is even a presence when she's
not on screen, her photograph acting as Doug's true objet d'amour while he
makes a clumsy pass at Pamela on her living room couch.
     Then, thirty minutes into the film, Connelly is banished from the
narrative, and the whole production goes into a stupor trying to figure
out what its about.  There are really two separate plot-lines in INVENTING
THE ABBOTTS -- Jacey's attempts to live vicariously through the Abbotts
and Doug's off-and-on romance with Pamela -- but once Connelly is out of
the picture, the episodic story is sluggish and rarely involving.  The
single predominant reason for that lack of involvement is the narration,
provided by an uncredited Michael Keaton to underline the action whenever
and wherever possible.  It becomes ever more obtrusive as the film moves
along, first providing merely background information but eventually
announcing the motivations of every character.  It is the narrator who
tells us how Jacey _really_ feels about Alice, not Billy Crudup's
performance; it is the narrator who make sure we understand how wonderful
Mrs. Holt is, not the interactions between the characters.  And, as though
aware that they are under no obligation to convey their emotions through
anything as mundane as acting, the actors simply don't bother.  Joaquin
Phoenix and Liv Tyler -- who needs to learn a different emotional shade
before she's too old to play "the virgin" -- make a perfectly nice couple,
but neither delivers a personality.  Both are pleasant to look at, and
they might as well be modeling for still photographs.
     Given the way Fox has marketed INVENTING THE ABBOTTS to focus on its
"hot young stars," it's not unreasonable to think of them as models in a
story.  It's not that they can't act; they're simply not given much of a
chance to do more than look as warm and inviting as the 1950s suburban
middle-America director Pat O'Connor (CIRCLE OF FRIENDS) creates.  The
audience isn't given much of a chance either, which ultimately may explain
more of my dissatisfaction with INVENTING THE ABBOTTS.  As artfully made
and sensitively plotted as it might be, INVENTING THE ABBOTTS ends up
insulting the audience with its over-reliance on narration.  TV's "The
Wonder Years" became a parody of itself when Daniel Stern piped up every
forty seconds or so to clarify significant details which required
absolutely no clarification, and that's the way INVENTING THE ABBOTTS
feels after 108 minutes.  AMERICAN GRAFFITI didn't need Richard Dreyfuss
in voice-over to explain his wonderful days of innocence; STAND BY ME got
that honor.  When narration makes a film feel more lazy than literary, as
happens in INVENTING THE ABBOTTS, it's time to shut up and follow the old
writer's rule:  show, don't tell.

Author
Walter Frith
A small town in Illinois in 1957 is the setting for the opening of 'Inventing
the Abbotts', a film about relationships that plays out more like a series of
home movies and family photographs rather than as a full length motion
picture.  Three young women from a wealthy family (Liv Tyler, Jennifer
Connelly and Joanna Going) examine their lives and make decisions about life
at home, careers, raising children and examing their own morals. They are
swept up in their tasks by two brothers (Joaquin Phoenix and Billy Crudup)
who desire to escape from their borderline poverty stricken lives to perhaps
marry into the wealthy family while providing love and companionship to their
widowed mother played by Kathy Baker ('Picket Fences').  
Will Patton is the head of the town's wealthy family who is strict in his
convictions about the future of his daughters.  At first one daughter, played
by Going, marries a wealthy young man at the insistence of her parents and
later has a child by him and ends up in an unhappy marriage.  Another
daughter (Connelly) who is the family tramp has a romantic fling with Crudup
while both brothers desire her.  Lastly, the nicest and most down to earth
daughter (Tyler) has a passion for Phoenix and thier relationship is the
centre of the film's focus and conflicts arise on all sides throughout the
course of the film.
"Bland" is the word to describe this slow moving and often lazy film which
has terrible performances from its leads (Tyler and Phoenix) and is a film
which never gets off the ground and offers no twists or surprises in its plot
to take it to another level.  The film spans its way well into the 1960's and
the characters are virtually the same at the end of the movie as they were at
the beginning with a predictable outcome as well.  Director Pat O'Connor has
no zest for filmmaking and his interpretation of boy meets girl, boy loses
girl and boy gets girl back is a tiresome one at best.  'Inventing the
Abbotts' is a disappointing slice of American life from an era in history
that many considered America's finest.  Too bad this movie doesn't live up to
the same expectations. 
