Title
Review for Groove (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
GROOVE
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Lola Glaudini, Hamish Linklater, Denny Kirkwood, Mackenzie
Firgens, Steve Van Wormer, Vince Riverside, Rachel True.
Screenplay:  Greg Harrison.
Producers:  Greg Harrison and Danielle Renfrew.
Director:  Greg Harrison.
MPAA Rating:  R (drug use, profanity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  86 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     That uniquely fin-de-siecle phenomenon known as the "rave" gets its
sociological moment in the sun in GROOVE, a film that will be more
effective as cultural curiosity a few years hence than it is as a story
today. Greg Harrison's episodic tale opens with a group of self-styled San
Francisco party masters, led by Ernie (Steve Van Wormer), selecting an
abandoned warehouse for the following night's party. Then the word goes
out to email and pagers, bringing together a collection of characters for
dancing into the wee hours. Colin (Denny Kirkwood) brings along his more
straight-laced brother David (Hamish Linklater), who expects he'll want to
leave early. Colin also brings along his girlfriend Harmony (Mackenzie
Firgens), to whom he intends to propose, while David hooks up with
recently transplanted New Yorker Leyla (Lola Glaudini). As the DJs spin
on, so do their stories and several others spin along for 86 minutes.
     That time is moderately well-spent as an introduction to the rave
sub-culture. Harrison drops in a few bits of memorable lingo ("buying a
vowel" for purchasing either acid or Ecstasy; "the nod" for the
party-goer's acknowledgement of the party-thrower's success; "baked,
not fried" for one fellow's expressed preference for marijuana over
hallucinogens) to set the scene without stranding newcomers in the 
minutia. There's a funny scene in which a relatively inexperienced DJ
(Bing Ching) shakes his head at the expertise of a pro, and another in
which the uptight David assumes Leyla is offering him drugs when she's
offering him earplugs. From the dance floor to the fruit-and-water-stocked
"chill room," GROOVE re-creates its unique world as effectively as you
could hope for.
     Harrison then proceeds to populate that world with one unmemorable,
uninvolving character after another. Most of the narrative is spent on
David and Leyla, whose budding relationship is supposed to be the core of
the film but feels like just another drug-fueled party scam. Worse still
is the contrived drama in the relationship between Colin and Harmony,
which takes a "hip," independent film sort of turn for the worse. There
are other sub-plots, including the inability of a gay couple to find the
party location, but they offer little to latch on to. The acting is
servicable at best, the characterizations not even that. GROOVE is
composed entirely of people doing the sort of thing one sees people do at
raves, played with all the energy and commitment of people playing types
-- you're the uncomfortable geek, you're the dealer, you're the party
princess, and so on.
     The issue isn't that GROOVE meanders along in its night-in-the-life
way without trying to be particularly profound. DAZED AND CONFUSED and
AMERICAN GRAFFITI were charming studies of its era's revellers, and no one
much cared if an epiphany was to be found. Both of those films, however,
had the benefit of a nostalgic distance, allowing both film-maker and
audience to recognize the silliness inherent in youthful celebration. Greg
Harrison is too serious about this milieu; he seems to be making the
suggestion that kids really have found party nirvana this time, not like
those goofy kids of the '60s, '70s and '80s. It's no wonder the characters
are irrelevant; Harrison just needed bodies to jump up and down to the
beat. His take on the rave scene, detailed though it may be, isn't DAZED
AND CONFUSED for the '90s. It's THANK GOD IT'S FRIDAY for the '90s.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Greg Harrison's ironically titled GROOVE, the action is anything but
groovy.  Following a group of twentysomethings as they take drugs and
dance at a San Francisco rave (underground dance), the movie is
remarkably similar to the recently released comedy HUMAN TRAFFIC about
the drug scene in Cardiff, Wales.  The best way to summarize GROOVE is
that it is HUMAN TRAFFIC, denuded of all of that film's energy.
An emotional zero, GROOVE could be considered a strong anti-drug movie.
After all, if drugs are this boring, why would anyone buy them.
Populated by actors who appear to have spent days in hot tubs before the
shooting, they are so laid back that it is surprising that they can
remember any of their lines, of which their aren't many.  "You can relax
-- it's just a party," Leyla (Lola Glaudini) tells a pseudo-nervous
David (Hamish Linklater).  David needn't worry since everyone is so
relaxed that a massive sleeping sickness appears about to strike at
anytime.
As the story starts, a group of kids dressed in rain slickers and
carrying flashlights are casing a large warehouse.  The movie would have
us believe that they are planning a big heist, except -- hello! -- the
title of this movie is GROOVE, remember.  Well, surprise, surprise, they
are inspecting the empty facility to see if it is suitable for crashing
that night for their secret party.  Being big and vacant, it fills the
bill, so the word goes out to all of the Palms, beepers and computers on
the party list that the rave is on.
About the only joke in this lifeless movie is the password phrase used
to purchase drugs.  You say, "I'd like to buy a vowel."
Besides the dance floor, the rave also features a room with professional
masseurs to relieve stress and another for group hugs.  About the only
New Age item missing is a room for Tarot card readings.
With unreal characters that utter meaningless dialog, the movie drifts
along on a drug-induced cloud of blissful shallowness.  This typical
interchange from the movie best summarizes the script's depth: "So?"
asks Leyla.  "So? replies David.  Or was it the other way around?  It
doesn't matter.  Nor does anything else in GROOVE.
GROOVE runs 1:26.  It is rated R for drug use, language and brief
sexuality and would be acceptable for college students, although I would
not suggest that anyone waste their time on this piece of drivel.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
A favorite of the Sundance Film Festival, first-time
writer/director Greg Harrison's "Groove" explores San Francisco's
underground rave scene. As I understand it, the difference between a
dance club and a rave is that raves are parties that spring up almost
spontaneously in different locations. Someone puts out the word on the
Internet, via e-mail, and it spreads. Others get a voice mail message
and pass it along. Participants gather, illegally, at the designated
place at the appointed time, pay an entrance fee, and the celebrated
DJs take turns, working in shifts to provide the music. This film
supposedly chronicles in pseudo-documentary tone one night at a
rave. It begins on Friday with an e-mail, announcing tomorrow's
event. By Saturday night, a crowd of 200 has assembled at an abandoned
Bay Area warehouse, many of whom are, want to be and/or will be high
on the drug Ecstasy.  There's the naive, aspiring writer David (Hamish
Linklater) from the Midwest who meets Leyla (Lola Glaudini), a worldly
New Yorker who advises him to take Ecstasy with lots of water to avoid
dehydration. And David's brother Colin (Denny Kirkwood) who surprises
his girlfriend (MacKenzie Firgens) on her birthday with something she
didn't expect. Real-life DJs with names like Digweed and Dimitri vary
the pace and mood by changing the tempo and tone of the music. Humor
is injected by the efforts of the promoter (Steve Van Wormer) to
divert the suspicions of a cop (Nick Offerman). The writing is
sketchy, relying on the art of improvisation which these unskilled
actors, and others, have yet to master. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Groove" is a throbbing, feeble 4.  I suspect there's less
than meets the eye in this manic, all-night, psychedelic celebration.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Greg Harrison
 Writer:  Greg Harrison
 Cast: Lola Glaudini, Harnish Linklater, Denny Kirkwood,
Mackenzie Firgens, Rachel True, Steve Van Wormer, Nick
Offerman, Ari Gold, Dmitri Ponce, John Digweed
   They say that disco is dead but to my unpracticed eyes,
the rave scene looks like a postmodern version of the dance
craze of the seventies...except that the taking of one specific
designer drug, Ecstasy, is required and music spans a range
of progressive electronic that was not part of the scene when
John Travolta strutted his stuff.  Drum and bass,
techno-house--these are among the new words that people
over 30 may not yet have in their vocabularies--nor may a lot
of us old-timers be familiar with any, I repeat, any, of the
artists that are part and parcel of the youthful rave parties. 
Ever hear of John Digweed?  The Hardkiss Brothers? 
WishFM?  N'Dea Davenport?  If not, prepare for an education
if you take in a Sundance favorite known as "Groove."  
   "Groove" features both professional and amateur actors,
the extras taken from the actual club scene in San Francisco. 
If the energy that these twenty-somethings expend during
their all-night warehouse party could be bottled, we wouldn't
need that new car that runs on both gasoline and electricity. 
Just put some of these tanked kids in your tank.
   First-time director Greg Harrison's movie is being released
at about the same time as a quirkier interpretation of the
scene, Justine Kerrigan's "Human Traffic," a look at
48 hours in the lives of some Welsh youngsters about the
same age as these Californians.  Kerrigan's kids look to the
weekend parties as an absolute release from their dead-end
jobs.  They hate what they do, whether that be selling jeans
or fast food and as one Kerrigan character says in that film, 
"All that exists now is clubs, drugs, pubs and parties...I'm
gonna blow steam out of my head like a screaming kettle. 
We're gonna get more spaced out than Neil Armstrong ever
did.  Anything could happen."  Harrison by contrast doesn't
tell us much about what his people do during the week nor
does his camera break off to show us the partygoers'
hallucinations.  In a far more straightforward way Harrison
begins by showing us how they learn where these illegal
parties: not through ads in the San Francisco Examiner but
via e-mail.  This is an electronic Now Generation from their
means of communication to their music.
   "Groove" has a loosely woven plot which centers particular
interest on one couple who meet at the warehouse, Leyla
(Lola Glaudini) and David (Hamish Linklater).  Leyla is a New
York veteran at these affairs making a most unlikely
connection with a would-be novelist who did not even want to
attend, who seems never to have taken illegal drugs, but who
is pushed into going by his hipper brother Colin (Denny
Kirkwood).  David is as surprised as Colin's girl friend,
Harmony (Mackenzie Firgens) when Colin pops a ring on her
finger and perhaps a little envious, but he need not be.  Leyla
introduces the square David to Ecstasy, instructing him to
drink lots of water to avoid dehydration.  David mellows out,
becomes groovy, and prompts his new girl friend to get off
her maternal soap box to reveal her own vulnerabilities.
   Though the ecstatic group bounce to the music of 25 artists
on display while psychedelic decor brings back memories of
the sixties, we get to know some of these fellows as
individuals.  Ernie (Steve Van Wormer), for example, is the
organizer who doesn't have time to dance.  After getting the
equipment set up, he spends most of his time outside
watching out for cops and, in the best scene in the story,
seems to con one police officer (Nick Offerman) into thinking
that the party is nothing but a housewarming for new
corporate offices being set up in the abandoned building. 
Why does Ernie volunteer for this work?  "For the nod," he
insists....for the thank-you's, the handshakes he gets from the
guys who sincerely appreciate what he is doing for them.
   This is a fun movie with nothing much up director
Harrison's sleeve but showing the audience and his cast a
good time, but there are moments of sadness.  We perceive
that many of these people have no idea where they're
headed in the real world, indeed justifying the expression
"Generation X" sometimes applied to them.  The movie could
also serve as a downer to those viewers who take very
seriously the messages about the side effects that Ecstasy
can have on its regular users, but though one guy becomes
virtually comatose from OD'ing on the capsules, he is soon
up and running.  The "just say no" message is nowhere to be
seen--nor is Nancy Reagan found among the jumping cast.  If
there is any message that Harrison wants to convey, it's that
rave parties are not the out-of-control shindigs that the
general public thinks they are but are more likely places for
young people to dance and, more important, to communicate
with one another on a more sensual and honest basis than
they could do without the help of Ecstasy.
Rated R.  Running time: 86 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     According to Groove, the economics of throwing a rave:  Charge $2 a
head for some 200 people to inhabit an abandoned warehouse for one
night.  Provide free food, water, massages, and of course, music from a
parade of 5 or 6 DJs.  Sounds like a losing proposition to me.
     In fact, the last time I went to a rave (in 1991, when the scene
was already on its way out), it cost $8.  Today, it's like $20.
Groove's $2 rave sounds a little phony, a little dated.
     While Groove was the talk of Sundance (and for an entire year the
talk of San Francisco -- where it was shot and where I live), it seems
hopelessly unable to live up to its hype, a la The Blair Witch Project.
Counting conservatively, it's the fourth movie set in the rave scene to
hit theaters in the last year.  And by my account, it does the least
with the throbbing rave lifestyle of all of them.
     Why?  Because Groove, while ostensibly about "one night in the San
Francisco rave scene" is really about one night in the lives of a bunch
of Bay Area twentysomethings.  Mostly, they're Berkeley
twentysomethings, best known for their ability to whine about just about
anything.
     Berkeley twentysomethings like to talk a lot, and in Groove, that's
what they do.  One minute they get out on the dance floor, then they
retire to a back room or the basement to chit-chat, then a new DJ comes
out, and the cycle repeats.  Through this conceit, we are introduced to
people like Leyla (Lola Glaudini), a New York transplant looking to hook
up with the scene in SF, and David (Hamish Linklater), a Midwestern rave
newcomer.  Then there's David's brother Colin (Denny Kirkwood) and his
girlfriend Harmony (Mackenzie Firgens), to whom Colin intends to
propose... only later we find him making out with some guy.  Later, the
moral of the entire tale is spat out by Rachel True's character near the
end: "Eat dinner before you take drugs."  Huh?  This story is right out
of 90210.  No, it's worse than 90210.
     While Groove - the story is pretty limp, Groove - the slice of life
examining today's counterculture is far better realized.  Watching the
DJs (all real-life rave disc jockeys) interact with the (teensy) crowd
is probably the most fun there is to have in the movie.  Considering its
small budget, the set design and production values are uniformly high.
Groove looks more like Go than any indie flick.  That's impressive.
     Again, it's the pedestal that the crowd of Groove (and its
filmmakers) put DJs upon that makes the film so intriguing.  Who knew
that people with names like Polywog and Digweed (a really famous DJ)
would become recognizable on sight to rave aficionados, as famous as any
cut-rate film critic?  It's enough to make you want to learn how to
spin.
Director: Greg Harrison
Producer: Greg Harrison, Danielle Renfrew
Writer: Greg Harrison
Starring: Lola Glaudini, Hamish Linklater, Denny Kirkwood, Mackenzie
Firgens, Rachel True, Steve Van Wormer, Nick Offerman, Ari Gold, Dmitri
Ponce, John Digweed
http://groovethemovie.com/home.html
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.
