Title
Review for Back to the Future Part III (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Randy Parker
        BACK TO THE FUTURE II ended with Doc Brown and Marty McFly buried
up to their necks in time-travel mayhem.  The fun of BACK TO THE FUTURE III
should have been watching Marty and Doc solve all the paradoxes they
created in part two.  But unfortunately, director Robert Zemeckis and
screenwriter Bob Gale somehow got sidetracked with the idea of making a
Western.
        Virtually all of BACK TO THE FUTURE III is set in the Wild West
circa 1885 so you have to judge the film _first_ as a Western and _then_ as
a time-travel movie.  As a Western, BACK TO THE FUTURE III is as flat as a
pancake.  The plot is merely a sequence of ho-hum cliches, from the big
showdown to a train hijacking.  They say the Western is dead; Back to the
Future III seems determined to prove it.
        Worse yet, the movie doesn't seem to care if its story line is
consistent with the first two films.  Parts one and two were meticulously
thought-out in terms of the dangers of time travel.  Part three, on the
other hand, shows blatant disregard for the time continuum.  The filmmakers
sweep all of the dangling plot strands from part two under the rug and then
expect you to forget about them.  You're supposed to believe that in one
fell swoop, Marty and Doc fix all of the paradoxes in all four of the time
periods.
        BACK TO THE FUTURE III is the only installment in the series that
wastes the supporting cast.  Thomas Wilson sparkled in the last movie as
the various versions of Biff, but here he gives a tiresome, one-note
performance as "Mad Dog" Tannen, Biff's ill-tempered, Wild West ancestor.
Lea Thompson, who always has been so charming as Marty's mother, has two
meaningless scenes as his Great Great Grandmother.  Mary Steenburgen has
the unenviable task of bringing to life a half-baked love affair with
Christopher Lloyd, who, according to the New York Times, receives his first
ever screen kiss in BACK TO THE FUTURE III.
        There's a sense of complacency about part three; it seems as if the
filmmakers just phoned the movie in after they came up with the Wild West
gimmick.  The film lacks the creative flair and whimsical imagination that
has made the series so much fun.  Even Bill and Ted's adventure was more
excellent than BACK TO THE FUTURE III.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1990, PG, 120 minutes [2 hours]
[adventure/western/sci-fi]
starring: Michael J. Fox (Marty McFly, Seamus McFly), Christopher Lloyd (Dr.
Emmett Brown), Thomas F. Wilson (Buford "Mad Dog" Tannen, Biff Tannen), Mary
Steenburgen (Clara Clayton), produced by Bob Gale, Neil Canton, written by
Bob Gale, directed by Robert Zemeckis.
"Back To The Future III" was a sequel that didn't have to me made, but as
far as unnecessary sequels go, this is one of the best. It doesn't have the
originality of the first two films, but it is still a good, decent movie.        
Just like "Part II," this one picks up right where the last one left off.
Marty (Fox) gets a letter from Doc (Lloyd) from the year 1885 and learns he
is happy and not to rescue him. But Marty is still stuck in 1955 (again) and
needs the help of the 1955 Doc to get back to the future. But when the two
realize the Doc of 1885 gets killed, the 1955 Doc wants Marty to rescue him
(after all, that's going to be him someday). So Marty goes back in time and
hilarity and adventure ensues. 
It seems that every time Marty travels through time he gets stuck somewhere.
This time he becomes stuck in 1885 when he rips the fuel tank of the
DeLorean, thus the car cannot run without gasoline, unless they can get a
train to push it up to 88 m.p.h. (ah ha!). There's a lot of the standard time
traveling confusion and conflicts, almost exactly like the situations that
occurred in the first two, but surprisingly enough it doesn't wear itself
out. And for the first time, Doc gets the girl.
Mary Steenburgen co-stars as Clara Clayton, a school teacher who was
supposed to fall into a ravine but Doc saves her at the last minute. And so a
romantic affair develops between the two, and this is a nice little surprise.
It's nothing too sappy and it's nothing too implied either, and it also
affects the plot of the story. The chemistry between Lloyd and Steenburgen is
pretty convincing, they have a cartoonish charm of sorts.
Meanwhile Marty is having a problem with the "Biff" of this time period -
Buford "Mad Dog" Tannen (Wilson). When he continues to insult and provoke
Tannen they decide to settle it once and for all at a shootout, except that
it's scheduled at the time when Marty and Doc are supposed to hijack a train
to go back to the future. The grand finale of this film is not unlike that of
the original movie. It involves being in the right place at the right time
and of course little obstacles crop up to get in their way. 
Overall, "Back To The Future Part III" has a lighthearted adventurous tone
to it. I hope next time Doc will build a time machine that is impossible to
damage, or have it run out of fuel or power. What good is traveling through
time if you keep getting stuck somewhere?
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Jaye Mathisen
     Marty and Doc do their level best to make the Universe safe for non
time-travelers.  All the old characters, including Biff are back in new
roles, along with the old ones.
     I really liked this movie.  Almost as much as I liked part one.
Sure, Marty and Doc don't resolve all the paradoxes that
occurred/might have occurred from the jumping about through the
space-time continuum, but they have a lot of fun doing it, and so did I.
     Doc is at his zaniest best, from the gigantic ice-tea making
machine, to the telescope strapped to his rifle.  And of course, to make
it complicated, Doc's gotta meet a girl (Mary Steenburgen, another
fave).
     Mad Dog (Biff) is truly the epitome of the old-west sleazoids.
However, there was one oddity about Mad Dog.  Doc and Marty are looking
through a history book, and discover that one of the reasons Mad Dog has
his name is because of his tendency to drool.  Gallons of slobber
dripping off of Mad Dog's chin in the first meeting with Marty must've
been left on the cutting room floor, so Mad Dog's name really didn't
make sense.  But if that's the only thing I can find to complain about,
the movie can't be too shabby.
     The ending is certainly corny, but fun.  It certainly looks like
this is the end of the series, and not much of a chance for any more.
Of course this was a given anyway.
Rating:
     The movie's light, moderately fast-paced, and very enjoyable.  It
     helps to riffle through BTTF II before seeing III, just to refresh
     the old brain cells, as the plot still has its twists and turns.
     The special effects are as good as always, and I almost fell out of
     my seat at the time-traveling steam engine.  I give it 4 stars
     (****,excellent) out of 4.
Enjoyability
     All the above.  Don't miss it, it's great fun.  4 stars again.
