Title
Review for Heart and Souls (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The light "life after death" fantasy is still with us.  You know the
sort of film: TOPPER, A GUY NAMED JOE, STAIRWAY TO HEAVEN, HERE COMES
MR. JORDAN, DEFENDING YOUR LIFE, even GHOST (though it had darker tones
mixed in).  They all have a nice, cushy, "death is just a change of state"
feel.  They were particularly popular during World War II when a comforting
view of death was needed.
     The latest entry, HEART AND SOULS, has a surprising degree of charm.
We are introduced to four people, each working out his or her life but
having unfinished business.  Destiny puts them all on the same ill-fated bus
which falls off the side of a bridge to avoid crashing into a car.  The car
just happens to contain a woman giving birth.  All four are killed along
with the driver, but the souls of the four passengers survive and are
somehow metaphysically attached to Thomas Reilly, the baby.  They are
compelled never to leave Reilly's side.  For a while they are visible to the
young boy, but when this appears to do more harm than good, they follow him
invisibly.
     When Reilly becomes a man (played by Robert Downey, Jr.) the souls
suddenly find they each have a mission and must appear to, and sometimes
physically possess, Reilly.
     Our four spirits are Charles Grodin as a singer with stage fright,
Alfre Woodard as a woman torn from the children she loved, Tom Sizemore as a
small-time hood with an attack of conscience, and Kyra Sedgwick as an overly
diffident lover.  But Downey outdoes Steve Martin's performance in ALL OF
ME, being in turn possessed by the four spirits.  Downey prior to CHAPLIN
never seemed to have much screen presence.  Now he is showing an amazing
flair for physical comedy and a tremendous versatility.
     There are some problems with the script.  All too often American
businesses are shown as having one conscienceless cut-throat and a bunch of
executives living off his kills.  This film falls into that same trap.  What
is more, the company that Downey's character seems to be liquidating is
apparently never save.  But in spite of that loose end, this is a likable
fantasy with some of its kooky special effects and its phantom bus.  It
might be a little sugary for some tastes, but it also has its share of
touching moments.  I rate this a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Louis Butler
     I can't begin to tell you how much I hate the phrase "feel-good"
when used as an adjective, but I am at a loss to find another phrase
that would be better suited for this movie.  Here we have a film that
is much like IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE or MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON.
It's an old fashioned movie with a fairly simple story to tell and a
childish innocence in the way it tells it.
     I suspect the movie is a remake of an older film, though I don't
know this for a fact.  Many elements of the story seem rather outdated
in this day and age.  For example, the small-time hood who's really a
pretty nice guy and wants to give back something he stole to the kid he
stole it from.
     Actually, there are many things about this movie that sound like
they would be quite annoying.  It is easy to hear a plot summary and
think, "Oh PUL-EASE!" but in point of fact, the movie carries itself
quite well.
     Robert Downey, Jr., plays a man whose imaginary childhood friends
come back to him when he's about thirty years old.  It seems that they
are actually the ghosts of four people killed at the time of Downey's
birth who were "attached" to him in some way.
     The four are played by Charles Grodin, Alfre Woodard, Kyra
Sedgwick, and Tom Sizemore.  Each is very good, with Sizemore being the
only one who is slightly weak.  Elizabeth Shue (ADVENTURES IN
BABYSITTING) playes Downey's girlfriend.
     Downey gets to be "possessed" by each of the four, and it is just
hilarious watching him.  He has a true comic gift.
     I do have some questions about the movie though.  It takes place
in 1989, is this a movie that was made several years ago and only now
released?  Elisabeth Shue does look a little older than in ADVENTURES
IN BABYSITTING, but I wouldn't swear to it.
The movie opens nationwide this Friday, I believe.

Author
Sally Smith
Starring Robert Downey, Jr., Charles Grodin, Kyra Sedgwick, Elisabeth Shue, 
         Tom Sizemore, David Paymer, Alfre Woodard
Directed by Ron Underwood
Screenplay by  Gregory Hansen, Erik Hansen, Brent Maddock, S. S. Wilson
Director of Photography Michael Watkins, ASC
Rated PG-13 (apparently just for occasional language, not content)
     I write this review under much the same conditions as my last: not
being overly familiar with the work of anyone working on it except for
the cinematographer--but that was enough reason for me to attend.
     Thomas Reilly (Downey) is born at the same time a bus crashes, and
the souls of the passengers--single working mom Woodard, nebbish opera
singer wannabe Grodin, small-time hood (Sizemore) and sweet waitress
(Sedgwick)--become attached to him (literally--they can only travel a
few yards away). Little Thomas grows up having a wonderful time with
his constant companions who are invisible to anyone but him.
Unfortunately, by the time he's seven, his family is so worried about
the behavior his "imaginary" friends are leading him into that the
spirits decide he'd be better off without him, and make themselves
completely invisible.
     Flash forward about 25 years. Thomas is now a greedy superficial
San Francisco yuppie specializing in corporate bankruptcies.  The ghosts
aren't happy with the way he's running his life (although they do
approve of his latest girlfriend, Shue), but stay invisible until
they're informed that there was a mixup "upstairs" and that they
shouldn't have been here all these years.  They were supposed to use
Thomas to fulfill the dreams they didn't get to accomplish, and now
they only have a few days to do it.  Thomas, naturally, is less than
thrilled about their reappearance, but is eventually persuaded
(humorously) to help them out--hopefully helping himself in the
process.
     Downey shows off his gift for physical comedy and mimicry in a
number of very funny scenes; Grodin is less annoying in this film than
in anything else in recent memory; Woodard is the very definition of
Mom; Sedgewick, Shue, Sizemore, and Paymer acquit themselves nicely in
somewhat under-written roles.  The actors playing the ghosts do develop
a rapport that reflects the reluctant affection that develops between
four total strangers forced to live together for decades.
     Special effects range from cheesy to quite attractive, including
some infrequent and correctly-used (hallelujah!) morph shots, Mic
Rodgers' stunt work is very well-done, the production design for both
the Fifties and Nineties is dead on, as is (the always-excellent)
Jean-Pierre Dorleac's costume design.  The photography again did not
disappoint me--it's stylish, lovely, fluid, imaginative (especially in
some of the subjective camera shots), and incorporates the many special
effects quite naturally and matter-of-factly. However, it does all this
without overwhelming the quiet, intimate nature of what is basically a
small story about some ordinary people.
     HEART AND SOULS is an overwhelmingly charming, sweet,
heart-warming, and old-fashioned movie. Cynics should avoid it at all
costs. People who want several good laughs, a lot of smiles, and a
couple of poignant moments should rush to see it. It's probably the
best date movie of the summer.  I liked it a lot, I'll see it again, I
recommend it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robert Downey, Jr., Charles Grodin, Kyra Sedgwick, 
           Alfre Woodard, Tom Sizemore, Elisabeth Shue
Director:  Ron Underwood
Producer:  Nancy Roberts and Sean Daniel
Screenplay:  Brent Maddock, S.S. Wilson, Gregory Hansen, and 
             Erik Hansen
Music:  Marc Shaiman
Released by Universal Pictures
     One night in 1959, four people (Charles Grodin, Kyra Sedgwick,
Alfre Woodard, and Tom Sizemore) board a city bus in San Francisco,
each suffering a major life crisis.  They are never given a chance to
solve their problems because the bus crashes and all on board are
killed.  However, instead of being assumed into heaven (or the other
place, as the case may be), they find themselves stuck on earth as the
"imaginary friends" of just-born Thomas Reilly (who grows up to be
Robert Downey, Jr.).  When it becomes apparent that the quartet are
seriously warping Thomas' personality (he talks to people that no one
else can see), they decide to fade from sight and leave him on his
own.  The separation isn't permanent, though.  Twenty years later, they
reappear to straighten out Thomas' life, as well as to set their own
personal ghosts to rest, before they are whisked away to inhabit new
bodies.
     The above description attempts to capture some of the nuances of a
needlessly-convoluted and poorly-conceived storyline that someone
should have had the intelligence to pare down to reasonable levels.
HEART AND SOULS, as is often the case with films scripted by four
people, is at odds with itself, frequently not seeming to know where to
go next and, on those occasions when it has a set direction, proceeding
in the most confused and unsatisfying manner possible.
     For nearly fifty years, film makers have been trying to recapture
the drama and magic of Frank Capra's 1946 American classic IT'S A
WONDERFUL LIFE.  To this date, no one has succeeded.  HEART AND SOULS
is yet another stab in the dark, and not only does it fail, but it
turns out to be worse than many of the efforts before it.  In
retrospect, it's hard to find many good things to say about this
movie.
     The thing about IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is that it took its time
developing the character of its protagonist, George Bailey.  Not until
the final quarter of the movie does the supernatural intervention
occur.  In HEART AND SOULS, while approximately a half-hour is spent
setting the story up, there are too many characters to flesh out.  None
of them are sufficiently fleshed out, and the rest of the movie ends up
falling flat because of it.  Character identification is crucial in a
film of this nature and, when it doesn't happen, the picture is
doomed.
     From start to finish, the script consciously and mechanically
tries to manipulate the audience to laughter and tears.  Partially as a
result of being too obvious about its intentions and partially because
of heavy-handed direction, it doesn't succeed.  Most of the jokes
aren't very funny and the scenes designed to strum the heart strings
are more embarrassing that touching.  When a rapport hasn't been
developed between the characters and the audience, attempts to make us
cry can end up looking rather silly.
     HEART AND SOULS has a fine cast, which is why it's surprising that
the acting is so lackluster.  I suppose part of the blame can go to the
behind-the-scenes team that "crafted" this dud, but the performers
can't be absolved of all blame.  Of the major participants, only Tom
Sizemore does a reasonable job.  Robert Downey, Jr., relies too much on
what he did in CHAPLIN (whenever one of the spirits enters his body he
gives a Tramp-like lurch).  Kyra Sedgwick, Alfre Woodard, and Charles
Grodin are flat, and Elisabeth Shue displays all the range of a water
pistol.  David Paymer, who was decent in Billy Crystal's MR.  SATURDAY
NIGHT, manages to be incredibly tedious in a small role as the bus
driver.
     There are a few energetic scenes that save this production from
being an utter debacle.  Chief among these is a concert given by
B. B. King (appearing as himself) where Thomas, under the influence of
Charles Grodin's Harrison Winslow, gives a throbbing rendition of the
"Star Spangled Banner."  There are also a few mildly humorous
interludes with a police officer, although the conclusion of that
particular subplot is laughably bad.
     For all of its attempts to weave a spell on the audience, HEART
AND SOULS manages to be annoyingly blatant in what it's trying to do.
Nevertheless, if you're someone who drools over happy endings, this may
be the movie for you (provided you can stomach the film's many other
shortcomings).  It doesn't just have one of these, but five, each more
cloying than the one before.  A rare treat for those who don't mind
going into sugar shock.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
