Title
Review for Cupid's Mistake (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
We all know the feeling.  We love them, but they love someone else.  All
right, it might not even be that we love them, but we at least have a vested
interest in finding yourself snuggled next to them late at night.  It
happens all the time, and there isn't a damn thing that anyone can do about
it.  With all of the times Cupid's arrow has misfired, let's be glad he
doesn't like to do a William Tell on all of us.
In fact, Cupid may strike gold and make us love the one that loves us
everyone once in a while, but in the general he's got all of the accuracy of
a Brittney Spears song... he hits everything but the mark, get's everyone
all riled up over nothing, and makes us turn out a lot of Hollywood dribble
in the hopes of getting further in a relationship that is going nowhere.
Such is the subject of Young Man Kang's (not a typo, it's really his name)
film Cupid's Mistake, in which girl number one likes guy number one who
likes girl number two who like guy number two who likes girl number one.
Yes, we're back in geometry class studying this love rectangle, hoping that
it doesn't turn to dribble like just about every other Hollywood romance.
Filmed on a budget of $980, Cupid's Mistake works off of improvisation,
bizarre videography techniques, and incredible acting from complete nobodies
in the acting world.   Yet it still ends up keeping us from being sick to
our stomachs, only has one time that we see the reflection of the
videographer, and is romantic besides... all of which makes us wonder why
the hell we pay for a $10 million Julia Stiles/Freddie Prinze Jr vehicle
that does none of the above and makes us feel like we're going to vomit from
its utter lack of quality besides.
Kang deserves credit for conceptualizing an editing a no budget film on no
budget, finding a distributor (Pandera Cinema) despite having no budget, and
also making a film that actually entertains on said budget of zero.  The
slick videography techniques Kang uses are readily available using almost
any video editing software, and Kang edits his movie so smoothly that the 90
minutes of it fly by.
Yet I'm really not praising the emperor with no clothes because he saved
the cost of fabric... really.  The quadrangle behind Cupid's Mistake is well
set up, the story solid and the acting as solid as you would expect from
actual professionals (they are all credited actors, just none you would
recognize), and the improvisation lends a real credo to the dialogue
(although there is no "Gillian's Island" monologue, this kicks the shit out
of the Blair Witch Project's conversations).  I would go so far as to
venture that Cupid's Mistake would be a pleasant art house romance without
it being the up and coming poster boy of the digital video revolution that
it is.
Of course there are flaws.  Although the acting is solid and the
conversation real, the actors still come off as slightly fake.  At points it
becomes clear that the dialogue is attempting to reach predestined points,
and that the story has needed trimming here or there, and some of the
visuals just don't work as well on video (which tries to compensate for
natural lighting that could have served great purposes at certain points) as
they would on film, but all of these flaws would have been eliminated (at
the efficiency Kang works on) with an extra grand or two in the coffer.  All
in all it's a solid indie flick, not perfect, not bad, and definitely worth
a view.
Join James' mailing list: http://filmcritic2000.listbot.com/
Visit James' page at Epinions: http://mk2k.epinions.com/user-mk2k
Visit SHORT STUFF: http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/
