Title
Review for Gazon maudit (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FRENCH TWIST (GAZON MAUDIT) is a farcical romantic comedy with a
strong sexual content.  It is a French film that was a smash hit when
it was released there.  The failing of the picture is that there are
three likable characters and actors in search of a decent script, and
director too for that matter.
     Laurent (Alain Chabat) is a strikingly handsome playboy in his
late twenties.  He is married to a gorgeous wife Loli, (Victoria
Abril), also in her late twenties.  They have two darling children,
aged 1 and 4.  The kids are adorable and sweet as can be, and their
parents either ignore them or get irritated at them, but then again,
this is a film about a couple who doesn't pay enough attention to their
kids to deserve them.
     Laurent chases every young skirt that goes by, but his naive wife
thinks he has only cheated just once, and she forgave him.  Into their
life comes a lesbian named Marijo and played by Josiane Balasko, who is
also the director and cowriter.  Marijo's van breaks down, and she
comes in and fixes Loli's plumbing and then stays for dinner.  Forty
year old Marijo has the looks of a fullback and is so harsh at first
that it seems she is trying to turn off the audience.  Thankfully, her
harshness soon wears off, and she becomes as compelling a character as
the other two.
     Loli gets disgusted with Laurent's spending evenings out and
ignoring her when he returns claiming he is too tired - the male
equivalent of having a headache.  Eventually Loli finds out about his
massive philandering and decides that Marijo's advances, which she has
been rejecting, now look quite enticing so they start having an affair.
When Laurent finds out, he does the macho thing and punches Marijo in
the nose.  He and his obnoxious male buddy sit around during this part
of the show and mouth homophobic cliches.  Soon, however, Loli, Lauren,
and Marijo form a menage a trois.  They live under the same roof, and
Loli shares time with the other two under a precisely agreed upon
timetable. Now arriving at track two, ...
     As well constructed and well acted as the characters are, the
script by Patrick Aubree and Josiane Balasko, based on a story by
Telshe Boorman, is a mess.  The minor character need development, there
is no discernible plot, and there are many needless scenes.  Among the
worse is a pointless one of Lauren going to a red light district and
finding a prostitute that is over sixty.  The director is of no help in
sorting out the plot for the actors, and they seem aimless most of the
time.
     FRENCH TWIST runs 1:45 and would be better if was trimmer.  The
movie is in French with English subtitles.  The film is correctly rated
R for a little violence, lots of quite natural nudity, some sex,
several scenes of dope smoking, and filthy language in every other
sentence.  Large numbers of bad words are usually a giveaway that the
writer is out of ideas.  FRENCH TWIST is a movie that grows on you.
Unfortunately, it did not grow on me quite enough for me to recommend
it.  I did like the three main actors, and I hope to see all of them
again but with a better script so I am giving the film **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
        FRENCH TWIST has a humorous premise and for most of the
film it carries out its promise to be funny.   If only directors
would know when to quit when they are ahead.
        The film is about a love triangle but this being a comedy as
well as being French, do not anticipate the usual triangle.
        Loli (Victoria Abril) is a pretty housewife who has a
husband, Laurent, (Alain Chabat) who deals in high-priced real
estate.   Loli understands that his job keeps him working late,
never suspecting that much of the time Laurent is cheating on her.
After a while she makes that discovery and she is, naturally, angry.
Little wonder that there has hardly been any sex of late.
        One day a woman, @Marijo (@Josiane @Balasko), a Lesbian, pulls
up in a truck and asks for some water as her car's water has leaked.
Marijo and Loli have a cup of coffee while Marijo listens to @Loli's
tale of woe.   Pretty soon she comes on to Loli who, in the mood she
is in, responds with hugs and kisses.  Marijo is invited to stay
and sleep on the couch but Laurent will have none of that.  He is
one jealous cheat.
        Unlike other triangle films, tables get turned in the most
odd and humorous way.   However, just when the film appears to have
concluded with a good finale, up comes on the screen, THREE MONTHS
LATER.   This leads to turning a light comedy into an unbelievable
farce, to say nothing of adding more minutes to the film than was
necessary.   Well, at least it was funny up until then.
      Written, playing Marijo, and Directed by Josiane Balasko

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Josiane Balasko
Writers: Patrick Aubrée and Josiane Balasko (story by Telsche Borman)
Starring: Victoria Abril, Josiane Balasko, Alain Chabat, Ticky Holgado,
Miguel Bosé
Contrary to popular belief, not every single foregin film released to an
American market is a masterpiece.  Some of them aren't even GOOD.  Some
examples of this principle are the aboslutely dreadful "Un indien dans
la ville" (presented as "Little Indian, Big City," and remade into that
crap Tim Allen flick, "Jungle2Jungle"), and this.  What could have been
a clever little sex comedy turns into one mess of a french flick.
"French Twist" (the "cool" American title, not the real one, which was
"Gazon Maudit," literally meaning "twisted ground," or something like
that) deals with a married couple with kids, and the intrusion of a
stranger who kinda screws things up for them.  Loli and Alain Chabat
(Victoria Abril and Alain Chabat) are not exactly happily married. 
Always on business trips, Alain Chabat more than once cheats on her, and
she eventually finds out.  And one day, she meets a butch mechanic,
Marijo (the co-writer/director Josiane Balasko), and they two kinda hit
it off.  So she decides she will get back at Alain Chabat by doing the
obvious: sleeping with Marijo.
But she soons starts to not only fall in love with Marijo, but she's
also realizes she's still in love with Alain Chabat.  So, of course, she
does the obvious from that: she decides to keep them both.  She'll be
(and sleep) with each of them for 3 days each, then on Sunday, she'll
rest by herself.  After all, she needs it if she's gonna have more sex
than Sylvia Kristel.
The film goes on for over an hour and a half, through stupidity after
stupidity, moronic twist after moronic twist, and soon there's the
little ironic (!!!) ending.  I know it's a completely different culture,
and I'm quite familiar with the French and their cinema, but this is
just BAD.  None of the characters are more intelligent than Peter
Stormare in "Fargo" (a movie where stupid characters were backed up to
make a point), and any action they do is pretty much just to get a
hopeful chuckle from the audience.  What's shocking is this was not only
one of France's biggest hits, but it was nominated for a lot of Cesars
(French equivalent of Oscars).
The writing and directing is really the big problem with it.  Josiane
Balasko does a good acting job with her role, but her little sex comedy
isn't very humerous, entertaining, or even deep at all.  Even Woody
Allen's not-very-good "A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy" is intelligent,
well-written, and possesses some depth.  This is shallow, unfunny, and
pretty annoying to watch.  The film moves at the pace of a snail, and is
damn-near painful to watch.  Thank god for the fast forward button.
The acting, however, isn't bad at all.  The actors do the best they can
with the bad material, and Victoria Abril is pretty likable despite the
script (and the fact that she's stupid enough to try to divide herself
over two people when she has kids).  And Alain Chabat has some funny
moments as the neurotic husband.
But "French Twist" is just pretty lame.  It's not overly horrible, and
has a couple very, very, very brief moments.  But it's just a really
crap film, and an example of an ill-advised distribution of a foreign
film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
     FRENCH TWIST, a droll, uneven comedy from writer/director Josiane
Blasko, starts fast and ends slow.  In between, it offers more than a
few double entendres, some farcical slapstick, and satirical jabs at the
traditional male/female double standard and homophobia.  With bright,
endearing performances by Victoria Abril and Blasko herself, and a game
effort by Alain Chabat to infuse his two-timing creep of a husband with
humanity, acting is not among FRENCH TWIST's weak points.  Plotting, on
the other hand, definitely is.
     Loli (Abril) and Laurent (Chabet) don't have a perfect marriage,
even though, on the surface, they seem happy enough.  Laurent is a
compulsive philanderer who has so many extra-marital liaisons that he
has to keep looking at his watch to make sure he doesn't miss one.
While Loli is blissfully unaware of the reasons for her husband's
inattentiveness, she is becoming frustrated.  Enter Marijo (Blasko), a
self-proclaimed dyke who is immediately attracted to Loli.  What follows
is Laurent's worst nightmare, as he discovers that not only is his wife
cheating on him, but she's doing so with another woman.
     For the better part of an hour, this is a fresh, engaging comedy
that mixes its laughs with unforced social commentary.  The actors
interact effectively, creating an ingenious triangle that always has one
of its three components disconnected.  Unfortunately, around the time
FRENCH TWIST reaches its midpoint, it starts to unravel.  The second
half moves turgidly, re-tilling ground already covered.  When, eighty
minutes into the film, Marijo comments that "the game's not over.  There
are three periods," we're of the opinion that proceedings have long
since moved into overtime.
     Laurent is the classic cheating husband -- it's okay for him to
have affairs (because he's a man), but his wife must be faithful.
Laurent applies a similar double standard to other things.  For example,
a dirty joke told by a man is funny, but, told by a woman, it's vulgar.
He's a homophobe, as well, which makes Loli's decision to take a woman
lover a double blow to his ego.  The "sauce for the goose" scenario is
always an enjoyable conceit, and that's doubly true here because Laurent
is brimming over with hypocritical self-righteousness.  Blasko enjoys
skewering his "macho" attitudes, and this aspect of her script is easily
the most satisfying.
Although Blasko tries to retain her characters' humanity, the over-the-
top humor occasionally leeches it away.  Laurent is never particularly
likable, and, despite Chabet's best attempts, he doesn't develop
believably into anything more substantial than an intolerant caricature.
Loli and Marijo are better rounded, but there are times when even they
strike a wrong chord.  Sometimes these scenes are funny, but they always
disturb FRENCH TWIST's balance between overt comedy and light drama.
     Taking any part of FRENCH TWIST too seriously would be a mistake,
even though the film has a clear social agenda.  Sixty minutes in, we're
entertained, and Blasko is succeeding.  Half an hour later, the appeal
is dwindling and we're waiting for the end credits. Considering this
film's erratic nature, it's difficult to fathom why the French
government chose it as their official entry into the Oscar race instead
of the vastly-superior LES MISERABLES.  The two aren't comparable, so
perhaps the decision in favor of Blasko's middling picture is the real
French twist -- and not a very laudable one, at that.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Pedro Sena
French sex farces can be hell. Well, for American audiences, anyway.
Unlike the American attitudes towards sex, France seems to take a more
lackadaisical attitude towards it, and by doing so, it is able to create
films like this one. And this type of situation, is not one that the
majority of America, away from the big cities, is likely to appreciate on
any  level, least of all a sexual competitive situation.
But if one can get out of the inner turmoils that religion, or any form of
idealism can add to a relationship, then this film is funny and spends more
time discussing the commitments that people make to themselves and each
other, than it does anything else. And in this case, the two people who are
better decided on their sexual preferences are the ones that seem to do
better.... well, they are also the two extremes in this story.
A married couple finds themselves with a guest, who happens to be gay. And
she wastes no time making friends of the wife. As the film wears on, the
wife is enjoying her probably as much as the husband, but there is one
problem. The opposites are trying to create problems for each other, by
confusing the woman in the middle. The husband is having to swallow his male
ego, and the woman is having to swallow her female ego. Caught in between,
of course, is the one that can not make a decision, and can not figure out
what she really wants to do. On one hand she has a family and husband, and
on the other she wants to better fulfill the sedate life that she obviously
has been a part of.
As the film moves on, it really becomes a sort of boring farce, and all the
characters are getting worn down. No one can win the battle, and no one is
prepared to lose it. And when one has a victory, the wife feels guilty and
moves in the other direction.
This film might have been better suited, and accomplished its aims, if the
director might have placed someone else in the role of the woman that comes
in between the married couple. Her staying in the middle of it all, is
really a problem in that the film never really provides an objective enough
choice for anyone... these are always subjectively made emotional decisions,
which at least the film shows that can not be good and long term
decisions... that is, they don't last. A director on the outside checking it
as she goes along, might have made the film less emotional and at the same
time more interesting... as it is at this point, it is just a farce, with
many bumbling and crazy decisions, that no one seems to have any desire to
hold up, which, for this reviewer, just makes the whole thing more
confusing... what's the point? Lead a mix-married life?
Funny film in that the situations are crazy, and the characters are crazier
still... other than that, don't take the whole thing too serious, as I don't
think it is meant to be.
3 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
Christopher Null
     The French title of this odd little film is GAZON MAUDIT, a French
euphemism meaning "dyke."  Any wonder why the title was changed for the
American audience?
     This picture, starring the radiant and naked-most-of-the-time
Victoria Abril (TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN! and HIGH HEELS), is a
schizophrenic tour of Loli's (Abril) life.  Her philandering husband
Laurent (Alain Chabat) walks all over her.  The kids are a constant
effort.  And when Marijo (Josiane Balasko, who co-wrote and directed as
well), a butchest-of-the-butch lesbian, shows up owing to car trouble, a
sudden bond of friendship is formed.  When Laurent's dalliances finally go
too far, Loli finds comfort in the arms...and the bed...and even the
bathtub of Marijo.
     So that's the titular "twist."  And as a premise, it's not a bad
one.  Balasko's performance is exactly what was required to make the
plausibility of the petite and erotic Abril fall for the decidedly
non-petite and non-erotic Balasko.  But after a brief (and fun) setup and
payoff, the film rambles into a roller coaster of "does she or doesn't
she" want to stay with her new lifestyle, followed by one false ending
after another.  The film finally finishes up on a sudden note that is
totally confusing, suggesting further "twists on the twist," and by this
time, the picture is so silly that any attempt at resolving this whole
thing wanders into pointlessness.
     Abril's performance is great, as usual, reminding us of her days with
director Pedro Almodovar, and as mentioned above, Balasko is a very
capable actress.  Unfortunately, it appears she had a hand in too many
things, as the script just falls apart at random places, becoming either
too busy and hard-to-follow or too boring and hard-to-stay awake. 
Balasko's use of sex jokes is unrelenting (and no one is safe from her
good-natured ribbing), but these too get old after the hundredth time.
     In the final analysis, FRENCH TWIST is extremely muddled and feels
much longer than its 107 minute running time.  Fortunately, it has a few
bright spots, including Balasko's subtle message about the cultural double
standard between men and women, that will make it worthwhile for the
viewer that is truly willing to be patient.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list
