Title
Review for I Shot Andy Warhol (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
I SHOT ANDY WARHOL *** Directed by Mary Harron. Written by Harron & 
Daniel Minahan. Photography, Ellen Kuras. Production design, Therese 
Deprez. Editing, Keith Reamer. Music, John Cale. Cast: Lili Taylor, 
Jared Harris, Martha Plimpton, Stephen Dorff, et al. An Orion release. 
103 min. Rated R (language, sex) . Art Theater.
It's a tossup as to who can name today the would-be assassin of Ronald 
Reagan and the killer of John Lennon. But it is almost certain that 
even fewer 
people could name Valerie Solanas, the young woman (then 32) who, in 
1968, fired several shots at Andy Warhol, in the belief that he had 
betrayed her. Although she did not kill him, the profound 
psychological and physical affects changed his work-style and probably 
hastened his death in 1987.
The film is well researched and, in many ways fascinating. Valerie was 
a very special case, a maverick anti-male revolutionary who had a bad 
childhood, a psychology degree from the University of Maryland, an 
original mind, a life that included panhandling, lesbianism (some of 
it paid) and prostitution. Ironically, she needed money from men to 
survive so that she could turn against them. Ordinary, or even 
exceptional standards did not apply to Valerie.
When, in 1966, she was introduced to Warhol and his entourage (in his 
large, then famous loft called The Factory) she found herself in a 
milieu of artists or would-be artists, of oddities, transvestites, 
transsexuals and camp-followers who conformed to non-conformism. 
Valerie had writing aspirations but her main purpose was her obsessive 
conviction of the superiority of women over men, something that shapes 
up as a non-stop attack on the male gender, as summed up in her SCUM 
Manifesto (The Society for Cutting Up Men). She had founded that 
society, of which she was the sole member. The manifesto (much of 
which is given as lines spoken by Valerie in the movie) was an 
ultra-radical, all-out war against men as well as against conformist 
women and even wrong-thinking feminists. (SCUM got nowhere then, but 
later became a key text among militant feminists). 
A lone wolf, Valerie, within the Warholian world was as much out of 
tune as outside it, with very rare exceptions, like her transvestite 
friend Candy Darling, and in a sense Warhol himself who, in many ways 
was an outsider among his own people. Valerie, in one of her 
black-humor, absurdist encounters, met Frenchman Maurice Girodias, the 
owner of the notorious Olympia Press, who eventually published the 
Manifesto -- and in Valerie's opinion exploited and cheated her.
The film melds nicely different shooting styles, from protracted 
scenes that remind one somewhat of Warhol movies, to fast-cutting 
sections that recall other Underground films of the period, to 
docu-dramas. All this is at the service of portraying a most unusual, 
and not balanced woman who, however, had method in her madness. 
Lili Taylor, always dressed like a butch bag lady, is perfect in her 
part and, for all purposes, since none of us knows the real Valerie, 
she is Valerie. The real Valerie was born and raised in Atlantic City. 
I was amazed to learn that Taylor is a native of Chicago, as her 
accent seems to me to be pure and wonderfully consistent New 
Jerseyian. (It is the kind of accent that only people who grew with it 
like, the way a hyena's babies look beautiful to their mother). 
The recreation of The Factory and its denizens is excellent, with 
notable performances, like Stephen Dorff's Candy Darling. Since  
pasty-faced, inexpressive, soft-spoken Warhol was, and to a large 
extent still is (through films and photos) a familiar presence, for 
viewers over a certain age a great deal of the movie's authenticity 
rides on his impersonator. Jared Harris, the son of actor Richard 
Harris, is a surprisingly believable simulacrum.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Lili Taylor, Jared Harris, Stephen Dorff, Martha Plimpton, 
      Lothaire Bluteau, Donovan Leitch, Tahnee Welch
Director: Mary Harron
Producers: Tom Kalin and Christine Vachon
Screenplay: Mary Harron and Daniel Minahan
Cinematography: Ellen Kuras
Music: John Cale
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company and Orion Pictures
     The script for I SHOT ANDY WARHOL began life as a documentary 
before the producers convinced writer/director Mary Harron to transform 
it into a dramatic interpretation.  The result is an impressive feature 
debut -- a provocative look at Valerie Solanas, the intellectual, 
possibly psychotic prefeminist who shot Warhol in 1968.  In the wake of 
NICO ICON, a documentary about The Velvet Underground and their lead 
singer, this film represents the next (and certainly not last) motion 
picture to plunge into the strange, experimental world surrounding Andy 
Warhol and his Factory.
     Most of I SHOT ANDY WARHOL takes place in New York City from 1966 
to 1968, chronicling the period in Valerie Solanas' (Lili Taylor) life 
when she wrote her definitive work, SCUM MANIFESTO, was introduced to 
Andy Warhol (Jared Harris), became a fringe member of his circle, and 
eventually shot him.  Valerie, who had a "pitiful childhood" 
characterized by abuse and molestation, is subversive and disturbed, but 
many of her theories, as outlandish as they initially seem, are 
consistent, logical, and thought-provoking.
     SCUM, or the Society for Cutting Up Men, was the prefeminist 
organization formed by Valerie (she was also the only member).  It was 
founded on a number of basic principles -- the male is a biological 
accident, women are the naturally superior gender, the female function 
is to create a "magical world", and men are sex-obsessed machines.  THE 
SCUM MANIFESTO represents Valerie's legacy (it's still in print today).
     Those offended by the "male bashing" aspect of THELMA AND LOUISE 
may become apoplectic during I SHOT ANDY WARHOL.  Since the film is 
essentially a character study of Valerie, it gives an uncompromising 
presentation of her views and experiences.  She despises "men, married 
women, and other degenerates", and makes no secret of her feelings.  
She's a "butch dyke", and proud of it, and the only time she has any 
sexual interaction with men is when she gets paid.
     Lili Taylor, who, like Eric Stoltz, has gravitated towards 
independent features, gives a powerful, passionate portrayal, bringing 
out Valerie's anger and disgust with the world.  Like Jennifer Jason 
Leigh in MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE, Taylor makes us believe 
that we're watching Valerie, not just an actress playing her.  There 
won't be an Oscar nomination for this work, but recognition of some sort 
is warranted.
     There are two other notable performances in I SHOT ANDY WARHOL.  
The first, given by Jared Harris (the son of Richard Harris), is that of 
Warhol himself.  Harris manages to capture not only Warhol's strange 
magnetism, but his aloof, almost-shy nature.  Stephen Dorff (BACKBEAT) 
plays Candy Darling, Valerie and Warhol's transvestite companion.  
Supporting roles are filled by Martha Plimpton (as Valerie's best 
friend), Lothaire Bluteau (as Maurice Girodius, the publisher who buys 
the rights to Valerie's writing), and Tahnee Welch (as a member of 
Warhol's circle).
     I SHOT ANDY WARHOL presents a toned-down, nostalgic look at New 
York in the late 1960s as well as the subculture that took root around 
Warhol -- the wild, bohemian lifestyle, complete with drugs and sex.  
Primarily, however, this is Valerie's story -- an invitation to explore 
her theories and understand her motivation, even if you can't relate to 
such a disagreeable personality.  In fact, I SHOT ANDY WARHOL is daring 
because it makes no attempt to soften Valerie's character or blunt the 
downward spiral of her insanity.  This is a film of powerful ideas, 
impressive set design, and compelling performances.  It will offer 
fodder for hours of post-movie discussion.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Lili Taylor nabbed one of her first lead roles in this true life drama about
Valerie Jean Solanas, the woman who shot Andy Warhol in 1968. But the film is
more of a showcase to the ways of the 60s and the influence that Warhol and
other artists had on the people at that time. 
Valerie Jean Solanas (Taylor) is a lesbian feminist who as written a book
called SCUM Manifesto, a book (which is now a classic) about the way that men
(like disease, or so she says) have been ruling here for the millions of years
before us. She tries to sell it on the street, and is thrilled when her drag
queen friend is invited to Andy Warhol's pad. This is her chance to sell him
not only on the book, but on some plays that she has been writing.
But Andy is just like all of the other men out there. When a publisher signs
her to a fraud contract and a friend puts her on a television show discussing
homosexuality where the host makes fun of her, she begins to think that Andy is
all behind it. He's been constantly ignoring and making fun of her and she
doesn't like it. Her increasing rage is about to bring on the deadliest of
consequences. 
Lili Taylor gives the performance of her career (at least so far) she puts
every ounce that she can into this character and it's a great treat to watch.
Flaws are abound however, most of the film is boring and needs something
interesting to be put on the screen and the story was told harsher than it
needs to be. Still, the film does a good job of examining the inner rage that
overcame the woman and her actions thereafter. If your looking for a cool 60s
noir piece, rent I Shot Andy Warhol, which gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: The main character is lesbian and we see one lesbian encounter.
She is also a prostitute and we see two (not very explicit) sex scenes of her
servicing her customers. It also contains strong language and drug use. Good
Age: 16 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Andrew Hicks
        You were wondering if this movie about the woman who 
shot Andy Warhol could be as strange as the famous 60's pop artist 
himself? Wonder no more; this movie is f*&%ing weird. It's also 
engaging and entertaining and does an incredible amount of justice 
to the sense of surreality that the late 60's had. I SHOT ANDY 
WARHOL was predominantly based on fact, but is too weird to 
have been entirely true. Its cast of characters includes hippies, drag 
queens and a man-hating lesbian.
        Played by Lili Taylor, the lesbian is the focal point of the 
story. As we catch up to her in the movie, she's graduated college 
with honors and is supporting herself through prostitution while 
writing plays and books on the side. Her claim to fame thus far is a 
book called The S.C.U.M. Manifesto, a propaganda piece for her 
one-member organization, the Society for Cutting Up Men. She's 
convinced men are biologically inferior to women -- the Y 
chromosome is after all an incomplete X -- and that the female of 
the species will soon retake their rightful position by force. Light 
reading this isn't.
        She wants Andy Warhol to produce her second-most-
interesting work, the play Up Your Ass, an equally Y-chromosome-
bashing piece of art. The only scene from this play we hear 
rehearsed involves a woman looking for a "yellow turd" for dinner. 
Her in-road to Warhol is a she-male friend who has long since 
forsaken his testosterone in favor of wigs and makeup. Taylor 
doesn't cut this guy up because she doesn't consider him a real 
man, and I doubt very few males would disagree with her.
        Taylor leaves the play with Warhol, who reads it aloud with 
a few ladyfriends who find the work of the "dyke" repulsive. Warhol 
doesn't want any part of this play either, but keeps in touch with 
Taylor anyway because she has this cool hippie vibe about her 
(everybody did back then). Meanwhile, Taylor keeps trying to sell 
copies of her manifesto on the street and soon signs a contract with 
a publisher to write a novel.
        Some of the scenes in I SHOT ANDY WARHOL are slow 
and dragged out, kind of like the trippy hippie experiences that 
influenced Taylor to try to kill Warhol. Ironically, Warhol and his 
open-minded self provided many of these drug-induced ideas that 
eventually pushed Taylor over the edge, convincing her that Warhol 
and her publisher were conspiring to oppress her life-changing 
works.
        Taylor's character is the very definition of mental illness, 
but still has a lot of interesting and / or amusing observations about 
society. A lot of the scenes that aren't even relevant to the Warhol 
plot are the most intriguing in the film. She relates one story toward 
the beginning of a man who paid her to walk on his chest in golf 
shoes for his own sexual gratification. It's a strange world. Even 
stranger, I still have scars on my chest from that.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I SHOT ANDY WARHOL is set mainly in the mid 60s and is based on a
true story.  It is done in quasi-documentary style and tells about the
life of Valerie Solanas (Lili Taylor) who shot Andy Warhol (Jared
Harris) because "he had too much control over my life."  The reason he
had so much control is because he would not produce her play claiming
it was "too disgusting even for us."  I can not even repeat its name in
this G rated review of an R rated film.
     The movie starts with Andy alive but his body bloody and quivering
after being shot.  The police want to know why she shot him, but she
keeps telling them it is too complicated to explain.  The film then
switches to her time in college and works it way back to the shooting.
     The best thing going for this basically worthless film is the
strong and effective performance by Lili Taylor.  Valerie describes
herself as a "butch dyke."  She is as tough as nails.  After college
she supports herself with panhandling and heterosexual prostitution
while living a life as a lesbian.  She starts a one person
revolutionary group called SCUM (Society for Cutting Up Men), and she
reads constantly from her SCUM Manifesto.  A lot of her philosophy is
obtuse.  She says, "You got to go through a lot of sex to be ready for
anti-sex."  She hangs out with her friend Stevie (Martha Plimpton) and
Stevie's girlfriend, the male transvestite Candy Darling (Stephen
Dorff).
     The cinematography (Ellen Kuras) is in color, but with many cuts
to grainy black and white footage of Valerie reading from her play or
her manifesto.  The slow editing (Keith Reamer) and the almost
non-existent music (John Cale) of the film is in sharp contrast to the
vibrant and energetic trailers for the picture.  I was impressed by the
trailers.  Warhol is right about the play being crude.  The longest
excerpt we hear has to do with everyone eating excrement.
     I had a lot of trouble trying to figure out why this picture was
made.  What was the director trying to accomplish?  I finally decided
perhaps the message was about the shallowness of the 60s drug culture
in general and of Andy Warhol in particular.  In the film, we see
unhappy people doing pills, pot, LSD, and heroin.  There is even a mock
Eucharist scene where they use the words to the Mass but give the kids
LSD cubes instead of the host.
     Andy comes off as having no visible talent, and his brain seems to
be on another planet.  When a TV reporter ask him, "Why do you spend
your time making underground films?"  He answers, "It's easier than
painting."  When asked which painters he likes best, he replies, "Oh,
all of them."
     His friends having a vastly stilted view of "The Factory" where
Warhol's people hang out and work.  His second in command as it were,
Gerard Malanga (Donovan Leitch), likens The Factory to the old MGM star
system.  He then goes on to say, "Our kids are a lot like the Disney
children except they are modern kids.  They take drugs and have sex."
     I SHOT ANDY WARHOL runs 1:40.  It is rated R.  There is nudity,
explicit sex of many flavors, some violence, bad language, and lots of
smoking and drug usage.  I would only let quite mature teenagers see
it.  I can not recommend this film whose only claim to fame, other than
the great performance by Lili Taylor, is its attempt to shock and to
show us the nihility of the 60s drug culture and of Andy Warhol.  For
Taylor's performance I give the movie * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
