Title
Review for First Kid (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I suppose one cannot dismiss "Star Search" as an utter vacuum in the
history of entertainment if it gave us Sinbad.  You may or may not recall
that The Comedian Formerly Known as David Adkins got his big break by
winning the comedy competition of the now-defunct talent contest a decade
or so ago, and that's almost enough to make up for giving us Carrot Top.
It's hard to explain my inordinate fondness for Sinbad, except to note
that I also loved Bill Cosby's stand-up, and I think of Sinbad as Cosby's
natural successor in the same way Eddie Murphy can be considered Richard
Pryor's.  Sinbad works clean _and_ funny, and he strikes me as an
incredibly decent person besides.  I have always believed that some day he
would justify my faith by making a great film comedy.  But FIRST KID is
not it.
     Sinbad plays Sam Simms, a Secret Service agent with a penchant for
loud ties and unconventional behavior which keeps him in low profile
assignments like working security at a mall where the President's
13-year-old son Luke (Brock Pierce) goes shopping for school clothes.
Little does Simms know that he is about to get up closer and more personal
with Luke:  when Luke's bodyguard (Timothy Busfield) is fired, it's Simms
who is handed the job.  That means escorting him to school, keeping track
of his pet snake and generally putting up with Luke's bad attitude.  It is
only when Simms realizes the reason for that attitude -- Luke feels
ignored and isolated -- that he decides to help Luke become a normal,
all-American teen-ager.
     FIRST KID is far from the first film about antagonists turned
inevitably like the seasons into friends; in fact, it's not even the first
film in which the antagonists are a Secret Service agent and a
Presidential family member (that would be 1994's GUARDING TESS).  And it's
not just a formula film, it's a formula film aimed at kids, which means
that clever banter is never used to establish the antagonism where a
pratfall, a bare backside or plenty of messy food can be used in its
place.  FIRST KID even manages to combine cop movie cliches (the grouchy
superior officer, played by Art LaFleur) with coming-of-age movie cliches
(the first girlfriend, played by Erin Williby).  Mind you, the film seemed
to be perfectly hilarious to the kids in the audience, although I can't
for the life of me understand why a film aimed at 12-year-olds included a
cameo by Sonny Bono.
     Still, as grossly predictable as FIRST KID is, I still found myself
smiling a lot at Sinbad.  I think he is the perfect star for a children's
film, because there is something wonderfully warm and open about his
screen persona.  Despite standing 6'5", Sinbad is more of an over-sized
teddy bear than an intimidating physical presence, and every time he
grins, it seems completely genuine.  He has precious little to work with
in FIRST KID -- a bland mentor (Robert Guillaume), an even blander
President (James Naughton) -- but the sheer force of his good nature keeps
you hoping something will come along and be deserving.  Unfortunately, he
is stuck playing with Brock Pierce, who is pleasant enough as the timid,
self-conscious Luke but doesn't have the spark to convince us he could be
obnoxious enough to irritate anyone.  When Luke gets in a fight with a
school bully ("Home Improvement's" Zachery Ty Bryan), it should be a sort
of comeuppance; instead, it's just plain sad.
     I might not have had a real problem with FIRST KID if screenwriter
Tim Kelleher and director David Mickey Evans had done what it appeared
they were initially intending to do, which is to tell a simple, harmless,
goofy buddy story with lots of physical comedy for kids.  However, they
make a big mistake by turning the conclusion into a suspense drama
involving an attempted kidnapping of Luke (extra credit points in
Cinematic Obviousness 101 if you can guess the kidnapper just from my
review).  They seem to feel that it is necessary to show Simms as a good
agent as well as a good guy, and that is fine, but the gunplay which
ensues is a bit too serious, making the last fifteen minutes somewhat
inappropriate for young children.  Far better to give Sinbad the
opportunity to take over the film, since he was clearly the best thing
they had going for them.  FIRST KID is not an unpleasant film, it's just a
blatantly unnecessary one.  Sinbad needs to search for some better
material to hang his star on.  Ed McMahon would not approve.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the writer (Tim Kelleher) who is bringing the controversial
CD-ROM game LEISURE SUIT LARRY to the big screen, we have a movie about
the FIRST KID, a. k. a., the son of the president.  I found the
trailers for the movie pretty lame so I was not looking forward to
seeing the film.  My son, Jeffrey (age 7), on the other hand, thought
the trailers were a hoot and kept asking when it was going to start so
we saw it on opening day.
     Although most of the jokes fall flat, FIRST KID is not without its
charms.  In fact, as the movie developed I begin to like parts of it,
most especially the acting by Sinbad as the First Kid's Secret Service
Agent known formally as Agent Sam Simms and informally as Agent Double
O Simms.  The quality of the script is quite low, but Sinbad played the
character with great panache as if he had just been given the best role
of the year.  It is so refreshing to see actors try so hard.  Too
often, see Val Kilmer in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU for example, actors
just brood and seem angry that the director expects them to do more
than just show up on the set.
     As the story starts, First Lady Linda Davenport (Lisa Eichhorn)
and 13-year-old First Kid Luke Davenport (Brock Pierce from THE MIGHTY
DUCKS series) are making their annual shopping trip to the mall to
demonstrate to America that they are average working stiffs like
everyone else.  The First Lady even remarks to the reporters how she is
essentially a working woman.  Like all of us working stiffs, the family
arrives in a long limousine with a phalanx of bodyguards.  The First
Kid hates his life and moons the herd of reporters that follow them in
the mall.
     The First Lady does not like the way Agent Woods (Timothy Busfield
from "thirtysomething") touches her son so she demands a new agent for
her son's protection.  Always in trouble Agent Simms is assigned to the
kid.  He becomes Luke's friend by helping him escape frequently from
The White House.
     In an absolutely predictable show, Simms warns Luke when he is
surfing the net that, "Just be careful out there in Cyberspace.  Don't
tell them anything."  This of course, serves to scare overly cautious
parents that The Net is the enemy.  Personally, I'd worry more in the
parking lot when I leave the theater.
     I have some problems with the appropriateness of parts of script.
One of the early jokes, albeit one aimed at the adults, has Simms
telling the bartender, "I'll have a Harvey Wall-Banger."  Agent Woods
one ups him with, "I'll have a Harvey Oswald."  Confused, Simms asks,
"What's the difference?"  Agent Woods gives him a devious smile
retorting, "Oswald has three shots."  Remember, these are agents sworn
to guard the lives of the President and his family.  Actually, the joke
is nothing more than a plot device so the writer can telegraph the
ending.
     Brock Pierce starts off giving nothing to the role of First Kid,
and even by the end, he warms up maybe to mediocrity.  Even worse is
James Naughton as the president.  He is terribly miscast.  He looks and
acts like, well, a mayor of a small town - one who spends his days
selling insurance.  Never, is he believable as a president of anything
more than the local Elks Club.
     Soon the First Son goes to school and the local bully, Rob
(Zachery Ty Bryan), taunts him with "I knew it.  A wus just like his
dad, the draft dodger."  They get into a fist fight where Luke gets a
busted and bloody lip while Agent Simms just watches.  Sure.
     The script tries to get us feeling sorry for Luke since he has no
friends.  Simms approach is to teach the kid boxing at a gym so he can
beat up the bully.  Again, back to my concern about some of the
messages of the show.  Nevertheless, there are some funny scenes at the
gym and elsewhere.
     The three best scenes in the show are the one where Luke asks a
girl to a dance, where Simms shoots an extra large spitball in class at
the bully, and where President Clinton calls on the videophone to ask
President Davenport to look for his lost saxophone.  My favorite minor
character is Luke's girlfriend Katie (Erin Williby).  She is sweet and
innocent, and she charms every scene she is in.  An impressive screen
presence for such a minor part.
     Finally, I feel a warning is necessary about the ending.  Given
how innocuous most of the film is, I was kind of shocked by the ending.
We have a child kidnapping scene complete with real guns, a very scared
child, slightly bloody violence, a realistic shoot-out, and a man
apparently and realistically shot dead.  If your kids worry about being
abducted, this could push them over the edge.  Now, Jeffrey was not
scared, but I bet many kids, especially younger ones, are and some
could be very frightened.
     FIRST KID runs too long at 1:41.  Editing out of the slow parts by
editor Harry Keramidas would have helped a lot.  The film is rated PG.
The language is pretty mild, and there is no sex or nudity, but note
the previous warnings about the violence.  Jeffrey gives it three
thumbs up.  Although I laughed some, there is not enough there for me
to be able to recommend it.  No matter how much energy Sinbad threw
into his role, director David M. Evans could not get much out of the
other actors so I can only give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sinbad, Brock Pierce, Blake Boyd, Robert Guillaume, 
      James Naughton, Lisa Eichorn, Timothy Busfield, Art La Fleur, 
      Zachary Ty Bryan, Bill Cobbs, Erin Williby
Director: David Mickey Evans
Producers: Roger Birnbaum and Riley Kathryn Ellis
Screenplay: Tim Kelleher
Cinematography: Anthony B. Richmond
Music: Richard Gibbs
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Chelsea Clinton must have it rough.  In addition to dealing with 
all the normal problems of adolescence, she has the added pressure of 
constantly being in the world's spotlight.  And, unlike child movie and 
TV stars, this isn't something she chose -- it's a role that was thrust 
upon her.  Though it may be slim consolation, at least her situation 
isn't as bleak as that of Luke Davenport (Brock Pierce), the title 
character of Disney's latest lame-brained live-action feature, FIRST 
KID.  Not only does he have a similar home situation to Chelsea, but, on 
top of that, he gets publically humiliated by a school bully (Zachary Ty 
Bryan) and threatened by a gun-weilding psycho at the mall.
     To me, the concept of making a movie about the child of a president 
seems like a good idea.  There's a dramatic goldmine inherent in the 
situation.  The teen years are a time of rebellion; how does a 
presidential son or daughter react to having their every minor 
infraction appear on the nightly news?  And much does it hurt to see 
their father and mother's names dragged through the mud?  While a great 
film could be made from this subject matter, FIRST KID isn't it.  Disney 
doesn't want hard-hitting, WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE-type realism.  They 
want lightweight, feel-good family fare -- the kind of movie that can 
turn a modest profit without offending anyone.
     Part of the problem is that, despite the title, this film isn't so 
much about the First Son as it is about his secret agent, Sam Simms.  
Simms is played by Sinbad, and this is obviously a vehicle for the 
comic-turned-actor.  In fact, it's his second starring role for Disney -
- he last appeared in the wretched HOUSEGUEST, which played like a 
feature-length commercial for McDonalds.  Not to be outdone this time 
around, Sinbad has two significant product plugs:  one for Duncan Donuts 
and one for Coca Cola.  You'd have to be blind or asleep to miss either.
     The story, shallow and feeble as it is, has 13-year old Luke going 
off to high school during an election year.  Luke is resentful that his 
parents (James Naughton and Lisa Eichorn) are always out on the campaign 
trail, and he takes out his frustration on the Secret Service agents 
assigned to protect him.  Agent Woods (Timothy Busfield) loses his job, 
and his replacement, Simms (who already has "a file full of borderline 
regulation infractions"), is headed in the same direction until he makes 
a remarkable discovery.  All Luke really wants is a friend.  So, by 
becoming co-conspirators in breaking White House rules (they sneak off 
to a Washington gym where Luke takes boxing lessons), they develop a 
deep and meaningful bond.  Meanwhile, at school, Luke falls for a pretty 
classmate (Erin Williby) and suffers all the typical anxiety of asking 
her out on a date.
     Not everything in FIRST KID is bad.  There are times when we feel 
for Luke, although never as deeply as we should.  It probably would have 
helped if he hadn't started out the film as such a dislikeable brat.  
And some of Sinbad's comic antics can't help but be funny -- this guy 
has got an abundance of charisma.  Unfortunately, comedy and light drama 
aren't the only things on FIRST KID's agenda.  The film ends with an 
extended action sequence that is (unintentionally) more laughable than 
Sinbad's best routine.  We get to see the star do his Clint Eastwood 
imitation by getting IN THE LINE OF FIRE.
     By aiming his film at children, director David Mickey Evans strips 
the movie of all potentially interesting elements, leaving behind 
material likely to appeal to only the least discriminating viewers.  
Then again, most Disney live-action features are about the same, so 
there shouldn't be any real surprises where FIRST KID is concerned.  The 
just-completed Democratic National Convention was better-scripted than 
this film.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FIRST KID (for kids under 10 ** ) Directed by David Mickey Evans.
Wrutten by Tim Kelleher. Photography, Anthony B. Richmond.
Editing,  Harry Keramidas. Production designer, Chester
Kaczenski. Costumes, Grania Preston. Music, Richard Gibbs.  Cast:
Sinbad (Sammy Simms), Brock Pierce (Luke Davenport), Blake
Boyd(Dash),
Timothy Busfield (Woods), James Naughton (President Davenport),
Lisa Eichhorn (the First Lady), et al. A Walt Disney Picture. 103
min. Rated PG.
Simms is not a rare last name, yet I wonder if the acronym widely
used in computer terminology (single inline memory modules) did
not influence this choice. Back to back we get David Simms (Don
Johnson) in "Tin Cup" and Sam Simms (Sinbad) in "First Kid." 
This may be the most interesting thing I have to say about "First
Kid," a wan comedy about Sammy who brings sunshine into the life
of young Luke, the son of the U.S. President.
Luke, 13 1/.2, is a pestiferous brat whose every step is followed by
a near-phalanx of Secret Service people. The sullen boy is notorious
for making their life miserable, above all for agent-in-chief Woods
who sticks to the kid (code-named Prince) like a tick. Luke also
uses his pet python to annoy or scare people. 
Matters reach a climax when the kid, reluctant to go and get
outfitted with ("dorky" says he) clothes for High School, moons 
everyone, the Press included, from shopping mall's fitting room.
The First Lady,  reacting peevishly to Agent Woods's reaction, has
him fired. His replacement is Simms whose ambition is to guard
Eagle (the President). Simms is a laid-back, unorthodox joker who
cons his way into getting freebies such as donuts. The assignment
to the Prince from Hell is a punishment. 
If you haven't guess it already, you soon realize that Luke's
nastiness comes from unhappiness. It's the old "Poor Little Rich
Kid," and "Bird in a Gilded Cage" setup. He has no friends ( an
improbable exaggeration in the script), no freedom of movement, no
normal teen-age life. His parents are too busy to take care of him,
even to see him often.
The President is a pallid character (cf. "Independence Day),  
running for re-election (cf. "The American President"). At least he's
not a crude politico as in "Dave," the best of the White House movie
fantasies. He is hardly even sketched in. 
The President is barely sketched in. The First Lady too, though we
sense that she is imperious, ambitious and cold. She could be called
by the epithet that the mother of a major player of the Opposition
to Bill Clinton used about Hillary while talking to reporter Connie
Chung. 
The movie and its development are totally predictable from the
word go. After a period of antagonism, the agent and the First Kid
bond --a cliche also familiar from boy-meets-girl flicks. The
understanding Simms breaks rule after rule to bring fun and
normalcy to Luke. You know that the bond has been cemented when,
following boxing practice in a gym, the two engage in high-fives.
"First Kid" is just a string of episodes. We get school sequences
where Simms has to attend all classes. A pretty teacher is thrown
in as a predictable (and undeveloped) romantic interest for Simms.
There's a class bully, puppy love and other unoriginalities. Hardly
any sequences flow naturally, rise above standard fare or are truly
believable.
The movie, merely mildly funny, is devoid of real humor or wit. It
often looks like an excuse for very pointed product placements,
from cereals, pizzas, doughnuts to a colossal plug for Coke.
The would-be comedic elements go from broad to very broad. At  a
Presidential reception, Simms, who wears flamboyant ties, is
rebuked by his superior "You know that this is black-tie affair."
Simms: "Got it covered. I'm wearing a tie and I'm black." Ugh.
At that reception Luke's python creates a panic. Pratfalls  follow. 
Simms plunges into a huge cake. Pie-throwing in silent films was
masterful by comparison.
The film goofs its details. As when Simms teaches Luke how to
dance, and the kid catches on far too fast. More amusing is when
the agent coaches the boy, via a two-way transmitter, to ask a girl
to a dance. This Cyrano Junior stuff could give some excellent clues
to students taking exams. 
The subject of a lonely, neglected First Kid could be interesting if
done sensitively and intelligently. Here, the closest we get  to
something substantial is when Simms tells the boy " You think it's
tough. You want my youth. Let me tell you about it." But this is not
explored either. 
All characters and performances are sketchy and by-the-numbers,
except for young Brock Pierce who is fair and Sinbad who is good.
The events are harmless and unsensational, until, that is, the film
starts wrapping up with grafted on, jarring scenes of violence,
blood and bullets. Even so, "First Kid" may work well with pre-teen
audiences -- but it is not a movie for unaccompanied adults.
