Title
Review for Suzhou he (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Just before Suzhou River unspooled at the Toronto International Film
Festival, a programmer described the film as Vertigo if it were directed
by Wong Kar-Wai.  It seemed like a silly statement to make and I
chuckled at the comparison as the lights went down.  An hour and a half
later, I walked out of the theatre in a delightful daze, wondering both
where Ye Lou came from and how he happened to make one of the year's
best films.
The film is set in Shanghai and takes place around the city's filthy
Suzhou River (hence the title).  The main character in Suzhou is a
hapless videographer whose identity is never revealed to the viewer.  We
never learn his name, and every scene he's in is filmed from his point
of view.  He spends his days spray-painting advertisements for his
struggling business around the city, and his nights are consumed by
watching videos.
The main character's lethargic nature seems to be due to a breakup with
Meimei (Xun Zhou, the blind girl from The Emperor and the Assassin), a
beautiful woman he met while he was filming the mermaid show at a bar
for one of his clients.  The film is full of flashbacks and replayed
conversations, like one haunting exchange where Meimei asks him if he'll
spend his whole life looking for her.  He says he will, but she doesn't
believe him.
A chance encounter seems to bring the main character back to life.  He
meets Mardar (Hongshen Jia), a bike messenger who has just been released
from prison.  Mardar served three years in the pokey for botching a
kidnapping attempt that he and his former girlfriend concocted to extort
money from her wealthy father.  Not only did he end up in the clink, but
his ex took a header off a bridge into the murky Suzhou after telling
him that she'd come back one day  as a mermaid.
If you've seen Vertigo, you can probably figure out that Mardar thinks
Meimei is his girlfriend (she's also played by Zhou).  Although
writer/director Ye Lou swears his film wasn't meant to be like
Hitchcock's classic, the parallels are unmistakable.  Mardar assumes the
Jimmy Stewart role, while Meimei plays the double role originally
handled by Kim Novak.
Ye Lou does an amazing job of establishing the dirty, claustrophobic
feel of both Shanghai and the gloomy, polluted Suzhou, which becomes
just as important as any of the film's characters.  You may have to go
out of your way to find it, but Suzhou is a film that should definitely
not be missed.

Author
Laura Clifford
Lao B. (Zhongkai Hua) is a videographer who falls in love with the somewhat
elusive Meimei (Xun Zhou, "The Emperor and the Assassin").  'If I disappeared,
would you search for me like Mardar did?' she asks and Lao B. recounts for
us this second tale of love which also takes place along "Suzhou River."
Writer/director Ye Lou's film of intertwining tales of love has been 
described as a Chinese "Vertigo."  It also recalls David Lynch's
"Lost Highway" with its prominent use of a videocamera and videocamera
point of view ('Don't complain if you don't like what you see - cameras
don't lie.').
Lao B. gives us a tour of the Suzhou River area with his videocamera as
our eyes (in a rather cool shot, he plays a hand slapping game with Meimei
and we see four flashing hands in the forefront with her laughing face
in the background).  We never really see Lao B.  He meets Meimei when her
boss, the owner of a shady tavern, asks him to tape his mermaid show to
use as promotion.  Meimei is the mermaid.
The bulk of the film, however, tells the tale of Mardar (Hongshen Jia)
and Moudan (Xun Zhou again, looking more childlike with her hair in pigtails).
Mardar is a good looking motorcycle courier who's paid by Moudan's father
to take her to her aunt's when he entertains his mistress.  (Moudan's father
runs an illegal vodka factory.)  Moudan, who carries a blond mermaid doll,
becomes attached to Mardar and a chaste romance develops between the two.
But wait, interrupts Lao B., before throwing some what-ifs at us which 
change Mardar's backstory.  Suddenly Mardar is tasked with holding Moudan
in a kidnap plot.  She tells him she'll find him again as a mermaid before
plunging off a bridge into the Suzhou.  After a prison sentence, Mardar
returns to find Meimei, the mermaid who looks exactly like Moudan.
Ye's video film envelops us in a dream state as we witness two men obssess
over the same(?) woman before all three/four cross paths.  Meimei/Moudan
appears to be identical (same face, same dress, same press-on tatoo),
although one is an worldly adult and the other an innocent.  
"Suzhou River" questions identity and reality within the confines of a
harsh environment.  It's tough, edgy, jaded and romantic.  Lou Ye's
accomplished a lot with very little.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
