Title
Review for Crying Game, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Stephen Rea is part of a terrorist organization in Ireland that
kidnaps soldier Forest Whitaker.  When Whitaker dies, upon Whitaker's
request, Rea goes to England to tell Whitaker's girlfriend what
happened.
     THE CRYING GAME has been in limited distribution and has just
opened nationwide.  This is a *must see* movie.  It is the best film
that I have seen in 1993.  On a scale of zero to five, I give THE
CRYING GAME a five.  THE CRYING GAME is rated R for explicit language,
adult situations, graphic violence, and brief male nudity.
     The writing for this film is great.  I am pleased to see that Neil
Jordan (MONA LISA, THE MIRACLE) has not yet conformed to Hollywood's
typical film standards.  This film is full of surprises and twists,
which make it well worth going to see.  Don't wait for the
videocassette for this film.  See it before you hear about the film's
surprises, because not knowing them makes the film all the more
enjoyable.
     The following may contain mild spoilers; read on with caution.
     THE CRYING GAME has been nominated for six academy awards; Best
Picture, Best Actor (Stephen Rea), Best Supporting Actor (Jaye
Davidson), and Film Editing (Kant Pan).  I feel that this film will
probably win at least one of the Oscars, probably Best Picture.
     The entire cast for this film is perfect.  Stephen Rea is great.
He makes his character completely believable and interesting.  Forest
Whitaker (DIARY OF A HITMAN; GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM), even though he is
not on the screen for much, is excellent.  He makes his character come
alive.  Jaye Davidson is great, and surprising.  Miranda Richardson
(DAMAGE, ENCHANTED APRIL) makes her character cruel and heartless.
Adrian Dunbar (HEAR MY SONG) gives a good performance as the leader of
the terrorist organization.  The man who plays the English bar keep is
excellent and reminds me of Robert Englund in "Nightmare Cafe."

Author
Stoneheel Michael
     Usually, when evaluating a film I try to isolate the formalist
elements and to analyze how they form aesthetics components which
relate to the theme and sometimes to a certain meaning.  This time it
seems irrelevant to proceed in such a manner because the film is based
on one and only one thing, namely the secret.
     It is very easy to notice that the revelation of the secret
shutters the expectations of the spectators.  The cinema is the perfect
media for such a turning point.  No sentence could have such a sudden
effect as the harsh visual exposure.  Obviously, the exposure effects
everyone, but how?
     For a male spectator, it is the culmination of an erotic scene.
Normally, he would identify himself with the hero, considering his love
actions his own.  When the true nature of the heroine is exposed so
suddenly, the spectator is forced to react emotionally and to
sympathize with the hero.  The general feeling seems to be of a shock.
What about the female spectator?
     Even tough I am not a woman, I think that the mechanism of
identification works for women in a symmetric way.  Naturally, after
the exposure the woman spectator has no one to be sexually identified
with.  The reaction of a woman spectator could be: "what?", "no!",
"yes!", "at last!?", "Disgusting!", but the most reasonable one would
be - "Definitely, it isn't I".  From this point, the man spectator may
succeed to put the feeling of astonishment behind (and this is not a
simple task) and to reconnect to the hero, but the woman spectator
seems to lost her contact with the main characters.
     One may argue at this stage that I am missing the whole point, and
that this film is not about sex, nor about love, but about our nature
and about learning to accept each person as himself.  After all how
could we forget the frog and the scorpion?
     It seems that such an argument makes sense.  The terrorist is
destructive in nature, the blond woman is cruel in nature, the hero is
good in his nature, and the heroine is a woman by her (or should we say
his) nature.  We could extend this principle even further.  A murderer
hurts people in his nature, war is horrible in its nature, and this
film is far from being perfect in its nature.  If this film is about
love, than love is one-sided or possible only in a detached way.  If it
is about morality, the ideas are superficial.  The only valid
interpretation seems to be that this film is about accepting the
different as a beloved human being.  Now, can the usage of the secret
be justified?
     It might be correct that in order to understand the different one
has to believe that he is normal.  Should we treat the heroine in a
different way before the secret is exposed and at the end of the film?
In fact, the heroine hasn't been changed.  The only persons changed are
us.  It is not difficult to sympathize with the heroine because she is
the only pure character in the film.  Most of the men characters are
terrorists, the two good men accept the heroine as she is, and the only
woman character is detestable.  The only problem is that it is very
difficult to transcend beyond our expectations and beyond the shock.
     Personally, I would prefer that such an important subject would be
handled in a more directed fashion that could effect a larger
audience.  I might be totally wrong, but is seems to me that this film
is another "womenless" film, directed by a man, intended mainly for
men, and has no women main characters.  The heroine itself is a
substitute for a woman.  I would rather see a film directed by a woman
with balanced roles for both sexes.  Why?

Author
Ron Hogan
1)  Excerpted from an interview with David Cronenberg in INNER VIEWS, a
collection of interviews with seven contemporary directors:
     Because in a cinema you are abstracting yourself from
     your daily life to have this special moment, this
     sacrament... But the very fact that you have abstracted
     yourself from you everyday life means you have disinvolved
     yourself, the process, from your life (235).
One of the things about growing up in what Jack Nicholson referred to in
a recent interview as the "post-literate generation" is that, from the
age of nine or so onward, film and cinema ceased to hold as much of that
sacramental mystique for me.  First through cable television, and later
and more powerfully through the VCR, the breadth and depth of cinema
became available in my home.  Cronenberg again: "It's almost unthinkable
now, that you did not have access to films except when they came out in
the cinema and then disappeared forever..." (236).  Through the process
of overfamiliarization, perhaps even saturation, I came to recognize the
conventional patterns around which films are organized--so individual
films rarely hold any suspense for me.  It seems that about one film a
year can come up with a plot twist that genuinely shocks me.  In 1991,
it was the true nature of Branagh's "I'm not Roman" line in DEAD AGAIN,
and in 1992, it is THE CRYING GAME.
2)  Since my film reviews have centered around what's in a film and what
can perhaps be extracted from its contents, rather than whether or not
you should go out and see it, I have been pretty casual with regards to
spoilers.  It helps that all the films I've previously reviewed have not
had any major surprises.  This is not the case with THE CRYING GAME.
Two of my ten points revolve around the genuine surprise contained
within the film.  That makes this review a genuine spoiler, so I've
decided to put a control-L after this paragraph.  If you haven't seen
the film, don't spoil it for yourself by reading the rest of this
article.
3)  The girl that isn't a girl: that genuinely surprising moment for me
is, of course, that beautiful tracking shot that starts from her head
and slowly goes down her body, soaking up her nakedness, culminating in
a full set of testicles.  I dare anybody to see that coming beforehand.
It's interesting that the film places her as one part of the only true
functional relationship, the unseen relationship between her and Jody.
The point being that love/trust isn't something that necessarily takes
place between a man and a woman, and that being a man or a woman isn't
necessarily related to having testicles or a vagina.  The bond between
Jody and Fergus, for example, is a strong bond, which has nothing to do
with the fact that both of them are men.  Placing a character in the
film who "is" simultaneously male and female emphasizes that this is a
film about relationships between *human beings*.
4)  Jaye Davidson does a fantastic job as Dil, probably the most
difficult film role of 1992.  One wonders if she were to be nominated
for an Oscar--AMPAS members could have a real puzzler on their hands as
to whether or not somebody with testicles can be nominated for Best
Actress or not.  This is a largely rhetorical question, of course--if
nothing else, the Academy will bend over backwards to find five people
with vaginas to throw into consideration--probably Emma Thompson and
Susan Sarandon included.  But in general, I don't think this has been an
especially good year for women's roles in film.
5)  Stephen Rea will not get nominated for Best Actor for Fergus,
because there's a glut of actors to choose from this year.  Which is a
shame, as he does a fantastic job playing a man trying to cope with all
the things that life throws at him: coming to respect a man and then
having to shoot that man; falling in love with a woman who turns out to
be a man; getting pulled back into a life he's trying to escape.  And on
his looks alone, especially after he gets his haircut in England, he has
the potential to be at least a minor sex symbol for the 90s if he plays
his cards right.
6)  Good to see Neil Jordan making a film for himself again--that seems
to be what he does best.  Though even his Hollywood films don't feel
like complete sellouts, and HIGH SPIRITS showed some genuine
potential--plus he never got a chance to supervise the cutting of that
film.  But it's in a situation like this, when Jordan is in control of
the vision, that he truly excels as a filmmaker.
7)  I had something to say about terrorism here, but I can't remember
what it was.  Only that it had something to do with a psychological
condition--the Stockholm syndrome--in which the hostages come to
identify with their captors.  An opposite process looks to occur within
this film, partly because Fergus isn't really cut out for
terrorism--he's got the skills, but not the heart.  As I said before, a
genuine bond takes place between Jody and Fergus, but I add now that
it's purposefully cultivated by Jody as a straw at which to grab when it
comes time to make the escape attempt.
8)  That bond is rooted in the fact that although one man is black and
the other white, one English and the other Irish, they are both men.
There are certain qualities that transcend national and ethnic
boundaries: the need for respect and self-respect, the love of a good
woman, the need for the sort of dignity that comes from being able to
take your own penis out of your boxers when you need to urinate.  It's
the search for those self-qualities that Fergus takes up even after
Jody's death--they are brought into the forefront when the two men are
talking, but they remain throughout the rest of the film.
9)  So the films about people's natures--a point brought home by the
telling of the parable of the frog and the scorpion *twice*.  Since the
best known source of that parable is Orson Welles' CONFIDENTIAL REPORT
(also known as MR. ARKADIN), I was trying to build up a connection
between the two films, at least in my mind, and it is this--the stories
of men who, in the midst of violent situations of intrigue, struggle to
discover the true identity of themselves and of their adversary--after
all, Fergus' affair with Dil is part of his attempt to understand what
Jody was really like, why he affected Fergus so.  Also, as in Welles'
TOUCH OF EVIL, nobody is who they appear to be in this film--only in THE
CRYING GAME, the differences become much more divergent, rooted in the
character's own bodies.
10) For a British film, there's a lot of American pop music, the two
main selections of which are used quite ironically, though the true
irony of "When a Man Loves a Woman" only becomes apparent halfway
through the film.  Lyle Lovett's cover of "Stand By Your Man" was so
perfectly suited to the ending of the film, though--the good humor with
which Fergus has sardonically adjusted to Dil's maleness really comes
through in his aloofness, and the song is the culmination point of the
ironic way Jordan deals with the revelation once it has been made.  As
for the song "The Crying Game," I had never heard it before, so I don't
honestly know if it's British or American, but Boy George's version
isn't half bad--and how appropriate to have the title song sung by the
one pop star of the eighties who most successfully embodied androgyny.
Heck, for the first month or so of "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me," I
thought he *was* a woman.  So it was a genuine surprise much like the
one provided by this excellent film when the truth came out.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     [Spoiler comments follow main review.]
     At an amusement park in Northern Ireland, English soldier Jody (played
by Forest Whitaker) has a good-looking local girl on his arm.  They go off
to be alone and suddenly Jody finds there are three men holding guns on him.
The IRA has kidnapped Jody.  They will kill him if the IRA prisoner held by
the English is not released.  Jody is brought to a hiding place.  There he
begins the slow task of picking out one of his captors and trying to make
him an ally.  He chooses Fergus (played by Stephen Rea).  Jody shows Fergus
a picture of his girlfriend Dil (played by Jaye Davidson).  Little do Jody,
Fergus, and Dil know how the one action has bound them together.
     THE CRYING GAME is a film for you to go to see ... quickly.  Don't read
any more reviews.  This is a tough film to review without revealing any of
the plot twists.  Word is going to get around soon about this film.  See it
first.  And don't tell anyone else either.
     THE CRYING GAME was written and directed by Neil Jordan, who previously
directed and co-wrote MONA LISA.  The similarities will be obvious.  Each
film has an intelligent script that lulls characters and audience alike into
one set of assumptions, then turns those assumptions inside out.  The two
films have much the same visual style.  Jaye Davidson and Cathy Tyson are
both sexy and attractive in much the same way.  In both cases the main
character is a white male in love with the beautiful centerpiece of the film
across racial lines.  And in fact it seems unimportant that it is across
racial lines, though each comes from a fairly racist culture.  This film and
MONA LISA each has a delightful sense of irony which in THE CRYING GAME
extends to the music over the end credit sequence.
     The two black stars both have to be surprisingly versatile in this film
and each manages.  Forest Whitaker (GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM!; CRIMINAL
JUSTICE; and A RAGE IN HARLEM) is an odd choice to play an English soldier.
His accent rings very true to my admittedly non-British ears.  Jaye
Davidson's performance will be the best remembered of the film probably.
The part calls for Dil to go through some major changes and Davidson is
always to the mark.
     The film did not quite make sense in that neither of the people would
have been sent to prison.  In either case it was self-defense against a
person who had been involved in a previous IRA killing.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     THE CRYING GAME is a film written and directed by Neil Jordan.  It
stars Stephen Rea, Jaye Davidson, Forest Whitaker, and Miranda
Richardson.  Rated R for nudity and mature themes.
     THE CRYING GAME is Jordan's best film since MONA LISA.  After a
string of flops---THE MIRACLE, WE'RE NO ANGELS, and the awful HIGH
SPIRITS---it's a profound relief to know that he is still capable of
making a film that is both thoughtful and gripping.
     This is a difficult film to review.  To discuss it properly would
require me to give away many of the surprises it holds in store for you.
     Stephen Rea plays Fergus, an IRA terrorist, who helps kidnap Jody,
a black English soldier played by Forest Whitaker.  The IRA want to
exchange Jody for one of their own men who is being interrogated by the
British.  If he's not handed back to them in three days, the IRA will
kill Jody.  Fergus has a kinder nature than the other kidnappers, who
see Jody only as a bargaining token, and he is gradually befriended by
Jody: Fergus feeds Jody, talks to him, and spends many hours guarding
him alone.  Jody grows to trust Fergus and knowing that he probably
won't survive, he shows a picture of his girlfriend to Fergus and asks
him to look her up.
     After the kidnapping ends in a bloody raid by the British Army,
Fergus barely escapes with his life.  Deciding to lie low for a while,
he heads "across the water" to London, where he gets himself a job as a
brickie on a building site.  Jimmy, as he now calls himself, finds Dil
(Jody's girlfriend, played by Jaye Davidson) and becomes friends with
her.  Of course, they start to fall in love.  Life suddenly becomes far
more complicated when the other survivors of the IRA cell catch up with
him.
     There are some obvious parallels to MONA LISA.  In both, the stars
are gentle, kind, naive men trapped in circumstances beyond their
control, with obligations to their ruthless bosses.  In both, they fall
in love with a beautiful, self-destructive black woman (though in
neither film is their colour important).
     THE CRYING GAME is not, however, a simple-minded reworking of MONA
LISA.  For one thing, it's not so bleak in tone.  Dil is sweeter, more
innocent, and less self-destructive than her counterpart in MONA LISA,
and Fergus is made of somewhat sterner stuff than Bob Hopkins's
character.
     THE CRYING GAME is a voyage of self discovery.  Fergus comes to
learn about himself, about the nature of loyalty, friendship, love, and
sexual attraction.
     This is a wonderful film, much better than my meager reviewing
skills are able to convey to you.  THE CRYING GAME works well both as a
thriller and as a love story.  Jordan has filled the film with
unheralded surprises, and the central surprise, the point upon which
much of the film turns, was completely unexpected to most of the
audience---including me.  Not only are the direction and the plot
excellent, but so too are the performances; in particular, those of
Davidson (whose first film this is) and Rea.
     I don't yet know which is the better film, MONA LISA or THE CRYING
GAME.  I'm not even sure if the question is worth asking---both are
excellent films and the comparison is somewhat invidious.  I do know
that I will enjoy watching THE CRYING GAME again and that it's been too
long since I last saw MONA LISA.
     Recommended.  One of the best films of the year.
________________
George V. Reilly   
