Title
Review for Thing, The (1982)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jason Overbeck
Don't want to see John Waters' Pecker than check out John Carpenter's
Thing.  That must be the ultimate control issue for directors, making
others ask to see your joystick.  If I ever make a film I'm sure I'll
title it Jason Overbeck's Third Leg.  Keeping with this train of thought
did you know Roger Ebert said of John Carpenter's Thing, that "Teenagers
can dare one another to watch."  I'll leave that one alone.
The Thing is a very effective movie, with scenes of shear suspense and
moments of terror and disgust.  It opened in 1982 with mixed reviews and
now seems to be a minor classic.  People will always remember the dogs
and the open-up chest and that blood-test scene.  They are perfectly
set-up and delivered, you can smile at the nifty special effects and
remember the good ole days before computer effects made lazy
imaginations.  Would any studio get away with a film like The Thing
now?  Hell no!  Not with that ending, those violent scenes with animals
and the general yuck feeling.
The story has a group of scientists in isolated Antarctica being
attacked by an alien that kills and replaces with a perfect clone.  Who
is and isn't infected?  Who can tell, the isolation has drawn strange
emotional states for all of these characters.  Leading the pack is pilot
(and antihero) MacReady (Kurt Russell) in a wacky-cool hat and a full
beard.  He is not unaffected by the isolation, he drinks too much and
plays long games of chess on his computer, but when duty calls he takes
command of the questionable group.
Guessing who is and isn't The Thing is almost impossible, everyone seems
to separate from each other and then look spooky.  The result leaves you
on the edge of your seat as they try to unmask the alien.  The final
answer leads you to feel that the screenwriter could have just picked a
name from a hat.  That doesn't matter much because this film is all
execution and the execution is slick, sick and a little gross.  It
recalls John Carpenter's much better classic Halloween.

Author
Byron Hinson
I have been a long-time fan of all John Carpenter movies, yes even Big
Trouble In Little China, but The Thing was the first Carpenter movie I ever
saw. The moody lighting, great acting, special effects and music drew me
into the film and it has remained one of my all time favourite movies ever
since.
This 'Collector's Edition' DVD not only comes with Dolby Digital 5.1
Surround Sound, but also a whole bunch of special features.
The Thing stars Kurt Russell in the role of MacReady, A.Wilford Brimley as
Blair and Donald Moffat as Garry. Kurt Russell is excellent in the lead role
of alcoholic MacReady, it is one of the few roles he has been really good in
(Breakdown not included).
The plot goes as follows..In the winter of 1982, a twelve-man research team
(don't know what they were actually doing there in the first place) at a
remote Antarctic research station discovers an alien buried in the snow for
over 100,000 years. Soon unfrozen, the form-changing alien wreaks havoc,
creates terror and becomes one of them. "The Thing" is a shapeshifter, and
it can change to any organic form it likes. And its really, really hard to
kill. Dr Blair gradually goes mad while calculating all of the possibilities
for a take-over by such an alien lifeform. The remaining team members become
weary of one another, as it is almost impossible to detect where the alien
could be.
The movie is excellent, John Carpenter manages to blend together the perfect
amount of tension, action and gore, while not being as scary as Halloween.
Now onto the actual DVD itself...The quality of the picture is wonderful,
far, far higher in quality than I ever imagined it would be, if you have
ever seen "The Thing" on TV or Video you really haven't seen it. The white,
blue and red colours are stunning, as the movie is set in the Antarctic
you'll see a lot of snow, ice and fire. The gorier parts of the movie stand
out, Rob Bottin's special effects seem to be highly enhanced on this DVD.
There are a number of bonus extras packed onto this DVD, they include an
great documentary "The Thing: Terror Takes Shape" which features Carpenter,
Russell, Cundey and many other members of the cast, they go into great
detail explaining film, special effects etc. The running commentary is also
well made, with Carpenter and Russell discussing all aspects of the movie
and for once on a DVD, never boring you to death with pointless dribble.
The DVD also includes various outtakes from "The Thing" and once you view
them, I think you will be glad they never made it into the movie.
There were a couple of things that disappointed me about the DVD, no 16X9
enhancements, and I would have also liked to see the script of the movie on
the CD, but they can be forgiven.
Overall....this is one of the best DVD's currently available, not only in
terms of picture and sound quality, but also with the amount of added bonus
features.
Running Commentary with Kurt Russell and director John Carpenter.
John Carpenter's THE THING: Terror Takes Shape, an 80-minute original
documentary, featuring interviews with John Carpenter, Kurt Russell, special
effects make-up designer Rob Bottin, legendary matte artist Albert Whitlock,
plus many other members of the cast, crew and special effects team.
- Never-before-seen stop motion animation footage cut from the film.
-Exclusive work-in-progress visual effects footage.

Author
Michael Turton
The Thing (1982) (a.k.a John Carpenter's The Thing)
Directed by John Carpenter.  Starring Kurt Russell.
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
Director John Carpenter once noted in an interview that he was puzzled by the
the indifference of audiences to _The Thing_. In view of the cult status of so
many of his films, the failure of _The Thing_ to find popularity is a bit of a
mystery, all the more so since it features the same pairing of director and
actor (Kurt Russell) that helped make _Escape from New York_ a cult classic.
_The Thing_ is taken from one of the best SF short novels ever written, a
Golden Age work by John Campbell entitled "Who Goes There?." There are some
changes which in my view strengthen the storyline (surprising for a Hollywood
script). The film is also a remake of an old (and now hokey) horror movie.
The story takes place in an isolated antarctic research station.  As the film
begins, a dog shows up chased by a seeming madman in a helicopter.  When the
man accidently shoots one of the station personnel in an attempt to kill the
dog, he is shot to death by one of the researchers.  The dog wanders around
the station for a few hours before being put in the kennel with the other
dogs.  When he is, strange things begin to happen.
Meanwhile MacReady (Kurt Russell), the taciturn helicopter pilot, hops over
to the madman's point of origin, a Norwegian research station.        There he
discovers that everyone is dead.  Some of the bodies are bizarrely changed,
others the result of bloodily painful suicide.        Slowly, as the evidence comes
in, MacReady learns that the Norwegians found an ancient spacecraft beneath
the ice that contained an alien capable of assimilating and becoming any
species, from dog to human.  As the story unfolds, it becomes apparent that
not everyone at the research station is human anymore.......
The story moves at a more leisurely pace than some of Carpenter's other
tales, since the viewer needs more information to understand what is going
on. Characters are boldly-drawn, just this side of being stereotypes, but
MacReady, whose character screams Vietnam vet, is given an introspective side
which doesn't quite save him from becoming the cliched hard-edged, gruff
hero.
The special effects are excellent and have held up well, although there are
some fairly silly inconsistencies that are probably necessary to increase the
horror factor.        For example, people's bodies split open and the alien pops
out a la the film _Alien_.  Why?  The alien is not _inside_ the person, the
alien _is_ the person.        The sound effects are wonderful, especially in the
scene where one of the station personnel, fleeing the station during his
"change," suddenly reveals he is an alien.  Tiresomely, as in too many other
movies, the horrifying aliens look like insects.  Is there no other form they
can take?
Carpenter's direction is competent and the tension builds well, following the
original story more or less faithfully in general right up to the end, where
there is a radical departure.  Unlike Campbell's original, in which the good
guys win out by a nose, Carpenter's version is both bloodier and more
ambiguous, requiring much more sacrifice.  In that sense, the movie is more
realistic than the original story.  In my judgement, the changes Carpenter
made in the plot make it a much stronger story.  Additionally, the
understated score by a veteran movie composer is a winner.
Carpenter resists well the urge to Hollywoodize this classic. There is no love
story here (no female characters), no redemptive ending and no blond-haired,
blue-eyed people save the world.  Instead, a bunch of relatively real people
muddle their way through, fouling up right and left, led by a hero who is
constantly off balance.
_The Thing_ is one of my personal favorites.  I give it 4 out of 5 stars.
Always a solid rental choice.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
