Title
Review for Vatel (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Who wants to be Louis XIV, Le Roi Soleil?  I don't, do you? 
Louis knew how to extract maximum torment from those
around him, but even worse, he could be a pain in the butt to
himself--literally.  Director Roland Joffe ("The Mission," "The
Killing Fields") is intent on evoking this early on in his new
movie, "Vatel."  We hear grunts and groans from off screen
to the left.  If this His Majesty enjoying one of his ladies-in-
waiting in his boudoir?  Not this time...this moment it's Louis
(Julian Sands) evacuating the wastes of his latest banquet in
the toilet.  No, wait, not the toilet at all but a section of a
large room adjoining the dining facilities in which Louis is
carrying out his natural functions in front of just about
everyone (just as Lyndon Johnson used to do) after which 
his butt is not figuratively kissed but literally wiped by an
appreciative servant.  Shortly after that Joffe, who is no
sexist, treats us to the ways that the royal women take to
their toilet: they too have servants holding pans under their
lavish dresses, then sympathetically towed away the fluids.
   "Vatel," however, is far from a sophomoric journey into the
culture and customs of Animal House inhabitants.  Aside from
scant moments such as these, the picture--which centers on
a feast for the king and retinue given by rural inhabitants of a
province in Western France in 1671--is for us a banquet for
the eyes.  This film is franc-ly the most lavish depiction of the
French court ever filmed, but it is not only that. "Vatel," for all
its seeming remoteness to the Western nations in the present
day, cleverly mocks the ways that the powerful in our own
societies deal with those who serve them.  The dominant
forces will betray us at the drop of a chapeau.  They will
exploit our labors and toss us to the wolves whenever they
are pleased to do so.  They may now wear pin-striped suits
rather than the foppish outfits so authentically portrayed by
costume designer Yvonne Lassinot de Nesle; they may
pretend to be humble and democratic, unlike the regal
processesion that parades before our eyes under Robert
Fraisse's lens.  But Jeanne Jabrune could as well be writing
about our own twenty-first century as he is about France in
the age of that country's most famous monarch.
   The story's thrust comes from an invitation delivered by
Louis XIV's favorite stooge, the Marquis de Lauzun (Tim
Roth), to the provincial Prince de Conde (Julian Glover)
announcing that the Versailles court will favor the prince's
western regions for a touch of rustic life.  "Don't fuss," says
the king, which the prince translates as "Go all out for His
Majesty."  What would a successful blowout do for the
prince?  This would lead to his appointment as commander-
in-chief of the French forces about to wage war against
William of Orange in Holland, and would open the coffers of
treasury honcho Colbert (Hywel Bennett), giving the area an
influx of funds that would save it from bankruptcy. 
   Since the key to a man's heart can be found in his
stomach, the prince enlists the aid of his talented steward,
Francois Vatel (Gerard Depardieu), to set up a groaning
board, a wise choice since the master chef is able not only to
lead a cadre of peasants in the preparation of the meal but is
able to con his suppliers into handing him the victuals without
payment.  Despite his ungainly appearance, he catches the
eye of one of the king's ladies-in-waiting, Anne de Montausier
(Uma Thurman), who readies herself to serve the king at
midnight while the deceitful Marquis de Lauzun schemes to
win her favors as well.
   Roland Joffe's take on the arrogance of privilege and the
inevitability of betrayal is particularly noteworthy not so much
because he shows us something we didn't already know but
because he spares no outlay in evoking for us the manners
of the French court in its heyday.  We see the no-expense-
spared desperation of a poverty-stricken province to please
the guy in charge; the foppishness and insolence of
hereditary officials who look eagerly forward to going to war
(as long as they're safely ensconced at Versailles); the
depraved sexual appetities of be-wigged and mustachioed
nobles who think nothing of appropriating small boys to
appease their lust.  As for the performances, that Tim Roth
almost steals the show is nothing new.  As the Marquis
envious of the king's absolute power, he is determined to go
after the woman of his dreams, stopping at nothing to get her
under the bedsheets--even though at one point, while asking
for a date, Anne tells him that she has received a better offer:
to delouse the king's spaniel.
   Uma Thurman is nothing to look out and goodness knows
why anyone would desire her colorless, weepy character, but
at least her chemistry with Gerard Depardieu exceeds what
we witnessed this year between Mel Gibson and Helen Hunt
or between Matt Damon and Penelope Cruz.  The film as
whole, though, serves us food for thought along with the
victuals of the banquet in this lush eye-popping spectacle.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 102 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Susan Granger
   Based on a true story and adapted into English by Tom
Stoppard from Jeanne Labrune's French screenplay, this elegant,
elaborate 17th century costume drama is propelled by the scheme of a
nearly bankrupt French prince (Julian Glover) to save his province by
entertaining King Louis XIV (Julian Sands) and his courtiers so
lavishly that he will gain favor and patronage.  To this end, he
relies on his master steward Vatel (Gerard Depardieu), an artist with
the power to "create and astonish," to design and orchestrate an
incredibly decadent weekend-in-the-country, a bacchanal of eating,
drinking, sport and opulent theatrical spectacles. What's unexpected
is that, amidst the various sensual pleasures and treacherous sexual
liaisons, the King's new courtesan, Anne de Montausier (Uma Thurman),
will take a fancy to Vatel, seeking him out amidst his army of
peasants in the kitchen galleys, which infuriates the King's scheming
confidante (Tim Roth), whom she spurns.  Director Roland Joffe ("The
Killing Fields") concocts an indulgent feast-for-the eye but what he
sacrifices at the banquet is character development. Many relationships
and political intrigues are left unexplored and unexplained. As a
result, the audience remains emotionally uninvolved. Cinematographer
Robert Fraisse, designer Jean Rabasse and costumer Yvonne Sassinot de
Nesle create magnificent pageantry and authentically gilded excess
within the vast chateau where Vatel, literally, has a finger in every
pot, inventing whipped cream when the eggs go bad, drawing miraculous
confections out of spun sugar, and defending a scullery lad from the
unwanted advances of the Sun King's gay brother. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Vatel" is a sumptuous 7, appealing particularly to
the appetites of art-house audiences.

Author
Indra Moeljadi
The Cannes Film Festival always produces good movies. At least that's what
they say. So I went to Vatel, a non-Hollywood movie, first released in
Cannes.
Although it is a non-Hollywood movie, it has all the elements of Hollywood.
A big budget, a big set, and famous Hollywood artists (Uma Thurman, Tim
Roth). The only french things in it is Gerard Depardieu and the setting.
Set in 1671, the story is about the visit of King Louis XIV to the Castle of
Prince Conde. The Prince of Conde must prepare a set of festivities to make
sure that the King is happy, so he assigns his Master Steward, Francois
Vatel, (Depardieu) to prepare a three-day banquet.
The whole movie is set in the huge Castle of Conde. Very detailed
background, you can see the difference between kingdom and peasants in
seconds. I can't recall any other movie set in 17th century France with such
precise details. From the castle, to the clothes, to the props, to the food.
But with this good set comes a vague story. For the first hour I was still
guessing where the movie is going to. There weren't a lot of conversations,
and when there was one, it was short with high-class language. It looked
like a love triangle, but it wasn't. Actually it was just the Master Steward
preparing the whole party. And then the fish came too late, or he was just
too impatient.
It's worth watching only when you're interested in 17th century France. Or
Gerard Depardieu's big nose. After all, it is a non-Hollywood movie. If
you're looking for action or suspense, then just go to The Gladiator or MI-2
again.
