Title
Review for Pariah (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Matherly
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Damon Jones, Dave Ward, David Lee Wilson, Aimee Chafin, Angela
Jones, Anna Padgett, Dan Weene, Ann Zupa, Brandon Slater, Jason Posey,
Chris Jarecki, Terence Washington, Tyrone Young, Orlando Estrada, Robert
Hargett, Elexa Williams, Tupelo Jerome, Ray Wadsworth, Kelly McCrary,
Joe Wood, Clint Curtis, Lynn Odell, Michael Turner, Candy Ass
Written and Directed by: Randolph Kret
Running Time: 105 minutes
Aggressive, bleak, and unrelenting film about an interracial couple,
Steve and Sam (Damon Jones and Elexa Williams respectively), who are
viciously attacked in a parking garage one night by a gang of
skinheads.  The skinheads beat Steve, then force him to watch as they
brutally rape his girlfriend over and over again.  When Sam kills
herself later that evening, Steve decides that the skinheads must be
taught a lesson.  Waiting seven months for the thuggish skinheads to
forget about the incident entirely, Steve shaves his head, dresses in
combat boots and suspenders, tattoos his flesh with Nazi symbols, and
tries to infiltrate the gang.  As he gets closer and closer to the
people who committed the horrible crime against his girlfriend, he
begins to learn just how vicious these people really are and starts to
question his own motives for violence.
Randolph Kret's script, based on two real life incidents that affected
not only his life but the life of the film's producer Shaun Hill, is an
affront on violence and intolerance.  The film causes its audience to be
subjected to such brutality and ignorance that one can't help but be
disgusted by the events presented within.  I've seen it said that this
is the film Fight Club should have been, but David Fincher's film was
trying to define a generation.  Kret's film is a wake up call to a
generation and his message is a powerful one.  If Fincher is the Kubrick
of our generation, then Kret is our D.W. Griffith (thematically
speaking).
There is not a single likable character in the film.  The skinheads are
obviously the most repulsive characters in the film, not only because of
their beliefs but because they are in a constant state of fury (not just
against other races but within their own circles).  The African-American
characters in the film are constantly shown as sexually assaulting drug
abusers who are always on a joyride looking for someone to accost.  Even
gay men get in on the act, locating the skinheads' lair and beating them
severely with lead pipes and other blunt objects.  The main character
Steve is also unlikable because of the person he becomes just to seek
out revenge.  What all of this comes down to is the simple message that
violence begets violence, and the constant clashes between factions will
do nothing but continue the endless cycle of violence inherent in our
society.
The cast of this film is absolutely remarkable.  Damon Jones shows a raw
energy that many actors can't seem to summon these days and his
performance seems nothing less than powerful.  His initial reaction to
hearing about his girlfriend's suicide is one of the most affecting
scenes I have ever seen in a film.  David Lee Wilson, who plays
(appropriately enough) David Lee is accurately evil as the second in
command skinhead who also makes extra money performing oral sex on other
men (an irony that seems lost on the other skinheads).  Wilson's
character is pure hatred and he brings out this hate perfectly.  Sadly,
actor Dave Ward, who portrays the character of Crew, will not be able to
follow up his excellent performance as he was the victim of a vicious
act of violence himself at the hands of a fellow actor during an
incident of road rage.  Ward showed immense promise and he will be
greatly missed.
Note: It is a shame that the filmmakers had to add a disclaimer to the
end of the film stating that neither they nor the musicians contributing
music for the film condone racism.  The message about hatred couldn't be
spelled out any more clearly than it is here, but there are those who
would probably find this film much more akin to a training video than a
condemnation.
There are no "winners" at the end of this film either.  No character
gets his or her comeuppance and the ending leaves us almost right where
we began.  Where American History X had redemption for most of its
characters, no such victories are in store for Pariah's band of twisted
souls.  It is this bleak ending that carries the film's most powerful
message: the message that, despite what you may be able to momentarily
do to put your own mind to rest, evil will still be with us (and in many
forms) and there is very little than can be done to eradicate it
entirely.
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Editor - The Jacksonville Film Journal
http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Ann Alvarez
Pariah is an explosive realistic look at the world of "Skinheads". As a
hispanic female, to watch the hatred portrayed against all races not
white,and abuse towards women in general. It is a slap in the face of
the realism that exists in the world today. The cast is absolutely
riveting and convincing in their portrayal. Damon Jones and Dave Owen
Ward stand out in their portrayal of skinhead and avenger. Jones, starts
out as a decent guy,whom happens to be involved in an interracial
relationship. At the wrong place at the wrong time, a group of skinheads
masterminded by Ward,rape and beat Jones girlfriend as he helplessly is
forced to watch.  She then commits suicide, which triggers Jones to take
a twisted turn of events, as he now is seeking vindication  for what has
become of his life. He becomes one of them (skinhead) after much
resistance from them. Aimee Chaffin(Sissy) brings a raw look into todays
street youth, that is hard on the outside,yet soft in the inside. And
you, as a viewer,can see through. Brandon Slater also delivers a
realistic look into an autistic youth who happens to be involved in the
world of skinheads, because of his sister, Sissy. Slater(Doughboy) is
the most endearing of all portrayed. How this all ends, will leave you
thinking about the world we live in and the society we've bred. This is
not a movie for the faint hearted or people whom simply choose to look
the other way and ignore the realisms of life. Randolph Kret has
directed a winner in my eyes. BRAVO!
ANN ALVAREZ                                              VENICE CA.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In Frank Loesser's musical "Most Happy Fella," a quartet of
guys who are standing on the corner watching all the girls go
by begin singing, "Brother, you can't go to jail for what you're
thinking."  Good thing.  Thoughts and fantasies of hate are
far more common than physical displays of these emotions:
feelings of racism and homophobia are probably more typical
than we presume.  Very fortunately, these feelings are
physically acted upon in only a relatively small minority of
cases.  "Pariah" demonstrates some of these.
   Randolph Kret's movie is thrown together helter-skelter,
scenes popping up before our eyes without rhyme or reason, 
but the picture is so visceral, has no much damn frenetic
energy, that it compels our attention.  The performers are
charged up throughout, giving us in the audience barely a
moment to reflect on what's going on, but then again, the
characters in this movie are probably clueless themselves
about their motivations.  They profess that they hate
"niggers," "spics," "fags," "kikes," "pussies" and all the
others in the country who are not exactly like them--and in
fact each often appears to hate his fellow in this pathetic
skinhead cult and, of course, himself as well.  Ultimately,
though, they get into daily fights not so much because they
can't stand members of minority groups but because fighting
is fun.  Like the boxers in David Fincher's "Fight Club" who
profess to dislike rampant consumerism and the feminization
of the male sex in America, the reasons they give for
confrontations are mere rationalizations.  These are empty-
headed, emotionally crippled individuals who would have to
face their nothingness if they could not dominate those who
were physically--but certainly not intellectually--weaker than
they.
   "Pariah" focuses particularly on Steve (Damon Jones), a
formerly peaceable white guy who becomes a hater because
he witnesses the rape and subsequent suicide of his black
girl friend (Elexa Williams).  Attacked by a band of skinheads
who beat the stuffing out of him and force him to watch the
gangbang, Steve becomes Dirty Harry, a one-man army who
takes the law into his own hands by going underground,
becoming a skinhead, and worming his way into the
organization of riff-raff in a raffish section of Hollywood that
seems to be inhabited by nobody from this planet.  He seeks
vengeance particularly against the person who led the attack,
David Lee (David Lee Wilson) and the honcho of the gang, a
large, well-built chap named Crew (David Oren Ward).
   While the movie will inevitably be compared to "Fight Club,"
it shares a genre more with Stanley Kubrick's 1971 classic "A
Clockwork Orange"--about a society in the not-too-distant
future in which rape, torture and killing are everyday events
and the law is nonexistent.  While this movie in no way has
Kubrick's style, it conveys the writer-director's view that
though many of us normal people never see these Hitler
youths close up, they are a dangerous force in America who
are difficult to reckon with despite their recognizability.  In fact
in watching the endless beatings engaged in by Crew, David
Lee, their simple-minded female groupies, and the
counterattacks launched by gangs of young blacks and gays,
we wonder why no one responsible for enforcing the law is
around and why these easily identified skins never get picked
up by the police.  
   Raldolph Kret does not motivate these sickos.  Sure, in one
case a young woman complains that his brother was killed by
a black man and in yet another a dysfunctional father
alternately throws the hoods out of his house and supplies
them with hospitality.  But he does not really delve into the
psychology of these common criminals who have memorized
gibberish from Nazi ideology but otherwise have no gray
matter inside their glabrous craniums.  "Pariah" is chock full
of rape (the only way these guys can enjoy sex), killing,
maiming and vulgar, racist language.  The most interesting
twist occurs when the undercover Steve is asked to prove his
loyalty by "offing" a transvestite.  Has Steve's hate become
so intense that he has himself become like one of his mortal
enemies?
Unrated.  Running Time: 105 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
