Title
Review for Kissing a Fool (1998)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
David Sunga
Synopsis: 
A man and a woman who intend to get married attend a wedding reception
and ask Linda the publisher (Bonnie Hunt) how the bride and groom met.
In four or five vignettes, she explains the story to them:
Writer Jay (Jason Lee) and his editor Samantha (Mili Avital) are both
literary types, and they work together and are falling in love.
Unfortunately, Samantha is already engaged to Jay's best friend, Max the
womanizer (David Schwimmer). This situation is easily solved, since the
moment Samantha finds out Max is a womanizer, she can live guiltlessly
and happily ever after with Jay.
Opinion:
The problem with this film is that the situation can be solved in a half
hour sitcom, so KISSING A FOOL has a very difficult time stretching the
story out to an hour and forty five minutes. They do this by breaking
the film up into five or so comedic situations which last about five
minutes a piece. Each situation is then followed by a five-minute
let-down period where the joke peters out, and then the camera has to
switch back to an unconvincingly enthusiastic couple asking publisher
Linda what will happen next in the story.
One really strange thing that differentiates this film from all the
others I've seen this year is that in every scene, whether home, living
room, front porch, office, restaurant, or bedroom, people are gulping
down alcohol like fish taking to water. They guzzle tequila shots, wine,
and beer on a continuous basis oblivious to the fact that they are
alcoholics.
KISSING A FOOL is entirely predictable, and feels completely contrived.
There is one mysterious part where Max hands two envelopes to Jay and
Samantha, but the envelopes are never explained. On the good side, at
least the wedding reception and ending are happy. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
What a fun movie!    The story may not be the most believable but
the acting is so deliciously good and fast-paced you are not going
to care; it will seem like a true story.
The movie opens with a wedding in a large outdoor garden.
Max (David Schwimmer) and Jay (Jason Lee) are best friends who go
way back together. While Max, a sports broadcaster who has more
women than should be allowed any one man in a lifetime, that is
about all he does know.  Women and sports.   Jay, on the other hand,
is more literary and cultured.   One day Jay tells Max he has a
girl, Samantha,  whom Max   absolutely must date.   Affectionately
called "Sam," she (the adorable Mili Avatal), happens to be an
editor at a publishing house where Jay is having his book made
ready.  Playboy Max and cultured Sam could hardly be less alike.
In a hysterically funny scene, a real belly-laugher, Max berates Jay
for having ruined his reputation by having himself be seen and
photographed with a loud-mouthed drunk.   In detail he describes
last night to an incredulous Jay.
Very shortly thereafter  Max is moving into Sam's apartment.
Surprised?   Never fear; it is all explained in the movie..   Sam
makes an announcement, on a sports broadcast listened to by his many
female friends, that he is no longer "available."    At this point I
should mention that while Schwimmer and Lee are handsome, the
beautiful, Ms. Avatal, a shining star in Israel, has the most
expressive eyes and face anywhere on the screen today.  Lovely.
Worth the price of admission;
All would be well as both Sam and Max appear to be  deeply in love.
But Max,  the kind of guy who never heard  "If it ain't broke,
don't fix it," begins to worry what if one day Sam decides she has
had enough of him and dumps him; he has always been the dumper and
now is afraid of possibly ending up a dumpee.   He must find out if
Sam is a one-man woman.   If Jay would play up to her with flowers,
dinners, nice words, would he be able to get Sam into the sack?  If
"Yes" then he better know before he marries her.
Jay, of course, tells him he is crazy and he will not do it but Max
begs and so Jay goes along. The idea is not to bed her but only to
see if that were possible.   As well we all know, nothing ever works
out as planned which is why this riotous comedy takes a very humorous turn.
Almost stealing the movie from the three main characters is Bonnie
Hunt as Linda, a woman at the wedding who is relating to two
breathless guests what the wedding is all about..   She knows every
bit of the story that leads up to the wedding and she relates what
is happening while the movie flashes back and forth in time to show
what it is she is describing. A gimmick but here used to perfection.
Not to be missed.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Some scattered thoughts on KISSING A FOOL, a film too aggressively
mediocre to permit much more:
     ...Memo to David Schwimmer and Jason Lee:  it's nice to see that you
wanted to stretch a bit and try change-of-pace roles.  Now quit it.  In
KISSING A FOOL, Schwimmer plays a womanizing sportscaster named Max Abbitt
who thinks he has finally found The One in editor Samantha Andrews (Mili
Avital); Lee plays Max's best friend Jay Murphy, a sensitive writer who
has spent a year moping over the end of a relationship while turning it
into his first novel.  The premise finds sensitive Jay struggling with
insecure Max's request that he test Samantha's fidelity by trying to
seduce her, leading to all sorts of wild hijinks.  
     That is assuming you are willing to suspend your disbelief from the
rafters long enough to buy the puppy-dog Schwimmer as an irresistable sex
machine, or Lee (the abrasive Banky in CHASING AMY) as Mr. Nice Guy.
Schwimmer's rendition of machismo consists of using a certain four-letter
explitive around forty times, while Lee seems to be comfortable only when
he's yelling at somebody (though he can be very funny when he is yelling
at somebody).  Both try so hard to create their own respective anti-image
that they don't create actual characters.
     ...Memo to the American movie-going public:  make Bonnie Hunt a star,
or else.  Hunt, who plays Jay's publisher and narrates the film in
flashback, is simply one of the funniest women in any medium, bringing
life to otherwise lifeless films like ONLY YOU or JUMANJI.  In KISSING A
FOOL, I kept waiting for the action to switch back to Hunt telling the
tale to a couple of annoying party guests, where her unmatched reaction
shots could provide all the zing the script lacked.  Sadly, no one seems
willing to give Hunt a chance to carry a film, which means she's generally
relegated to mop-up duty in supporting roles.  Until we all rise up and
demand a better showcase for this wonderful performer, we'll all have to
sit through films like KISSING A FOOL in order to see her.
     ...Memo to screenwriters of mainstream romantic comedies:  enough
with the coy pretext that everyone in the audience doesn't know exactly
how the story is going to end.  The flashback framing structure of KISSING
A FOOL teases us by not showing us the groom to whom Samantha is getting
married, but I mean _really_.  The set-up is so transparently headed in
one direction that it's insulting to suggest that anyone would guess
incorrectly, not to mention the small fact that Hunt's character makes it
explicitly clear with one comment.  All this playing around with "who's
gonna get the girl," with the accompanying wacky plot machinations,
becomes just a way to pass the time.  
     News flash:  romance is about _chemistry_.  How about giving us a
reason to _care_ who ends up with whom?  How about giving us the faintest
clue who Samantha (the appealing Israeli actress Avital) really is?  How
about a couple more scenes between her and, oh, I don't know, anybody?  If
you judged strictly on the basis of shared scenes, you might think KISSING
A FOOL was a romance between Schwimmer and Lee (shades of CHASING AMY,
anyone?).

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Doug Ellin's KISSING A FOOL, released earlier this year,
is an aptly titled comedy about two plastic couples housed in an
artificial story.  Like a sitcom with jokes so lame that it would be
impossible to overlay a laugh track on it, the movie meanders along
insulting the viewers' intelligence in almost every frame.
     The script by James Frey and the director is filled with vapid
actors who read meaningless lines you've heard before.  ("I'm not
wearing any underwear," the bimbo tells the famous sportscaster, Max,
in what she assumes will be a sure-fire come-on line.)
     Max, Chicago's biggest playboy, decides to get married after a
whirlwind love affair with Sam, short for Samantha.  Max and Sam
possess two irritating personalities, and they hold little chemistry
for each other or the audience.
     Max is played without any style by David Schwimmer.  Schwimmer,
whose acting talent is playing characters devoid of personality, makes
an unlikely lover.  His costar, Mili Avital as Sam, is cut from the
same cloth, so they can be argued to be a matched pair.  After all,
people of the same intelligence are naturally drawn to each other,
ditto for similar looks, so why shouldn't the personality-challenged be
attracted?
     The implausible plot has Max asking his best friend, Jay (Jason
Lee), to hit on Sam as a test.  Jay is supposed to try to get her to
sleep with him, but stop short of the actual act.  Max, being
promiscuous by nature, worries that his future bride may have the same
need to sleep around as he does.  The idea of flirting with the
beautiful Sam makes Jay so sick that he becomes unable to eat or work.
Neither the script nor the actors make this test believable.
     "The 64,000 question is: How do you know you're with the wrong
person so you can avoid wreaking havoc on major parts of your life?"
Jay asks in one of the unsuccessful attempts at adding some seriousness
to the film.
     Finally, there is the film's attempt at physical comedy.  Jay's
ex-girlfriend Natasha (Vanessa Angel) becomes infatuated with Jay again
once she thinks he is going out with someone else.  Natasha rips Jay's
shirt open after pushing him down onto the sofa.  As she throws her
hair on his bare chest, she demands he pull it.  This is supposed to be
funny?
     Most films have some saving grace. Some bit part was done
especially well or some scene managed to be funny even if the rest of
the picture wasn't. KISSING A FOOL, on the other hand, has nothing to
recommend it.
     KISSING A FOOL runs 1:45.  It is rated R for profanity and
sexuality and would be acceptable for most teenagers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: David Schwimmer, Jason Lee, Mili Avital, Bonnie Hunt, 
      Vanessa Angel, Kari Wuhrer
Director: Doug Ellin
Producers: Andrew Form, Rick Lashbrook, Tag Mendillo
Screenplay: James Frey and Doug Ellin
Cinematography: Thomas Del Ruth
Music: Joseph Williams
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     KISSING A FOOL is yet another obligatory romantic comedy with dumb 
characters trying to plow their way through a morass of contrived 
situations.  From that ringing endorsement, you might assume that I 
hated the movie.  Actually, given my expectations, I didn't think it was 
too bad.  Sure, I would have appreciated a little more originality, but, 
on the whole, KISSING A FOOL delivers just about what I thought it 
would.  In the process, it annoyed me slightly less than another recent 
entry into the genre, THE WEDDING SINGER.  
     There are three problems that make KISSING A FOOL marginally less 
enjoyable than the average, formula-driven romantic comedy.  None have 
anything to do with the cast, but can be fixed firmly on the shoulders 
of writer/director Doug Ellin and his co-scribe, James Frey.  
     The first is that the dialogue is boring.  It isn't cringingly 
awful, nor should the actors have been embarrassed to say their lines, 
but there's nothing special in the words.  Apparently, Ellin and Frey 
were attempting to capture the feeling of the kind of stuff written by 
Kevin Smith or Quentin Tarantino, but they have the texture and the 
rhythm all wrong.  The result -- forgettable dialogue that reminds us 
how talented the screenwriters are who can make viewers savor the way 
characters speak.
     Flaw #2 is the painfully inept way KISSING A FOOL is structured.  
For some unknown reason, the entire thing is told in flashback.  Not 
only does this saddle the audience with a narrator (Bonnie Hunt), but 
there are so many cut-backs between the past and present that any 
romantic tension is completely destroyed.  What's more, it's an 
unnecessary tactic.  This film would have been significantly better had 
it been presented in a strictly linear fashion.
     Finally, the third problem is that the audience is always at least 
two steps ahead of the characters.  Not only are they stupid (one guy 
thinks Australia is in Europe), but they're blind as well.  The director 
apparently believes that fault extends to the audience, because he 
actually thinks there's some suspense about who the girl ends up with at 
the end.  Movies of this sort add to my appreciation of the likes of MY 
BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, where there's real doubt about how things will 
work out.
     What KISSING A FOOL offers is an old-fashioned romantic triangle 
done without much old-fashioned style.  Max (David Schwimmer, 
effectively playing a jerk) is an self-centered TV sports caster who 
falls head-over-heels in love with pretty Sam (Mili Avital, who was in 
STARGATE and now has a number of films on the way).  But Max's best 
friend, sensitive Jay (Jason Lee, who isn't nearly as good here as he 
was in CHASING AMY), also loves her, although a recent relationship that 
ended badly has left him tentative about romance.  Eventually, Max and 
Sam become engaged, but Max wonders about Sam's fidelity.  So he enlists 
Jay to test her by trying to seduce her.  Jay is reluctant, because he 
doesn't think it's right, but his attraction to Sam is so great that he 
can't help going out on long romantic walks with her.  Guess who ends up 
marrying whom?
     Needless to say, audiences get the happy ending they expect.  All 
hard feelings are forgotten, the narrator gets to dance with the best 
man, and everything turns out the way Screenwriting 101 has decreed that 
romantic comedies must end.  This leaves but one question.  Who's the 
fool:  the film maker who thinks we'll buy all of this or those of us 
who actually do?
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        We all see a lot of romantic comedies.  Studios love to release them
because people go and see them regardless of the fact that they are
almost always completely predictable.  And, naturally, this addition to
the genre doesn't break that particular tradition.  What Kissing a Fool
(what does the title mean?) does do, however, is provide a bunch of
likable and realistic characters in a situation that, miraculously,
doesn't feel banal and lifeless.  
        The story centers around Max (David Schwimmer) and Jay (Jason Lee), who
are best friends.  Jay is a writer, and Max is a well-known
sportscaster.  Jay introduces Max to his editor, Sam (Mili Avital), and
the two hit it off immediately.  They are engaged within a fortnight,
and soon they move in with each other.  But it can't be that simple: 
Max suspects that Sam might cheat on him, so he tries to get Jay to see
if she will.  How Max expected the details of this operation to ensue is
still under question.
        Boy, it just sounds like your typical, insipid romantic comedy, right? 
Well, yeah, the plot kind of works that way.  However, due to the great
characters and acting, I didn't even notice the gears of the plot
turning slowly-but-surely to provide for the foreseen conclusion.  The
film is totally hilarious, which doesn't hurt; it also manages to avoid
a lapse in laughter towards the end as the plot has to sum itself
up--everything up through the last frame is fun and entertaining.
        However, my biggest reason for liking Kissing a Fool requires for me to
once again officially disagree with Roger Ebert and one particularly
untrue statement he makes in his review of the film.  He says, "...none
of the characters behaves at any moment like any human being we have
ever met."  I guess me explaining the lack of truth in this statement
forces me to admit that my primary reasons for enjoying Kissing a Fool
are somewhat personal.  The character Jay, played by Jason Lee, is me! 
I suppose that it's very presumptuous and perhaps even arrogant of
myself to say such a thing (I know myself *really* well...?). 
Nonetheless, it is true, and almost disturbingly so.
        Lee's portrayal of me...er, Jay, is realistic and extremely
entertaining.  I also enjoyed him in Chasing Amy as the Friend, Banky. 
He is a lot different here (not just in appearance); he actually proves
he can play different kinds of characters.  Jay is really uptight and
ridiculously affected by his surroundings, so it comes as no surprise to
me when he becomes physically ill every time his ex-girlfriend, Natasha
(Vanessa Angel) is even mentioned.  All right, so, maybe not everyone
will like Jay as much as I did . . . but he seems like such a nice,
affable guy!
        David Schwimmer seems intent on breaking Matt Damon's record for number
of times he uses the f-word in a single line of dialogue.  I lost count
in this case, so I'll grant him the award.  I liked Schwimmer here, and
even though his character is the kind of guy I'd like to stab to death
in real life, I enjoyed watching him.  In fact, I know people just like
this, so I could watch and believe everything he does here without
questioning him.  Sam, played well by Avital, is the one character who
could have used a bit of fleshing-out.  She seems rather cardboard-ish
here, mostly because the screenplay doesn't give her a lot to do aside
from react to the two main guys.
        It must be me.  Every situation in this film feels like something that
has either happened to me, or that I've seen happen to someone I know. 
I can't be that different from everyone else--that's why I think someone
out there might watch this movie and say, "Yup, that's how it goes."  I
really enjoyed Kissing a Fool, and I think that if all romantic comedies
were this funny and realistic, we might not have to be so wary of the
genre.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: David Schwimmer, Jason Lee, Mili Avital, Bonnie Hunt, Vanessa
Angel, Kari Wuhrer
Director: Doug Ellin
Producers: Andrew Form, Rick Lashbrook, Tag Mendillo
Screenplay: James Frey and Doug Ellin
Another day, another poorly made David Schwimmer movie. He ends up
making a fool of himself, but that's becoming a usual trend in his
movies. If you're the kind of person who likes David Schwimmer in
FRIENDS or who appreciated his performance in THE PALLBEARER, then you
may be able to tolerate this movie. Since I am neither, I will stand
back and be totally biased and say this was an awful movie.
Ever notice that David Schwimmer always carries the same persona in all
his acting roles. He just can't seem to get out of that annoying puppy
dog look, feel sorry for me, … duh … droll-sort-of-voice which makes
many women fall for him??? He's the kind of actor, that women probably
like to mother in real life, but has drawbacks in limiting your choice
of movie roles after awhile. Anyway enough about Schwimmer, before my
blood pressure soars through the roof. Let's just say that KISSING A
FOOL is marginally better than most of his co-star
FRIENDS-Hollywood-efforts, but that doesn't really say much considering
their poor track record.
The plot basically involves two best friends, Max Abbit (Schwimmer) and
Jay Murphy (Jason Lee) and how they end up falling in love with the same
woma, Samantha Andrews (Mili Avital). The story is told through the lips
of the ever-charming Bonnie Hunt, and the idea is to semi-guess what
happened and who ends up with whom in the end. It's all very
predictable, but I'm not sure how many guys will really appreciate their
best-friends ex-girlfriends after knowing how intimate they were in bed?
Can you still be best friends after this? In Hollywood you can, and with
a tremendous about of forgiving, forgetting and reading – all ends up
well in the rather foolish world of David Schwimmer.

Author
James Sanford
         Every so often, there's a pleasant surprise hiding inside an
unpromising package. Case in point: ``Kissing A Fool,'' which comes
with a laundry list of turn-offs attached to it.
  First off, it was directed and co-written by Doug Ellin,
whose previous film, the excruciating ``Phat Beach,'' was almost as
offensive as a minstrel show. Second, it stars David Schwimmer of TV's
``Friends,'' who didn't exactly set the screen aflame in ``The
Pallbearer.'' Finally, there's that awful title, which calls to mind
George Michael's gooey ballad of the same name.
  But ``Fool'' succeeds both as a look at the competitiveness
lurking underneath many friendships and as an offbeat romantic comedy
that allows Schwimmer to convincingly play against type. One of the
handicaps of ``Pallbearer'' was Schwimmer's by-the-numbers performance
in a role almost identical to his milquetoast Ross on ``Friends.''
  ``Fool'' is something else entirely, as Schwimmer plays Max
Abbitt, an egomaniacal Chicago sportscaster who greets everyone with a
cheerful ``Wuttup?'' and who'd be obnoxious if he weren't so
ridiculous.
  Max is blissfully hedonistic until his considerably more
sensitive best friend Jay (Jason Lee, who has few equals when it comes
to finding humor in misery) introduces him to book editor Sam (Mili
Avital). Following what Jay terms a three-week ``Love Boat'' episode,
Max and Sam are engaged and living together.
  Still nursing a heart shattered by his would-be supermodel
ex-girlfriend Natasha (Vanessa Angel), Jay tries to be happy for his
friend, with only semi-convincing results.
  Starting off as an acidic look at love, ``Fool'' begins as a
variation on ``Chasing Amy,'' which also cast Lee as the guy on the
outside of an affair and which sported the same sort of slightly
grainy/gritty look Ellin has given this film.
  But by its midpoint the movie has somehow reinvented itself
as a quirky romance that recalls, of all things, ``Moonstruck,'' with
Lee as Nicolas Cage, Avital as Cher and Schwimmer as Danny
Aiello. ``Fool'' also incorporates various other colorful characters,
including Sam's bratty cousin (Judy Greer), Max's libidinous co-worker
(Kari Wuhrer) and the much-discussed Natasha, who shows up late in the
game to declare ``I go by Nastassia now'' and to try to reignite Jay's
torch.
  Author John Patrick Shanley graced ``Moonstruck'' with a
magnificent finale that untangled all its plot threads in one
astonishing, hilarious sequence. Ellin isn't a gifted enough writer to
come up with that kind of climax to his story, so ``Fool'' wheezes to
a stop rather than wrapping up with any real punch.
  But that doesn't negate the considerable charms of Avital,
Lee and Schwimmer or the frequent bursts of wit in Ellin's script,
several of which deal with Jay's sappy taste in music. When Max chides
him for wallowing in self-pity while listening to Barry Manilow
albums, Jay protests he wasn't playing Manilow discs: ``That was a
radio special!'' he insists.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KISSING A FOOL * 1/2   Directed by Doug Ellin. Written by James Frey and
Ellin from a story by Frey. Photography, Thomas Del Ruth. Productiondesign,
Charles Breen. Editing, Favid Finfer. Music, Joseph Vitarelli. Cast: David
Schimmer (Max Abbitt), Jason Lee (Jay Murphy), Mili Avital (Samantha
Andrews), Bonnie Hunt (Linda), Vanesa Angel (Natasha), et al. A Universal
release. 93 minutes. Rated R (strong sexual content, coarse language)
It opens with some beautiful aerial shots of Chicago to the sounds a song
(written and sung by Harry Connick) that 's like a "romantic" insipidity, a
throwback to several generations ago.
A wedding is taking place on a splendid suburban estate. Right away, the
film starts playing transparent, cutesy-coy little "guess who? guess what?"
games with the audience. The groom is not identified. A rather tipsy
vulgarian, Linda (Hunt) seems to be a lesser (or  uninvited) guest who
needs to talk -- to anybody -- but  soon reveals that she is the hostess,
the owner of the place.
She plays her game with an unprepossessing, dumb-looking fellow and his
fiancee, taunting them with the story of Max and Jay. It comes out in
episodes.
Jay and Max have been best friends since childhood. You realize instantly
the artificiality of this. Jay, a sensitive young man now working on his
first novel, cannot get over his having been dumped by his girl Natasha,
who became a model, went to Paris, was and still is a tramp. An unlikely
couple and another artificial situation. Jay's novel is based on his
experiences. Some book!
Max is a popular sportscaster and a stud. When it comes to women, he leaves
no stone unturned. He is a foul-mouthed egotist. He has no AIDS, but give
him time. He may know about passes, in football games or in bars, but he is
abysmally uneducated.
Linda (see above) is a wealthy publisher. She will bring out Jay's book,
and assigns to him Samantha ( Israeli actress Mili Avital) as editor, .
Jay, for some reason, persists in setting up a date between Sam and Max.
Max loudly, coarsely and volubly refuses, but Jay wins.
Cut to a haggard Max knocking on Jay's door with his tale of woe about that
date. Cut to Sam doing ditto with a diametrically opposed story. Hey, this
might turn out to be a fin-de-siecle "Rashomon" !  It's not. It's just a
practical joke.
Max and Sam have fallen in love instantly and plan to marry. Never mind
that they are opposites, that Max says "I hate books, she hates sports."
Never mind that Max is really an untraveled yokel and Sam a worldly
sophisticate. So what's the answer? There isn't one, not any more than
there's a key to the impossible friendship between the artistic Jay and the
crass Max. I've always thought that the "opposites attract" theory is mucho
hooey.
Max moves in with Sam. Three weeks later, he gets cold feet as he ponders
about his future as a husband and probably a father. Two big worries.
Number One is expressed: will Sam be faithful to him? Number Two is, I
guess, subconscious and unexpressed: will, I, Max, have to give up all
those chicks?
So Max will test Sam. So Max will ask pal Jay to hit on Sam, then we'll
see. By now the film is 35 minutes old.
Jay, that decent, self-pitying soul, won't hear of it. But somehow, as he
works closely with Sam on his book, he falls for her, and she for him. They
have much in common. Just happens they've both been to that same restaurant
in a small Italian town -- and they ooh and aah about it. And other such
things. Conveniently too, Max has gone to Detroit on an assignment. With a
girl.
Jay and Sam go to a strip-bar where they encounter, of all people, the
notorious Natasha back from France. She is now Natassia. Sam, getting
closer and closer to Jay, plays the game, introduces herself as Claudette.
Jason: : "She is my fiancee." That's wishful thinking.
Let's cut to the chase. There are 3-way confrontations; faithful friend Jay
moves to New York; Max moves out of Sam's apartment. Months pass. Jay's
book is a big hit, Max gets Jay back to Chicago and reunites him with Sam.
We return to the framing story of the wedding of Sam and Jay. Max, dancing
with publisher Linda, tells her: "So, you have money. I do too. That's
good." THE END
A crass tale? Yes. A perverted variant and great-grandchild of the really
romantic Cyrano story? Perhaps.
Max comes to terms with the situation during Jay's stay in the Big Apple,
after he (the I-hate-books fellow) has read a book, probably the only one
in his life, a  gift from Jay. Another colossal improbability. The
leather-bound volume is not "The Further Adventures of Superman" or " Sex
for TV Personalities" but "Maxims," by the great French moralist La
Rochefoucauld (1613-1680). Give us a break! Who's trying to impress whom
with "Cultcha." The scriptwriters showing off theirs?
And who could possibly  ever but ever believe that the cute, intelligent,
educated Sam would fall for the creep Max? And who could possibly ever but
ever doubt, that sooner or later Jay and Sam would become an item?
Or, for that matter, that Jay's book is a huge best-seller? (I admit that
this is less of a stretch than the rest , since so many bad novels do sell
well).
Now, the curious thing is that this dumb movie had some passing attractions
and did often keep my attention. Unhealthy curiosity? The sights and sounds
of Chicago? Good photography? Frankly I can't tell without seeing it again,
in the comfort of my TV screen that is.
One item that did strike me is the magic of the movies. Not special effects
but the fact that Mili Avital looked pretty in all the scenes, beautiful in
others, very beautiful in others yet. Amazing what lighting, makeup, camera
angles, clothing and such can do.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Matt Williams
Doug Ellin wrote and directed Kissing a Fool, a hit-and-miss romantic
comedy, that, although humorous, is hampered by a bad structure and weak
characters.
The story of Kissing a Fool is framed in a flashback, in which a
publisher, Linda (Bonnie Hunt), while hosting a wedding at her house,
relates to two over-eager wedding guests the story of how the bride and
groom got together.
The bride in question is Sam (Mili Avital), an editor who works for
Linda. She's currently editing the novel of Jay (Jason Lee), whose best
friend is Chicago sportscaster Max Abbott (David Schwimmer).  Jay sets
up Sam and Max, and before you know it, the couple is engaged to be
married.
However, the womanizing Max has doubts about the loyalties of his
bride-to-be. He tries to get his pal Jay to seduce her as a test.  If
she bites, Max will call off the wedding...otherwise, he's found the
right girl.  Of course, Jay is reluctant, coming off a bad relationship
with Natasha (Vanessa Angel), but he soon finds himself falling in love
with Sam.
The heart of any romantic comedy is its characters, and Kissing the Fool
runs the gamut from good to not so good.  In the "good" category: Jason
Lee. His is the most developed character in the film, and he handles it
well. To top it off, he's funny, and gets most of the film's good lines.
Mili Avital sits somewhere in the middle of the road.  Her character is
nice, but flavorless.  We never learn that much about her, and she
doesn't express a strong presence that might transcend her mundane
character.
Playing out of type, and without much success, is David Schwimmer.  As
much as he tries, his suave sportscaster is never quite believable. He's
at his best during his "pathetic" moments, or, in other words, when he
seems to be in more familiar territory. It just goes to show that a
change of pace isn't necessarily good.
And then there's Bonnie Hunt.  She barely registers a presence as a
minor character throughout the flashbacks, but when she's the narrator,
you wish she would just go away.  It certainly doesn't help that the
entire awkward flashback structure kills the story (for some reason it
reveals the answers to the film's central questions right at the
beginning). But any time the film begins to gain momentum on its own,
WHAM! We're thrust back to Bonnie Hunt and her over-eager guests, and
everything falls apart.
The story itself is a bit light.  Even without the revealing framework,
you can see exactly where the film is going.  But the film's saving
graces are its humorous moments.  There are some wonderful exchanges
between characters, and plenty of amusingly awkward situations
throughout Kissing a Fool. However, while the humor makes Kissing a Fool
palatable, its many flaws keep it from being completely enjoyable.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Ryan Davis
        What would happen if you best friend sleeps with your fiancée? Would
it make any difference if you asked him too? That's what this new independent
film from second time director Doug Ellin is about.
  Jay(Jason Lee), a depressed young writer, introduces his editor, Sam(Mili
Avital), to his best friend Max Abbott(David Schwimmer). Max and Sam hit it
off and are engages about two weeks later. Max, worried that Sam will cheat
on him, ask Jay to "test" her loyalty. Jay doesn't agree but when Max goes
out of town, Jay falls in love with Sam.
        The script is rather funny but the movie just doesn't fly. The actors
are believable and likable in their parts. Unfortunately the movie is just
cute and pretty entertaining but lacks originality and creativity.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Jamie Peck
KISSING A FOOL
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
"Kissing a Fool" opens with a mystery wedding at a mansion in Chicago's North 
Shore. The estate belongs to a publishing mogul named Linda (Bonnie Hunt), and 
the bride is pretty, witty Sam Andrews (Mili Avital), an editor who works for 
her. The groom's identity remains an enigma until the film's final segment, but 
we know from the get-go it's one of two best friends -- cynical, womanizing 
sportscaster Max Abbitt (Schwimmer) or on-the-rebound, touchy novelist Jay 
Murphy (Jason Lee). The story unfolds in flashback, beginning with a whirlwind 
courtship between Max and Sam that leads to their ultra-fast engagement. Max 
loves Sam, but grows hesitant upon realizing that marriage is, or is supposed to 
be, a life-long commitment. (Duh.) Acting impulsively, he enlists Jay's help to 
test Sam's loyalty, but doesn't expect Jay to fall for her in the process. 
Romantic comedies are hard to do because each one is basically rehashing the 
same premise over and over again, and that rule holds true for "Kissing a Fool" 
-- very little of what goes on is remarkably new or challenging. But it's the 
way the material is handled that makes the film so appealing; the screenplay 
flows like various components of "Seinfeld," "Ally McBeal" and, yes, "Friends" 
rolled up into a comfortable comedic crisis. Occasionally, the dialogue and 
situations resemble something from the pens of Kevin Smith or Quentin Tarantino. 
One segment in particular finds Max and Sam telling Jay two wildly different 
versions of what happened on a date the previous evening, and we get to see both 
sides acted out; the capper to this is probably worth the admission price alone. 
Sore spots include a climax that's a little heavier than it should have been, 
plus a framing device that would be downright irritating if not for the 
gleefully acerbic presence of Bonnie Hunt. The only purpose for that latter 
glitch is to keep you guessing as to who really is going to end up with Sam, but 
look and listen closely to the movie's prologue and that mystery is solved. 
Flaws aside, "Kissing a Fool" is still a nice showcase for its performers. 
Israeli actress Avital ("StarGate") is effervescently charming, while Lee 
("Chasing Amy") does the whiny friend thing with earnest conviction despite a 
hairdo that never looks right on his head. But it's Schwimmer who turns doubt on 
its ear by acing a character that's the polar opposite of what he's known for. 
With projects like these, who needs "Friends"? 

Author
Bill Chambers
KISSING A FOOL *1/2 (out of four)
(My apologies for an awkward Sphere review; I posted the wrong draft.
But you can read it restored on...
MY WEBSITE!
FILM FrEaK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504
Enjoy the show, and remember that I have a section where YOU, the
surfer, can recommend movies to ME and other surfers. Just click on
"Can't Miss".
Do I ever shut up?)
starring David Schwimmer, Jason Lee, Mili Avital, Bonnie Hunt
written by James Frey & Doug Ellin
directed by Doug Ellin
Post-Chasing Amy, a slew of love-triangle movies: this month we have
Kissing A Fool, co-starring Amy's own Lee, and April brings us The
Object of My Affection, which may as well be titled Chasing Allan, for
it is the story of a woman who falls in love with her gay
roommate. (To be absolutely Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon about it, that
film stars Schwimmer's Friend Jennifer Aniston.) If only Kevin Smith
could write them all...
Schwimmer stars as womanizing Chicago sportscaster Max, who falls in
love with his best friend Jay (Lee)'s book editor Samantha (Avital) a
mere twenty-four hours after meeting her. They are soon engaged, and
Max, because of his own raging libido, grows suspicious of Samantha's
fidelity. He convinces Jay to flirt with Samantha during the
development of his book, to "test her". The trouble is, Jay might be
secretly in love with her.
To stretch this flat, sitcom premise to feature length, the plot is
framed by a climactic wedding, at which Bonnie Hunt recounts the
triangular tale--the events leading up to the nuptials--to an annoying
fat man and his silly girlfriend.  Hunt has the best comic timing of
anyone in the film; Schwimmer can spin bad dialogue into mildly
humorous dialogue; and Lee, poor Lee, is miscast. So hysterically
funny in Chasing Amy, here he is forced to repress his comic
instincts: to swear, to yell, to talk about oral sex... The script's
idea of a character trait is to stress that Jay is a "sensitive man",
and then show him drinking Pepto Bismol when he's stewing over his
girl trouble. As for Avital, an Israeli actress, she is warm and
sweet, but we don't know anything about her character other than that
it takes her an incredibly long time to realize the most obvious
things. She also too closely resembles the stunningly beautiful Kari
Wuhrer, who plays Schwimmer's assistant and personal temptress,
turning that particular subplot into an unintentional riff on Vertigo.
There are a handful, a smattering, of good scenes in Kissing A Fool. I
enjoyed a moment in a comedy club, during which Jay gets up and asks
"Has anyone here ever hated their girlfriend so much you wanted to
kill her?" over and over until he's booted off stage.  There are also
a few obviously improvised lines that are fresher than anything that's
on the page. Kissing A Fool is never as clever as the Thursday night
joke-machine Friends that spawned Schwimmer's movie career, so save
yourself eight dollars and watch three episodes of that series back to
back.  
-Bill Chambers; March, 1998 (wchamber@netcom.ca)

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Oh, how I wanted to love this movie, and I almost did, but something about its
overpowering lackluster prevented me from doing so. So much potential, so many
winning elements, and so many mistakes, KISSING A FOOL has its wings, it just
doesn't know how to take flight.
"Friend" to all, David Schwimmer stars in this romantic comedy as a Chicago
sportscaster / local Don Juan, Max Abbitt, a handsome egomaniac who scores
more often than the Cubs. We begin at a wedding where the groom's identity is
kept concealed, allowing for a small amount of mystery for anyone in the
audience who can't figure out the end from the very beginning. As everyone's
off dancing and celebrating, we focus in on a semi-cynical, chain smoking
wedding guest, Linda Streicher (Bonnie Hunt), who seems more anxious to sit on
tacks than be in attendance at the gala. It is from her that the story behind
Max, his best friend Jay (Jason Lee), and Sam the bride (Mili Avital), is
recounted to a pair of total strangers who listen intently as Linda catches
them, and the audience, up on all the wedding preliminaries.
Flashback: Jay is a novelist catering to the tenderness of the heart, adapting
his novels from the feelings of love and heartbreak experienced in
relationships past. After being dumped by an aspiring model (Vanessa Angel),
Jay has spent the past several months in a state of depression, working and
writing as a compensation for lost love. In the meanwhile, his best friend for
life, Max, is Chicago's most eligible (and promiscuous) bachelor. In an
attempt to tame the libidinous beast, Jay sets Max up for a night out with his
new book editor, Sam, hoping that Max will be stricken by something new,
beauty *and* brains, and finally settle down into a happily monogamous
relationship. As things turn out, it is only a matter of weeks before Sam and
Max are engaged to be married, surprising everyone at the sudden change in
Max's flirtatious lifestyle.
As the wedding bells draw near, it becomes apparent that Max is more than
skeptical of jumping into such a committable institution, but surprise
surprise, it's isn't Max's fear of monogamy, it's his fear of Sam's
trustworthiness. What if Max isn't enough for her? So, drawing it straight
down the line, Max approaches Jay with a proposition - try to get Sam to cheat
on him. If she's willing to sleep with Jay, the wedding's off, but if not, Max
will know she's the one. The premise is as shallow as Max himself, but it
gives Scwimmer quite a turn from his puppy-dog character on "Friends".
Likewise, Lee becomes the emotional romantic as opposed to the self-righteous
misanthrope characters he played in MALLRATS and CHASING AMY. While Schwimmer
turns in a competent performance, it is Lee who clearly shines, perhaps
brooding with too much talent for such an otherwise mediocre film. Showing
that he can charmingly play either side of the spectrum, hopefully Lee's
appearance here will catapult him to some bigger and better roles, even if his
talent is hidden in the depths of a blasé film.
Leave it to Avital to make the underdeveloped Sam as likeable as she is,
surely not an easy task with such thin makings. Avital shows budding ability
that, after nurturing a few roles, has real potential to blossom. The stifled
chemistry between her and Lee (oops, did I say something?) is surprisingly
candid. It is those kind of attributes that make KISSING A FOOL such a
disappointment. It's as if they're saying "look how good we *could* have been"
before retaliating with an occasional ill-directed, terribly wooden scene.
Charm abounds, quite a few bits of humor are downright hilarious, but quality,
overall, sags. To be fair, the charm outweighs the flaws, so brace yourself
for all the imperfections and give this one a chance on video.

Author
Jon Popick
Kissing a Fool is the latest romantic comedy served up to the mindless
legion of brain-dead imbeciles that we call the American viewers.  It
does nothing new, but since they have embraced similar filth (read: My
Best Friend's Wedding), it will probably be well received.
The only interesting thing about Kissing is the unique casting.  David
Schwimmer (Friends) plays Max Abbott, an over-confident, ultra-macho
Chicago sportscaster who nails everything that moves and utters the line
`What Up, Chicago?' ad nauseum in both his professional and personal
lives.  Schwimmer is usually typecast as the super-shy downtrodden loser
type, but in Kissing, that role is filled by Jason Lee (Chasing Amy),
who plays the sensitive Air Supply/Barry Manilow loving writer, Jay.
Lee is known best for his offensive obscenity-screaming characters
written by Kevin Smith.  So, what I guess what I'm trying to say is that
the parts were kinda swapped.
Linda (Bonnie Hunt, Jumanji) tells the film in narrative flashback at a
wedding.  She is a wealthy publisher who claims to have been responsible
for introducing the happy newlyweds.  We don't know who has just been
married, but Linda doesn't care.  She starts her story at the
beginning…Max and Jay have been friends since grammar school...
Long story short, Jay sets Max up with Sam (Avital, Polish Wedding), his
beautiful new editor.  They fall in love and quickly start planning a
wedding.  The boorish Max suddenly develops the strange notion that Sam
may not be `the one' and tries to get his pal to sleep with him as some
sort of bizarre testosterone love-test.  Jay, of course, wants nothing
to do with Max's sinister plan, but ends up falling for Sam regardless.
Other than the casting, the only other bright spot in all of the
banality is Israeli newcomer Avital.  Of course, that could just be
because she isn't Julia Roberts, Jennifer Aniston or Cameron Diaz.  Lee
seems more out of place in his role than Schwimmer does, but I have a
feeling that Schwimmer is probably like Max in real life.  Lee also has
very disturbing hair.  That could be because he had to have hair similar
to Max so that when the bride and groom kiss at the beginning of the
film, we wouldn't know who the groom was.  I would have cut that scene
and given Jay better hair.  Maybe that would have helped his
self-confidence, which would have led to him come to terms with his
feelings for Sam sooner, which would have led to me getting home
earlier.
