Title
Review for Blaue Engel, Der (1930)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Der Blaue Engel" is a German film better known by its
English translation title, "The Blue Angel".  Two versions were
filmed simultaneously, with the same cast, one in English
and one in German.  The version discussed here is in English.
I have heard that the German language version is better,
but that may only be because it is easier to read the
English subtitles than to decipher the thick German accents
of the actors.  Having been made very early in the talkie era
does not help matters, as the sound quality is only adequate.
The story takes place in Germany during the 1920s.
A High School professor (Emil Jannings) has some rowdy
pupils in his class.  These students frequently visit a
disreputable nightclub (The Blue Angel).  When Jannings
learns of this, he visits the nightclub to catch them
in the act.  But instead of catching them, he falls in
love with a showgirl (Marlene Dietrich), resulting in
his ruin.
At the time, Jannings was a much bigger star than Dietrich.
He had made dozens of German films, and had recently won
the 1929 Academy Award for Best Actor (for both "The Way of
All Flesh" and "The Last Command").  While Dietrich's
role is much smaller, it catapulted her to Hollywood stardom.
She would never make another German film.  Curiously, it
is the only German title credited to the director,
Austrian-born Josef von Sternberg, who had a lengthy but
stormy career in Hollywood.
In the U.S., a high school teacher is not a high status
position, and the wages are much lower than that person
could make in the business world.  In Germany during the 1920s,
a high school professor was apparently very well respected.
The students stand at attention when he enters the room,
and fear his wrath.  At the nightclub, the entertainers
refer to him by title, and even bow to him.  Perhaps this
help makes the romance between Jannings and Dietrich more
believable, as what the glamorous showgirl sees in the
unkempt, stodgy, middle-aged man is beyond my understanding.
The film's strength does not come from Dietrich but
from Janning's character.  From the film's beginning,
he is shown to be somewhat foolish, but as his fortunes change,
he becomes bitter, and later humiliated and frightened.
Perhaps the lesson is that we all have a certain place
in society and life, and changing that position can only
lead to trouble.  This pessimistic view is unusual for
the cinema, which even in themes of tragic love have both
partners remain in good faith, and more often promotes the
notion that true love conquers all.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
