Title
Review for Slam (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Susan Granger
Marc Levin's low-budget ($1 million) chronicle of poetry
behind bars justifiably captured the 1998 Grand Jury Prize at the
Sundance Film Festival and the Camera D'Or at the Cannes Film
Festival. Shot on location in Washington, D.C., the film features a
cast of non-actors including controversial Mayor Marion Berry, who
faced a real-life conviction on drug charges, in an ironic cameo as a
criminal court judge. The story follows the spiritual and artistic
journey of a small-time marijuana dealer and rapper, played by
dreadlock'd Saul Williams, who is sentenced to prison after he's
caught fleeing the scene of a drug-related shooting in a ghetto
housing project known as Dodge City. In the grim process of
rehabilitation, he finds love with a reformed prostitute/crack addict,
Sonja Sohn, who becomes his writing teacher and salvation through
"slamming," a combination of poetry and rap. The
story-behind-the-story adds fascination to what's on the screen. Saul
Williams and Sonja Sohn were discovered at a real-life urban poetry
slam and many of the extras were actual prisoners in the D.C. criminal
justice system. One of the film's producers, Richard Stratton, as well
as Bonz Malone, who plays a prison gang leader, cites art as redeeming
him from a life of crime. Cinema verite cinematographer Marc Benjamin
uses a hand-held camera as Marc Levin superimposes a documentary style
on an innovative and topical theme; unfortunately, Levin's delight in
the emotional honesty of his subjects occasionally becomes
self-indulgent and the length of the improvisations can be
stultifying. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Slam" is a fresh,
daring, emotionally challenging 7. It's scary, strong, street-wise
stuff.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Welcome to the DC jail," the tough guard barks matter-of-factly to the
new inmate.  "You might make it out of here, and you might not."  He
then rattles off, drill sergeant fashion, the depressing statistics for
the percentages of African-American adult males in our nation's capitol
who are incarcerated.  Challenging the newest prisoner to "do the math,"
he paints a picture that is not encouraging.
Ray Joshua, a "performance poet" in his first acting role, plays Saul
Williams the charismatic protagonist of SLAM.  SLAM was a major award
winner at this year's Sundance and Cannes film festivals.
Ray has the bad luck to be at the scene of a shooting, where the police
catch him with a half-pound of marijuana on him.  Ray is a gentle soul
whose passion is his poetry, which he does rapid fire, rap style but
without music.  Williams wrote the pieces he performs.  ("You massage
the universe's spine as you twirl through time," starts one of his
typical poems.)
(A "slam" is a form of competitive poetry that is practiced throughout
the country.  A fascinating woman known as the "Slam Granny," who was at
our press screening, explained the basic ideas and the rules to me.  The
movie would have been much better if the slams were more prevalent in
it.)
Although director Marc Levin gets the poetry part right, probably
because his background is in documentaries, the rest of the movie is
pretty thin.  The jail fight sequences, for example, are amateurishly
choreographed.  There is also a pseudo-sappy romantic subplot with the
jail's poetry teacher (Sonja Sohn).   Her funds are cut off by the
government, which she claims no longer cares about rehabilitation.
Ray's salvation is his art.  When up against a sea of buff bodies in the
prison's exercise yard, he bursts out in poetry.  The men, with their
rippling muscles bordering on explosion, don't know what to make of
someone like Ray.
At the prison poetry group, in which one of the cons reads a poem about
his killing 3 people when he was only 15, Ray seems at home.
Eventually, Ray will perform at a slam, and there he finally really
comes into his own, as his poetry flies out of his mouth with great
intensity and power.
The big question for Ray is will he "cop a plea" as his court appointed
lawyer recommends or will he fight it out in court.  His odds in a court
of law are miserable, his lawyer tells him with all the gravity he can
muster.  The movie wisely provides no easy answers for Ray.
SLAM runs 1:40.  It is rated R for profanity, sex, violence, and drugs
and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Marc Levin's _Slam_ is a powder keg of a movie, exploding with emotional
honesty and truth and the exuberant passion of raw young talent.  It is an
uplifting and exhilarating experience, a powerful work that deservedly won
the Grand Jury Prize at this year's Sundance Film Festival.
Newcomer Saul Williams plays Ray Joshua, a talented Washington, D.C.
rapper/poet whose dealings in the drug biz land him in jail.  There, given
the choice of falling into the trap of violence or hone his gift, Ray
chooses the latter, and with the help and love of prison writing teacher
Lauren Bell (Sonja Sohn), he discovers the transcendent power of his words.
The "finding oneself through art" premise isn't entirely original, but
what makes _Slam_ such a triumph is the freshness of its voice.  The first
scene where Ray "slams," with the help of an inmate (Momulu Stewart) in the
next cell, is dazzling in its sheer energy and percussive force.  "Force"
can also be used to describe Williams and Sohn, who are not only talented
poets but charismatic screen presences and extraordinary actors.  The two
are downright electrifying; one highly charged confrontation in which she
tries to convince him to own up to his past mistakes packs an overwhelming
emotional potency.  The same can be said of the entire film, which Williams
has called--and rightfully so--"more of a movement than a movie."  (opens
October 16)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
SLAM
(Trimark)
Starring:  Saul Williams, Sonja Sohn, Bonz Malone, Beau Sia.
Screenplay:  Marc Levin, Richard Stratton, Bonz Malone, Saul Williams and
Sonja Sohn.
Producers:  Henri M. Kessler, Richard Stratton, Marc Levin.
Director:  Marc Levin.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, sexual situations)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     SLAM appeals to everything critics want movies to be.  It tells a
story of a side of American life most of us are lucky enough never to see.
It has a unique narrative rhythm, and a gritty, uncompromising style.
It's an idea movie, one that clearly wants its audience to walk out
pondering its weighty themes rather than humming a theme song or grinning
from ear to ear.  It comes with the pedigree of an award-winning
documentary film-maker directing his first feature film, and a Sundance
Film Festival Grand Prize.  SLAM is a great praise-worthy package.
     It is not, however, a great film.  In fact, it's not even a
particularly good one.  Documentarian Marc Levin (HBO's "Bangin' in Little
Rock") brings his verite style to the story of Ray Joshua (Saul Williams),
a street poet and small-time marijuana dealer in Washington D.C.'s inner
city.  Caught in the wrong place at the wrong time during a gang shooting,
Ray ends up convicted of possession with intent.  In prison, Ray finds his
survival may depend on allying himself with prison gang leaders like Hopha
(Bonz Malone), even though Ray claims to be a pacifist.  He also meets
Lauren (Sonja Sohn), a poet offering creative writing classes for inmates.
The two cross paths again upon Ray's release from prison, where their
relationship forces ray to conider his role in the decay of his
environment.
     SLAM virtually bubbles and boils with provocative concepts and
viscerally effective scenes.  Though at first it seems like it may be
little more than a liberal tract on hard lives, inequities in the judicial
system and the like, the film probes a bit deeper, questioning whether Ray
is part of the solution or part of the problem.  It's also hard not to
feel a charge from the scene in which Ray defuses a potential fight in the
prison workout yard by bursting into a poem of paralyzing ferocity.  With
Levin occasionally toning down the strident voice for a few wry
observations (including Malone's smooth turn as the prison entrepreneur
and Marion Barry's cameo as a trial judge waxing ironically indignant
about drug dealing), SLAM at its best does manage to grab hold of you.
     Then, nearly as quickly, it'll let you go again.  SLAM depends almost
entirely on gripping you in the thrall of its intensity, but that doesn't
always happen with a pair of inexperienced lead actors handling the most
challenging material.  Saul Williams doesn't have the chops to handle
Ray's complex character arc, nor can Sonja Sohn always handle Lauren's
didactic role.  That leads to scenes where the two merely shout at each
other with a discouraging lack of subtlety.  As comfortable as they may be
with the rat-a-tat, stream-of-insanity style of their poetry (showcased in
scenes at coffee house poetry "slams"), it often feels like that's the
only note they can bring to their performances.
     Make no mistake, Levin and his cast understand this milieu, and the
sincerity of their conviction is never in doubt.  Their film-making
instincts are another matter entirely.  From moment to moment, Levin
alternates between compelling realism and the pretentious whiff of
conspicuous symbolism -- a gangsta who becomes enlightened after he is
blinded, for instance, or the hollowly open-ended final shot.  SLAM is its
own kind of tone poem, I suppose, its success riding on the strong
accented beats provided by a few individually effective scenes.  Yet
ultimately that's all it is -- a collection of emotional iambs,
alternately engrossing and meandering.  Sincerity can only get you so far,
even when you're telling a story everyone would like to have told.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
An intense look at the low quality of life for blacks in the inner city
of Washington, D.C.,  where killings and drugs are commonplace. SLAM has
the feel of a documentary film, as it traces the story of a young rapper
and minor drug dealer, Ray (Saul), who gets caught with the stuff while
running away from the scene of his friend being shot. He is faced with
the decision of ratting out others and going free, copping a guilty plea
and getting two years, or of taking the case to court and if convicted
getting a ten year sentence.
In jail, Ray uses his slam poetry (a combination of rap, hip-hop, and
expressive non-traditional poetry) to save himself from being set upon,
as he discovers that freedom is in the mind of the beholder. Jail is a
perplexing place for this gentle soul, as he is bedazzled by  the
inhumanity and injustice of it.
He is noticed by an attractive, sensitive prison English teacher, a
reformed addict and prostitute, Lauren (Sonja), who starts a
relationship with him, intrigued by his poetic ability and the
desperation of his situation. These two non-professional actors give
this film the fiery performance, it sorely needs.
When he is bailed out of jail, he meets Sonja at her home, and realizes
that he has entered a new world, where the practice of non-violence
through his poetry is the best way out of his situation. The highlights
of the film come from the strong performance poetry readings by the
actual poets, where their poems are seen as innovative, and have a more
powerful feel to them than the liberal preachiness of the film does.
What makes the film seem somewhat foolish and improbable, is the
contrast of how real and menacing the authentic prison scenes looked and
of how artificial the message of non-violence is, when delivered by
those who lived their entire life in violence and are suddenly converted
by one slam poem into changing their ways. It does give the film an
uplifting message, but it was not believable in the context of this
story.
This film can be valued for the energy it spends on its performances,
the sharpness of its poetry, and the clarity of its cinematography.
There is hope for Ray, as he tries to survive and establish his art and
self-identity. There is, also, hope that this film can have a positive
affect on the young audience that sees it. But, it should be noted, this
is by no means cutting edge film making.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
