Title
Review for Love Jones (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Larenz Tate, Nia Long, Isaiah Washington, Lisa Nicole Carson, 
      Bill Bellamy, Leonard Roberts, Bernadette L. Clarke 
Director: Theodore Witcher 
Producers: Jeremiah Samuels and Nick Wechsler 
Screenplay: Theodore Witcher 
Cinematography: Ernest Holzmann 
Music: Darryl Jones 
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema 
     LOVE JONES won the 1997 Sundance Film Festival Audience Award.  
That in itself means little.  Consider, for example, that the 1996 
winner was THE SPITFIRE GRILL, one of the most manipulative films of the 
year.  Even so, it's difficult to envision this motion picture, a 
traditional romance with non-traditional characters and circumstances, 
as an award-winner.  It's enjoyable in an undemanding way, but it never 
takes any real risks, nor does it display much ambition.  As a result, 
LOVE JONES' victory probably says more about the "mainstreaming" of 
Sundance than it does about the film. 
     It's an unfortunate trend in modern American movies that whenever a 
motion picture with a cast of African American actors is released, we 
expect it to feature violence, urban decay, and a heavy rap soundtrack.  
LOVE JONES, the feature debut of writer/director Theodore Witcher, 
offers none of these elements, which makes it something of a fresh 
experience.  Instead, this is a simple romance between two young, 
attractive, middle-class black characters who appreciate poetry and 
Charlie Parker music.  The film is entirely free of violence; there's 
not a gun or knife to be found.   
     The main characters are Darius Lovehall (Larenz Tate), a soulful 
poet with a roving eye, and Nina Mosley (Nia Long), a would-be 
photographer on the rebound from a long-term relationship.  He has only 
once been with a woman for more than six months; she's through with 
love, saying that it's "played out like an 8-track".  Needless to say, 
the two meet each other, sparks fly, and they end up in bed.  And, even 
though the truth is obvious to their friends and everyone in the 
audience, they assert that they're not in love, they're "just kickin' 
it".  So, when complications arise, as they must in any motion picture 
romance, the question (which in this sort of movie isn't that hard to 
answer) is whether their relationship can survive the stormy waters. 
     There are several reasons why this film works better than the 
common, garden-variety love story.  To begin with, the setting and 
texture are much different than that of most mainstream romances.  The 
culture, in which post-college African Americans mingle while pursuing 
careers and relationships, represents a signficiant change from what 
we're used to.  The Sanctuary, the intimate Chicago nightclub where 
Darius and Nina meet, is rich in its eclectic, bluesy atmosphere.  And 
LOVE JONES' dialogue is rarely trite.  When the characters open their 
mouths, it usually because they have something intelligent to say, not 
because they're trying to fill up dead air with meaningless words.   
     Larenz Tate (DEAD PRESIDENTS) and Nia Long (BOYZ 'N THE HOOD) 
invest their portrayals with a great deal of energy.  The chemistry 
between Darius and Nina alternately sizzles and smolders, resulting in a 
relationship that varies from playful to hot.  While the romantic 
dynamic between these two is familiar, the performances add a refreshing 
dimension to the often-stale choreography of motion picture love 
affairs.  And, in a surprising move, while Witcher ends the film on an 
upbeat note, there's no "happily ever after" promise. 
     The supporting cast is populated with colorful characters.  The 
most successful are Isaiah Washington's Savon Garrison and Bernadette L. 
Clarke's Sheila, both of whom seem like genuine people with legitimate 
personalities.  Less impressive are Bill Bellamy as Hollywood, a 
stereotypical ladies' man on the prowl, and Lisa Nicole Carson's Josie, 
who consistently strikes a false note.   
     The Sundance Audience Award notwithstanding, LOVE JONES isn't the 
kind of motion picture to inspire unqualified raves, nor is it likely to 
obscure the memory of SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT.  It runs a little too long 
for something so predictable, and sometimes the smart dialogue gets a 
little too clever.  Anyone who enjoys well-executed romances will find a 
lot to like about this film, but it lacks the strength of originality 
evident in those movies that inhabit the genre's top echelon.  LOVE 
JONES is a perfectly respectable entry into the late winter box office 
sweepstakes provided you don't take the Sundance pedigree too seriously. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  Larenz Tate, Nia Long, Isaiah Washington, Bill Bellamy, Khalil
Kain, Bernadette L. Clark, Lisa Nicole Carson.
Screenplay:  Theodore Witcher.
Producers:  Nick Wechsler and Jeremiah Samuels.
Director:  Theodore Witcher.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, brief nudity)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
    Theodore Witcher's LOVE JONES won the Audience Award at the 1997
Sundance Film Festival, which lately seems to be more of a general message
on the state of cinema than a comment on a specific film.  Last year's
winner, THE SPITFIRE GRILL, was a maudlin contraption which was laudable
for being a thoroughly decent redemption story.  In the case of LOVE
JONES, the Audience Award may have been sending a similar message about
what they'd like to see more of.  African-Americans in the movies have
been either clowns, criminals or police captains so often in recent years
that LOVE JONES -- a low-key comedy-drama about educated black artists --
was bound to strike a responsive chord.  I can't help but wonder whether
the Sundance audience was rewarding LOVE JONES itself or the idea of a
film _like_ LOVE JONES.  Make no mistake, Witcher's sophisticated romantic
tale is exceptionally well-crafted and includes some appealing moments,
but the script is sometimes lazy and not particularly interesting.  It's a
film with better intentions than
results.
     LOVE JONES is set in Chicago, where aspiring photographer Nina
Mosley (Nia Long) has just broken up with her fiance.  Nina resolves to
avoid falling in love, but she doesn't count on meeting aspiring poet
Darius Lovehall (Larenz Tate) at a jazz-and-poetry club.  Though Nina
initially resists Darius' advances, she eventually agrees to a date...which
doesn't end until the next morning.  Nina and Darius are soon involved in
a sexual relationship which both parties insist is nothing serious, but
all their friends are skeptical.  The skepticism proves warranted when
Nina's ex-fiance Marvin (Khalil Kain) decides he wants her back, and both
Nina and Darius are unsure how to react.  It is only when each suspects
the other of being unfaithful to their non-exclusive relationship that
they confront what their real feelings might be.
     At its core, LOVE JONES is a spin on WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, a slick
romantic comedy about smart people over-thinking their relationships,
turning those relationships over and over with their friends, and trying
to walk the fine line between friend and lover.  It is fairly incidental
to the story that these characters happen to be African-Americans, yet
that doesn't mean that the film is color-blind, or that the characters
talk like they just walked out of Eton.  The scenes between Darius and his
friends -- Savon (Isaiah Washington), Hollywood (Bill Bellamy) and Sheila
(Bernadette L. Clark) -- have a low-key energy, sparked by the wit of
their ritualized insults.  The dialogue feels natural and authentic, and
the performances are characterized by a convincing sense of familiarity
which makes them even stronger collectively than individually.
     If LOVE JONES had been a film about these characters just sitting
around talking, I probably would have enjoyed it much more.  The problem
is that the plot _is_ essentially a re-hash of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, with
relationships not nearly as compelling or funny.  Darryl Jones contributes
a wonderfully jazzy score, but that score infuses LOVE JONES with a
languid pace, the effect of which is to make you as nonchalant about the
fate of Darius and Nina's romance as they seem to be themselves.  There is
plenty of chemistry between Larenz Tate and Nia Long; there's just not
enough drama.  The entire arc of their relationship is drawn up in
well-worn tropes:  the meeting in a bar, the reluctant coupling, the
jealously and conflict, even a mad rush by one lover to stop the other
from leaving on a train.  Even when Darius finally breaks down and
confesses his love for Nina, there isn't a sense that there was anything
at stake for these two.  Their relationship seems just fine "just kickin'
it."
     That casual quality sometimes seeps into Witcher's plotting.  Threads
of sub-plots drift through LOVE JONES at regular intervals, and Witcher
never seems interested in explaining them in any detail.  Savon
experiences marital difficulties, but we don't know anything about his
wife and even less about their relationship; Nina has a brief fling with
Hollywood, but we don't know why he seems so deliberately antagonistic
towards Darius.  The large supporting cast consists of faces and voices
which don't develop into full-fledged people.  They are more like
background notes in a tone poem.
     LOVE JONES is the kind of film I would like to encourage, but I find
it hard to recommend it enthusiastically.  It's respectable, it's
admirable, it's smooth and smart and professional.  It's just not
particularly enjoyable.  Audiences have been jonesing for characters like
those in LOVE JONES, but they may be able to work up no more than a like
jones for this film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Have you been listening?" asks lead character Darius Lovehall
(Larenz Tate).  "The point is.  The point is.  I don't know what the
point is."  And neither does LOVE JONES's writer and director Theodore
Witcher.
     I suppose that if this lame excuse for a film has a point, it is
that blacks can make formulaic romantic comedies too.  In less than a
week I have seen two romantic comedies, the other being FOOLS RUSH IN,
that are neither romantic nor funny.  As bad as FOOLS RUSH IN is, at
least it had enough energy to keep your interest.  In contrast, LOVE
JONES is lifeless.  There is not a character in the show worth caring
about, and the leads demonstrate little genuine chemistry.  I was in a
fairly full audience and rarely heard more than a few snickers -- not a
good sign for a comedy.
     Ernest Holzmann's warm cinematography evokes an immediate intimacy
that promises more that the show ever delivers.  When the characters
begin to speak, one of the problems of the film becomes evident.  All
of the characters speak in a low, monotonic voice, making their dialog
sometimes unintelligible.  To exacerbate this, the loud background
noise frequently drowns out the speech.  With proper straining, one can
make out their lines, but then the more substantial problem emerges.
The writer constructs the dialog out of random snippets of small talk
laced with heavy profanities.  I go to enough art house films to be
able to tune out the profanities, but LOVE JONES's dialog is vacuous
with or without the cussing.  I found myself wishing for the smart,
funny dialog and crisp direction of Spike Lee's SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT.
     Female lead Nina Mosley is played by Nia Long.  Both Long and Tate
are good looking actors, but they are unable to make any talent they
have shine through this material.  I suspect the director got just the
mood he wanted, but it is a formula I have seen innumerable times
before and without a decent script, sitting through it again was
painful.
     I'll give you a few points of the story, and you can easily guess
most of the rest.  With typical 1990's movie morals, Nina and Darius
have sex and spend the night together on their first date.  Darius
claims interest only in sex, but falls in love as well.  Nina favors
romance but wants to test his level of commitment so she tries to make
him jealous.  The only scene with any imagination occurs late in the
picture.  She invites him to her apartment to sleep over and then
temporarily denies him sex.  This induces mass anguish on both of their
parts.
     Maysie Hoy's editing has jarring cuts between scenes and lets most
scenes live on way past their welcome.  I became reacquainted with my
watch during the show.  Finally, the film did end, and I was released.
Had I not been at a screening, I would have walked out, and if I had
left, I would have missed nothing.
     Toward the end of the picture, one of Darius's friends gives him
some advice.  "It ain't supposed to make sense," he says.  "Love,
passion -- it is what it is."  Well, this show made little sense and
had little credible love or passion.  I hope that for his next film,
first-time writer and director Witcher will either avoid formula films
or, if he feels compelled to make another, find something fresh to say.
     LOVE JONES runs too long at 1:50.  It is not yet rated, but will
certainly get an R for a little sex, a little nudity, crude sexual
humor, and a lot of profanity.  If teenagers go, they should be mature.
I would not wish this film on anyone else so I give it thumbs down and
a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
