Title
Review for Once Were Warriors (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Christopher Null
     The opening scene of ONCE WERE WARRIORS, a highly-acclaimed new
film from New Zealand, demolishes any outdated notions you may have
that the island is a pastoral paradise, that families live on fields of
green with herds of sheep, and that all is well in this world as a
whole.
     This unexpectedly powerful melodrama is the story of a Maori
family in urban New Zealand, trying to make ends meet and coping with
the overbearing presence of the family's father, a drunken brute who
regularly beats those who cross him into bloodied pulp.  Some of the
most disturbing and explosive fight scenes on film result from this, as
well as a tragically heart-breaking story line that inevitably
follows.  Because the family does nothing to stop the father, his
madness goes unchecked.  And when he shows a tinge of kindness, it is
always soon replaced with retribution.
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS is obviously not light fare.  It is a painful
and very effective tale about the destructive power of abuse, rape,
alcoholism, and violence in general that easily transcends its New
Zealand origin.  The title refers to the fact that the Maoris were once
a race of slaves and fighters, born with the rage of their ancestors
deep in their souls.  The story tells us what has become of the
centuries of rage, leaving the audience with a warning about what may
be happening in your country, in your town, in your home.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Rena Owen, Temuera Morrison, Mamaengaroa Kerr-Bell,
Julian Arahanga, Taungaroa Emile.
Screenplay:  Riwia Brown.
Director:  Lee Tamahori.
     Critics are often heard complaining about the lack of
originality in American filmmaking, about remakes, TV-retreads and
tired concepts dominating the multiplexes.  When Hollywood does
decide to show the audience something it has never seen before, it
is usually technology leading the way (JURASSIC PARK, TERMINATOR 2).
ONCE WERE WARRIORS is a wonderful example of what the movie-going
experience can teach us given the opportunity.  As an examination of
the Maori culture in contemporary New Zealand, ONCE WERE WARRIORS
showed me a world I had never seen before, and up until its overly
melodramatic final half hour, it is a fascinating and unsettling
drama.
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS is the story of the Heke family, people of
Maori descent living in present day Auckland.  Beth (Rena Owen), a
stoic homemaker, faces tremendous family pressures, most dangerously
from her unemployed and frequently abusive husband Jake (Temuera
Morrison).  The children also present problems:  oldest son Nig
(Julian Arahanga) has left home in favor of the company of a Maori
gang; middle son Boogie (Taungaroa Emile) has frequent run-ins with
the law and may be taken away by social services; daughter Grace
(Mamaengaroa Kerr-Bell) dreams of being a writer but is discouraged
by the culture's traditional roles for women.  These pressures
continue to build, until a family tragedy forces Beth to decide if
she can continue to live the same life.
     The first image in ONCE WERE WARRIORS is an idyllic landscape,
which is quickly revealed to be a billboard over a busy highway and
a Maori "ghetto."  Director Lee Tamahori sets up his story as one
far removed from a perhaps-mythic past, and defined by a warrior
culture in a land where the war for survival is fought against less
tangible enemies.  Often poor and treated with disdain by white
authority figures, the Maori turn their aggression inward, in
pointless and explosive barroom brawls and domestic violence.  ONCE
WERE WARRIORS has become a massive box office success in New Zealand
for addressing this culture which accounts for almost 10% of its
population, but it doesn't require a stretch to recognize that it is
a story which translates all too well to stories of America's
economically disadvantaged minority cultures.  It is a specific
story, but in many ways it is also a universal one.
     The specific story is most effective thanks to several powerful
performances.  Rena Owen's Beth is a proud woman whose beauty still
appears in a bright smile on her weathered face, though nearly
twenty years of marriage have beaten her down.  Her love for Jake is
as genuine as her frequent fear and hatred of him, and that conflict
drives the film.  Temuera Morrison is even more complex as Jake,
because he makes a violent drunk appealing enough during his good
moments to make the relationship convincing; he is Fred Flintstone
with a serious attitude.  Mamaengaroa Kerr-Bell, as the ever-more-
pessimistic Grace, is also good, as is Taungaroa Emile as the
troubled Boogie.
     While it is frighteningly real violence which drives ONCE WERE
WARRIORS for much of its running time, pathos unfortunately takes
over in the third act.  There is a drawn-out sequence which gives
everyone a chance to cry and make a speech, and characters start to
speak in platitudes like, "You're still a slave, Jake ... a slave to
your fists" and "I'll wear my (tatoos) on the inside."  By the end,
I was wondering whether Tamahori was taking his cue from Hollywood,
providing a feel-good resolution which tied up loose ends far too
neatly, rather than sticking with the harsh realities of the world
in which he has placed us.  This takes nothing away from everything
that has gone before, however.  ONCE WERE WARRIORS is filled with
memorable images, solid acting and a keen sense of place and
character, but without even realizing it, Tamahori has also told a
story about urban sub-cultures far from his own home.

Author
Cuda Brown
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS begins with a placid scene of a beautiful
mountain lake, the green foothills not far beyond.  Pure serenity.
Could be any time, any place.  Removed from the hustle and bustle, no
pollution to be found.  The music is serene as well, befitting the
surroundings.  But soon, the camera begins to pan left and as it does,
you begin to hear the din of city life, maybe a highway nearby.  And
heavy-metal guitar begins to wail, jangling the nerves.  The camera
moves to roaring traffic on the highway below, an industrial setting
with noise and smoke.  You realize that the beautiful surroundings you
imagined just moments before were merely an expressway billboard.  That
moment of serenity is the last we will have until the end of the film.
     This film, though also set in New Zealand, will clearly not be
another version of THE PIANO.  The time frame is completely different.
That was then, this is, well, today.  As the film unfolds, you also
notice that the casting is different.  Rather than addressing the
difficulties of white settlers entering a strange and foreign land, the
Maori natives appearing only as part of the scenery, this film is about
the Maori and what has become of them as a result of the earlier
settling.  Of course, there is more to it than that, which is what
makes ONCE WERE WARRIORS such an important film, in my estimation.
     The film is about Jake and Beth Heke (played by Temuera Morrison
and Rena Owen, respectively) who live in a run down part of an urban
area.  Beth struggles to keep her family together in the face of
pernicious violence from Jake that not only threatens her life, but
also makes it impossible to keep the respect of teenage children who
have their own ideas about life.  In fact, abusive is an understatement
in this case.  She risks losing her children if she doesn't stand up
and take control, but she clearly risks her life if she does.  To
complicate matters, she loves her husband and seems as trapped in their
lifestyle as he does, so the choice is not easy or completely up to
her.  She does the best she thinks she can.
     In such a setting, we witness unparalleled pain before reaching
the inevitable conclusion, and that process is a wrenching one in the
film.  After she seems to lose her eldest son to a Maori gang and her
next oldest son to the streets and, ultimately, a youth home, Beth
suffers a excruciating loss that epitomizes the lot of women in this
film.  Her daughter, Grace, a sensitive and caring young woman, chooses
death over a life that will, inevitably, be much like her mother's.
And finally, although it is not soon enough to save Grace, Beth is
compelled to act.
     Morrison, who reminds me of Robert DeNiro, delivers a powerful
portrayal of Jake.  He seems simultaneously capable of great charm and
sensuality, and, as "Jake the Muss," incredible brutality.  He uses
both to control Beth, who is played with eminent sensitivity by Owen.
Lee Tamahori, in his directorial debut, doesn't let Jake off the hook
by being sentimental, and Jake remains both brutal and pathetic.
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS holds a number of important lessons.  The first
is about domestic violence.  According to a note about the film on
National Public Radio, the film has been responsible for focusing
needed attention on domestic violence in New Zealand.  Jake's acts are
so reprehensible that sympathy for him is the last thing you'll want to
have, even though, at film's end, he remains a victim.  Nevertheless,
it is Beth and the children who bear Jake's wrath and it is clear that,
wherever or whenever it arises, domestic violence cannot be explained
or sympathized away.  In this way, the film makes a universal appeal to
ending such violence.  While written about a Maori family in New
Zealand, it could as easily be about any family in any corner of the
world.
     However, an equally compelling story is derived from the movie's
title itself.  A modern day tale set in the city, ONCE WERE WARRIORS is
about Maori who have strayed far from their roots.  With all of the
depravity of the city, the negative influences of drugs and alcohol and
unemployment and violence, we see a people who, once upon a time were
fearless warriors, yet have long since given up the battles of old to
settle for what is available.  We also see lots of victims, from those
who are "on the dole" or would like to be, to those like Jake and Beth
and their circle of friends, who are caught up in incurable sadness.
     Finally, ultimately, the film is a story of redemption.  In some
ways too late, but Beth nevertheless does finally act.  She stands up
and takes control.  She does what is necessary for survival and we are
left with hope.
     In some ways, ONCE WERE WARRIORS is a new conservative anthem,
about returning to one's roots, returning to traditional values.  It is
about standing up, about not merely taking what life dishes out lying
down.  It is about taking responsibility, regardless of the
surroundings or what everyone else is doing.  And that is a powerful
lesson indeed.  While this story is set in New Zealand, it could easily
be set in any black neighborhood in this country.  The fact is, it
could be set anywhere, anywhere people are not taking individual
responsibility and are satisfied with blaming "others" for their
predicament.  Even when those others are, in fact, responsible.
     The lesson of ONCE WERE WARRIORS is that those of us whose
ancestors were warriors, those of us who are descended from people who
had to struggle against forms of oppression, should once again, take up
that struggle and not accept the fate others have decided for us.  We
should not wait for someone, anyone, to come to our assistance.  We
should take control ourselves.  It is clearly a useful lesson for the
Maori.  It is equally compelling for African-Americans, for other
minorities, for women.  The message is not to go back to the good old
days, but to bring the values that allowed us to survive slavery and
oppression, to bring that struggle, forward for use in our current-days
lives.  As when Beth's son, asked if he wants to wear the traditional
Maori tattooing on his face, responds, "I wear mine on the inside."
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS is the most compelling, and perhaps the best
made, film I've seen in years.  In any event, don't take my word for
it.  Go see it for yourself!
[This review appeared in Meanderings 2.03.  You can find the entire
issue at http://www.webcom.com/~sppg/meanderings/me203/me203_00.shtml
]

Author
Krishin Asnani
     "Sharp Edged" were the words that floated through my mind when I
saw the film from New Zealand called ONCE WERE WARRIORS last night
at the chi-chi Paris theater that is adjacent to the very elegantly
arching Grace building outside of which are trees with very pretty
yellow flickering lights.  As I walked back to the car after the film
in the freezing night with my hands firmly planted in the pockets of my
jacket, none of this beatific scenery outside helped me escape the film
which remained lodged in my mind long after it was over.
     The opening shot of the film is a picture-perfect postcard view of
New Zealand's pristine mountains.  We quickly realize this is a
billboard poster as the camera pans away from it to reveal a highway
and the dilapidated neighbourhood under it which forms the stark canvas
of this film.  The attention grabbing opening credits with the hip-hop
music juxtaposed with very short bluesy guitar riffs set up the brutal
tone for the film.
     We are in the home of the Heke family who are descendents of the
Maori tribe.  This tribe has urbanized itself but the members of the
family still have varying degrees of ties to the tribe and its
rituals.  Jake is the brutal-looking and very muscular father who wears
small tattoos on his neck and like every member of the member wears
leather paraphernalia-all characters in this film look like they belong
to a motorcycle gang; Beth is the mother whose face has many
similarities to Jeane Moreau though her mouth is not pointed downward
like Moreau's and therefore Beth's smile is quite sensuous. (Janet
Maslin at the Times actually sees the connection between Beth and
Moreau).  Her broad forehead, silky golden hair, and a very angular and
high cheekboned face convey a sense of congeniality and are pointers to
her Maori roots.
     Jake and Beth have five children who occupy two rooms.  One night
the boozy and recently unemployed Jake brings home his huge party of
drunkard friends who also belong to the Maori tribe who don the same
type of costume as the Hekes; they have a grand time sitting around the
living room, drinking and crooning melodious tunes-there is one by Jake
and Beth that is really quite affecting.  The children sleeping in the
next room remark that alcohol brings out the true feelings of love.
Beth's bliss is very short-lived, a fight breaks out between Jake and
Beth and this is probably the scene that will rattle you and make you
recoil-the vividness of Jake's brutal and vicious violence is so acute
that you just can't look at the screen but before you know it its
over-your eyes have no chance to bolt.  The exquisite and the
expressive face of Beth is battered.  And the "true feelings of love"
are very scarce at that point.  Not to sound too cold but the editing
of this scene is remarkable.
     This has been going on for most of the sixteen years of their
marriage; Beth endures the husband for the sake of the children.  Jake
can be a real charmer and that makes Beth forgive him.  His charm is
phony and there was never a doubt in my mind that Jake is a very two
dimensional man, all his impulses are excessive: his violence, his
eating and drinking, and his love-making.  There is absolutely no sense
of balance let alone self-doubt to him.  After this first flare-up, his
physical menace is always at the back of our minds.  Besides Beth, some
of the patrons at a local bar become his punching bags too.  The
nihilistic onlookers display very little alarm.  The man who plays Jake
(Temeura Morrison) actually plays a very well-likable doctor in a New
Zealand soap opera.  What a transformation this man must have gone
through to play the role of Jake.
     Beth's face has had such a workout that she is unable to go to
court next day to prevent her younger son from being taken into a state
welfare institution.  This son, by the end of the film, achieves some
measure of identity--thanks to the teacher at the institute who is able
to channelize the son's energy into learning Maori rituals.  These
rituals performed by the disaffected yet trying to reform youth are a
form of martial-arts dance that is accompanied by their beautiful
chanting.  The direction of these scenes is handled with panache,
stylization and theatrics that only an experienced director would be
capable of.  Surprisingly, this is director Lee Tamahori's debut film.
     An older son takes refuge in a gang that has strong ties to the
Maori tribe: the members wear very creative tattoos on their faces and
their entire body and their uniform is all leather and chains.  The
initiation rites are brutal but are exquisitely well photographed.
Grace, the 13 year daughter in the family is the only sane child with a
very innocent face that exudes equanimity in this violent home.  Her
best friend is a soulful, chain-smoking, dreadlock-wearing homeless boy
who lives inside a junked car under a highway.
     The relationship between Beth and Grace is well explored in a
scene which occurs few days after the violence and Jake has apologized
to Beth.  The family takes a trip in their new car to see their younger
son in the institution.  On their way, they stop at a picnic spot to
revel in nostalgia of their former lives as tribe members.  These
scenes are magical in their lyricism, the scenery of the picnic spot is
breathtaking.  They get back in the car and Jake and Beth sing along to
a pop song blaring out from their car radio.
     Again, this bliss is transitory: on their way to the institution,
Jake stops at a bar for one beer only (he promises) while the family
waits for him in the car.  After half an hour, when Beth goes in to get
him, he shouts at her in a way that will make anyone tremble to stop
interrupting him from watching the horse races on the tele.  At this
point Beth is convinced that she has to dig herself out of this
dysfunctional marriage.
     After yet another heartfelt tragedy that will go unmentioned here,
Beth lectures Jake on the greatness of her tribe and how its
characteristics are different from Jake's.  The speech is didactic, and
it is delivered with great passion: the only face on the screen is
Beth's, the wind makes her hair sway back revealing the steely
determination of her clear blue eyes in a broad face that deserves a
lot better fate.
     The film is supposed to be an exercise that explores the
rootlessness of this tribe, the politics of how they deal with the
present society that knows very little about them and the past that
they have little connection to.  It has become the most popular film in
the history of New Zealand and deserves to be be in the Top 10 lists of
US critics at the end of 1995.  The director is very talented, has
found an interesting topic to explore and has many talented friends in
the sound, editing, music and cinematography departments and all pitch
in to give this the film a raw, industrial, and a very professional
look.
     For me, the personal was far more engaging than the political.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release on 2/24/95
Running Length: 1:39
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, rape, language)
Starring: Rena Owen, Temuera Morrison, Mamaengaroa Kerr-Bell,
          Julian Arahanga, Taungaroa Emile, Cliff Curtis
Director: Lee Tamahori
Producer: Robin Scholes
Screenplay: Riwia Brown based on the novel by Alan Duff
Cinematography: Stuart Dryburgh
Music: Murray McNabb
Released by Fine Line Features
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS, a New Zealand export, is centered upon the
touchy yet timely topic of domestic violence.  It is not, however,
merely another "domestic violence motion picture."  With its complex
cultural backdrop and its stark view of this societal cancer, ONCE WERE
WARRIORS attains a level where it is equally painful and potent.
     The critical themes of this movie are universal, even though there
is a great deal of background that only a New Zealander (or a student
of that country's history) can appreciate.  Nevertheless, though many
elements of the subtext may be lost to outside viewers, the key
issue--the brutal cycle of violence and denial within a family--is
brought to the fore in a manner that necessitates no special
awareness.
     It is helpful, although not essential, to know a little about
Maori society and culture (Maoris are the Polynesian warrior-race who
settled--or, more appropriately, conquered--New Zealand some 1000 years
ago).  Equality is not a basic tenant of the Maori lifestyle, at least
as depicted in this film.  However, alcoholism and unemployment are.
It's the lot of the woman to work, while the man--the
"protector"--spends all day at the local pub getting drunk.
Wife-beating, while distasteful, is acceptable behavior, especially if
the woman has the audacity to talk back to her husband.
     The movie takes place in an urbanized area of south Auckland,
where Beth and Jake Heke (Rena Owen and New Zealand soap stud Temuera
Morrison) live in a small house with four of their five children.  The
fifth, Nig (Julian Arahanga), has moved out to join a local gang.  At
first glance, Beth and Jake seem to have a solid marriage.  They gripe
at each other, but all seems pretty tranquil, and there are moments of
genuine affection.  But when Jake is drunk (which is frequently), his
temper is easily ignited, and when one of Beth's barbs pushes him too
far, the bloody and violent results are terrible to behold.  Many films
have depicted wife-beatings.  Few have been as graphic and difficult to
watch.
     Beth and Jake's troubles have a domino effect on their children.
Boogie (Taungaroa Emile) has been arrested, and when neither of his
parents appear at his court hearing, he is sentenced to enter social
welfare custody.  Grace (Mamaengaroa Kerr-Bell), the Heke's
thirteen-year old daughter, is having as much difficulty coping with
her own sexuality as with the brutal chaos of her home life.
     The acting throughout ONCE WERE WARRIORS is uniformly strong, with
leading and supporting actors turning in performances that range from
credible to electric.  The musical score, by Murray McNabb, is
evocative, and a perfect match for the drab, dreary colors suffusing
Stuart Dryburgh's camerawork.  Great pains have been taken to emphasize
that everyone in this film is trapped by one thing or another--if not
their circumstances, then their personality.  The only moment of
serenity--the opening scene depicting a pastoral setting--turns out to
be an illusion:  a billboard in the midst of a gray city.
     By anchoring ONCE WERE WARRIORS in the turmoil of a Maori family,
director Lee Tamahori takes full advantage of an opportunity not only
to dissect the forces that lead to domestic violence, but also to focus
on the clash between Maori traditions and modern values.  The snares
laid for men and women are not the only concepts put forth to ponder.
ONCE WERE WARRIORS works, to some degree, on three levels:  the
visceral, the emotional, and the intellectual, and it is the
amalgamation of these that makes this a memorable film.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
