Title
Review for Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  In a world where Mickey Mouse and Bugs
     Bunny really could come knocking at your door, nearly
     anything can happen.  WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT is a rather
     dull mystery plot set on a really great background where
     cartoon characters rub shoulders with living humans.
     Technical credits and inspiration of having the favorite
     cartoon characters of the 1940s come together in one film
     make the plot inadequacies seem unimportant.  Rating: +2.
     Back in the three or four years after the Second World War, two
different sorts of films were reaching their heyday.  One was the hard-
boiled detective film, which made a tentative start before the war with a
few films like THE MALTESE FALCON, had dried up a little during the war
years, then really hit its stride with films like MURDER, MY SWEET; THE BIG
SLEEP; and LADY IN THE LAKE.  At the same time, Chuck Jones' cartoon
characters began taking on the shapes and styles familiar to modern viewers.
But no two styles of film could be much further apart than the film noir
detective story and the cartoon form.  At least that was the case until Gary
Wolf wrote the mystery novel WHO CENSORED ROGER RABBIT?  Wolf set his story
in those post-war years but took out the blacks that Raymond Chandler's
detective called "shines" and replaced them with "toons," the characters of
cartoons.  In this world cartoons are just live-action films in which all
the actors are toons.  Adjoining Los Angeles is the ghetto where all the
toon actors live, a place called Toontwon.  Against this background the film
WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT takes place.
     And the background is what is important in this film.  In the
foreground is a sort of prosaic mystery story in which tough-guy (humor)
detective Eddie Valiant (valiantly played by Bob Hoskins) is looking for the
real killer in a murder case in which the police strongly suspect famous
cartoon star Roger Rabbit.  Valiant (at least initially) thinks Roger is
innocent, but he is not so sure about Roger's buxom wife Jessica Rabbit.
(Don't let the name fool you; she is a very human-looking toon.)  The
mystery story is not a very good one and its resolution is disappointingly
bad, but it is unlikely that that will disappoint much of the audience.
What may resonate a little is the statement against bigotry against toons or
humans.  The technical effect of mixing live action and cartoon will
definitely dazzle most audiences.  The integration of live action and
cartoon, reputed to be flawless, is at least technically very, very good.
Just occasionally we find Bob Hoskins looking a little too high as he talks
to Roger.  The animators had, after the fact, placed the top of Roger's head
rather than Roger's eyes in Hoskins' line of vision.  But that quibble
aside, this film goes many orders of magnitude beyond any previous such
mixing.  The cartoon characters in the real world have a three-dimensional
quality, resulting from careful use of shadow--no explanation why they do
not have shadowing when they appear in cartoons.
     Among the interesting touches are the attempts to make toons work
consistently in the real world.  Clearly the laws of physics do not work the
same in cartoons as they do in the real world, but when you start separating
cartoon characters from cartoon settings you have to decide which side gets
the ability to break with physical law.  As it turns out--logically or not-
-both sides get it to some extent.  Roger tends to rocket around a real
world room when he drinks a glass of whiskey.  But a human in Toontown also
gets some special cartoon protection like being able to survive falls.
Apparently toons have magic both in themselves and in their setting.
     WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT is a cooperation between the two traditional
competitors, Steven Spielberg's Amblin Entertainment and Walt Disney
Enterprises, who decided late in the production that this film would be a
Touchstone film and not a Walt Disney film.  Perhaps they wanted it released
through their adult division because of some violence, though their
professed reason was that Jessica Rabbit was a little too well-endowed and a
little under-dressed for a child audience.  That cooperation and either the
money it brought or the inspiration of the project bred more cooperation.
As Disney was one of the production companies, getting permission to use
Disney cartoon characters was probably no problem, but somehow they managed
to get Warner Brothers' characters, complete with Mel Blanc's voice, so you
could have Daffy Duck on screen with Donald Duck and making wisecracks about
Donald's speech impediment.  (Donald may have been wisecracking back but
with Donald, who can tell?)  Woody Woodpecker and hosts of other cartoon
characters are also on hand.  For humans, the cast is no so star-studded but
Christopher Lloyd is on hand with another weird  character for director
Robert Zemeckis (BACK TO THE FUTURE).  Then there are Kathleen Turner and
Amy Irving who do the voice for Jessica: Turner does the speaking; Irving
does the singing.
     WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT is a great film for lots of reasons, many of
which have little to do with the actual plot.  Rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Joseph Toscano
        WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? in a nutshell brings two worlds together that
many people have always dreamed about. The world of animated characters
and fantastical lore meet the real human world. Specifically the live
and wild one called, "Hollywood."
        If the special effects in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? had been done in a
poor manner, then the whole movie would be change. But fortunately, Ken
Ralston, of Star Wars and Forrest Gump fame, has done a splendid job in
meshing the two worlds together.
        As the tagline suggests, the film is about a man, a rabbit and a woman
in a triangle of trouble. The plot is set in Hollywood 1949, with the
sets and clothes perfectly matched for the time period. A mile away from
the Maroon Cartoon studios is a tunnel that leads to a town called Toon
Town, which is the home of the toons. "Every Joe loves Toon Town" except
for Eddie Valiant, a drunk of a PI, who's brother was killed by a toon
years back. Their team always cracked the important toon cases, and they
were admired until the accident.        Now Eddie is assigned to a new job, and
it unfolds into a plot to destroy Toon Town, and those loveable toons.
        Although the plot is a bit disjointed in a few spots, it holds together
well enough because of the magic of the toons. The toons are crazy, so
when the plot takes odd twists, it makes sense.
        There are many strengths in this film, and they do far outweigh the
weaknesses. The acting of Eddie Valiant (Bob Hoskins) and Judge Doom
(Christopher Lloyd) make the picture soar in parts. Hoskins plays a
great burnt out PI, and on top of that, he's usually acting solo since
there really isn't a Rabbit named Roger speaking to him. He conveys
great emotion without even having another actor to speak to.
        Another strength is the humor. It's done in a brilliant way, with the
toons and humans, and you find yourself cracking up at things that you
normally wouldn't. The voice acting of the talented Charles Fleischer,
as he plays four characters in the film, also elicits some chuckles. The
simple premise of mixing these two worlds alone just produces laughter,
as it's a fresh, new idea.
        The humor, along with the suspense of the storyline create a good
atmosphere. I've always liked when movies are two or more movies in one.
Like this one, which is a mystery and a comedy in one. And Zemeckis
manages to pull it off without making it look too corny.
        Musical score can be 50% of a movie sometimes. In the case of WHO
FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?, composer Alan Silvestri creates a brilliant score
that captures the very essence of the movie. Written with an old time
jazz feeling, the score soars at all times, making some scenes ooze with
a sense of completion. The music in this film deserved at least an Oscar
nomination, as it's wonderfully written and styled.
        Although the ending could use some adjustment, it is one of the most
suspenseful and hilarious closings to a movie that have come along.
Although movies don't need to always end with the bad guy getting
clocked, in this case it was almost needed, especially when the badguy
is seemingly invincible.
        The film passes along a message through the mayhem of the toons, which
is that laughter is important. Sometimes laughter is the only thing we
have. And with all the laughs produced by the film, it does carry the
message well.
        WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? ends with style, and you'll find youself
chuckling as the credits roll, recalling events that occured during the
film. Even though quirky, corny, and confusing a few times, the movie
creates a sense of funny wonder, and definately does not dissapoint.
-- Joseph Toscano (January 9, 1998) scarjt@buffnet.net

Author
Wayne Citrin
     Hefty German woman (Marianne Saegebrecht) finds herself stranded at a
motel in the middle of the California desert with a bunch of American oddballs.
She finds friendship, and brings some happiness into their lives.  Film seems
somewhat remote and uninvolving during the viewing, but grows on you
afterwards.  Two and a half stars.
     The best film I've seen so far this year.  Several interlocking stories
about young people in the Bronx in 1964, centered around the homecoming of a
psychopath just out of prison.  Offbeat story and dialogue written by the writer
of MOONSTRUCK.  Reminiscent of THE WANDERERS and DINER.  Three and a half stars.
     A romantic farce set in a village on the Greek island of Rhodes during the
tourist season.  The set of interlocking stories concerning romance,
entrepreneurialism, espionage, and art theft, is coherent and funny.  The
scenery is incomparable, and Jacqueline Bisset, although looking her age, is
still beautiful.  Only problem in the film is the romance between Bisset and
her ex-husband, played by Edward Fox, which is completely lacking in chemistry.
There's enough in this film to make up for that, though.  Three stars.
     In the Kenya of the Fifties, a young African boy whose father has been
killed by the Mau-Mau, is forced to take a job as a "kitchen toto" (or helper)
in the house of the British chief of police.  He becomes caught up in the
revolution and is divided in his loyalties between the Africans and his British
employers.  The film presents a well-rounded and even-handed treatment of the
British colonials and their African servants, but I felt that the treatment of
the Mau-Mau as evil thugs was too shallow and took away from whatever points
the film made on behalf of the British.  Two and a half stars.
     I read the novel last year and have been looking for the film (on video or
in a theatre) ever since.  The film, by Visconti, is a meticulous recreation of
the classic novel about a Sicilian prince (Burt Lancaster) and his adjustment
to Italian unification and the rise of the bourgeois society.  Visconti decided
to leave out the last few chapters (for time reasons, probably, although the
film still lasts almost three hours), which unfortunately tends to blunt the
point that the novel tries to make.  There's still enough here, though, to make
the film worthwhile, even if you haven't read the book.  Three stars.
     I finally got around to seeing this after reading some negative reviews
and was pleasantly surprised.  Something of a romantic fantasy, but with
intelligent, well-rounded characters and witty dialogue.  Cher and Nicolas Cage
put in excellent performances, and I can't even look at Vincent Gardenia's face
with out breaking up.  Three stars.
     Nothing I say will keep anyone from going to see it, but I thought it was
a low-grade "Chinatown" with a "Howard the Duck" ending.  Yes, the technical
virtuosity was admirable, but that's only enough to give it two stars out of
four.

Author
Craig Good
     Wednesday evening I stood in line at the newly restored Alhambra Theatre
in San Francisco.  (Here's a trend I hope catches on: the theatre used to be
split in two, but now it's back to being one large room the way theatres are
*supposed* to be!)  I was at the head of a long line -- a very long line.
Opening night audiences are the best in the world, especially when the movie is
An Event.
     And what an event it turned out to be.  WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT (always
sans question mark) is a landmark film.  Technically it is as big a
breakthrough as STAR WARS, and there are precious few movies I've enjoyed as
much as this one.  Now, I like to think of myself as reasonably well up on the
state of the art in visual effects and, to a respectable degree, in the state
of the art in animation.  Roger proved to me that I don't know nuthin'.
     The animation, as John Lasseter pointed out, is the kind of animation
animators dream of doing: this is real animator's animation.  In nearly every
shot they go out of their way to show off.  Most of it is so flawless that
animation neophytes will never guess how hard it was to do.  But they will
enjoy it just the same.  How could you not enjoy a piano duet with Donald and
Daffy Duck?  How could you not enjoy seeing nearly every great animated
character ever created working together in one film?  (I could tell you more
about characters which get applause for just showing up, but I'm bound and
determined not to put any spoilers in this review.)
     Industrial Light and Magic, especially the optical department, deserves a
zillion simoleans and a basket of joy buzzers for their work on this film.  I
particularly hope that Ed Jones gets a little statue for the "tone mattes" used
to give the animated characters so much dimensionality.  The optical crew
composited 1,050 shots, as compared with just over 600 for RETURN OF THE JEDI.
Bear in mind that they pulled this off simultaneously with doing WILLOW.  Those
guys are superhuman, suicidal, or both.
     Do not, I repeat -- do *not* -- show up late for this film.  If it starts
while you are at the candy counter, forget the imitation popcorn and bits of
sticky chewy stuff and run into the theatre.  The first several minutes contain
some of the best (and hardest) animation ever done.  While the animation is
pedal-to-the-metal during the whole movie, one standout sequence is also the
most subdued.  Jessica Rabbit, Roger's wife, delivers a knock-out torch song at
the Ink and Paint club in a sequence which is a cinematic tour de force.  (Amy
Irving did the vocal performance for the scene, and I didn't know she could
sing!)
     As if the animation weren't enough reason to go see the movie, and don't
you think it ought to be, Robert "Back to the Future" Zemekis serves up his
finest work ever.  The same layered, detailed approach he took to the world of
1955 is applied to 1947.  For example, there are no cartoon characters in the
movie predating that year except for the penguins from MARY POPPINS, but
they're working as waiters.  The best part of his direction for me is his sense
of kinetics.  The timing, the pace, the movement of everything is darn near
perfect, from the way scenes are cut to the way props move.
     Bob Hoskins is absolutely dead-on as the drunk, has-been private eye Eddie
Valiant who is caught up in a murder mystery.  His ability to act with
characters that aren't there yet is stunning.  This is "effects acting" at its
finest.  If he isn't remembered at Oscar time then the Academy is a bigger
bunch of maroons than even I thought.  The supporting cast, almost half of
which is human, is also very good.  Christopher Lloyd is wonderfully evil as the
dread Judge Doom.  Joanna Cassidy, as Valiant's lady friend, holds her own even
though she can be seen at least once biting her lip to keep from laughing.
     Don't *you* try that or you'll need stitches in your lip.  Listen.  Log
out now and head for the theatre.  Expect long lines.  Word of mouth on this
film is going to be incredible.  See it in a theatre with a big audience --
it's a terrific audience participation film.  Of course, there is so much going
on, and the laughter is so frequent that you'll have to go see it again and
again to catch what you missed the first time.

Author
Aaron Fager
          Mini review: WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT deals with an animated
     (i.e., cartoon) rabbit accused of murdering a human being.  He
     is aided by an alcoholic private eye to clear his name.  Robert
     Zemickis and Stephen Spielberg give us a standard but
     irresistible story and characters.  I give this a must-see, A-,
     +3, and a 95%.
     To paraphrase from HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE, "Sneakin' in at the Movies," "This
was a great movie.  It was filled with stereotypes, but I give it the serious
high-five!."  If you have ever enjoyed the Roadrunner, Tom and Jerry, Sylvester
and Tweety, or any other slapstick chase cartoons, then you will love ROGER
RABBIT.  If you have ever enjoyed Goofy, Bugs Bunny, Droopy, or any other
'hidden-adult-meanings-but-fun-for-kids' cartoons, then you will love ROGER
RABBIT.  If you enjoyed the Star Trek episodes dealing with the 1930's and
1940's (e.g., "A Piece of the Action"), or the Christopher Lloyd characters in
BUCKAROO BANZAI, BACK TO THE FUTURE, and Star Trek III: The Search for Spock,
then you will love ROGER RABBIT!!!!!!
     I should give a little background before the movie.  Boston was definitely
'Dark and Stormy,' but it caught me by surprise, and put me in the mood for
cartoon humor with the high winds, the driving rain from out of nowhere, and
the lightening which seemed to be chasing me as I ran to the theatre.  Anyone
who has seen Bugs Bunny run from Elmer Fudd could relate.  Especially the
episode where he uses the 'Spear and Magic Helmet' to bring down our hero.  
     This is a great work of art totally separate from the quality of the
story.  The Toons move through the story just as "realistically" as the
humans, a compliment to the artists who do this in much better quality than
seen in any cartoons since the time of the 1950's and Chuck Jones.  The actors
have it much easier.  They only have to act in front of the camera with no
cues or references.  Jimmy Stewart had to do this, and many people have seen
people play off of "invisible" actors in BEWITCHED and I DREAM OF JEANNIE, but
these Toon/Human interactions are perfectly done, right down to the Toon's
effects on human clothing and bodies.
     The premise behind the movie is simple.  Toons are alive and well and
living in Toontown, but work in Hollywood/Los Angeles with humans.  Roger
Rabbit is a recurrent victim of Baby Herman in their "films," but has had
trouble doing his "part" lately.  Bob Hoskins (MONA LISA) is Private Eye Eddie
Valient, known for doing Toons a good turn until ...  ??  And Christopher Lloyd
is Judge Doom, the "magistrate" of Toontown, meant to keep them Toons in their
place.
     The supporting cast is just about anyone from Disney and Warner Brothers
that you would remember, and in a version of detente, they all work together in
this film.  You have:
just to name a few.  Plenty of others will be easy to spot, plus the references
to many more not seen in the film.  This is the kind of film that you would
*buy* instead of rent as a VCR tape, because each time you watch it, you will
see neat little details that you missed the first time.  You might even want 
to buy a few of the old cartoons before going, just to get even more in the
mood for the camp, fun, nostalgia, and quality animation.  The last time I felt
this from a film was in BATMAN, THE MOVIE.  And never have I heard the amount
of applause after the movie was over.  Definitely the best out so far this
summer.
     My first movie review is now concluded, and I leave you with one of many
quotes that will stay with you a while.  (There are plenty more visual jokes
that cannot be described, can only be seen.)
Aaron Fager, Boston University and The University of Miami.

Author
George Lau
Cast: Bob Hoskins, Christopher Lloyd, Joanna Cassidy, Charles Fleischer, Stubby
Kaye and Alan Tilvern 
Director: Robert Zemekis 
Producer: Robert Watts and Frank Marshall 
Screenplay: Jeffrey Price and Peter Seaman based on the book, "Who Censored
Roger Rabbit?" by Gary K. Wolf 
Director of Animation: Richard Williams 
Cinematography: Dean Cundey 
Music: Alan Silvestri 
Running Time: 103 minutes 
MPAA Rating: PG 
Having not seen, "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" in over 10 years, and not
remembering much besides that I liked it then, I decided to rent it recently.
Watching it I was struck by just how brilliant a film it is. Aside from the
fact that it's a milestone in animation in movies (it's the first film to
combine real actors and cartoon characters, have them interact, and make it
convincingly real) and a great entertainment it's also quite an effective
comedy/mystery. While the plot may be somewhat familiar the characters are
original, especially Baby Herman, and watching them together is a lot of fun. 
The story begins in Hollywood in 1947. Cartoon star Roger Rabbit is blowing
takes and having trouble keeping his mind on work, so hard-boiled private
detective Eddie Valiant (Bob Hoskins) is called in by studio head R.K. Maroon
(Alan Tilvern) to try to help get Roger's mind back on work. Maroon thinks that
Roger's wife, Jessica's, possible unfaithfulness to him might be the cause of
distraction and tells Eddie to get some photos of her in the act before it
costs him any more money in reshoots. 
Valiant takes some photos of Jessica playing, `patty cake' with Marvin Acme
(Stubby Kaye), the owner of Toontown (where all of the cartoon characters live)
and takes them to Maroon. Upon seeing them, Roger is emotionally destroyed and
soon after Acme is found dead and Roger Rabbit is the prime suspect. 
The rest of the movie follows Valiant and Roger as they run around town (and
eventually Toontown) trying to clear Roger's good name. Along the way they meet
Judge Doom (Christopher Lloyd) a judge-jury-and executioner type who's out to
get Roger and has discovered the one and only way to kill a `toon.' 
`Who Framed Roger Rabbit' won 4 Academy Awards including a Special Achievement
Award for Richard Williams for animation direction and creation of the cartoon
characters (Williams and his teams went through the film frame by frame and
hand drew the cartoon characters in). Director Robert Zemekis must be given an
equal amount of praise for overseeing the entire production, which included
hundreds of animators. Also Bob Hoskins' performance should be credited. He, in
addition to the rest of the human cast, finds the right note to play in all of
the scenes with his cartoon co-stars. According to The Internet Movie Database,
Hoskins studied his young daughter to learn how to act with imaginary
characters and I guess his hard work paid off. 
`Who Framed Roger Rabbit' is a rare film. One that not only presented a great
challenge to the filmmakers but one that can be enjoyed by the whole family
(although some very young viewers may be a little scared by Judge Doom). Do
yourself a favor and rent it, `P-p-p-p-please." 
