Title
Review for Restoration (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Epic historical dramas are so rare, these days, that even the
emotionally-empty RESTORATION may find itself an audience.  There's very
little weight behind this 17th Century story of an English physician
(Robert Downey Jr.) who finds his faith tested by the King (Sam Neill),
a fellow practitioner (David Thewlis), and a mentally-ill commoner (Meg
Ryan).  The running time is a wig's hair under two hours, and yet it
feels like four.  Nobody in Michael Hoffman's film commands any presence,
least of all Downey, who appears in nearly every single scene.  (The Big
Cast also includes Hugh Grant, who, apparently, is now required to 
appear in at least three period pieces per year.  Maybe it's part of his
sentence.) The opulent set design and detailed costumes are about as
exciting as it gets.  Though there's never a shortage of story-- the
plot churns away merrily from the very first scene-- the absence of even
a *single* interesting character turns the title into an apt description
of what most viewers will be attempting with regard to the blood flow to
their buttocks.  Boring. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Pedro Sena
There are films that grab one's attention, and then there are films where
one just doesn't know if our attention is supposed to be gotten or not. Many
of these films fall into the artsy category, and tend to disappear and not
be
noticed for much of anything. But every now and then, a film comes by that
is actually pretty good, although as far as action goes, it doesn't make
the grade.
The period that the story takes place, has a complete theatre dedicated to
it, and its affectations. It is called Restoration Theatre, and it is very
difficult to do well, unless one is well versed in the manners and styles of
the age. The film takes its cue from the its settings, and never lets it go.
And this is rare in film making. One could easily fall for the sentimental
story, or the period's affectations and its silly ways.  Instead one keeps
finding out more about the time and what went on.
Unfortunately ( for the main character ) in the middle of all this, a story
is born and he has to live with it.
This is the story of the period, before it really is the story of a  certain
Meryvel, who does not care for his job and work in the medical  field. He
finds it boring, and not pleasing, not to mention that it ruins  much of his
social life. As it happens, he develops a new style of  healing based on his
intuition, and this gets him to the king's chambers.  Here he is asked to
cure one of the king's favorite pets, a dog.  And of  course, Meryvel, has
no idea what he did, but somehow his way ( not  bleeding the patient )
happens to help cure the animal which places  Meryvel in the king's favor.
As time goes by, the king decides to use Meryvel. He will marry him off  to
his mistress, with the agreement that he will not bother her, spend  time
with her, and so on. But there is a larger sub-plot, that will  eventually
change the course of the film from where it is to another  place. It is the
plague that is beginning to foster in London, and  Charles II has not
figured out how to deal with it. He was too worried  about his new city
instead of taking the advise of his inferiors to  create sewers and water
mains.
Meryvel, finds that he is attracted to the King's mistress, even if she  is
not interested in him at all. And a court painter is brought in to  paint
the lady, and he is held up so that Meryvel can try to convince  the
mistress. Alas, the painter is also one of the king's stool pigeons,  and
eventually the little story is found out, and Meryvel has to leave,  and
does.
He ends up in a Quaker convent, where his brother is the medic. But his
brother's ways are the old ones and his efficiency is not evident.  Meryvel
promptly suggests a few changes, and in the course of affecting  one of
them, he ends up meeting a woman that is there. She appears crazy,  but
apparently is not, and he does not see the point in bleeding any  patients.
Eventually they come together and she gets pregnant. This is not good for
the convent and they both have to leave. And they are both  in the middle of
the London plague. During the nasty birth, the child  is saved, but the
mother dies. And from here, the story takes on some  rather sad, and
different moods. All of a sudden, we do not see the  court life, we see the
street deaths, and the court falling apart as  well.
The rest I won't spoil for you... but suffice it to say that some  poetic
justice does come about, even though the court's style of  justice could be
thought to be rather boring, and not dependable...  but as Charles says,
it's the best he can do as long as he is king.  But Meryvel's reputation as
a doctor is restored, and he is now a
valuable member of society, and one that is important in the recovery  that
London will have to undergo.
Perhaps the very best thing about this film, is that we do not really know
who is who, and what parts they are playing. There are no credits  at the
beginning, and I find that this is great. It takes you directly into the
"play" and makes the statement that the situation and the  story is the
point, not the actors, and the people that created the  film, which, REALLY,
is the way it should be.
And later we find out that Sam Neill is the king, Robert Downey Jr. is
Meryvel, and that Meg Ryan is the crazy woman. Should one remember this
before hand, the effect may have not been the same. All the performances are
excellent, and the film seems to be really well focused on its themes.
Worth seeing. Beautiful film, and won a couple of Oscars, the costumes
being one of them.

Author
John Schuurman
     In 1660 England awakens to a "New Age." What the Cavaliers like to
call "Enlightenment" returns after a dismal rule of a dozen or so years
by Cromwell and his gloomy Puritans. Now, at last, "rich men can go to
heaven agai n." The charming Charles II is restored to the throne and
sets up what has long been regarded as England's most decadent court.
Megalomaniac that he is, he also makes plans for one of the most
ambitious building projects ever known to man, a tribute to his royal
person.
     But not everything is so "enlightened" and free of shadow. Not all
flesh delights. For there still lingers in the land the superstitions
of the masses and the unctuous airs of the religious; but more than
them all, the Bl ack Plague, that indiscriminate killer of millions, is
rumored to be lurking again. As the fun guy Charles II says in one of
his reflective moments, "The plague rouses men from their sleep."
     RESTORATION is a fine film surrounded by this conflicted world.
Michael Hoffman and his army of technical and research people, have
restored to us this time and place. We have seen a lot of cinematic
treatments of various periods of English history of late, "Brave
Heart," "Rob Roy," "Sense and Sensibility," and "Persuasion," to name
but a few, but I don't recall one so careful and so splendid. This is
painstaking film-making at its very best.
     RESTORATION is what the industry calls "A Coming of Age" film. But
it is not as innocuous a coming of age as most of Hollywood's fare. A
sign on the doorpost of a Quaker asylum for the mentally ill quotes
Isaiah 48:10 "Be hold, I have refined thee in the furnace of
affliction." We can watch the burning away of the character's baser
elements on several levels.
     Walking us through the tumultuous time and countryside is a gifted
but licentious young physician, Rowe Merivel. His life is in disarray
from the outset because of his philandering; his taste for women even
gets him into trouble in the court of Charles. As we travel with Rowe,
we marvel and wonder at the sumptuous life. We also share the
consternation of his good friend and fellow physician, John Pierce, a
quiet (and not at all unctuous) Quaker. John sees in Rowe someone that
God has uniquely gifted with a surgeon's heart and hands. We, with
John, hate it when we see Rowe waste the gift. But as tumult moves into
ever greater tumult, we see Rowe "come of age." With each new trouble,
we see more of the man, less of the baser nature. There is within him
something we hoped we would see and at the end he is responsible,
respected and (probably) chaste.
     Something similar happens to Charles, and, (since the king is the
microcosm of the country), to merry old England herself, (you can do
this kind of thing in the movies). As the plague creeps in and attacks
the kingdom and the royal household, Charles and England experience
refinment in the furnace of affliction too. The great fire of London in
1666 is what it takes to purge the city of the plague. It also purges
Charles of his grand desig ns. At the end, we see the two of them
chastened (if not chaste)
For more reviews by John Schuurman see: 
http://www.mcs.com/%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert Downey Jr., Sam Neill, David Thewlis, Polly Walker, 
      Meg Ryan, Ian McKellan, Hugh McDiarmid, Hugh Grant
Director: Michael Hoffman
Producers: Cary Brokaw, Andy Paterson, and Sarah Ryan Black
Screenplay: Rupert Walters based on the novel by Rose Tremain
Cinematography: Oliver Stapleton
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     The setting for RESTORATION -- England in the 1660s -- represents 
one of the most interesting eras in European history.  Following the 
death of Oliver Cromwell, Charles II returned from exile to reclaim the 
throne for the Stuart family.  His coronation heralded the Restoration -
- a time of great enlightenment and debauchery.  Then, in 1665, the 
Great Plague struck, and in 1666, London burned.  The film RESTORATION 
attempts to incorporate all of these events into its two-hour story.  
Those hoping for historical accuracy will be sorely disappointed, 
however.  The 1660s serve as little more than a backdrop for the action.  
The costumes and sets are authentic-looking, but little else has more 
than a flavor of the period.  Even the dialogue is frequently 
anachronistic.
     Historical authenticity aside, RESTORATION is still a worthy source 
of entertainment.  The narrative has numerous dramatic hiccups -- most 
caused by trying to cram too much into too little time -- but, overall, 
it tells an engrossing tale.  The film, which opens in 1663 London, 
follows the rise and fall of Robert Merivel (Robert Downey Jr.), a 
reluctant physician.  Despite his undeniable medical gifts, he would 
rather spend time drinking and whoring.  When King Charles II (Sam 
Neill) needs someone unconventional to heal his ailing dog, he sends for 
Merivel.  The animal's recovery assures the doctor a place at court, 
where he is gradually transformed from physician to fool.  
     One of the most unusual services demanded of Merivel by the King is 
that he marry the royal Mistress, Celia Clemence (Polly Walker).  The 
doctor is told in no uncertain terms that the marriage is never to be 
consummated -- it is in name only ("I need a man far too enamored of 
women in general to love one in particular," Charles tells Merivel).  
Unfortunately for his status at court, Merivel falls for Celia, and when 
the King learns of this, he dispatches Merivel from his service.  The 
now-penniless physician ends up in a Quaker community with an old friend 
(David Thewlis).  It is there that he discovers the true nature of his 
talents.
     RESTORATION is developed as a series of episodes which combine to 
form a story arc taking Merivel's character from debauchery to poverty 
to redemption.  The "restoration" of the title is as much the central 
character's as it is England's.  Flaws aside, the film is a sumptuous, 
affecting tale about the most roguish of men making good.  And, despite 
assorted tragedies along the way, the tone and intent are decidedly 
upbeat.
     One of the problems with RESTORATION is that it moves too many 
characters through Merivel's life.  Other than David Thewlis' 
effectively-rendered John Pearce and Ian McKellan's Will Gates, none of 
them displays much personality -- they're gone too quickly.  Each adds 
something to Merivel's character, but as individuals in their own right, 
they fade into the background, no more memorable than the wild colors 
with which the doctor decorates his Suffolk estate.
     Robert Downey does a fine job as Merivel, and his English accent 
rarely slips.  During the '90s, Downey has emerged as an admirable 
leading actor.  His performance as Chaplin in Richard Attenborough's 
1992 biopic put him in the spotlight; everything he has done since has 
furthered his reputation.  Of late, Downey seems to have developed an 
affinity for period pieces.  Other than RESTORATION and the 
aforementioned CHAPLIN, he can also be seen in the new version of 
RICHARD III.
     The rest of the cast is impressive.  In addition to McKellan and 
Thewlis, Sam Neill, Polly Walker, and Hugh McDiarmid turn in effective 
supporting performances.  Hugh Grant has a small role as a fatuous, 
self-important painter.  Meg Ryan, moonlighting from frothy romantic 
comedies like IQ and FRENCH KISS, is barely adequate as Katherine, the 
madwoman who captures Merivel's heart.
     As a well-developed, fast-paced movie that tells a "feel good" 
story, RESTORATION is a welcome entry.  As a history lesson, it's a 
failure.  The British are famous for their period pieces, and, while 
RESTORATION isn't among the best (all of Jane Austen's adapted novels 
are superior), it's still solid entertainment, especially in a season 
when Hollywood's releases are repeatedly causing grimaces. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Christopher Null
     Robert Downey's schizophrenic personality has finally found a home in
RESTORATION.  This sweeping film, set in 1660 England during the reign of
the flamboyant Charles II (Sam Neill), tells the story of Merivel
(Downey), who rides a rollercoaster from volunteer surgeon to King's
veterinarian, to his fall from grace and his eventual rebirth.
     Merivel, the kind of guy who pawns his medical instruments to buy
time with prostitutes, starts out as a pretty loathsome chap.  However,
he's also a pretty talented (and daring) physician, and after healing the
King's beloved spaniel, he is brought into the fold of nobility.  But the
story then takes an inexplicable turn as Merivel is given a knighthood and
coerced to marry the King's mistress, Celia (Polly Walker), and then
promptly falls in love with her.
     And just when you get used to this, he is discovered and cast out,
penniless.  Merivel returns to caring for the poor with his old friend
Pearce (David Thewlis), and falls in love with one of his insane patients,
Katherine (Meg Ryan, cast as an Irish mental patient, if you can imagine
that).  And then there's the plague and the big fire that burned down
London, and Merivel somehow comes out of this a hero and a changed man to
boot.
     A downright silly script is the fundamental flaw in RESTORATION. 
What starts out as a funny, genuine character-driven drama quickly
degenerates into a couple of bland love stories that don't even fit
together.  There's a lot of good acting here (with the notable exception
of Ryan), but the parts don't give the stars a lot of room to work. 
Neill's King Charles is a true standout, pulling off the dichotomy between
royal grace and bawdy humor with ease.
     RESTORATION is also one of the most exquisitely rendered period
pieces I've ever seen, replete with fully-laden palaces and disgustingly
realistic plague victims.  But details do not a movie make, and
all-in-all, RESTORATION comes across as a film in which the sum of the
parts is much greater than the picture as a whole.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     On January 30, 1649, Charles I of England, who had earlier lost
his fight to restrict the power of Parliament, paid the price and was
beheaded.  England was in the hands of the Parliamentarians.  Oliver
Cromwell, the Puritan who commanded the New Model Army remained as
unbeatable as Charles I had found him.  Cromwell took control of the
government making himself essentially a dictator.  He went on and
within months subdued the rebellious Ireland.  Charles I's son, who had
been crowned Charles II of Scotland, raised an army to invade England,
but he was beaten back by Cromwell's army.  In another victory Cromwell
presided over a successful war with the Netherlands.  But now the
dictator needed money to finance his victories.  To get it he reversed
a ruling of Edward I (see my review of BRAVEHEART) and allowed Jews
back into England to get their financial support.
     When Cromwell died on September 3, 1658, there was nobody worthy
to replace him and his son Richard was the nobody worthy who was
chosen.  To have a continuation of the harsh Puritanical rule of a
Cromwell and the lack of leadership that Richard offered brought
discontent throughout England.  It did not take much of Richard
Cromwell's rule to make Charles II of Scotland look like a natural
leader.  Charles II was given the throne of England on assurances that
he would take no revenge for his father's death and would allow
religious freedom for England.  With the return of the monarchy to
England begins the period called the Restoration.
     Thus we have an England that was still ravaged from the Civil War.
And it still has bitter conflict between severe Puritans and more
free-living and perhaps even decadent followers of the two Charles
Stuarts.  In spite of continuing conflicts the Restoration was the time
of great cultural landmarks in English history.  Milton wrote "Paradise
Lost."  Social philosophers Thomas Hobbes and John Locke were
publishing.  King Charles had a particular interest in science and
chartered the Royal Society of London to do scientific research.  Isaac
Newton was 19 when Charles returned and was doing his early work.  When
the Great Plague struck London with its full force in April of 1665
Newton fled to his mother's farm and there worked out the laws of
gravitation.  Meanwhile over 50,000 people in London died of the
pestilence.  Luckily he was still out of London 17 months later when a
bakery fire broke out near London Bridge and engulfed a street of
vulnerable wood houses.  Fanned by east winds the inferno continued to
spread and burn for four days until much of the city had been consumed.
Even with a large piece of the city leveled, an estimated 13,000
houses, enough to make 100,000 people homeless, Charles could not
convince property owners to rebuild along lines planned by master
architect Christopher Wren and Charles had to settle for Wren's
redesign of St. Paul's Cathedral.  I is in this Restoration England
that the story of RESTORATION is set.
     Robert Merivale (Robert Downey Jr.) and John Pearce (David
Thewlis) are close friends who are very similar but very different.
Both are promising medical students, but for John successes come only
through hard work and a dedication that is well in keeping with his
stern Quaker background.  Robert has more of a genius for medicine, or
would if he would ever stop partying.  One day Robert is called to
court in a personal mission of healing by Charles II (Sam Neill).
While there his womanizing is noticed by Charles.  Charles is looking
for a nominal and platonic husband for his mistress Celia (Polly
Walker).  Once she is married he can continue his affair with her while
she is still under a cloak of respectability.  Along with this non-wife
wife Robert is given a house and lands and a pension.  But then the
plot takes the obvious turn with Robert falling in love with his for-
show wife Celia.  Luckily this complication leads to others which turn
what was a rather bland situation comedy in an interesting setting into
another story entirely that affords a much better view of Restoration
England.
     Yes, the story does improve as it goes along but the one factor
that remains constant is that the story is never so interesting as to
avoid being upstaged by the detailed and beautifully filmed setting.
Michael Hoffman, whose best known film to date was SOAPDISH, manages to
bring in a sumptuous look at mid-17th Century England at a surprisingly
small budget of $18.5 million.  The budget is in large part helped by
having cinematographer Oliver Stapleton use relatively close shots of
nearly every fancy scene.  This only occasionally gives a feeling of
constriction and probably saves immensely on costs.  Rupert Walters's
screenplay based on the novel by Rose Tremain moves the story at a pace
that never drags and allows the action to bring the audience to a
surprising number interesting places, yet never occupies the viewer too
much to look for the detail at the sides of the frame.  The film is a
study in contrasts.  We go back and forth from the pleasureless work of
the Quakers to the workless pleasures of life in Charles's court.  We
see people who are all style and no substance and styleless people of
great substance.
     In spite of the low budget, one has to look a fair distance down
the cast list to find unfamiliar names.  David Thewlis is very good as
the dedicated and serious friend and colleague though he carries some
baggage from his skin-crawling role in NAKED.  Polly Walker of
ENCHANTED APRIL and PATRIOT GAMES makes a fetching mistress.  Also
present are Meg Ryan, Ian McKellen (currently starring in RICHARD III),
and of course Hugh Grant.
     For those who like films that show them a bit of a different world
and a different time, this film should be a pleasant surprise.  I give
it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     For fans of historical films wanting to expand their film
experience and learn about the period, there is a terrific Worldwide
Web site for this film at
http://www.obs-us.com/obs/english/films/mx/rest/top.htm with great
links to original source material about the Restoration.  This is what
the Web was made for.  I just hope it remains around long enough for
the readers of this review to who want to have an opportunity access
it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     RESTORATION is a lavish production by director Michael Hoffman
(SOAPDISH and PROMISED LAND).  It is a movie on an epic scale about a
physician during the Restoration.  In the opening credits we learn that
it is the time in England of the restoration of Charles II's monarchy
as well of scientific endeavors and of pleasure.  It is a time when "a
rich man can get to heaven" again.  The Puritans would have never
permitted it.
     The movie has three distinct but related parts: the court, the
Quakers, and the plague.  Each has enough material to be a movie in its
own right, but screenwriter Rupert Walters (using a novel by Rose
Tremain) and editor Garth Craven have conspired to chop this all down
to a movie of less than two hours in length.  It felt as if it was a
three and a half hour movie that the studio had ordered cut to a
standard length for marketability.  For whatever reason they did it, it
makes for a choppy movie that is a delight to the senses, but leaves
you wanting more that the movie delivers.
     As the movie opens we see the hustle and bustle of seventeenth
century London.  As the camera lens draws closer we see its squalor.
Robert Downey Jr. plays Robert Merivel who is a physician at the Royal
Hospital.  It is a sweatshop where they do not even have adequate time
to eat, but at least they get to do medical research of a sort.
Merivel is called by King Charles II (Sam Neill) to his court to save
his pet spaniel.  Once Merivel saves the dog, the king makes him a
court physician and provides a life of luxury for him.  The king trusts
him so much that he tells Merivel to marry his mistress Celia Clemence
(Polly Walker) because, "for her husband I need a man who is far too
fond of women in general to love one in particular".  We are to assume
that Merivel is a great womanizer although to this point the movie has
only touched on it, again reinforcing my theory that much film was left
on the cutting room floor.
     The real motivation for seeing RESTORATION is the production
itself with sets by Eugenio Zanetti, costumes by James Acheson, and
cinematography by Oliver Stapleton.  From the first open shot of London
with its golden earth tones and elaborate set reminiscent of a Brueghel
painting, we sense that this picture will be special.  My favorite
cinematographic technique in the movie is the way light rushes in
windows to bath the occupants of the room as if the light were the hand
of god.
     The opulence of the court is a stark contrast to the London
streets.  The wedding procession, for example, takes place on a manmade
lake with a boat pulled by large artificial golden horses.  All of the
costumes by two time Academy Award winning (DANGEROUS LIAISONS and THE
LAST EMPEROR) costume designer James Acheson are so elaborate that they
border on being silly, but I found them effect.  The contrast between
the simple black physician's robe that Merivel has at the first to his
court regalia of red robe and hat with large flowing red feathers let
you know he has arrived.
     Soon Merivel is made a Knight, and he and his wife are off to a
great house near London where the king can visit, but Merivel is told
that he is to be a husband in name only.  The king commissions a
painting by Elias Finn (Hugh Grant) of Lady Celia.  You guessed it, the
King hears that Merivel is sweet on Lady Celia and is angry saying,
"Love was the only thing not asked of you.  Indeed it was the only
thing expressly forbidden of you."
     In the second act, we have Merivel among the Quakers trying to be
a physician again.  He has to work with people with mental handicaps.
There he meets Katherine (Meg Ryan) who has had a troubled past and may
or may not be crazy.  The Quaker solution to mental problems is to
bleed the patients.  This is done a bit too realistically for my taste.
For some reason, Meg Ryan attempts a thick Irish accent whereas the
other people have little noticeable accents.  It is quite distracting.
     In the final act, we have the plague.  London is filled with
bodies stacked everywhere and even floating down the river.  We learn
many interesting historical tidbits like when a plague strikes a
building everyone in it is quarantined whether sick or not, which
usually means they will all die.  They also tie the sick to their beds
to keep them from wandering the streets of infecting others.  Merivel
tells the people that, "Fear is our greatest enemy, and hope is our
greatest weapon against the disease."  No miracle drugs then.
     I have just skimmed the surface of this tale.  You can learn
almost all of the above facts in the marvelous trailer for the movie.
In fact the trailer is much better that the film itself.  In the
trailer the music (James Newton Howard) is heavy and dramatic, the
energy level is high, and the images are so strong they have a
spirituality.  After seeing the trailer I almost expected to see
something on the level of THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.  While watching
RESTORATION I realized that I wished they would have just put the
trailer on an endless loop and let me watch it for two hours.  I liked
RESTORATION, but I would have much preferred the trailer.
     The problem with RESTORATION can be summed up in two words, poor
direction.  The compelling visuals are populated with a bunch of actors
actresses plying their trade not viable characters.  I found them all
interesting, but never did I find them believable.  When tragedy
strikes in the show, I didn't care.  I thought Sam Neill's performance
to be the best of a mediocre lot.  This is a shame since the actors and
actresses are some of the best.
     RESTORATION stops way too fast at 1:53.  It is rated R for tame
ogres, some sex, brief male and female nudity, and way too realistic
medieval medical practices.  It would be fine for any teenager.  It is
such an incredible exercise in style that I am glad I saw it so I give
it a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2, but I felt cheated after seeing the
trailers and knowing what could have been.  Then again as Lady Celia
says, "We live in an age when many are made fools and many are
deceived."
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
