Title
Review for 39 Steps, The (1935)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: Charles Bennet and Ian Hay (based on the novel by John Buchan)
Starring: Robert Donat, Madeleine Carol, Godfrey Tearle, Lucie Mannheim,
Peggy Ashcroft, John Laurie, Helen Haye, Frank Cellier, Wylie Watson,
Gus MacNaughton, Jerry Verno, Peggy Simpson
What makes Alfred Hitchcock so great?  Why is a director who made almost
nothing but suspense films considered to be one of the best if not the
best director of all time?  To me, the man was great because in almost
all of his films, he was able to tackle the individual subjects in an
almost flawless manner.  With each of his films, he breathed fresh life
and individual nuances into them, creating memorable sequences and
satisfying wholes.  He can tackle interesting topics like in
"Notorious," create a ton of depth you wouldn't see in other suspense
thrillers like in "Vertigo," and even make simple films that just stick
in your mind as classics.  "The Thirty-Nine Steps," one of his best
films, belongs in the latter.
"The Thirty-Nine Steps" deals with a much-used subject in his films: an
innocent man trying to prove his, well, innocence.  Richard Hannay
(Robert Donat), a Canadian visiting England, meets a woman named
Annabella (Lucie Mannheim) in a hall one night, and takes her home after
a mass exodus from the place due to some gunshots.  There, she tells him
that she was being followed by two secret agents looking to kill her
over a formula, but Richard does not believe her.  I mean, why should
he?  But that night, she stumbles into his bedroom with a knife lodged
in her back.
Richard was told by her to go to a place in Scotland to give the formula
to a Professor (Godfrey Tearle) there, but has already been accused of
the murder before the morning.  He begins running around the UK, trying
to stay away from the police and the secret agents, and eventually meets
up with a woman, Pamela (Madeleine Carol), who he soon finds himself
handcuffed to, setting the standard for future
two-people-handcuffed-together movies.  And soon they have to work
together to prove his innocence and show who the real bad guy is.
It sounds like a typical chase movie, and it originally was intended to
be that way.  But Hitchcock, with brilliant direction, turns it into a
classic.  The screenplay is filled to the brim with humor, supplying the
actors with great dialogue, and even some great zingers here and there
(example: "Are you married?"  "Yes, but don't rub it in.").  Every scene
is handled for the highest reaction from the audience, and filled with
originality.  In one clever scene, Richard tries to coax a milkman to
give him his outfit so he can hide from the two killer secret agents,
but since he doesn't believe him, he makes up some story about a jealous
lover, and the guy gives in.
The film moves at a fast pace, mostly being filled with sequences which
tie into the next.  One of the most brilliant tie-ins in cinema history
is in here, as the maid of the hotel finds the body of Annabella, and
her scream dissolves into the hissing of a train whistle.  There are
some chase sequences here and there, but they're never boring, and never
cliched.  Even the scene where Richard and Pamela run handcuffed
together is handled nicely.
And, of course, there's a great final shot.  Among other things,
Hitchcock is a master of creating memorable final shots, like the ones
in "Notorious" and "Vertigo," which add a new surprise to the film, and
even some depth.  Although not being a surprise, it is very good, and
set the standard for later Hitchcock films.
And the acting is great.  Robert Donat is amazing in the lead, adding a
lot of humor, and delivering his lines wonderfully.  But most
importantly, he creates a character who is sympathetic, which is one of
the best things about Hitchcock films: characters we care about. 
Madeliene Carol, who joins up in the film late on, has great chemitry
with Donat, and creates a woman who isn't very weak, but then again, not
too strong either.
But why is this film one of his best?  Well, "The Thirty-Nine Steps" is
one of the ultimate examples of what's so great about Hitchcock.  A
great story, interesting and likable characters, lots of great suspense,
memorable sequences, great twits, cool camera tricks, attractive stars,
a satisfying ending, and a great script are just some of the many things
that are great about this movie.  In fact, "The Thirty-Nine Steps" is
pretty much the epitome about what's so amazing about Alfred Hitchcock.
Although being a hard film to find in your video store, it is more than
well worth the viewing.  Of all the cheap thrillers we get today, with
twists that are moronic and forced, it's almost cleansing to see a film
like this which doesn't insult your intelligence, and leaves you with a
grin on your face.  And that's what's so timeless about the films of
Aldred Hitchcock.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
