Title
Review for Fletch Lives (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        In FLETCH LIVES, everybody's favorite investigative reporter is
back in action, but unfortunately he's neither better than ever nor new and
improved.  FLETCH LIVES is a disappointing sequel to the 1985 hit comedy
FLETCH, which was a surprisingly engaging Chevy Chase vehicle.  With Chase
returning in the role of Fletch and with Michael Ritchie serving once again
as director, I had hoped that FLETCH LIVES would be better than the average
sequel.  I should have known better.  FLETCH LIVES pales in comparison to
the original; someone should have put this sequel out of its misery.
        After his dismal outing in so-called FUNNY FARM, you'd think that
for the sake of his career, Chase would have learned to avoid the
country-side.  But no, in FLETCH LIVES he inherits a mansion in Louisiana,
which gives him an excuse to quit his crummy job at the paper, pack his
chest, and move to the mid-west.  In Louisiana, Fletch immediately becomes
embroiled in an elaborate and tiresome plot involving the usual mayhem: a
murder, a televangelist, a beautiful blonde, a big brute, and a dastardly
villain.
        Although FLETCH LIVES is genuinely funny at times, more often it
flounders and flails.  None of the blame, however, falls on Chase, who does
his best to evoke laughs in the face of a flat screenplay.  Chase gives his
character that biting sarcasm and quick wit that made the first film so
much fun.  And, as in the original, Chase's disguises are simply amazing
and his impersonations brilliant.  When Chase passes himself off as a faith
healer, for example, he's completely unrecognizable, and the scene proves
to be one of the few in the movie to offer some inspired humor.
        Unfortunately, Chase's efforts are sabotaged by the film's
incredibly uneven script and unnecessarily complicated story line.  While
some of the jokes and gags are effective, most of them fizzle and cater to
the lowest common denominator.  In fact, FLETCH LIVES hits rock bottom when
it commits the unforgivable sin of resorting to nose-picking jokes.  FLETCH
LIVES also suffers from excess plot; the uncompelling story line should
have been merely an excuse for Fletch's irreverent impersonations and
wisecracks.  But the film devotes so much time and energy to its
uncompelling plot that the comic moments often get lost in the shuffle.
        Ultimately, there's very little to recommend in FLETCH LIVES as the
movie fails to give us either sympathetic characters or sufficient laughs.
