Title
Review for Allnighter, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Susanna Hoffs, Dedee Pfeiffer, Joan Cusack, John Terlesky, James
Shanta, Michael Ontkean, Pam Grier, Meshach Taylor, Max Perlich
Written by: M.L. Kessler and Tamar Simon Hoffs
Directed by: Tamar Simon Hoffs
Running Time: 95 minutes
It's the last weekend of school at Pacifica University and three beach
house mates: Gina (Joan Cusack), Val (Dedee Pfeiffer) and the Molly
(Susanna Hoffs, lead singer for The Bangles) have big plans.  Val and
Gina hope to attend a wild beach party to end all beach parties, and
Molly is looking for either true love (she's looking for someone smart
and cool like playwright Sam Shepard!) or a one night stand.
These plans never materialize thanks to supposed "comedic" antics that
try to ruin their final big night together.  For example, the guy that
Molly wants her one night stand with (Sheriff Harry S. Truman from
"Twin Peaks" himself, Michael Ontkean, playing an ex-rock star that
Molly confuses with George Harrison!) flat out rejects her.  And Gina
and Val?  Well they get arrested for prostitution in a wacky whimsical
sub-plot!
Directed by Susanna Hoffs' mother Tamar Simon Hoffs, everything about
The Allnighter is quite frankly a waste of time.  Even the title is
misleading, since that at least 45 minutes of this movie takes place
the day after the uneventful "all nighter".  The long, pointless
surfing montages, the chicks in prison sub-plot (with Pam Grier to
boot), and the extended sequence when Hoffs strips down to her skimpy
underwear and dances around to Aretha Franklin's "Respect" are all
utterly worthless (well ok, Hoffs in her underwear is fine by me, but
you get the idea).
Although initially a Universal release, The Allnighter is presented on
DVD from Anchor Bay Entertainment.  It has the film in standard (pan
and scan) form, as well as it's original theatrical aspect ratio of
1.85:1.  Also included on the DVD: an audio commentary by director
Tamar Simon Hoffs and star Susanna Hoffs, a music video for the film
directed by Tamar Simon Hoffs (the song for which is slightly catchy,
but the video itself is unintentionally hilarious), the original
theatrical trailer, and biographies for both mother and daughter
Hoffs.
The commentary track is fairly entertaining as far as commentary
tracks go, but rarely do mother and daughter Hoffs seem to be on the
same train of thought.  They'll talk over each other and interrupt one
another, then neglect to go back and finish the previous anecdote that
was being told.  Also at the start of the commentary, Susanna Hoffs
informs us that she has laryngitis, which doesn't exactly make for an
interesting listening experience.
Another bonus on the DVD is a short film circa 1982 written, produced,
and directed by Tamar Simon Hoffs called The Haircut.  It stars John
Cassavetes as a businessman who enters a barber shop for a quick trim
only to come away amazed at the deluxe full-service treatment given
inside.  This short film runs roughly 20 minutes long, and is
infinitely more entertaining than anything in The Allnighter.  Running
commentary is also given for this short film by both mother and
daughter (the latter appears in the film as part of "The Bangs"... an
early formation of The Bangles).
Overall, Anchor Bay gives us a fairly solid DVD for a film that barely
seems worth all the effort.  I mean sure it might be "the first major
studio film written, produced, and directed by a woman"... but does
that make it any good?  No.  [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.
