Title
Review for From Dusk Till Dawn (1996)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
John Robertson
Directed by: Robert Rodriguez
Screenplay by: Quentin Tarantino
Starring: George Clooney, Quentin Tarantino, Harvey Keitel, 
          Juliette Lewis, Cheech Marin
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is Joe Bob 
Briggs.  Although I haven't heard what Joe Bob thinks of this movie, 
my guess would be that he likes it, a lot.  See the review below for 
more information.  
Joe Bob Briggs is a fictional persona who writes movie reviews and 
books.  Though it may surprise some, much of what I learned about 
reviewing comes from him.  To Joe Bob, the most important things in a 
movie are, roughly, 'What's the body count?', 'How many breasts do you 
see?', 'Do heads roll?' and 'Can any person in this movie die at any 
moment?'.  Though Joe Bob traditionally rates drive-in movies, I have 
a feeling that he would really, really like this movie.  
>From Dusk Till Dawn is thought by many to be the next Quentin 
Tarantino film, when in fact, it's really the next Paul Rodriguez 
film.  Appropriately, expect style over substance, even though there 
is a great deal of substance in this film.  One thing that is central 
to this film that I would expect from neither Rodriguez nor Tarantino 
is the huge plot and tone shift that the film makes approximately two 
thirds of the way through.  
The film begins in a typically Tarantino way, with clever dialog that 
you wish would make up the whole movie.  In this case, it's a Texas 
ranger talking with a clerk in a liquor store.  The ranger is so 
gritty, and his speech is so interesting, you wish the movie was about 
him, but as you might suspect, this ranger is not going to be in the 
movie long.  The film is really about Seth and Richie Gecko, played by 
George Clooney and Quentin Tarantino, two men hiding in the back of 
the liquor store with hostages, waiting for the ranger to leave.  Seth 
is tattooed, tough and cool, while Richie is clever, brutal, and a 
psychopath.  Thanks to Richie's dementia, the ranger and the clerk 
meet sudden, violent, and in one case, very spectacular deaths.  Scene 
one ends, the rock music starts, and the opening credits roll.  Up 
until this point, the movie is as good as either Tarantino or 
Rodriguez have ever done.  
Seth and Richie are headed to Mexico with a hostage in their trunk, 
after Richie broke Seth out of prison and the two of them held up a 
bank.  Along the way, they kidnap the family and motor home of a 
preacher, played by Harvey Keitel, who has abandoned his faith.  Using 
the RV and the preacher's family as cover, Seth and Richie make it to 
Mexico, where they are scheduled to rendezvous with a local crime boss 
who will take them in and help them launder their money.  The meeting 
is scheduled to happen at a bar called the Titty Twister, and it's 
here that things soon get out of hand.  
Outside the bar is Cheech Marin, playing a barker of sorts, trying to 
attract bikers and truckers to the bar.  Marin actually plays three 
roles in this film, but this one is the most memorable, mostly because 
his chant uses the word "pussy" more times that anyone would think is 
possible.  
Inside the bar, which seems like paradise to Seth and Richie and hell 
to the preacher, Jacob, and his family; topless women gyrate, bikers 
brawl, and the locals menace in a feast for the eyes and ears.  After 
some scene building, the main attraction, a dancer who is called the 
queen of evil appears and dances for Richie.  Soon, Richie's psychoses 
and some extra attention from the locals lead to a deadly fight 
between Seth, Richie and the bouncers.  After the fight, Richie is 
bleeding profusely from his hand, and this mesmerizes the dancer.  At 
this point, the movie takes the aforementioned plot and tone shift 
that had my jaw dropping to the floor.  
Before describing what happens next, I should say that I have never 
seen a movie make a "left turn" like this.  If you can imagine an 
Ingmar Bergman film suddenly turning into a Zucker brothers' Naked Gun 
movie two thirds through, you can maybe imagine the change in tone.  
The dancer, enthralled with the blood dripping from Richie's wound, 
can take no more, and morphs into a bat-like vampire, attacking 
Richie.  This signals feeding time to the many other vampires in the 
room, and soon you have a supernatural barfight of epic proportions 
underway.  Camp, kitsch and non-sequiters rule the film suddenly, as 
the movie turns into a monster movie extraordinaire.  If you've seen 
Evil Dead, or Dead Alive, you're about ready for the type and tempo of 
the action that ensues, but if you're not prepared, you'll be shocked.
There are more deaths per minute than a Rambo movie suddenly, and it's 
all done with very impressive effects.  
The climax of the movie is as violent and over the top as any I've 
ever seen, and then slowly winds down to tone that was present before, 
literally, all hell broke loose.  Shaking my head, I left the theatre 
awed and puzzled by what I'd seen.  
This movie isn't for everyone, clearly, and so the "Perfect Person 
Rating" is pretty important here.  Obviously, someone who likes their 
movies visceral, with lots of violence, nudity, and gore will love 
this movie, particularly the latter half.  There is more here though, 
both in things to attract people to the movie and in things to warn 
about.  The acting of all characters, but particularly Clooney and, 
surprisingly, Tarantino, is very impressive.  Only Keitel and Juliette 
Lewis seem stiff, and it's easy to understand.  As mentioned before, 
the special effects are very good, as is the score and the screenplay, 
which is the main strength of the first half of the movie.  The main 
reason that someone wouldn't like this movie is the abrupt tone change 
when the vampires make their presence known.  Throughout the latter 
half of the movie, I kept thinking to myself that this movie was 
violating some unwritten rule that a movie should put itself into a 
category and stay there.  Some people might appreciate the daring it 
took to make a movie like this, but others will probably just be 
unpleasantly confused.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson.  Retransmit freely if unedited.  My 
opinions are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my 
employer.  
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to 
give the reader a new way of understanding my rating.  Rather than 
give a film a score, either overall, or on several attributes, the 
Perfect Person Rating tries to identify the type of person would enjoy 
this movie the most.  Since a reviewer is by nature someone with a 
great deal of experience in what they are reviewing, their experience 
may not be the same as someone who is less informed, less jaded, or 
more attuned to the subject.  Hopefully the Perfect Person Rating will 
go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple rating 
scale.  Comments are appreciated.  

Author
Jerry Saravia
After Tarantino's post-"Pulp Fiction" success in 1994, his future remained 
questionable. Here was a man who reinvented and rewrote the rules of gangster 
flicks forever - in retrospect, not so new were his rules or inventions as 
much as the energy he brought to them - and the question remained if he ever 
could top his crowning "Pulp" jewel. Tarantino didn't try to prove anything 
as he largely acted in some rotten films like "Destiny Turns on the Radio" 
and his own horrendous short film in a collection of bad ones called "Four 
Rooms." It wasn't until 1997 that Tarantino showed why he was a success in 
the first place. It was not the gore or violence as much as his sharp, clever 
writing and the introduction of the gangster as an ironic antihero. "From 
Dusk Till Dawn" was an early script by Quentin from long before "Reservoir 
Dogs," and it is actually two movies rolled into one. It is a silly, jagged 
and overlong pulp carnival that at times is entertaining and funny. From 
behind the cameras is Robert Rodriguez of "Desperado" fame, and you can 
clearly see where Tarantino's movie ends and Rodriguez's begins. 
The opening scene is reminiscent of "Natural Born Killers" with George 
Clooney and Quentin Tarantino playing two brothers, Seth and Richard Gecko, 
who rob a convenience store and murder the owner and the police officer all 
in the space of less than ten minutes of screen time. The two antiheroes are 
two bumbling thieves wearing black suits with no particular direction in life 
other than robbing convenience stores. Seth is the calm, resourceful crook 
whereas Richard is a stupid, raging psychopath. 
After the murderous robbery, the pair take a hostage from an earlier bank 
robbery to a run-down motel. Richard disposes of the hostage, and the twosome 
end up kidnapping a grizzled preacher, Jacob Fuller (Harvey Keitel), and his 
two kids, the teenage Kate (Juliette Lewis) and her adopted Chinese brother, 
Scott (Ernest Liu). Seth needs them as bait to cross the border to Mexico 
where he's supposed to rendezvous with his employer. At this point, the movie 
takes on an odd route and becomes a cartoonish "Evil Dead" flick when the 
incongruous group go to a bar named the Titty Twister run by vicious, 
grotesque, constantly morphing vampires! This is where the over-the-top 
histrionics of Rodriguez begins. 
As enjoyable as "From Dusk Till Dawn" frequently is, it is disappointing. The 
first half of the film is terrific stuff, mixing in laughs, tension and 
surprises with ease, and all superbly written by Quentin Tarantino. Once the 
movie settles in for the horror aspect, it becomes slightly repetitive and 
mindless. The movie spends an eternity showing our heroes and anti-heroes 
shoving stakes into vampires' hearts, as well as chopping off their heads and 
limbs with an arsenal that includes chairs, beer glasses, crossbows and 
crosses. There is so much vampiric carnage that Rodriguez doesn't allow much 
room for Tarantino's trademark wordplay and that is a shame. 
There are, however, some hilarious performances and understated acting to 
compensate. There's the 70's blaxploitation star Fred Williamson as a Vietnam 
Vet; Tom Savini (former make-up artist of "Dawn of the Dead" fame) as a 
leather-jacketed punk named Sex Machine; and Cheech Marin in three roles - 
the best is as the Titty Twister host who invites all the truckers and bikers 
to join in the fun of watching the sexy strippers do their snake striptease 
dances!
George Clooney made a successful transition here from television's "E.R." to 
the big screen, as evidenced by some of his later work post-"Batman and 
Robin." Here he projects a calm, relaxed personality as Seth, and makes a 
convincing, charismatic action star. Surprisingly, Tarantino does his best 
work here as the psychopathic, horny Richard who has the hots for Kate, the 
preacher's daughter. Harvey Keitel brings a level of humanity and quiet 
authority as the preacher who has lost his faith since his wife died in a car 
crash. Juliette Lewis is at her most restrained here and brings a sensual, 
sweetly innocent side that makes us care for her amidst all the flying 
vampire body parts. 
In short, "From Dusk Till Dawn" is a rollercoaster ride of thrills and laughs 
that throws in everything from bits of "Pulp Fiction" and the Indiana Jones 
series to all those grade Z zombie/vampire thrillers. The special-effects are 
enthralling yet exhausting, and Rodriguez has still not learned what balanced 
rhythm is. With some spectacularly edited sequences and better-than-average 
performances, this is junky, fast-paced filmmaking at its best. Now if only 
Tarantino would direct his own screenplays more often. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
James Brundage
The perennial problem with film buffs is the belief that filmmakers are fine
wines.  That, due to the name of such and such, said film will undoubtedly
be good.  Oh, they'll say: `it's a Van Sant, circa 1989' or a `Spielberg.'
To an outsider to this particular argot, one would almost find the Napa
Valley and the San Fernando Valley indistinguishable both homes of fine
craftsman of a product of whateverness.  As From Dusk Till Dawn proves, this
is not the case.
Both a `Rodriguez' and a `Tarantino,' still manages to be a fairly
unengaging vintage filled with little humor, a go-nowhere plot, and a
vampire mythology so far off the norm that From Dusk Till Dawn's only
redeeming value is in self-parody.  And call me someone who doesn't
appreciate Tarantino's or Rodriguez's innate genius, but said self-parody
fails to do anything for me.
Of course, this in and of itself isn't the really disappointing factor in
>From Dusk till Dawn.  Schlock horror in and of itself makes for interesting
viewing and psuedo intelligent insults.  From Dusk till Dawn, however, doesn
't choose to go campy or go artsy.  It does both.  It starts off by
introducing Seth (Clooney) and Richie (Tarantino) Gekko, two brothers who
have robbed a bank and are now heading for Mexico to get sanctuary in a town
called El Ray.  Seth is cool, calm, professional: a cold sociopath who cares
about nothing more than getting the job done.  Richie, on the other hand, is
a full blown psychosexual pervert.  He rapes women, he kills for no reason,
and he's absolutely paranoid.  On the other side of the tracks lie Jacob and
Kate Fuller (Keitel and Lewis), an ex-minister and his daughter, both low on
their faith.
So how do we become a movie about a bunch of stripper vampires?  You've got
me.
I really could tell you how this film descends into the utter madness at
which it ends up, but it doesn't seem to matter.  All that matters is that
>From Dusk till Dawn is good until it gets in the bar, and then it sucks
worse than the vampires it depicts.
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Producer:  Gianni Nunnari, Meir Teper
Writer: Quentin Tarantino
Starring: George Clooney, Quentin Tarantino, Juliette Lewis, Harvey Keitel
In order to hear about some more messed up movies, join James' mailing list:
http://filmcritic2000.listbot.com/
Short Stuff, reviews of Short Films and Hypermedia:
http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: George Clooney, Harvey Keitel, Quentin Tarantino, Juliette Lewis, 
      Ernest Lieu, Salma Hayek, Fred Williamson, Cheech Marin
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Producers: Gianni Nunnari and Meir Teper
Screenplay: Quentin Tarantino
Cinematography: Guillermo Navarro
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: Dimension Films
     It's great fun, but certainly not great art.  FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, 
a special effects blood-and-gore extravaganza from director Robert 
Rodriguez, follows in the footsteps of such cult classics as Sam Raimi's 
EVIL DEAD series, thumbing its nose at conventional film expectations 
and gleefully embracing the campiness of the B-movie genre.  With its 
palette of hideous monstrosities, decapitations, dismemberments, 
eviscerations, topless dancers, profane dialogue, and bare foot licking, 
this motion picture pushes the R-rating to the edge.  
     Yet the reason FROM DUSK TILL DAWN entertains is because it never 
takes itself seriously.  The film is steeped in wit, parody, and offbeat 
humor.  There aren't any characters here -- only caricatures.  The movie 
has been designed as a burst of high energy, and that's exactly what it 
turns out to be.  FROM DUSK TILL DAWN will appeal to only a small 
portion of the cinema-visiting population, but for those who enjoy this 
kind of tongue-and-cheek horror story, the film has a lot to offer.
     FROM DUSK TILL DAWN marks the most recent phase in the creative 
collaboration between Rodriguez and Quentin Tarantino.  (Tarantino 
appeared in Rodriguez's DESPERADO and the two were both involved in FOUR 
ROOMS.)  For this film, not only is Tarantino credited with the 
screenplay, but he has a significant on-screen role.  Although a 
terrible performer, he doesn't actually damage the movie, however, 
because acting ability has little merit here.  
     In FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, the setup is as long as the main story.  
The film opens by introducing us to two bank robbers on the run -- Seth 
Gecko (George Clooney) and his nutcase brother Richie (Tarantino).  
They're on their way to Mexico, but they need a cover to get across the 
border.  So, to that end, they hijack the mobile home of ex-preacher 
Jacob Fuller (Harvey Keitel) and his two kids (Juliette Lewis and Ernest 
Lieu), and force them, at gunpoint, to help.  Once in Mexico, the five 
stop at an all-night bar for a little R&R.  Only one problem:  the place 
is run by vampires, and, after a little topless dancing, it's feeding 
time.
     For the most part, Tarantino's dialogue here pales in comparison to 
what he wrote for RESERVOIR DOGS and PULP FICTION.  That said, however, 
there's still a snappy rhythm to the way the men, women, and undead of 
FROM DUSK TILL DAWN speak.  The script is peppered with deadpan humor, 
from allusions to Peter Cushing's Hammer Horror battles against Dracula 
to Harvey Keitel's Bible quotations as he sets about taking out his 
demonic opponents.  There are also numerous references, visual and 
otherwise, to previous work by Tarantino and Rodriguez.  Depending on 
your opinion of the two men, this can be seen as either clever or self-
indulgent.
     The only one who really attempts any sort of real acting is Keitel.  
Everyone else is just out there kicking butt, taking their lumps, and 
occasionally getting bitten in the neck.  TV veteran George Clooney, 
making his feature debut, generates a palpable screen presence.  His 
deadpan delivery of lines like "psychos do not explode when sunlight 
hits them" is priceless.
     At present, there is a Tarantino backlash in progress, but it's 
unlikely that the growing public dislike of "Mr. Overexposure" is going 
to damage FROM DUSK TILL DAWN's box-office prospects, since the target 
audience won't care about the prevailing opinion of the screenwriter/co-
star.  What they want, this film offers:  a stylish, ultra-hip twist to 
one of humanity's oldest, darkest legends.  Vampires will never live 
this one down.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Michael Dequina
>From Dusk till Dawn (R) ***
        A jarring hybrid of tense psychological drama and campy, B-grade 
exploitation horror, director Robert Rodriguez and screenwriter Quentin 
Tarantino's From Dusk till Dawn is bizarre, bloody... and a blast.
        Roughly the first hour of the film is a riveting 
killers-on-the-lam psychodrama, with the treacherous Gecko brothers, the 
relatively level-headed Seth and paranoid, hotheaded sex offender Richard 
(George Clooney and Tarantino), fleeing the authorities 
following Richard's jailbreak of Seth and their subsequent killing 
spree.  The two take former preacher Jacob Fuller (Harvey Keitel) and his 
daughter Kate and son Scott (Juliette Lewis and Ernest Liu) hostage, using 
the family's RV to cross the U.S.-Mexico border.  Once in Mexico, the group 
hole up at the Titty Twister, a seedy stripper bar, where Seth and Richard 
intend to rendezvous with an associate.
        Following a steamy table dance by one Santanica Pandemonium 
(Salma Hayek), From Dusk till Dawn abruptly shifts gears into a vampire 
thriller when all the dancers and a number of the bar patrons reveal 
themselves as bloodsuckers, with Santanica being the queen.  From here on 
out, the film is a gleefully bloody homage to B-grade horror films of the past
as the Gecko brothers and their hostages, with the aid of bar patrons Frost 
(Fred Williamson, doing a fun sendup of his image as a blaxploitation 
action icon) and Sex Machine (Tom Savini) fight for their lives.
        Tarantino has gone on record that he and Rodriguez intend to 
"offend sensibilities" with this film, and based on the reaction of some 
of the audience members with whom I saw the film (first show, opening 
day, of course), they have succeeded.  During the nearly hour-long 
bloodbath of a finale, a number of people walked out of the theatre.  
Seeing the film, it's easy to see how someone could be appalled by the 
carnage; however, it's done in such a pleasingly cartoonish manner that it 
can't be taken too seriously; one can't help but have fun with it.  
Rodriguez and Tarantino are well aware that for the second half, he's 
making a "balls-out exploitation flick" (albeit one with a top-flight 
cast), and the honest lack of pretensions is refreshing.  The filmmakers 
set forth a modest goal and make no bones about it.
        Tarantino especially also appears to have offended critics' 
sensibilities with the hybrid narrative, which has been the major 
criticism of the film (one person who had walked out, who had sat in front 
of me, appeared to have been a critic of some sort, for I could see him taking
notes during the film).  However, I feel that the leap from drama to 
horror is a justifiable one, and not just on the basis of audacity and 
cleverness and shock value--it works on a thematic level.  For the first part
of the film, we see the Fuller family being put through a metaphorical hell, 
and in the second half, it takes a tangible form in the Titty Twister, 
which, ironically, also entraps the creators of that hell, in effect, giving 
the Gecko brothers their ultimate comeuppance--a taste of their own medicine. 
Also, the vampires serve as Seth and Richard's true rendezvous; they come to 
the Titty Twister to meet with an associate, and the bloodthirsty monsters are
"associates" on a deeper, spiritual level.  The Gecko brothers in a sense 
are seeing a reflection of themselves, albeit an exaggeration akin to a 
reflection in a fun house mirror.  I know I'm grasping at straws, 
trying to find a subtext in a film that by all intents and purposes is
supposed to be a shallow trifle, but for those searching for a "logical" 
reason for the abrupt genre shift, it's there.
        Rodriguez brings his usual expert craftsmanship to the numerous 
action set pieces, but his usual quick cut razzle-dazzle appears to be 
softened for this film; in fact, he borrows a thing or two from the 
handbook of Tarantino, such as the now-familiar "looking out from the 
trunk" shot.  A clever touch was to include references to their 
previous works; the Big Kahuna Burger logo from Pulp Fiction is 
emblazoned on the fast food bags Seth carries, and a crotch cannon only 
seen in Desperado is actually put to use here.  And in keeping with the 
spirit of B-grade exploitation flicks, the makeup effects are good but 
not all that convincing; in fact, they are kind of overdone, which adds 
to the air of excess and unpretentiousness.
        Clooney reveals himself to be a bonafide screen presence with his 
intense portrayal of Seth.  While level-headed as a whole, one can see 
the fire in his eyes, the dangerous killer ready to erupt should the need 
arise.  He's captivating to watch.  Tarantino is also quite effective 
here; his rather innocuous-looking exterior works for the truly psychotic 
Richard--it makes him that much more frightening when he explodes into 
violence.  Keitel, despite a labored Southern accent, lends quiet dignity 
to his role, providing a cool relaxed anchor in reality when the story 
turns toward the fantastic.  The same goes for Lewis, who, as in Cape 
Fear, perfectly captures adolescent awkwardness and insecurity and makes 
Kate's tranformation into, as Tarantino says, a "badass" entirely 
believable.  Hayek is also memorable as the sexy Santanica, but her 
appearance is much too brief; and Cheech Marin is a scene-stealer in 
three different roles, especially as a sleazy guy by the name of, ahem, 
Chet Pussy.  The only one not turning in a decent performance is newcomer Liu,
who is adequate during the first half of the film but whose second-half 
emoting is quite amateurish.  Rodriguez made a similar gamble casting young 
unknowns for his segment in Four Rooms; while it paid off incredibly well 
there, it does not here.
        One's enjoyment of From Dusk till Dawn depends entirely on one's 
expectations going in.  Those expecting a straight action/horror vehicle 
(which the ads are making it out to be) will be disappointed.  However, 
anyone wanting to see an interesting marriage of two seemingly unlinkable 
genres and a fun tongue-in-cheek gorefest that both spoofs and celebrates 
the glories of B-grade exploitation vehicles are in for an entertaining 
treat.
IN CURRENT RELEASE
(full reviews of the following can be found at Mr. Brown's Movie Site)
Bed of Roses (R)
        Storybook romance involving a workaholic banker (Mary Stuart 
Masterson) and a secret admirer (Christian Slater) who sends her 
elaborate flower arrangements.  The original title of this one was Amelia 
and the King of Plants, but I guess that was deemed too offbeat.  Slater 
proved he could pull off romance in the sweet Untamed Heart, but 
Masterson, whose romantic appeal eludes me, fizzled in the horrendous Benny 
and Joon, so the jury's out on this one.
Big Bully (PG)
        Tom Arnold is the bully of the title and Rick Moranis is his 
victim in this comedy delayed from last summer.  Never a good sign.  Also 
not a good sign is Arnold carrying a film.  Decent character actors do 
not always good leads make.
Screamers (R)
        Sci-fi thriller with Peter Weller battling killer alien 
"screamers" on a distant planet.  Sounds like nothing out of the ordinary 
in the sci-fi genre.
Jade (R) ***
        Granted, this fixture of many worst lists is very misogynistic 
and doesn't make complete sense, but I think it is a fairly entertaining 
whodunit involving a DA (David Caruso), his ex-flame (Linda Fiorentino), 
and her husband (Chazz Palminteri).  The obvious shortcomings of Joe 
Eszterhas's script are made up for by the good performances and stylish 
direction by William Friedkin, who includes a great car chase here.  A 
guilty pleasure that isn't a bad rental choice.  (Paramount Home Video)
Waterworld (PG-13) **
        Nearly $200 million down the drain, and you get this 
astonishingly mediocre action wannabe-epic about a half-man, half-fish 
anti-hero (Kevin Costner) who aids a woman (Jeanne Tripplehorn) and her 
adoptive daughter (Tina Majorino) search for the legendary dry land in a 
world completely covered in water.  The sets, stunts, costumes--none of 
it appears to justify the inflated budget.  Displaced director Kevin 
Reynolds proved he could make a rousing action spectacle with Robin 
Hood: Prince of Thieves, but Waterworld, being neither boring nor 
particularly exciting, just sits there, leaving no impact on the viewer.  
(MCA/Universal Home Video)
Love and Human Remains (R)
        Canadian drama that chronicles the romantic travails of roommates 
(Thomas Gibson and Ruth Marshall) while a serial killer preying on women 
stalks the streets.  (Columbia TriStar Home Video)

Author
Zach Douglas
This is my early draft as I couldn't locate names and spellings
for all involved parties!  Forgive me if I've made a grammatical
error or two also.  I'm a busy man!  Send me corrections if you
find mistakes please.  Also, I haven't given away anything that
isn't given away in interviews or on t.v. but
read at your own risk.
First off, let's consult Webster's College Dictionary
    Gen-re (zhan're) n. 1. a class or category or artistic endeavor 
having a
    particular form, content, technique, or the like.
    be-wil-der (bi wil d'upside down e'r) v.t. 1. to confuse or puzzle
    completely.
    Ok, lets not kid anyone.  We all know Dusk Till Dawn is being hyped
because of Quentin Tarantino's involvement.  He's done a re-write here, 
some
less than good acting there, even a sandbox project for grownup directors
gone terribly wrong - but here is what he does best: Write scripts.  We
ALSO know or should know by now that his new movie is about killing 
vampires.
More things we know are that Harvey Keitel, Julliete Lewis, and George
Clooney are in the film.  Oh yeah, we also knew that hot-shot Robert
Rodriguez is not only the director but the 'Camera Operator' as the 
credits
say.  OK, you think you're set up pretty well. You are expecting the 
worst.
Maybe your expecting the best.  I'll just say that no matter what you 
expect,
you will in no way be prepared for this film!
    OK quick synopsis if you haven't heard.  Notorious criminals
Seth and Richie Gecko are armed, dangerous, and on the loose after
a jail break and bank robbery.  While fleeing to Mexico they take a 
family
hostage.  Keitel is the ex-minister/dad, disgruntled with the Lord for 
the
loss of his wife and heading to Mexico with daughter (Lewis) and Chinese
son (?).  So, the band swings on down to the rendevous point where they
proceed to KILL VAMPIRES.  AND MORE VAMPIRES. AND MORE AND MORE.
Mr. Blue: "How many vampires is that?"
Mr. White: "A LOT"
    Now, I don't recall ever having watched a movie with this sort
of genre splicing in my life.  This movie is 50% road/heist film and
50% Splatter/Horror.  I've seen movies that hovered on the fringe of it
(most recently, Dead Presidents) but never, never, never have I seen
something like this.  For that alone, I admire Tarantino much like Todd
admires Butthead when he says, "You're TWISTED MAN!". (p.s. that's
a compliment; Also, mentioning of Beavis, Butthead, or Todd in any
followup posts or mail is punishable by death)
    But, I guess we must dig to the heart of the matter and ask the
bigger question: Does it Work? CAN it work?  Yes and No.  It works
as 50% of a heist film, and it definitely works as 50% of a splatter
film.  But I'm not sure if those parts put together are as fulfilling
as 100% of either genre.
     The first half of the film is pretty tight.  Reminiscent of The
Getaway (No dummy, the one with Steve McQueen, not that Baldwin freak)
and Natural Born Killers if they had featured two brothers instead of
lovers.  First off we notice that Clooney can play the tough guy!  This
guy smokes. Tarantino also shows that he was really meant to play
a psychopath all this time also!  I rather enjoyed his performance,
and the two make quite a team.  We also  catch a good look at what
NBK would have looked like in it's original form (Die Oliver Die).
There's violence, tension, and humor, but it's all as black as the
outfits the Gecko Brothers are wearing.  The dialogue is Tarantino gone
Texas, and fairly accurate. The characters even throw in a few movie
references to get their point across.  But, before you get your panties
in a wad by saying that QT's a one trick dialogue spewing pony, it's
really not that similar to his last writing jobs.   OK, so maybe it is,
but different at the same time; Just don't let me hear that 'one trick
pony' line because I hate it.  Rodriguez does his usual magic with the
camera, and he does the desert road justice.  There is one disturbing
scene I won't mention which is rather well done, but quite bewildering
and I'll leave it up to you to figure THAT one out.
    The second half of the movie finds the unlikely gang making it to
the rendevous point (an insanely wild titty-bar, pardon my French) where
they are greeted by Cheech Marin and a load of Vampires.  They have a
couple of bruisers lend a hand for a while - a Black Vietnam Vet and a
Large Mexican Fellow.  From here the movie takes on the likeness of one
of the greatest splatter flicks ever made, Dead Alive.  As in Dead Alive,
the ex-minister must gain strength to fight the evil ("I kick ass, for 
the
Lord! - from D.A. not Dusk, but Keitel gives a similar, more sedate
monologue).  Also, the point is not really to escape, but to KILL every
last Mexican turned undead evil minion from the whorey nether regions.
They go at the task with great vigor, and the camera work may leave your
head spinning at times!  Drawback here as that any attempt to recapture
anything from the first half of the movie is lost.  Acting or dialogue
is no longer important, and so you've lost sight of the creative effort.
It's just too much of a shock to the film-goers well trained mind!  For
me it was a pleasent shock, but I can imagine many will be repulsed by 
the
total abandoment of basic film structure
    Having said all that, I'd say that if they had a genre for this
genre, it would be at or near the top.  But since they don't, this film
will probably be forgotten only to live on as a best renter in the cult
classics section of the video store 15 years from now.  I liked it
personally, and will probably see it again just to relive the bizarre
experience (note, still nothing has topped the experience of sitting
through Tetsuo's Ironman!).  I won't put it on my top shelf with 
Reservoir
Dogs and Pulp Fiction, but I will always marvel at the fact that 
Tarantino
actually got away with getting this film made, and doing it as grandly as 
he
did with the help of Robert "water into wine" Rodriguez. I see it as 
another
visually strong effort from Rodriguez and another page in Tarantino's
bizzarre film resume.  One that, when he is finished writing, will indeed 
be
more bizarre than anything that the good Doctor Seuss could come up with.

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[action/horror]
Starring: George Clooney (Seth Gecko), Harvey Keitel (Pastor Jacob Fuller),
Juliette Lewis (Kate Fuller), Quentin Tarantino (Richie Gecko), Ernest Liu
(Scott Fuller), written by Robert Kurtzman, Quentin Tarantino, produced by
Gianni Nunnari, Meir Teper, directed by Robert Rodriguez.
"From Dusk Till Dawn" is one of the most bizarre films I've ever seen, but
it's also one of the most original films I've ever seen. The basic premise to
the movie is, "What if the tough criminals from brutal crime films found
themselves trapped in a cliche, grotesque, horror flick?" The answer should
be a great satire, but instead all we get is a violent bloodbath with
vampires, bikers, a preacher's family, and Tarantino-style thieves.
Robert Rodriguez and Quentin Tarantino are two of the most promising
writer/directors working today. Rodriguez has a great sense of action and
adventure, and doesn't usually rely on cliches to tell his stories (i.e. "El
Mariachi"). Tarantino is a master of uncanny dialogue and great crime stories
(i.e. "Pulp Fiction"). The two come together pretty well: we get a bit of the
pulp crime genre, combined with a lot of action, but this time both wander
into uncharted territory when they approach the horror genre.
The film opens in traditional western/crime style with a liquor store
robbery that goes awry when one of the two robbers can't control himself.
George Clooney and Quentin Tarantino star as Seth and Richie Gecko, two
cliche thieves-on-the-run who happen to be brothers. Seth is the older,
smarter brother in charge, while Richie is the mentally unbalanced,
trigger-happy, adult brat. The casting of these two is strange as neither can
really pass for a mass-murdering, vile criminal. They just don't have the
basic look at all, they are too likable.
The first half of the film is quite enjoyable even though little happens. The
Gecko brothers kidnap a pastor and his two children, and force them to drive
them to the Mexican border. At this point we're not really sure whether to
hope they escape the law, or to hope the family escapes them. Harvey Keitel
co-stars as Jacob Fuller, a Christian pastor who seems to have lost his faith
in God, and only a little explanation is given as to why he has had a sudden
change of heart. In an earlier scene he briefly discusses it with his
daughter Kate (Lewis) and adopted son Scott (Liu). This is the same type of
character as Father Karras in "The Exorcist," and is used in the same manner,
so that everything comes down to his faith.
The group find themselves waiting in a Mexican strip club for tough bikers,
which has fight scenes written all over it. And then the film turns on a dime
and becomes a bizarre horror flick as all the strippers turn into demons and
vampires and a huge orgy of fighting and bloodshed ensues. Everything had
been relatively normal and a creative up until this point, so the sudden
shift is like a punch in the face. Absolutely no explanation is given as to
why this supernatural element takes over a seemingly normal reality. Are we
actually supposed to be excited because now it's a battle of who is the
toughest - criminals or vampires?
That question really can't be answered because even though we had spent the
first half getting to know the Gecko brothers and the Fuller family, we
hardly recognize them once they become pawns in a cross between a bad horror
movie, and a mindless action flick.
Horror movies are essentially all the same, and this one isn't much
different. The characters find themselves trapped, surrounded by evil, and of
course start to turn on each other. Eventually they team up and escape, but
only two of them come out alive. 
It seems strange to discuss "From Dusk Till Dawn" in terms of plot because
it's really two movies in one. I don't know why such talented filmmakers
would dabble with such strange elements. Maybe the whole thing was really
just a personal experiment to see what happens when they mix things up. The
result could have been brilliant, but perhaps the instructions weren't clear
enough. 
(1/11/97) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Natural Born Killers"]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        If Beavis and Butthead had a favorite movie, FROM 
DUSK TILL DAWN would probably be it. Scripted by Quentin 
Tarantino and directed by Robert Rodriguez (Desperado), the 
movie panders to the very worst in sex and violence -- and is 
incredibly fun to watch. It starts off as a PULP FICTION-type 
crime story, with criminal brothers George Clooney and Tarantino 
robbing a convenience store. Because this is a Tarantino movie, 
however, it's not just a case of pull the gun and take the loot, it's 
a case of a hole being shot through someone's hand, a man on fire 
jumping out behind the counter and the entire store blowing up as 
they drive away.
        The opening scene sets the tone for the rest of the 
movie -- everything overdone and nothing as it seems. Clooney 
and Tarantino bring a hostage to the motel and then hijack an RV 
with a family in it. Harvey Keitel plays the backslidden ex-preacher 
and Juliette Lewis his daughter, whom registered sex-pervert 
Tarantino eyes endlessly. You know you're mentally unbalanced 
when you find Lewis the least bit attractive, although she's not 
nearly as obnoxious as usual in FROM DUSK TILL DAWN.
        The first half of the movie has the criminals and hostages 
trying to get to and through the Mexico border, Clooney's strategy 
involving hiding in the RV shower while Lewis is on the toilet. It 
does its trick; the border guard takes one look at Lewis relieving 
herself and immediately goes blind, never noticing Clooney or 
Tarantino.
        Once they get to Mexico, it's time to wait at the rendezvous 
point, a topless bar called Titty Twister where we're once again 
reminded Tarantino wrote the movie as he drinks champagne off 
the foot of a stripper. Finally, after about ten minutes of intercut 
boob shots and Clooney forcing Keitel and Lewis to drink with 
him, the stripper turns into a vampire. Soon half the people in the 
bar are vampires and the other half fall or fight back.
        That's right, we've come all this way to see a vampire 
movie. But like everything else, Tarantino takes this age-old genre 
and twists it to his own ends to produce over-the-top entertainment. 
So we get holy water condom balloons, heads rolling, quadruple 
impalement on an overturned table and Keitel getting bitten by a 
vampire and announcing he only has a few minutes left before he 
becomes "a lap dog of Satan."
        The FROM DUSK TILL DAWN dialogue is 100% 
Tarantino, hovering between absurd and disgusting (as when 
they're entering the nightclub and Cheech Marin announces the 
main attractions of the Titty Twister), but always entertaining, and 
is a huge reason the movie is so much fun to watch instead of 
being one more second-rate gorefest. Clooney, Keitel and especially 
Tarantino are so over-the-top with their delivery that the dialogue 
is that much more hilarious, ensuring not one second of FROM 
DUSK TILL DAWN is taken the least bit seriously.
        Stuff like this would be terrible in any other movie, but 
Tarantino and Rodriguez know exactly what to do to entertain 
people, even if there's absolutely no message or meaning to 
FROM DUSK TILL DAWN. PULP FICTION had the vulgarity 
and violence for a reason, but this movie just throws it out for 
cheap entertainment. FROM DUSK TILL DAWN isn't the classic 
of modern cinema that PF is, but is does prove you can do a 
good job making a really bad movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Chuck Dowling
>From Dusk Till Dawn (1996) ****1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Harvey Keitel,
George Clooney, Quentin Tarantino, Juliette Lewis, Fred Williamson, Cheech
Marin, Salma Hayek, Michael Parks, John Saxon, Kelly Preston, Tom Savini.
Written by Quentin Tarantino. Directed by: Robert Rodriguez. Running Time:
110 minutes.
Screenwriter/co-star Tarantino and director Robert Rodriguez instantly
rebound from the overall pathetic "Four Rooms" to bring us an extremely
entertaining horror film. This is exactly what movies should be, fun from
start to finish.
Clooney and Tarantino are the Gecko brothers, who happen to be bank robbers
and murderers. They head down to Mexico after a heist and along the way
kidnap Keitel and his kids. They end up in a bar in Mexico which just so
happens to be populated by vampires and from there, Evil Dead/Dawn of the
Dead-ish mayhem begins. The film opens with one of the coolest scenes in
recent years and stays constant throughout. The character Michael Parks
plays in that opening scene is so interesting, you'll wish he was in the
film more. Great dialog, fun action sequences, and excellent acting from a
great cast, including Tarantino, who is often taking hits on his acting
ability (sometimes justifiable hits). This is his best performance on film.
Williamson spoofs his characters from just about every movie he's ever been
in as the tough ex-Vietnam vet, and make-up artist Savini seems to be
playing the exact same character he portrayed in "Dawn of the Dead". [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Totoro
        I am not a regualr contributor to this group, more a lurker
who has enjoyed hearing the well formed opinions of others
while trying to pick a movie to see or rent. However, since
I am probably among the first to see this movie, having gone
to a sneak preview on wednesday, I decided to share my thoughts.
Let me warn you folks that my inexperienced style may accidently
release a spoiler or two, so ignore my review if you wish to
remain unspoiled.
This movie a collaboration between two of the hottest young
movie making talents making movies Richard Rodriguez directing,
Tarrantino writing has enormous promise. It does not let one down.
The satire in this movie is often enough to make a person want to
collapse from irony. Such as when we see a news report on our protagonists
(played by George Clooney and Tarrantino) giving a running death total.
The simultaneous shot at critics of movie violence and TV news
is two-bird-with-one-stone writing that we have come to expect
from Tarrantino.
Mostly, I would describe this movie as a hip 90s update of
the Texas Chainsaw Massacre. Except that I was ambivelent toward
TCM and I very much liked this movie.
I do have a few nitpicks. The dialogue was sparse and minimalist.
I expected more, particularly a few good soliloquies from Tarrantino,
though one could make the case that many parts of this movie are
his soliloquies on the state of the world. In addition, at the very end
of the movie we learn the topless bar is apparently part of an
ancient temple. We never got a chance to explore the depths of the
place, and one wonders what still might be lurking in there,
perhaps good fodder for a sequel.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FROM DUSK TILL DAWN * 1/2. Directed and edited by Robert 
Rodriguez. Written by Quentin Tarantino. Photography, 
Guillermo Navarro. Production design, Cecilia Montiel. Music, 
Graeme Revell. Cast: Harvey Keitel, George Clooney, Quentin 
Tarantino, Juliette Lewis, Cheech Marin, Fred Williamson, 
Salma Hayek, Tom Savini, Ernest Liu.  A Miramax release. 100 
minutes. Rated R (language, graphic violence, more violence, 
sex, sex and horror exploitation) 
"El Mariachi," the made-for-pennies first major work of Robert 
Rodriguez, was better than "Desperado," his big-budget sequel. 
His third movie, a segment in "Four Rooms," intensified the 
slide. In the latter, writer-director Tarantino did even 
worse."From Dusk till Dawn," written by Tarantino, directed 
and edited by Rodriguez, is also a disappointment.  
Mister Ugly (Tarantino) and Mister Pretty (Clooney) are the 
Gecko Brothers.  Their name (remember Michael Douglas's Gordon 
Gekko in "Wall Street"?) is the starting point for smug,mostly 
ineffectual filmic in-jokes and references. The Geckos are 
sadistic robbers and killers. Escaped convict Seth (Clooney) 
seems relatively rational  by his standards (but  how could he 
be?) and is in nominal control. Dumb,trigger-happy Richard 
(Tarantino) is a card-carrying delusional nut, sex maniac and 
rapist . Real-life hyper-kinetic, weirdo Tarantino is well 
cast. Clooney too. He slips easily into the strong, menacing 
character of Rodriguez or Tarantino movies. 
The pair have just robbed a Texas bank, killed many and taken 
a hostage. (All this is later reported  on TV with amusing 
black, media-satirizing humor). In  a roadside gas station the 
brothers add to the body count. It's so gratuitously, crazily 
shown that the violence is stylized and surreal. As they're 
fleeing to Mexico, another in-joke, a kind of  X-ray of their 
car's trunk, reveals momentarily their trussed up hostage. 
Someone has been watching Godard and Truffaut movies; someone 
ought to have learned from them more about substance and 
subtexts. 
A family of three in an RV are the next hostages. The parts 
are performed with unusual calm --another in-joke.  Harvey 
Keitel is a widowed pastor who has lost his faith. In another 
joke on the audience, Keitel's daughter Juliette Lewis, whom 
we would expect to join the brothers as a Natural Born Killer, 
does not. In a logic-defying gag, Chinese-American Ernest Liu 
plays the son. Clooney wonders :"How can he be your son? He 
looks Japanese." "No" retorts Keitel," he looks Chinese."  
Of such bits is the first part made. They are sort of  
promising,  although for a good, oddly lyrical yet 
based-on-fact killing spree movie I would recommend "Badlands" 
(1973) with Martin Sheen and Sissy Spacek. 
Entering Mexico, the brothers rendez-vous with their Mexican 
contacts in Titty Twister, a huge, crass, baroque, surreal 
strip joint in the middle of nowhere. It is full of nude 
dancers and swarthy, murderous-looking Mexican bikers and 
truckers. (Texican Rodriguez keeps perpetuating movie 
cliches). One of the customers has a miniature cannon strapped 
to his private parts. The joint almost makes you smell sweat, 
body odors, and think of V.D. Violent things happen. 
After a lull, Satanico Pandemonium (beautiful Salma Hayek from 
"Desperado") does a number with a huge snake. Suddenly she 
morphs into a ghoul --as does everyone else.  Becoming allies, 
captors and hostages unite against an onslaught of vampires, 
the Undead, monsters. The struggle goes on forever. How long 
is "forever"? My stopwatch 's battery got so fed up that it 
died. 
At the start of this second half there are sporadic gags. 
"Does anyone have a cross?" (to stop the vampires). "No, but 
two pieces of wood would do. Peter Cushing does it all the 
time."  A disquisition on vampires follows.  "We need a book, 
a real book" "Like  a Time-Life book?"  Cheap humor, but still  
preferable to the mayhem.
Interminably, the morphing and re-morphing disgusting vampire 
critters attack. The lurid, incoherent hodge-podge of 
massacres is an orgy of gore and dismemberment. It also kills 
whatever character development was present earlier. 
Unrelieved, very dull, this becomes a second, tacked-on, 
irrelevant movie.  The visuals and other special effects are 
skillful, but so what? It's all deja vu. The only original, 
also surreal gag, at the very end, when we see the back of the 
joint. It  is built like a Mexican pyramid. 
The fortune all this cost could have Rodriguez's parents, nine 
siblings and extended family live in comfort for a lifetime, 
with money left over for another ten generations. This flick 
is not merely over-the-top, it tops the topper. It is not 
plain old pulp fiction either. Much of it is what happens to 
pulp after it's been digested. 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Let's say you are a video store clerk with some ideas of what you
would like to see in films.  So you make the crime film you have in
mind, inspired by Hong Kong crime films, and it is a moderate success
and popular with critics.  You take most of your remaining plot ideas
and combine them all in one script and surprise, the film is an
international sensation.  You bask in fame, but soon the question
arises: just what do you do for an encore.  The world is waiting for
your next film expectantly.  Can you imagine the pressure?  What are
you going to give us next, Mr. Tarantino?  Well, there is an old
Hitchcock plot you can turn into a short film for FOUR ROOMS.  This
time the critics are unimpressed.  But your name is gold so you make
another film.  This time you dust off a horror script you wrote as a
video clerk.  So what happens?  Well, in my opinion you have made a
fairly standard video store sort of horror film, a hyper-version of a
story that has been done before.  FROM DUSK TO DAWN is somewhat dressed
up with familiar actors and a big special effects budget, but these can
not raise the film much above its modest origins.  As director, Robert
Rodriguez handles his characters and his first large budget well.
Rodriguez is best known for his ultra-low-budget EL MARIACHI and
still-low-budget DESPERADO.  By his standards this is an epic spectacle
film.  But Tarantino, whose real forte is in creating the script, the
writing is already a big step down.  He needed to be associated with a
strong film and this was not it.
     The Gecko Brothers are loose and headed for the border.  Richard
Gecko (played by Quentin Tarantino) has helped Seth Gecko (George
Clooney) escape from prison and the two are cutting a swath, killing
and kidnapping their way to the Mexican border.  Along the way they
kidnap a family of three: widower and pastor Jacob Fuller (Harvey
Keitel), his daughter Kate (Juliette Lewis) and son Scott (Ernest Liu).
They sneak across the border and make for a rendezvous at a trucker and
biker bar.  The most sophisticated and stylish thing about this bar is
its name, The Titty Twister.  It is a place of drugs and sleazy
strippers with wild bar fights during the day.  Then after dark the
folks really let their hair down and not, long after, their fangs.
Yes, the whole bar is a front for a den of vampires.  Our two killers
and three hostages find themselves besieged by, if not an army, at
least a platoon of vampires presented in the special effects tradition
of FRIGHT NIGHT.  If this plot seems new and creative you haven't seen
the "Midnight Mess" chapter of 1973's VAULT OF HORROR.
     FROM DUSK TO DAWN will be a real disappointment for most Tarantino
fans.  While his trademarked hyper-violence is present in all its gory
glory, the dialog is not nearly so finely honed as it was in PULP
FICTION.  My guess is that Tarantino has not rewritten his script to
give audiences the sort of writing characterizations--he has given to
previous films.  One place where this film does stand out is in one of
Harvey Keitel's rare subdued performances.
     FROM DUSK TO DAWN may well get the attention of the critics
because of the names involved and the ad campaign, but more creative
vampire films get made and go unnoticed to video stores and to cable.
In specific, whatever creativity FROM DUSK TO DAWN has, it pales next
to the latter two chapters of Ted Nicolaou's nearly unnoticed
SUBSPECIES trilogy or Anthony Hickox's SUNDOWN: THE VAMPIRE IN RETREAT.
You will find them on the same shelf of your video store where FROM
DUSK TO DAWN will probably end up.  I give the new film a 0 on the -4
to +4 scale.  My suspicion is that Tarantino used up his creative plots
on PULP FICTION and now his writing subsists of small borrowings from
old Hitchcock plots and an Amicus anthology film, and a bit from
NATURAL BORN KILLERS.
     Spoiler..Spoiler..Spoiler..Spoiler..Spoiler..Spoiler..Spoiler..
     While Rodriguez gives us some fast-paced action, much of it does
not make a lot of sense.  We once again have the BLOOD SIMPLE visual
image of a dark and dusty room with bullets cutting holes in the walls
so we see beams of light pierce the room.  But Rodriguez does not do it
right.  Following a beam backwards should take you directly to a source
the light.  If the beams are from sunlight they should all be parallel.
But Rodriguez has them pierce the room at all angles as if there are
many suns in the sky.  It is important to the plot of a vampire film
that the beams of light be from sunlight as you can imagine.  The same
error was made in NEAR DARK.
     A vampire must be staked through the heart to kill it.
Technically the stake should pin the vampire's heart to the coffin,
according to expert Montague Summers.  But Rodriguez allows several
scenes to pass where vampires are staked in the stomach.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-George Clooney, Harvey Kietel, Juliette Lewis, Quentin
Tarantino, Cheech Marin, Salma Hayek, Fred Williamson and Tom Savini
Director-Robert Rodriguez
Rated R
Dimension
What From Dusk Till Dawn is, I'm not so sure. It's two completely
different movies sewn together to make a freakish looking final product.
One is a gangster story with violent and profane mannerisms, much like
earlier work of writer and co-star Quentin Tarantino. The second is a
gory bloodbath involving a battle against the un-dead, lots of
explosives and severed limbs. Where one story merges into another is
hard to say - but the result is an enjoyable time, if you've got the
stomach to withstand it.
The story picks up in the desert near the Mexican border, where the
Gecko brothers - Seth (George Clooney) and Richie (Tarantino) - have
just robbed a bank and killed four rangers in the process. They need to
pass the border so they can meet their accomplice at a Mexican
rendezvous point, but have trouble maintaining a living hostage in their
possession, because Richie is prone to shooting them. Stopped at a
motel, they come upon a former preacher named Jacob Fuller (Harvey
Kietel), and his two children (Juliette Lewis and Ernest Liu). They even
have a motorhome - perfect for a quiet getaway. And so the brothers'
take the family of three hostage, until they have safely crossed the
Mexican border and reached their destination.
The rendezvous point chosen is a wild, raunchy biker bar called the
`Titty Twister', populated by naked women and tight-fisted truckers.
This is where things get really bizarre. After Seth and Richie bruise up
some of the locals, it becomes apparent that the Titty Twister is
infested with ravenous vampires hungry for blood. From here on in, the
movie turns into a gory action fest that never lets up. Tarantino and
director Robert Rodriguez steal largely from films like Sam Raimi's Evil
Dead, but this part of From Dusk Till Dawn is more of a homage than
rip-off. And there is no room for the squeamish; heads roll, people are
disemboweled, and chunky flesh splatters in all directions. But it also
means that the main characters must also depend on each other, so they
can make it until dawn alive.
>From Dusk Till Dawn is a fun movie. The entire second half is done with
tongue-in-cheek, making it more ridiculous than scary. Part of the
enjoyment comes in the casting; for instance, hunky TV star George
Clooney is admittedly an odd choice to play the hero figure in something
like this. But in a pleasant surprise, Clooney is admirably game as he
mangles the hapless vampire race with amusing enthusiasm. Kietel, in the
midst of such a ridiculous plot alteration, still manages to deliver a
fairly good performance. And then there are other survivors in the bar,
who amazingly have the ability to slaughter vampires as if they do it
for a living. In a neat bit of casting, one such character is played by
famous makeup guru Tom Savini, who calls himself (for no apparent
reason) `sex machine'. Salma Hayek plays a voluptuous Mexican dancer
named Satinico Pandemonium. But alas, she is a vampire too.
As expected in a Tarantino film, the exchanges of dialogue are spewed
out in sharp and witty bursts of startling profanity between characters.
But all that is weighed down when the silly monster plot abruptly takes
over. And practically everything seems so appropriate in the third act
of this movie. For instance, hordes of vampires can't get through a
small wooden door (or even attempt to) as the main characters anti up
with weapons found in crates that truckers had brought through. Then, as
the good guys launch an assault using crossbows and super soakers filled
with holy water (that was clever), the un-dead seem to keel over a bit
too easy. Plus, all myths and legends associated with vampire movies
(garlic, crosses, etc.) conveniently work like a charm. But what's the
use of this criticism? The movie checked it's brain at the door, but was
fun anyhow.
If you're a fan of Quentin Tarantino films, you should enjoy From Dusk
Till Dawn. At least the first half.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Christopher Null
     If you have the faintest idea what this movie is all about, I'd
appreciate a call.  As best I can tell, the lowdown is this:  guns,
hostages, a Winnebago, Mexico, breasts, booze, vampires, and gore...lots
and lots of gore.
     "Not for all tastes" is an extreme understatement, as FROM DUSK TILL
DAWN is the most obscenely violent and distasteful film to come along in
years.  Basically an EVIL DEAD set in Mexico, this Quentin
Tarantino-Robert Rodriguez collaboration tells the sketchy story of the
Gecko brothers (Tarantino and George Clooney, taking a rest from "ER" to
cut up people in another medium), a couple of fugitives on the run to the
border.  On the way, they pick up a family as hostages:  lapsed preacher
Jacob Fuller (Harvey Keitel), daughter Kate (Juliette Lewis), and son
Scott (Ernest Liu).  In the Fuller's RV, they make it to a Mexican strip
bar, only to discover it's run by vampires.  (Thankfully, it makes a great
place for an old-fashioned bloodletting.)  Plot is clearly incidental to
the film.
     Tarantino's typical wry humor (some is funny, some is decidedly not)
pervades the film, punctuated by Rodriguez's flair for filming violence. 
The latter gets a lot more screen time, with the frequently loud
explosions effectively muting what I expect were some good one-liners. 
These two filmmakers may be best buddies (and they are), but their styles
just don't seem to match sometimes:  Tarantino's penchant for long,
drawn-out scenes doesn't fit with Rodriguez's quick cutting style.  You
can almost hear him off-screen, chanting, "Get on with it!"
     And I was too.  I wish Tarantino would get over the fascination of
hearing his own dialogue, although I must admit he seems to have found his
perfect role as a demented pervert with a heart of coal.  By the time the
gore-fest is in full swing, it feels like a giant-screen game of "DOOM,"
complete with flowing blood and rolling heads.
     The way-over-the-top campiness is so completely ridiculous, it's
impossible to take anything in the film seriously.  And trust me, that's
not a bad thing.  The problem is, it makes rating FROM DUSK TILL DAWN
nearly impossible, so here's my best shot.  For the squeamish and/or
feminists: *.  For schlock horror fans and Tarantino freaks: *****.  A
nice average:
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Dennis Schwartz
FROM DUSK Till DAWN (director/editor: Robert Rodriguez; screenwriters: Quentin
Tarantino/Robert Kurtzman (story); cinematographer: Guillermo Navarro; cast:
Quentin Tarantino (Richie Gecko), George Clooney (Seth Gecko), Juliette Lewis
(Kate Fuller), Harvey Keitel (Jacob Fuller), Ernest Liu (Scott Fuller), Salma
Hayek (Santanico Pandemonium), Tom Savini (Sex Machine), Fred Williamson
(Frost), Cheech Marin (Border Guard/Chet Pussy/Carlos), Michael Parks (Texas
Ranger), Brenda Hillhouse (Hostage Gloria); Runtime: 108; Dimension Films; 1996)
It's a love it or hate it film. I simply hated it. On its menu for fun, is a
violent feast served up as charm and done in a tongue-and-cheek manner. It's a
serial killer/horror film farce of nonstop over-the-top action and sleaze,
involving decapitations, vampires, biker fights, extended gun play, and an array
of gore that has to be seen to be believed. A film that regales in its vulgarity
and campiness for blood-and-gore, as it goes out of its way to gloss over the
clichés of the conventional B-films. It's geared only for the cult film crowd,
and will make its mark there one way or the other. 
The plot involves two psychopath brothers, the older professional bank robber
and killer Seth Gecko (Clooney) and the perverted psychopath killer, Richie
(Tarantino), who kills for pleasure and is also a rapist. They escape jail and
go on a killing spree in Wichita and then flee to a liquor store in a small
Texas border town. They have just robbed a bank and killed a number of cops,
they have also taken a middle-aged bank teller as a hostage. In the liquor store
they kill a Texas Ranger and the store clerk, and burn down the store. Stopping
off in a flop-house motel, Richie rapes and slaughters the hostage. These scenes
are all done with an eye for comedy and parody, if that's possible. On the TV
news, it says they have killed 16 so far and most are Texas Rangers. 
The brothers plan to get to Mexico and meet Carlos (Cheech), who will give them
a place of sanctuary for thirty percent of their illegal take. With road blocks
and car searches at the border, the brothers commandeer a motor home of a
vacationing family who stopped at their motel so that the father could sleep in
a real bed. There is the father, Jacob Fuller (Keitel), who just resigned as a
minister because he lost faith ever since his wife died in a car accident; his
sexy 20-year-old, innocent daughter, Kate (Lewis); and, her shy brother Scott
(Liu). It's not explained how he happens to be Chinese. 
The story really becomes bizarre when they get across the border and get ready
to meet Carlos in a bar/whorehouse for truckers and bikers called the Titty
Twister. The place is open from dawn to dusk, thus the film's title. Here's
where Rodriguez has a chance to throw convention out the window and have some
absurd fun, as the place turns out to be a vampire hangout. It sells sex to its
patrons, and has exotic stripper Santanico Pandemonium (Hayek) do her alluring
strip before turning into a vampire. The brothers and their hostages have to
fight their way out of the place, as the vampires keep coming and the killings
become the film's staple. 
This supposedly clever script did nothing but turn me off, though there were a
few funny moments in a film that was dripping with special effects and spent
most of its script in finding novel ways to showcase its killings. I'll take a
pass on this one, it's just not my style of a film. The characters were as empty
as the story, and the film was an easy one to forget. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
