Title
Review for Mon oncle Antoine (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Omar Odeh
"Although Canada has continued to produce a number of
interesting films with uniquely Canadian content, the majority of
them are either shot out of the country with CFDC funding or use
Canadian locales to represent other locations entirely..." 
                        -David A. Cook, A History of Narrative Film
    Under the auspices of the Toronto International Film Festival
Group, an pristine print of the late Claude Jutra's 1971
masterpiece, Mon Oncle Antoine is being circulated. It is a
welcome opportunity to re(visit) a film that eschews the two
criticisms made above. The film is shot entirely in rural Quebec in
a town that essentially plays itself as opposed to Nova Scotia playing
Long-Island (Love and Death on
Long Island) or Toronto playing New York (Take your pick...). As the
Canadian cinema begins to earn
some very real, long overdue international recognition at increasingly
pretigious venues Jutra's film serves
as a reminder of a proud film heritage. The film is truly world class, in
its aesthetic as well as its
technical merits; the climatic conditions under which many of the scenes
were shot are truly savage. The
film has been taglined as 'the greatest Canadian film ever...', a dubious
honour and an ironic example of
marketing hyperbole, given our usual predilection for understatement; an
approach that for once would
have been appropriate. 
    At the risk of dispelling whatever tame interest there exists for this
film, it can best be described as a
coming of age chronicle. In every sense of the term, the themes of
self-discovery and identity permeate
the film. This is exposed not just through the trajectory of the young
protagonist, but through the state of
things in the very town itself. The finances of the general store, for
instance are increasingly put into
question suggesting its days are numbered. Each of the principal characters
struggles through awkward
attempts to define themselves, their existence and to accomodate certain
uncomfortable realities. Joe's
clumsy farewell scene is an excellent example. Their roll in the hay is
almost certainly an event from their
past and its reincarnation is both uncomfortable and very touching.  It is
an extremely eleagant way to
underscore the deep felt change that Joe's leaving represents. It is such
change that is at the very heart
of the film. Unlike the repetitive cyclic change of seasons (deftly
integrated into Will There be Snow For
Christmas) this is the permanent and enduring change of a natural disaster.
 This is the very process that
the towns and the characters undergo through the course of the film. Jutra
thoroughly integrates this
theme into the film allowing for a multitude of allusions to emerge. The
result is a depiction of veritable
coming of age; not the banal musings on dating partners and sex that
populate so many other films on
the same subject. 
    Many aspects of the film allude to documentary filmmaking, including
the style of the film itself. The
camera is never sure about anything ultimately giving the film the feel of
an interrogation not an assertion.
This is particularly significant since it is via the documentaty tradition
that Canadian filmmaking was born.
Jutra punctuates his film with a number of sustained shaky zooms. A number
of key scenes in the film
as well as the opening and closing shots are photographed this way. But the
device is more than simply
homage to the early traditions of Canadian cinema. The themes of change and
of self-interrogation are
particularly well served by the technique. The shaky zooms are extremely
self-conscious but not at all
certain or sure. Contrast these to Kubrick's expertly executed creeping
zooms from 'The Shining'. Both
are instances of virtuoso filmmaking where the director achieves remarkable
density through the use of a
rigorous and coherent code. At other times in the film Jutra uses long-take
shooting to turn things over to
the remarkable cast who sing along or share moments of tortured intimacy.
The gut-wrenching moment of
discovery for the young protagonist late in the film, for instance is
perfectly handled in this way. 
    Mon Oncle Antoine, sets an unassuming mandate for itself: it is a
chronicle of painful transition of a
people and a place. The film is free of pretense and fullfills this mandate
exceptionally well. The narrative
structure of the film is elliptical but never opaque. The dialogue is not
weighed down with
pseudo-philosophy or other annoyances. At the center of this chronicle of
change and evolution is the
Antoine of the title. The young protagonist's uncle who is perhaps the only
character that is spared the
uneasy task of revaluating themselves and their lives. Thoroughly content,
or so it seems, he fullfills his
tasks as the town's undertaker and general store owner in an aloof but
sympathetic manner. As the film
progresses however, Jutra unveils his scheme, and the viewer comes to know
a man who is not the pillar
of certitude he appeared to be. Although certain elements of the film are
left ambiguous, the film is never
unclear. It is the ambiguities that reinforce that feelings of apprehension
and confusion that precede any
momentous change. 
    The film could reluctantly be called a precursor to Jean-Claude
Lauzon's Leolo. While direct
comparison of the films would be reductionist both constitute examples by
Quebecois filmmakers to
reveal uncertainties about their time and place through stories centered
around a child. It is interesting to
speculate as to how big an influence Jutra's film may have been on Lauzon.
At any rate, Mon Oncle
Antoine cannot help but strongly influence any who chose to see it. It is a
fine choice, to celebrate
Canadian filmmaking's past, present and future. 
-- 
-Omar Odeh
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920

Author
David Dalgleish
"I'm not made for the country.  I hate it here."
Claude Jutra does two things with great assurance and subtlety in MON 
ONCLE ANTOINE ("My Uncle Antoine").  First, he captures the essence of 
a place, a people, and a time.  Second, he tells the story of a young 
boy's rite-of-passage.  If Jutra did one of these things well, this 
would be a good movie; because he does both, it is great.
The place is a small asbestos mining community in Quebec; the people 
are the insular, Catholic townsfolk; and the time is Christmas, 
sometime in the 1940s, before the Quiet Revolution urbanized and 
secularized the province.  Place, people, and time are lovingly 
observed: there is not a moment in this film which does not seem 
authentic.  The cold, stark winter landscape is captured in all its 
austere beauty by Michel Brault, while the naturally lit interiors are 
cluttered and shadowy and everyday, filling the frame with a sense of 
real places and real lives.  There is a strong sense of community: 
these people have only each other, and Jutra conveys all the joys and 
frustrations of this way of life.  This is a cinematic postcard, a 
memento of a place which no longer exists as it once did.
The principal players are Antoine (Jean Duceppe) and his nephew 
Benoit (Jacques Gagnon).  Antoine should, in theory, be the grand 
patriarch of this town.  He owns the general store--the community's 
heart--and he is also the undertaker, responsible for bringing the 
dead to church for last rites.  But it is his wife (Olivette Thibault) 
who really runs the store, with the aid of the clerk (Jutra) and the 
two adolescents who live and work there: Benoit and Carmen (Lyne 
Champagne).  Antoine mostly sits about lazily, drinking heavily; we 
realize he is living one of Thoreau's lives of quiet desperation.
As the title suggests, the crucial moments of MON ONCLE ANTOINE are 
seen through Benoit's eyes: the story is in his changing awareness of 
his uncle and of nubile Carmen, his growth into maturity, into a 
newfound awareness of mortality and sexuality, death and desire: the 
two issues which separate adulthood from childhood.  There is one 
scene which is absolutely perfect.  Benoit and Antoine go to a rural 
house, where the eldest son has just died, to bring the body back to 
town;  they are given a meal for their trouble by the grieving mother.  
The way Jutra handles this entire scene is virtuosic: his camera 
captures the emotions of the mother, the surviving children, Benoit 
and his uncle, with economy and accuracy and insight.  This is cinema 
at its most accomplished, conveying with images and sparse dialogue 
all the complexity and emotional texture of a great novel.
Most of the film approaches this level of mastery, but not all: it 
drags on perhaps 15 minutes too long, and there is one tedious, 
predictable scene in which Benoit and another boy, fascinated by women 
and clueless about them, nervously spy on an older woman as she 
strips.  I've seen variants on this scene many times, and considering 
how well Jutra elsewhere handles Benoit's growing sexual 
self-consciousness, here it is irrelevant.  But this is an exception: 
what is remarkable is that Jutra manages to avoid cliché, making this 
timeworn material seem new and even profound, in its own deceptively 
simple way.
MON ONCLE ANTOINE has twice been voted the greatest ever Canadian 
film, in Canada's version of the once-a-decade Sight & Sound poll.  
This in part reflects the feebleness of the Canadian film industry and 
the resulting paucity of great Canadian movies, but it also reflects 
the quintessential Canadian-ness of the film, which in its quiet, 
understated examination of small-town life resembles Canadian literary 
classics like Stephen Leacock's Sunshine Sketches of a Little Town.  
Its ambitions are modest, but it more than succeeds in what it sets 
out to do.  It is also quintessentially Canadian in that it could have 
been a little less restrained, and a little more ambitious.
