Title
Review for Siebtelbauern, Die (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
What's left for peasants to do when the owner of the farm they worked
all their lives has died?  Quite a lot actually, in writer and director
Stefan Ruzowitzky's morality tale, THE INHERITORS (DIE SIEBTELBAUERN),
set in a 1930's Austria that looks like the 1730s.  They've inherited
the farm, and they've never worked so hard in their lives now that they
are both employers and employees.
Their owner has died of mysterious circumstances, angering the local
police, who like their murderers to be caught red-handed.  The story
isn't a murder mystery per se, the crime's investigation being shuttled
off to a cinematic sidetrack.
The setup concerns the effect of the owner's will.  Hating basically
everyone in the town, he gives his farm to the peasants who have worked
it.  Not some noble gesture, his bequest is done as a kind of a lark,
and he says in the will that he expects them to fight among themselves.
Among the ten peasants, the two leaders are played by Sophie Rois as
Emmy and Simon Schwarz as Lukas.
The formula film rigidly dichotomizes the local inhabitants into the
good and the bad.  The good are the free-spirited, lithe peasants
dressed in cheerful, plaid clothes.  The bad can be just as easily
recognized.  They are the farmers with their abundant girth and black,
somber suits, hats and ties.  The farmers get lines certain to draw our
wrath.  ("God wants things the way they are, and the way they have
always been," the lead farmer argues as to why it isn't right for
peasants to own their own farm.)
The characters lack much depth or complexity.  Looking at their clothes
is sufficient information to predict their behavior.  Made in
interchangeable parts, the peasants are downtrodden and hence worthy of
our sympathy.  The farmers, rich and vicious, are deserving of our
indignation.  It is all rather like vaudeville plays in which they hold
up "applause" and "hiss" signs to instruct the audience on how they are
supposed to feel when the various characters are on stage.
As a director, Stefan Ruzowitzky strives to set a whimsical tone, but
his script doesn't provide much humorous material to back up his
intentions.  Sometimes, as in the gang rape sequence, he tries hard to
manipulate our emotions.  The problem with this and other similar scenes
is that the characters are not genuine enough for us to care as we
should.
The body of the movie has the farmers conniving to get the farm from the
peasants while the peasants work hard to save it.  Lacking much
complexity, the movie exists on scenes like the recurring one around the
large kitchen table.  The peasants scarf down their soup while grimacing
at each other.  They always keep a place set for the dead owner.  Why is
never adequately explained, since they loathed him.
Ultimately it isn't what happens in THE INHERITORS that is the problem,
but what doesn't.  The story is so thin that it is barely there, and the
formula film runs most of the time on autopilot.
THE INHERITORS runs 1:32.  It is in German with English subtitles.  The
film isn't rated but would be an R for sex, nudity, violence, profanity
and rape and would be acceptable for teenagers only if they are older
and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

INHERITORS, THE (Siebtelbauern, Die)(director/writer: Stefan Ruzowitzky;
cinematographer: Peter von Haller; cast: Simon Schwarz (Lukas
Candlemas), Sophie Rois (Emmy), Lars Rudolph (Severin), Julia Gschnitzer
(Alte Nane), Tilo Prückner (Großknecht-Farm Foreman), Ulrich Wildgruber
(Farmer Danniger), Susanne Silverio (Lisbeth), Kirstin Schwab (Liesl),
Dietmar Nigsch (Sepp), Werner Prinz (Policeman), Elisabeth Orth
(Rosalind), 1998-Ger/Austrian)
Stefan Ruzowitzky's film is an ominous parable set in the 1930s in an
Austrian village. The story centers on the mysterious death of a mean
and stingy landowner and his unusual last will. His land will be given
to the peasants to share and their peasant status will be elevated to
farmers (land owner). The farmer does this because he hates everyone,
including the church which expected to inherit the farm, and since he
has no family he mischievously leaves it to the peasants who worked for
him. He expects that they hate each other so much and can't work
together, that they will kill each other off.
It soon turns out that there is no mystery about who brutally killed the
farmer Hillinger, it is a silent peasant woman who remains by the
chicken coops. She was a virgin raped by Hillinger a number of years ago
and when she went to the police for help, she was framed by the farmer
who put a stolen brooch in her trunk and had her arrested for theft. She
became pregnant from that rape and gave birth to an idiot child called
Lukas (Schwarz). He was raised on the farm as a peasant and was blessed
with a happy-go-lucky disposition, but not knowing who his parents were
or where he came from. He tried to be friendly with everyone. The only
one who knew the secret, was the old peasant woman, Alte Nane (Julia),
who never told anyone else.
The hated foreman (Tilo) who used to beat the peasants regularly and
treat them with undue cruelty, refuses to go along with the seven others
who plan to work the farm and own something for once in their life,
after an offer by a rich farmer, Danniger (Wildgruber), to buy the place
well below its worth is refused. The battle becomes a class struggle
between the church, which sides with the landed citizens, and the town
farmers, against these new one-seventh farmers.
When the new farmers do better than expected and bring in a good
harvest, the established farmers, led by the particularly vindicative
Danniger, who is afraid of them succeeding and what it would mean to all
the other peasants in the territory, gets the city fathers to charge the
farm a high inheritance tax; when that fails as the peasants make the
payment, they resort to beating up the stableboy, killing a cow,
harassing them while working, and eventually to the most fatal incident
in the story, of burning down some of the farm buildings and forcing
Lukas to fight back to defend himself. That event leads Lukas to kill
the foreman and go on the run.
The film highlights the interactions of the likable but weakminded Lukas
and the vibrant Emmy (Sophie Rois) to tell its sad tale. Lukas loves
Emmy, romancing her freely, but things change when they have all the
responsibilities of running the farm and she is forced to become the
leader for the group, displaying a flashing temper at all the injustice
done to them. At first, the new farmers were confused about what to do
but soon were determined to succeeed, to put aside their differences and
work together.
It is a dark morality tale, excitingly shot, about the powerful ones
acting petty and cruel, while the peasants act with dignity and courage.
Ruzowitzky's film throws out many political ideas, gives one a true
sense of what collective hatred and what class warfare are like. The
film has many different moods to it: ranging from dark comedy to
free-spirited romance to bitter violence. It tells how a nonviolent soul
could suddely become a hunted man for murder. It is a well-made film; it
clearly shows how injustice is part of a system that enslaves people.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Stratosphere Entertainment
 Director:   Stefan Ruzowitzky
 Writer:  Stefan Ruzowitzky
 Cast:  Julia Gschnitzer, Elisabeth Orth, Tilo Pruckner, Sophie Rois, Lars
Rudolph, Simon Schwarz, Ulrich Wildgruber
   A spirited, Karl Marx-inspired ode to bauer-power, "The
Inheritors" answers the question, just what happens to land
once it's divided up among the poor peasants who farmed it? 
While the answer is as varied as the reformers who order the
partitions--different for Guatemalans under Arbenz and for
Cubans under Castro--the apportionment in writer-director
Stefan Ruzowitzsky's vision is at once hilarious, zestful, and
melodramatic.  "The Inheritors" succeeds wonderfully because
it takes a topic that could have been as dry as a graduate
lecture in political science, informing it with lustful humor, vivid
characterizations, and lovely shots of the Austrian
countryside.  Ruzowitzky filmed the movie with a
determination to avoid the "trash sentimentality" in works like
"The Sound of Music" and the "kitsch tales of a farmer's
endeavors to preserve the land so that he might feed his
family or with sentimental tales of royalty."
   The story opens on a large farm in Austria during the 1930s
owned by a meanspirited grower. His will is enforced by a
leathery overseer who uses brute force to keep the landless
peasants in line.  When the farmer is found murdered, the
town expects the land to be handed over to the church, the
usual procedure when such a man is childless.  Instead, the
farmer's scathing and rollicking will--which bequeaths to at
least one of the townspeople "a bucket of manure"--hands the
land over to the seven peasants who have had nothing at all
their lives.  Not that the farmer had grown soft. His intention,
clearly stated in the endowment, is to have the new owners
fight among themselves, even kill one another, in their greed
to own the entire plot.  What does occur, shocks not only the
local farmers (who fear uprisings among their own peasants
should the experiment succeed) and the church (which backs
the propertied class and considers it a sin for the landless to
become their own masters), but the newly enfranchised
themselves.  They take up their new responsibilities with vigor
and a renewed sense of cooperation, standing firm against
the old-line farmers determined to crush the Marxist-like
experiment.  Here is a classic case of class struggle, the
clergy and landed against the shirtless ones.  The film is aptly
entitled "Die Siebtelbauern," meaning the one-seventh
farmers.
   Two characters give the story its energy and audience
interest.  One is Lukas (Simon Schwarz), an orphan who, like
Oedipus, is shocked and moved when he unearths the secret
of his birth.  The other is Emmy (Sophie Rois), a hot-
tempered, liberated woman who submits happily to the
seductions of the handsome Lukas while emerging as the
fiery leader of the siebtelbauern.  She becomes noted for
such contemporary ideas as "make your own coffee" and the
notion that life holds more promise than what has been
offered to her gender by those in power. "You work for
someone, you get all men to hump you, and then you die,"
sounds a note about the nature of the feminine condition at
the time.  She fearlessly puts down her vociferous opponents
in the town with comments like "those who have big mouths
have small cocks."  Director Ruzowitzky takes us on a journey
of discovery that lifts her and her six comrades into a new
orb.  
   Like any radical change, the transformation is not without
perils.  Photographer Peter Von Haller captures the intensity
of the hazards--the fiery destruction of some of the group's
quarters, the liquidation of a cow, the chase after one of the
heroes who has a reward posted on his head.  Backed by an
appropriate strain of Erik Satie's music, "The Inheritors" is
swiftly-paced and unsentimental, a work of genuine integrity. 
The film received the award for best picture at this year's
Rotterdam Film Festival and played at the New York Film
Festival at Lincoln Center.
