Title
Review for Intent to Kill (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:35, NC-17, Action, 1993
Director: Charles Kanganis
Cast: Traci Lords, Angelo Tiffe, Scott Patterson, Louis A. Perez, 
      Sabrina Ferrand, Michael Foley, Sam Travolta, Vinnie Curto, 
      Elena Sahagun, Kevin Benton, Yaphet Kotto
     The Columbian Cowboys, a gang of drug dealers, are trying to
regain some lost dope.  They are slaughtering people all over the city
to get the dope back.  Traci Lords, a non-conformist cop, unofficially
goes after The Columbian Cowboys to try and stop the blood bath.
     INTENT TO KILL has just recently been released on P.M. video
cassette.  This is a good film for those of you who tend to enjoy B
movies, but don't mind a considerable amount of violence.  The special
effects for the film aren't the best, but the poor special effects
doesn't detract too much from the film.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give INTENT TO KILL a four.  INTENT TO KILL is rated NC-17 for explicit
language, graphic violence, and adult situations.
     The cast for this film, for the most part, is quite good.  Traci
Lords (A TIME TO DIE [1991], CRY-BABY), the underage porn actress who
shocked many people when she was revealed several years ago, has
starred in a series of quality films that prove that she can really
act.  This film is one of them.  She does a very good job in this film
proving that she can handle dramatic roles.  Yaphet Kotto (ALIEN,
MIDNIGHT RUN) is great as Lords's captain.  He brings life to any
character that he takes on.  The actor in the cast that I was least
impressed with is the person who plays the psychotic member of the
Columbian Cowboys.  His acting isn't very convincing and I think that
he could have been better cast.
     I don't know why this film received an NC-17 rating.  It didn't
seem to have anything worse than the film MARKED FOR DEATH, which
received an R.  Don't let the NC-17 rating scare you away because you
will be missing a great film.
     The premise behind this film has been done many times before, and,
unfortunately, this film is also very predictable.  However, the film
is still enjoyable to watch.  I suggest that you attempt to see this
film before it disappears.
