Title
Review for Joe's Apartment (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Hicks
        See if this makes sense to you. MTV, the network that has 
given the current generation of teenagers a short attention span and 
craving for sex and violence, makes a non-violent, non-sexual movie 
out of something that was originally two minutes long. It is -- to 
quote the Green Day video they've been playing all summer -- a 
walking contradiction.
        JOE'S APARTMENT, a low-budget, low-plot, low-
intelligence and even lower comedy level movie, is based on a 
very short film that has been airing on MTV since about 1993. In 
that film, a young man brought his pretty young date up to his place 
and was about to score when a couple hundred talking cockroaches 
fell out of the chandelier and down the woman's dress. It was a 
decent one joke, two minute piece of entertainment.
        Now comes the ninety minute version, where we get 
Joe's life story. He's just out of college and trying to find a cheap 
apartment in New York City. Some old woman dies right in front 
of him and he decides to move into her apartment, but the punk 
landlords want him out, beginning a few rounds of lowbrow 
harrassment. Also wanting him out of the apartment is a transvestite 
senator who has bought out the leases of every surrounding 
building, Joe being the only thing keeping him from building a 
giant prison on the property.
        So Joe moves in and finds out he has a few thousand 
roommates, a bunch of talking cockroaches who also sing and 
dance on occasion. He reacts in surprise, digust, etc. but they 
like him so much he eventually accepts life with 40,000 talking 
insects. And he meets a woman named Lily who wants to make 
the delapidated neighborhood into one big garden for the kids 
to play in before getting shot. Joe, of course, falls in love instantly 
and -- wouldn't you know it? -- she turns out to be the senator's 
daughter.
        The plot is right out of a hundred other comedies with 
slightly unique premises driven into the ground. The idea of an 
apartment inhabited by talking cockroaches has potential but never 
goes anywhere because the writing is lame and the plot so stale and 
transparent, not to mention the fact that the Joe character is just 
plain annoying. JOE'S APARTMENT alternates between petty 
conflicts with the hoodlum landlords and scenes of Joe trying to 
find a job or impress Lily. None of it is any good and the only 
times the movie elevates itself past awful and up to the level of 
pretty bad are when the cockroaches do their three song-and-
dance numbers.
        MTV should have realized what they were getting into 
when they decided to inflate something to almost fifty times its 
original length and anyone who went to see this should have known 
better. JOE'S APARTMENT is ridiculously bad, unfunny beyond 
belief. It gets the one-star rating on the strength of two short 
sequences -- the song-and-dance number where the cockroaches 
swim in the toilet and the final sequence, where everything turns 
out happy and the cockroaches turn the apartment into a charismatic 
church, complete with pipe organs and a crippled cockroach who is 
healed by faith. Unfortunately, this crippled little movie is never 
healed by faith or anything else.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The year's best tag-line, "sex bugs rock 'n' roll," is actually a
bit of misnomer.  There's precious little skin and only a mild rock
sensibility to this feature-film expansion of the MTV short.  John
Payson, who created the original, writes and directs this absurdly
amusing comedy about a young man from Iowa (Jerry O'Connell) and his
adventures living with thousands of talking (and singing, and dancing)
cockroaches in a run-down, rent-controlled apartment in New York City.
Animated by stop-motion and CGI effects, the bug sequences (roach
clips?) are delightful.  The insects squeal like Joe Pesci on helium as
they bicker, banter, and break into song.  (My favorite: a Busby
Berkeley number set inside a toilet bowl.) The plot, involving a
romantic interest and some serious landlord woes, is awfully thin and
makes the 79-minute running time seem longer than it really is.  JOE'S
APARTMENT works best as a mild comedy about life in the Big Apple.  How
will gags about 911 operators, street violence, and pooper scoopers play
in Peoria?  Only the grosses will tell.  With appearances by David
Huddleston, Don Ho, and Robert Vaughn, who has aged into a fine Strother
Martin look-alike.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jerry O'Connell, Megan Ward, Jim Turner, Sandra Denton, 
      Robert Vaughn, Don Ho 
Director: John Payson 
Producers: Diana Phillips, Bonni Lee 
Screenplay: John Payson based on the MTV short film 
Cinematography: Peter Deming 
Music: Carter Burwell 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     JOE'S APARTMENT started life as a short film on MTV.  And, while I 
haven't seen that production, it seems about the right length for this 
premise, which is too thin to sustain a full-length feature.  Even 
though JOE'S APARTMENT runs a slim seventy-nine minutes, it seems 
hopelessly padded.  There's not enough story here for something half 
that length, so we're subjected to numerous pointless and irritating 
song-and-dance numbers designed to nudge the lame plot towards its 
conclusion. 
     The film doesn't start off badly.  In fact, during the first half-
hour, there's a quirky comic momentum.  When we first meet Joe (Jerry 
O'Connell), he has just arrived in New York City from his home state of 
Iowa.  He doesn't have much money, and what little he possesses, is 
quickly removed by the locals (JOE'S APARTMENT delights in lampooning 
the manners and morals of New York citizens).  Soon, Joe is searching 
for a job and an affordable place to live -- neither of which is easy to 
find.  But, through a series of absurd coincidences, Joe cons his way 
into a rent-controlled, East Village apartment.  There's only one 
problem -- he has to share his pad with hundreds of singing, dancing 
cockroaches.  And, when he decides to bring his new girlfriend, Lily 
(Megan Ward), home with him, the insect presence becomes a serious 
drawback to romance.   
     As I said, I like the way the film develops in the early stages, 
taking some chances and daring to be a little different.  Not much of 
the comedy is uproarious, but JOE'S APARTMENT has a few clever moments, 
at least until it loses its edge.  The cockroaches, which are the 
product of digital animation, are quite real-looking.  They're a little 
less disturbing than the genuine article because they sound like Alvin 
and the Chipmunks.  Unfortunately, the film makers seem inordinately 
fond of the little creatures, and, as a result, they quickly become 
overexposed. 
     The film's greatest failing, however, is the manner in which it 
treats its human characters.  Joe is one of the least-interesting 
personalities to grace the screen this year.  Despite being described as 
the "dirtiest freakin' slob on the planet", he seems remarkably clean, 
orderly, and well-groomed, although I suppose the occasional smear of 
dirt on his forehead is supposed to indicate that he never bathes.  His 
girlfriend is equally bland, which means that the only two significant 
people in this film aren't worth more than a yawn or two.  Together, 
these two are more potent than a Sominex. 
     "Big" cameos come from Robert Vaughn and Don Ho, which is a fair 
indication of the level of talent attracted by the script.  Not since 
THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE has a film deteriorated this quickly.  Good 
beginning aside, the ultimate result is that JOE'S APARTMENT is full of 
bugs. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
David N. Butterworth
A film review by David N. Butterworth
Copyright 1996 David N. Butterworth/The Summer Pennsylvanian
Right after I'd seen JOE'S APARTMENT, I was checking out the poster with
its promise of "Sex, Bugs, and Rock 'n' Roll," when some punk kid with a
crew cut came up to me and asked me what I'd just seen.  "That," I said,
motioning towards the advertisement in front of me.  "Was it any good?" the
young scruff persisted.  My immediate response was to roll my hand from
side to side, indicating ambivalence, but then I thought about it for a
moment...  Remembering the film's juvenile humor, broad slapstick, toilet
jokes, squeaky, high-pitched voices, outright silliness and downright
cutesiness, I revised my opinion.  "Yeah," I told him, "you'll enjoy it."
JOE'S APARTMENT is based on an original short subject that aired on MTV in
1992.  As nothing succeeds like success, it didn't take long for creator
John Payson to pull, tug, and stretch his initial concept into a
ninety-minute feature.  Grown-ups might find JOE'S APARTMENT a little
insubstantial as a result of that expansion, but it's not without its
charms.
Not something you'd expect, necessarily, from a film crawling with fifty
thousand cockroaches.
Computer generated roaches, that is, and singing and dancing ones at that.
The movie opens with our farm fresh hero, Joe (an affable lug played with
open-mouthed conviction by Jerry O'Connell), hopping off the bus in New
York City.  Jobless, the first thing he looks for is a place to stay.  But
every damp, dirty, and wallpaper-peeling dive he looks at runs to four
figures.  "Anything for $100 a month?" he asks.  "Try Nebraska!" suggests a
witty slumlord.
Finally Joe stumbles upon a rent-controlled apartment in the East
Village--"the nastiest neighborhood in New York"--and by an opportune twist
of fate becomes the new tenant.  Much to the chagrin of landlords Vladimir
and Jesus Bianco (Shiek Mahmud-Bey and Jim Sterling) that is, who want him
out so that they can work a scam with a local senator (Robert Vaughn) to
raze the property and build a maximum security federal prison on the lot.
But Joe is in and settling down and discovering that he's got a roommate
problem.  Stuff moves.  Food gets eaten.  The place hums with a chorus of
tiny falsetto voices.  Finally, Joe gets to meet his diminutive uninvited
guests, a veritable army of wise-cracking, vaudevillian cockroaches who
form an immediate kinship with their human lodger on account of his
slobbiness.
These beetles have attitude.  And a code of honor.  And talent, belting out
a variety of "roach songs" throughout the film, from rap to gospel to Busby
Berkeley-inspired production numbers, each one sillier and cornier than the
last.  And the singing cockroaches are also on hand to help Joe win the
heart of the senator's daughter Lily (Megan Ward).  Lily, of course, is
unaware of her unscrupulous, fetishistic father's plans for the site, and
instead dreams of turning it into a community garden.
It's a socially-relevant, environmentally-conscious love story with songs
and bugs.  Lots of bugs.
I had guessed that the inquisitive youth outside the theater would get a
kick out of watching grown men pushing old folk down stairs, picking up
poop, and wearing women's undies.  If I was right, then he certainly
enjoyed spending the afternoon at JOE'S APARTMENT.  If not, at least he
couldn't have been offended by this harmless no-brainer.
