Title
Review for Okraina (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival, in Portland, Oregon)
It's hard to tell if this is a farce, or a comedy, or just plainly, one of
those films that really wants to take the proverbial pogo stick and shove it
in the .... of those who really deserve it. BUT, wait a minute, who is that
person?
It is the story of a few men that had their land stolen, and then sold to
someone who ended up owning the rights to it for 100 years, so that he could
look for oil, or some other equitable resources. Well, it doesn't matter who
these rights went to. Might as well been Ross Perot. Never mind that the
people that live there need food, and have worked this land for centuries
and are not getting anything for it at all. Is this a statement on the
Capitalist world? Or is this a major attack on the failure of the new system
in Russia, where privatization seems to be aiding a few, but hurting the
most? Or is this the signal that there are inherent problems which the
country itself has not addressed?
Shot in Black and White, in a cool style that really shows the b&w of the
cold, icy country where these people live, it is the story of one man that
decides to undertake a crusade to either regain their land or avenge the
land that was stolen from them. How to get this done, is something that they
have to figure out along the way. Some of the people had been their very own
neighbors and friends, and now they are turned against each other. As the
man gathers his friends, and departs, the group has a few adventures, some
of which are very amusing.
However, there are barriers. Some of the people that engineered these
deals, did so to gain something for themselves at the cost of their friends.
In one case, he was outright tricked, or robbed.
As the entourage takes off for Moscow, they meet their adversaries, and
they have to get information as to the next step and the manner in which
they get this information is one of the times that we come to like in this
film, even if sordid. It is all a part of the deadpan humor, that is found
in this film that is often subtle, but after a while gets you going. Just
when you think the film is beginning to drag on, we crack up.
Eventually the film gets into its end, and the farmers get their due. They
get to see the Certificate of Ownership, which they undoubtedly will take
home with them. And the end of the film, is a bit of a throwaway, but it
makes the point. It is the people that matter, and must be answered to in
the long run.
Not per se a great film, but an enjoyable one that has some rather funny
moments and a type of humor that we don't always enjoy or are afraid to
appreciate. It is black humor in every sense of the word, but at the same
time it is deadly serious, since the characters have a valid point, and
deserve some recognition and respect. What the film does not say, or worry
about, is that the government is responsible for these things. The film
maintains the individualistic point of view through out and refuses to
discuss politics. We are left with a story of a few men, and their adventure
in trying to recover their very own Utopia. Well, right or wrong, the nice
thing is that they get it. How, that's another story.
Well written, and as usual, a wonderful acting exercise where
characterization is of supreme importance, and each character is very
different from the other. Few films, or plays have such a well defined cast,
and this reviewer has not been able to find information on this film that
would have helped give credit where credit is due.
Their are large musical passages in this film during the quiet moments that
induce a sense of isolation and loneliness which these people no doubt live
under, but all in all it is difficult to fault this film as inferior. It's
humor, as subtle and quick as it is, and so darn'd deadpan, keeps you on
your toes and wondering what next. It is done rather allegorically,
specially towards the end, but by then it doesn't matter. We are just happy
that this group of people was able to achieve what they needed for survival.
Even if the ending is a throwaway.
3.5 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1999. All Rights Reserved.
