Title
Review for White Hunter, Black Heart (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
White Hunter, Black Heart (1990) 110m. 
Film based on a book based on a film based on a book.  Or, to be more
precise:  Clint Eastwood's film of Peter Viertel's roman-a-clef about
John Huston's film of C. S. Forester's novel `The African Queen'. 
Huston's production was quite an ordeal.  His cast and crew shot on
location in the Belgian Congo; their steamboat sank in the river;
filming was delayed by rain; and nearly everyone contracted malaria or
dysentery.  Eastwood/Viertel's retelling instead chooses to focus on
Huston's ambition to shoot a wild elephant.  Was his prime motivation
for travelling to Africa to enchance his film's authenticity or pick
up a hunting permit for a few hundred dollars and go on safari?  It's
the latter argument that drives Eastwood's monomaniacal director John
Wilson, who doesn't care about his creditors, his producers, his
audience, or even possibly his film.  He appears to be the worst type
of character to let be in charge of a film on location.  But Wilson
manages to persuade everyone to let him have his due - he is funny,
cynical, gruff, opinionated, and articulate.  You can see how Eastwood
was attracted to this role, particularly in the scenes when he cuts
someone down to size with one of his caustic monologues.  His
performance, whether it is based on Huston or not (let's face it, a
cigar-chewing, gravelly-voiced director isn't exactly a stretch for
Eastwood), dominates everything on screen.
Eastwood/Wilson keeps himself at a far remove from any other
characters and it is only through his peer/mentor relationship with
the more responsible screenwriter Pete (Jeff Fahey) that we see him at
his most approachable.  Pete provides the voice of Wilson's
conscience, i.e. the voice he does not listen to.  But it's clear that
Wilson is calling the shots, even in Pete's domain: early in the film
Wilson writes the lead characters out of his script by killing them at
the story's conclusion because as a film `god' it is his right to do
so.  We naturally expect the same reasoning behind his killing of an
animal, a notion Pete (who sees elephants as timeless beings) balks
at.  If a godlike human is superior to his human contemporaries does
that also confer him superiority over a godlike animal?  The answer to
this question is where the film seems to be heading from the outset. 
We do at least see a change in Wilson's demeanor at the conclusion -
upon one character's utterance of the film's title, it looks as if he
has finally been struck by a grim revelation.  It's ironic that
Wilson, given to lengthy invectives against his travelling companions,
is brought down to earth by nothing more than four words.  He is on
the receiving end of his own advice to Peter:  strip away all
complications and keep it simple.  Eastwood's film itself is also
deceptively simple - it ranks among his very best.  Unfortunately, the
public, more used to seeing Eastwood as a hero with a gun and not an
anti-hero with a gun, largely ignored it upon release.  Catch it if
you can.  
