Title
Review for Strawberry Fields (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The U.S. has a history of paranoia dating back at least to
the Salem Witch trials, occurrences which have included
McCarthyism, the 1920s anti-communist purges, and the
belief that a Communist Vietnam would lead to the "fall" of all
of Asia as though the nations of that vast continent were little
more than a stack of dominoes.  Looking back now to the
internment of Japanese-Americans in 1942 in California
camps, we can readily see how absurd, even unconstitutional,
it was to single out this ethnic group as though they were
spies and saboteurs for Imperial Japan.  While that shameful
incident occurred fifty-six years ago, some American people
are still suffering under the weight of that chagrin, and not all
of them were old enough to have been placed in those
military quarters.  Even teenagers today, a group considered
anything but political, can feel its effects.  The impact can be
magnified depending on the climate of the times.  Teens
during the late 1960s and early 1970s were indeed more
politically motivated than they are today, living through a
chaotic time of America's involvement in the Vietnam War.
   Take Irene Kawai (Suzy Nakamura), age sixteen in the year
1971, a troubled adolescent from a dysfunctional family and
the principal character of Rea Tajiri's film "Strawberry Fields." 
When her kid sister suddenly dies, she is traumatized, the
death understandably affecting the relations between her
mother and father as well.  Her emotional condition is not 
eased in school, where her classmates think nothing of calling
Asian people by pejorative names and where at least one kid
in her class proclaims "the only good gook is a dead gook."   
   To top things off, before her death her sister had found a
picture in her mother's closet of a building in one of those
1940s internment camps, and Irene learns that this is where
her mother and her grandfather were incarcerated during
World War II.  Believing that her distressed feelings could be
lessened if she could visit the site, she takes off with a hippie
friend to visit the location, only to discover that it is vast
wasteland, a western desert which may conjure up images of
Butch Cassidy to some Americans, of depressing Indian
reservations to others, and of freedom from claustrophobic
conditions back home to still additional people.  Consciously
or not, Irene may have made the trip principally to get away
from home, but to her knowledge it was strictly to seek her
roots.
   The film is a personal one based on director Rea Tajiri's
own background as a kid, and features a recurring image of
fire.  We grasp from the opening scenes of the 86-minute
work that Irene's grandfather had burned his possessions,
principally to prevent the FBI from finding any evidence that
could link him in any way to his roots in the Japanese
archipelago.  Irene burns books of matches in the bathtub; in
one episode she throws matches at a woman who is walking
in front of her, minding her own business; and her nightmares
and daydreams are filled with repetitive reflections of fire, as
though to symbolize a holocaust.  She engages in a sexually
active, love-hate relationship with a handsome boy friend who
is frequently on the verge of walking away during her
tantrums.  In one episode that brought occasional laughs from
the audience--probably inappropriate guffaws--she listens to
haphazard singing from a woman who is a friend of Irene's
friend, who links up with the traveling party and points out the
locations in the internment area of the drama class, the police
station, and the Buddha.
   Ms. Nakamura turns in an impassioned role as the troubled
teen but the film is frequently frustrating.  It fails to show how
her grandfather's fate is connected to Irene's high-strung
behavior.  What comes across, really, is that her frequently
yelling, her breaking objects and tossing them around the
room, her playing with matches, is little more than typically
adolescent rebellion furthered by her understandable
depression at the loss of her younger sister.  The repetition of
images, particularly of fire (which appears in her mind at least
thirty times during the movie) and of the ghost of her sister, is
irritating.  While the non-narrative format is a reasonable
enough choice given the nature of the plot (a disturbed girl
seeking solace), "Strawberry Fields" is particularly disjointed, 
for the most part failing to connect the unfortunate domestic
developments of wartime U.S. with the young woman's
dilemma.
   This is director Rea Tajiri's first feature film.  She had been
heretofore known as an award-winning videomaker whose
"History and Memory" transposing personal stories against
what she considers a flawed conventional approach to
documenting the past.  "Strawberry Fields" was shown in New
York City as part of the 21st Asian-American International
Film Festival.
