Title
Review for Doug's 1st Movie (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
Continuing in the bad tradition of stretching animated television shows
into full-length movies, DOUG'S 1ST MOVIE is the latest incarnation.
With the vast number of mediocre kids' television series still left to
be "adapted" for the big screen, the mind boggles at what our kids will
probably be offered at the theaters in the next few years.  Although
there are marvelous films like A BUG'S LIFE and THE PRINCE OF EGYPT,
most of what the studios send to the theaters these days is the
cinematic equivalent of elevator music -- terminally bland but with just
enough familiar parts to keep you from falling asleep.
In DOUG'S 1ST MOVIE the "action" at Doug's school surrounds the planning
for the big Valentine's dance.  The wimpy Doug, voiced by Thomas McHugh,
has signed up to help coordinate the dance until the BMOC, Guy, takes it
over.
Although Doug's real life has its limitations, he has a vivid dream
life.  "He imagines himself as a superhero big enough to wear his
underwear over his pants," explains the deep-throated narrator with a
documentarian's seriousness.  What that quote means, I have no idea, but
we do see him dressed as such.
The dance turns out to be merely a subplot.  The main story concerns a
friendly monster, affectionately named Herman Melville, that Doug's
friend Skeeter discovers.  Herman, looking a like stuffed, powder blue
version of Barney, is a creature more likely to hug you to death than
scare you.  Among Herman's bad habits is drinking out of toilets.
There are a few, a very few, bits of nice humor in the story.  One
inventor shows them his virtual reality system, which he says is just
like the real world only more expensive.  Another has the superhero
version of Doug make a big monster regurgitate by showing him a "mushy
teen" television series.  (Showing him this movie might provoke a
similar reaction.)
The colorful animation has little detail in the drawings, making it look
like something that was quick and easy to slap together, but the
credits, which run almost as long as the movie itself, suggest
otherwise.
With a thin story as flat as the animation, one can only hope that
DOUG'S 1ST MOVIE will be his last.
DOUG'S 1ST MOVIE runs 1:15.  It is rated G and has nothing objectionable
for any age.
My son Jeffrey, almost 10, said he gave the movie *** because he likes
the television series.  He liked the way the movie made him wonder what
was going to happen next.  His buddy Nickolas, almost 10, said he hadn't
seen the show and didn't care much for the movie or Doug.  He gave it **.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
DeWyNGaLe
DOUG'S 1ST MOVIE by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: C+
A few weeks ago, Doug's 1st Movie came out of nowhere with a poster and a
trailer.  There was no buzz building up to it or anything, which shows that
Disney through together a Doug movie without much notice at all, which could be
a sign that it isn't very good.  The trailers looked horrible.  Doug used to be
a great cartoon series in the time that it was aired on Nickelodeon from
1991-1996.  But in 1996, Disney took over the show and made some horrible
changes such as voices, looks, and setting of the show.  Personally, I think
the movie was a mistake in since the show had not gotten much attention ever
since it left Nickelodeon.  
The plot for Doug's 1st Movie goes like this: Doug is a normal kid in middle
school who has a huge crush on Patti, one of the most popular girls in school. 
He is always trying to impress Patti, and he will do anything to reach that
goal.  Doug's best friend is Skeeter.  Skeeter is a blue kid who also attends
the same school, but Skeeter is in love with Beebe, another blue person.  Doug
and Skeeter's latest adventure is trying to figure out the mystery of Lucky
Duck Lake.  Supposedly, a monster roams in the polluted waters of the lake. 
They actually find the monster, but the monster isn't a big and scary one who
eats people.  The monster is a sweet monster, who doesn't want to live in the
lake anymore because it is polluted hurts him.  From here on out, Doug must
take care of the monster to protect it from anyone who may harm it.
Meanwhile, a Valentine's Day dance for the kids at Doug's school is being
planned at "Funkytown."  Doug tried to get on the dance committee, but it turns
out that Guy Graham and Patti are on the team because Guy took Doug off the
list so he could be with Patti.  Doug is extremely jealous as Patti starts to
fall for Guy, and Patti calls Doug a liar about the whole monster incident. 
Doug isn't a very happy person right now.
The characters in the film are not developed at all, but for fans of the
television show, the characters will already be familiar.  The film should have
given some background on the characters for people new to the characters and
setting.
In Disney movies, hidden messages are often found that little kids will not
understand or catch, but many people do.  I caught many hidden messages in
Doug's 1st Movie which I thought were terrible and shouldn't in a Rated G
children's movie.  Hopefully, someone else will catch these same messages and
let Disney know that they have been caught.  The Little Mermaid, Aladdin, and
The Lion King also contained such messages.  The most obvious one was in
Aladdin when Aladdin states "Good teenagers take off their clothes," in a quiet
and muffled manner.         
The content of the film really isn't that bad, and it actually could have gone
somewhere, but it isn't presented in an interesting enough form.  The entire
monster plot line could have been erased from the film, leaving the sub-plot of
Doug trying to get Patti back from Guy as the main plot.  I didn't really
approve of the monster plot, considering Doug is almost always a very realistic
show.  The plot line containing the monster was very boring, very predictable,
and very unoriginal.  Even though the main sub-plot wasn't all that original
either, it was certainly a lot more fun to watch.
The Bottom Line- The title is Doug's 1st Movie.  Let's hope there isn't Doug's
2nd Movie.

Author
Matt Williams
Following the success of The Rugrats Movie, Disney has been quick to
follow suit.  Doug's 1st Movie takes the TV cartoon staple, Doug, and
plops him where he doesn't quite belong:  on the movie screen. The
result is mildly entertaining (though purely for kids), but possesses no
real draw to see it at the theater.
Doug Funnie (Thomas McHugh) is your average everyday kid.  His time is
divided between pining for his love, Patti Mayonaise (Constance
Shulman), and helping his pal, Skeeter Valentine (Fred Newman), hunt for
the legendary Monster of Lucky Duck lake.
His adventures truly begin when he discovers that the monster is real!
Not only that, but the monster is friendly (in an E.T. sort of way), and
moves in with Doug.  Of course, this complicates Doug's plans to help
Patti organize the Valentine's Day dance.
The plot fluctuates between the realistic (Doug's infatuation with
Patti, and his rivalry with a suave 8th-grader, Guy (Guy Hadley)) and
the bizarre (the Monster, a killer robot, and a magical shrinking ray).
But, then again, when the average student at Doug's middle school might
be blue, purple or green, who's to say what's normal?
The film tries to tackle the issue of pollution, but never truly grasps
the issue.  Apparently, town mogul Mr. Bluff (Doug Preis) has been
dumping toxic waste into Lucky Duck Lake.   This has not only spawned
the friendly monster, but made the lake into a terrible pool of acid not
seen since the likes of Dante's Peak. Now, however, the monster decides
that the Lake is to toxic for him to call home (though, shouldn't our
atmosphere be toxic to a monster born to pollution). Meanwhile, the evil
Mr. Bluff wants to kill the monster for two widely different reasons:
to keep people from knowing about the monster, and to let people know
about the monster (so he can be the hero who saves the town). It gives
you a headache if you try and make sense of it all.
Kids who enjoy Doug on TV will continue to find him likable on the big
screen.  However, there's very little reason for him to be there. In all
honesty, this feels more like a direct-to-video cartoon rather than a
piece of quality feature animation.  There's little here to entertain
adults, and kids aren't likely to care whether Doug Funnie is 40 feet
tall on a movie screen, or 27" on TV.
If you're desperate for a kid film to see at the theater, this one will
certainly do in a pinch.  But, on the whole, you're better off waiting
for the video.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Featuring the voice talents of Thomas McHugh, Fred Newman, Chris Phillips,
Constance Shulman, Frank Welker, Doug Preis, Guy Hadley, Alice Playten. Rated
G.
For years, films made for a younger audience have either targeted
preschoolers or older teens. Barring the occasional transcendent animated
Disney feature, the amount of movies made to appeal to, say, a 12-year old.
Disney tries to change all that with Doug's First Movie, a film treatment of
the popular Saturday morning cartoon. The star of both the show and the movie
is Doug, a shy, timid schoolboy who is trying to win the heart of his
life-long crush Patti Mayonnaise in time for the school dance. He is forced
to compete with a cool, sleazy "upper-classman" named Guy. Incidentally, his
best friend Skeeter Valentine discovers a monster in the polluted Lucky-Duck
lake nearby, and now Doug must decide whether to save the monster, who is
being hunted by the trash-happy mayor and his dustbusters, or go after Patti.
I've always been an affectionate fan of the cartoon (please, don't leave!)
because of the neat way it chronicles how an ordinary kid deals with ordinary
problems in extraordinary ways. One of the problems with Doug's First Movie
is that it actually puts its protagonist in a truly unusual situation. I
never expected Doug to concern itself with a friendly monster, it is almost
abominably against the 'toon's very nature, but here we are.
The concept could have worked if it wasn't such a blatant rip-off of E.T. The
Extra Terrestrial, the classic about a boy who befriends a friendly alien.
This is essentially the same movie, except this one is preachy and not nearly
as touching -- or as cute -- as Steven Spielberg's family masterpiece.
The subplots about Doug's girlfriend-to-be and the evil mayor fare better, as
they are more involving and more akin to the tv show's general themes. While
the monster scenario is targeted at the very young people who will inevitably
see this movie, the other plots are out there for the preteens who should
have the most fun with Doug's First Movie. The film is too bland for the
4-year olds who will be disappointed at the non-flashy, sub-par animation and
the unfamiliar to them get-the-girl sub-plot. But 12-year olds might enjoy
this immensely because they are the group that it speaks to, if any.
Still, there are oodles of toons out there that are far superior to this
dull, unexceptional effort from Disney's animation. Doug's First Movie was
originally slated for straight-to-video release, but got a shot at the
multiplexes after the success of The Rugrats Movie. Unfortunately, on video
is where this belongs, and it would be much more passable as a rental. Unless
you have a 12-year old who is a fan of the show, there is simply no reason to
spend money on a film which is so unimpressive when compared to the string of
stellar animation that we have seen come out of the studios these past few
years.
Doug's First Movie is not as intelligence insulting as Quest for Camelot but
it's not nearly as good as The Rugrats Movie. It doesn't feel like an event
that belongs on the big screen. Also, Doug's First Movie decides to outright
preach (a no-no Rugrats avoided), which is decidedly un-Dougish.
Although I smiled and even chuckled at some of the jokes in this picture
(especially a VR gag that's "just like being in this living room... only much
more expensive), this does not amuse an adult; it may even torture a few. My
advice is to see this film only in case of extenuating circumstances.
Otherwise, wait for it to show up on those trusty video shelves.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       "Disney's Doug" leaps from ABC-TV's Saturday morning series
onto the big screen but, for the most part, I doubt if it's worth
paying - at a theater - for what you can get free - at home, unless
you're the parent of a pre-schooler who is desperate for
something-to-do. The 77-minute story revolves around 12 1/2 year-old
Doug Funnie (voiced by Thomas McHugh) and his blue-faced buddy Skeeter
(Fred Newman) and their search for the supposedly mythical monster of
Bluffington's Lucky Duck Lake. When they find the creature - a gentle
baby dinosaur mutant - and befriend him, naming him Herman Melville,
they also discover an environmental hazard, a pond of industrial
waste, covered-up by evil industrialist Bill Bluff (Doug Preis) who is
determined to keep his nasty secret. In addition, Doug's romantic
crush, Patti Mayonnaise (Constance Shulman), is being courted by Guy
Graham (Guy Hadley), the slick editor of the school newspaper, who
just happens to be the powerful Bluff's spy in the community. Will
Doug risk Patti's love and do the right thing? To put it tactfully,
Nickelodeon screenwriter Ken Scarborough was obviously inspired by the
plot of "E.T.," and the animation, while pleasant, is flat and
unimaginative except in one virtual-reality sequence in which
everything is exactly the same as in real life - except more
expensive. "Doug's" was originally conceived as a direct-to-video
project but diverted to theaters following the success of "The Rugrats
Movie." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Doug's 1st Movie" is a
flimsy 3. Wait for the video.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Maurice Joyce.
Voices: Thomas McHugh, Fred Newman, Constance Shulman, Chris Phillips, 
Frank Welker, Doug Preis, Guy Hadley, Alice Playten.
1999 - 78 minutes
Rated G (nothing objectionable).
Reviewed March 27, 1999.
Because of last year's horrendous, excruciating "The Rugrats Movie," one 
honestly could only expect the worst from this recent animated feature 
film adaptation of the popular children's show, "Doug's 1st Movie." As 
the film played itself out, I noticed one vital difference between the 
two: while "Rugrats" was one of the most boring, junky family films to 
come along in some time, I couldn't help but be swept up in the spell 
that "Doug's 1st Movie" put me under, which was one of great, unexpected 
sweetness. Though I have never seen the television series, I now have a 
reason to actually give it a chance, where it airs on Nickelodeon.
Doug Funnie (vioced by Thomas McHugh) is an average 12-year-old living 
in the small, generally peaceful town of Bluffington, with all of the 
usual ordeals of any pre-teen, as he must constantly fight not only for 
respect from some of the older, more popular kids in his school, but for 
the girl of his heart, Patti Mayonnaise (Constance Shulman), whom he 
wants to ask out to the Valentine's Day Dance. At the same time, Doug, 
along with his friend, Skeeter (Fred Newman), have a chance encounter 
with the legendary monster of the local Lucky Duck Lake, and is 
surprised to find that the creature, named Herman Melville after his 
favorite book, "Moby Dick," is actually friendly, and trying to gain 
solace from the severely polluted lake, due to the company, Bluffco, 
releasing harmful chemicals into the waters. When Doug is encouraged to 
keep the monster a secret so as to protect him from the community, this 
poses a problem with Patti, since she mistakenly believes he is lying to 
her, and starts to hang around with the Doug's bullish nemesis, Guy (Guy 
Hadley).
To be clear about things, "Doug's 1st Movie" is only the second animated 
feature in the last sixteen months that I have enjoyed, the other being 
the spectacular, far superior "The Prince of Egypt." "Doug" is certainly 
more minor and slight fare than "The Prince of Egypt," but that isn't a 
bad thing, as I was pleasantly proven wrong about my low expectations. 
The characters in "Doug's 1st Movie" were all likable and well-written, 
and the complicated relationship between Doug and Patti was genuine and 
far more involving than what is usually seen in a film aimed at the 
young kiddie market. Although this aspect of the story was definately 
the strongest element, the main plot involving the kind-hearted 
creature, a la "E.T.," was also pleasant enough.
The merits of the animation could be debated, but I thought, for this 
film, at least, it worked. The colors were always vibrant and bright, 
and although the drawings were simple, they were also visually 
stimulating, something the recent dreary animated film, "The King and 
I," cannot attest to. Another interesting thing to note is that there 
are several overshot views of the whole town of Bluffington, including a 
shot of a map, and in the film, the locations were actually explored and 
accurate in their placement that we had previously seen them in. 
Bluffington, believe it or not, is a town I'd actually like to visit, if 
it actually existed.
Not only is "Doug's 1st Movie" more mature in its treatment of a 
children's pic (thankfully, there are no potty jokes in sight), but it 
also included an often sly screenplay, as well as some in-jokes that 
only adults might "get." For example, when discussing the town while 
looking at the map, Doug mentions that right behind Lucky Duck Lake is 
Crystal Lake (a reference to the slasher series, "Friday the 13th"). 
While watching the movie, I was also taken aback at how effective the 
voiceovers were, especially Constance Shulman, as Patti Mayonnaise, a 
fetching young girl with a delightful southern accent. Adding several 
laughs was Beebe (voiced by Alice Playten), a wealthy, spoiled friend of 
Doug's who is always commanding her father and servants to do anything 
she asks.
At a scant 78 minutes, "Doug's 1st Movie" is short and entertaining 
enough to never overstay its welcome, and I was in constant enjoyment as 
I watched it. After the end credits appeared, the earth didn't shake, 
but I was in a slight state of shock at how much I really did like it, 
with the wonderful last scene, set on the dock of the lake between Doug 
and Patti, only confirming my enthusiasm. Released by Walt Disney 
Pictures, "Doug's 1st Movie" is one of their lesser efforts in terms of 
how high its profile is, but is actually their best film since 1996's 
"The Hunchback of Notre Dame," which only proves that flashy, stylish 
animation isn't the only key to a successful film: you also need to have 
a diverting, original story and characters you care about. You do not, 
however, need a non-stop string of elaborate, corny musical numbers.

Author
Scott Renshaw
DOUG'S 1st MOVIE
(Disney)
Voices:  Thomas McHugh, Fred Newman, Chris Phillips, Constance Shulman,
Frank Welker, Doug Preis, Guy Hadley, Alice Playten.
Screenplay:  Ken Scarborough, based on characters created by Jim Jinkins.
Producer:  Jim Jinkins, David Campbell, Melanie Grisanti, Jack Spillum.
Director:  Maurice Joyce.
MPAA Rating:  G.
Running Time:  77 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There are two basic kinds of "family films" that come to your local
multiplex.  In one category are those that genuinely deserve the name
"family film," the kind that can actually keep an adult entertained while
remaining appropriate for kids.  In the other category are the generally
inspid, generally TV-based tales made exclusively for non-discriminating
sub-teens.  With no experience of the television series on which it was
based, I went into DOUG'S 1st MOVIE expecting the latter.  Instead, I
found something halfway between the two:  a good-natured, good-humored
kids' film that actually treated young viewers as though they had
intelligence.
     The plot for DOUG'S 1st MOVIE returns to some recurring threads from
the "Doug" show which originated on Nickelodeon before moving to ABC
Saturday mornings.  Doug (voiced by Thomas McHugh), a 12-year-old student
at Bluffington Middle School, is still trying to catch the eye of Patti
Mayonnaise (Constance Shulman), the long-time object of his affection;
Doug's best friend Skeeter (Fred Newman) is still seeking the monster of
Lucky Duck Lake.  In the film, however, Skeeter actually finds the
creature, a friendly amphibious beast he dubs Herman Melville (Frank
Welker).  Herman is also proof that local big-wig Mr. Bluff (Doug Preis)
is polluting the lake, which presents Doug with a moral dilemma.  Should
he risk derision by helping Herman and taking on Mr. Bluff, or focus on
staying in Patti's good graces?
     In fact, it's not really much of a dilemma at all.  Doug is the
nicest of nice guys, an easy guy for his peers to relate to.  He has
superhero fantasies, he mopes when Patti spends time with cocky 
upperclassman Guy Graham (Guy Hadley), and he trusts his faithful dog
Porkchop.  Like most adolescents, he's a little insecure, but he always
tries hard to do the right thing.  That's the basic, simple appeal of
DOUG'S 1st MOVIE:  it's a message movie for kids in which the message is
"be decent," and where the message isn't obscured by special effects or
infantilism.  Sure, it moves at a fairly pokey cartoon pace, but that's a
welcome respite from animated films that behave as though kids will only
sit still for frantic action.
     Parents may even be sitting still for some of the funny asides in
DOUG'S 1st MOVIE.  Though Ken Scarborough's script is hardly heavy on
adult references, it does feel slightly smarter than most cartoon scripts.
I don't think a single line in the film would be over the head of a
12-year-old, yet somehow I still felt in on the joke despite the fact that
most of the humor centered on schoolkid types (the whiz-kid nerds, the
stuck-up rich girl, the minor-league bully and his cronies).  The best
point of comparison for DOUG'S 1st MOVIE is probably the "Peanuts"
television specials and features of the late 60s and 1970s -- they were
both sincere and engaging, and easy for families to share.  DOUG may not
stand "Peanuts'" test of time, but it's a solid choice for parents who
like the idea of a film that doesn't condescend to their kids.
