Title
Review for King Lear (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
It is really nice to see another Godard film, and one that shows that he has
not lost one iota of his irreverence, and ability to create pieces of film
making that are exciting, weird, unpredictable, unrehearsed, free of boring
technical expertise, free of slick and pretentious shooting styles, and
above all, with pure thought at work.
AAAAAAaaaaahhhhhhhhhh, true Godard.
This film may have something to do with Shakespeare's King Lear, but to the
common and unknown audience, it might just as well not have any connection
at all to anything ( NO THING ) except a mad man, and possible genius, named
Jean Luc Godard.  As with much of his work, this is ( to my eyes and ears )
true surrealism in search of a reality through images in film, and the
script  just happens to be a loose form and interpretation of King Lear.
Maybe  aesthetically and intellectually it might have something to do with
that play, but I don't care.  It's Godard, and it's more fun than
Shakespeare.
There are several things which are pure Godard, and go back at least thirty
years, when he was turning the film world upside down with his ANTI-FILM
films that left a lot of people wondering what the heck was going on.  Much
like  another weirdo out of Italy, Godard became an enigma unto himself, and
started getting laughed at.  Indeed, films like HAIL MARY, are nice and
interesting but they don't hold anything next to TWO OR THREE THINGS I KNOW
ABOUT HER, ALPHAVILLE, MASCULIN FEMININ, LA CHINOISE, WEEK-END, ONE PLUS
ONE, that really left a lot of people wondering what he was about.
The greed in the film business during the 70's and 80's hurt the true
artistic creative geniuses of the previous decade, and even, Francois
Truffaut undertook to do some acting to support his habit of making such
simple and inexpensive films, which even a major studio didn't want to help
him with.  And the oddballs, like Godard, were left behind, despite having
made many people rich during the sixties.
But Godard, wasn't forgotten.  And he has many friends, and they all want to
be a part of his work, in any form, or shape.
Lo and Behold, when fools, madmen, geniuses and the like get together, one
would figure to have something.  I don't think it is going to be a critical
success in any form, but it is going to leave a lot of critics who only see
shtick and crap wondering what hit them.   It is easy to think that this
film  is about something or other.  Actually it is just GODARD mere and
simple, and stronger than ever, defying the conventions of film making, into
creating something which can stand up on its own, and though based loosely
on the famous play, it really does well, as a piece of experimental film, if
not
a really experimental presentation, or attempt to anyway, of Shakespeare's
play.
With Norman Mailer as the writer, and Molly Ringwald ( she sure has a knack
for appearing in the unusual ones, like Paul Mazursky's version of the
TEMPEST ) as Cordelia, this film plods along in vignettes with small
sub-titles, and two THE END sequences that continue with conversation over a
blank screen, as if we ourselves did not do that.
In between, the soundtrack has a life of its own, it starts and stops
whenever it feels like, or so it seems, and the characters thinking is done
out loud to let us understand something which is actually complex, and not
fun.  We are a dichotomous people.  We say different things from what we
feel and wish to say.
TRUE, TRUE, GODARD.  He never left us at all....
a must see for true avid film go'ers who appreciate the oddest things!!!!!
IF YOU DON'T KNOW GODARD, THIS IS A GOOD ONE TO START ON.
