Title
Review for X (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
That's the most likely question after seeing Tarô Rin's X.  The most
frequent question of those who haven't seen it is about the title.  The
short answer is that the film has nothing to do with pornography and
that it is rated R, not X.
Telling an apocalyptic story with stirring, visual panache, this
Japanese animated movie (anime) dazzles us with its depressing images
and dramatic music.  If BLADE RUNNER were remade into an animated
feature by the Japanese, this is probably how it would look.  X's
imagery, however, isn't in the same league as another anime, PRINCESS
MONONOKE, which was close to the top of my best of the year list last
year.
Now as to the story.  From what I was able to piece together it seems to
involve the dragons of the heavens, who come from the 7 stars that make
up the Big Dipper, the dragons of the earth and the Tokyo power grid.  I
am not making this up.
Periodically the narrator stops for a minute and introduces another
batch of characters along with their history.  Imagine that you have
never heard of Christianity and that you are introduced to it by a
single animated movie that covers all the books of the bible.  This
describes the experience of watching X, which Rin directs with a
Mixmaster approach.
The film's images are stunning, but, boy, are they ever violent.  In the
opening, a completely nude mother rips open her own stomach in order to
pull out a sword to give to her son.  He is to use the weapon in saving
Tokyo.  Decapitations occur regularly in the film, as does the severing
of other body parts.  The end of the world isn't pretty.
As I watched the movie, unable to figure much of it out, I began to
wonder why various figures are drawn the way they are.  Take the women,
for example.  Most of them have dime-sized mouths, whereas most of the
men have full-sized ones.  Is this the way that the women keep so
fashionably skinny?
In a movie that is deadly serious, the stilted dialog provides
unexpected sources of mirth.  ("You're handling the situation so
stylishly, I thought it would be unaesthetic to interfere.")  Although
one could write this off to bad translations, I'm not buying it.
PRINCESS MONONOKE had no such problem, and the ridiculousness of the
script for X permeates every scene.
If you want to enjoy more than just X's stunning look, perhaps reading
the book would help.  I can't say.  What I do know is that even with my
usual copious notes taken during the film, I still couldn't figure it
out.  The saving grace is that X never made me care that I found it
indecipherable.
X runs 1:38.  X is dubbed in English and is rated R for violence, gore
and some nudity.  It would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, April 21, 2000.
In the Silicon Valley it will be playing at the Towne Theater.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
An old Japanese Anime pic gets new life (and English dialogue) in time
for its rerelease in the states.  Anime fans will no doubt be thrilled
by the movie, but many of my fellow moviegoers will likely echo my
overall opinion about X: It just doesn't make any sense.
>From what I can put together, the story is this.  The world is ending,
and one man must destroy one of the Dragons that are warring over the
world.  Should he destroy the Dragons of the Earth or the Dragons of the
Heaven?  Destroying Earth will destroy earth.  Destroying Heaven will
keep the earth intact.  Two buxom sisters predict (and seek) opposite
outcomes.  And our hero is wooed by each sister.
Lots of flying around and stabbing people with swords and energy blasts
ensues, and Tokyo is ground zero for their fight.  Much of Tokyo gets
destroyed anyway during the epic battle (buildings collapse, the subway
is demolished, etc.), but oddly, no one seems to mind much.  Near the
end of the film, there's very little evidence of any battle at all.
X contains a few moments of haunting beauty, separated by long,
drawn-out scenes of exposition that only confuse the plot even further.
The animation is spotty at best.  It seems much effort has gone into
making a few choice scenes perfect, which the rest languishes in
lifeless backdrops upon which to kill the supporting cast in fountains
of blood.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Directed by Rintaro. Unrated (would be rated R due to strong, pervasive
animated violence and nudity).
I am not at all an anime (adult Japanese animation) aficionado; I have
seen very little and what I have seen has not particularly enthused me.
But here, at long last, is an anime I can get excited about. X, made in
1996 and only now getting to America, is complex, rather confusing but
outrageously exciting all the same. It's an apocalyptic vision,
superficially not unlike End of Days, except that it has an interesting
plot that actually makes some sense. Though at times hampered by
awkward dialogue and less-than-fluid action sequences, X remains a
riveting adult science fiction adventure.
At the center of the story is a young man named Kamui. In a dream he
sees his deceased mother, who tells him to go to Tokyo, though she
doesn't specify why. Curious, he follows her advice and goes to the
city. Once there, he seeks out his best friend Fuma and his sister
Kotori. In the meantime, a mysterious Oracle visits him in his dreams.
She tells him the story of the Dragon of the Earth and the Dragon of
Heaven, two opposing armies who are about to fight the final battle for
the future of the planet. If the Dragon of the Earth wins, mankind will
be wiped out and the planet will be cleansed of the species that, in
their constant effort to better their lifestyle, destroyed it. If the
Dragon of Heaven wins, mankind -- and the city of Tokyo -- will be
saved.
The kicker is that Kamui, whose name stands for "Power of God," has the
power to decide the outcome of the war by siding with one of the
armies. The Oracle and her group of mankind supporters urge Kamui to
side with the Dragon of Heaven but the Oracle's evil sister has other
plans. She recruits Fuma, who is rumored to have the exact same powers
as Kamui and tells him that whatever Dragon Kamui becomes, Fuma must
become the other. Their Destiny is Preordained (that is actually one of
the versions of the title); they must fight each other to the death.
The movie is brief, fast and furious. It rarely stops to explain
anything and if you get lost, you're left behind. But if you pay
attention and take a couple of small steps into suspension of
disbelief, X becomes an immensely satisfying experience. The plot is
farfetched, yes, but it's also utterly engrossing; we don't just see
our planet being put at risk, we care. The plot moves along so fast
that if something in it becomes unclear the best thing to do is forget
about it and concentrate on what's on-screen because otherwise you lose
track. That can happen at any moment and yet I was involved enough in
the story that I tried desperately (and, thank God, was ultimately
successful) to keep it together in my mind. That has to be a good sign.
Another good aspect of the storyline is the idea of two friends pitted
against each other by insurmountable fate. The idea is not a new one,
but it still manages to be effective pathos when done correctly. Helped
out tremendously by a poignant ending, X manages to turn the tables,
avoid the formulas and weave a compelling human story into a kinetic
science fiction thriller.
The film is not without its problems. Japanese must be a very difficult
language to translate because the few animes that I have seen have all
featured very awkward dialogue. Perhaps it's the culture difference, I
don't know. With a plot as feverishly fast as this one, you tend not to
care about the authenticity of the dialogue, but some conversations are
so cringe-worthy, you can't help but notice. It's also worth mentioning
that some of the action sequences are a little confusing, with
explosions everywhere and people jumping all over the place, making it
hard to keep track of what exactly is going on.
If you go see X, do not buy a beverage. If you have to go to the
bathroom, you might as well not come back. It will most likely take all
of your concentration to keep up with the movie, but it will be worth
it.
