Title
Review for Alligator (1980)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ryan Kohler
Movies, for the most part, should be entertaining.  Sometimes it doesn't 
matter what the subject matter or how well made it is technically. 
 "Brain Donors" is comedy that makes me laugh hard everytime I see it, 
though I wouldn't put it on any top-ten list.  "Alligator" is film that 
should be seen and enjoyed; it is a none-too-gory horror film about a 
mutant alligator (see, Mom, was right: alligators do live in the 
sewers.) 
At the center of the story is David Madison (Robert Forster), a cop with 
a guilty conscience. When sewer workers start turning up in pieces in 
the Chicago sewer system, Madison is called in to investigate.  It soon 
becomes obvious that a huge-ass alligator is loose in the sewer.  With 
the help of a doctor named Marisa (Robin Riker), Madison tracks down the 
alligator (whose name turns out to be Ramon) and comes face to face with 
him a rather tension filled finale. 
The script, by John Sayles (!), is humorous and is above the grain for a 
horror film (but considering that Sayles wrote it, the quality is not 
all that surprising.)  Lewis Teague (who went to "Cujo) creates a number 
of interesting visuals, most effective in the final showdown as the 
sewer becomes enshrouded in haze and smoke.   
The odd thing about "Alligator" was that it was not very scary.  It 
creates tension, sure, but there aren't any jump-out-of-your-seat 
shocks.  The alligator itself is humorous in appearance; it is a big, 
lumbering, obviously fake thing that helps to ease fear.  To be honest, 
I don't think that is a bad thing; perhaps the lack of shocks or scares 
may upset other people looking for that, but I was more interested, and 
enjoyed more, the performances and the witty script. 
The cast is led by Robert Forster (known now for "Jackie Brown).  He 
brings a unshaven, rugged quality to the role of David the cop.  David 
is a lot like a usual film cop: his apartment is small, cluttered, with 
some art posters on the walls, he lives alone, has a cute little puppy 
to keep him company.  Forster fits the role very well and, the most 
important thing, he looks like he is having fun.  Essentially, I feel 
that "Alligator" is kind of a joke; Forster gives the impression that he 
is in on the joke and creates a likable screen presence.   
The others in the cast do a good job with the material, including Robin 
Riker as the doctor who, naturally, takes a liking to David.  Michael 
Gazzo is also on hand as The Chief, who is skeptical at first but 
eventually believes David. 
The only real distraction in the film is Colonel Brock, a big-game 
hunter, played by Henry Silva. Brock is a required character because his 
presence forces David to get fired and hunt the alligator on his own, 
which is what HAS to happen.  Silva is such a bad actor, however, that 
his character is an annoyance in his few scenes before he becomes gator 
food. 
If you're looking for a good time, go and pick up "Alligator" from the 
video store.  Some films are meant to be entertaining and enjoyed.  This 
was one of them; "Alligator" does not disappoint.  
"Alligator" (1980).  Written by John Sayles.  Directed by Lewis Teague. 
 With Robert Forster, Robin Riker, Michael Gazzo, Dean Jagger, and Henry 
Silva.  Running time: 94 minutes.  Available on home video.  Rated: R. 
Visit my Film Review Multiplex: http://pages.prodigy.com/XWKZ01B/index.htm
