Title
Review for Un coeur en hiver (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For many years Stephan (played by Daniel Auteuil) and Maxim (played by
Andre Dussolier) have been partners in a violin repair business in Paris.
Where Maxim is handsome and affable, Stephan is introspective and
introverted.  In the years of their partnership Maxim has been married and
divorced and has dated many women.  Stephan has little life outside of the
repair business.  He is a genius in building and repairing violins.  He has
one friend, a woman, in whom he confides, but their relationship is purely
platonic.  Maxim's latest girlfriend is Camille, a brilliant and beautiful
violinist (played by Emmanuelle Beart) who takes an instant dislike to the
blunt Stephan, but when it is clear that Stephan appreciates Camille's
music, Camille becomes interested in the odd loner.  The stage is set for a
tragic love story.
     UN COEUR EN HIVER revolves around about Stephan's unusual personality,
which is revealed only gradually through the film.  Suffice it to say this
is a much more touching and engaging film than could be expected from the
above description.  Stephan is a personality type rarely seen in film, yet
not nearly so rare in real life.  I went into this film expecting a fatuous
love story and came out with a film that will almost definitely be on my top
ten list of the year.  Stephan's personality, what it does to him, and how
others use it and react to it make this a thoughtful and intelligent
addition to the films of this year.  UN COEUR EN HIVER was directed by
Claude Sautet from a screenplay he co-authored with Jacques Fieschi.  Scenes
of Emmanuelle Beart playing Ravel (beautifully orchestrated by Philippe
Sarde) have a pristine beauty that is as sexy as anything you will find in
any American film this year.  I give it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     UN COEUR EN HIVER (A HEART IN WINTER) is a 1992 French film
directed by Claude Sautet.  The cast includes Daniel Auteuil,
Emmanuelle Beart, Andre Dussolier, and Elisabeth Bourgine.  The film is
unrated, in French with English subtitles.
     UN COEUR EN HIVER is a welcome antidote for the summer glut of
big-bucks, effects-rich, story-poor action films.  UN COEUR has won
extensive honors in Europe, and rightly so, including 1992 Cesars (the
French Oscars) for best director (Claude Sautet) and best supporting
actor (Andre Dussolier) with nominations for Daniel Auteuil and
Emmanuelle Beart for best male  and female actor, respectively.  Sautet
is a masterful director with a breath-taking sense of timing, of when
to cut and when to linger, a master of silences that speak volumes.  He
placed the images of his film on top a sound track that includes many
fragments of the incredibly beautiful Sonatas and Trio of Maurice
Ravel, perfect choice--passionate, intimate chamber music to illuminate
a film about passion.  Indeed, it is not too far-fetched to regard UN
COEUR as a kind of chamber film, if you will, more at home in intimate
surroundings than grand auditoria, a film of intimate and delicately
controlled emotionalism, a film in which three players enact of quiet
drama.
     Beart plays an up-and-coming violinist who through most of the
film is either rehearsing or recording the Ravel.  It is no small
achievement that she completely convinced me and my partner Lyndol
(himself a musician) that she was playing the complex, passionate music
with authority and virtuosity.  In actuality, the music was performed
by Jean-Jacques Kantorow.
     Beart is one of the cinema's great beauties, in addition to being
an actor of taste and intelligence.  Here she plays Camille.  Beart's
physical beauty is perfect match for Camille's precise, demanding,
perfectionist aesthetics.  And when in a critical scene Camille appears
drunk, her make-up garish and sloppy, her hair as disarrayed as her
emotions and her career and art momentarily put to one side, it is
profoundly shocking, deeply painful.
     Camille's foil is Stephan, played by Auteuil.  Stephan is a failed
musician who has become a master violin maker and restorer.  Stephan is
handsome, introverted, denying himself love and passion, denying even a
capacity to love, a giant ear (as he is called by one of his victims),
casually cruel in his refusal to love others.  He lives a spartan life,
as spare of emotion as it is of furniture.  His partner, Maxim
(Dussolier), has taken Camille as his lover, in the process disrupting
a relationship between the violinist and her agent and mentor and
apartment-mate (Elisabeth Bourgine).  Maxim furthers Camille's
education and growth, but it Stephan whom she desires.  The more
Stephan tells her that he is unavailable, the more obsessed Camille
becomes with him.  He indulges himself in a games of approach and
avoidance that takes on a life of its own and eventually hurts all
three in this reticent menage a trois.
     Reticence is at the heart of this film's style and greatness.  The
dialogue of silences, passionate refusal to touch and be touched, the
emptying of emotions are acts of privacy carried out largely in public,
in bars, rehearsal halls, on the streets of Paris.  The one scene of
overt emotionalism, acted out in a familiar bar-restaurant, is cleverly
foreshadowed in the same bar by a different, less austere couple.  They
recover quickly, whereas the principals never fully recover the things
that were last in that later scene.
     The film is also illuminated by a quiet cinematography that works
the ambient light as extension of the story, as part of the dialogue.
The design, likewise, is restrained, unobtrusive.  Even Auteuil's
Christian Dior wardrobe is too rich, too tasteful to call attention to
itself.
     One of our local critics sees UN COEUR as revisionist comment on
the French Lover of movie history.  Only Maxim fits the suave, debonair
role, but even he is far from the stereotype in his actions and words.
Stephan as the anti-lover is far from the stumbling, bumbling, clownish
Pierre Richard sort of French comic tradition.  I don't object to the
critic putting the film in a filmic context.  However, I think this
aspect is only one of the subtexts here even though I don't want to
write much about what I see is the meaning of UN COEUR since that would
require an essay of a very personal nature and like Stephan I would
prefer not to expose myself to my own emotions.
     Instead, let me get by with saying that UN COEUR EN HIVER is a
mature, accomplished, complete achievement of fine French filmmaking.
It is a film that I recommend to any adult at any price and a film I
hope you get a chance to see.

Author
epc1@midway.uchicago.edu (Merlin)
Starring:  Daniel Auteuil, Emmanuelle Beart, Andre Dussollier, 
           Elisabeth Bourgine
Director:  Claude Sautet
Producers:  Jean-Louis Livi and Philippe Carcassonne
Screenplay:  Yves Ulmann, Jacques Fieschi, and Jerome Tonnere
Music:  Maurice Ravel
Released by October Films
French with English Subtitles
     Many people dislike French films for their lack of closure.  While
possibly shallow, I've often had a desire for a sense of epiphany, or
at least a resolution, in the films which I view.  There is no
revelation in UN COEUR EN HIVER in the traditional; however, the film
is incredibly successful in its passionate dramatization of a
passion-denying protagonist, Stephane (Daniel Auteuil).
     Stephane (Daniel Auteuil) is a master violin maker.  He is
passionless about all that which surrounds him except his craft and the
music which his craft is responsible for producing.  Even the
relationship between he and his boss, Maxime (Andre Dussollier) is a
controlled, and almost manipulated association, highlighted by the fact
that Stephane permits Maxime to win close squash matches.  In the
beginning of the movie, Stephane is a closed, solitary individual and
the audience is carefully left to wonder about the depth of emotion
behind this enigmatic man.
     Camille Kessler (Emmanuelle Beart) is a master violinist and the
new love of Maximes.  Maxime is so much in love with Camille that he
plans to and does leave his wife.  Like Stephane, Camille is outwardly
very controlled and reserved, sacrificing all thought and emotion to
her violin and the music which emerges.
     When Stephane and Camille meet, there is a recognition of a
bonding by both individuals.  However, whereas Camille submits to the
wild interplay of emotions which she now feels for Stephane, Stephane
only admits that Camille is attracted to him.  Stephane ignores his
feelings for Camille, which the audience cannot help but to see is
present.
     As the movie progresses, the two characters become more and more
polarized in their views and emotions for one another.  These two
people, with very similar approaches to life initially, react to their
new circumstance very differently.  Stephane becomes even more rational
and controlled, while Camille becomes more tempestuous, until she
almost borders on suffering a nervous breakdown due to the inability to
consummate their relationship.
     However, their approach to each other is perhaps not surprising
considering their vocation.  The audience is led to believe that
Stephane may have been a genius as a violinist as well, due to his
relationship with a master violin teacher.  However, apparently, he
could not be a violinist due to his intolerance for flaws in his
playing.  Consequently, Stephane becomes a precision craftsmen with the
instrument and no longer plays.  In contrast, Camille had almost given
the violin, years earlier.  However, with the aid of her manager, she
has progressed to being almost one of the world's finest, successfully
submerging herself to her playing.
     During the course of the movie, we see both characters evolve as
they struggle to meet the challenge of their new emotions.  Stephane
attempts to remain unchanged.  However, we do see subtle hints of his
transformation.  One of the most obvious is when he defeats Maxime in
squash.
     The development of all of the characters, many of which is not
included in this synopsis, is incredible.  American movies, with rare
exceptions, have not and I would daresay cannot approach foreign films
in character development.  In its essence, this movie is about the
development and growth of the characters, Camille and Stephane.  The
portrayal of all the other characters in the movie, including a death,
is to further the development of Camille's and Stepahne's characters.
     I am not sure why Berardinelli says, "At times it becomes
difficult to determine whether Stephane should be pitied or vilified,
and it is to Auteuil's credit that he manages to maintain this
uncertainty."  This movie is not about judging Stephane's actions as
being right or wrong, but about viewing their growth and accepting the
characters as who they are.
     I find the ending appropriate; unfortunately, I found the last ten
minutes which led up to the final scene to be very unfulfilling.  This
portion of the film is where the "sense of closure" could have been
successfully accomplished.  Unfortunately, there is a hurried and
almost a soap opera-type surge of emotions from all of the characters.
     While Ravel may not be quite as accomplished as Schubert or
Mozart, Ravel has his day in this film.  The synergism of the tension
of Ravel's music and tension on the screen is the best I have ever
seen.
     The directing in this movie is wonderful.  The actors and
actresses are excellent, each playing their part with great sincerity
and warmth.  Emmanuelle Beart's personality is beautiful.  And needless
to say, I must say that Emmanuelle Beart, herself, is beautiful.
Besides the near ending, the only other criticism of the movie which I
have is that the movie is almost too cerebral.  I almost left with the
sense little happened because almost all the changes which occur in the
movie happen in deep in their psyches and little in their personalities
or the situations which they end as part of.  The one question which I
am left with is while they have accepted their lot, has their attitude
towards love changed?  I have several possibilities which I believe the
movie hints at, but I am unsure of which the director is espousing.
     In summary, this movie is solely about the character growth of two
characters who almost develop a relationship.  In the process, we see
their attitude towards life and other people.  In itself, I do not
believe Un Coeur is a complicated movie.  Where it does become
complicated is when we juxtapose the scenes of the movie into the
greater walk of life where we, as Americans, have preconceived American
notions of relationship, love, and people.
     I do wonder how the movie translates when viewed within its native
French culture.  However, I, bringing my American preconceptions,
enjoyed the film.  I would welcome any comments about this movie from
any who have seen it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 9.5 out of 10 (A+, **** out of ****)
Starring:  Daniel Auteuil, Emmanuelle Beart, Andre Dussollier, 
           Elisabeth Bourgine
Director:  Claude Sautet
Producers:  Jean-Louis Livi and Philippe Carcassonne
Screenplay:  Yves Ulmann, Jacques Fieschi, and Jerome Tonnere
Music:  Maurice Ravel
Released by October Films
French with English Subtitles
     Stephane (Daniel Auteuil) and Maxime (Andre Dussollier) share a
friendship the closeness of which is unusual between employee and
employer.  Stephane works for Maxime at an exclusive Paris violin
repair shop.  One evening, when the two are at dinner, Maxime announces
that he has fallen in love with a new client, Camille Kessler
(Emmanuelle Beart).  The affair is so serious that Maxime has left his
wife and intends to move in with Camille.  Upon meeting his friend's
new lover, Stephane is immediately intrigued, and the reaction is
certainly mutual.  It doesn't take long for the feelings between the
two to grow, and their contact, while infrequent, becomes increasingly
intimate.  Yet even as Stephane fights to maintain his own emotional
equilibrium, for the first time in her life, Camille loses hers, and
her simple attraction to Stephane becomes an obsession.
     Often foreign films, and French films in particular, are thought
of by the average movie-goer as being exceptionally (and some would say
"overly") intellectual.  This could not be more true than for UN COEUR
EN HIVER, yet it is not merely the mind that this film touches.  The
rich musical score (Ravel) is a feast for the ears, and the exceptional
performances of the principals leads to several emotionally-potent
moments.  UN COEUR EN HIVER is one of those rare films that can be
described as completely satisfying.
     Distilled to its basic essence, the movie is a story that the
French do so well: the romantic triangle.  Beyond the premise,
however, there is nothing ordinary about UN COEUR EN HIVER.  From the
point where Stephane and Camille meet, much of what happens goes
contrary to expectations.  Theirs is definitely not a typical tale of
clandestine love.  Rather, it is an examination of the prices of
emotional honesty and emotional isolation.
     Oddly enough, it's Stephane, the character with the most screen
time (and the man whose heart is "in winter") who remains much the
enigma to the audience.  Even though we come to identify with him, and
understand some of what he does, the depth of his emotions often
remains unclear.  The last scene of the movie explicitly reveals part
of the truth, but for much about Stephane, the viewer must reach his or
her own conclusions.
     Daniel Auteuil plays his role with ability.  His is a difficult
performance to make succeed, given the ambiguity surrounding Stephane,
but Auteuil has found the perfect balance.  At times it becomes
difficult to determine whether Stephane should be pitied or vilified,
and it is to Auteuil's credit that he manages to maintain this
uncertainty.
     Camille is no less a complicated character, but her feelings are
simpler to read.  She hides nothing, and when she recognizes that she
loves Stephane, there is no doubt in her mind--or ours--of the
truth.  Especially noteworthy is the way that Camille's sudden, intense
passion for Stephane intertwines, and at times conflicts with her
lifelong love of music.
     Emmanuelle Beart gives an astonishing, unaffected performance.
Emotion is often displayed in the most subtle and easy-to-miss
gestures, expressions, and vocal inflections.  Before beginning
production of UN COEUR EN HIVER, Beart had never played the violin.
After the film's release in France, director Claude Sautet claimed that
she "fooled everyone" with her "perfect motions" (violinist
Jean-Jacques Kantorow does the actual playing).  Not only are her hand
movements accomplished, but the look of rapture on her face as she
loses herself in the music of Ravel is a clear example of how fully
Ms.  Beart allowed the personae of Camille to enfold her.
     Beart explained the importance of coming to understand music as
integral to defining Camille:  "[Director] Claude [Sautet] told me from
the beginning, 'I will only ask one thing of you; play the violin.  The
day you can play the violin, you will be Camille.  There is nothing
more I can tell you about the character.'"  Indeed, it is the
importance of music to Camille that puts every other emotion in the
film, whether displayed by her or by others, into perspective.
     UN COEUR EN HIVER is yet another case of real-life chemistry
translating well to the screen.  Beart and Auteuil are companions away
from their acting, and the spark of this intensity, even unfulfilled as
it is here, is too obvious to miss.
     With the exceptions of MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING and SOMMERSBY, there
have been no 1993 releases to equal the power of UN COEUR EN HIVER.
Strong characters, intelligent writing, and exquisite performances
combine to draw the audience into the movie.  Mental and emotional
participation are demanded.  This is a movie with deep, churning
currents.  Those who are attracted only to Hollywood's shallow waters
may find UN COEUR EN HIVER too intimidating, but anyone who enjoys a
more complex cinematic experience will find as much as they could hope
for in this picture.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
