Title
Review for Mephisto (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Few days of popular revolt were enough for Serbia to
transform from most despised genocidal pariah nation into
new and popular member of European democratic community,
with Western diplomatic establishment lifting sanctions and
pouring bucketloads of aid money to the same people who had
been mercilessly bombed only a year ago. This new
development wasn't exactly welcomed by Serbia's neighbours,
where people claim that the fall of one man can't redeem the
crimes of millions who had directly or indirectly supported
his policies. Although such notions can be best explained by
envy or old irrational Balkans hatreds, they have some merit
- horrors of history simply can't be explained by couple of
psychotic, evil or scruples individuals who took reign at
the wrong place and in the wrong time. Leaders who conducted
genocide, ethnic cleansing or waged aggressive wars would
have been powerless without plenty of individuals willing to
support or carry out their policies. That includes Hitler
and Nazism, and it is even more interesting to find out that
such phenomenon actually occurred in one of the most
enlightened and civilised nation of the Western world, with
plenty of rather ordinary, decent and sometimes even
liberal-minded folks ready to stand behind Nazi banner.
While Hollywood films dealt with Nazism in recent years,
they usually concentrated solely on its most horrific and
obvious aftermath in the form of Holocaust, and failed to
deal with the causes of such phenomenon. On the other hand,
European cinema was traditionally more able to explore this
dark territory, with filmmakers unafraid of coming with some
rather unpleasant conclusions. One of those filmmakers was
Hungarian Istvan Szabo, whose drama MEPHISTO was awarded
with "Oscar" in 1981.
The plot of the film is based on the novel of German emitter
Klaus Mann, written in 1936 and partially inspired by the
biography of real life figure - famous German stage actor
Gustaf Gruendgens. His alter ego in this film is named
Hendrik Hoefgen and played by Klaus Maria Brandauer. The
film begins in late 1920s, when Hoefgen is talented but
still relatively unknown and frustrated actor in provincial
theatre in Hamburg. sharing Communist beliefs with most of
his friends and colleagues. After the marriage to Barbara
Bruckner (played by Krystyna Janda), well-connected daughter
of bourgeoisie family, his fortunes begin to change. He
comes to Berlin and begins working in prestigious State
Theatre. His career would reach new peak when he astounds
everyone with his brilliant performance as Mephisto in stage
version of Goethe's "Faust". The same performance brings
attention of General (played by Rolf Hoppe), bigwig in
rising Nazi party, who sees enormous propaganda potential in
Hoefgen. When Nazis come to power, some of Hoefgen's
friends, including his wife, emigrate, while others, like
his colleague Otto Ulrichs (played by Peter Andorai) want to
organise resistance. But Hoefgen seems blind to those
development - intoxicated with stage success, he can't
imagine his life of career outside Germany and for him Nazi
regime is like any other. Hoefgen decides to stay and
collaborate with Nazis, and for that he is rewarded with
prestigious position of State theatre manager, luxurious
villa and various other privileges. But after some time
Hoefgen, who had discarded his youthful ideals, friends,
wife and mistress, would realise both the real nature of
Nazi regime and the real price of his collaboration.
Seeing that the film was made by Hungarian director during
the Cold War, many critics would like to think of MEFISTO as
a drama with subtle, but very not so implicit anti-Communist
context. They might be right, because 1930s dilemmas of
Gustaf Gruendgens/Hendrik Hoefgens are, more or less, same
as the dilemmas that many Hungarian artists had after the
failure of 1956 uprising. Those people had two basic
alternatives - one was to remain in their country, continue
their respective careers as nothing had happened and
therefore legitimise the oppressive regime in exchange for
the existential security. The other choice was to emigrate
and enjoy freedom beyond borders of their homeland, but the
price for that freedom was unemployment, poverty and
anonimity in countries that didn't share their language -
the most important tool of the acting trade. Same as Klaus
Mann in the original novel, Szabo and his scriptwriter Peter
Dobai extensively covered pros & cons, creating many
interesting and impressive characters in the process. But it
would be wrong to think about MEFISTO in the context of Cold
War Hungary - the topic of the film is universal, despite
Szabo using Hungarian, German and Polish cast and thus
giving distinctively Mitteleuropean flavour to the film (the
technique he would later use in COLONEL REDL and HANUSSEN).
Furthermore, dilemma faced by the protagonist of MEFISTO
isn't limited to fascism, communism or Mitteleuropa - we
could find them even in the most democratic countries of the
world, for example, among leftist radicals on 1960s American
campuses who embraced right-wing values and turned into
greedy business executives during Reagan's years. Another
interesting thing about MEFISTO is Szabo's decision to give
period "feel" to the movie without usual cliches about
decaying democracy in Weimar Germany - there is very little
violence in this film or references to inflation,
unemployment and other socio-economic ailments that had
contributed to Hitler's rise to power. Protagonists of this
film are actors who live in their little artistic ivory
towers, separated from mere mortals and paying only lip
service to the developments outside world (in a same way
that many Beverly Hills celebrities couldn't care less about
things that go on Los Angeles ghettos). Perhaps the most
radical (and in the context of Communist-controled East
Europe subversive) element of Szabo's film is the character
Hanks Miklas (played by Gioergy Cserhalmi), actor who
sympathises Nazis out of his genuine beliefs, for which he
is ready to sacrifice his own life.
This excellent psychological and sociological study of
conformism couldn't have been made without Klaus Maria
Brandauer, German stage actor who seemed perfect for this
complex and very demanding role. His Hoefgen is multilayered
person, torn between conflicting loyalties and various faces
he must wear in both private and public. Brandauer fleshes
out almost every detail of the said personality, hinting his
inner weaknesses and lack of principle from the first scenes
- Hoefgen is loyal to nobody but himself and he simply tries
to act his way to success. Szabo utilises Brandauer's talent
throughout the film - one of the example is the scene which
establishes similarity between Hoefgen's career of actor and
Hoefgen's career of theatrical bureaucrat in Nazi Germany.
For Brandauer it was the role of the lifetime that would
pave the way to Hollywood (where he unfortunately didn't
manage to rise above villanish or supporting roles).
Brandauer had the good fortune of being together with truly
stellar cast, although some of them, like Andrzej Wajda's
long-time associate Krystina Janda had to settle for minor
and somewhat undeserving role. However, the only actor who
seems on the same level with Brandauer is Rolf Hoppe in the
role of General (who is obviously modelled on Hermann
Goering). This General in the early, introductory scenes
seems refined, hedonistic and not too burdened with Nazi
ideology, in some way even similar to conformist Hoefgen.
Only in the latter segments of the film Hoppe establishes
true nature of that violent and ruthless regime through the
actions of General. Unfortunately, in the later segments of
the film Szabo have abandoned subtlety to certain degree and
used some rather unecessary scenes. The ending also seems
forced, confusing and somewhat too "artsy". However, MEFISTO
is still a very good film with a intriguing and disturbing
message that is relevant even for our, seemingly
non-totalitarian times.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
