Title
Review for One Night at McCool's (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
So my grandson gives me passes to this new picture One Night at McCool's
because the free screening is the same night as that horrible show with
those poor prisoners trapped on the island who eat the bugs.  "Go," he says,
"it's just like Rush-o-Man."  Like I'm supposed to know what that means.
Honey, when you get to be my age, you don't want to rush anywhere (except
maybe the bathroom).
McCool's is a story about a very pretty girl who bewitches several men with
her good looks, but leaves each high and dry at the end.  The girl, who is
quite a simple actress, is played by the daughter of Arrowsmith guitar
player Joe Perry.  Jewel starts off by tricking a broke bartender named
Randy (played by Matt Damon) into thinking she was being raped in the alley
behind his bar.  But Jewel really just wants to lure him back to his house,
so she can call her boyfriend (Andrew Diceclay) in to rob the place.  At the
last second, Jewel decides she's in love with Randy and shoots her old
boyfriend in the head.
But there are other men in the story, too.  Most of McCool's is told with
flashback from three different men who each fall in love with Jewel.  In
addition to Randy, there's a lawyer named Carl, whose is played by Paul
Buchman.  He tells his story to a psychiatrist/country music star and we
learn that he likes to wear those pants where your rear end hangs out the
back.  Roseanne's husband plays the other man, a police officer who thinks
Jewel looks like his dead wife, godresthersole.  His flashbacks occur as he
tells them to a priest, who snacks on the body of Christ as he listens.
As if that wasn't enough excitement for one picture, Kirk Douglas plays a
bingo player that Randy hires to kill Jewel when she stops being nice to
him.  It's nice to see Kirk again, and he looked a lot younger than I
thought he would, and such a thick head of hair for a man his age.
Everything comes together at the end, which my grandson keeps reminding me
to tell you all is just a rip-off of True Romance.  There's a very funny
joke that involves a wooden Indian that's almost worth the price of
admission on its own.
I'll tell you what McCool's reminded me of - that time I went to Pearl's
house for dinner, and her goodfornothing son was watching that show The
X-Men Files, which I had never seen before.  But he wouldn't switch over to
Touched By An Angel, so I had no choice but to watch.  In the episode, the
two FBI people were on a mission in the deep south.  Agent Sculder was in
love with the local sheriff, but her partner thought he was a dumb rube (he
was played by Owen Wilson).  As viewers, we got to see the investigation
from the different viewpoints of both Agent Sculder and Agent Mully.  In
one, the sheriff was smart and charming, but in the other, he had rotten
teeth and was a moron.  It just goes to show you.
Back to McCool's now - I didn't care for all the sex and violence, but
thought the acting was pretty good.  Like I said, the main actress isn't
very talented, but all she had to do here was show off her boobs and bend
over a lot.  That's not too much to ask.  When the picture was over, it said
it was made in memory of Stan Seidel, who was the man who wrote the
screenplay.  One can only assume he died of embarrassment, because he wrote
one mean, sick story.  My grandson said the director person used to make
music video for the NTV, but it seemed like he had a hard time keeping
himself focused on things.  Maybe he was too busy staring at that girl's
boob, too.
1:32 - R for violence, sexuality and language

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Harald Zwart's film noir comedy, ONE NIGHT AT MCCOOL'S, Liv Tyler 
plays a Lauren Bacall-type character known as Jewel Valentine.  Jewel is 
a scam artist who steals men's hearts and homes.  With wonderfully 
revealing dresses -- too revealing in the case of her surprisingly 
knobby knees -- she takes men's breath away.  The camera has a love 
affair with her as well, pausing to soak up her reflected beauty 
whenever she enters a new man's life.  The picture's most memorable 
sequence has her washing her car like a sex toy in something 
approximating a clothed version of a Playboy video.  Water, she 
confides, is her second favorite thing in the world.  The men are 
absolutely delighted to find out what's number one on her hit parade.
The story is told from the differing perspectives of three of the many 
males who orbit around her as their sexual sun.  Each of them tells 
their story in flashback to someone else.  The main story concerns a 
bartender aptly named Randy (Matt Dillon), a happy-go-lucky sort who 
thinks he has gone to heaven when he first spies Jewel in a tart red 
dress.  Randy tells his tale of woe at a cheap bingo parlor to a sleazy 
man named Mr. Burmeister (Michael Douglas looking like Joe Pesci having 
a very bad hair day).  Douglas's bouffant beehive turns out to be the 
funniest part of the picture.
Randy's cousin Carl (Paul Reiser), a cocksure lawyer who brags to 
everyone he meets that he is a partner in the second biggest law firm in 
the state, tells his story to his new psychiatrist (Reba McEntire).  An 
obnoxious married man with two kids, he thinks that he is irresistible 
to females.
Finally, a love-struck Detective Dehling (John Goodman) confesses his 
transgressions to an almost panting Father Jimmy (Richard Jenkins) who 
drinks out of the communion chalice while hearing all of the sordid 
details of the detective's trysts.  When the detective isn't pining for 
Jewel, he investigates the murders that keep cropping up around her.
Although the movie does have its moments, it is an uneven and fairly 
forgettable comedy that produces only sporadic laughter.  There's no 
reason to see it, but, if you do go, you'll probably have a decent time.  
Whatever you do, don't make a trip to the concession stand until you've 
enjoyed the car wash sequence.
ONE NIGHT AT MCCOOL'S runs 1:33.  It is rated R for violence, sexuality 
and language and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
