Title
Review for Tommy Boy (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Chad Polenz
Tommy Boy
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1995, PG-13, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Chris Farley (Tommy), David Spade (Richard), Julie Warner
(Michelle), Rob Lowe (Paul), written by Bonnie and Terry Turner, Fred Wolf,
produced by Lorne Michaels, directed by Peter Segal.
"Tommy Boy" may be the most generic comedy I've ever seen. It's not really a
movie, but more of a 98 minute-long sit-com. Sometimes it's funny, but in a
dumbed-down way.
Chris Farley stars as Tommy Callahan, an idiot manchild who is about to
inherit the family  auto parts manufacturing company (idiot child heir -
generic comedy plot #1). His dad is the president of the company and wants
Tommy to take over when he retires, but he's doubts Tommy's smart enough to
handle the job. Mr. Callahan is also marrying a beautiful woman who has a
suspicious son (the mysterious fiancee - generic comedy plot #2). 
We also meet Richard (Spade), the smartass young manager who handles
everything and doesn't want to be bothered with having to work with idiotic
Tommy (the smartass assistant - generic comedy plot #3). Of course Tommy's
father does marry the beautiful mistress, but he also dies on the same day.
Due to his death the company starts to crumble financially. If they can't
sell a half million brake pads within three weeks they'll be forced to sell
to an out-of-town distributor (the monetary deadline - generic comedy plot
#4). So Tommy and Richard set off on a cross-country trip to sell the brake
pads themselves and single-handedly save the company (the road trip - generic
comedy plot #5). 
Slapstick comedy was invented and perfected by Charlie Chaplin, but that was
because he was making silent movies without dialogue. Modern films [should]
depend on dialogue for humor, not people getting hit in the groin with and
walking into walls, etc. And that is what we get with this film, which seems
like nothing more than a live action version of "The Roadrunner and Wile E.
Coyote." After a while the slapstick and total stupidity become predictable
and repetitive. Even the one-liners are only a little funny.
Even though the slapstick element is stupid, it's still kinda fun to watch
Farley who relishes in his silliness. To show a customer how important his
brake pads are he uses expensive model cars and acts like a 5-year-old,
screaming and yelling and smashes the cars and sets them on fire. In another
scene he runs from the police screaming, "Killer bees are stinging my flesh
off!" Stuff like this is funny at the time, but in retrospect, that's not
intelligent comedy.
It's not that "Tommy Boy" is or isn't funny, it's just not a good film to
begin with. Had it been more original it would have been OK, but what we get
is at least watchable. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.

Author
Jer Fairall
     I know that the critics of America all disagree with me but I think
that Chris Farley is pretty funny. He was enjoyable back when Saturday
night Live was still watchable and he had a funny cameo in fellow
SNL-alumni Adam Sandler's vehicle "Billy Madison" and he is just as
amusing in his first starring vehicle "Tommy Boy." 
     The plot is pretty simple. Farley plays Tommy, the clumsy, overweight
and dim witted son of the wealthy owner of an automobile company (played
nicely Brian Dennehy). When tommy's father has an untimely passing, the
company is in danger of slipping out of the families hands and into the
posession of two scam artists (Bo Derek and Rob Lowe). So Tommy, with the
help of one of the companies ass-kissing employees (smugly played by SNL's
David Spade) goes on the road in order to sell enough goods to save the
company. 
     The bulk of the movie consists pretty much of things going wrong on
the road and Spade getting mad at Farley who is always screwing up
somehow. Alot of it seems to be trying to imitate the same formula from
the great John Candy/Steve Martin film "Planes Trains and Automobiles." 
     This is not a very hard movie to review. It's pretty much a
hit-and-miss comedy. I did enjoy Farley and I especially like the scene
where he and Spade end up singing along to the Carpenters shmaltz classic
"Superstar."  I just wish that the movie hit more than it missed.  

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Look for some inspired casting in two of this week's new
releases.  The action/adventure/buddy-comedy/everybody-gets-shot BAD
BOYS pairs television comics Will Smith and Martin Lawrence, while the
romantic comedy DON JUAN DEMARCO teams Johnny Depp with Marlon Brando.
(Hey, look what it did for Martin Landau!) The latter also stars Faye
Dunaway.  Other new releases:  BOY'S LIFE, A GOOFY MOVIE, and SEX,
DRUGS, AND DEMOCRACY.
     The mysterious, monotonous world of a Toronto strip club is
explored in this mysterious, monotonous movie from Canadian director
Atom Egoyan (FAMILY VIEWING, THE ADJUSTER).  The layers of the story
are peeled away every-so-slowly, as the film discreetly expands upon
the relationships between a patron, a dancer, and a deejay.  The
mystery--and the promise of a payoff--is good for about an hour,
after which point the evidence begins to mount that there's really
nothing waiting at the center.
     Spring must be the time for wedding movies.  Last year it was Hugh
Grant attending FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.  This year it's newcomer
Toni Collette in the crowd-pleasing MURIEL'S WEDDING.  Though billed as
a comedy, this Aussie import is really a revenge fantasy.  Don't look
for any role models in these shallow, callow characters who seem better
suited to real-life than romantic comedy.
     Thank goodness, then, for Toni Collette.  With her ill-fitting
clothes and some forty-odd pounds of extra weight, she the ungainly
starlett that we've been waiting for.  Her brain may be vacant--Muriel
knows nothing more than a want to get married--but she's a joy to
watch.  Whether singing along to ABBA, or beaming at the altar, she
radiates more charm than Andie MacDowell has ever known.
     Badly edited, and played way too far over-the-top, MURIEL'S
WEDDING still delivers the laughs.  The film is overlong, though, with
thirty minutes of unnecessary drama that's almost too much for this
little film to have to bear.
     Quite the racy love story, QUEEN MARGOT is dressed-up as a 16th
Century period piece involving French Catholics, Protestants, and the
entire court of King Charles XI.  At the center is Margot (Isabelle
Adjani), the King's Catholic sister, who would like nothing more than
to forget her marriage of convenience to Henri of Navarre (Daniel
Auteuil), also a Protestant.  They were wed for peace, or so they
thought, until most of Henri's guests (1000+) are slaughtered at the
Saint Bartholomew's Day Massacre.
     This is strong stuff, and certainly not for the squeamish.  It's
also quite confusing, thanks to the subtitles and the continuous stream
of new characters.  Have no fear, as all becomes clear in due time.
After about ninety minutes, the actors take over and help transform
QUEEN MARGOT into a simple--though quite twisted--love story that just
*looks* like a big historical drama.
     The first comic-book film of the year stars Lori Petty (FREE
WILLY) as an impulsive, wise-cracking punkster who roams the wastelands
of 2033 for the seemingly sole purpose of fighting the Water and Power
Police.  The latter is led by Malcolm McDowell, who did us all a big
favor by killing Captain Kirk in STAR TREK GENERATIONS.  She also
steals a tank, hence the name, and, later, hooks up with some mutant
Kangaroos, one of whom is played by rapper Ice-T.
     TANK GIRL benefits from a hot soundtrack (supervised by Courtney
Love) and a good production design.  Of course, neither is enough to
sustain viewer interest into the second hour.  This poor film doesn't
know what it wants to be, and so the narrative veers wildly in every
direction.  Don't be surprised when the characters break into a
song-and-dance routine.  You have been warned.
Next up: BATMAN FOREVER, then JUDGE DREDD.
     The rules must go something like this:  if you're a current cast
member of "Saturday Night Live," then you get your own movie.  No
questions asked.  Now it's Chris Farley's turn.  He plays the no-brain
son of an auto parts manufacturer (Brian Dehenney), who's forced to go
on the road to save the company.  His travel companion:  David Spade,
also of SNL.
     As expected, Farley makes an easy target for Spade's sarcastic
barbs.  It's "stupid" this, and "fat" that--inoffensive routines that
fall somewhere between the material in DUMB AND DUMBER and PLANES,
TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES.  The physical gags aren't bad either.  The
scene of Farley trying to change clothes in an airplane restroom is
easily worth the price of admission.  With Bo Derek, Rob Lowe, Julie
Warner, and Dan Aykroyd.
Next up: STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY (with Al Franken).

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Chris Farley, David Spade, Bo Derek, Julie Warner,
           Brian Dennehy, Dan Aykroyd.
Screenplay:  Terry Turner & Bonnie Turner.
Director:  Peter Segal.
     If there is a development in recent popular culture more
depressing than the degeneration of "Saturday Night Live" into a
weekly televised car wreck, it is the proliferation of equally
pungent big screen projects featuring current and alumni SNL cast
members.  These films have primarily been wrong-headed attempts to
turn a five minute sketch into a ninety-minute movie (IT'S PAT,
CONEHEADS) or self-indulgent star vehicles for annoying stars
(OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS, BILLY MADISON).  That is why it comes as such a
complete shock that TOMMY BOY is funny, and not just sporadically.
It is an ideal vehicle for Chris Farley and David Spade that falls
flat only when it mistakenly tries to be warm and fuzzy.
     Farley plays Thomas "Tommy" Callahan III, a big good-natured
doofus who has finally graduated from college after seven years.
Fortunately, his dad Big Tom Callahan (Brian Dennehy) owns an auto
parts company, and plans to have Tommy Boy follow him in running the
family business.  That opportunity comes sooner than expected when
Big Tom dies on the day of his wedding to Beverly (Bo Derek),
leaving behind a business in financial trouble.  In an attempt to
save Callahan Auto Parts, Tommy goes on the road with Richard Hayden
(David Spade), his dad's sarcastic right hand man, to sell
Callahan's new state-of-the-art brake pad to retailers.  If Tommy
Boy can't learn to be a great salesman, Callahan will be sold to a
competitor (Dan Aykroyd)--which would suit Beverly and her "son"
Paul (an uncredited Rob Lowe) just fine.
     What separates TOMMY BOY from other SNL cast projects is that
it looks like someone actually sat down and tried to figure out how
Chris Farley and David Spade could best be used.  It turns out that
they are a nearly ideal pairing as a comic team.  An hour and a half
of nothing but Farley's pratfalls and manic outbursts would have
been intolerable; ditto for Spade's snottier-than-thou put-downs.
Indeed, both of their comic personae are very individual tastes, and
those who are irritated by either or both of them might not find
much to like in TOMMY BOY.  But for some reason, Farley and Spade
complement each other very well:  Farley does something really
stupid, and Spade makes an acerbic comment.  That's the basic
formula, repeated with variations on the content and context.  And
most of the time, it's good for a solid laugh.
     That is largely because screenwriters Terry and Bonnie Turner
(THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE) come up with some inspired situations within
the routine plot.  There are a few hilarious scenes of Farley and
Spade bonding over cheesy songs on the radio, including The
Carpenters' "Superstar" and the Spanish language ballad "Eres Tu."
Another highlight has the portly Farley trying to change clothes in
an airplane restroom, cleverly directed by Peter Segal (NAKED GUN
33-1/3).  Sure there are more than a few clunkers, as well as a
completely unnecessary and un-funny scene centered around
masturbation, but far more of the jokes are dead on.
     TOMMY BOY's biggest lapses come when silly plot contrivances
draw the focus away from the two stars.  There is an obligatory
romantic interest for Farley in the woefully under-used Julie Warner
as a spunky employee at Callahan's, but it is about as tacked-on as
a sub-plot could be.  Farley's villainous step-family is also pretty
boring for the most part, although it is a kick to see Bo Derek
again after over a decade, and Rob Lowe may have discovered a new
career as a camp villain after this film and the first WAYNE'S
WORLD.  The attempts to play up the close relationship between Tommy
Boy and his father are also well-intentioned but distracting.
Basically, any time the makers of TOMMY BOY try too hard to be
anything but funny, it doesn't work.  When they try to be funny, it
does.  The current writing crew of "Saturday Night Live" might
consider giving TOMMY BOY a good look.  They could stand to learn a
thing or two.

Author
Eric Grossman
     After graduating from seven years of college with a D+ average,
Tommy Callahan (Chris Farley) finds himself back in his hometown of
Sandusky, Ohio where a top job in his father's factory awaits him.
When Big Tom (Brian Dennehy) is struck by a fatal heart attack, the
family business falls in danger of being bought out by a rival.  It is
up to Tommy and Richard Hayden (David Spade), an uptight but efficient
company man, to keep Callahan Auto Parts from being cannibalized and
sending Tommy and the town of Sandusky to ruin.
     It has been a long time since "Saturday Night Live" produced a
big-screen star in the likes of a Bill Murray or Eddie Murphy.  Michael
Myers and Dana Carvey found success in the WAYNE'S WORLD series but
have never had a hit otherwise.  Chris Farley, however, may be a
different story.
     Large and likable, Farley has what it takes to carry a movie.
Whether he is struggling to change his clothes in an airplane lavatory
or demonstrating the advantages of auto parts by lighting model cars
on fire, his Tommy Boy is always fun to watch.  Add Farley's gift for
humor with his big-hearted sincerity and you have a comedian that
audiences will want to see more of.
     Spade is the opposite of Farley, deadpan and tiny, but he is
equally entertaining.  The two make an excellent team and if they can
find themselves a more substantial vehicle than this, a great comedy
might be born.
     Director Peter Segal (NAKED GUN 33-1/3) keeps the pace moving and
elevates the thin script by Fred Wolf and Bonnie and Terry Turner.  To
their credit, the filmmakers give Farley and Spade enough scenes to
allow them to shine but they waste time on unnecessary sub-plots
including one with Bo Derek and Rob Lowe as they try to steal away the
factory.
     TOMMY BOY is a mediocre movie but offers some good laughs because
of the talents of Farley and Spade.

Author
Will FitzHugh
I saw this one on video and I consider it an ominous sign when 6
previews are tacked onto the beginning of the tape.  Is the movie that
short?  Is anybody who rents this a sure bet to see just about
anything?  Apprehensions aside, let's continue (the answers to those
questions, by the way, are 'no' and 'probably').
'Tommy Boy' is Chris Farley's first major role after smaller,
moderately amusing parts in 'Airheads' and 'Wayne's World'.  Here he
plays a fat, dumb recent college graduate who gets a do-nothing job at
his father's (Brian Dennehy) auto parts factory.  There's some amusing
stuff of his last days at college; drinking, smoking, passing out and
running into things.  If Jim Carrey is the Jerry Lewis of the 90's (a
stupid comparison, in my opinion) then Farley is the Buster Keaton and
Charlie Chaplin (two guys put together, get it?) of the, um, well,
let's put it this way: he's got the hair of Nicholas Cage, the body of
John Candy and the face of, uh, well, forget it.
So his father marries Bo Derek whose son is Rob Lowe who actually turns
out to be her husband.  Dad has a heart attack at the wedding (the
prospect of spending the rest of his life staring into Bo's blank stare
probably pushed him over the edge) and Bo and Rob's plan to take over
the business goes on the fast track.  Tommy is forced to take over his
father's sales route to save the business and Farley and weenie David
Spade hit the road.  See, the trip is not only a literal journey to
riches but a spiritual quest for self-discovery (a la 'Zen and the Art
of Motorcycle Maintenance: the Series' or Dennis Hopper's wistful
'Flashback') which leads them to the brink of failure and then to
ultimate success.  Plus Farley gets hit with a two-by-four and runs
into some more stuff and there's several witty masturbation jokes
thrown in.
Did I mention the obligatory love interest?  Luckily, the director
(Peter Segal, whose only other film was 'Naked Gun 33 1/3') has the
good sense to leave any love-making off-screen (which is bad enough for
those of us with vivid imaginations).  Or maybe it was cut to satisfy
Jack 'Off' Valenti, along with the bong-inhalation shot that was
clipped almost to nothing.  Whatever.  The final analysis reveals that
Farley has too much talent to waste in watered-down John Landis-type
retreads like this.  He should be playing Puck in Kenneth Branagh's 'A
Midsummer Night's Dream' or Baron Harkonnen in the David Lynch version
of 'Dune' (can you imagine? David Lynch doing 'Dune'.  How could it
fail to be cool?) or a replicant in 'Blade Runner II' (now that my
first choice, John Candy, is no more).  Don't go for the quick kiddie
cash, Chris.  Pursue your artistic vision.  Scare people.
