Title
Review for 61* (2001) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Blake French
Billy Crystal's 61* explains why baseball is more than a sport -- it's a
legacy.  I've always seen sports as simple games people play.  Sure,
those guys out there on the field have talent, but why do athletes get
paid more than doctors, teachers, and scientists?  Do teachers spend a
large portion of their lives hundreds of miles apart from their loving
family?  Other professions are indeed more important, but seldom do they
get this stressful or demanding.  Now I have a new appreciation for
baseball and sports alike.
Good movies about baseball make the game look like a lot of fun, sharing
the enthusiasm and energy of the players.  61* doesn't do that.  It does
contain intense sequences of ball playing, but the main goal here is
examining the overworked life a ballplayer must live in order to receive
his short 15 minutes of fame.  This movie allows us to take part in that
experience, both positive and negative.
It's 1961.  New York Yankee teammates Roger Maris (Berry Pepper) and
Mickey Mantle (Thomas Jane) are both challenging Babe Ruth's 60 home run
record.  Mantle, outspoken and reckless, begins the season with a bang,
but Maris, quiet and focused, doesn't look so promising.  Fearing he
might be traded during his first season, Maris starts cracking homer
after homer, while Mantle's excessive lifestyle begins to slow his
game.  After moving in with Maris, Mantle begins to concentrate on
taking care of himself and breaking the baseball record.  The two soon
converge and become "The M&M Boys."
Regardless of how close the score became, Mantle remained the public's
favorite baseball player.  Will Maris overcome the negative media
coverage and discouraging public image and break the record, or will
Mantle take home the honors.  And regardless of who wins, will their
friendship survive?
Billy Crystal directs with sincerity and passion, never losing his
amiable sense of humor.  The style, costume design, and the performances
capture the 1960s well.  Thomas Jane makes clear the contrast of his
character at the beginning and end of the story.  Berry Pepper proves
that he is indeed a talented actor when he's not in Battlefield Earth. 
His performance is humble, soft, and lovable, although he creates an
effective intensity underneath the quiet, compassionate character.
Touching and insightful, 61* not only displays the ups and downs of
being a sports legend, it also proves that the best performance in a
film doesn't have to come from a human actor.  The film's Yankee Stadium
scenes were shot at a disguised Tiger Stadium in Detroit.  The
filmmakers painted infield seats green, and a partial third deck and a
1961 Bronx skyline were digitally added later.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
