Title
Review for Spitfire Grill, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     When faced with watching a movie that is so utterly uninteresting
and entirely uninvolving, what is the sane person to do?  Well, you can
yawn and stretch and scratch your parts and read your watch and, if
you're lucky enough to be armed with a notepad, translate your miseries
into hand-written musings.  The torture doesn't end, though, until you
leave the theater, which is exactly what I wish I'd done during THE
SPITFIRE GRILL.  This butt-numbing tear-jerker stars newcomer Alison
Elliott (THE UNDERNEATH) as a stranger in a small Maine town, recently
released from prison and now working at a local diner.  Her alien
presence-- or is it her seeming aversion to shampoo?-- sets the entire
town on its ear, which then gives the Crusty Diner Owner Widow Mother
with the Bad Back (Ellen Burstyn) a chance to start sticking up for her.
Yawn.  This one won an award at the Sundance Film Festival and, frankly,
I'd like to know what they were smoking.  The hazy lighting, suffocating
score, dueling accents, eye-rolling monologues, and story surprises that
you can see coming from a mile off were all too much for me.  But what
do I know?  The audience that I saw this with cried, clapped, and, in
later scenes, cheerfully talked back to the screen.  You go girls.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 8/30/96 (limited); 9/6/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:57
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Alison Elliott, Ellen Burstyn, Marcia Gay Harden, Will Patton, 
      Kieran Mulroney, Gailard Sartain, John M. Jackson
Director: Lee David Zlotoff
Producer: Forrest Murray
Screenplay: Lee David Zlotoff
Cinematography: Robert Draper
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     If you decide to see THE SPITFIRE GRILL, bring a handkerchief.  Or, 
better yet, make that a whole box of tissues.  The only dry eyes at the 
end of the film will belong to movie-goers who recognize writer/director 
Lee David Zlotoff's gauche and shameless manipulation.  Cynic that I am, 
I left the theater dry-eyed, realizing that, had Zlotoff not been moved 
to inject overblown melodrama into this simple character-based piece, 
THE SPITFIRE GRILL could have been an enjoyable little picture.  By 
failing to curb certain excesses, Zlotoff damages the film's emotional 
balance.
     It's understandable why this motion picture took the audience award 
at this year's Sundance Film Festival, especially when you consider the 
fete's growing commercial tendencies.  With THE SPITFIRE GRILL, if you 
don't think too hard about what's going on, it's easy to be drawn in by 
the film's apparent sincerity.  The movie pushes all the right buttons, 
and viewers inevitably react.  However, the bottom line is that, while 
THE SPITFIRE GRILL is a tearjerker, it's too clumsily-constructed to be 
considered a skillful one.  
     Actually, the movie follows up a strong start with a solid middle.  
It's only in the last half-hour that things start to go bad.  It's as if 
Zlotoff, not knowing how to end the story, decided that the easiest way 
to tie up loose ends was to go for the quick, cheap way out.  The 
concluding quarter of THE SPITFIRE GRILL contains a few too many 
contrivances -- missing money, a "surprise" revelation (which is 
anything but unexpected), white water rafting without the raft, and an 
"emotional" speech that strikes the wrong chord.
      The Spitfire Grill is the only place to grab a bite in the small 
town of Gilead, Maine -- the North's answer to FRIED GREEN TOMATOES' 
Whistle Stop Cafe.  With her bad leg, the proprietress, Hannah Ferguson 
(Ellen Burstyn), is finding the Grill progressively more difficult to 
run.  So, when the sheriff comes to her with an offer of help, she 
reluctantly agrees.  Her new waitress/kitchen worker is named Percy 
Talbot (Alison Elliott), and she's an ex-con, having just been released 
from Windham Prison after serving a five-year term for manslaughter.  
     When Hannah suffers an incapacitating injury, Percy is forced to 
take over the day-to-day operation of the Grill.  Since she's a terrible 
cook, she's grateful for the help of a local woman, Shelby Goddard 
(Marcia Gay Harden), who's a godsend in the kitchen.  Shelby's bitter 
husband, Nahum (Will Patton), is far less helpful, however.  Convinced 
that Percy means no good, he'd like nothing better than to run her out 
of town.  Meanwhile, a mysterious watcher in the woods lurks around the 
Grill by night, coming into the open only to collect a bag of canned 
goods that Hannah leaves outside for him.
     As a character study of Percy, THE SPITFIRE GRILL works.  Although 
parts of her past are painted with broad strokes, she is fleshed out 
with amazing aptitude by actress Alison Elliot (the "woman left behind" 
in THE UNDERNEATH), who's easily the best thing about this movie.  
Elliot's performance keeps us involved for nearly the entire film, and 
almost gets us through the turbulence of THE SPITFIRE GRILL's 
dissatisfying climax.
     Playing roles that are variations of familiar stereotypes, none of 
Elliot's co-stars are especially noteworthy.  Ellen Burstyn is the 
crusty old woman with a good heart who hides a terrible, tragic secret.  
Marcia Gay Harden is the meek wife who finds a backbone as a result of 
her association with Percy.  And Will Patton is the hard-hearted cynic 
who distrusts the newcomer from the moment that she sets food in Gilead.  
Burstyn's performance is robust, and Harden is effectively pathetic 
(despite the uneven accent), but Patton's unsubtle, unsympathetic 
portrayal is unfortunate.
     There are numerous similarities between THE SPITFIRE GRILL and 
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES, but, while both movies shamelessly go for the 
tearducts, Jon Avnet's 1992 feature has a level of emotional honesty 
that's missing here.  I wanted very much to like THE SPITFIRE GRILL, in 
large part because Alison Elliot made me care about Percy, and, for the 
better part of ninety minutes, I was willing to forgive the movie its 
few, mostly small, narrative problems.  Unfortunately, those flaws 
multiply at an alarming rate as the end draws near, and I left the 
theater feeling somewhat let down.  THE SPITFIRE GRILL isn't a bad 
movie, but, like Percy's breakfast special, certain overdone portions 
are difficult to digest.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
John Schuurman
Written and Directed by Lee David Zlotoff
I am encouraged. After the dreadful dearth of quality popular movies (I
hear "Lone Star," "Emma," and "Trainspotting" are exceptions) in the
summer of '96, at last there are some new films emerging for the autumn
season that will get me out to the theater again. 
"The Spitfire Grill" was well worth the time and money. Set in a
wonderful little backwoods town in Maine called Gilead the film does
much with references to its Biblical namesake. In the Bible, Gilead is
the region to the east of the Jordan river, noted for the soothing
"balm" or ointment gleaned from its woodlands. One of the hopes for
modern Gilead's future is that such a substance (for healing purposes)
has been discovered in the forests of the region that had long been
thought ruined and useless. The Biblical Gilead was also a refuge for
fugitives. Among those who sought refuge in Gilead were Jacob when he
fled before Laban (Gn. 31:21-55), the Israelites who feared the
Philistines in Saul's time (1 Sa. 13:7), Ishbosheth (2 Sa. 2:8-9) and
David during Absalom's revolt (2 Sa. 17:22ff.) 
Gilead provides such a refuge for Percy, a young woman recently
released from prison. She finds healing and purpose in Gilead (although
not without notable obstacles). Ultimately, she loses her life there,
but in the losi
ng, provides a Gilead of her own for some significant others. The old
spiritual goes,  "There is a Balm in Gilead to make the wounded
whole"(Jer 8:22),  and it provides the theme for this grand movie. The
place becomes a haven of hope and healing.  
Some other reasons to attend: The movie is beautifully shot in rural
New England, the acting over all is first-rate, and writer-director Lee
David Zlotoff has brought a wonderful ensemble together of Ellen
Burstyn, Marcia Gay Harden and Alison Elliott. 
And then some new territory too: I am not usually grateful for the long
run of suspense and action dramas that compose such a large portion of
the menu provided by American film makers. The cliche:
"menacing-music-followed-by-bad-things-happening-suddenly" is so
overworked that, like a grouchy cat, I grow weary of being played with,
and so I hiss and huff and hide under the chair. But sometimes I am
grateful because all of those suspense movies and TV shows that torment
us with menacing music as we wait for the sudden horror to bust into
the screen have built a vocabulary and a context for viewing in which a
movie like this one can come along -- and playing off of that context
-- become something all together different. The point is, I don't think
this move works without all of the suspenseful nailbiters to provide a
counter-point. 
But it works well. "Tender Mercies" was like that. Bruce Beresford,
director of "Tender Mercies" and Zlotoff continually serve up
situations that are full of threat which then prove to be innocent or
even helpful. 
It happens this way, (you have learned to see these things coming): It
is about time for the plot to take a twist. Ominous things are afoot.
The sub-terranian music of fore-boding softly growls several layers
deep. A car full of men pulls up or a child steps out into the street
or you see a movement in the shadows. But then, "Fooled 'ya!; it's OK;
no harm intended here; rape, murder, mayhem didn't even cross our
mind." 
Well, we know it is not true but we love the relief. The unsavory
characters smile and don't make any sudden moves; the child simply
makes it to the other side of the street, the man lurking in the trees
proves to be an angel.
This technique works wonderfully well in "Spitfire." The movie is not
without "bad things happening" and there is enough suspense for the
movie to work. But the film does tighten and release its grip on us
repeatedly until we are relaxed and softened up for the occasion when
it does want to really squeeze us.
One last thing: Zlotoff has the courage to have the bad guy of the
movie restored at the end. This is risky film making. Nahum, the
close-minded towny scoundrel  is someone we have found it easy to hate
when the time comes to close the film. And our blood lust would have
been satisfied had he come to a wretched end. But we are not allowed
that catharsis. The man does a righteous thing. And though he is
damaged goods, and though we are reluctant to bless and not curse him,
we see him restored. In addition to being the most accurate
demonstration of the Christian doctrine of grace I have seen in recent
memory, it is one of the most risky film making choices I have
witnessed in a long while. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~sjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
I missed Spitfire Grill when it was out in the theaters, though it
got wildly enthusiastic comments from viewers as diverse as
my daughter and my mother.  So I rented it last night and
really enjoyed the first half of the film.  It's the sort of
movie with almost no surprises, but some of the details are
a hoot, especially the location of the Maine Travel Bureau
operators.
We're introduced to a very young prison inmate named
Percy, played by the remarkable Allison Elliott.  She's
extremely creative and an eager learner, but clearly a person
without much education and a rough past.  Upon her release she's
sent to a small town in what's supposed to be rural Maine.
She goes to work for Hannah, the owner of the Spitfire Grill.
The townspeople are a series of horrific cliches, being so
small-minded they hardly even talk to the young woman, even to
the point of not ordering their meals from her in the grill.
This ludicrous behavior does go away pretty fast, so most of the
first half of the movie or so deals with Percy trying to adjust to
life outside, with Hannah adjusting to Percy and yet another
debilitating injury and with Shelby who comes to help them both.
And the first half of the movie or so is very pleasant and
reasonably-true-to-life, almost like a small British movie.
The script is interesting in that parts of it don't insult the
viewer's intelligence.  Some things happen in the background that
later become very important in the film, but the writer doesn't
feel the need to batter the viewer over the head with them.
So I felt the script had lots of potential, at least in the first 
half.  
There are a few problems with the movie overall, and they probably
never bothered the average viewer, but, being a New Englander, they
bothered me.  The movie is supposed to be set up in rural, central
Maine, somewhere near Lewiston or Bethel.  However, that area tends
to be filled with forests and lakes, and I don't remember so much of it
having been cleared for farms.  It was actually filmed in northeastern
Vermont, probably because rural Maine is just too remote.
So you get some beautiful shots of Vermont countryside, and a
particularly sweeping shot of Lake Willoughby gap (where one
large mountain became two smaller ones back during the last ice age)
in the distance.  Similarly, the accents of almost everyone in the
movie is likewise "grafted on."  Just like rural Vermont and rural Maine
look different, an upstate Maine resident doesn't have the identical
speech patterns of an upstate Vermonter.  Its the sort of thing
that it's better to just let the folks speak without any accent at
all than to force them to sound so unnatural.
But these are kind of minor things that no one noticed.
The acting, especially of the women in this picture, is quite good,
so there's plenty to hold your interest.
However, what surprises me is that no one ever
mentioned the gross misogyny that permeates almost every
frame of the last third of this film. The Catholic Church, 
a major financier of this film, has shown once again how much 
it really has a major problem with how it treats women.
I remember hearing a church representative talk about how
life-affirming this movie is.  Hardly.  The movie goes absolutely
out of its way to promote the "woman as martyr" image.
The first hint of the kind of sick direction this movie was going
take was in Percy's reaction to a man named Joe.  Joe took a shine
to her and asks her out, takes her for walks, etc.  Percy seems to
like him, but doesn't want to get too close.  Finally, Joe asks her
to marry him.  She turns him down because he wants children and
she can't have them.  He says he doesn't care about that, but she's
adamant.  
Hannah is very bitter about her son who went to Viet Nam and
didn't come back.  Well, at least on the surface.  It's clear her
son went AWOL and is hiding and its Hannah's insufferable pride
and the small town memories of her husband's valor in WW II
that helps keep her son away from the help he so obviously needs.
He's kind of a Bo-Radleyesque character, but this is the '90s
not the '30s so keeping the son "a secret" just seems wrong.
And then there's Nahum, Shelby's husband and Hannah's nephew.
He's a quietly viscious man who is nasty to Shelby and to Percy.
He's supposed to have "redeemed" himself at the end of the movie
by owning up to one terrible wrong he committed, but the
scene was just terribly awkward.
And there's the situation that landed Percy in prison. Near the
end of the movie, she tells Shelby her story. She was
sexually abused by her stepfather and made pregnant by him she she
was 16.  Since this movie was financed by the Catholic Church,
she, naturally, loves the baby of the man who raped her, and is
devastated when he beats her so badly that she looses the baby and
her ability to ever have children again.  She is kidnapped out of
the hospital by this man and kills him in self defense.  You
have to ask yourself what kind of incompetent lawyer did she have,
that landed her in jail for even 30 seconds much less five years
for manslaughter.
As you might have guessed by now, Percy dies by the end of the movie
in trying to warn the AWOL son that the police are trying to find him
because they think she gave him money "she stole" from Hannah.
And the lesson the town learns is to be nice to strange women who
come to Gilead to attempt to have a new start at life.
This picture COULD have been life-affirming if only it hadn't sunk
to so much misongyny and melodrama.  It's not so obvious as
those movie that promote violence against women, but it's almost
more insidious.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Alison Elliott, Ellen Burstyn, Marcia Gay Harden, Will Patton,
Kieran Mulroney.
Screenplay:  Lee David Zlotoff.
Director:  Lee David Zlotoff.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The notoriously sap-averse Hollywood insiders at this year's Sundance
Film Festival went absolutely nuts over THE SPITFIRE GRILL, resulting in a
bidding war which found Castle Rock paying a head-spinning $10 million to
distribute an independent film.  Maybe they smelled a female-appeal hit
like FRIED GREEN TOMATOES; maybe they liked the idea of countering the
Hollywood filth-monger mentality by supporting a film produced by clergy;
maybe, just maybe, they were genuinely touched by the story.  Whatever the
reason, they have themselves a film which doesn't just jerk tears -- it
slaps, kicks, pinches and pleads for them.  THE SPITFIRE GRILL may be
positive and uplifting, but it is so aggressive in the pursuit of your
sympathy that it becomes exhausting.
     THE SPITFIRE GRILL stars Alison Elliott as Percy Talbott, a young
woman just released after five years in a Maine prison and looking for a
fresh start in life.  That search brings her to the small town of Gilead,
where she goes to work at The Spitfire Grill for Hannah Ferguson (Ellen
Burstyn), a feisty widow recovering from a hip injury.  Hannah has been
trying -- unsuccessfully -- to sell the grill for many years, which leads
Percy to suggest an essay/raffle contest to give it away.  Most of the
townspeople are suspicious of Percy's motives, including Hannah's nephew
Nahum (Will Patton), but Percy still manages to make some unlikely
friends, including Nahum's timid wife Shelby (Marcia Gay Harden) and a
mysterious figure who lives in the woods.  Still, it is difficult for
Percy to escape a past which she is reluctant to discuss but which Nahum
is intent on discovering.
     On its most basic level, THE SPITFIRE GRILL is yet another in a long
line of films about benevolent strangers who teach intransigent folks a
lesson in tolerance, and again the lead character is perhaps the most
troubled, but not really the character who grows and changes.  Alison
Elliott is the best thing about THE SPITFIRE GRILL, a talented young
actress who turns in strong and emotional work as Percy, a woman who is
just as unable to forgive herself as others are to forgive her.  She is
the sympathetic core of the film, and we grow to care about whether she
will be able to find redemption.  Unfortunately, we never get to see her
experience that redemption, and it is something of a cheat.  It is never
nearly as important to us that Hannah makes peace with her demons, or that
Nahum learns to be accepting, or that any particular person ends up with
the grill, but those are the only scraps we are tossed to give THE
SPITFIRE GRILL any sense of consequence.
     In place of consequence, writer/director Lee David Zlotoff provides a
film which often feels like a string of feel-good cliches, scored by James
Horner, the master of feel-good cliche music.  Zlotoff never misses the
opportunity to send out scenes like tear-seeking missiles, scenes which
might have been effective individually but en masse serve only to batter
you insensible.  For the record, THE SPITFIRE GRILL includes an abusive
husband to boo, a story about an abusive stepfather to feel outraged over,
a story about a troubled Vietnam veteran to feel sorry for, three
different stories about lost children to sob over, three different
wrenching tales from the essay contest to sob over some more, one
mother-and-child reunion to sob over still more, a wedding proposal to
feel warm and fuzzy over, a funeral oration for moral uplift and a scene
of a once near-catatonic man emerging into the sunlight to provoke
unintentional snickers.  If my description seems cruelly cynical, it is
only because THE SPITFIRE GRILL numbs you with its pathos.  In its own
way, it is just as shallow as an action film which is just one explosion
after another.
     The story goes that THE SPITFIRE GRILL was "commissioned" by a
collective of Catholic priests who wanted to back a film with "positive
human values," and I suppose you could say that they got what they
ordered.  Everyone in Gilead eventually Does the Right Thing, and it is
the kind of film which will probably end up on Bob Dole's Hit Parade.  But
in the course of injecting those human values, Lee David Zlotoff didn't
bother to inject many human beings -- Gilead, Maine and nearly everyone in
it (particularly the terminally irrascible Hannah) seems plucked from a
Pepperidge Farm commercial.  Alison Elliott's performance is strong enough
that, for a while, you might think THE SPITFIRE GRILL is about something,
but it isn't about people whose troubles make you emotional.  It's more of
an endurance contest between you and your supply of facial tissues.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE SPITFIRE GRILL is a sometimes delightful, but all too often
disappointing fable.  At its best, it is a morality tale with some
touching characters and a magical setting.  I hate to report that the
directing and the script by Lee David Zlotoff is uneven and
unconvincing.  THE SPITFIRE GRILL serves to both mesmerize and to
frustrate its audience.  This is a shame since at its heart it is such
a sweet little story.  I should say that I never found the movie overly
sentimental for which it has been so heavily criticized.  It has also
become a needlessly controversial film in the press, but more on that
later in the review.
     Talented actress Alison Elliott plays inmate Percy Talbot.  Percy
is one of the women in the Maine Tourist Information Bureau's phone
bank in the prison.  Percy is just finishing up her time for murder,
and the warden has arranged for her to get a job in the small and
busybody town of Gilead, Maine.  This a cliched little village where
everybody maintains the right to know and comment on everyone else's
business.  I am not sure if towns like this actually exist, but it is
easy enough to suspend disbelief and assume that they do.
     As Percy approaches Gilead, it is a quintessential Normal Rockwell
hamlet.  Bathed in the evening glow of Robert Draper's cinematography
is clump of houses and a white church with the canonical tall steeple.
James Horner's (APOLLO 13 and BRAVEHEART) music is mystical - full of
flutes and harps.  Thus is the audience set up for a deeply felt and
moving cinematic experience which this pictures only partially
fulfills.
     Percy goes to work at the SPITFIRE GRILL owned and operated by
senior citizen Hannah Ferguson (Ellen Burstyn).  Burstyn plays the only
completely developed character and is the only actor who delivers an
entirely convincing performance.  This is a role that is usually done
with gushing sentimentality.  Here Burstyn transforms her character
into a tough old bird with more resilience than heart.  Typical of this
is when she tells her nephew and the picture's poorly cast villain
Nahum Goddard (Will Patton) that "Until I forget my name or start
drooling at the mouth, I'll thank you to let me make my own decisions."
     Joe Sperling (Kieran Mulroney) stops by one day at the grill and
begins to fall for Percy.  Since she claims to be from Ohio, but has a
strong and vaguely Southern accent, he tells her, "You sound like
you're from the South."  She mysteriously informs him that, "Things
ain't always what they sound."
     In a supporting role full of rarely realized potential Marcia Gay
Harden plays Nahum's wife Shelby.  She goes to work at the grill to
help Percy when it is discovered that Percy's cooking is inedible.
Shelby and Percy band together as friends against adversity.  Harden's
acting range consists of various sad smiles.
     Perpetually morose Percy keeps describing herself as being poor
white trash.  If she is, then she gives poor white trash a good name.
She works hard in the grill and even develops a scheme to help Hannah
finally sell the grill which she has been attempting to do for the last
ten years.  Other than her smoking and the slight problem of having
killed someone, of course with good reason, Percy is close to
sainthood.  She even helps out the mysterious homeless person that
appears late every night.
     In case, you haven't realized it by now, this movie is bursting at
the seams with mysteries.  A few are interesting, but most are lame.
In the characterizations of Hannah and Percy is where the show comes
alive and demands to be seen.  The other ingredients serve only to bog
down a promising story.
     As the movie gets to full steam in the middle, the music and the
cinematography open up.  They move from the mystical beginnings to
settings and sounds of grandeur.  By the end of the film they come full
circle and are back to the intimate.  Both of these technical elements
of the picture work well.
     The ending is one of my favorite parts of the film.  It follows
the more hard hitting aspects of the premise of the movie that so often
gets lost in its development.  Suffice it to say, that it is not your
typical happy ending.
     Before I close, I must comment on all of the controversy in the
press surrounding the funding of the film.  The shocking truth is that
some Catholic nuns provided some of the money.  They were looking to
find a picture with morals that they approved of, and this film had
them.  Why this causes people such anguish, I have no idea.  In film
after film Hollywood ridicules religion and the church.  If you see
someone in religious robes in a movie, you immediately begin to suspect
him since most scripts have him be a killer, a child molester, an
alcoholic or run a cult.  THE SPITFIRE GRILL avoids discussions of
religion and the only church in town is abandoned so the pro-religious
aspects of this picture are dramatically less than anti-religious ones
of most other films.
     THE SPITFIRE GRILL runs a little long at 1:57.  It is rated PG-13,
but why is beyond me.  This film such be PG at most since there is no
sex, nudity, or violence although it does have a tragedy.  The picture
has a single and mild cuss word, and it teaches good morals to kids.
It would be fine for any kid old enough to be interested in it.
Although there is much to admire, THE SPITFIRE GRILL is not fully
developed enough for me to be able to recommend it.  It gets ** from
me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
