Title
Review for Rocketeer, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Jeff Meyer
     When we entered the San Diego Con Thursday, I noticed a hastily-scrawled
note on the events chalkboard discussing the "Rocketeer Movie."  I was
intrigued by this, since I had heard nothing about any adaptation of Dave
Stevens' characters (a wayward young pilot in the late 1930s who unwittingly
gains a jet-pack that allows him to fly, for those of you who don't read
rec.arts.comics) for film.  At first I thought it might be animated, which was
slightly amusing since Stevens (whose art in THE ROCKETEER has gained him a
great deal of renown) is not known to be the most speedy of pencilers.  Anyway,
Kathy Li and I stopped by and took a look; Stevens and two of the screenwriters
for the proposed film were there to talk about it.
     Basically it would be a live-action period adventure picture, set very
closely to the plot of the Rocketeer graphic novel, though not exactly adapting
it.  It has (after being taken around to several studios over the last two
years) almost been picked up by Disney; they're looking for something in the
"Indiana Jones" area, and feel that the Rocketeer could be just as popular (and
have just as many popular sequels -- so do I, if they can get people to really
capture the period, as Stevens does in his work).  "They want to market this as
much as possible -- a Rocketeer ride at DisneyLand."  Disney is "about the
fattest company around" (i.e. they're making good profits via Touchstone and
Buena Vista), so they can supply the needed budget.  They say a director, the
fellow who did HARRY AND THE HENDERSONS ("Bill Geer"?  -- my tape recorder
didn't do so well in this session) has been picked, and it's close to being
finalized.  It needs to be fairly big-budget, since it's a period piece, they
want the old airplanes (they want the "Gee Bee" very badly -- Dave knows where
there's one in Springfield, IL) for the flying sequences, and of course a
Flying Man with a Rocket On His Back (the last flying sequence is *inside* a
building -- neat idea).  They really want it to look like Superman in the old
Fleisher cartoons -- "like he has velocity and mass, not like the old Commander
Cody and the Rangers of the Stratosphere."  As they point out, this film *is*
about flying more than anything else, and so this will have to be a very strong
point.
     The two screenwriters are apparently working very closely with Stevens --
in fact, they're scripting the next two issues of THE ROCKETEER ADVENTURE
MAGAZINE (with Cliff working for The Shadow in New York).  It sounds as if the
three of them have been working together to get the picture made, and Stevens
feels that whatever makes THE ROCKETEER so popular in comics will be carried
over to the picture (at least by the script).  Someone asked if the in-joke in
the comic about the jet-pack's creator (it's "revealed" to be Howard Hughes,
but Hughes and his assistants are certainly meant to be Doc Savage and his
aides) will simply be made to be Hughes (let's face it, most moviegoers
wouldn't get the joke).  J. Edgar Hoover is chasing Cliff around for the
jet-pack, and the villain is a quasi-Errol Flynn character that plays off the
rumors that Flynn was a Nazi (much like Chaykin did in the BLACKHAWK series).
The sequence with Cliff rescuing the old rummy in the plane with the jet-pack
has been taken straight out of the movie.
     Speaking of what makes THE ROCKETEER so popular: Betty (Cliff's pin-up
girl obsession that Stevens has rendered so memorably).   She'll be an
voluptuous, aspiring actress who doesn't act very well -- "Well, it won't be
Merryl Streep."  They'd like Matthew Modine to play Cliff, but the director
apparently likes Bruce Campbell (sp?) who was in EVIL DEAD II.  There's also a
character in the movie that they'll be introducing in the comix series very
soon.
     One interesting side story about all of this:  Warren Beatty is starring,
producing and possibly directing as -- get this -- Dick Tracy.  Whoever's hired
him was talking a budget of $25 million, but Beatty is promised to get $11
million out of the deal.   Be nice to see him go after Bonnie and Clyde...  :-)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     What better childhood fantasy than flying with a rocket strapped
to your back?  In 1991, Disney developed that idea into a movie called
THE ROCKETEER.
     The highly atmospheric script by Danny Bilson, Paul De Meo,
William Dear, and Dave Stevens is set in a glitzy Hollywood just before
the outbreak of World War II.  A happy-go-lucky time, full of lavish
nightclubs and barnstorming aviators.
     The gist of the story is that Howard Hughes (Terry O'Quinn) has
invented a personal rocket backpack, but a Mafia group led by Eddie
Valentine (Paul Sorvino) is trying to steal it.  They make off with the
rocket, during the getaway it is switched with an Electro-Lux vacuum
cleaner by mistake.
     The real rocket pack comes into the possession of ace pilot Cliff
Secord (Bill Campbell) and his older mentor Peevy (Alan Arkin).  Once
he flies with it, Cliff becomes known as "The Rocketeer."
     Cliff is head over heels in love with Jenny Blake (Jennifer
Connelly), who is an extra in a movie with famous actor Neville
Sinclair (Timothy Dalton).  Neville turns out to be a Nazi spy who has
been bankrolling Valentine and his boys to steal the rocket pack for
the fatherland.  Hitler has plans to use rocket packs to send a swarm
of soldiers to attack the United States.
     Marilyn Vance-Straker's costumes for Cliff are a delightful
reinterpretation of those worn by Buck Rogers.  The sets by James D.
Bissell capture a glamour that probably never existed except in our
minds.  James Horner's music stays energetic and sugary sweet.  One
gets the sense that all of the cast and crew viewed the film as a romp.
     In good BUCK ROGERS fashion, which is the series the show most
closely resembles, logic goes out the window.  Anyone wearing the
rocket would have a barbecued rear and legs.  The illogical aspects are
not germane since the story stays totally in Fantasyland.
     The problem with the film is that it is nothing more than an
exercise in whimsical style.  Nothing in the narrative is compelling.
In place of a story we have antics.
     Typical of the slapstick is the scene in which Cliff straps on the
jets for the first-time in order to rescue a clown who is attempting to
fly an airplane.  Cliff goes through all of the canonical gags
including shooting out-of-control through a clothesline of freshly
washed clothes.  Of course, a sheet gets stuck on his face almost
causing him to crash.  In another scene, there is a race through a
crowded restaurant kitchen, and the mayhem causes the obligatory flying
food.  One gets tired of recycled comedy.  Still the scenes of soaring
with the rocket are great fun, and they are fresh.  Well, fresh if you
are too old to remember early science fiction movies.
     The biggest failing of the film is the casting of the lead.  It is
easy to see why Bill Campbell has never been given an important movie
role before or since.  Campbell has no personality so his acting
detracts from instead of enhancing Cliff's persona.  Arkin, Dalton, and
Connelly give nice performances, but all have done much better work.
     Director Joe Johnson seems happy to let the actors in the film
drift just so long as the atmosphere stays completely nostalgic.
Exercises in style like this are rarely enough for adults, although
they can be enough to satisfy younger viewers.  But not too young since
Tommy guns blast everywhere, and scores of people die in the film.  A
particularly frightening scene has a guy with his face forced against a
hot range.  Nevertheless, the picture keeps its violence mainly at the
cartoon level.  And the acting too.
     THE ROCKETEER runs 1:48.  It is rated PG although given the level
of violence, PG-13 might have been more appropriate.  The film should
be fine for most kids say 7 or 8 and up, but be careful if they are
sensitive to violence.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, thought the movie was
"good."  His favorite part was The Rocketeer whom he would probably
love to be.  There is not enough for me to be able to recommend the
movie.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Enrique Conty
[Follow-ups directed to rec.arts.movies.  -Moderator]
    The casting was great, especially Timothy Dalton as the utterly
villainous Oil Can Harry ... err, Neville Sinclair.  Howard Hughes
(actor?)  and Cliff Secord (Bill Campbell) looked just like they should.
Jenny (Jennifer Connely) *did* look like Betty Page ... from the neck
down.  Wowzers!
    But enough pig-chauvinist sexist remarks.  On to the FX.  The flying
scenes were pure Hollywood magic, and a treat to the senses involved.
I'm still trying to figure out just how did they do the scene where the
rocketpack goes in flames behind, around, and all over Neville (if
you've seen it, you know what I mean).  One thing I didn't like a bit
was Neville's giant hitman.  The makeup job was so atrocious he couldn't
even talk right!
    Some things that I didn't like at all:
- The flag scene.  Why does every recent superhero movie thinks it needs
  a cutesy scene where the main character looks a zillion times
  larger-than-life?
- The scene near the end (you know it if you've seen it) which literally
  screams "SEQUEL!!" back atcha.  Pfeh.
    The plot is *very* different from the graphic novel, but it still
managed to capture the "feel" of the 1930 serials, which was the novel's
strong point to begin with.  There were a couple of corny and downright
campy bits (the animated Nazi propaganda film that ended with "Today
Europe, Tomorrow The World" being a perfect example), but overall it
"clicked".  One scene to add to rec.arts.movies' "perfect movie moments"
discussion is the scene where the balsa "Spruce Goose" model glides away
into the night...
    Overall, I think the movie is worth the six bucks to watch in a
first-run cinema.  Very good stuff.
P.S.  What was the aspect ratio for this film?  Either I've got
astigmatism or it was more than 1:2.

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1991) ****1/2 - C:Alan Arkin, Bill Campbell, Jennifer Connelly, Timothy
Dalton, Paul Sorvino, Terry O'Quinn.
Parents who complain about the lack of quality family movies each year
should all be slapped. Every year, Hollywood gives them one or two films
with exactly what they ask for, and then they don't go! "The Rocketeer" is a
perfect example. It's a great film for the whole family and yet it bombed at
the box office.
The story takes place in the 1940's. Campbell stars as a pilot who stumbles
across a single person jet pack built by Howard Hughes (O'Quinn). The
government wants to get their hands on it to use it against the Nazis, and
the Nazis want the jet pack to use against the world. Campbell's best friend
Peevy (Arkin) constructs a helmet with a rudder on it and Campbell
reluctantly tests the jet pack to save a friend in need at an air show. The
papers, on hand for the show, all witness a flying man and name him The
Rocketeer. Campbell's girlfriend (the gorgeous Jennifer Connelly) is later
kidnapped by an Errol Flynn-type actor (Dalton) who happens to be a nazi spy
and also wants the jet pack.
The film has a great cast, especially Alan Arkin, who has yet to give a bad
performance on film. My only reason for not giving the film a perfect rating
is because one of the thugs in the film is this big mutant thing which looks
like a leftover from the cast of Warren Beatty's "Dick Tracy". That's just
too silly to overlook. "The Rocketeer" has a rousing musical score and
overall, it's just a simple, fun, entertaining family movie.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[Follow-ups directed to rec.arts.movies.  -Moderator]
     I recognize that there are some films that it is hard for me to be
objective about and all I can do is state my prejudices at the beginning of
my review.  I think I was about five years old when Saturday morning
television ran COMMANDO CODY, SKY MARSHALL OF THE UNIVERSE.  At five years
of age I decided that I really liked something I later learned to call
"science fiction" and everything I have ever really been interested in since
has been an out-branching from that root.  For years, I dreamed of somehow
getting a rocket suit like Commando Cody's.  Not being a graphic novel fan,
I never heard of THE ROCKETEER, released ten years ago.  However, seeing the
stand-up poster for THE ROCKETEER several months ago brought a flood of
memories and I knew even then this was a film that I would have a hard time
being objective about.  And the film turned out to be much better than I
expected even then.
     The setting is 1934 Los Angeles.  The title character is Cliff Secord,
played a bit too callow and pure by Bill Campbell.  Secord is a flying ace
who, through rather contrived circumstances, comes into possession of a
stolen rocket suit designed by Howard Hughes (played by Terry O'Quinn).
Lots of people want this suit for lots of different reasons, but it is
Secord who has the suit and who reluctantly lets it make him into a
superhero.  The main villain who wants to get his slimey hands on the suit
is handsome film star Neville Sinclair, a character based on allegations
that have been made about Errol Flynn.  Sinclair is played by Timothy
Dalton.  The basic plot is very basic and is a negative aspect of the film.
     But while the plot is pretty humdrum, much of the writing is not.  Like
David Mamet's "Water Engine," THE ROCKETEER ties together many pieces of
1930s and 1940s popular culture into a single story.  For little details to
throw into the story, THE ROCKETEER draws heavily on Hollywood icons, on
then-contemporary world events, and on details of aviation history.  Through
Rick Baker's make-up we get one final film in which Rondo Hatton plays the
heavy.  There is a witty reference to the famous Hollywood sign over
Hollywood.  There are allusions to the Hindenburg, here called the
Luxembourg.  As a rather canny inside joke, a small piece of animation is
done in the style used in Frank Capra's "Why We Fight" films.  The joke is
that Capra's animation, like the film THE ROCKETEER, was a product of Disney
Studios.  And of course there are the classic planes of the period, provided
in part by the heavy involvement of Howard Hughes as a major character.
Also we see the classic art deco and just plain weird Los Angeles
architecture.  For example, the Bulldog Diner is shaped like a giant
bulldog.  The flying suit itself is art deco.  All these elements combine to
make a fascinatingly detailed film that constantly challenges the viewer
with more than meets the eye.
     Special effects are charmingly provided by Industrial Light and Magic.
They are generally fairly good with the ironic exception of the flying suit
sequences, which are not quite visually believable and which would in real
life rip our rocket man apart with whiplash.  The script's weak points are
the occasional lapses into self-satire, the overly complex interrelations of
the villains, and a sequence in a nightclub that drags on much too long.
With those exceptions, one has to say that THE ROCKETEER is a very nicely
crafted film offering entertainment on many levels.  This is one of those
rare films you can truly say the whole family should enjoy.  I give it a
high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     I dragged my husband and child off the the sneak preview of THE
ROCKETEER on Saturday, and I was very glad I did (even though I didn't
get a commemorative button).
     THE ROCKETEER is sort of a slower-moving Indy Jones movie with time
for a little character development and things like that.  The action
scenes are superb, and the performances are good.  And there are so many
little extras in this movie, I'm not sure where to begin.
     There's a thug in this movie who's the living image of Rondo
Hatton, a character actor who always played thugs in 1940s B-movies.  The
movie has much of the structure of a 1930s or 1940s movie, with heroic
heroes, villainous villains, an over-interest in the doings of
Hollywood, and a fancy restaurant scene with singing and dancing.  There
are "appearances" by folks like Clark Gable, W. C. Fields, Howard Hughes,
and other characters of the era.  Timothy Dalton gives a perfect
performance as an Errol Flynn-like actor with a penchant for over-acting.
And Jennifer Connelly has matured significantly since she played the
Dorothy-like character in LABYRINTH.
     This movie is solid and extremely enjoyable.  While there's some
sexual innuendo in the movie and some character endangerment,  I think
most kids over about 7 would like it (I think it's rated PG).  It was
also a pleasure to see Alan Arkin in a film---where the hell has he been
lately???  The lead actor is amiable enough as the Rocketeer, but I
can't say he gave the sort of performance that Harrison Ford did in the
Indy movies.  While he maybe could have used a charisma transplant, he
was okay.  (Besides, if we still need charisma, we can go see Kevin
Costner this weekend!!)
     I disagree strongly with the earlier poster who compared this film
to BATMAN (and the poster didn't like BATMAN either).  BATMAN was a film
where style triumphed over all.  THE ROCKETEER never quite lets style
overtake a very compressed story.
     This is a solid 7 on the Chuck scale.  Absolutely worth your time,
and a movie you can take your kids to (even if they did have a preview
of TERMINATOR II which featured full sidal nudity of Arne!)

Author
Olivia Williamson
[Follow-ups directed to rec.arts.movies.  -Moderator]
     I, too, saw the ROCKETEER preview on Saturday.  From the early 
publicity and summaries I heard, this could have been a really awful
movie.  Fortunately, Disney resisted the temptation to try and make this
a summer blockbuster, and just a made a nice, entertaining film with
adventure, romance, humor, and not too much violence.
     It doesn't begin with a bang -- you kind of segue into the movie.  
Actually, the first fifteen minutes or so strongly resembles the IMAX
film "Flyers" which had some great scenic shots, but no plot.
Fortunately, Rocketeer *does* develop a plot.  We meet our Hero and his
pals, and are then introduced to the Love Interest (Jennifer Connelly,
who is a good choice for the looks of the late 30's, and actually plays
a fairly strong character).  Interspersed with this, we learn of the
Conflict, which is the "rocket" of the title which has been stolen by
the bad guys.
     The plot is hardly unique (in fact, I think it has a lot of
similarities with the first Indiana Jones movie: a little bit lower-key,
maybe), but it is well-developed, and has some nice twists -- who exactly
the bad guys are and why is not divulged until fairly late in the game,
and is a satisfying discovery.  There are nicely handled humourous
touches throughout, and some in-jokes for Disney freaks (that aren't
obviously in-jokes).
     The costuming was very well done, and they were very careful at 
recreating a big-band dance floor/musician's stand/Hollywood night-spot
of the 30's location.  The music wasn't too exciting, but wasn't
detracting.
     "Our Hero" gave a reasonable performance (although now I can't
remember his name), but he had that River Phoenix hairdo we saw on young
Indy in THE LAST CRUSADE which I found irritating.  Jennifer Connelly
gave a good performance of a fairly strong character -- and I think she's
really pretty.  Timothy Dalton plays an older Hollywood actor, of the
Errol Flynn type -- I think it was a much better performance than we saw
from him in the James Bond movies.  Unfortunately, he resembles a bit to
closely Terry O'Quinn, who plays Howard Hughes -- not the weirded-out
recluse we associate the name with, but a capable engineer and director
of a major company.  Anyway, this resemblance can be a little confusing
at first, but it soon clears up.
     I think it's a strong film, and both the kids and the adults in the
audiuence really enjoyed it.  Comic-book type machine-gun shooting, but 
not many people get hurt.  No strong language, no nudity -- it's under the 
Disney label, so I think they wanted to keep it moderate.  I think it's 
probably the best live-action film they've done in quite some time, and I 
hope they can make more in the same vein.  Do go see it when it comes out
in two weeks -- I probably will.
