Title
Review for Turn It Up (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
Small-time drug dealer Diamond (Pras from the rap group The Fugees) has 
aspirations.  He  wants to trade in his life of guns and drugs for a 
music contract.  "I want to be legitimate," he says earnestly to his 
music manager and fellow coke-dealer, Gage, played by real-life 
hip-hopper Ja Rule.  "I want to earn some respect."
An admitted perfectionist when it comes to creating his sound, Diamond 
has a much more flexible attitude when it comes to ethics.  Using his 
shiny guns, he is happy to waste anyone gets in his way.  But even he 
has limits.  The morality test that separates the men from the boys or, 
in case of TURN IT UP, the vicious killers from the really vicious 
killers, involves an innocent, Spanish-speaking, pregnant woman who 
witnesses Diamond and Gage murdering a bunch of other dealers.  In a 
minor moral moment, Diamond insists that Gage let her go.  One wonders 
what was it that tipped the scales in her favor.  Would the pregnancy 
alone have been enough?  Probably not, since Diamond argues with Gage 
that not only is she pregnant but, since she doesn't speak English, she 
couldn't turn them in.
Even if the script by the director, Robert Adetuyi doesn't work as a 
morality tale, it does form the basis for some interesting set pieces to 
demonstrate Adetuyi's skills in staging scenes.  Handsomely lit and shot 
by cinematographer Hubert Taczanowski, the movie is a real treat for the 
eyes.  Your ears, however, may complain that there's little for them.  
When the actors aren't speaking, they strut upon the stage with 
impressive verve.  But when they start reading their lines, you realize 
how vacuous the script is.  Even ignoring its propensity for non-stop 
profanity, there is little to admire about it.  With miniscule plot and 
character development, the script leaves the visuals to carry the movie.  
And that's asking for some pretty heavy lifting.
Well, Diamond is a freedom-loving man who refuses even to give his 
girlfriend his cell phone number, equating that to the umbilical cord 
that once bound men to their mothers.  Gage has a succinct statement of 
human desires.  He says that all we want is "money, drugs and hos."  
Gage is aghast when a big record producer named Mr. White -- yes, he is 
-- wants to hear a demo tape before hiring Diamond.  The audacity!
This much can be said.  After enduring many ugly bad movies, I, for one, 
appreciate having a bad movie that it is at least handsomely filmed and 
competently directed.  
TURN IT UP runs 1:23.  It is rated R for strong violence, language and 
some drug content and would be acceptable for high school seniors and 
older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
How would you like to be elected king for a day?  The enormously
talented Ice Cube paved the way for chart-topping rap stars to become
media moguls, running his own music and film production company.  His
explosive talent and shrewd business sense made his success look easy. 
Wow!  Anyone can do this!  The market soon became flooded with rap
artists vying for movie stardom, not to mention creative control.  Most
of the stories revolve around familiar "urban gangsta" elements such as
tough-talking badasses with flashy threads, fast cars, nickel-plated
revolvers and beautiful hoochie-mamas.  In sum, well-photographed vanity
projects that make the stars feel cool.
Case in point: international sensation Pras co-produced and stars in
Turn It Up.  It's about, what else, a young man's struggle to escape his
life of crime.  Redemption is the order of the day.  Diamond (Pras) is a
talented hip-hop performer who harbors big dreams of cutting his own
record, but can't afford the inflated costs of studio time.  His
mercurial loose cannon of a best friend, Gage (Billboard chart-topper Ja
Rule), wants to lend a helping hand, stealing $10,000 from an ill-fated
drug runner.  Unfortunately, the money financing Diamond's career
belongs to a vicious British gangster (Jason Stratham, Snatch, good even
when he's coasting) who suddenly takes an interest in stealing the
rights to Diamond's record.  Things sure are heating up around here.
Just in case we get bored with itemized record deal negotiations, there
are a few back alley drug deals that go sour.  Ha!  Are there any other
kind?  Messrs. Pras and Rule are given ample opportunity to pop off
several rounds of ammo in dramatic slow motion.  John Woo's
"two-guns-at-once" are combined with Quentin Tarantino's
"point-the-gun-diagonally," since those techniques seemed to work well
in other, better films.  There's plenty of shattering glass -- can't
have a shootout without some shattering glass!  The rhythm and pacing
resemble a lazy and inconsiderate lover, unimaginatively going through
the motions.
Lest all this gunplay reinforce a negative image of the black community,
there's an after-school special subplot involving Diamond's girlfriend
(Tamala Jones).  She's pregnant.  Will Diamond accept the responsibility
of being a father, or choose to pursue his music career?  On cue, his
long-lost pop (Vondie Curtis-Hall, Eve's Bayou) shows up with sage
advice: Do the right thing, son.
During the dramatic "brother's keeper" scenes between Pras and Ja Rule,
Manhattan's skyline looms in the distance.  It's all about having a
spectacular background, no?  The two leads carry on with self-conscious
intensity, performing as expected.  They can't act, but they have
charisma to burn with obligatory thousand yard stares and solemn
affirmations of loyalty and respect.  These rap sensations only come
alive during their one live performance midway through Turn It Up,
finally living up to the title as they bust their moves in a club (or is
it an abandoned aircraft hangar -- all the better for a tie-in music
video).
Turn It Up isn't a bad film, content to be merely sluggish and generic. 
Projects like this don't feel scripted -- they're packaged, complete
with a hot soundtrack.  I'll bet it made for a swell looking deal memo. 
If anything is to be learned from Ice Cube's success, it is not that rap
stars make bankable pictures.  Cube brought his own distinct, original
voice to Friday and The Player's Club, stories only indirectly related
to the hood.  He has an ear for vivid dialogue and seems carefully
selective of his cast and crew.  To date, he's been the only filmmaker
smart enough to place the explosive comic Bernie Mac (The Original Kings
of Comedy) in a lead role.
Audiences have responded to Ice Cube's material over his contemporaries
because he takes calculated risks.  The result is something fresh and
new, and the masses thrive on fresh and new when the studios quake in
fear at the thought of pushing the envelope.  (Even when those films
make tons of money -- I cite The Matrix and The Silence of the Lambs as
world heavyweight champions of this theory.)  Turn It Up never aspires
to be more than an excuse for Pras and Ja Rule to flash their
ultra-sleek MTV fashions for 90 minutes.  With trends seemingly changing
every week, the public is fickle.  It's a safe bet there's another urban
hip-hop drama being hustled through production even as you read this
review.  Watch out, Pras - your 15 minutes are almost up.
http://www.turnitupmovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    If you want to know how Blacks have been treated by
Whites in the music industry, you'd look for a revival of
August Wilson's play, "Ma Rainey"s Black Bottom," set in
1927 in a rundown recording studio in Chicago.  The drama
involves a White owner of a recording company and her
White manager plus Ma Rainey, a legendary blues singer
who is due to cut new sides of old favorites.  The play won
the prestigious New York Drama Critics Circle Award for its
portrayal of rage, racism, and the self-hate that racism and
exploitation breeds.
   If you want to know how stupid a movie can be, take in
"Turn It Up," Robert Adetuyi's lame attempt to expose, in
part, the roadblocks faced by an excellent hip-hop artist when
the only way he sees to raise the money needed to cut an
album is to take part reluctantly in criminal activities with 
his manager.
   A film with zero crossover appeal and limited allure even for
the targeted audience of boyz in the 'hood, "Turn It Up" plays
through every cliche imaginable with its clunky dialogue
highlighting a basically good guy, Diamond (Pras) who lives
in Brooklyn's East New York projects and hopes for a debut
CD that will break him out.  He is aided by his old friend
Gage (Ja-Rule), who is such a great buddy that anything
he might steal, any influence he might have, he is willing to
use for the benefit of his pal.  Since Diamond is aware of his
friend's devotion, he is willing to be dragged into Gage's
world of drug dealing, robbing, even tolerating the man's
murders.
   This good-friend bad-friend cliche--most recently used in
the arthouse movie "Orfeu" about a great musician who
remains devoted to his old drug-dealing buddy in the Brazilian
favelas of Rio--is just the beginning of the overdone motifs. 
Diamond's dad (Vondie Curtis Hall) wants to set his son
straight, but he's a flawed character as well having
abandoned the family some time back.  There's more. 
Diamond has a girl friend (Tamala Jones), who, like Dad, is
lobbying to put her man on the straight-and-narrow path but--
all together now--SHE'S PREGNANT!  What's a poor guy gonna
do?
   Filmed in New York and Toronto, "Turn It Up" does not
even enjoy an exotic Caribbean locale as did another turkey,
Chris Browne's "Third World Cop," and it sure as heck has
no-one who possesses the charisma that Sam Jackson gives
to the sizzling remake of "Shaft."  If anything will draw the
targeted audience, the special ingredient would be the
prominence of Prakazrel Pras Michel, a Haitian-American
rapper from the group called The Fugees, and Ja Rule, from
the group Cash Money Click.  Of course the soundtrack is
loaded with hip-hop performed by such artists as Tasha
Scott, D-Fuse and Rapper Noyd while the dialogue is equally
freighted with "shut the f*** up" and the like.
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Turn_It_Up_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
        Another day, another urban drama starring rappers with acting
aspirations.  The latest entry, _Turn_It_Up_, offers nothing that hasn't
been seen nor heard before--lots of gunplay, beatings, drug and alcohol
abuse, all to a hip-hop soundtrack.  But it is distinctive in a most
dubious sense--this is perhaps the worst film of its kind to see a
theatrical release.
        Mind you, this isn't the worst rapper-starring urban drama ever
made; it doesn't quite reach the depths plumbed by the direct-to-video
projects produced by and featuring Ice-T.  But _Turn_It_Up_ is pretty
awful in its own respect.  Scripter-director Robert Adetuyi put in very
little thought to the plot, which plays into the common perception that
the rap music business is dirty and violence-riddled.  Diamond (Pras,
late of the Fugees) wants to break into said industry, but the studio
time for cutting his demo is also cutting deep into what little money he
earns doing menial jobs for a local drug lord named Mr. B. (Jason
Statham).  When the already steep price for the recording sessions goes
up, Diamond's hotheaded best friend and partner Gage (Ja Rule) comes up
with a seemingly foolproof--and, of course, illegal--funding plan. 
Needless to say, the plan doesn't go off without a hitch or two.
        To say that _Turn_It_Up_ doesn't go off without a hitch or two is
an understatement.  Beyond the tired, predictable plot--and the equally
dull subplots, such as Diamond's fed-up girlfriend (Tamala Jones) and the
sudden surfacing of Diamond's long-absent father (Vondie Curtis-Hall, way
beneath his league here)--there's some truly abysmal dialogue (Diamond's
raps are invariably described as "hot") and acting to match.  Jones and
Curtis-Hall emerge with their dignity intact, but that's partly a side
effect of having fairly little screen time and mostly because they
actually have some acting ability.  That cannot be said of everyone else.
 The two rap stars leading the cast are no acting finds; Pras is stiff,
and Ja Rule subscribes to the adage, "if you can't act, overact."  As bad
as they are, they are outdone by the weak work of Statham and the
laughably atrocious John Ralston, who plays record label bigwig Mr.
White.
        But what really does in _Turn_It_Up_ is what's under the terrible
execution--or, rather, what isn't there.  The script doesn't offer any
reason why we should really care about any of these characters and what
happens to them, nor do these characters exhibit any qualities that would
consistently engage our interest.  For all the mayhem that fills the
screen in _Turn_It_Up_--and there is a lot of it, both visual and
sonic--the film is still a crushing bore.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Steve Rhodes
Small-time drug dealer Diamond (Pras from the rap group The Fugees) has 
aspirations.  He  wants to trade in his life of guns and drugs for a 
music contract.  "I want to be legitimate," he says earnestly to his 
music manager and fellow coke-dealer, Gage, played by real-life 
hip-hopper Ja Rule.  "I want to earn some respect."
An admitted perfectionist when it comes to creating his sound, Diamond 
has a much more flexible attitude when it comes to ethics.  Using his 
shiny guns, he is happy to waste anyone gets in his way.  But even he 
has limits.  The morality test that separates the men from the boys or, 
in case of TURN IT UP, the vicious killers from the really vicious 
killers, involves an innocent, Spanish-speaking, pregnant woman who 
witnesses Diamond and Gage murdering a bunch of other dealers.  In a 
minor moral moment, Diamond insists that Gage let her go.  One wonders 
what was it that tipped the scales in her favor.  Would the pregnancy 
alone have been enough?  Probably not, since Diamond argues with Gage 
that not only is she pregnant but, since she doesn't speak English, she 
couldn't turn them in.
Even if the script by the director, Robert Adetuyi doesn't work as a 
morality tale, it does form the basis for some interesting set pieces to 
demonstrate Adetuyi's skills in staging scenes.  Handsomely lit and shot 
by cinematographer Hubert Taczanowski, the movie is a real treat for the 
eyes.  Your ears, however, may complain that there's little for them.  
When the actors aren't speaking, they strut upon the stage with 
impressive verve.  But when they start reading their lines, you realize 
how vacuous the script is.  Even ignoring its propensity for non-stop 
profanity, there is little to admire about it.  With miniscule plot and 
character development, the script leaves the visuals to carry the movie.  
And that's asking for some pretty heavy lifting.
Well, Diamond is a freedom-loving man who refuses even to give his 
girlfriend his cell phone number, equating that to the umbilical cord 
that once bound men to their mothers.  Gage has a succinct statement of 
human desires.  He says that all we want is "money, drugs and hos."  
Gage is aghast when a big record producer named Mr. White -- yes, he is 
-- wants to hear a demo tape before hiring Diamond.  The audacity!
This much can be said.  After enduring many ugly bad movies, I, for one, 
appreciate having a bad movie that it is at least handsomely filmed and 
competently directed.  
TURN IT UP runs 1:23.  It is rated R for strong violence, language and 
some drug content and would be acceptable for high school seniors and 
older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
