Title
Review for Guns of Navarone, The (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
World War Two seems to be the only major world conflict
resembling an average Hollywood movie - dividing line
between Good Guys and Bad Guys is more or less, clearly
defined and final victory of the Good Guys provides happy
ending, at least for the majority of audience. So, it isn't
surprising that in the following decades WW2 became
inspiration for many action-oriented pieces of popular
culture - novels, comic books and movies. In the literary
domain Alistar MacLean contributed to the trend with the
series of novels about small bands of Allied agents or
commandos wreaking havoc behind enemy lines. Combination of
complicated plots and constant breath-taking action proved
to be quite attractive for movie producers, so in 1960s some
of those novels were adapted into spectacular and very
popular action films. The most popular and influential of
them all was THE GUNS OF NAVARONE, directed in 1961 by J.
Lee Thompson.
Plot of the film begins in Autumn 1943. Following the
capitulation of Italy and mass surrender of Italian
garrisons scattered all over occupied Balkans, British
forces seized the opportunity and rushed to seize many Greek
islands in Aegean Sea. This attempt to regain foothold on
Balkans was short-lived, because Germans reacted more
rapidly by sending even more forces in the area and bringing
small British garrisons into strategically untenable
situation. The situation is especially grim for 2,000 men at
island of Kheros, who can't be evacuated by sea because the
only escape route is controlled by two huge German naval
guns stationed on the nearby island of Navarone. Attempts to
silence the guns from the air failed, and less than a week
before final German assault, British command is left only
with one, desperate alternative. Small group of British and
Greek commandos, led by Major Franklin (played by Anthony
Quayle) is sent to land on the island, contact the local
partisans and, using their help, sabotage the guns before
the evacuation convoy gets near Kheros. When their mission
gets underway, commandos are faced with many unexpected
difficulties and Captain Mallory (played by Gregory Peck),
who had replaced injured Franklin, begins suspecting
possible traitor among his comrades.
The script for THE GUNS OF NAVARONE was written by Carl
Foreman, one of the most talented Hollywood screenwriters of
1950s, whose previous credits included HIGH NOON. He
remained uncredited for his last major film, WW2 drama THE
BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI, due to studio blacklisting and
alleged Communist beliefs. THE GUNS OF NAVARONE was
Foreman's first major project with his real name back on the
credits (and the way he saw his alleged fling with Communism
could be seen in character of C.P.O. Brown, disillusioned
veteran of Spanish Civil War, played by Stanley Baker).
Foreman adapted MacLean's novel, probably intrigued with
opportunity to explore the humanity in war - theme he had
used with so much success in KWAI.
Unfortunately, this time direction wasn't in the hands of
first class filmmaker like David Lean, but J. Lee Thompson,
director whose overall career was hardly stellar. Thompson
was less interested in serious subjects and character
exploration and instead paid attention only to numerous
action scenes. Those scenes are truly spectacular, using
both the Shepperton studios and exotic island locations of
Rhodes, as well as manpower and equipment of Greek and
British military. In some cases, special effects are
top-notch and can impress even after almost four decades
(like in the scene describing commando team landing on the
island). But, generally speaking, attraction of these scenes
lies in quantity, not quality - THE GUNS OF NAVARONE simply
features more explosions, more shootouts and bigger
bodycount than in any contemporary action movie. Characters
somehow got lost in all that mayhem and, despite being
played by excellent actors, they hardly stay in viewer's
memory, since their motivations and subplots mostly get only
hinted and never properly explored, despite film having more
than two and half hours of length. Anthony Quayle, whose
real life WW2 adventures actually resembled those of his
character, is the only exception as physically and
psychologically injured leader of the team.
THE GUNS OF NAVARONE, although inferior as serious WW2
drama, could still be enjoyed as entertaining, exciting
action film with appeal that didn't fade through time. Its
reputation, on the other hand, owes much more to the more
talented film makers who later used THE GUNS OF NAVARONE as
an inspiration for much better examples of the genre.
(Historical note: Islands of Kheros and Navarone are
fictious, as well as the events described in the movie. The
real events that inspired them, however, turned quite
differently for the British. In November 1943 British island
garrisons in Aegean Sea were overran in combined operation
by Wehrmacht, Kriegsmarine and Luftwaffe. British attempt to
evacuate their stranded forces turned into disaster -
British navy suffered huge losses and most of the men in the
garrisons surrendered to Germans.)
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
