Title
Review for Theodore Rex (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THEODORE REX   Zero stars. [Credits follow text] 
This little PG went to market. This little PG stayed home...
That's where audiences ought to stay.
The movie is set in a vague future where dinosaurs have been 
re-bred by science. They co-exist with humans, have human 
speech, all other human characteristics and lifestyles. Whoopi 
is a tough cop. Eight-foot dino Theodore ("call me Teddy") is 
friendly. The two are partnered, with all the cliches of the 
buddy genre, for an investigation of "dinocide" that leads 
them to a dark plot.
The movie makes no sense. The the kids at whom it is aimed 
will understand what there is to understand (which is nothing) 
only if they are geniuses or morons. At the benefit show I 
went to, they did not react, just sat there or moved about, 
and bawled for popcorn or the bathroom.
There are several other critters in the movie, ranging from 
Dr.Who-ish to disembodied heads to things with glowing red 
eyes.  Whoopi is several pounds overweight. Teddy is the 
equivalent of the man in the gorilla suit but far less 
convincing than those apes. His head is way too big for his 
body. It is obviously cardboard or the equivalent, with just 
the eyes moving, and the mouth poorly synchronized to speech. 
The sets are uneven, some are poor ripoffs of the grungy look 
of "Bladerunner." The movie tries to be cute and funny. And 
tries, and tries...
I was told that Whoopi tried to get out of this film but after 
the fracas re: Kim Basinger, who had to pay a great deal of 
money for her independence, Ms.Goldberg had second thoughts. 
After looking and looking, I  could only find two references 
to writer-director Jonathan Betuel. He scripted the 1984 "The 
Last Starfighter" (kiddie stuff),wrote and directed the 1985 
"My Science Project." 
I cannot give more details about this movie, as it put me in a 
state of catatonia. 
CREDITS Written and directed by Jonathan Betuel. Photography, 
David Tattersall. Production design, Walter Martishius. 
Editing, Rick Shaine, Steve Mirkovich. Dinosaurs by John 
Criswell & Chris Finch. Music, Robert Folk. Cast: Whoopi 
Goldberg, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Juliet Landau, Bud Cort, 
Stephen McChattie, Richard Roundtree, Jack Riley, Peter 
MacKennzie, Joe Dalessandro, Edith Diaz,et al. Voices of 
George Newbern & Carole Kane. A New Line release. 92 min. 
Rated PG.
