Title
Review for Swingers (1996)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Christopher Null
     One of the most sincere and earnest looks into single life in the
90's, SWINGERS is nothing but -- in the terms of its resident lounge
lizards -- *money*.
     You've probably seen print ads, movie reviews, and the like,
portraying SWINGERS as a film about a bunch of suave and sexy guys,
making the moves on the pretty babies (aka women) in the nightlife of
La-La land.  The title's double entendre doesn't help matters, either,
so let me set the record straight.
     SWINGERS is about a bunch of guys in L.A., yes, but they aren't
overly suave, with the exception of Trent (the hysterically funny Vince
Vaughn), who lives in an apparent fantasy world of CLOCKWORK ORANGEy
faux-English doublespeak.  His best friend is Mike (Jon Favreau, who
also wrote the script), a down-and-out actor/comedian suffering over the
breakup with his girlfriend of six years.  Rob (Ron Livingston) and Sue
(is in "a boy named Sue," Patrick Van Horn) are both actors/losers also.
     Weaving through Los Angeles and Las Vegas, Trent, Mike, and their
friends turn out to pretty much be high-talkers and low-rollers, about
like everyone else.  We see that these are regular guys, each with his
own demons, each as insecure as you and me.  But they talk a big game.
     Sound familiar?  In the end, SWINGERS perfectly humanizes its
players, makes a touching statement about getting back on your feet
after love knocks you down, and, most importantly, comes off as really,
really, really funny.  Favreau and director Doug Liman are sure to hit
the big time after this, and Vaughn (who's already been picked to star
in JURASSIC PARK 2) ought to get a Best Supporting Actor nomination, at
least.
     SWINGERS is one of those very rare movies where you really come out
a changed, happier person -- at least for awhile.  Hey, maybe I'm money,
and I don't even know it!
     And am I the only one that thinks Favreau looks *exactly* like
George Clooney?  And yes, Doug, that Aaton-III camera is *way* too loud.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit The Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Chad Polenz
Swingers
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 96 minutes [1 hour, 36 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jon Favreau (Mike), Vince Vaughn (Trent), Ron Livingston (Rob),
Patrick Van Horn (Sue), written by Jon Favreau, produced by Victor Simpkins,
directed by Doug Liman.
        Considering the success of independent films aimed at and made by
20-something GenXers, "Swingers" seems like a film that had to be made. It
follows many of the styles set recently by Kevin Smith, Richard Linklater,
and Quentin Tarantino as it comprised mostly of offbeat dialogue and comical
situations, funny dialogue, and realistic characters with a story that might
be a bit trendy but is still fun to watch.
        Like many recent independent comedies there really isn't a plot to this
film, it's just an exercise in characterization and dialogue. Now this has
been done before ("Clerks," "Pulp Fiction") but it's become so hip by now
it's practically a cliche, and yet this film still makes it work. 
        The first scene establishes the basic setting and a clever layer of satire
as we meet Mike (Favreau), a struggling comedian and actor who has moved to
Los Angeles from New York and can't get over the fact his [ex-] girlfriend
hasn't called him in six months. He plays his messages and all say the same
thing, "Get over her and go out and party!" Even his answering machine joins
in the coercion.
        Then there is Trent (Vaughn), a producer of sorts who feels the need to take
advantage of his situation, that is: a handsome, single, Hollywood-type with
money to spend. He talks Mike into going to Las Vegas in the middle of the
night on a Wednesday and here is where the real comedy begins by showing
their "swinging" lifestyle. When they arrive in Vegas they try to make an
impression at the Black Jack tables, and a sit-com-esque atmosphere starts to
form. Although it's hilarious at the time, it also seems a bit strange, but
the film eventually finds its niche through character interaction.
        They don't call the film "Swingers" for nothing, so naturally the two try to
pick up women for some fast action. Needless to say this does happen but it
doesn't seem cliche in the way it happens. Favreau's script is able to
maintain a level of realism even as the film tends to go through the motions.
For example, the film does not cut straight to sex scenes, instead, it shows
Mike and Trent and their "dates" continuing their conversations even when
they go back to "her place."
        Most of the film depicts Mike, Trent, and their friends Rob (Livingston),
Sue (Van Horn) and Charles (Alex Desert), hanging out and hitting clubs,
bars, and parties. They see women, make eye contact, flirt with them, and
eventually go over. This might sound a little repetitive, but again, it's the
script and the realistic dialogue that makes this film different. These guys
talk and act like real men, they know what women want to hear and don't act
nor talk like movie characters, but like realistic, horny men. They're not
just out for sex, you can tell deep down they want a relationship, but conside
ring who they are what the premise of the film is, there's no way that will
happen.
        I've noticed films about nihilism like this tend to end on conservative
notes, but often they become sappy and/or just plain cheesy, but that doesn't
happen here. Mike is constantly whining about not being able to meet the
right woman and about how hard it is to get over his girlfriend, so guess
what happens to him?
        Some might say "Swingers" is just another independent, plotless, slightly
raunchy, character and dialogue-driven GenX comedy, but there isn't nearly
enough films like this (at least good ones) to refer to it as "just another."
Even if it was, it's still good and you have to respect that.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 10/18/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Jon Favreau, Vince Vaughn, Ron Livingston, Patrick Van Horn, 
      Alex Desert, Heather Graham, Deena Martin, Katherine Kendall,
      Brooke Langton
Director: Doug Liman
Producer: Victor Simpkins
Screenplay: Jon Favreau
Cinematography: Doug Liman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     SWINGERS is the latest independent film success story.  Shot for 
approximately $250,000, the movie became the object of a bidding war.  
Miramax eventually secured the distribution rights, but only after 
agreeing to pay $5 million.  Director Doug Liman (who previously made a 
1994 movie called GETTING IN), producer Victor Simpkins, and 
writer/actor Jon Favreau were suddenly a lot more wealthy than they had 
ever expected to be.
     It's hard to understand why the film attracted so much attention.  
As Generation X comedies go, there's nothing remarkable about this one.  
It's basically the story of a twenty-something wannabe actor who, coming 
off a long-term relationship, has trouble meeting women.  There's a lot 
of male bonding going on here, and Quentin Tarantino's influence on the 
tone is apparent.  In short, this is familiar stuff that has been 
packaged slightly differently (and, considering the growing number of 
films borrowing from Tarantino's uniquely derivative style, the 
flavoring isn't all that unique).
     The central character is Mike (Jon Favreau), a New York native who 
moves to L.A. to pursue his acting career.  So far, he has managed to 
get a bit part in a movie and a job hosting an open mike night at a 
comedy club.  His trip west necessitated a breakup with his long-time 
girlfriend, and Mike misses her horribly.  Whenever he meets a girl, he 
inevitably starts telling her his "sad" story -- not a good way to start 
a potential romance.
     Mike has a "support group" of four male friends:  Trent (Vince 
Vaughn), Rob (Ron Livingston), Sue (Patrick Van Horn), and Charles (Alex 
Desert).  They decide to concentrate all their efforts on getting Mike 
some female companionship.  To that end, they drag him out of his tiny 
apartment and subject him to a trip to Las Vegas followed by stops at a 
number of parties and bars.  But Mike's dream girl continues to elude 
him.
     Even though the plot of SWINGERS could probably use an injection of 
originality, the script is littered with effective comedy.  In fact, 
several of the gags are sidesplitting.  One uses the JAWS theme to 
identify a predator at a party, another portrays a woman at a bar as a 
bunny, and a third has Mike wrestling with the problem of an answering 
machine message that cuts him off before he can leave his phone number.  
Then there's a hilariously bad jazz rendition of "Staying Alive" that 
will have SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER fans cringing.
     The film makers don't attempt to hide their infatuation with 
Tarantino, and elements of his style have wormed their way into the 
production.  Actor Vince Vaughn resembles the PULP FICTION director, 
both in terms of physical appearance and acting ability.  One of the 
characters has a RESERVOIR DOGS poster on his wall.  An argument about 
whether Tarantino borrowed from Scorsese provokes the comment that 
"everybody steals from everybody".  This is followed by a same-shot, 
same-angle, slo-mo recreation of the RESERVOIR DOGS opening with the 
characters of SWINGERS replacing Tarantino's unholy gang.
     The only actor to leave much of an impression is Jon Favreau, who 
does a good job emphasizing Mike's "everyman" quality.  Anyone (or at 
least any male) who has experienced romantic disappointment will relate 
to his situation.  His friends may not be the most sympathetic 
characters, but Mike's a likable guy.  The rest of the cast, with the 
exception of Heather Graham (who has a small role late in the film), is 
made up of largely-unfamiliar faces, none of whom displays much screen 
presence.
     Had SWINGERS been released five years ago, it would have been 
cutting-edge.  Even as recently as 1994, it would have been reasonably 
fresh.  But today, this kind of story -- a staple of low-budget features 
-- is getting awfully stale, and the injection of humor can't completely 
invigorate the proceedings.  SWINGERS is enjoyable in a shallow way, but 
there's nothing so special here that it warrants more than a cursory 
glance. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Doug Liman
Writer: Jon Favreau
Starring: Jon Favreau, Vince Vaughn, Ron Livingston, Patrick Von Horn, 
Alex Desert, Brooke         Langton, Deena Martin, Katherine Kendall, 
Heather Graham
Any movie where the characters have their own kind of vernacular amongst 
them is already a pretty damn cool flick to me.  Any movie that not only 
has this, but has the guts to say Quentin Tarantino rips off Martin 
Scorsese's has got to get some kind of ultra-cool award (It's true, 
Quentin does - you know it, I know it, and the American people know it - 
but the man is still a god).
"Swingers" is perhaps the coolest movie of the year...and it even has a 
neurotic, insecure protagonist.  The guys in this movie are either 
out-of-work or actors-with-crap-jobs living in L.A, going to parties and 
those clubs that have no sign and are a bitch to find.  During the day, 
they go to pointless call-backs; at night, they go around town, 
drinking, dancing, and picking up "digits."  Their unofficial leader is 
the ultra-confident, semi-philisophical Trent (an amazingly great Vince 
Vaughn, now having the cool pick-up line of "I was in Jurassic Park 2"). 
 But the focus is on the depressed Mike (writer and star, Jon Favreau, 
also blessed with a new cool pick-up line: "I was on "Friends" for a 
couple episodes then was taken out with the most bizarre plot twist in 
recent television history.")
Mike has just...okay, so it was 6 months ago...he broke up with his 
girlfriend and after half the year, he hasn't gotten over her.  He's so 
depressed, he sits for days against the wall looking at pictures of them 
and having weird delusions of his answering machine giving him 
confidence boosts (which begins a cool continuum problem - look for it). 
In the beginning, Trent calls him up and they impulsively go to Vegas to 
gamble, but Trent just wants to pick up "babies."  Mike is nervous and 
tells a really hokey joke...then confesses he's actually an out-of-work 
comedian.
The story focuses mainly on Mike, but the other characters - Rob (Ron 
Livingston) is his actor friend who just moved out there and is bummed 
because he's going from doing Hamlet on Broadway to Goofy for Disney; 
and Sue (Patrick Von Horn), who has a temper and basically sucks at NHL 
Hockey for the Sega Genesis mainly because they took out the fighting - 
well, the other characters are presented nicely as well.  There is no 
real plot, unless you call Mike's pilgrimmage from depression to getting 
back into the scene a plot.
"Swingers" has no real big grandios themes and doesn't offer any real 
poetic messages; it's just a really fun, clever and intelligent film.  
While there is some satire from of the out-of-work actor thing and the 
whole swinging/nightlife scene, the main thing to admire from it is the 
acting and the great writing by Jon Favreau.  He writes beautiful 
dialogue and clearly-carved characters, especially Trent, who's got to 
be one of the coolest characters written for the screen since...well, in 
a while.  And who's character, as cool as he is, is presented as the 
true normal-guy-schmuck that he is in the final scene.
The acting is fantastic from everyone, epsecially Favreau and Vaughn: 
Favreau shows great comic flair as the neurotic, down-on-his-self-esteem 
guy; and Vaughn is just, well, "money" (word for cool in their clique). 
 Also standing out is some Melrose Place star (Brooke Langton - what she 
does on the show, I don't know, I don't watch it and I don't plan to 
ever) as one of the girls Mike attempts to pick up but lets his 
confidence and lying get in the way of ever doing well with her.  
Because it's so fun to watch and the fact that I laughed hysterically 
numerous times (and the fact that the published screenplay has a 
glossary for the terms in the back), I highly reccomend "Swingers" as 
one of the best films of last year.

Author
Jason Overbeck
Swingers is a very funny film that offers observations of the club scene
in LA, and how hard it is to break through in "The Business."  We get
observant glances at LA trends ("Why aren't there any signs outside the
clubs") as we follow a group of actors through episodic frequently
hilarious situations as they try to score sex with a "beautiful baby"
and wait for return calls that don't arrive.
The main character is Mike (Jon Favreau, also the writer) who dreams of
becoming a stand up comedian/actor.  All his friends also have dreams of
becoming actors and mostly fail.  Trent (Vince Vaughn) takes Mike under
his wing to help him get over his previous relationship.  Mike is really
pretty pathetic, he seems to have really been in love with his
ex-girlfriend (who stayed in New York when he came to LA) and even
spoils attempts at other girls because his negativity is weighing down
his approach.
The dialogue is often funny, and more than a tip of the hat to Quentin
Tarantino's wonderful words.  In fact Tarantino seems to have an
influence on more than a few scenes.  They sit and discuss his wonderful
works and note that "everybody steals from everybody" right before a
clever homage of Reservoir Dogs and Goodfellas.  Both of those offer big
laughs.
The only complaint I have with the film is that it's slight.  No big
messages are offers or attempted.  Even the final scene where Mike is
explaining an unorthodoxed decision he made is cut off with a gag.  I
don't mind this much, I don't want many films to preach to me truths
that have already been discussed to the point of making them cliches.  I
would have preferred if Swingers had contained more meat on it's bones,
and finally that is just a testament to the films strong writing and
wonderful characterizations.  
There is a wonderful small scene in Swingers, which has Trent playing
Video Hockey with another friend.  They engage in obscene banter that
sounds like a typical exchange you WOULD expect while playing such a
game.  I laughed harder in that scene then I do in most Hollywood
movies, it is driven by the characters - like the film.

Author
Nick Schaden
Don't you love it how low budget independent movies absolutely amaze
you every so often?  "Swingers" is that kind of movie.   With a
hilarious witty plot, and great acting, I fell in love with this little
gem.   Not since watching "Reservoir Dogs" have I ever seen a low budget
independent (and under hyped) flick that I enjoyed this much.
"Swingers" tells the story of young L.A. twenty something guys, who,
among other activities, cruise for dates and love.   They hit on women
at bars, they swagger and act tough.   They constantly talk to each
other (in rapid fire Woody Allen talk no less) about the art of picking
up women.   The irony of "Swingers" though, is that these guys are a
hopeless case in finding love, women are usually repelled away from
their machismo, not attracted to it.   It's a great and witty plot, and
watching these guys stumble over themselves is wonderful.
In addition, the male stars of the movie, Mike (Jon Favreau), Trent
(Vince Vaughn), Rob (Ron Livingston) and Sue (Patrick Van Horn) all act
wonderfully.   Whether it's Mike ranting and raving about his
ex-girlfriend, or Trent comparing the directors Scorcese and Tarentino
to each other, or Sue playing far too competitively in a video game,
it's hilarious.
Finally, little touches in the movie made it even more interesting to
me.   For example, in one of the funnier scenes of the movie, we watch
Mike completely blow a potential date by leaving message after message
on her answering machine late at night.   Later on, when Mike gets
another lucky phone number, if the audience pays close attention they
can see that the camera angles, music, etc. is EXACTLY the same as in
the earlier scene botched by Mike. It's a great idea, as the audience
can't help but cringe at the possibility of poor Mike screwing up his
chance for love again.   In addition, we see several nods to Tarentino's
"Reservoir Dogs", whether a poster of "Mr. Blonde" in the background, or
a spoof of "Reservoir Dogs"'s famous slow motion intro sequence.  
Finally, the movie wraps up neatly with a cool and well done ending.
All in all, "Swingers" blows away the far majority of any
"blockbusters" that have come out this summer.   I highly recommend it.
Nick's Rating: +4 (Highly Recommended)
*** Movies rated from -4 (worst) to +4 (best), 0 = average rating ***

Author
James Brundage
Starring Jon Favreau, Vince Vaughn, Ron Livingston, Patrick van Horn, Alex
Desert, Heather Graham, and Brooke Langton
     I love swing.  I can jump, jive, 'n' wail.  I can flip a beautiful baby
and jump with her tonight.  In my spare time, I teach my friends how to
swing dance.  I have seven CDs that are strictly swing music, and one that
happens to have swing on it.  I know the underarm turn, the overarm turn,
the cuddle.  I know some East coast, some West Coast, and some improv of the
two.  I know the Charleston, the Jigwalk.  I'm working on the Hollywood
Whip.  Gimme time.  Right now I'm listening to Big Bad Voodoo Daddy's "Mr.
Pinstripe Suit" reflecting.
     I'd like to say that Doug Liman's hip flick Swingers started it all,
but it didn't.  I was interested a bit before that, but hey, I'm always into
doing the new things.  I liked the music about six months before I saw the
movie, but it was the movie that got me started on the ability to dance this
stuff.
     The movie has been classified as a cult flick, but lets forget that
label.  It isn't a cult flick.  Anything that wins an MTV movie award, the
most fickle type of award ever granted (i.e. whatever's "in" at the time) is
way too big to be a cult flick.  Swingers is instead, something that should
be cult, but isn't.  It should apply to only Los Angelenos or people who
like Swing music, but it doesn't.  Thanks to a brilliantly witty script by
the star Jon Favreau, Swingers has an appeal to everyone who's ever been in
and out of love (or the hopeless romantics who are just dying for this
chance).
     It's got a very old plot: we open with boy having already lost girl.
She's been gone for six months and she hasn't called yet.  Boy (Mike, played
by Jon Favreau) is under tremendous pressure from his friends to get back in
the game of dating.   Boy goes to Vegas with Trent (Vince Vaughn) where he
spoils both of their chances of getting laid by telling his sad story to a
Dorothy from the MGM Grand and talks French philosophy over pancakes with a
waitress at 5 Am.  Boy's friend, Rob (Ron Livingston) was Hamlet two months
ago, has been in boy's situation before, and is now faced with the prospect
of becoming the Disney character Goofy because he doesn't have a job.  In
the meantime, Trent and a boy named Sue (Patrick Van Horn) are pushing the
boy to get back in the game where he ends up having an entire relationship
with Nikki's (Brooke Langton) answering machine and gets to swing dance to a
live performance of Big Bad Voodoo Daddy at the Derby with new girl,
Lorraine (Heather Graham).
     The thing that is so impressive about Swingers is that it has the
ability to be effortlessly cool while, at the same time, making fun of being
cool.  Jon Favreau puts his characters in situations as bizarre as any
Stephen Wright story but at the same time, suspends our disbelief of them.
Like the Nick Hornby novel "High Fidelity", Swingers offers a comprehensive
view into the clandestine world of men's feelings.  Sure, there are movies
upon movies about the girl trying to find love and telling us about their
inner thoughts, but how often do they get the same thing from us.
     Doug Liman, doing cinematography for his first time ever, is a constant
surprise.  Armed with a stedicam he takes an entire movie down all by
himself, not only operating the camera, but also being the only camera
operator.  He is able to handle everything from too much natural light in
the Stardust in Vegas to too little light in the alleys of LA.  He amazes me
constantly as one of the finest cinematographers of our time.
     Wrapping up my tirade, Swingers isn't a cult flick.  It's mainstream.
It isn't a guy's movie.  It's a date movie.  And, despite what the genres on
the imdb tell me, its a comedy through and through.  Watch it with your
beautiful baby for some laughs.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let's do a destination check.  If you are looking for a sex
show, then you've got the wrong movie - SWINGERS isn't it.  Regardless
of the title, which actually has a triple meaning in the film, SWINGERS
is about a sweet character who broke up with his long time girlfriend
six months ago, but can't get over it.
     SWINGERS is a touching little film with an endearing performance
by Jon Favreau as unlucky-at-love Mike.  Favreau, with his strong chin
and long sad face that looks like a rock statue, has just the physique
to afford him the opportunity to play such roles for maximum empathy.
Although the other actors in the show are okay, only his acting is
compelling.  Favreau also wrote and co-produced SWINGERS.  Favreau's
script and Doug Liman's direction are what makes this little tale come
alive.
     "You have to put life into perspective.  She doesn't deserve you,"
says Mike's answer machine to him since his ex-girlfriend still hasn't
called him.  He has moved from the East Coast to LA and now hangs out
with new male buddies who are all trying to break into the
entertainment field.  He is a wannabe comic, but most of all he is a
wannabe boyfriend of somebody.
     Most of the film is about his trying unsuccessfully to establish a
relationship with someone of the opposite sex.  His buddies have a
plethora of advice, most about the correct time before calling back a
woman you have just met.  "Two days is like industry standard" advises
his male friend named Sue (Patrick Van Horn).  The proper interval is a
subject of much debate among his den of male companions, who approach
the topic with ferocity and precision.
     His male clique's pseudo-sophistication provides most of the
humor.  There are few guffaws, but lots of nice episodes worthy of many
a chuckle.  Trent (Vince Vaughn), who claims a long string of female
conquests, admits that he hasn't a clue as to what his girlfriends are
talking about and "all I do is stare at their mouths and wrinkle my
nose, and I turn out to be a sweetheart" to them.
     His friends' careers are going nowhere like his own.  When Rob
(Ron Livingston) doesn't get his sitcom part, he tries out for a job as
Goofy, but gets turned down because, "I didn't have any theme park
experience."
     The script is full of little quirky aspects.  My favorite is that
it reveals that all of the coolest bars in Hollywood are entered via
unmarked doors in alleyways.  Another nice touch is the way the guys go
places in solo car convoys that look for all intents and purposes like
a funeral procession.
     Poor Mike, when meets a group of women at a chic party in the
Hollywood Hills, he tries politeness with, "Hi, how are you ladies
doing this evening?"  The leader of the group immediately cuts him down
to size with the definitive question, "What do you drive?"
     Trent is full of advice for Mike on scoring with women.  When Mike
spots a prospect at a bar, Trent tells him, "I don't want you to be
like the guy in the PG-13 movie where everyone hopes its going to
happen.  I want you to be like the guy in the rated R movie."
     The script is full of references to past films.  When Sue uses a
gun to scare away some guys in a dark parking lot, Mike screams at him,
"Haven't you seen BOYZ N THE HOOD?  They are going to come back and
shoot us."
     The show has many well done small touches.  Mike's clothes by
Genevieve Tyrrell are carefully chosen examples of choices likely to
turn off potential female admirers.  Typical is the bad suit with the
Burgundy shirt and ugly tie that he uses to impress people in Vegas.
     Hang out with these guys for a while, and you may begin to feel
sorry for them.  They have lots of theories, but actually not a clue as
to how to relate to women.  Only Mike is a whole person, and we grow to
care about him thanks to Jon Favreau's sympathetic and heartfelt
performance.  The rest of the guys deserve their empty lives.
     SWINGERS runs a fast 1:35.  It is rated R solely for the language
which I thought fairly tame considering the subject matter.  There is
no violence, nudity, or sex although there are a lot of discussions
about sex.  The film would be fine for any teenager interested in the
film.  I had several good laughs and liked the show enough to recommend
it and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It's tough to find a fresh angle when you're making a movie about
20-somethings and their relationships in 1996, since the last five years
have seen such a glut of such films that you couldn't throw a rock without
hitting one.  Young film-makers may be attempting to follow the Creative
Writing 101 dictum of "write what you know," but in so doing they are
writing what we all have seen enough of by now to know even better than
they do.  SWINGERS appears at first glance to be more of the same, but
it's not really a relationship film.  Instead, screenwriter Jon Favreau
has created what amounts to a comedy with a National Geographic twist, a
charming, almost documentary account of the habits of the North American
human male in the wild.
     Favreau plays Mike Peters, an aspiring stand-up comedian and actor
recently relocated to Los Angeles from New York.  Mike is recovering --
very slowly -- from the end of a six-year relationship, and finding it
very difficult to get back into the swing of dating.  The ultra-cool
atmosphere of L.A.'s hidden nightclubs doesn't make things any easier, not
does the well-intentioned goading of Mike's friends Trent (Vince Vaughn),
Sue (Patrick Van Horn), Rob (Ron Livingston) and Charles (Alex Desert),
who force Mike out into a world of party- and bar-hopping with which they
are far more comfortable than he is.
     SWINGERS is set in the nouveau-hip "cocktail nation" milieu, a
retro-Swing movement which has become all the rage at Hollywood
nightspots.  That setting gives SWINGERS a unique look and vibe, captured
most notably in a scene at the legendary Derby with the band Big Bad
Voodoo Daddy, as well as a unique lexicon (beautiful women are "babies;" a
man who radiates success and confidence is "money").  Director Doug Liman
seems to be working hard to create a sense of place; in fact, he sometimes
seems to be working a bit too hard.  SWINGERS opens with Mike and Trent
taking a road trip to Las Vegas, then proceeds to bounce from location to
location in the name of authenticity.
     The authenticity Liman is going for with those locations is an
authenticity specific to the time and place where SWINGERS is set, and
that is fine, but it is much more winning in its authentic portrayal of
the way men act when they are out in groups and on the prowl.  Vince
Vaughn turns in a priceless performance as Trent, the ladies' man who
makes it his mission to turn Mike into an equally potent dating machine;
there is a great scene in which Trent and Sue, both drunk, watch Mike
trying to pick up a woman (Heather Graham), high-fiving and cheerleading
all the while.  The dynamics of a group of male friends is presented with
a hilariously spot-on realism, with Trent as alpha male directing the
behavior of guys who are little like him, and in fact may not not _like_
him.  That is another aspect of male friendships which is rarely
represented on screen but which is nailed in Favreau's script:  men often
find themselves hanging out with guys with whom they share virtually
nothing in common.  SWINGERS gets its' characters relationships so right
that it is almost frightening.
     It is rather disappointing that so much time is spent on Mike mooning
over his ex, given the stronger kick of the male-bonding scenes.  Jon
Favreau, who looks like a cross between Jay Leno and Steve Guttenberg, is
extremely likeable as Mike, and he gets a few great scenes highlighting
how uncomfortable he is dealing with women, particularly a struggle with
an unforgiving answering machine.  The sad fact is that, like in real
life, spending a lot of time with someone who does little but whine about
his lost love gets to be a bit of a drag.  Mike's extremely tentative
steps toward getting back on the horse are the frame on which the events
in SWINGERS hang, which makes it kind of a necessary evil.  The comedy is
much richer when Favreau, Liman and the cast of SWINGERS take you on
safari, observing a mating dance that is both strange and wonderfully
familiar.

Author
Rob Reser
Poor Mike. But haven't we all been there at one point or time? SWINGERS
is a 'life in the week of....' movie and a great one at that. Mike (Jon
Favreau) has broken up with his girlfriend and moved to California to
'attempt' to make it as a comedian. His friends are extremely concerned
about his well being, however, since he can only obsess over his loss.
Checking his answering machine hourly and at very inconvenient times in
hopes of hearing her voice he practically refuses to leave his
apartment. The guys, however, are there to remedy the situation. In a
series of "nights out" Mike is thrust back into the singles scene again
and finding that it is much more difficult than he remembers. Trent
(Vince Vaughn) is the king of the swingers, though, being able to say
the right thing at the right time even though it looks like the wrong
thing at the wrong time. His knack at picking up women is unconventional
but always right on the "money". The entire gang spends their time
trying to boost Mike's horribly low self-esteem by coaching him in the
ways of women and by dragging him through California and Las Vegas
nightlife. The movie feel is that of just hanging out with a group of
guys who exist to have a good time and hit on the "babies". The script
is extremely well written and dialog is snappy and hysterical. Director
Doug Liman (whose only previous credit is 1994's GETTING IN) does an
acceptable job of pacing the film and pulling out the 'real-life' feel
and look from the actors. A discussion of good/bad Hollywood directors
amongst the guys even leads to a couple of homage scenes that are well
placed and enjoyable. SWINGERS soundtrack is well suited adding a
jazzy-swing flavor to the picture that only adds to the already exciting
ambiance. Feel like a good laugh and a look at the way guys think today?
You don't want to miss SWINGERS then. 3 ˝ spots. (Out of 4)
Favorite line: The whole bunny/bear conversation

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 90 minutes (1 hour 30 minutes)
Starring Jon Favreau, Vince Vaughn and Heather Graham
 Directed By Doug Liman
Another 'independent film', this comedy, which was brought by Miramax
for $5 million, is good fun. Favreau and Vaughn (The Lost World:
Jurassic Park, 1997) play Mike and Trent, two everyday 20somethings on
the lookout for women. The film just basically follows their plight on
the lookout for lurve, and along the way we get to meet some of their
friends, see their attempts at chatting up girls, and just basically
get a insight into their lives. And all of this is great fun.
Swingers doesn't rely on huge special effects, or big name stars to
provide entertainment. No, it just has a great script and superb
little known actors. The script, by Favreau, is great. Mike is always
missing is girlfriend, who hasn't called him for six months, and every
time he meets a girl, he always end up telling her about the ex. The
audience feels for this pathetic little man, thanks to the great
script. Vaughn is 'the money' (Swingers speak for 'the best') as the
womanizing Trent, always on the lookout for a new girl. Some of his
chat-up lines are awful, but he always seems to get the girl thanks to
his 'hard man' nature.  Vaughns character also gets the best laugh in
the film, towards the end in a diner. The conversations that go on
between Mike and Trent are great, but it never quite reaches Tarantino
standards (which I suspect the film was trying to reach.) There are
some excellent, laugh out loud jokes in the film, and some superbly
funny set pieces (such as Favreau cringe-worhy battle with a answer
machine that always cut him off before he finishes his
sentence. Embarrassing to him, hilarious to the audience.)
Mike & Trents friends are also good, although there characters seem a
bit underwritten, and we never really learn as much as we would like
about them. Although this is primarily Mike and Trents film, it would
of been nice to learn a bit more about their friends. They just seem
to wander aimlessly in the background. But again, the lines they say
are usually pretty good, and they do have some funny parts. It's just
a shame that they didn't have more meatier roles.
The acting is superb. As said above, Vaughn is superb as Trent, he's
definitely the best thing in the film. Favreau is also good, acting as
'the little man' very well, and the way he always feels sorry for
himself is very funny. Graham (Boogie Nights, 1997) has a small but
good role as Lorraine, a girl Mike finally falls in love with. She
hardly features in the film at all, but she still manages to make an
impact on the audience.
Swingers, then, is funny, but it does have some flaws. Firstly, the
running time is a bit too short. The film comes to an abrupt halt, and
I actually wanted the film to carry on longer. It never really comes
to a satisfying conclusion, which is a shame, as most films are too
long! Also, this type of film has been done too many times, such as
Sleep with Me (1994). But these small flaws don't really spoil what is
a funny, entertaining comedy.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SWINGERS (director: Doug Liman; cast: (Mike) Jon Favreau, (Trent) Vince
Vaughn, (Rob) Ron Livingston, (Sue) Patrick Van Horn, (Charles) Alex
Desert, Heather Graham, Deena Martin, Katherine Kendall, Brooke Langton,
1996)
An independent film, shot for around $250,000, that lacks a cutting
edge, something indie films should not leave home without. It sure looks
like a Hollywood studio film to me, but with a little bit of spice
thrown in to give it some oomph. It is a story about swingers, which
should be a revolting topic and is, for most of the film, nevertheless,
there is humor to be found. The boys are out to have some fun, all
wrapped up in their libidos, ready to score with the opposite sex. The
gang is made up of actors looking for work, coming to Hollywood to be
where the action is. The star of the film, is the one who wrote the
screenplay, Jon Favreau (Mike), who plays this whiny, ex-New Yorker, who
wants to be a stand-up comedian but is the only one of his swinger
friends who is not funny, he is, instead, disconsolate because he left
his "honey" 6 months ago to be in LaLa land, jump-starting his comic
career. He now feels lost without her, finding every other chick he
meets to be no match for her. Unfortunately, we have to hear this
whining for most of the film, until he acts natural, and bingo,
something good happens to this dude, who I must fess up and say, I felt
nothing at all for.
That girls are attracted to the swingers, speaks volumes for how sex and
love are intertwined in our culture. And the boys will be boys theme is
played here to the hilt, as sex is always foremost on their mind. For
Mike, it has to be both, sex and love. That he is clearly the winner at
the end, gives the film the right perspective it needs, not to fall into
its own cool lingo trap.
Preoccupied with himself, Mike always thinks he is being sensitive, even
when telling the girls he means it when he says how much he misses his
"babe," so naturally, he fails to attract their interest. In contrast,
the swingers that make up his group, roam Las Vegas, the bars of L.A.,
and the home parties they get invited to with a steel will for scoring
as many chicks as they can.
Mike's best pal is Trent (Vince). He sets the tone for the boys.
Encouraging them when they are down, but he is caught in his own
deceits, vainly thinking he can pick-up any girl he wants. He represents
the heart and soul of the swingers and gives the film a comedic tone,
that at times, as silly as it is, is downright funny. I loved his
philosophical advice to Mike, from one swinger to another, advising him
that you cannot get a woman to come back unless you're willing to forget
her, after which, of course, you don't care if she comes back. It is
also riotous to hear the loud mouth Trent, call Mike, "money" every time
he wants to cheer his pal up. The other swingers are, Rob (Ron
Livingston), Sue (Patrick Van Horn, yes, Sue is a boy), and Charles
(Alex Desert), who act to support each other, looking out for Mike in
particular, thinking he desperately needs to get his head together in
order to be back with them swinging.
What irked me most about the film, was how the filmmakers seemed proud
that they ripped off  Tarantino's style of film, claiming everyone rips
off everyone else. The problem with that logic, is that this film
doesn't look original, it looks and feels like all those other Tarantino
clones. It smacks of wannabe actors being made into a film by wannabe
directors and writers.
If you have a strong stomach and can take the staleness of the story,
you might find it funny enough, and actually enjoy it, realizing, in all
seriousness, that this is the way it is for many heterosexuals, and it
is always hard to change the way it is, no pun intended.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Froilan Vispo
You don't want to be like Mike.  Mike has been doing badly.
Embarrassingly bad.  He broke up a six-year relationship six months ago
to move from N.Y. to L.A. and he's still not over her.  As a result,
his jokes fall flat when he tries to impress, and he's a comedian.
Well, an unemployed comedian, one of Hollywood's little fish, and it
has gotten so bad he's asked for an application at Starbuck's.
Actually, the Starbuck's thing gets even worse.  And worse.
You won't fail to like Mike, however, played endearingly by Jon
Favreau.  SWINGERS revolves around Mike's half-hearted and awkward
efforts to get back in the social swing of things.  To this end he is
enthusiastically assisted by his equally underachieving twentysomething
actor friends, such as Trent (Vince Vaughn with the film's most
animated performance), who has the gift of gab bordering on the
disturbing side of motivational speaking, gun-toting Sue (Patrick van
Horn), and Rob (Ron Livingston), who once played Hamlet but now longs
to work as Goofy in Disneyland, but doesn't succeed because of his lack
of "theme park experience."  Together they talk about women - how to
make eye contact, which involves avoiding it, and when to call so as
never to appear desperate, two days being "industry standard." After
talking the talk, they walk the walk, strutting like the cool swingers
they aspire to be, always to laughable effect.
To get Mike out of his funk, his friends persistently convince him to
get outside, whether it be to a quickie night trip to a seedy Vegas
casino or a cutthroat Hollywood party with the beautiful people or a
50s swing lounge.  Everywhere they encourage Mike to look for a
replacement "honey" and then keep vigil over his progress, or lack of
it.  Like dotty doting parents, Mike never leaves their company without
being the recipient of their confidence cheerleading ("You're money,
Mike, and the honeys know it.") or equipped with their eccentric dating
philosophies, such as an analogy of flirting with the bear and the
bunny.  With the unwavering support of friends like these, maybe Mike's
not doing too badly after all.
Favreau also doubled as the film's screenwriter, and he proves he has
the gift for creating engaging characters and witty banter that goes
beyond today's bon mot.  There is a reassuring honesty to the
friendships, even when it hits its low points and the friends
commiserate.  When Mike gets the gumption to look for love, you will
join his cheerleading section as well.
SWINGERS is light, unassuming fare, sweet candy you will want to bust
your gut with - laughing - again and again.

Author
Tim Voon
In this tale about human mating rituals, we have the scenario of a down
and out comedian in L.A. who has recently been dumped by his long time
lover and is wallowing with depression. His juvenile friends, despite
being childish and irresponsible attempt to cheer him up by getting him
up and out to mingle with society. This is a good idea, but becomes
annoying when they give him mostly wrong advice. Advice like you can't
call someone out for a date until 2 days post first meeting. Leaving it
for several weeks is a better option. Or you need to look cool, be
slightly arrogant and throw money about for people to notice you.
Yes, people will start noticing you, all the wrong sorts. For this
lonely, otherwise pleasant young man he seems to be searching for the
right woman in all the wrong places i.e. bars, night clubs etc. Places
conducive for sex, drugs and alcohol but not ideal for a generating a
more lasting union. So night after night he searches for true love,
toddling behind his high swinging' friends whose main intent is to get
laid, whilst he is searching for a more meaningful relationship. My
advice to him is to look for love elsewhere. He stands a better chance
of finding a prospective partner who hasn't slept with all his friends
and a hundred different people let's say at a church picnic. The crowd
that haunts the night scene is also a festering pool of crime, suicide
and sexually transmitted diseases waiting to happen. When one gets older
this lifestyle loses its charm because it is based on youth, good looks
and vitality. When these virtues disappear it becomes evident how
rootless' this way of life truly is.
This movie makes a good study about the evolving rituals of courting in
late 20th century males. Where the subject matter, a man in his twenties
unexpectedly finds love in a bar. He takes a chance by not following the
usual conventions described to him by his friends. It also makes a good
study on resisting peer group pressure and making your own stance and
decisions in life. I was very proud of him when he actually decided not
to force himself on the girl after their first meeting, and remained a
gentleman throughout the encounter. This is a movie I started out hating
because of all the misconceived notions it suggests about courting, but
ended up liking because it declared how wrong these notions were.
