Title
Review for Halloween H20: Twenty Years Later (1998)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Matthew Brissette
There are more classic lines in horror movies than in any other genre.
"I'll be right back , don't start without me!" comes to mind. Or how
about "Everybody stay calm!" and "Is somebody in there?" Classic lines
of dialogue , but the the award for best line ever in a horror movie
simply must go to Adam Arkin for his: "That's horrible! Take off your
clothes." 
Unfortunately , that little tibbit from Halloween : H20 is the only
thing you'll remember about this movie years from now. Before going any
further I have to get this off my chest , mostly because it's one of the
few good things I have to say about H20 : if you can stand a full hour
of bad acting , half a dozen false alarms , several cheap "it was just a
cat , dog , bird , man , girl , car , bell , phone , door , window ,
glass...etc etc..." moments...then you can look foward to a thirty
minute long cat and mouse chase between Laurie Strode and Mike Myers. Is
it worth that long a wait? Yes. Barely. 
H20's final half hour contains more truly scary scenes than during the
entire length of Scream 2. No , that's not quite right : H20's final
half hour contains more truly CREEPY scenes. There are no jump out of
your seat scares but you will feel the hairs on the back of your neck
rise up. Micheal is more frightening than he as been in years , this is
definately not a guy you would want coming after you. Fans of the horror
genre , I include myself in that clique , will get a good vibe from
seing Jamie Lee Curtis once again in the genre that made her famous. 
Luckily , she manages to hold the movie together for all the other
actors. The actor playing her son does a decent enough job , nothing
spectacular but at least I found him less annoying than the other teens.
This brings up an important question : why is it that psycho killers
always go after teens? As a teen myself , I find that pretty annoying.
Why should they always pick on us?! 
Once , just once , I'd like to see ol' Jason or Michael go wacko in a
retirement home or one of those places in florida where old guys and
gals go. Stop picking on us! Anyway , it's not really that much of a
problem since you will want most of these teens dead anyway. People
often complain that horror movie teens are way too dumb...that's the
point! That way you don't feel too bad when they get chopped to pieces. 
I'm speaking of Michelle Williams , of course. Will somebody tell me
what's wrong with her cheeks? 
( No , not those cheeks you perverts...)  She looks like she swallowed a
pair of balloons! And what's up with those eyebrows anyway? Yuck. Anyway
, she is one of those Dawson's Creek kids. That should tell you enough
about her acting.
Adding to the babe factor , an important factor in any good scary movie
, is Jodi Lyn O'Keefe. I wanted to hate her but her character gets to
die during H20's scariest scene , an exciting busboy chase , so she gets
brownie points for dying in a cool way. Boy , I bet Nash is gonna drive
the cuda right up Michael's butt when he hears what he did to Cassidy.
( If you don't get that one then you must not watch Nash Bridges. So
don't think about it too much. Moving on...)
Adam Arkin is wasted in a thankless role , maybe he took the role
because he wanted the chance to have Jamie Lee Curtis feed him some
candy. ( You'll know it when you see it. ) LL Cool J provides a little
comic relief , usually this type of character gets to die in some heroic
way in horror movies. In H20? Ever hear of friendly fire? 
H20's biggest weakness is it's lack of any real surprise and several
plot holes. Of course the mother and her child don't get killed ,
children under the age of ten never get killed. See any previous
Halloween or Friday The 13th. Of course Jamie Lee does not hide in the
closet , that's why they showed us that flashback at the beginning of
the movie. 
Can somebody explain this to me : the producers asked us to forget any
Halloween sequel after number 2 
( gladly! ) and told us that H20 is the only real sequel to Halloween 2.
Here's my problem : in Halloween 2 , Doctor Loomis dies in a blaze along
with Myers. Of course ,  Loomis was back in four-six with "serious
burns" but 3 to 6 never happened according to the producers. Thus ,
since Loomis is in fact dead since number 2 , why does a police man in
the doc's house  , twenty years later ,  says that doc loomis died "a
few years ago" and that he was living with a nurse?
How does it end , you ask? Badly. H20 does the unthinkable : it actually
kills it's monster! No , no , no...for real this time! I doubt even ol'
Mike Myers can repair a severed head. I actually felt bad for the guy.
Sniff. Final analysis: I was fast feeling asleep near the end of the
first house but my pulse was doing the rumba in my chest for the final
confrontation.
Rating: Three and a half stars out of Six for the chance to hear that
catchy theme one more time , a kick ass Jamie Lee Curtis , a thrilling
conclusion , overwhelmingly bad acting by the supporting cast , one butt
ugly blonde ( those eyebrows...those
cheeks....ewwww....must...resist...urge to pop....her...cheeks...) and a
"really big kitchen knife". 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Dimension Films
 Director: Steve Miner
 Writers:  Robert Zappia, Matt Greenberg, Kevin Williamson
 Cast: Jamie Lee Curtis, Michelle Williams, Josh Hartnett,
Adam Arkin, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Adam Hann-Byrd,LL Cool J.
   When John Carpenter's "Halloween" (also featuring Jamie
Lee Curtis) hit the screens in 1978, it scared the heck out of
people who thought they were too sophisticated to be fazed
by horror films.  Roger Ebert called it an "absolutely merciless
thriller, a movie so violent and scary that I would compare it to
'Psycho.'"  "Halloween" was about a six-year-old kid who
commits a murder at the beginning of the movie and is
counseled by a psychiatrist who recommends--as psychiatrists
are not usually wont to do--that the kid stay
in jail for a long long time.  The kid's name is Michael Myers,
he had killed his brother, and though he is thought to be
dead, his sister, Laurie Strode, fears for her life.  For two
decades, Myers has not shown his face in town, seeming to
confirm that he is no longer with us, but now, on October 31,
1998, he is doing what he does best.  In his attempt to get at
his sister, now in her late thirties and the head mistress of an
exclusive prep school in California, he must first clear away a
few other people whose predicament is that they are seen as
buffers to the frightened and enraged Strode (Jamie Lee
Curtis).  Some time back, Laurie had changed her name to
Keri Tate, has been unsuccessful at fighting her problems
with alcohol and prescription drugs, and is much too
protective of her 17-year-old son, John (Josh Hartnett).
   "Halloween H20" is yet another sequel that cannot match
up to the glories of its precursor and, in fact, is considerably
less hair-raising than recent horror films like "Scream,"
"Scream 2," and even "Mimic."  Directed by Steve Miner--who
is unable to mine the "Psycho"-like terror of John Carpenter's
original, "Halloween H20" spends much of its brief 85 minutes'
duration establishing the atmosphere of a quiet town which
harbors the exclusive and secluded high school presided over
by Keri Tate.  She has taken a mere guidance counselor, Will
Brennan (Adam Arkin) as a lover, and against the usual rules
of pedagogy includes her own son in her literature class.  The
story, scripted by three people(!), strives for metaphoric
content, highlighting a class discussion of the novel
"Frankenstein" (which only one student seems to have read),
but otherwise lays no claim to cerebral satisfactions.
   Several flaws are responsible for this picture's relative lack
of nail-biting tension.  For one, Miner has mined the
conventions of the genre leaving little for originality.  Principal
among these protocols is the repetition of false alarms, as
when a guy would seeming sneak up to a potential victim, lay
his hand on her shoulder, and amid her screams turn out to
be no-one more dangerous than the next-door neighbor.  For
another, the chief villain, Michael Myers (Chris Durand),
commits his murders purely for reasons never known to the
audience.  He may be having fun as he butchers his victims,
but given the white Halloween mask he never removes, we
see no expression on his face when he commits
mayhem, nor do we know a thing about him except that he's
a psycho.  He has no conscience and presumably feels no
pain; so where is the thrill of acquiring retribution over him?  
   Like other creeps in the genre, this mosntrous guy never
runs after his intended victims but rather walks like the
Frankenstein monster and as a result misses out on some
juicy killings; nor does he make his profession easier by
using anything more lethal than a kitchen knife.  Only one
murder is shown in vivid, close-up horror; that of quarry who
does not simply roll over and die when stabbed but who
actually has frightening tremors during his brief but eerie
death-rattle.  
   LL Cool J plays a nice guy, a security guard who is an
aspiring novelist and spends much time on duty phoning his
woman with chapters from his salacious works-in-progress. 
He's not the sort of fellow whom the audience would allow to
be sliced up, so not to worry.  As the high school sweethearts
John and Molly, Josh Hartnett and Michelle Williams are from
stereotype city.  John does not exactly get a chance to shine
when he's given lines like "Mom, you've got to let me live my
own life."  As the adult sweethearts, Tate and Brennan seem
made for each other.  Tate, an alcoholic prone to hysteria, is
too flawed to sympathize with, and Brennan turns in a
stick-like performance this time around.  What's more Steve
Miner gives us a teasing glimpse of what he could have done
with this movie by flashing a few seconds of "Scream" on the
teens' TV screen; "Do you want to die tonight?"  Now that's
scary.

Author
Bob Bloom
Halloween H20: 20 Years Later, starring Jamie Lee Curtis and Adam Arkin
1 1/2 stars out of 4
 Twenty years ago Halloween was a groundbreaker, an intense, scary,
shockfest that held you breathless from start to finish.
  It introduced most of the modus operendi of what became known as the
"slasher" film; linking sexual promiscuity, especially that of teen-age
girls, to death; the jump-into-frame bump; the unstoppable killer.
 Without Halloween, they'd be no Jasons and no Freddie Kruegers. I will
leave it to the sociologists to determine whether that is a good or bad
thing.
 Kevin Williamson, the writer of Scream and Scream 2, was profoundly
influenced by Halloween. It's obvious in his works.
 Now, he serves as executive producer of Halloween H2O: 20 Years Later, a
cumbersome title for a cumbersome movie.
 Williamson probably meant this film as a tribute to a work that set him on
his career course. Unfortunately, his writers and director have done a hack
job with this latest incarnation in the deadly exploits of Michael Myers.
 Ignorning all the sequels that came after Halloween 2, H2O's story picks
up 20 years after that infamous Halloween night back in Illinois in which
Michael massacred half the teen-age population.
 His sister, Laurie Strode, has changed her name to Keri Tate and is
headmistress at a private school in northern California. Reprising her role
as Laurie is Jamie Lee Curtis.
 Her Laurie/Keri is a single mom, a closet alcoholic beset by nightmares
about Michael coming after her.
 And so he does. No explanation is given for where Michael came from or how
he even knew how to begin to look for his long-lost sister.
 But before you can say butcher knife, Michael has murdered his way to
California and is making plans to skewer Laurie and anyone else within his
grasp.
  H2O is a pale imitation of the original. But, to be fair, this is not so
much the fault of the filmmakers, as it is with the changing times.
  So many films has copied and ripped off the original Halloween formula
that instead of being one step behind the filmmaker, as in the original,
the audience is one step ahead.
  Yes H2O offers some frights. It has its share of people jumping out of
corners into into the frame, red-herring screeching music that sets the
audience on edge, but signifies nothing. Yet it is now so familiar, so
predictable that it elicits laughs instead of screams.
  H2O may be meant as a homage, but nearly comes off as parody, especially
in the over-the-top finale.
  Curtis is too good an actress to allow the weak material to underwhelm
her. She makes Laurie/Keri's fears palatable. She does not condescend to
the material. It's a shame the script never is able to reach her artistic
level.
  The rest of the cast is merely there to be victims. Adam Arkin really has
nothing to do as the school's counselor, who also happens to be Laurie's
lover.
  Only LL Cool J as the school's romance-writing security guard offers some
originality.
  Other Halloween H2O is merely just another cliched entry into the
overstuffed trunk of slasher films. And it's a sad commentary on the
audience that we can laugh at all these gruesome proceedings without
feeling a bit of pity or empathy for the plight of those Michael is
stalking.
 The vast number of these movies have so overwhelmed our senses that we
have become immune to any normal reaction - except perhaps to keep a body
count.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
You can reach him by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Jamie Lee Curtis; Adam Arkin; Josh Hartnett; Michelle Williams &
Adam Hann-Byrd
Good old Michael Myers is back to instill his usual brand of terror on
Halloween night. Unlike the previous 2 dozen sequels (at least it seemed
like that many), this latest installment has some real actors involved. At
the head of that list is Jamie Lee Curtis who became a star after starring
in the first Halloween and its first sequel as Laurie Strode, Michael Myers'
sister and the object of his obsession. Of course obsession in Mike's case
means that he wants to kill her. Joining Curtis this time out are Adam Arkin
(from TV's Chicago Hope) and Michelle Williams (from TV's Dawson's Creek).
It must have seemed like a reunion of sorts for Michelle Williams, since the
executive producer of Dawson's Creek, Kevin Williamson, also had a hand in
the making of Halloween: H20. By now people are starting to realize that
Kevin Williamson's involvement in a movie tends to mean that a quality
project is going to appear on the screen. With such horror films as Scream,
Scream 2 and I Know What You Did Last Summer under his belt, Kevin
Williamson knows a little something about horror films. A fact that is
fairly evident in the latest Halloween movie. Gone are the plot less,
mindless, badly acted sequels on the past few years, Williamson and company
have managed to breathe new life into a very tired horror series that by
rights should have been killed off years ago. It's a credit to all of those
involved in H20 that it makes you remember just why the original is
considered to be the classic that it is today. And speaking of classics, no
review of H20 would be complete without the mentioning the inclusion of
Janet Leigh in a small but memorable role in H20. For those of you who are
less knowledgeable out there in movie land, Leigh starred in psycho and was
the one who ended taking that ill- fated shower at the Bates motel. She also
happens to be Jamie Lee Curtis' mother. I only mention this because most of
the fairly young audience that I screened the film with completely missed
the very clever psycho references that Leigh made.
Anyway, on to the plot. As everybody already knows, Michael Myers is the
masked knife wielding psycho who seems to be on a fairly relentless quest to
kill off all members of his family. (As a bit of trivia, the mask that Myers
wears is a William Shatner mask painted white. Which may explain all of the
bad acting in the past several sequels.) Although just how relentless that
murderous quest is seems to be questionable. This latest Halloween film
seems to ignore the events of the last 3 or 4 sequels where Myers has killed
off half of the Midwestern United States. It seems to suggest that Myers
hasn't been heard from since the events of the first two movies. But in
other ways it doesn't, since Curtis's character supposedly changed her name
and went into hiding sometime after the events of the first two movies --
giving way to explain why she wasn't around for the last 3 of these movies
when Myers was trying to slice and dice her daughter. At any rate, good old
Mike, after all these years has finally figured out where his sister Laurie
is and he is coming over for a family reunion. Since Laurie Strode and Mike
last exchanged pleasantries (in the form of Laurie blowing him up in
Halloween 2), Laurie has changed her name, and is a divorced mother of one
(which doesn't explain her daughter who Myers terrorized through Halloween 4
and 5) and she is a teacher at a private school in California. It seems that
the majority of the student body is going off on a little field trip that
will leave the gated campus largely deserted over the Halloween weekend.
Gosh, that's convenient. Also hanging out on the campus are Strode's son and
his girlfriend, as well as another young couple who are playing hookey from
the field trip. Oh yeah, uncle Mike shows up too, just in time to show off
his own brand of trick or treating. You can probably figure out the rest.
But lets just say that Jamie Lee Curtis shows us that even after twenty
years she can still take on masked killers with the best of them.
My complaints with this movie are small ones. Unlike the Scream films, the
characters in this movie don't appear to have watched that many horror
films, so as a result, when Myers appears wielding some large weapon, they
tend to be your typical dumb horror film characters. I.e. They run upstairs
as opposed to running out the front door. My next beef is the whole timeline
thing. While I understand that the producers would love to forget the last
few movies, it tends to be a bit confusing for those of us who actually sat
through all of them. (What can I say? I have no life.) I guess my biggest
disappointment was sadly one that could not have been prevented. Donald
Pleasance, the only bright spot in all of the Halloween films passed away
after the filming of the last Halloween movie, so Dr. Sam Loomis was not
around to save the day as he was in the earlier 6 films. Although as a sort
of tribute to him, they did use his voice in one of the opening scenes of
the film as they were recapping the Halloween story for those that may not
have seen Myers and company in twenty years.
The best Halloween since the original.

Author
Jerry Saravia
              "Halloween: H20" is the seventh in the endless "Halloween" series
and, although it is superior to the last few sequels, it is also surprisingly
bland, unscary, emotionally defunct, and unrewarding. 
"Halloween H20" finally brings back Jamie Lee Curtis as Laurie Strode, who last
fought and screamed her way through Michael Myers' path at the end of
"Halloween II." Now it's twenty years later, and guess what day it is. Laurie
is now twenty years older and has been in hiding as Keri Tate, the headmistress
of a prestigious private high school where her son attends! Keri is still
having nightmares about Myers, drinks Vodka by the gallon, and confides in her
love interest, a psychiatrist (Adam Arkin of "Chicago Hope"), about her hellish
past. But, what do you know, Michael has tracked her down, courtesy of a nurse
who knew Laurie from the old days in an uninventive opening sequence. 
"Halloween H20" is fun for a short while, and it is a pleasure to see Janet
Leigh in a largely brief cameo as Norma (!) who provides a maternal shoulder
for Laurie (sorry, Keri) and drives the same sedan she drove in "Psycho" - it's
a post-modernist "Scream" twist and the only witty idea in the entire movie.
But instead of creating a scenario of suspense where Keri tries to fend off not
only Michael but her own personal demons, the movie opts for blood-soaked,
stupid thrills by having some emaciated, hormonal teens go through the clichéd
motions of your average slasher flick. The kids say, "Who's there?", and the
incompetent direction by Steve Miner ("Friday the 13th Part 2") allows us to
see Michael in the shadows too soon before he walks up to the victims
and...well, you get the idea. Let's not kid ourselves: the two "Scream" movies
and the original "Halloween" went through the same motions but with, oh so much
more atmosphere, finesse, suspense and humor. 
There are two tense sequences that stand out: one involves an anonymous mother
and her daughter at a rural rest stop where Michael lurks behind bathroom
walls; and the coup de resistance moment where Michael and Laurie finally meet
face to face through a window. It's a moment of pure shock and horror, exactly
what should have been there throughout the whole movie.
Beyond that, "Halloween H20" has no real scares, surprises or suspense, but it
does have the enormous dignity of Jamie Lee Curtis. Her scenes with her teenage
son and with Arkin are pleasurable to watch and a bit of a novelty in a
disreputable genre. Curtis brings pathos, tears and toughness to her role that
Neve Campbell and Jennifer Love-Hewitt will never quite muster. She almost
singlehandedly saves this mediocre, run-of-the-mill sequel.
Footnote for the curious: The post-"Halloween" movies and rip-offs offered the
idea that a virginal teenager had a better chance of surviving a killer's
throes than those who had unruly sex. Laurie Strode was virginal in the first
two "Halloweens'" but now she has a son through the miracle of...sexual
intercourse. Is Laurie's son the reason Michael Myers is after her?
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING:   Jamie Lee Curtis, LL Cool J, Janet Leigh
DIRECTOR:   Steve Miner
WRITERS:    Robert Zappia, Matt Greenberg, Kevin Williamson (uncredited)
RATED/YEAR: R/1998
        For better or for worse, I am a child of the '80s.  Yes, I cried
at "E.T." when I was ten.  I get nostalgic when I hear the "Miami Vice"
theme song.  I spent most of my lunch money on games of "Donkey Kong."
And yeah, if you must know, I've still got a copy of "Thriller" buried
deep in my album collection.
        Because of this, it's almost unfair for me to review horror
movies.  You may as well ask me to critique the time period during
which my entire personality was defined.  Horror movies weren't just a
once-in-a-while thing for my friends and I; we were obsessed by the silly
things.  Yes, that's right: I, your friendly neighborhood self-appointed
film critic, who loves to watch boring, subtitled French dramas, still
gets giggly with glee at the thought of a slasher flick.  I'm not proud
of this, but I can't help it.  It's in my blood, thanks to the many
Saturday afternoons I spent over at the homes of various friends during
my junior high-school years, catching up on the latest adventures of
Jason, Freddy, and all their ilk.
        The '80s were the closest thing to a Renaissance that the horror
genre has ever had.  New films appeared every few weeks in the already
saturated marketplace, and my friends and I saw most of them.  As America
moved into the politically-correct '90s, however, a decline in both the
quantity and quality of these films became apparent.  Gone were the
suspense and excitement that made the movies so much fun to watch, replaced
instead with lingering shots of gore and brutality.  Attendance plummeted.
Hollywood, following their usual logic, figured this must mean that people
were tired of scary movies.  No, Hollywood, we weren't.  We quit watching
horror flicks because, while we want to be scared, we don't neccessarily
need to see a step-by-step disembowelment of each victim.  The glory days
of suspensful thrillers were gone forever, or so it seemed.
        But in 1996, a little film called "Scream" came along and single-
handedly revitalised the horror industry.  Here, for the first time in
over a decade, was a horror movie with memorable characters and a
fiendishly clever plot, featuring witty (and often hilarious) dialogue.
So profound was "Scream" that, for the first time ever, a screenwriter
(first-time scripter Kevin Williamson), got as much attention as the
director (horror veteran Wes Craven).  The duo teamed up again on the
equally entertaining and successful "Scream 2"; since then, Williamson has
found his services much in demand: he penned the screenplay for "I Know
What You Did Last Summer," in addition to creating the hit TV series
"Dawson's Creek."
        In an interview with a popular screenwriting magazine, Williamson
was asked to name his favorite movie.  "Halloween," he replied without a
moment's hesitation.  He then went on to cite the profound effect that
the movie had on both his life and the horror genre in general.  He did
not exaggerate: "Halloween" is a certified classic, single-handedly
creating (for better or for worse) the slasher movie.
        The story, for those of you not in the know, involves an eight-
year-old boy named Michael Myers, who brutally murdered his sister on
Halloween night, 1963.  Committed to a mental hospital, Myers underwent
years of psycho-analysis before his doctor, Sam Loomis, pronounced him
incurable.  In 1978, Michael, now 23, escaped from the institution and
made his way back to his family's home in Haddonfield Illinois, with Dr.
Loomis in hot pursuit.  The climax of the film, in which Michael stalks the
residents of the neighborhood while Dr. Loomis attempts to stop him, is one
of the genre's finest moments.
        "Halloween" starred a then-unknown actress named Jamie Lee Curtis,
playing the role of all-American girl Laurie Strode, tormented by Myers
for reasons she doesn't understand.  She did an admirable job; her
performance still stands up, twenty years later.  Curtis brought a depth
to the character that reached far beyond the typical caricature roles that
women were usually assigned in such movies; it's easy to believe that
Laurie Strode is a "real" person, not the typical cardboard cutout that
is usually preferred in such parts.  That's why we rooted for her.
        "Halloween" was a huge success, both critically and financially.
Roger Ebert's famous review, in which he gave the film four stars (his
highest rating) and compared it favorably to "Psycho," was typical of the
adulation and praise that it received.  And movie-goers took note: until
recently, "Halloween" was the highest-grossing independent movie *ever*.
(If I remember correctly, "The English Patient" was the film which finally
stole away the title.)
        A sequel quickly followed, and "Halloween II," while flawed,
managed to thrill and delight audiences all over again.  Picking up mere
moments after the original movie ended, we watched as Dr. Loomis continued
his search for Michael Myers, who'd managed to slither from his grasp.
Curtis's character is sent to a nearby hospital to have her wounds treated.
Michael, wanting desperately to finish the job he'd begun earlier that
night, follows her, giving us the opportunity for a suspensful game of cat
and mouse.  In an "Empire Strikes Back"-type twist we learn that Michael is
actally Laurie's brother, which is the reason he's so gung-ho on killing
her: he wants to dispose of his entire family.  Dr. Loomis comes to the
rescue, however, and Michael is apparently destroyed.
        He wasn't, though, and other "Halloween" films followed.  None of
them were anywhere near as successful as these first two outings.  Jamie
Lee Curtis declined to return to the series; therefore, silly new plot
twists were invented, including the introduction of other relatives that
Michael feels the need to dispose of.  John Carpenter, the auteur who
created the series and composed its famous theme song, also called it quits
after two films.  The death of the series was imminent: in subsequent
outings, Dr. Loomis became more and more uninteresting, while the suspense
and tension the first film is so famous for were exchanged for gore.
Sadly, the franchise degenerated into just another bunch of slasher
pictures, no better than the other "copycat" movies which quickly flooded
the market after the success of the first installment.
        I've always thought the series should've given up when Curtis left;
happily, director Steve Miner agrees with me.  The latest installment in the
series, "Halloween: 20 Years Later" is a direct sequel to the first two
films, bringing Jamie Lee Curtis back to the role that began her career
and cheerfully ignoring the other dreadful movies that came out in the
interim.  Kudos, I say!
        The story: Laurie Strode, unable to come to terms with the tragedy
that Michael Myers inflicted upon her, devises a plan to free herself and
reclaim her life.  She fakes her death, changes her name, and moves to
California.  Over the next two decades she gets married, has a son, gets
divorced, and becomes the principal of a fancy private school.  She's a
well-respected community leader, but she still can't shake the demons from
her past.  She sees Michael Myers in every reflection, and has developed a
drug and alcohol problem as her way of dealing with the pressure and her
own questionable sanity.
        Dr. Loomis, her ally from the first two films, has passed away.
In the opening sequence, an intruder breaks into Loomis's empty home and
steals a file containing confidential data on Laurie Strode.  Yes, boys
and girls: it's Michael Myers, determined to find his little sister once
again.
        Offering assistance to Laurie are her son and his friends, plus
Ronnie Jones (LL Cool J), a local security guard/aspiring writer, all of
whom turn in acceptable performances.  (One of the most entertaining comes
from Ronnie's unseen wife, who chats with him constantly on the phone while
he reads her the latest pages of his novel-in-progress.)
        Mr. Miner throws in lots of subtle little touches which suit the
film nicely.  In the original "Halloween," Michael's victims watch "The
Thing" on TV, unaware that a more immediate terror lurks right outside the
living room window.  In "H20," teens watch Ed Wood's "Plan Nine From
Outer Space" ("Your stupid minds!  Stupid, stupid minds!" shouts the
television) and the aforementioned "Scream."  It's a nice tip of the hat
to Kevin Williamson, who also worked on the script (uncredited), no doubt
fulfilling a lifelong dream by doing so.
        Williamson's touch is present throughout, which may be one of the
reasons the film works.  This movie actually feels more like "Scream" than
the later "Halloween" sequels: we have many humorous lines (uncommon even
in the earlier movies), lots of "fake scares" (something Williamson's
earlier movies have thrived on), and of course, the patented "the killer
comes back to life after he's supposed to be dead" trick.  The cliches
occasionally get a bit tedious (do we really need to see the old "the car
won't start when we need to make a quick get-away" gag again?), but by
and large the film knows what to do.  It's not particularly innovative,
but it *is* rock solid.
        Is it perfect?  Hardly.  There are at least two instances in which
the viewer simply must roll his or her eyes good-naturedly at the screen.
One character, who gets all six chambers of a revolver emptied into his
chest, pops up again at the end of the film.  "I'm fine!  The bullets just
grazed me!" he explains.  Uh-huh.  Then why'd you'd bleed all over the
place?  Also, one skeptic who doesn't believe that Myers has really
returned asks: "Why would Michael wait twenty years before seeking revenge
on Laurie?"  An excellent question!  Too bad we never find out the answer.
Both are nitpicks, but they kinda bothered me.
         I loved the photography in this movie.  I'm a sucker for unusual
angles and lighting, and this film does not disappoint.  Like the original
"Halloween," Michael is mainly seen in shadowy profile, giving him an
ethereal quality which suits the film's mood.  The guy's still scary,
you gotta admit.
        The film flies by, thanks to its "to-the-bone" editing.  It runs
a scant 85 minutes (about half as long as "Saving Private Ryan"), making
it one of the shortest non-animated films I've ever seen.  Still,
additional footage would've only slowed its breakneck pace.  I, for one,
approved of its brevity.
        In fact, I have to confess something, and I hope my film-critic
license isn't revoked because of it: I absolutely loved this film.  Jamie
Lee is in top form (and still looks great), the direction is creative, and
the final scene is haunting and satisfying.  (It actually got a hearty
round of applause at the screening I attended.)  Horror films may be a
guilty pleasure for me, but when they're this much fun, who cares?  I felt
like I was 14 again while I was watching.  If I'd only been able to catch
a Mr. Mister tune on the radio after the show, the experience would've
been complete.
        (Oh, and check out the older lady who plays Laurie's receptionist:
yes, it's Janet Leigh!  Not only is she Jamie Lee Curtis's real-life mother,
but she played the shower scene victim in the original "Psycho," too.  How
can any horror fan resist two generations of Scream Queens in the same
movie?)
This review was written: August 6, 1998
Copyright (c) 1998 by Joe Barlow.  This review may be freely distributed as
long as ABSOLUTELY NO CHANGES are made and this disclaimer remains attached.
It may not be reproduced for profit without the written consent of the
author.  If you have comments or questions, please send them to: jbarlow
at earthling dot net (substituting the appropriate symbols, to discourage
spam).
-----
  "Average Joe" Barlow * MiSTie #73097 * Writer/musician/aspiring filmmaker
       jbarlow@YOURearthling.PANTSnet http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow
              {Remove YOUR PANTS to e-mail me.}        

Author
Paul K. Bisson
"HALLOWEEN: H20" -- Reviewed by Paul K. Bisson
What's the difference between a good film and a bad one?  Or, more to
the point, what would make a potentially bad movie good?  If there was
just one element that could make an otherwise mediocre flick worth
it's eight buck admission, what would it be?  And what if this picture
was a sequel?...A sequel with the number "7" in the title?
Well, sometimes, it all comes down to one thing.  In this case:
nostalgia.  That's the reason "HALLOWEEN: H2O" worked for me.  In
fact, that's the only reason it worked for me.
Good or bad, say what you will about the modern horror movie.  But be
sure not to deny the fact that in 1978, John Carpenter's "HALLOWEEN"
changed the face of it with what has since become known as the
"slasher genre."  That's big stuff.  Unusual.  But not entirely rare.
Hitchcock did it with "PSYCHO."  Craven & Williamson did it with
"SCREAM."  But while "PSYCHO" shocked an unprepared generation with it
and "SCREAM" redefined it, "HALLOWEEN" pushed us headlong into the
core of it.
And any Hollywood producer worth his weight in the industry would have
been crazy not to capitalize on the success of it.  There was the
"FRIDAY THE 13TH" franchise, followed by the "NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET"
series.  And, of course, "HALLOWEEN II-VI."  And while some of these
enjoyed moderate to huge successes, it wasn't long before "slasher"
became synonymous with a big fat "yawn."
So what's so special about another "HALLOWEEN" sequel?  Especially
after we've been spoiled by the intelligence and wit of "SCREAM" and
"SCREAM 2?"  Well, like I said, nostalgia.
There's something special about Jamie Lee Curtis returning to her
cinematic roots and reprising her role as Laurie Strode.  There's
something special about rediscovering this character, learning what
has happened to her in the last twenty years, understanding the person
she has become and why.  There's also something utterly fascinating
about a new confrontation with an old nemesis, the Shape she has
eluded all these years, her brother, Michael Myers.
20 years ago, Laurie Strode died in a car crash and Keri Tate was
born.  Now a divorcee with a seventeen year old son, Curtis gives a
credible performance as the older Strode/Tate, an overprotective
mother who holds the position as Head Mistress of a prestigious
private school.  Addicted to drugs and alcohol, she goes through life
seemingly normal on the outside but fighting an emotional battle
within, living in constant fear that one day her brother will track
her (and her son) down and finish what he started.
And as October 31st arrives, her fears become reality.  Most of the
students and faculty have gone on a camping trip for the holiday,
leaving a handful of pickings behind for the kill.  We know, from an
earlier scene, that Myers has located his sister and has set out to
find her.  From there the movie plays out as we expect it to and as it
should.  There's no guessing game here, no tricky surprises.  Just the
Bogeyman and Laurie Strode, together again for the first time in
twenty years.
Yes--kids are killed in a variety of ways, yes--there are stalking
chases, yes--there are bumps-in-the-night and sudden shocks.  But what
did you expect?  This is a horror movie.  It would have been nice to
know what Myers has been up to all these years (especially since the
movie ignores sequels 4-6).  It would be nice to learn more of the
evil that drives him (instead we are treated to a flashback of Donald
Pleasence's haunting monologue).  Yes, this movie could have provided
us with a few more insights and details.  But it doesn't give us that.
What it does give us are wonderful cameos by Janet Leigh (paying
homage to Carpenter's inspiration) and Nancy Stevens (reprising her
role as Dr. Loomis' Nurse Wittington from the original).  What it does
give us is Jamie Lee Curtis.  What it does give us is a final
confrontation between good and evil.  A Do Or Die re-match between the
masked villain that started it all and his, the original, scream queen
heroine.  All to the newly arranged orchestration of that menacing
little tune.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Michael Myers (AKA The Shape) return as the little brother who never
dies, in this seventh installment (called H20 because it takes place 20
years after the original story/movie took place) of the coveted
HALLOWEEN series. The original was directed by horror-meister John
Carpenter.
PLOT:
Laurie Strode (Curtis) has moved on with her life. She is now the
headmistress of a private school, of which her son is a proud 17-year
old member. She's changed her name and assumed a new identity, because
she still fears that her crazy little brother, who murdered her friends
and sister twenty years ago, will return and try to kill her again.
Halloween night approaches. Michael Myers returns. Let the killing
begin.
CRITIQUE:
The horror genre is back, and so is Mr. Kevin Williamson's wonderful
touch on all things scary. This movie's packed with all the screams,
cheers, laughs and gross-outs that you could swing a spooky stick at.
It's everything you ever looked for in a scary popcorn movie. Period.
And on those fronts, this movie delivers just like SCREAM (8/10),
SCREAM 2 (7/10) and I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER (7.5/10) did over
the past couple of years. All films signed by Kevin Williamson. Advised
be those who did not care for any of the previously mentioned films, to
avoid this teenage-bludgeoning, blood-letting, LL Cool J-costarring
funfest.
In case anyone is worried about not having seen any of the previous
Halloweens-don't worry, the whole back-story is explained pretty
quickly, and frankly, the story is that this man with the eerie mask is
f-cked up real bad, and wants to kill people, most prominently his
sister. The film does start off a little slow, and did offer up one too
many "fake scares" in my humble opinion, but once the action gets
going, it really takes off! Another cool thing about this movie is that
it's barely an hour and a half long. It doesn't get bogged down in
explanation after explanation, but does demonstrate various ways in
which a psychopath could stab people. Speaking of which, there are at
least two PSYCHO (7/10) references in this movie, one alone, coming
from Ms. Psycho herself, Janet Leigh, who has a throwaway part in this
film as the school's secretary.
People screamed, people laughed, people screeched (Mrs. JoBlo got the
guts scared out of her), people farted...let's just say that people had
a blast! (Mind you, I saw this film on the first showing of the first
night that it came out. Real horror fans only, please.) Oh yeah, and
did I mention that John Carpenter's "theme to Halloween" remains one of
the eeriest scores to run a movie over? Good stuff. All in all, if
you're a horror fan, and like all of the other Kevin Williamson-based
films, there's no good reason why you shouldn't truly enjoy this one
(Besides the fact, that it's not jam-packed with hip, young, successful
Hollywood stars and starlets.) And if you don't dig horror, well, I
guess there's always THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY (7/10)!
Note: Double up on the salsa for this one. Trust me, the nachos will
thank you later.
Little Known Facts: 
Jamie Lee Curtis was paid a hefty sum of $8000 for her role in the
original HALLOWEEN, and $100,000 for the follow-up.
At one point during this movie, you could clearly see SCREAM 2 playing
on a television set. At one point during the original SCREAM film, you
could see the original HALLOWEEN playing on the television set.
Janet Leigh is Jamie Lee Curtis' mother in real-life. Actor Tony Curtis
is her real-life father. Janet Leigh was the lady who "got it" in the
infamous shower scene from Alfred Hitchcock's PSYCHO. 
Other titles for this movie were "Halloween 7", "Halloween 7: The
Revenge of Laurie Strode", "Halloween: H20 (20 Years Later)" and
"Halloween: The Revenge of Laurie Strode."
TV's "Dawson's Creek" connections: Actress Michelle Williams stars in
the show. Director Steve Miner has directed episodes of the show. And
wunderkid Kevin Williamson created and produces the show.
Jamie Lee Curtis met her husband Christopher Guest after she saw a
picture of him in the Rolling Stone magazine, and cleverly made sure
that his agent got her number.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        If I've learned something in twenty years as a moviegoer, it's 
that no matter how many times Hollywood has beaten a dead horse, 
there can always be another unwarranted sequel. In the late '80s, we 
hoped HALLOWEEN 5 would be the last. Then came the even more 
dreadful sixth installment in 1995; now, for the original movie's 
twentieth anniversary, out comes HALLOWEEN: H20, which SCREAM 
writer Kevin Williamson fought to bring to the big screen.
        Ignoring the last four sequels (probably the brightest flash of 
inspiration this movie had), H20 goes back to the roots of the series -- 
Michael Myers stalking Jamie Lee Curtis, who is now well into her 
40s and drinking vodka straight from the bottle. Laurie Strode, the 
archetypical babysitter victim, is now the head mistress at a private 
school, living under an assumed name as Halloween 1998 rolls 
around. It's the twentieth anniversary of the Haddonfield murders and 
Laurie/Keri is rightfully freaked out.
        Besides being an alcoholic, she's a frighteningly 
overprotective mother. Her son (Josh Harnett) attends the same 
boarding school, and she won't let him go with the other students and 
faculty on a Yosemite camping trip (the requisite plot devise to clear 
out the facilities). So he stays behind with three other delinquents 
(Michelle Williams, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe and Adam Hann-Byrd, at least 
one of whom is on "Dawson's Creek") who plan a night of booze, sex 
and food. Way to go, Mom.
        Rounding out the cast of those left behind are LL Cool J as an 
erotica-writing security guard and Jamie Lee's boyfriend, played by 
Adam Arkin of "Chicago Hope." He's a therapist, which proves 
opposites attract, and seals his own fate when she tells him about her 
past and he replies, "That's sucky." It's a fun game early on to guess 
who will get killed and by which instruments, although there are few 
surprises and the movie seems to have far fewer substance than even 
the bad sequels.
        Then there's Myers, also known as The Shape. He emerges on 
October 29 to kill the nurse from the first two HALLOWEEN films and 
Joseph Gordon-Levitt of "3rd Rock From the Sun" with an ice skate to 
the face (which will probably be worth full ticket price for people who 
find little Joseph annoying). Then he steals two cars and heads to 
California to catch up with Jamie Lee, making the rest of us wonder if 
he really wears that mask when he drives. It would tend to impair 
vision, I imagine.
        Bringing Jamie Lee back and bringing Williamson aboard 
made this the sequel with the most appeal since HALLOWEEN II, but 
there comes a point where it's really ridiculous to see the same woman 
run from the same masked killer for the umpteenth time. Not only is 
Curtis pre-menopausal (though her character is only supposed to be 
37) but Michael Myers himself is over the hill. Every time a nubile 
teen runs from him, I'm waiting for him to say, "Come back here, you 
damn kid. I'm too old for this shit."
        The idea here is to invoke the familiar, to the point where 
Jamie Lee ends up reciting some of the exact same dialogue from the 
first movie ("Do as I say!") and yelling the f-word when she realizes 
the only place to hide is in a closet. This movie is more a nostalgia 
kick than anything, up to its ears in in-jokes, down to having Jamie's 
real mother (Janet Leigh, the famous shower stabbing victim in 
PSYCHO) pop in a cameo to "be maternal."
        HALLOWEEN: H20 has a few shocks but no real scares. Then 
again, it comes from Steve Miner, who directed FRIDAY THE 13TH Parts 
2 and 3. There's no hope for a classy horror movie when the director is 
best known for a 3-D movie where Jason popped some kid's eyeball 
from its socket. At least the movie has a sense of humor, most of 
which from some uncredited Williamson script moments. And finally 
we get a HALLOWEEN movie that ends exactly like all the other ones 
should have. Maybe Laurie Strode has wised up a little in the past 
twenty years. Let's hope Hollywood has, and there's no HALLOWEEN: 
H21.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steve Miner.
Cast: Jamie Lee Curtis, Josh Hartnett, Michelle Williams, Jodi Lyn 
O'Keefe, Adam Hann-Byrd, LL Cool J, Adam Arkin, Nancy Stephens, Joseph 
Gordon-Levitt, Branden Williams, Janet Leigh, Emilee Thompson, Lisa Gay 
Hamilton, Chris Durand.
1998 - 82 minutes.
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed October 27, 1998.
John Carpenter's 1978 classic "Halloween" was a masterpiece, the best 
horror film I have ever seen. I am sure no genre film of its type will 
ever surpass it, but when I heard that Jamie Lee Curtis was returning 
for a 20th-anniversary sequel, my hopes ran sky-high. I thought to 
myself, while no sequel could equal the original, it could very well be, 
for once, a truly worthy follow-up. Going into "Halloween: H20," I was 
all set to see a great horror film in the vein of the original, and with 
the talent involved, I was almost positive it wouldn't be anything less 
than superb. Well, I have now seen "Halloween: H20," and I am very 
saddened to say that the film was a disappointment.
Most people are very familiar with the original "Halloween," as it was 
about a teenage babysitter, Laurie Strode, played by Curtis, on 
Halloween night whose evil, psychotic brother went after her on 
Halloween night, thus hoping to have murdered both of his siblings.
"Halloween: H20" picks up exactly twenty years later, as Laurie Strode 
now lives under the false name of Keri Tate, has a 17-year-old son (Josh 
Hartnett), is the headmistress of a posh, exclusive private school, and 
lives every day of her life terrified that her brother, Michael Myers, 
will come back, thus hiding behind prescription drugs and alcohol. 
Laurie's fears happen to come true on Halloween night, as all of the 
children have gone on a vacation, except for Curtis' son, his 
girlfriend, Molly (Michelle Williams), and their other two friends (Adam 
Hann-Byrd, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe), leaving them, as well as Laurie's 
boyfriend (Adam Arkin) and the school security guard (LL Cool J), alone 
at the school to fend off Michael Myers, who has found out where his 
sister has been hiding all of these years.
That is the set-up for "Halloween: H20," a film that all but disregards 
Parts 4-6, which is alright with me, since they started to get off 
track, focusing on ridiculous druid claptrap. This new film also 
obviously has a larger budget, has moody, atmospheric cinematography, 
and pays homage quite cleverly to the original. Luckily, it also 
includes enough suspense for two movies, and a good amount of scares, 
most prominently in the lengthy prologue, which is flawless and 
terrifying, and could stand well on its own as a short film. The movie 
playfully 
toys with you quite a lot, especially in a creepy scene set at a 
desolate rest stop, and involving a young child and her mother...not to 
mention the man with the mask. There is another moment involving a 
garbage disposal that is absolutely nerve-racking. There is also a very 
funny small perforamance by Lisa Gay Hamilton, as LL Cool J's 
girlfriend. Although we only hear her voice on the telephone throughout, 
she is dynamite. All that I have mentioned so far is simply great. It is 
probably scarier than all of the other sequels, and is more stylish. It 
even has a sweet cameo by Janet Leigh ("Psycho"), Curtis' real-life 
mother.
But, overall "Halloween: H20" is an incredibly huge letdown. The biggest 
problem with the film, and this large quiff pretty much leads to all of 
the smaller problems, is that the movie is 82 minutes long! If the 
makers are going to take the time to bring back Curtis, not to mention 
the feel of the first one, then why did they make the movie little more 
than an hour in length? By making it so short, it seemed almost utterly 
empty. I liked all of the actors, but the characters were so slight and 
sloppily written that we didn't get to spend nearly enough time with any 
of them or learn anything about them. Even the star of the film, Curtis, 
isn't in it nearly enough. 
To make a long story short, this is what "Halloween: H20" feels like: 
the movie contains a first act and a third act, but the middle 20 
minutes are missing. It feels as if a reel was somehow lost, and that is 
truly disheartening. The picture had so much potential, so much suspense 
and scares, and...a second act that is nowhere to be found.
Another thing that is disappointing is that, aside from the first scene 
and one scene set in the town, the movie doesn't even feel like 
Halloween. By setting the movie mostly away from the town and in the 
confines of the school, we miss out on the establishing shots that have 
made the Halloween films so memorable; moments that show pumpkins 
outside of houses, and trick-or-treaters running from house to house as 
a killer lurks outside with them. That is all missing, and an incredibly 
big mistake. 
No matter how good a "Halloween" film is, they always have had that 
classic music score, and this one has it too, sort of. But aside from 
two scenes, a lot of the music doesn't sound anything like it. In fact, 
the score sounds exactly like the one from "Scream," and this is no 
surprise since the person who did that score, Marco Beltrami, also 
lended himself to perform additional music for this one. Big mistake.
"Halloween: H20" had a lot going for it, and I could praise it endlessly 
for all of the fabulous moments within, but I'd rather criticize it for 
only giving hints to how truly impressive it could have been, but 
wasn't. It is a missed opportunity. After all, why make a 
20th-anniversary sequel when it is going to have a running time less 
than most animated features? 
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
HALLOWEEN H20: TWENTY YEARS LATER
(Dimension)
Starring:  Jamie Lee Curtis, Josh Hartnett, Adam Arkin, Michelle Williams,
Adam Hann-Byrd, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, LL Cool J, Chris Durand.
Screenplay:  Robert Zappia and Matt Greenberg.
Producer:  Paul Freeman.
Director:  Steve Miner.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It was 20 years ago that teenage babysitter Laurie Strode (Jamie Lee
Curtis) and her long-institutionalized, homicidal brother Michael Myers
took sibling squabbling to a new plateau, one involving cutlery and the
creative use of wire hangers.  The film was John Carpenter's HALLOWEEN, a
low-budget phenomenon which launched the much-loathed but immensely
profitable "teen slasher" genre.  Masked and/or mutilated maniacs
proliferated, the numbers on the sequels clicking by faster than the
number of customers served by McDonald's.  It's no wonder Dimension Films
tagged the sub-title TWENTY YEARS LATER on HALLOWEEN H20; they probably
feared viewers would actually think this was the 20th film in the series.
     This sequel, of course, is banking on something a bit more than name
recognition to draw viewers:  nostalgia.  After nearly two decades
(including the 1981 sequel HALLOWEEN 2), Jamie Lee Curtis returns to the
role that made her famous, showing us how effectively Laurie Strode
recovered from that one traumatic Halloween night, namely not at all.
Living under an assumed name as the headmistress of a California private
school, Laurie is a walking psychological disaster area.  Behind her are
an abusive marriage and years of therapy; still with her are an alcohol
problem, a prescription drug problem, recurring nightmares and a
paralyzing fear of letting her teenage son John (Josh Hartnett) out of her
sight.  If you've ever wondered what surviving the carnage of a teen
slasher movie would do to someone, here's your answer.
     That effective bit of back story carries HALLOWEEN H20 over the
pitfalls of genre convention which even executive producer Kevin
Williamson -- the post-modernist horror connoisseur behind SCREAM and
SCREAM 2 -- can't quite shake off.  The events begin with Michael raiding
the files of the late Dr. Loomis (the late Donald Pleasance, to whom the
film is dedicated) to find Laurie's new identity, though why he would
demonstrate the grand sense of theater to wait until the 20th anniversary
is never quite clear.  From there he proceeds to make his way west,
reserving most of his wrath for the libidinous, in keeping with the fine
sex-equals-death tradition of slasher film-making.  Blood is spilled,
startling musical cues accompany every movement into frame by the most
innocuous character, and kitchen implements are used contrary to the
safety instructions.
     The one thing Williamson and director Steve Miner _do_ bring to the
proceedings is a bit more understated menace.  Surprisingly, every
encounter between Michael and an unfortunate stranger does not result in
an impromptu Ginzu aeration.  The threat of impending death is sometimes
used strictly as a threat, raising the stakes of every subsequent
encounter because you know it's possible to survive.  This killer's
singularity of purpose, combined with some well-crafted set-pieces, allows
this HALLOWEEN to score more points with tension than it does with shock
value.
     Clearly it also scores on the basis of its climactic showdown.
Though Hartnett, Michelle Williams and Jodi Lyn O'Keefe are on hand for
teen hormone value, Curtis is unquestionably the star of this show.  
Laurie's resourcefulness in the original HALLOWEEN made her an uncommon
screen heroine, and the same quality is present this time around.  She
goes into battle armed not just with an axe, but with twenty years of 
history and a convincing grim determination.  It's actually here that
Williamson's sensibility shows through most obviously; playing on genre
expectations, HALLOWEEN H20 shows Laurie not trusting anything as mundane
as a body bag to guarantee that Michael won't be back to continue
tormenting her in HALLOWEEN H21.  The return of Laurie Strode could have
been a cheap publicity stunt.  Instead, it's a genuinely effective
recognition of the original's influence.  Though too conventional to be
truly thrilling, HALLOWEEN H20 is a fitting final round for one of screen
history's bloodiest family feuds.

Author
Michael Dequina
Say what you will about its banality or the inherent ridiculousness of its
messengers, but the Spice Girls' mantra of "Girl Power" seems to have made
a profound effect in Hollywood.  For proof, look no further than two wildly
different films opening within less than a week between them: _Ever_After_
and _Halloween:_H20--20_Years_Later_, which put effective feminist spins on
the normally weak icons of Cinderella and the slasher film scream queen,
respectively.
Drew Barrymore's Danielle, the heroine of _Ever_After_, has more than a
little in common with the Cinderella of fairy tale lore.  After the death
of her father (Jeroen Krabbé), Danielle (nicknamed "Cinderella") is treated
as a lowly servant girl by her wicked stepmother Rodmilla (Anjelica Huston,
wonderfully bitchy).  There are two stepsisters, Marguerite (Megan Dodds)
and Jacqueline (Melanie Lynskey, Kate Winslet's best friend/lover/partner
in crime in _Heavenly_Creatures_); there is a prince, by the name of Henry
(Dougray Scott); and there is a lavish ball and even a slipper left behind.
But it is there that the similiarities end and something quite radical
begins.  For one thing, there is no magic at all in _Ever_After_--no
pumpkin carriage, rat horses, not even a fairy godmother, though Danielle
has a helper in no less than Leonardo daVinci (Patrick Godfrey).  The
absence of the fantastic has an empowering and liberating effect on the
heroine, who in other Cinderella tales is rather passive and weak.
Danielle is far from that, strong in will and body (in one scene, she
literally _carries_ the prince) and in total command of her destiny.  The
prince is nice and strong himself, but she can rescue herself, thank you
very much (Danielle could very well be nicknamed "Cinder Spice").  Female
empowerment also manifests itself in _Ever_After_'s sense of sisterhood, a
quality that is missing from other versions of the story.  Only Marguerite
qualifies as a wicked stepsister; the zaftig Jacqueline is every bit
Rodmilla's victim as well, and she is constantly belittled by her mother
because of her size.  As such, Danielle and Jacqueline recognize themselves
as kindred spirits.
This revisionism performed by director Andy Tennant and screenwriters
Susannah Grant and Rick Parks is not without a few missteps.  There is an
awkward, completely superfluous framing story, where a mysterious older
woman (Jeanne Moreau) tells the story to the Grimm Brothers; and a subplot
involving a sleazy nobleman (Richard O'Brien) with a jones for Danielle is
poorly developed.  But the freshness of the entire affair and the
exuberance of its execution, bolstered by sweet chemistry between Barrymore
and Scott, goes a long way in charming the viewer.
Perhaps the most indelible image of John Carpenter's seminal 1978 chiller
_Halloween_ was that of 17-year-old babysitter Laurie Strode (Jamie Lee
Curtis) cowering in the corner of a crudely locked closet while "the
Bogeyman," a.k.a. Michael Myers, stabbed his ways through the doors.  Flash
forward twenty years, and to the clunkily titled
_Halloween:_H20--20_Years_Later_ (why not just
_Halloween:_20_Years_Later_?).  The most memorable sight?  The same but
older Laurie, brandishing an ax, openly inviting--or, rather, _daring_--her
unseen tormentor to show his white-masked face with the piercing wail of
"MICHAEL!"  Yes, cinema's most famous scream queen is back, louder than
ever, but now infused with a strong dose of Girl--make that _Grrrl_--Power.
This entertaining seventh installment of the series glazes over the events
of installments 4-6 (the third film was completely unrelated) and takes a
sharp focus on the first two, namely the character and history of Laurie.
Since last seen learning that Michael is her brother in _Halloween_II_ and
witnessing his apparent demise (apparently she didn't hear of his exploits
depicted in 4-6), Laurie faked her death and moved from Illinois to
California as Keri Tate.  Now a divorced single mom of 17-year-old John
(Josh Hartnett), Laurie/Keri is the head mistress of a posh private school.
 But she is still haunted by the memory of her murderous brother, who, of
course, locates his long-lost sister and decides to pay her a visit on
Halloween night, 1998--twenty years to the night he first terrorized her.
The basic story and script of _H20_, credited to Robert Zappia and Matt
Greenberg (working from a treatment by _Scream_ wunderkind Kevin
Williamson), doesn't hold up to much scrutiny.  Michael bumps off a couple
of the libidinous teens at the school as well as a handful of others who
get in the way.  Laurie finds out he's back and is forced to face her
demons (or, rather, demon).  That's it.  But, then again, the basic story
of Carpenter's original didn't exactly hold up under close examination,
either.  What's important is the effectiveness of the shock and scare
scenes, and while director Steve Miner doesn't take the high road that
Carpenter took in _Halloween_ (that is, keep blood and gore to a surprising
minimum), he pulls off more than a few nailbiters, most notably the
extended climactic chases between Laurie and Michael.
The effectiveness of the thrilling final act, and the film as a whole,
owes a huge debt to Curtis and the character of Laurie.  Though her
stress-related alcoholism and pill-popping are never satisfactorily
resolved, Laurie undergoes a nice character arc in reference to her
previous two films.  It is highly believable that she would no longer be
scared of Michael so much as angry and, thus, out for blood herself; it
would have been less convincing if, after all this time, she was still the
girl who cowered in the closet.  Although the _Scream_ films' Sydney
Prescott is a rather proactive horror heroine, the new Laurie is a step
beyond that.  The seemingly indestructable Michael may want to kill her,
but that is nothing compared to her desire to kill _him_ and free herself
from the past, making for an intriguing pas de deux where the two often
trade the roles of stalker and stalkee.
_Halloween:_H20_'s Laurie Strode may not be given the fairy tale fate met
by Danielle in _Ever_After_, which is just the first in an endless list of
differences.  But one, strong trait unifies them: they use their wits and
will to escape and triumph over their victimizers and take control of their
lives.  Whatever the time, whatever the place, female empowerment makes the
same sound--a blistering roar.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
James Sanford
        In a summer full of overlong epics like "Armageddon" and "The Mask
of Zorro," a modest quickie like "Halloween: H2O - Twenty Years Later" seems
refreshingly unpretentious. It takes almost as long to pronounce that
unwieldly title as it does to watch the movie. But here's a case in which
brevity is something of a handicap.
 There are actually some intriguing issues bubbling just below the
blood-spattered surface of "H2O," which brings back Jamie Lee Curtis of the
original two "Halloween" movies to restore some much-needed class to the
"slasher flick" genre, but the film's 85-minute running time leaves scores
of irritating unanswered questions and unresolved issues.
 Alright, no one buying a ticket for "H2O" is going in expecting an
insightful study of human nature, but much of the movie's first hour devotes
itself to detailing the disturbing, fragile bond between Curtis' character
Laurie Strode and her 17-year-old son John (Josh Hartnett), which plays like
an Oedipal version of the Meg Ryan-Andy Garcia relationship in "When A Man
Loves A Woman." Still traumatized from her violent brushes with her
psychotic brother Michael Myers, Laurie now lives under the alias of Keri
Tate and oversees Hillcrest, an exclusive prep school. She's referred to by
John as a "functioning alcoholic," which apparently means she can pound
glasses of chardonnay at lunch, down a triple-vodka dinner and still have
the energy to harangue Hillcrest's useless security guard (LL Cool J).
 Director Steve Miner, whose previous films include the clever
sleeper "Warlock," manages to sustain a fair level of tension as Laurie's
drink-induced hallucinations of Michael -- he's become her personal Baby Cha
Cha -- give way to the all-too-real thing, the chalky-faced killing machine
who shows up at school while the kids are away on a Halloween field trip.
While family counseling might have worked wonders for other siblings in
similar situations, Laurie and Michael prefer to resolve their differences
with big knives, heavy machinery and the always-reliable fireman's ax.
 Curtis is both "H2O''s trump card and its biggest problem, the
trouble being that she does such a fine job of illuminating Laurie's hollow
shell of a life that we can't help but want to know more about her and how
she's managed to keep it together for as long as she has. There's
considerably more attention paid to characterization here than one would
expect in a horror film and that may cause "H2O" to seem slightly sluggish
to fans raised on the high energy and hip wit of the "Scream" movies.
 Because Curtis takes so much care in establishing Laurie as a
fascinating, flawed woman, the slash-and-burn mayhem of the film's last 20
minutes (complete with 'victims' coming back from death's door) seems like
the writers' lazy way out of completing what could have been a much smarter,
more interesting script. There are enough flashes of intelligence in
"H2O" -- check out the music during Janet Leigh's big scene and the make of
the automobile she's driving -- to indicate everyone concerned could have
gone a bit further and pushed the boundaries of the genre a little more.
Unfortunately, the abrupt ending of "H2O" cuts it to the quick, making the
movie seem like a slow build-up to a puny pay-off.
James Sanford

Author
Matt Williams
Michael Myers is back (yawn), and, oooh, aren't we scared. This seventh
entry into the Halloween series has eschewed its traditional numeral in
favor of the more cryptic H20 (it's been 20 years since the original
Halloween...get it?)  However, don't let the moniker change fool you,
Halloween H20 is every bit as moldy and dull as the seventh film in a
series is likely to be.
For those unfamiliar with the series, Michael Myers is the bogeyman
personified.  As a child, he killed his older sister with a big knife on
Halloween.  Fifteen years later, he escaped from his mental institution,
donned a bleached out William Shatner mask and resumed his mass
murdering streak.  His target of choice was babysitter Laurie Strode
(Jamie Lee Curtis), who had unknown ties to Michael.
Twenty years after that rampage (and a little additional mayhem from
Halloween 2), Laurie Strode has gone into hiding.  She is now known as
Keri Tate, a teacher at a private school in Northern California. She has
tried to put her trauma behind her, even raising a son, John (Josh
Hartnett), and striking up a relationship with fellow teacher Will
Brennan (Adam Arkin).  But every year on October 31st, she gets chills.
Little does she suspect that Michael is still hunting her after all
these years.  Where has Michael been, and what has he been doing over
all this time?  Who knows?  The film blatantly forgets the events of the
past four sequels, but never accounts for Michael's doings over that
time.  The film just doesn't bother with trivialities like that.  Simply
take discomfort from the knowledge that he's back in the saddle again,
twenty years later.
The film makes a big hoopla over the return of Jamie Lee Curtis, but it
still provides several teen victims.  Along with John, there's his
girlfriend Molly (Michelle Williams), his best friend Charlie (Adam
Hann-Byrd), and Charlie's main squeeze Sarah (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe).  Good
luck in finding anything out about these characters.  The most complex
of them has a character description of "generic teen victim".  It's even
a chore to discover their names (which were probably tacked on as a mere
afterthought).
Halloween H20 suffers from an overly prolonged setup.  Aside from a
brief pre-credits teaser, nothing at all happens for the first hour of
the film.  With an 85-minute running time, that's saying quite a lot.
As a placeholder, the film packs in the false alarms.  They occur with
such frequency that they quickly lose their shock value.  Maybe the
first five are even slightly heart-quickening but when the number
reaches ten, and twenty, and beyond, you're more likely to be checking
your watch.
And throughout all this, very little is actually accomplished. The setup
is simple:  an isolated group of people are stalked by a killer.
Countless of other horror films (even countless other Halloween sequels)
have used the same premise, but established it with much more
efficiency. When the final conflict occurs, it's a mere flash in the
pan, bright, quick and substanceless.
The entire experience of Halloween H20 leaves you feeling cheated.
However, anyone going into the seventh entry of a horror series
shouldn't expect much.  Don't be deceived.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Steve Miner
Cast:  Jamie Lee Curtis, Adam Arkin, Josh Hartnett, Michelle Williams,
LL Cool J, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Adam Hann-Byrd, Nancy Stephens, Janet
Leigh, Chris Durand
Screenplay:  Robert Zappia, Matt Greenberg
Producers:  Paul Freeman
Runtime:  85 min.
US Distribution:  Dimension Films
Rated R:  Violence, gore, profanity, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
There are many films that feature crazed individuals roaming around
neighborhoods, skewering Innocent Bystanders in the futile attempt to
get the one person who typically escapes.  These individuals are
intensely violent people, who show no remorse or feeling at any time
during any of these films.  Sometimes the films that revolve around
these people are good; often times they are lousy.  Any way you look at
it, I think the makers of these films have been focusing on the wrong
side of the story all these years.
Sure, knives plunging into teenagers' backs is interesting.  An ice
skate in the face will never fail to grab my attention.  I even like the
fracturing of ankles by means of dumbwaiters.  But, for all of the happy
joy that one may find in scenes like these, I doubt that any of them can
compare to what it would be like to understand the thought process of a
maniac like Michael Meyers.  He is, perhaps, one of the most interesting
characters in any film I've ever seen.  There is no character
development, of course (such a term can only be used mockingly in this
context), but he is certainly a prominent character in this film.  I
think a mock-biography on Michael Meyers would have been more
interesting than anything presented in Halloween:  H20.
Unfortunately, it seems that viewers are more content with the slasher
stuff.  I can identify with that; it's fun to escape into ultra-violence
like this every once in a while.  As a horror flick, H20 isn't too bad. 
It's fun, and even witty (gasp!) at times.  It's intelligently-crafted
by director Steven Miner, and well-acted by the wonderful Jamie Lee
Curtis.  There isn't a whole lot of new material presented in this
particular genre piece, but I was surprised with how much I enjoyed it.  
This is the seventh film in the Halloween series, the first of which
was made twenty years ago by a fellow named John Carpenter.  I tried so
hard to see that film before this one, but, alas, I was unsuccessful. 
I've seen the last five minutes of it, but I can't make a fair judgment
of quality.  I hear it's good.  I'll leave it at that.  
Jamie Lee Curtis reprises her role from the first film as Laurie Strode
(though she's changed her name for security reasons).  She is the sister
of the homicidal maniac, Michael Meyers.  Among other things, I'd like
to know why they have different last names.
Well, poor Laurie is still very upset, twenty years later, and it turns
out she has good reason:  Mike is back in town, and he's pissed!  He's
here to take revenge on his sister, who apparently failed to kill him. 
For some reason, he wastes a lot of time with Innocent Bystanders, and
doesn't even work towards mutilating poor Laurie until the very end of
the film.  When it turns out that she was right about her brother, she
takes it very well, and tries valiantly to murder him with a fire axe.
I guess most sins are exploited in various kinds of films.  Like the
other members of the "teen slasher" genre, H20 is porno for the
violence-obsessed.  It's not quite as shameful as some of the
less-intelligent entries into the genre (there are so many that listing
examples is highly pointless).  Miner is miraculously able to manifest
suspense and menace out of a lot of scenes (the dumbwaiter is a terrific
set piece), and, no matter how many times you look at that imitation of
William Shatner's face, it still looks scary.  I was amazed that I
actually felt suspense at any time during this film -- not even the
Scream films managed to provide suspense for me.
Curtis is very likable here, as she always is.  I think she's a gifted,
funny actress who hasn't gotten a lot of recognition for her talents. 
Her role here feels a bit obligatory, as if the paycheck were a little
more influential than the chance to create something grand and artistic,
but I liked watching her anyway.  What's also nice is that there are
some good scenes between Laurie and her son, John (Josh Hartnett) that
effectively lampoon as character development.  
There are also some nifty turns towards the end, such as an unexpected
final showdown between our heroine and her loony bro.  H20 is a step
above its siblings in acting and directing, but the very fact that it's
a slasher flick keeps it from really getting anywhere.  What would have
made worlds of difference here?  Show me a psychoanalysis of Michael
Meyers.  Or maybe a thermal brain scan.  I'd like to see a nutty
psychiatrist question him in prison, and toy with him in a covertly
sadistic way.  I mean, it's cool and interesting that Mike kills a lot
of people, but aren't the thoughts behind that crazy mask more
interesting?  I'd sit through ten more Halloween films if just one of
them explained just what, exactly, can make a man so insane.

Author
R. L. Strong
Dimension Films presents a Nightfall Production of a Steve Miner film
Jamie Lee Curtis  HALLOWEEN H20   Michelle Williams     Josh Hartnett     Adam Arkin     Jodi Lyn O'Keefe
Adam Hann-Byrd     Janet Leigh    and  LL Cool J    Cinematography by Daryn Okada
Music by John Ottman   Production Designer John Willett   Costume Designer Deborah Everton  Edited by Patrick Lussier  Associate Producer: Malek Akkad  Executive Producer:
Moustapha Akkad  Produced by John Carpenter, Paul Freeman, and Debra Hill Original story by Robert Zappia  Screenplay by Robert Zappia and Matt Greenberg  Directed by Steve
Miner
Well, we knew it was going to happen. When a franchise is doing even
remotely well, it behooves the producers to continue running the
series into the ground. We've seen this with almost every horror
franchise since the original 'Frankenstein'. Now there have been
exceptions to the rule. Such films as "New Nightmare" and "The Bride
of Frankenstein" have actually been superior to their originators. But
the 'Halloween' has not been so lucky. While trying to breath fresh
blood into the series, Moustapha Akkad had created an increasingly
absurd complex scenario. What makes this entry in the series is two
remarkable things. Firstly, the return of Jamie Lee Curtis to the role
that started her career, and secondly (and most importantly) a script
that disavows the previous sequels.
The film opens on October 29th. 1998. Nurse Marion Chambers (Nancy
Stephens, returning from the original film) arrives home to find her
home broken into. She gains the assistants of her two teenage
neighbors to call the Police. One of the boys investigates the home
and finds Nurse Chambers' study ransacked. Returning home, the boys
leave Ms.  Chambers to wait for the Police. She finds that her study
has indeed been vandalized and more importantly that the file of
Laurie Stroud has been stolen. Seeing a stranger in the hallway, she
narrow escapes to her neighbor's house. There she finds that the two
boys have already been murdered. The Shape (AKA: Michael Myers)
attacks and kills the nurse as the police arrive.
We are then introduced to Jamie Lee's character Laurie Stroud. She is
the Dean of a private school in Northern California. Divorced and
suffering from anxiety from her earlier experience, she has taken on a
false identity after faking her own death in an attempt to hide from
her murderous brother. Well, her son has recently turned 17, the same
age Laurie was, when Michael he escaped from the asylum back in
'78. Laurie attempts to deal with her fear by irrationally trying to
protect her son from danger. Well in due time, Michael finds his
siblings, and the battle begins.
Horror films for the most part are very, very predictable. You know
all of the set ups by heart. Lights the don't work, cars that refuse
to start when danger is near, etc., etc. All of these are in ample
supply here. The difference between this film and others of it's ink
is Jamie Lee Curtis. Ms. Curtis has always been a fine if not a
remarkable actress. her past performances have always been enlivening
and enjoyable (think 'True Lies', she was the only shinning light in
that ponderous and misogynistic film). Here, Ms. Curtis is center
stage, and she carries the film with a strength and determination that
is refreshingly honest to the character.
The screenplay by scribes Robert Zappia and Matt Greenberg (with
un-credited assistance from Kevin Williamson of 'Scream' fame) is very
tight, with a nicely set up premise and credible (for the most part)
situations. The inclusion of Janet Leigh as Norma (the maintenance
director of the private school) complaining about the drains in the
Girls' shower room being clogged is a marvelously funny tribute to
'Psycho' and a smack in the face to every other filmmaker who has
ripped off that famous scene. References to other works are remarkable
very slight in this film. It's not as jokey as the "Scream" films, in
that "Halloween H20" takes itself seriously. While most of the
characters are not very deeply written, they don't need to be as these
people are recognizable to most of us. What is most refreshing here is
that this film does it's best to do away with the body count mentality
of most horror films. Situations are set up wherein a character is
placed in mortal danger and is not killed. This simple idea leads to a
lot more suspense, and identifies the audience with the main
characters more intimately. Michael Myers is after one person, he only
kills those that get in the way of his goal.
Directed with a sure and steady hand by Steve Miner, Halloween H20 has
lots to offer it's audience. Mr. Miner is no stranger to the horror
genre having helmed the (arguably) best entry in the 'Friday the 13th'
series ("Friday the 13th: 3D"). Having moved onto more mainstream
films ('Forever Young' also with Ms. Curtis, and 'My Father is a
Hero') Mr. Miner shows a true love for the trappings of the genre,
making grand use of lighting and shadow throughout the film. His
handling of his actors is fine, with surprising performances put in by
relative newcomer Josh Hartnett as John Tate, Laurie Stroud's
son. Adam Arkin is fine as school counselor Will Brennan, bringing a
light touch of humor to the proceedings.
Halloween H20 is a fine entry in the horror sweepstakes and a fitting
end to a series that was starting to wear out it's welcome. There's a
lesson to be learned here for Hollywood. It's the writing.. dummies!
On a scale ***** "Halloween H20" rates ***=
Copyright ) 1998 R. L. StrongNothing in this article may be quoted or re-printedwithout the expressed written permission of the author.
