Title
Review for Just Cause (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Eric Grossman
     A young girl is murdered in the Florida Everglades and the police
force the confession of the man they think who did it.  Eight years
later, Harvard professor Paul Armstrong (Sean Connery) must find the
truth behind the killing and set an innocent man free.
     With its weak script by Jeb Stuart and Peter Stone and Arne
Glimcher's uninspired direction, JUST CAUSE just barely manages to be
entertaining and it is due solely to the strength of its cast.  Dealt a
bland character, Connery is only able to peak our interest in Armstrong
because of his potent star-persona.  Laurence Fishburne also does his
best portraying the unorthodox cop, Tanny Brown, but poor writing
undermines him.  Ed Harris has the film's plumb role as the psychotic
Blair Sullivan, a poor man's Hannibal Lecter but in this film, we'll
take what we can get.  Blair Underwood is positively boring as the
innocent man accused and Kate Capshaw is downright bad as Armstrong's
wife.
     With the help of its Florida location and some alligators,  JUST
CAUSE has a few thrills sprinkled throughout its one hour forty-two
minute running time but it is hardly enough to make up the slow pace
and gaping plot-holes.  This one is a rental.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Second time director Arne Glimcher (THE MAMBO KINGS) in 1995
decided to make a movie, JUST CAUSE, that looks like a combination of
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, DEAD MAN WALKING, and SHAFT.  It is the least
subtle movie I have seen in a long time.  Populated with cliched
characters and fast paced, it does entertain, but it demands a high
tolerance for unbelievability.
     As the show opens, Harvard professor Paul Armstrong (Sean Connery)
is speaking against capital punishment in a debate.  He seems to be
winning until the other debater effectively raises the issue of the
victims.  After the debate a mother comes to Armstrong to ask him to
get her son off of death row.  Although he has not practiced law in 25
years, he agrees to investigate the case of a man accused of brutally
raping and murdering a seven year old girl.
     He finds that the defendant, Bobby Earl (Blair Underwood), is an
ex-heroin dealer who cleaned up his act, became his High School class
valedictorian, and then got a full academic scholarship to Cornell.
There is that old suspension of disbelief problem.
     Earl claims he gave his "confession" to the rape and murder only
after a beating by the police and the playing of Russian roulette in
his mouth by Officer Tanny Brown (Laurence Fishburne).  Soon the police
and the whole town seem about to tar and feather Armstrong for asking
question about something that happened eight years ago and which they
want to forget.
     Complicating things more is a mysterious serial murder, Blair
Sullivan (Ed Harris), who is also on death row and who may have some
important evidence.  In the Hannibal Lecter role, Harris give either a
brilliant or an excessively ridiculous performance.  You choose.  One
could make an argument either way.
     In another implausible role, we have Kate Capshaw as Armstrong's
wife Laurie.  It seems that Earl was charged the year before for
kidnapping a girl, and Laurie was the prosecutor.  Of course these
charges were trumped up Earl tells us.  Capshaw is totally
unconvincing, and this link between the two cases is a silly plot
device.
     So what is good about this absurd show?  Several things actually.
Sean Connery is a fascinating and compelling actor.  Here he gives an
excellent performance in a ridiculous movie.  Fishburne (WHAT'S LOVE
GOT TO DO WITH IT) manages to take a bunch of stupid lines and somehow
make them worth hearing.  His screen presence is amazing.  Ultimately,
I even liked Harris as the uncontrollable psychopath.
     Editor William Anderson keeps the movie going at a lightning pace.
The sounds of the swamp are menacing, and the gators are ready to chop
off legs in a flash.  The cinematography (Lajos Koltai) is best when
shooting in the swamp.  Eerie.
     Although the script by Peter Stone and Jeb Stuart based on the
novel by John Katzenbach has all of the delicacy of a meat cleaver and
seems incapable of surprise, the show takes a sharp turn in the middle
that is a real jolt.  On the whole the film ends up no more than an
unbelievable action picture with a few rewarding performances.
     JUST CAUSE runs 1:42.  It is rated R.  There is no sex or nudity,
but there is violence, a few gory scenes, and some bad language.  It
would be okay for most teenagers.  I can not bring myself to recommend
JUST CAUSE, but you might find it enjoyable albeit totally
unbelievable.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Sean Connery stars as a Harvard law professor who heads back into the
courtroom, by way of the Everglades, to defend a young, educated black
man (Blair Underwood).  The guy is on death row for the murder of a
white girl, and says that his confession was coerced from the region's
tough, black cop (Lawrence Fishburne).
Watching Connery and Fishburne bump heads for two hours is amusing
enough, but the plot's a joke.  There's no logic at work here.  Tone is
also an issue--there is none.  Director Arne Glimcher never establishes
exactly what his film is trying to say.  Is it a statement on human
rights?  Is it a knock-off of SILENCE OF THE LAMBS?  Glimcher never
tells.  Instead, he forces his characters to jump through hoop after
hoop, over drawbridge after drawbridge, hoping that the audience won't
notice what's missing.
Still wondering who Nigel Hawthorne is?  Then check out his Oscar-
nominated work in THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE, still playing in both
Raleigh and Chapel Hill.  Stage director Nicholas Hytner, in a
remarkable screen debut, has adapted Alan Bennett's 1991 tragic comedy
to fine effect.  Sumptuous-looking and only mildly stuffy, the film
charts the madness that plagued King George III (Hawthorne) almost 30
years into his reign.
In Suri Krishnamma's A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE, Albert Finney disappears so
deeply into the role of a lovable Dublin bus conductor that it's a shame
when the film gets so serious around him.  His character is a conductor
with a passion for Oscar Wilde.  He reads to his riders, and once a
year, with their help, he tries to stage one of the author's plays.
For about an hour, there's a sweet magic behind Finney and his troupe of
working-class stiffs.  Conflict arises, but it's small stuff--an
administrator from the bus company here, an outraged Catholic pork
butcher (Michael Gambon) there.  But with Finney at the wheel, so to
speak, the film rolls smoothly over these plot points--just like the
gorgeous Leland double-decker bus in the story.
Where things get serious is toward the end of the film, when the plot
takes a turn that the bus never would, and the story heads down a very
dark alley that marks the end of an enjoyable ride.  The twist makes
sense--and helps paint a complete picture of Finney's character--but
the trip to get there betrays the light, airy atmosphere of what had
come before.
It's not a fatal misstep, mind you, and it doesn't send the story
soaring into the realms of incredulity.  It's just a turn off.
Mein Fuhrer!  The most fun that *I* had last month was in Durham, at the
Carolina, at a mid-week screening of Stanley Kubrick's pitch-black
comedy DR. STRANGELOVE (OR HOW I LEARNED TO STOP WORRYING AND LOVE THE
BOMB).  The 1964 film stars Peter Sellers (in three roles), George C.
Scott, Sterling Hayden, and Slim Pickens.  Their antics brought the
house down, which, to my surprise, was packed by an audience younger
than the film.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sean Connery, Laurence Fishburne, Blair Underwood,
           Kate Capshaw, Ed Harris.
Screenplay:  Jeb Stuart & Peter Stone.
Director:  Arne Glimcher.
     You could probably count on one hand the number of male stars
over 60 who can still carry a film:  Paul Newman, certainly; Clint
Eastwood; and of course, Sean Connery.  And what is astonishing
about all three of these examples is that for the longest time, few
people really thought of any of them as good actors.  They were
pretty boys, action heroes destined for obscurity once the youthful
good looks faded, but all three have developed unexpected range over
the years.  Sean Connery might have had the farthest to go, moving
from James Bond to Academy Award winner to veteran star.  He is an
impressive presence in JUST CAUSE, but he is wasted.  JUST CAUSE is
a sorry excuse for a thriller, with both narrative and character
handled with remarkable ineptitude.
     Connery plays Paul Armstrong, a Harvard law professor renowned
for his opposition to capital punishment.  He is approached at a
debate one night by a woman (Ruby Dee) who needs his help.  Her
grandson, Bobby Earl Ferguson (Blair Underwood), is on death row in
Florida, the result of what he claims was a forced confession.
Armstrong is reluctant to take the case at first, but at the
insistence of his wife Laurie (Kate Capshaw), he heads down to
Florida to investigate.  There he finds a very antagonistic local
police force led by detective Tanny Brown (Laurence Fishburne), some
questionable evidence, and a possible alternative suspect in the
person of convicted serial killer Blair Sullivan (Ed Harris).
     The cast of JUST CAUSE is loaded with talent, and that alone
offered a great deal of promise.  However, with the exception of
Laurence Fishburne, who is impressive as the hard-case small town
cop, they are given almost nothing to work with or fumble what they
do have.  The usually reliable Ed Harris bugs his eyes and bares his
teeth as the religious fanatic/psycho Sullivan, looking for all the
world like he is auditioning for the next Hannibal Lecter in case
Anthony Hopkins asks for too much money.  He does everything but say
"fava beans."  Kate Capshaw takes a step up from her
blink-and-you'll-miss-it role in LOVE AFFAIR, but she isn't really
subtle enough an actor to make the stock threatened wife role
anything interesting.  Blair Underwood has a few nice moments early,
but he too is saddled with a shallow character with some really
unpleasant undertones.
     Then there is Connery, who can do wonders with a wry smile but
is trapped in a character that looks like it was abandoned by
writers Jeb Stuart and Peter Stone two-thirds of the way through and
completed by computer.  There is some suggestion early in the film
that there is a reason Armstrong hasn't practiced law in 25 years, a
reason which will play a role in Ferguson's case.  Later, when
Armstrong is talking to Sullivan, Sullivan says that he sees in
Armstrong's eyes that he is a killer.  Again there is the suggestion
that there is a dark, guilty secret in Armstrong's past, but there
is never another mention of the issue.  Connery is left stranded
without any real motivation, and as the plot develops that absence
proves crucial, leaving his feelings about criminal justice
completely unexplored.
     Actually, describing the plot as "developing" is something of
an overstatement.  JUST CAUSE is a completely predictable thriller,
with deus ex machina clues popping up for Armstrong to discover and
a plot twist which was nearly inevitable.  Director Arne Glimcher
doesn't appear to have a single original idea for how to construct a
film like this, so he puts together ideas from a hundred other
mundane thrillers:  a car chase here, a woman in distress there, a
serial killer, a mano-a-mano in the Everglades and some moody
lighting.  But there's just no point to any of it.  JUST CAUSE fails
to generate an ounce of tension because tension depends on
unpredictability and characters we genuinely want to see survive the
danger.  I was actually kind of hoping that everyone would end up as
gator bait.  The biggest mystery in JUST CAUSE ends up being why in
the world Sean Connery decided to do it.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 2/17/95  
Running Length: 1:42 
MPAA Classification:  R (Violence, mature themes, language) 
Starring: Sean Connery, Laurence Fishburne, Kate Capshaw, 
          Blair Underwood, Ed Harris 
Director: Arne Glimcher 
Producers: Lee Rich, Arne Glimcher, and Steve Perry 
Screenplay: Jeb Stuart and Peter Stone 
Cinematography: Lajos Koltai 
Music: James Newton Howard 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     One of the most interesting things about JUST CAUSE is the number of 
movies it manages to allude to and copy from.  By the time the closing 
credits are rolling, a feeling of familiarity is not only likely, but 
justified.  It's hard to imagine any film-goer not having seen at least 
one of this picture's antecedents. 
     JUST CAUSE starts out like IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER transplanted to 
the 1986 Florida Everglades, with Blair Underwood as Bobby Earl Ferguson, 
a seemingly-innocent, Cornell-educated, young black man who is arrested 
for the rape and murder of a ten-year old white girl.  After being taken 
into custody by local police big-wig Tanny Brown (Laurence Fishburne), 
Bobby Earl is beaten and threatened until he confesses to the crime.  A 
trial takes place and Bobby Earl ends up on death row. 
     Enter Sean Connery's Paul Armstrong, a Harvard Law professor with a 
conscience.  His agreement to appeal Bobby Earl's case turns the story in 
a new direction--sort of a cross between JAGGED EDGE and THE SILENCE OF 
THE LAMBS.  The latter is courtesy of Ed Harris, who gives a delightfully 
over-the-top performance as the Hannibal Lechter-like Blair Sullivan, a 
bible-quoting serial killer whose death row cell is near Bobby Earl's, 
and who knows a lot more than he's willing to reveal. 
     Once the references to these films are played out, JUST CAUSE offers 
one more "homage" (that word sounds so much nicer than "theft")--to 
Martin Scorsese's graphic remake of CAPE FEAR.  There's even an added 
attraction to the climactic in-the-water struggle, and this one could 
have been lifted from CROCODILE DUNDEE (or, more correctly, considering 
the location, ALLIGATOR DUNDEE). 
     All-in-all, JUST CAUSE obviously doesn't offer much that's new or 
attention-grabbing, but the presence of several top-notch actors makes 
the material more appealing that it has a right to be.  Connery captures 
our sympathy as the relentlessly upright practitioner of the law.  
Fishburne resurrects images of WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT's Ike Turner 
in Tanny Brown, a cop who has crossed the line.  Harris, while not as 
deliciously evil as SILENCE's Anthony Hopkins, is still riveting.  
Supporting roles are ably filled by the likes of Ned Beatty, Daniel J. 
Travanti, and George Plimpton. 
     Despite its tendency to tread well-traveled roads, JUST CAUSE is 
filmed with enough energy and craft that, for the majority of its one-
hundred minute running time, it's reasonably entertaining.  Things don't 
get out of control until the last quarter-hour, when the need to inject 
action revs up the pace a little too much.  Suddenly, we're thrown from 
the realm of the psychological thriller into a series of car chases, 
shoot-outs, and hand-to-hand combats.  It's kind of unfortunate, really.  
But, after all, this is Hollywood, where the success of movies is often 
based far more on noisy struggles to the death than on thoughtful 
endings.  Ultimately, the only thing noteworthy about JUST CAUSE's climax 
is how nicely cinematographer Lajos Koltai managed to photograph the 
final scenes.  While that may be acceptable to the popcorn-munching 
crowd, those of us who want a little more will find this film lacking. 
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
