Title
Review for Wes Craven's New Nightmare (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
     It's been more than fifteen years since the release of John
Carpenter's HALLOWEEN, and ten since Wes Craven's A NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET arrived on the big screen.  Each, in its own way, was a top-of-
the-line horror flick--a film that relied more on chills and thrills
than on graphic displays of butchery.  Those movies had unique visions
of what was required to scare an audience, and neither resorted to the
pointless and grotesque displays of gratuitous gore that permeated the
other "big" entry of the time (FRIDAY THE 13TH).
     But then came the inevitable sequels, and the corresponding
plummet in quality.  Making a cheap buck took precedence over
everything--including telling a good story.  HALLOWEEN 2 was steeped
in blood.  NIGHTMARE 2, not directed by Wes Craven, lacked even a
coherent story.  The race to mediocrity--and worse--was on.  By the
end of the '80s, it was difficult to discern much difference between
the various screen bogeymen:  Jason, Michael, and Freddy.
     The NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET series perhaps took a slightly
different path than the HALLOWEENs and FRIDAYs.  It was still
gore-happy, but its baddie, Freddy, had a self-deprecating sense of
humor (his one-liners reminded one of the kinds of things that Arnold
Schwarzenegger was wont to spout).  By the fifth NIGHTMARE sequel, the
films had become self- parodies.
     So why do another NIGHTMARE movie?  Probably, as New Line Cinema
exec Robert Shaye puts it (in a cameo in this new entry), because the
public wants it.  The Freddy Krueger mask is still a pretty hot seller
in Halloween costume stores.
     Perhaps the best turn of events is the return of Wes Craven,
directing a NIGHTMARE for the first time since the original.  He has
returned a sense of genuine horror to the series, in part by taking it
to completely new ground, and in part by giving his actors a legitimate
script to work with.  The Freddy of old--a horrifying, murderous
creature--is back, replacing the caricature who gasped his last in
1991's FREDDY'S DEAD--THE FINAL NIGHTMARE.
     WES CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE focuses on the lives of some of the
actors who appeared in the 1984 original (Heather Langenkamp, Robert
Englund, and John Saxon, all of whom play themselves).  Langenkamp is
having dreams about Freddy and Englund is painting some very strange
pictures.  For his part, Craven (who also appears in the film) is
writing a new script (which turns out to be the screenplay for this
picture).  All of them realize that something is very wrong.
     Then, Langenkamp's young son Dylan (Miko Hughes) starts having
catatonic episodes where he speaks in Freddy's voice, and her husband
Chase (David Newsom) is involved in an accident that appears to involve
razor-sharp claws.  Freddy, according to Craven (who is called upon to
provide an explanation for everything that's going on) is a being of
mythical evil whose essence was captured by the NIGHTMARE films.  Now
that the series is completed, he is seeking a gateway to the real
world.
     Whereas the other NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET films delighted in
blurring the lines between waking and dreaming, this one adds another
layer--that of pseudo-reality versus fantasy.  Craven has given
himself a wonderful new playground to fool around in, and he clearly
relishes the opportunity.  Those who can accept the basic premise are
likely to have nearly as much fun.  This isn't quite cinema verite, but
at its most clever, it comes close--a sort of big-budget, horror
version of MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND.  The only argument against Craven's
vision is that he perhaps didn't push the envelope far enough.
     Of course, the centerpiece of WES CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE is Freddy
Krueger (once again played by Englund, even though the end credits
ascribe Freddy's role to "himself").  This time around, the dream demon
has been given a newer, meaner look and a set of nastier claws, but
there's no questioning that he's the same monster that began his screen
haunts a decade ago.  The visual and gore effects, while not ILM
top-of- the-line, are believable and occasionally downright chilling.
The entire production is steeped in an unsettling atmosphere.
     The cinematic horror genre, like the science fiction one, has been
badly hamstrung by poor films, and several of the NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET entries have been at the forefront of the decline.  Therefore,
it's somewhat ironic that one of the most intelligent and creative
efforts to come along in a while bears the NIGHTMARE theme, title, and
signature villain.  Any copycat features spawned by this movie will
hopefully take a cue from WES CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE and favor quality
of scares over quantity of blood.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David Elliot
     I finally got around to seeing WES CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE last
night.  I had already seen PULP FICTION too many times, so WCNN seemed
a viable option for some blood-soaked entertainment.  How wrong I was.
     The plot is one of the silliest, and most confused in recent
memory.  The actors in the film all play themselves, all the way down
to Wes Craven playing the director of A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET (which
he was).  Heather Langenkamp--the heroine from NIGHTMARES 1 and 3 plays
herself down as a jittery, slightly spineless mother.  The film opens
with a stupid scene in which a robotic Freddy glove slices two SFX
techs into mince, then runs around the room like Thing from THE
ADDAMS FAMILY.  It's really quite embarrassing to watch.
     To cut a long (and inane) story short--Wes Craven tells Langenkamp
that because the "Nightmare on Elm Street" films have ended--Freddy
has been let out "like a genie from a bottle" ... erm ...  because ...
that's the way the script was written.
     Freddy has been getting into Heather's dreams, because he was the
one who "killed" him first.  He also enters the dreams of her son--an
intensely precocious and distasteful little child, a cross between
Macauley Culkin and Linda Blair.  The kid's stuffed dinosaur "protects
him from the mean ol' man with the claws."  Oh, how cute yet
menacing ... I don't think.
     I don't want to give too much away, but let's just say that the
final scene where Heather climbs into her sons bed and crawls down one
end to face Freddy has to be one of the most ridiculous scenes ever put
into a commercial horror flick--especially one with Freddy's cult-hero
status.
     The performances are hammed up--Langenkamp's screeching, illogical
portrayal being rather annoying--and Robert Englund (the actor who
plays Freddy) is simply written out of the script half way through the
film.  The loose ends are never tied up ... and the film basically
sucks.
     If you are not convinced to stay away from this piece of garbage,
I'm going to print it in capitals:
     That's right.  The big guy with the killer claws is only seen for
the final scene ... and even then he acts like a moron.  I give this
film a low -3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Steer clear, guys.  It's
garbage.  If only I could get my 9.50 back....

Author
David Cromwell
     All the good reviews you've been seeing about this movie are right
on target.  Not only is this a good horror movie; it's simply a good
movie period.  The intelligence behind this movie is so far above your
average dead teenager movie that it's practically in another
dimension.  The movie is also well-crafted, the production values are
excellent, and the pacing is wonderful.  There's not a single dead spot
in the whole film.
     I went to this movie because my teenage son and his friend wanted
to go.  I was a little leery about it, so one of the factors that
created tension in the movie for me is that I was always wondering
"when is he going to show something truly revolting; something that
makes me wish I hadn't come" (as in CALIGULA or I SPIT ON YOUR GRAVE).
The good news is that this movie always stays within the bounds of the
contract between filmmaker and viewer implicit in the old-time, classic
horror movies/psychological thrillers.  You see the shadow on the
curtain, you hear the screams, you see the blood-stained water spiral
down the drain, but you never see the knife enter the body.  In the
best Alfred Hitchcock tradition, the violence in this movie, at least
the violence that occurs in reality, is all implied.
     There is a scene in a morgue where the sheet covering a corpse is
lifted up only enough to see the face of the victim and only the
*beginning* of the claw marks that supposedly run the length of the
entire torso, which we're given to believe has been torn apart.  When
the sheet is lifted again for better look, you don't see much more than
you did the first time, but you do see the reaction of the person
viewing it.  My son observed that this film could be shown on TV
without any cuts.  However, it probably won't.  It is so intense and
scary, that my eight-year-old daughter would be *seriously* traumatized
by watching it.
     The best part of this movie is its complexity and the interworking
multiple levels of reality.  Wes Craven has created an amazingly
complete and consistent world, with all its different levels tied
seamlessly together.  Even the cliched character of Freddie is made
believable within the context of the film.
     Craven also has some fun on the side, throwing in some ironic
commentary about the effects of modern horror movies on kids, making
conscious reference to horror movies of the past, and observing a
number of time-honored horror film conventions.
     The first time I saw this movie, it was an experience.  When I go
back to see it again, it will be to watch for the details I missed the
first time and to appreciate the craft with which it was made.

Author
James Saravia
Freddy Krueger is a horror icon on the same level as Dracula, Frankenstein's
monster, King Kong, among others. The character is Wes Craven's invention and
it still is an imaginatively created character. Freddy has a burnt face, glove
with four sharp razors, a red and green striped sweater, a fedora hat, and an
attitude. The original "Nightmare on Elm Street" is among the best and most
original horror films ever made - a scarefest that examines the psychological
dreams and the subconscious of unruly teenagers living on Elm Street who are
being pursued in their dreams by a child killer named Freddy. If he kills you
in your dreams, you'll wake up dead. The inevitable sequels were not quite on
the same level as the original but they were creative, visual tour de forces
with excellent special-effects and a jocose Freddy. Wes Craven was not involved
in any of the follow-ups but he came up with a new idea in 1994 - a
film-within-the-film treatise on the danger of the "Nightmare" movies and how
they affect the cast members. It is a noble idea but it doesn't quite deliver
any new themes or ideas. 
"Wes Craven's New Nightmare" stars Heather Langenkamp as herself, an actress
whose life dramatically changed since she completed the "Nightmare" movies. She
has a nice house in L.A., a faithful husband (David Newsom) who works on
special-effects, and a seemingly disturbed young son named Dylan (Miko Hughes)
who watches scenes from the original "Nightmare" movie and even speaks like
Freddy (he also loves to read "Hansel and Gretel"). Not all is well as we
discover something ominous is happening in the Langenkamp residence. There are
the numerous phone calls from an obsessed fan (maybe Freddy); several
earthquake tremors; Dylan screaming at the top of his lungs; her husband killed
in a car accident (could be Freddy's fault); and so on. Heather meets with
several of her movie co-stars (John Saxon and Robert Englund as themselves) to
determine what is happening. My feeling is that she dotes on and is overly
protective of her son, Dylan, but that's just a thought. Perhaps Dylan
shouldn't be watching any of those movies. What do you think, Heather?
It turns out that Heather is being offered a new role in a new "Nightmare"
movie, hence the movie we are watching. Wes's new script had been devised to
get rid of the demon who has been unleashed into the world after killing off
the fictional character in "Freddy's Dead." As Wes explains in one of the best
scenes in the movie, this demon is more powerful and more evil than Freddy and
Heather must try to stop him from getting her and her son. It is art imitating
life in the broadest sense, and this is possibly the best and most twisted idea
in the whole series by far. 
Unfortunately, Wes screws it up because he doesn't allow the screenplay to
play for some clever thrills and psychological meanings. Instead, he opts for
clever inside jokes and unwarranted hysteria. Being a confessed Freddy fan
myself, I enjoyed seeing all the puns and jokes, and I liked seeing some of the
actors as themselves (look quickly for Tuesday Knight from "Nightmare 4"), the
agents, New Line president Robert Shaye, etc. The movie plays like a docudrama
and that's when it works best. It's the dramatic, maybe personal stuff, that
doesn't work.
 The biggest flaw is the crucial casting of the Dylan role: he's played by
Miko Hughes who overacts to the hilt and delivers fake screams. This kid is so
intolerable and so unlikable that it is difficult to build any kind of sympathy
for him or his plight. Heather Langenkamp does a relatively fine job of playing
herself (not Nancy) and she is at her best in the opening scenes where the
phone continually rings and her son continually screams - her dazed, agitated
behavior is superbly realized. For the rest of the movie, though, she seems to
be playing the character Nancy and not herself. Of course, she may be dreaming
the whole film that we are watching but that's a moot point. I like the scenes
where Heather is more relaxed such as when she meets with John Saxon at a park,
or when she converses with Wes at his house.         Some of the obligatory dream
sequences are excellent, including the magnificent (and overlong) inferno
ending where Freddy nearly swallows Dylan! I also liked the terrifying sequence
where Dylan walks across a highway where dozens of cars and trucks nearly hit
him. But most of the movie tries, and fails, to build suspense through
countless earthquakes, and numerous telephone rings as in Craven's more
successful "Scream." Nothing in the film is particularly thrilling or
compelling - it just becomes repetitious and numbing after a while. 
I saw this film three times because the critics thought so highly of it, and I
thought maybe I missed something. The first time I saw it, I hated it - it
seemed nothing like the previous films. The second time,  I thought it was just
plain awful. The third time I saw it on was actually on TNT (hosted by Joe Bob
Briggs) and I appreciated some of the minute subtleties, and the performances
that were a lot better than I had anticipated. Director Wes Craven just missed
the mark by not investing the psychological, real-life horror of horror movies
taking over the lead actors' lives and their families. 
"Wes Craven's New Nightmare" is not a terrible movie but it is unfocused and
mediocre - just being self-reverential is not enough. Still, if you're a Freddy
Krueger fan, you should check it out for the clever puns and the infrequent
brilliant nightmare scenes, but not for any other reason. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any comments, suggestions or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or
at jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Jerry Saravia
Freddy Krueger is a horror icon on the same level as Dracula, Frankenstein's
monster, King Kong, among others. The character is Wes Craven's invention and
it still is an imaginatively created character. Freddy has a burnt face, glove
with four sharp razors, a red and green sweater, a fedora hat, and an attitude.
The original "Nightmare on Elm Street" is among the best and most original
horror films ever made - a scarefest that examines the psychological dreams and
the subconscious of unruly teenagers living on Elm Street who are being pursued
in their dreams by a child killer named Freddy. If he kills you in your dreams,
you'll wake up dead. The inevitable sequels were not quite on the same league
as the original but they were creative, visual tour de forces with excellent
special-effects and a jocose Freddy. Wes Craven was not involved in any of the
follow-ups but he came up with a new idea in 1994 - a film-within-the-film
treatise on the danger of the "Nightmare" movies and how they affect the cast
members. It is a noble idea but it doesn't quite deliver any new themes or
ideas. 
"Wes Craven's New Nightmare" stars Heather Langenkamp as herself, an actress
whose life dramatically changed since she completed the "Nightmare" movies. She
has a nice house in L.A., a faithful husband (David Newsom) who works on
special-effects, and a seemingly disturbed young son named Dylan (Miko Hughes)
who watches scenes from the original "Nightmare" movie and even speaks like
Freddy (he also loves to read "Hansel and Gretel"). Not all is well as we
discover something ominous is happening in the Langenkamp residence. There are
the numerous phone calls from an obsessed fan (maybe Freddy); several
earthquake tremors; Dylan screaming at the top of his lungs; her husband killed
in a car accident (could be Freddy's fault); and so on. Heather meets with
several of her movie co-stars (John Saxon and Robert Englund as themselves) to
determine what is happening. My feeling is that she dotes on and is overly
protective of her son, Dylan, but that's just a thought. Perhaps Dylan
shouldn't be watching any of those movies. What do you think, Heather?
It turns out that Heather is being offered a new role in a new "Nightmare"
movie, hence the movie we are watching. Wes's new script had been devised to
get rid of the demon who has been unleashed into the world after killing off
the fictional character in Freddy's Dead. As Wes explains in one of the best
scenes in the movie, this demon is more powerful and more evil than Freddy and
Heather must try to stop him from getting her and her son. It is art imitating
life in the broadest sense, and this is possibly the best and most twisted idea
in the whole series by far. 
Unfortunately, Wes screws it up because he doesn't allow the screenplay to play
for some clever thrills and psychological meanings. Instead, he opts for clever
inside jokes and unwarranted hysteria. Being a confessed Freddy fan myself, I
enjoyed seeing all the puns and jokes, and I liked seeing some of the actors as
themselves (look quickly for Tuesday Knight from "Nightmare 4"), the agents,
New Line president Robert Shaye, etc. The movie plays like a docudrama and
that's when it works best. It's the dramatic, personal stuff, that doesn't
work.
The biggest flaw is the crucial casting of the Dylan role: he's played by Miko
Hughes who overacts to the hilt and delivers fake screams. This kid is so
intolerable and so unlikable that it is difficult to build any kind of sympathy
for him or his plight. Heather Langenkamp does a relatively fine job of playing
herself (not Nancy) and she is at her best in the opening scenes where the
phone continually rings and her son continually screams - her dazed, agitated
behavior is superbly realized. For the rest of the movie, though, she seems to
be playing the character Nancy and not herself. Of course, she may be dreaming
the whole film that we are watching but that's a moot point. I like the scenes
where Heather is more relaxed such as when she meets with John Saxon at a park,
or when she converses with Wes at his house.         Some of the obligatory dream
sequences are excellent, including the magnificent (and overlong) inferno
ending where Freddy nearly swallows Dylan! I also liked the terrifying sequence
where Dylan walks across a highway where dozens of cars and trucks nearly hit
him. But most of the movie tries, and fails, to build suspense through
countless earthquakes, and numerous telephone rings as in Craven's "Scream."
Nothing in the film is particularly thrilling or compelling - it just becomes
repetitious and numbing after a while. 
I saw this film three times because the critics thought so highly of it, and I
thought maybe I missed something. The first time I saw it, I hated it - it
seemed nothing like the previous films. The second time I saw it, I thought it
was just plain awful. The third time, I saw it on a TNT "Monstervision" special
(hosted by Joe Bob Briggs) and I appreciated some of the minute subtleties, and
the performances  were a lot better than I had anticipated. Director Wes Craven
just missed the mark by not investing the psychological, real-life horror of
horror movies taking over the lead actors' lives and their families. 
"Wes Craven's New Nightmare" is not a terrible movie but it is unfocused and
mediocre - just being self-reverential is not enough. Still, if you're a Freddy
Krueger fan, you should check it out for the clever puns and the infrequent
brilliant nightmare scenes, but not for any other reason. Stick with the
original "Nightmare." 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com
