Title
Review for Taxi Driver (1976)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Chad Polenz
Taxi Driver
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1976, R, 114 minutes [1 hour, 54 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Robert De Niro (Travis Bickle), Cybill Shepherd (Betsy), Jodie
Foster (Iris), Harvey Keitel (Matthew), written by Paul Schrader, produced by
Michael and Julia Phillips, directed by Martin Scorsese.
What's great about the movies is they allow us to get to know anonymous
strangers. Usually the characters we meet are likable and relatable, but
"Taxi Driver" tries to rob us of the innocence we're used to with a character
study of a person everyone's encountered but never given a second thought to.
New York City has been and always will be associated with crime, pollution,
ghettos, and the "scum" that comes with them. Everyone thinks the streets
could and should be cleaned up, but most realize there's nothing that can
really be done about it and don't let it get to them. Travis Bickle (De Niro)
wishes he could feel that way, he's a Vietnam veteran who drives a taxi
throughout city and can't help noticing the Hellish nature of the city and
the society it breeds. Bickle himself seems to be forming his own reality as
we constantly hear his narration of his obsession and hatred for the city and
his own life.
It's easy to sympathize with Bickle as Scorsese paints a bleak, Gothic-like
portrait of the city by emphasizing the heat and humidity of the summer as
there always seems to be steam or mist rising from the sewers and the
streets. Most of the action takes place at night where only the neon signs
from cheap diners and adult movie theaters provide light. Bickle's passengers
tend to be the "spooks" people avoid such as drunks, prostitutes, two-bit
criminals, and "normal" people who relieve their neurosis in the privacy and
anonymity of the cab (including one funny, yet disturbing scene with a cameo
by Scorsese).
The entire film seems to be a long letter to society, written by Bickle,
attempting to justify his mental deterioration. The first half shows his
struggle to cope and be a normal person. He charms a political organizer
named Betsy (Shepherd) into going out with him (why she ever liked him is
beyond me). But he blows it and when she refuses to see him again he blames
her and thinks she's the same as all the other scum, just better dressed.
As the film progresses Bickle slips deeper and deeper into his own world. He
buys several guns illegally and it seems as if he will become a vigilante,
but besides stopping a robbery, this doesn't happen. He also finds himself
bumping into a young teenage prostitute named Iris (Foster) whom he wants to
"save" from her pimp Matthew (Keitel). 
Little happens in terms of plot, and although there are a few good scenes of
Bickle's attempt to make a difference with Iris, he becomes entirely too
twisted to relate to because there isn't enough (if any) back-story present.
I'm sure the fact he's a veteran has something to do with it, but why not
have flashbacks to something traumatic in his life? As good a job as Scorsese
does in depicting the nihilism Bickle is obsessed with, he doesn't give
enough specific examples. The ending is too surreal for its own good, but I
guess it follows the film's logical conclusion.
Although "Taxi Driver" works as a good narrative and establishment of mood,
there's still a lot more that could have been done. De Niro's performance is
excellent especially considering how pathetic his character is and how
exhausting it must be to carry the film virtually solo. Still, the elements
that make it up are well assembled and entertaining, but most of all
original.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://membersa.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Long Che Chan
Martin Scorsese's films don't age.  Taxi Driver is one of his most
timeless efforts, along with The Last Temptation of Christ, Mean
Streets, GoodFellas, and Raging Bull.  His films are usually filled with
overt anger and fury at society, the mob, New York He is so
indescribably talented: he mixes his rage with hidden gems of humor.
Beyond the gun fights, the blood, and the swearing is a message on
society, something brilliantly and brutally real, something about
America, and something about the world.  This is enough to garner
respect and admiration- but he has also assisted in film preservation
and his risqué attitudes advanced the state of auteur motion pictures.
Taxi Driver is fiery, enraged, and feels like poison- the streets of New
York are devilishly depicted as the homes of prostitutes, pimps, and
drug dealers.  It is uncomfortable, it is eerie.
Robert DeNiro, in his highly acclaimed and revolutionary performance, is
Travis Bickle, a man who is an outsider in New York.  He hates New York
with a passion and cannot wait to perform his vengeance on the city.
What is compelling is that Travis himself is not pure.  His morals are
so poorly structured that he thinks pornography is what normal people
watch.  He drives his taxi nights, he is an insomniac.  When he sees
Betsy, a political campaigner (Cybill Shepherd), he sees what he wishes
the world would be filled with- pure people like her.  He is slinky
while pursuing her and she eventually dates him.  When that fails, his
repression becomes too much- he must find an outlet through which he can
express himself.
For him, the easiest way to get rid of his fury is through violence.  He
buys a whole set if guns from an elusive drug dealer and begins playing
with them like a child plays with toys.  His burning wrath at New York
society is only increased by what he sees in his customers- people who
seek the death of their philandering wives, rich tycoons having flings
with hookers, and a twelve-year-old prostitute being battered by her
pimp.  This prostitute, Iris (Jodie Foster) fixes what Travis decides to
do with his life- he decides to save her from her wicked pimp Sport
(Harvey Keitel).  He believes that Iris should be in school, with her
parents.  He knows she has lost her innocence, but she can still return
to a happy childhood, she is only twelve.  Jodie Foster gives an
abnormally mature and preconscious performance as Iris and her knowledge
and identification with her character is deeply felt.  The finale where
Travis murders everyone who stands in the way of him saving this girl is
his way of doing something he thinks is good, full of heart, and
noteworthy, and also excreting his rage through violence.  It is so
chilling, so frightening because we know that this killing spree is only
a temporary way of distancing himself from his insanity.
Robert DeNiro's performance is so genius because he turned Travis Bickle
into a bitter Vietnam vet as charismatic as Humphrey Bogart, as twisted
as Jack Nicholson, and as thoughtful as Spencer Tracy.  He strips Travis
down to his rotten, unredeemed core.  The movie's score by the legendary
Bernard Hermann was recorded a day before he died- it is rip-roaring and
comical, staccato and consuming.
What is wrong with Taxi Driver is more of an opinion.  The movie is made
in such an- er- ugly way, the streets of New York are so congested, so
Midnight Cowboy-ish, so disgusting, and the movie is so unredeeming,
cold, and black-hearted- it is hard to care about the characters or care
for the movie at all.  The atmosphere is thick, humid, and wicked and
that is what detracts from appreciating this film.  It is a collection
of atrocities performed by this ill man, each one drawing a bit too much
attention to itself.
However, the power of the film is so shaking, so unsettling, it deserves
credit.  Martin Scorsese, with Taxi Driver, contributed to the world one
of the ugliest and scariest horror films ever.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
American classic deals with the effects of urbanization, loneliness,
and the lost American Dream. Scorsese's gritty urban drama was brought
even greater attention when real-life psychopath John F. Hinckley Jr.
attempted to assassinate President Reagan in 1981. He claimed that he
was committing the act in order "to impress Jodie Foster". 
PLOT:
Taxi driver Travis Bickle drives along the scummiest streets in the
world, New York City. He doesn't know "much about much", but he does
know that he does not like the continuing propagation of the pimps,
hookers, junkies and low-lifes in his fair city. He also likes a girl.
She doesn't like him back. He is lonely. He likes to drink. He gets
depressed. He gets angry... 
CRITIQUE:
Great urban drama accurately demonstrates the development of a
sociopath within a realistically portrayed city of hell. Travis Bickle
seems like a nice guy, who just couldn't take it anymore. Have any of
you ever felt the same way in your lifetime? Of course. We all have.
And herein lies the continuing popularity of this classic film which
despite some aging concerns, still stands up in time after all these
years.
On the surface, this film will not blow you away in one sitting, but
the symbolism used by Scorsese, the extremely effective acting by
Robert DeNiro, and the superb writing by Paul Schrader, turn this movie
into a cinematic adventure of many layers. The ticking of the cab fare
ticker representing Bickle's growing dissatisfaction with the world
around him (like a bomb), the red and green lights garbing Bickle's
moods, and the plethora of other symbols used to convey anger,
confusion and ultimate frustration.
The soundtrack is perfect (Mrs. JoBlo remarked that it set her into an
icky and depressed state...exactly what was needed to appreciate
Bickle's character), in that it allows you to feel the depravity of his
being. You understand the point that he's reached when he begins to
pour Peach Schnapps into his morning cereal (Bernard Herrmann wasn't
going to write the score for this film, but agreed to do it (his last)
when he saw this pitiful scene.) He is no longer very logical. His
anti-socialism has got the better of him. The direction is top-notch,
with Scorsese showing up in no less than two scenes. And the acting is
superb with DeNiro leading the way, Foster pulling off an effective
"12-and a half year old" hooker, and Keitel, well, being Keitel. The
scene where DeNiro and Keitel haggle for Foster's "services" is one of
my favourites in this movie. 
Many classic scenes and lines are now splashed across this film, such
as the infamous "Are you talking to me?" line (completely ad-libbed by
DeNiro, bien sur), the trademark Scorsese slo-mo's, and the green Army
jacket and penchant for pie and coffee (all used in an effective
hommage in 1993's TRUE ROMANCE (9/10) by writer Quentin Tarantino and
director Tony Scott.) I have always watched this film when I was
feeling down and out, and now I know why. As bad as anything gets in my
life, I could always count on Mr. Travis Bickle's life to be so much
more pathetic.
Keep an eye on the last scene of the film after Bickle drops his
passenger off and notices "his inner demons" quickly appear through the
rearview mirror. Some of the monster still remains... 
Little Known Facts: 
Robert DeNiro was married to the attendant at the porno theater in this
film (actress Diahnne Abbott) from 1976 to 1988. He has been quoted as
saying about his own films, ""I don't like to watch my own movies - I
fall asleep in my own movies." He stands 5"9.
Writer Paul Schrader had spent weeks sleeping in his car while writing
this script, when he realized that he hadn't spoken to another human
being in about three weeks (he was depressed and an alcoholic at the
time.)
Jodie Foster was second choice to play Princess Leia in STAR WARS
(8.5/10). 
Various studios considered producing this film...one had even suggested
Neil Diamond for the lead role.
Director Martin Scorsese claims that the most important shot in the
movie is when Bickle is on the phone trying to get another date with
Betsy. The camera moves to the side slowly and pans down the long,
empty hallway next to Bickle, as if to suggest that the phone
conversation is too painful and pathetic to bear.
Jodie Foster's real name is Alicia Christian Foster. She stands 5"4. In
1980 she graduated as the best of her class from the College Lycée
Français and began to study English Literature at Yale University, from
where she graduated magna cum laude in 1985. She was nominated for Best
Supporting Actress at the 1977 Oscars for her role as Iris the
prostitute in this film (the award went to Beatrice Straight from
NETWORK (7/10).)
Before becoming director, Martin Scorsese had thought about entering
the priesthood. He has been married four times, including actress
Isabella Rossellini, and his sometime producer Barbara De Fina.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
1976.  One year after the United States had pulled out of Vietnam and the
country had began of new era of recovery.  At the tail end of this era, set
in a time of one of the worst crime periods in the history of New York City
and America in general was Martin Scorsese's 'Taxi Driver'.  A landmark film
that transformed stomach turning violence into art, confronted social issues
many wanted to turn away from and made stars out of many of its cast
members.  Robert De Niro had already won an Oscar for 1974's 'The Godfather
Part II' in the best supporting actor category and 'Taxi Driver' was his
first Oscar nomination as best actor.  His performance is one of hypnotic
gore as he plays Travis Bickle, a taxi driver, and a lonely drifter without
family or friends and a man who isn't evil, he just suffers from urban
paranoia.  He wants to save a 12 year old prostitute (Jodie Foster) from a
sleazy life and return her to her parents in Pittsburgh, is tired of all
street scum in general (not realizing later on the potential hypocrisy of
his actions), and he executes an armed robber while defending a
neighbourhood merchant who thanks him and through all of this, believes he
is doing the right thing by planning to assassinate a leading candidate
running for president.  Travis plans the assassination for two reasons: he
was scorned by a woman named Betsy (Cybil Sheppard), volunteering her
services for the candidate, and to vent his disgust for a man working with
her in the same cause (Albert Brooks).  Travis draws a great deal of
influence from a middle aged cabbie named Wizard (Peter Boyle) but uses that
wisdom in a misguided fashion.
If 'Taxi Driver' had been made just ten years earlier, it would have
received an X rating by the American style of rating movies through the
Motion Picture Association of America or it may have been banned altogether.
It is still considered to have hard core violence in this the year 2000 and
is not the least bit dated.  This is Martin Scorsese's first truly great
film.  It is a landmark achievement.  Many would say that Scorsese's first
great film is 1973's Mean Streets' but as great a film as it is, it is
considered more of a cult film among film historians than a mainstream
Hollywood film.  'Taxi Driver' is hardly conventional film making but has
garnered probably more controversy than most other films in the last thirty
years.  Film historian Leonard Maltin only rates it two stars out of four
which was truly a surprise when I first read his review and the American
Film Institute in 1998 rated it #47 on their top 100 list of greatest films
ever made.
Scorsese directs many scenes slowly and in a stiff manner, which works
perfectly as the terror of its psychological qualities make it a full
blooded horror film at times without monsters or elements of the paranormal.
Also getting his first big break in this film is Harvey Keitel, who plays a
street pimp and is one of the most slimy characters you will ever see in a
film.  My two favourite scenes in the film are, one, where Travis buys arms
from a dealer who also trades in drugs and stolen automobiles.  He shows
Travis a suitcase full of firearms and Travis' seduction for these deadly
weapons transforms him into a full workout mode to get his body into shape
and fulfill the fantasies created by the dark side of his mind.  The other
killer scene actually unfolds several times as Travis performs his
assassination rehearsal in front of a mirror where he repeats
confrontational lines several times and it is a trademark scene of style
that De Niro would uses several times in his career and it works every time.
One thing that should be remembered from this film is how devastating the
influence of film can be.  John Hinckley Jr. said this film made him attempt
to kill president Ronald Reagan in order to prove his love to Jodie Foster,
who, as mentioned earlier, played a child prostitute in the film.  Hinckley
attempted to kill Reagan outside a Washington D.C. hotel on March 30, 1981.
Reagan at first wasn't believed to have been shot because he didn't feel a
thing.  After a chest wound was discovered in the presidential limousine,
Reagan was then rushed to the hospital and thankfully, made a full recovery.
The 53rd annual Oscar telecast was delayed one day, to March 31, out of
respect for the president.
I've always found it strange that the 1970's, in my view, the most decadent
and dreary decade of 20th century America, has produced the greatest films
of the the 20th century.  'Taxi Driver' is certainly one of the greatest
films ever made, not only because of its sheer attempt to go for the
jugular, but because is celebrates a whole host of subjects which were
brought to the attention of many who refused to believe or even know they
were present in such a vile way within society.  And many of Scorsese's
small interjections of freakish characters, such as the one he plays as a
well dressed man in the back of De Niro's cab who watches his wife in a
strange apartment committing adultery and telling Travis how he plans to
kill her, give the film the detail it needs and prevents his film from being
a low level exploitation film and instead Scorsese elevates it into
influential artistry.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert De Niro, Jodie Foster, Albert Brooks, Harvey Keitel, 
      Leonard Harris, Cybill Shepherd
Director: Martin Scorsese
Producers: Julia Phillips and Michael Phillips
Screenplay: Paul Schrader
Cinematography: Michael Chapman
Music: Bernard Herrmann
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     In March 1977, the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences 
committed another in their seemingly-endless series of injustices, 
awarding the Best Picture Oscar to John Avildsen's ROCKY, thereby 
snubbing one of the great modern American classics, Martin Scorsese's 
TAXI DRIVER.  While ROCKY represents solid entertainment, it lacks the 
psychological depth of Scorsese's picture, replacing daring character 
development with a feel-good sports formula.  TAXI DRIVER is on a level 
that ROCKY neither aspires to nor attains.
     Like RAGING BULL, TAXI DRIVER features Robert De Niro in top form.  
As good as the actor has been elsewhere, these two pictures mark the 
apex of his superlative career.  From his first scene in TAXI DRIVER, De 
Niro is Travis Bickle, a 26-year old ex-Marine searching for work that 
will keep him up all night as a means of combating insomnia.  At the 
outset, Travis is a lonely, disillusioned man who can still function 
within the "normal" constraints of society.  As time passes, however, 
Travis becomes increasingly alienated from the world around him, 
spiraling into a state of dissociated delusion.  He sees New York City 
as a place of urban decay populated by "animals" and "scum" that need to 
be swept away.  And who better than him to initiate the process?  De 
Niro's performance is so perfectly-tuned that we in the audience don't 
have a moment's doubt or disbelief about what's taking place in Travis' 
troubled mind.
     Initially, Travis is attracted to the cool-but-beautiful Betsy 
(Cybill Shepherd), a volunteer for Senator Palantine's Presidential 
campaign.  Although Travis' stares initially make Betsy uneasy, his 
persistence pays off when she agrees to accompany him to the movies.  
Unfortunately, the socially-inept Travis chooses a hard-core porn film 
for their first date.  Following that gaffe, Betsy dumps him, 
accelerating Travis' descent into isolation.
     The next woman to enter Travis' life is a twelve-year old 
prostitute named Iris.  Played by a fresh-faced Jodie Foster with an 
enthralling mix of youth and world-weary sophistication, Iris' apparent 
innocence is belied by her profession.  Travis decides to save her, 
although his motivation results less from a concern for her well-being 
than from a need to be seen as a savior.  Iris really isn't a person to 
him; she's a symbol.  But redeeming one girl is only an aspect of his 
plan -- he also intends to assassinate Senator Palantine.  Travis is 
tired of sitting back and taking what life dishes out.  He wants to act, 
even if the action has no basis in logic, because, by this time, he is 
beyond rational considerations.
     Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader append the perfect conclusion to 
TAXI DRIVER.  Steeped in irony, the five-minute epilogue underscores the 
vagaries of fate.  The media builds Travis into a hero, when, had he 
been a little quicker drawing his gun against Senator Palantine, he 
would have been reviled as an assassin.  As the film closes, the 
misanthrope has been embraced as the model citizen -- someone who takes 
on pimps, drug dealers, and mobsters to save one little girl.
     There's no doubt that TAXI DRIVER paints an extremely disturbing 
portrait -- we find ourselves understanding Travis' mindset.  This is 
expert film making from Scorsese, cinematographer Michael Chapman, and 
the actors.  Schrader's script, which was inspired by such diverse works 
as Dostoevsky's NOTES FROM UNDERGROUND and Harry Chapin's song, "Taxi", 
is a masterful psychological study, the depth of which can only fully be 
appreciated on repeat viewings.
     Twenty years after its initial release, TAXI DRIVER has reached 
screens in a new, pristine print featuring a remastered stereo 
soundtrack.  And, despite the passage of two decades, the only thing 
dated about this film are the fashions.  TAXI DRIVER's message still 
rings as true as ever, and the characters are as shockingly believable 
as in the mid-seventies.  This re-release offers movie-goers another 
opportunity to see one of Scorsese's most influential and disturbing 
films on the big screen.

Author
Brian Koller
"Taxi Driver" is a brooding, sometimes violent
character study.  Although controversial, it has
generally been highly praised.  While it is a
good film, it lacks focus, and De Niro's character
transitions sometimes lack credibility.
A very lean Robert De Niro is Travis, a taxi driver
in New York City.  Travis is a loner, spending off
hours in porn movie houses and brooding alone in
his apartment.  He keeps a journal in which he
condemns the street life of NYC, and wishes that
somebody would clean the city up.  He develops
obsessions for political staffer Cybil Shephard,
her Presidential candidate Senator Palantine
(Leonard Harris), handguns, and a twelve year old
prostitute (Jodie Foster).
The climax of "Taxi Driver" has the heavily armed
De Niro attempting to rescue Foster from her pimp
(Harvey Keitel, who has shoulder-length hair).
This results in a graphic shootout.  I don't object
to the bloodfest, but its aftermath.  It is as if
nothing has happened: Travis is again working as
a cab driver, and has recovered his mental faculties.
After Shephard's brief relationship with De Niro ends,
her character keeps resurfacing.  This is as confusing
to me as De Niro's actions.  He attends a Palantine
speech, apparently to assassinate him, with the
assumed motive of impressing Shephard.  But by this
time, his interests have turned to Foster and Keitel.
The Bernard Herrman score, good as it is, increases the
confusion, changing back and forth from sleepy retro
jazz to something more brooding and ominous.
"Taxi Driver" is a very interesting film.  It is
impossible to predict where the story will go next,
the dialogue is very good, and the cast and direction
(by Martin Scorsese) is good.  Palantine, a stereotype
of an ambitious, platitude-spouting politician, is
the only weak character.
1976 was the year of "Network" and "Rocky", preventing
"Taxi Driver" from winning any Academy Awards.  The
film was nominated for Best Picture, Best Actor (De Niro),
Best Supporting Actress (Foster) and Best Score.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Zak Forsman
"Loneliness has followed me my whole life. Everywhere. In bars and cars,
sidewalks, stores--everywhere. There's no escape. I'm God's lonely man." We
listen to Travis Bickle, played by Robert DeNiro, as he watches the night
people on 42nd avenue from inside his taxi. "All the animals come out at
night," he says. It is at this particular moment when we realize that
Martin Scorsese's TAXI DRIVER is not a film about a psychotic, it is not a
film about a pervert, but a film about a lonely man in a city full of
people.
Over twenty years ago screenwriter, Paul Schrader, was in a terrible state. He'd
divorced his wife, left the American Film Institute and his career as a
film critic was waning. Schrader found himself living out of his car and
going to pornography theaters daily. Suffering from extreme pain in his
abdomen he went to an emergency room. It was there that Schrader realized
that he hadn't spoken to another person in three weeks. He began to see
his car as a kind of steel coffin and recognized that a taxi driver shares
a similar situation. Schrader quickly settled on his main character and
wrote the first and second drafts of the screenplay in ten days as a
personal catharsis, borrowing heavily from his own experiences.
What fascinates me about TAXI DRIVER is the complexity of character that arises
from a fairly simple story. Travis is obsessed with two women. Betsy (Cybil
Shepherd) is the woman he desires but cannot have. And twelve-year-old
Iris (Jodie Foster) is the prostitute he can have, but does not desire. In
his frustration over the men who seemingly control and can have these
women, Travis attempts to kill the Senator/father-figure of one, fails and
kills the pimp/father-figure of the other. And because he is lucky, Travis
is regarded a hero. Along the way we see the plan growing in his head
within scenes that keep that fact in the background--almost like an
undercurrent. One of the more memorable scenes has director Martin
Scorsese as one of Travis' passengers who lays out his plan to murder his
adulterous wife with a .44 Magnum. It is here that the idea of violent
action is planted in Travis' head and until the film's climax we watch it
grow. "I've got a lot of bad ideas in my head," he admits with a nervous
smile. Again, what has truly happened in this scene is not spoon-fed to us
which in result engages our minds. This is the difference
between great cinema and the standard Hollywood fare. This film respects its
audience.
As does Robert DeNiro of his character. DeNiro is so far into Travis
Bickle we stop seeing him as DeNiro. We forget he's acting. He's one of
few actors that can convincingly disappear inside their character. Travis
is obsessed and DeNiro knows this. Travis has trouble relating to women
and DeNiro knows this. Travis can sometimes be unaware that he's in his
own world. DeNiro knows this. In one scene some other cabbies are talking
and one asks Travis how he's doing. Travis slowly replies, "What's that?"
Then he goes on to tell a story about another taxi driver that was cut up
by a knife-wielding madman. What's important here is the look on DeNiro's
face when he first replies. Travis wasn't daydreaming and he isn't slow.
He's been floating around the city in his "steel coffin" all the while
living in his own moral universe. That's where Travis is coming from and
as I said, Robert DeNiro knows this. A great performance like this comes
down to trust in character. And honesty.
The best way to describe director Martin Scorsese's ability is with a
scene in TAXI DRIVER when Travis is standing in a hallway and talking to
Betsy on a pay-phone. He is apologizing to her for bringing her to an
X-rated movie on their date the night before. When he asks if she received
the flowers he sent, she tells him she didn't. The director's camera
tracks to the right and stops on a shot of an empty hallway. Scorsese has
said that he did this because it is as though Travis' rejection is too
painful to watch. It moves away. Apparently even harder to watch than the
violence at the film's climax. I must admit I find this motivation for
camera movement fascinating and it is for reasons like this that I feel
Martin Scorsese is our greatest director. He has an obvious and important
signature, most Hollywood directors don't.
TAXI DRIVER is a film about character. Schrader's dialogue for, DeNiro's
understanding of and Scorsese's attention to this character come together
brilliantly. Twenty years ago this film was up for Best Picture at the
Academy Awards and it won the International Grand Prize at the Cannes film
festival. And I'm sure you've realized by now that I highly recommend you
see TAXI DRIVER.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     One of Martin Scorsese's first and most important pictures was
TAXI DRIVER.  For its 20th anniversary, there is a new print and a
remastered stereo sound track, and the picture has a new theatrical
release.  Some of the hairdos make look dated, but the message it tells
is as powerful and frightening today as it was in 1976.  This is a
landmark film in the history of the cinema.
     Robert De Niro plays 26 year old Vietnam vet Travis Bickle.
Travis is a New York City taxi driver who willing works the nightshift
in the roughest sections of town.  Prostitutes use the back seat of his
taxi as a moving bed, and people are stabbed in it.  Travis is a
psychological misfit, but someone who wants this degradation cleaned
up.  He, of course, does not realize that he is one of them.  He says,
"someday a real rain will come and wipe this scum off the streets."  He
wants to be that rain.
     He falls in love with a beautiful woman in the window of a Senator
Charles Palantine (Leonard Harris) for President campaign headquarters.
He finds her name is Betsy (Cybill Shepherd), and he even gets her to
go on a date with him.  They both have an outward innocence that make
them appear well matched in some strange sense.  When Betsy realizes
that his idea of a date is a porn movie in the sleaziest area of town,
she walks out and refuses to ever speak to him again.  He is so naive
that he does not realize that taking her to a porn movie on their first
date is a faux pas.
     Some of the movie has the taxi drivers at a coffee shop, a la
DINER, discussing life.  After Betsy ditches him, Travis tries to
understand it all so he turns to the oldest and hence wisest taxi
driver, who goes by the nickname of Wizard (Peter Boyle).  Wizard sees
his job as the shaper of his destiny and tells Travis, "You get a job.
You become the job."
     The show is full of great visuals.  Travis sits in front of the TV
staring with a wasted look and glazed eyes while eating his breakfast,
which consists of white bread clumps with large quantities of brandy,
sugar, and milk poured on top.  In another he glares at American
Bandstand while holding a gun with a foot long barrel resting on his
temple.
     There are many great minor characters.  One of my favorites has
Martin Scorsese as a husband sitting in Travis's taxi watching his
philandering wife's silhouette in the window of an apartment.  He turns
out to be as evil as Travis.  Eventually Travis buys himself a small
arsenal of weapons.  He practices the classic cinematic line, "You
talkin' to me," in the mirror while practicing drawing his guns
quasi-cowboy style.  He tells himself, "Listen world.  Here is a man
who stood up against the scum."
     Travis meets a 12 1/2 year old prostitute named Iris who calls
herself Easy (Jodie Foster).  He decides he wants to save her in
particular and mankind in general, but the problem is that she does not
want to be saved since she is used to staying with her pimp Matthew,
whom she calls Sport (Harvey Keitel).  To Travis this is all a mission
as if from God, although he claims no divine inspiration.  Travis says,
"Now I see this clearly.  My whole life is pointed in one direction.
There never has been a choice for me."
     In a scene reminiscent of John Hinkley, Travis goes fully armed to
a Palantine rally.  The senator is delivering a pompous and meaningless
speech that parallels Travis's vision of life.  The senator proclaims,
"We meet at a crossroads in history.  No longer will the wrong roads be
taken."  In a movie full of make up and hair styles that make a
statement, Travis shows up at the rally with a Mohawk.  The ending is
suspenseful, extremely gory, and somewhat surprising.  The epilogue
after that is really surprising.
     So much of this study of evil is brilliant.  Certainly at the top
of the list is the acting by De Niro, but close behind would be the
directing and the writing (Paul Schrader).  Everyone knows what an
excellent job Jodie Foster did, but I was impressed at how Cybill
Shepherd took the almost coquettish but naive minor part and made it
interesting.  Harvey Keitel had a tiny part, but managed to put a lot
into it.
     The cinematography (Michael Chapman) throughout the picture is
quite effective showing the grit and the garish lights of the city, but
the slow motion sequences at the end are the best.  The sets (Charles
Rosen) of New York City are suitably ugly, thus creating just the right
images.  The costume design (Ruth Morley) ranged from a lovely set of
sweet dress complete with beautiful neck bands for Betsy to sinister
outfits for Travis.  An impressive range.
     I certainly was pleased with the remastered sound since the show
had great movie music (Bernard Herrmann).  It started off with sad and
melancholic tunes and then switched to ominous ones created with a
muted trumpet.  Rarely these days do films dare to have any music to
speak of, and if they do, it is frequently nothing more that loud and
overpowering rock music that turns the show into a long rock video more
suitable for MTV.
     TAXI DRIVER runs a well edited, thanks to Marcia Lucas, Tom Rolf,
and Melvin Shapiro, and fast 1:53.  It is rated R, but borders on
NC-17.  There is no sex or nudity.  The language is frequently obscene,
and there are some racial epithets.  The reason I say it is almost
NC-17 is solely for the gory ending.  I do not think the violence is
gratuitous, and I am glad the studio did not demand a more saleable
version without the scenes.  I think the picture as delivered is
brilliant.  I would let teenagers see it if they are mature.  I
recommend the film highly, and give it my top rating of ****.

Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
When people are talking about good old times, they actually want to make
some bad times look better. Nice example of such behaviour is
contemporary attitude of popular media towards the 1970s. For new
generations, Superseventies are the lost Golden Age of chic fashion,
cult TV shows and sexual freedom unchecked by AIDS. For people who
actually had to live in that period, it was the Gloomy Decade, marked by
lost ideals of 1968, rampant inflation and unemployment, international
terrorism, fuel crisis and loss of faith in almost anything that
previous generation stood for. Feelings of despair and nihilism found
its reflections in many films of that era. Martin Scorsese's TAXI
DRIVER, which symbolises both the glory and despair of the Seventies, is
most celebrated of them all.
The movie's protagonist is Travis Bickle (Robert de Niro), 26-year old
former Marine who takes the job of taxi driver in New York City because
he can't sleep at nights. The job gets him exposed to the dark side of
apocalyptic megalopolis, and Travis gradually gets alienated from the
rest of world. The only bright spot in his life is Betsy (Cybil
Sheperd), attractive woman working in Senator Palantine's presidential
campaign. Their date ends as humiliating fiasco because Travis makes
fatal mistake by inviting her to porno movie theatre. Losing his only
link to better side of the world, Travis gradually descends into
psychosis, becoming convinced that his mission in life is to battle scum
on the street. He purchases a formidable arsenal of guns and begins
physical preparations for the inevitable conflict. That conflict finally
comes when he takes personal interest in Iris (Jodie Foster), 12-year
old prostitute who temporarily took refuge in his taxi.
As many great movies that got cult status through the years, TAXI DRIVER
became the object of many interpretations. For some critics and scholars
it is an exploration of universal subjects that date back to Dostoyevski
- loss of moral compass in a bleak reality of dirty, overpopulated
industrial cities; the story could have been set in 19th Century same as
in our times. For others, the movie uses Raskolnikov-like figure in
order to portray burning problems of 1970s America - its apparent
inability to deal with the consequences of rapid social changes that
occurred in previous decade.
Brilliant performance of Robert De Niro in role of a lifetime can give
arguments for both sides. His Travis Bickle has a lot in common with
most of the average viewers of today - many of us share his feelings of
isolation, loneliness and outrage towards crime, drugs, prostitution and
senseless street violence. His pathetic attempts to establish some kind
of human connection with the people around him, sometimes in most
unusual circumstances - like with Secret Service agents, pimps or job
interviewers - make him a person too goofy to be the hero, and too
pathetic to be the classic villain. However, most of the average viewers
are sensible enough to recognise the tin line that separate concerned
citizens or troubled souls from fanatical madmen. But despite anything,
average viewer at the end actually cheers for Travis - his crusade
against "scum" is something that average person wants, but doesn't have
a stomach/lack of brains to do it.
While De Niro's Travis might come in and out of particular times and
places, other persons that appear in the film (mostly played by the
character actors) give it distinctively 1970s feel. Wizzard (played by
Peter Boyle) presents the only link with America's better past; but only
because he is the oldest taxi driver in company and therefore everybody
assumes that he "knows stuff". His obvious inadequacy in giving advice
to troubled Travis illustrates the inability of pre-1960s generations to
find answers to the problems of Gloomy Decade. Other characters, on the
other hand, show the bad side of New Age. Matthew "Sport" (Keitel, who
befriended real-life pimps in other to prepare for his role of a
lifetime) is dressed like a hippie; Iris found excuse for her escape to
the world of drugs and child prostitution in a ideology of
Counterculture. Porno movies, that should be the element of new times of
sexual freedom, are too much even for supposedly "liberated" Betsy. Even
the politicians, like Senator Palantine, are lost in post-Vietnam and
post-Watergate mess; his broad and senseless "messages" that cover the
lack of any serious program can't fool even such idiots like Travis. The
Past is gone, The Present is bad, and even The Future seems bleak, and
the feeling of pessimism can't be washed away even by ironic happy end.
Travis and his world found themselves in a desperate situation, and
Martin Scorsese uses the best of his cinematic skills in order to spill
the gloom of Schrader's screenplay into the silver screen. New York City
in the night is portrayed as a Hell on Earth, and the red light and
steam coming out of sewers give it surreal, almost Stygian atmosphere.
Another important element of the atmosphere is score of great Bernard
Herrman, whose efficient use of jazz elements gives some melancholy that
softens the brutality of motion picture.
One of the greatest ironies of TAXI DRIVER is the fact that the movie
was, same as his protagonist, famous for the wrong reason. Instead of
receiving cult status because of his artistic merits, for many years it
was tabloid-fodder because of Hinckley and his real-life re-enactment of
events in the movie. Now, more than two decades later, when some other
"life imitating art" incidents get more attention, we can finally enjoy
TAXI DRIVER in all its artistic glory.
