Title
Review for Amantes (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Spanish films are finally settling in as an important part of the art world,
usually having to play second banana to either an Italian, French or English
film.  But at least, when the films do not like a Spanish piece of fluff,
they are beginning to shape up as a nice breed of work, even if, so far, it
seems to be centered around one actress, whose
work is beginning to be noticed.  Victoria Abril has helped put her
country's films back on the map, a bit on a sabbatical since the late master
LUIS BUNUEL, who single handedly made sure we knew there was much more to
Spain than Generalissimo  Franco, even though the government was not about
to say anything about the film, so they could sweep their distaste for
arguments with the church.
If anything, if Pedro Almodovar and Carlos Saura are an indication, the film
industry has finally succeeded in Spain, to the point where the church is no
longer a divisive factor of the public by deciding a film is bad, and the
public flocking to go see it.  Were these church leaders intelligent, they
would have embraced the artists and public, and set themselves up well
 even financially ) for the next century or two.  But old ideas die hard....
and the divinity  plays have not improved.....
Amidst a country, like Italy, where the Christian church has such a  large
influence, film is thriving.  While it exposes a side of people, which Luis
Bunuel himself was already discussing in very large detail, although he made
a point of showing up his opponents,
these films have begun to gain a life of their own, and probably say more
about the actual population of the area, than it does about their ideas.  As
in Bunuel, the ideas and the realities are not quite the same thing, and the
opposite sides can have disastrous impacts on individuals.  If this helps
people learn, then the church  has found its destroyer.
AMANTES, is a story of dualities, and specially in the mind of a man, who
can not decide between his love for a woman, and his desire to be involved
with someone more innocent, but who can't satisfy him despite her true love
and care for him.  And the resolution he has  to make involves a bit of a
plot to get rid of the innocent girl, who
has in the end, finally recognized that she does not want to live, since her
only dream is dead.  And in front a church, she allows for her lover to help
her commit suicide.
The whole film is based on a true story, and the outcome of the events,  and
while it creates a wonderful screen tale, with very good actors carrying it,
it is the subtlety of the situation, and the teetering edge that it lives in
that keeps the film going.
Victoria Abril is very good, and as in at least two of her previous films,
has no qualms about her sexuality or sensual involvement in her roles, and
portrays another depth for an actress which is not readily found.  As such,
it also shows the potential of a new
style of film making, which in the future will incorporated what is today
called pornography, into an art form.  There are moments which are not quite
for everyone, surrounded by the gypsy love songs about sex, and while a bit
surrealistic to see it portrayed in a film, it does bring out another set of
feelings in the people involved.  And the innocent girl, lacked this kind of
open-ness. And while she is willing to learn, it also appears that she is
destined to fail.  She is not free from herself, as the lover has become
with her body.  However, it is also this freedom which brings about the
fateful deed, and the eventual destruction of the romantic relationship.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
105 min., R, Drama, 1991, In Spanish with English subtitles
Director: Vincente Aranda
Cast: Victoria Abril, Jorge Sanz, Maribel Verdu, Enrique Cerro,   
      Mabel Escano, Alicia Agut
     Ex-soldier Jorge Sanz moves into the town where his girlfriend
Maribel Verdu lives.  As soon as he gets a job and money, they will get
married.  Sanz rents a room from Victoria Abril.  She seduces him, and
Sanz finds that he is falling out of love with Verdu, and into love with
Abril.
     AMANTES is a rather sad film and is based on a true story.   I
don't recommend this film for everybody, although if it comes to a
theater near you for a cheap enough rate, you might be interested in
going to see it.  If the film sounds interesting to you from the review
I have written, I suggest that you do attempt to see this film at a
theater as I don't know if it will ever be released on video cassette.
On a scale of zero to five, I give AMANTES a four.  AMANTES is rated R
for strong sexual content, explicit language, adult situations, brief
female nudity, and brief male nudity.
     The actors/actresses in this film do a very good job.   Victoria
Abril is excellent as Jorge Sanz's landlady.  She is seductive, yet you
can see the evil behind what she does.  Jorge Sanz is great as the poor
man who is deeply in love with Maribel Verdu.  As he gets to know
Victoria Abril he starts to fall in love with her; or is it just the
sexual things that she does with him?  Maribel Verdu is excellent as
Jorge Sanz's girlfriend who sees herself losing him.  She has to convert
to Victoria Abril's tactics if she wants to keep Jorge Sanz for herself.
     This film reminded me a lot of the Pamela Smart case that happened
in New Hampshire last year.  It is almost the exact story, except
instead of a husband, the third person is a girlfriend.  The film is
quite well written.  The end of the film is rushed and a little
confusing.  There are a few slow spots, and I vaguely remember one place
that moved along too quickly, but other than that I don't remember any
problems with the writing.  The film presented the material rather well,
not making it too depressing, especially considering the content.
However, at some points, especially towards the end, the film does get
depressing.
