Title
Review for Thin Line Between Love and Hate, A (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chris Casino
*1/2 out of **** (poor, but has some good moments).
Directed by Martin Lawrence, Written by Martin Lawrence, Bentley Kyle Evans,
Kenny Buford, Kim Bass, Produced by Martin Lawrence.
Cast: Martin Lawrence (Darnell Wright), Lynn Whitfield (Brandi Web),
Regina King (Mia Wilkins), Bobby Brown (Tee), Della Reese (Momma Wright)
The main problem with Martin Lawrence's pet project, A Thin Line Between Love 
and Hate, like any Fatal Attraction variation where the protagonist is a man,
is that his character is an irresponsible jerk, and if that is the
case, it doesn't seem to do anything except justify the woman's
actions.
That is especially the case in Lawrence's Darnell Wright. He is one of
those macho guys with women lined up a mile long. Now don't
think I condone this just because I'm male. My philosophy is,
if you are one of the few heterosexual males lucky enough to get
your hands on a beautiful, kind girl, you should treat her
like a princess and respect her. Darnell doesn't think like this. He 
sleeps with these girls once and dumps them. And by the period
in the film he discovered that his newest target, beautiful, wealthy 
Brandi Web (played nicely by Whitfield) who runs a successful real 
estate business, is out to kill him for dumping her for his 
childdhood friend Mia (King), I found myself thinking, "I'm
supposed to feel sorry for this guy?" 
After all, it is largely Darnell's fault. If he is lining up
all these women, you'd think he'd have enough common sense
to think it would backfire on him one day, as his mother says it
does. But he doesn't, so you get the sense that he's not only
irresponsible, but also pretty dumb. You especially get this
sense that he's dumb after Brandi tells him she killed her
husband for allegedly abusing her. (I'd put my pants on in two
seconds after that!)
Now, Brandi is a psycho bitch, but it's hard not to agree with what she
says to Darnell during the finale about guys like him treating her 
like garbage.
One final flaw, though, is letting Brandi fall for Darnell to begin
with. Brandi is a classy, intelligent woman with an MBA from
Harvard, who initally resists Darnell's "immature play"
as she calls it, as any woman like her would in real life. 
But all of a sudden she says yes. But when you listen to
Darnell's four letter word vocabulary watch his actions,
you wonder why such an intelligent woman would fall for
a guy like Darnell period, much less have such an unhealthy obsession
for him!
Lawrence can be good when he wants to, but in order to prove it, 
he needs to let other people write and direct his movies.
Look at this movie. Four writers, as a result it's too long
(two hours, when it could've easily worked at ninety minutes!)
and it has a lot of subplots and characters that appear and
disappear as quickly as they came (which makes me think the
writers didn't get along), all of which isn't necessary.
There are some bright spots, though. Whitfield, Regina King,
Della Reese, and Bobby Brown all do what they can with
lazily written parts, and they help it out a lot.
And there are some funny parts (like, for example, the
scene where Reese attempts to fight Whitfeld for 
harrassing her son and damaging her property),
but they're just not enough to sustain the film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Martin Lawrence, Lynn Whitfield, Regina King, Bobby Brown, 
      Della Reese, Roger E. Mosley
Director: Martin Lawrence
Producers: Douglas McHenry and George Jackson
Screenplay: Martin Lawrence, Bentley Kyle Evans, Kenny Buford, 
      and Kim Bass
Cinematography: Francis Kenny
Music: Roger Troutman
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     A THIN LINE BETWEEN LOVE AND HATE is muddled to the point of 
tedium.  The screenplay is credited to four writers, and its unevenness 
argues that none of them were on the same wavelength.  Subplots start 
but never finish, characters come and go, and even the main storyline 
can't decide whether it wants to be a comedy, a morality play, or a 
thriller.  Lead actor Martin Lawrence (in his directorial debut) has a 
degree of screen presence, but not even his charisma can rescue this 
cliched film from sliding into oblivion.
     Darnell (Lawrence) is the kind of character who it's easy to 
dislike.  He's a classic womanizer -- the kind of man who keeps a stream 
of girlfriends waiting at the other end of the phone for his call.  For 
Darnell, the harder a woman is to get, the more she entices him.  So 
when Brandi (Lynn Whitfield), a wealthy real estate agent, turns her 
nose up at his come-ons, Darnell goes after her with the tenacity of a 
pit bull.  Employing every trick in his book -- flowers, a hired limo, 
classy presents, and even a horseback riding excursion -- he sets out on 
a coldly-plotted plan of seduction.  Eventually, he succeeds, but he 
gets more than he bargained for.  When he tries to break things off with 
Brandi to prove his affection for the high school sweetheart who has 
come back to town (Regina King), he discovers that Brandi isn't willing 
to let him go.  She'll try anything, including bodily harm, to keep him.
     Mix Eddie Murphy's BOOMERANG with FATAL ATTRACTION, and you get an 
idea how confused A THIN LINE BETWEEN LOVE AND HATE is.  Although 
Lawrence, who's wearing half-a-dozen hats for this film (Executive 
Producer, Music Supervisor, Story, Screenplay, Director, and Star), 
includes a few humorous scenes, there's not enough comedy to leaven the 
film's slower portions.  The dreary setup takes forever, the thriller 
elements are disappointingly pedestrian, and the climax is formulaic.  
     There is the core of an interesting story here -- what happens when 
a lothario becomes a victim -- but Lawrence never does more with this 
plot strand than superficially trace it.  There should be a lot 
transpiring on a psychological level, but the script is content with 
unbelievable transformations and simple labels.  Darnell is the 
repentant sinner and Brandi is the psycho scorned woman.  The film's 
message -- don't say you love someone unless you mean it -- doesn't have 
any resonance because, aside from a few cuts and bruises, Darnell never 
pays a real price for his actions.  The ending doesn't have the guts to 
demand a meaningful sacrifice.
     A THIN LINE BETWEEN LOVE AND HATE boasts several solid 
performances.  Lawrence is energetic, but never so completely out-of-
control that he loses the audience the way Jim Carrey does.  Lynn 
Whitfield occasionally manages to bring hints of humanity to Brandi (the 
almost-invisible tear on her cheek when Darnell breaks off the 
relationship is a nice touch).  Regina King and Della Reese (as 
Darnell's mother) are effective in supporting roles.  
     With a more clear notion of what it was trying to do and a shorter, 
tighter script, A THIN LINE BETWEEN LOVE AND HATE could have been 
worthwhile as a comedy or a thriller, although doubtfully as both.  In 
its present form, however, the only line that this film treads is the 
ugly one between mediocrity and pointlessness.

Author
Chuck Dowling
A Thin Line Between Love and Hate (1996) NO STARS out of ***** - C:Martin
Lawrence, Lynn Whitfield, Bobby Brown, Della Reese, Roger E. Mosley.
Martin Lawrence stars in, wrote, produced, directed, and supervised the
music of this absolutely dreadful "movie" about what might be one of the
most unlikable main characters in movie history.
Lawrence plays a "ladies man" who has dedicated his life to the pursuit of
women, just so he can have sex with them once and then dump them.
Immediately, NO ONE should care what happens to this man. He soon meets his
match (Whitfield), who leads him on for days and then decides to take
revenge when she realizes she's been used and lied to. Immediately, EVERYONE
should be rooting for this woman. However, the film is written so that
Lawrence is the good guy in the situation, and Whitfield is just a crazy
psycho.
Pauly Shore is a brilliant comedian compared to Lawrence, and I absolutely
HATE Pauly Shore. Also, like Adam Sandler in "Billy Madison", not once in
the film can Lawrence say a line of dialogue normally. At least one word in
each sentence has to be exaggerated for no reason whatsoever and after about
five minutes it couldn't be more irritating. "A Thin Line Between Love and
Hate" is easily one of the worst films of the year and most definately one
of the worst "comedies" of all time. I think that being murdered would be
funnier than this movie.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.
