Title
Review for JFK (1991)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ralph Benner
     In the February 1992 Vanity Fair, no less than Norman Mailer wrote
that despite director Oliver Stone's clumsiness with facts, "The first
thing to be said about JFK is that it is a great movie, and the next is
that it is one of the worst great movies ever made." Leave it to Mailer to
have it both ways, but he's doing nothing that Stone himself is not: JFK
confirms that the Warren Report is bunk; it also has built-in protections
against criticism that Stone's hero, New Orleans district attorney Jim
Garrison, was discredited back in the late 60s when he attempted to prove
a wide conspiracy in John Kennedy's assassination. Clever of Stone to put
those fail-safes into the movie's Garrison. And clever of Mailer to avoid
refuting much of Stone's composite theory. It's been years since I've seen
a movie I consciously fought against seeing -- but ended up loving. Trying
to avoid JFK had nothing to do with what Stone was doing with the
purported facts and the ever-expanding periphery of lies, concoctions,
suppositions; he is, after all, THE movie provocateur of our time and it's
his undisputed right to scorn whatever or whoever he wishes. I hesitated
because I didn't want to see that g.d. Zapruder home movie again, or have
to once again swallow the claims the Warren Commission didn't cover up
what happened. We all feel, no matter what side we take, that whatever the
government not only really knows but also what it doesn't know about
Kennedy's death, it isn't sharing. It's morally unconscionable that an
unelected committee has the authority to deny us files associated with the
assassination and enforce that they be kept from disclosure until 2029 --
when the Kennedy and pre-Kennedy generations will be goners. A simple
question: What are "they" hiding? Considering the torrent of obfuscation,
we the living and -- much worse -- history may never know. (I agree with
Edmund Berkeley's prediction: LBJ, with a little help from J. Edgar,
Dulles, perhaps Nixon, instigated a coup d'etat. And inspite of his
lengthy, detailed "Oswald's Tale: An American Mystery," Mailer himself
concludes that he's only about 75% sure that Oswald did it, and maybe only
60% sure that it did it alone. Not enough for a conviction.) This
inconclusiveness the stuff of conspiracy: the government hasn't any
irrefutable evidence to support the "lone nut with a rifle" theory -- and
Stone's greatest contribution is in destroying, once and for all, Lee
Harvey Oswald's marksmanship: not only do Oswald's own military records
indicate that he was less than average as a shot, but Gerald Ford, the
only living enthusiast-patsy of the Warren Commission, cheerfully embraces
the psychodramaturgy that Oswald was a "failure," "sexually impotent, a
"victim" of his wife's constant berating, all of which suggests an
emotional instability that lessens his chances of being able to fire off,
with trees obstructing his view, three rounds from a cheap 6.5 Italian
Carbine in roughly six seconds. (One round fired in 0.9 of a second after
a previous shot -- an impossibility.) Then there's the "magic" bullet --
the pristine projectile that's the crux of the Warren Report. Ballistics
proved it came from Oswald's rifle, yet in exhaustive tests, it was proved
not to be the bullet that hit John Connally. Neither could ballistics
prove when the bullet was fired nor has anyone explained how it ended up
on a Parkland Hospital stretcher. The commission ignored the ballistics
conclusions. The disturbing multi-part documentary "The Men Who Killed
Kennedy," shown on A & E's "Investigative Reports," produces convincing
eyewitnesses who claim one of the shots that struck the president was
indeed fired from the infamous grassy knoll -- witnesses whose testimony
was omitted from the WR, which also ignored a credible witness who
reported seeing two gunmen aiming from the TBR, and, most discomforting,
accepted an altered autopsy report on Kennedy that's contradictory to what
the Parkland doctors originally claimed. JFK attacks and is an admission
of the fact that we the people have, in the end, zilch power.
     As pure entertainment, JFK is the American movie of its year.
That's its major surprise. Making it inexplicably great is that many of us
still can't figure out how Stone was able to put the jangling disparity
together in such an intensely consumable style. In scene after scene,
we're eating it all up, even when we sense he's gone too far -- especially
with the homosexual and Vietnam angles. He's holding us so rapt that we
get carried along, feeling surges of excitement we haven't felt from movie
viewing in a longer time than we're willing to admit. Of course, if you're
a Warren Report diehard, you'll go crazy; if you're a skeptic, as most
are, submitting to Stone's disputations is rather like reeling from a
pent-up citizenry's vindictive high. The main pleasure is in the acting:
does anyone is this three hour epic give a bad performance? Arguably Joe
Pesci as David Ferry does, if you don't buy into his paranoia. I did: his
performance, like Stone's conspiracy theory, represents a composite of a
tawdry underground; Pesci's style of smoking, eyebrows and hair reek of a
60s effeminacy, yet the internalized fury and craziness are authentic to
the period. (I've met his physical type.) Ed Asner is a square-faced
menace you would think twice about having a drink with; Jack Lemmon does
well his renowned weakling number; Donald Sutherland as -- don't snicker
-- Mr. X is super-riveting as he lists the various possibilities of why
Kennedy got knocked off; Sissy Spacek matches perfectly with megastar
Kevin Costner; John Candy and Kevin Bacon are prime comic relief; and
Tommy Lee Jones, as Clay Shaw/Bertrand, is resurrected as an actor. Even
the real Jim Garrison, looking as if near death (and was), shows up as
Chief Justice Earl Warren.
     Kevin Costner's portrayal of Garrison is not accurate on many
accounts, but Stone's intention is not to depict him as he really was,
because that might have left us with a character not entirely sympathetic.
There was and still is something heroic in Garrison's persistence in
establishing substantial doubt about the excessively wordy Warren Report;
but there was nothing but pity and strange, pathetic ridicule left when in
real life he was denied at every turn his chance to prove his case --
because all of his central witnesses died before the trial. (This irony
supports conspiracy buffs.) Stone sees Costner as a 90s narrator of a
smorgasbord docudrama about alleged facts that have come to light long
after Clay Shaw was acquitted of any links to Kennedy's death. This is the
central reason why Costner's summation runs on and on -- Stone wants to
get every conceivable denunciation he can on the filmic record. With the
exception of BULL DURHAM, in which he was absolutely dead-on, Costner
usually works against himself: he looked like a Playgirl photo op in
SILVERADO; he was puny in and misfitted for NO WAY OUT and THE
UNTOUCHABLES; in DANCES WITH WOLVES his voice-overs wiped out the tanned
romantic illegitimacy of his soldier & Indians fantasy. As executive
producer of REVENGE, he was plucking so hard to save the bomb that he lost
sight of whatever tiny vision of a movie he was making. His voice proves
he's no ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THEIVES. (A rushed movie, the only things
worth commending are Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio's unexpected
user-friendliness and some top notch action sequences.) Here in JFK,
Costner's vocal limitations are noticeable only in that he's providing a
southern accent as affectation that Garrison didn't have or use. In bad
clothes, pedestrian glasses and with touches of gray in his hair, he's
deglamourized; he's so earnestly bland that while most everyone else
around him leaps with paranoid energy, he gains our respect by his sheer
ordinariness.
     In a speech before the National Press Club in Washington,
televised by C-SPAN, Oliver Stone said of the WR, "Ladies and gentlemen,
this is not history, this is myth. It is myth that a scant number of
American have ever believed. It is a myth that has sustained a generation
of journalists and historians who have refused to examine it, who have
refused to question it, and, above all, who close ranks to criticize and
vilify those who do. Some journalists from the 60s are self-appointed
keepers of the flame. They talk about our history and fight savagely those
who would question it. But confronted with the crime of the century with
no motive and hardly any alleged perpetrators, they stand mute." A few
days after the speech, Andy Rooney, on 60 Minutes, joked that Stone was
this era's Orson Welles looking for his Rosebud. Rooney unwittingly
confirmed Stone's legitimate deploring of our dangerously lazy press: the
Rosebud of JFK may be LBJ. (Perhaps if he lives to be able to complete his
multi-volume biography of Johnson, author Robert A. Caro will corroborate
Stone's contention.) What Stone has really made is his own and much more
horrifying and brutal MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE. Stone's polemic is
counter-myth, a refutist's grand mal that gets carried away with spasms of
conjecture and invective. It's dazzling, work-me-over movie making in the
most flagrant traditions of disreputable press muckraking -- what Ayn
Rand's Ellsworth Toohy might accomplish if he were a frothing liberal let
loose on The Banner. As you watch the movie unfold, and after you leave
the theatre, you think the worst possible thoughts about everybody.
Stone's message is much beyond his multi-layered conspiracy: he's
admonishing all of us for acquiescing to the volumes of prevarication. JFK
makes us feel used, abused and powerless. This combo is the movie's
clarion call.

Author
Mark R. Leeper

discussion of the conspiracy is being held.  If you are discussing
the *movie*, feel free to change the followup line to
rec.arts.movies. -Moderator]
          Capsule review:  This is Oliver Stone's biography and
     defense of New Orleans D.A. Jim Garrison attempting to
     discredit the official explanation of the Kennedy
     assassination.  While not always convincing in it ambitious
     conclusions, it will cause people to question the Warren
     Report.  Rating: low +2 (-4 to +4)  (Minor spoilers in
     review)
     It is difficult to evaluate a propaganda film--that is, a film intended
to convince the viewer of a particular political point of view.  How
strongly do you weight your agreement with the political message?  How
strongly do you weigh whether the filmmaker played fairly and honestly?  How
strongly do you consider whether the film was convincing or not?  How
important are traditional values such as plot and technique?  Is Leni
Riefenstahl's TRIUMPH OF THE WILL a good film because of the beautiful
filmic technique or a bad film because it deified Adolf Hitler?  How good
were Einsenstein's BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN and ALEXANDER NEVSKY?  How good was Z
or MATEWAN or ROGER AND ME?  What about MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON or ALL
THE PRESIDENT'S MEN?  I take the amoral--hopefully not immoral--view that
what is important are traditional film values plus whether the film makes a
good argument.  I divorce myself from my own political viewpoint.  Nor will
I strongly consider if the filmmaker is being fair unless it hurts the
argument being made.  I would claim TRIUMPH OF THE WILL is much better
propaganda than television's M.A.S.H. in spite of the fact I agree much more
with M.A.S.H.'s politics.
     That stated, I can now begin to discuss Oliver Stone's JFK.  Is it a
good film from the traditional viewpoint?  It does hold the viewer's
attention and it does have some good performances, and some wooden ones
also.  Overall it is an enjoyable film.  Is it convincing?  That depends on
what you think it is trying to convince you of.  If it is trying to convince
the viewer that the Warren Commission's official explanation of what
happened is wrong, it succeeds beautifully.  It is difficult to believe that
earl Warren himself could see this film and not question his own
commission's findings.  On the other hand, the film darkly implies that this
might have been a huge governmental conspiracy--essentially a coup d'etat--
with the express goal of precipitating a war in Vietnam.  For this
conclusion the evidence is sketchy at best.  Jim Garrison and Oliver Stone
essentially show tens of thousands of people who had a motive to murder
Kennedy and a few people who might have been involved with pulling the
triggers.  There is not much connection in between.  That is where the film
falls down.
     JFK is structured as Kevin Costner, in the role of Jim Garrison,
presenting the Warren Commission's findings and knocking holes in them.
This is followed by a speech on the implications to American democracy of
the government's cover-up and these pieces are preceded by a docudrama
prologue that tells how Garrison got involved and what he discovered in his
investigations.  Of course, we see this prologue first, but the real heart
of the film is the rebuttal.
     The prologue does not really have much of a plot any more than ALL THE
PRESIDENT'S MEN did.  Instead, we just follow step by step the
investigation.  Other than the obvious dramatic impact of the puzzle getting
solved, there is a minor melodramatic sub-plot of Garrison alienating his
family and his staff over his monomaniacal approach.  This sub-plot is
superficially added and resolved just as superficially.  The detail of the
investigation is well told, though its impact depends a great deal on the
viewer's interest in revelations about the assassination.  Stone makes a
safe bet that most of the public, and certainly most who would come to see
the film, have a great deal of interest in the Kennedy assassination.  The
chase after information is at least as interesting as the similar chase in
ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN.
     Kevin Costner brings a good deal of his Elliot Ness portrayal to his
Jim Garrison.  Sissy Spacek plays Mrs. Garrison exactly the way she played
the Southern housewife in THE LONG WALK HOME.  Joe Pesci is good playing one
more and different breed of low-life.  Edward Asner is notable as a gruff,
bullet-shaped, bigoted conspirator.  There are quite a few notables in the
cast, perhaps to make a political point.  Jim Garrison himself is along as
Earl Warren.
     As with many docudramas, JFK may not play exactly fair.  It mixes
together newsreel footage, fake newsreel footage, dramatization of events
that happened, dramatization of events that may have happened, dramatization
of events that did not happen but that improve the story, even mental images
and supposed memories.  This is, of course, a questionable strategy, but
with a little thought the viewer knows what is being shown.  It does shed
some question on some of the assertions made.
     This is a film that will change some minds and provoke argument.  73%
of Americans believe there was a conspiracy and that percentage is likely to
go up with this film.  I give it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Movie Premise: Kennedy was killed because of Vietnam and almost
every man, woman and child alive at the time was part of the
conspiracy.
     My expanded review: Oliver Stone is a great movie director.
Sometimes he lets his skill go to his head.  This is a fine movie from
a technical and an acting viewpoint.  The problem is that it is all
balderdash.
     So I guess, I do recommend it, but why oh why can't he sprinkle in
a little realism.  I hate fantasies masquerading as reality.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jason Overbeck
JFK is about one man's crusade for the truth in the assassination of
John F. Kennedy.  This man, Jim Garrison (played marvelously by Kevin
Costner) is district attorney of New Orleans, and slowly becomes
obsessed with the Kennedy case.  He investigates the sloppy case, while
dealing separately with family problems, press leaks, death threats,
fighting among staff and someone bugging his office.  What suspects he
does interview seem shady and unreliable, as he becomes further emerged
in his case. 
JFK is gripping and brilliantly written and directed, this is also the
birth and height of Stone's truly original, artistic approach to movie
making.  JFK offers an absolutely gripping tale that weaves with
wonderful dialogue and characters and turns with pure movie making
flare.  It is to Stone's credit that we are captivated and fixated
during the film's over three hours of running time.
He acting is also brilliant and amazing, with an all star cast that rips
up the screen with fury.  Kevin Costner has his career best role in this
film, the best performance he will ever give.  Sissy Spacek has a great
turn as his growingly annoyed and concerned wife.  Gary Oldman, Tommy
Lee Jones, Joe Pesci are superb in small but important roles.
Stone was criticized as being a vast conspiracy theorist after the
release of this film and that is a shame because this film is more
interested in the truth than concocting some nutty theory about who
killed Kennedy.  This film has the same goal as its hero Jim Garrison
does as they both approach it fast and hard.  They aren't willing to
compromise to suit everybody and don't care if you disagree with their
opinions.  JFK, though based on two books (Crossfire: The Plot to Kill
Kennedy & On the Trail of the Assassins), should not be taken as a
documentary and some scenes may crumble if put to intense scrutiny.  
What is so wonderful about JFK is that it puts that intense scrutiny on
the government, Warren's report and autopsy/police records.  Many
inconsistencies and impossibilities are seen as the theories are
questioned and made to crumble.  I guess JFK may be conspiratorial and
somewhat inaccurate BUT so are the reports we are offered, most of which
are incomplete or incomprehensible to a common sense.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A technical marvel, but an intellectual muddle, and ever so
pretentious. Oliver Stone's take on who really killed JFK is compulsively
watchable even if indigestible as history.
When I watch a movie that is based, however loosely, on fact, I try to keep
"the facts" out of my mind and just watch the movie. With a movie as
voluminous and fraught with controversy as JFK, this is darned near
impossible, but I think I've managed to keep my feelings about the film in
the abstract, and the service that the film has been put to.
In the space of three hours, JFK covers an astonishing amount of
information and territory, and presents it in a package that is superbly
edited and filmed. It keeps up involved and keeps us tense. What it does
not do is provide us with much in the way of real characters, or a story
that is not simply a mining of miscellaneous conspiracy theories that,
especially after the publication of books like Gerald Posner's CASE CLOSED,
pretty hard to defend.
Oliver Stone, the director, has chosen to follow the odd saga of Louisiana
district attorney Jim Garrison, who got curious about the assassination
after the fact and attempted to prosecute a Louisiana businessman, Clay
Shaw, for conspiring to kill JFK. In real life, Garrison's ethics and
scruples were questionable to say the least, and the story makes for some
eye-opening reading. Stone doesn't hesitate a second to whitewash Garrison:
the first time we see him, he's wearing a white shirt, and backlit to give
him an angelic glow.
Many of the important details about who Garrison talked to, and when, and
under what circumstances, are distorted or omitted entirely. What does come
across is a sense of urgency and *grand mal* paranoia that few other movies
have managed to match. Even if Garrison is dead wrong -- heck, even if
*Stone* is dead wrong -- we can still sense what they must have been going
through. The rush of names, places, footage styles, all contribute to the
general feelig of truth held over. Even if the feeling is a propagandistic
one, the fact that the movie works as well as it does can't be denied.
I had an argument with someone after coming out of the movie -- that JFK
should be screened along with Leni Rienfenstahl's TRIUMPH OF THE WILL as a
pair of perfect examples of film propaganda. The other man was appalled
that I would dare to lump an obvious Nazi sympathizer in with someone as
liberally inclined as JFK. I don't remember the conversation getting much
further than that, unfortunately.

Author
Ed Nilges

discussion of the conspiracy is being held.  If you are discussing
the *movie*, feel free to change the followup line to
rec.arts.movies. -Moderator]
     * The political question ("is Stone right about the assassination?")
     Yes, you *will* be entertained by this movie unless you are
braindead.  Folks old enough to remember the terrible weekend of 1963 (I
was a high school freshman) will relive the pity and terror as Costner
sits in Napoleon's (a N'Awlins bar) watching the news reports, including
Walter Cronkite breaking down as Cronkite is passed the news of
Kennedy's death.  
     Folks too young will get a history lesson in the fact that the
Sixties were not all sex/drugs/rock and roll...they were also an
expression of cynicism in a system in which it at least appeared that a
President with a demonstrated commitment to peace (as evinced by his
test ban treaty and by his honorable handling of Bay of Pigs) was
replaced by a President who (while committed to civil rights) did not
share Kennedy's commitment to peace.  It at least appeared to us
antiwar protesters that Johnson was, to a greater degree than JFK, a
creature of the defense establishment.  This history lesson is made
effectively, using a combination of newsreel footage and reenacted
incidents the pacing of which keeps the attention of the MTV set.
     Should you wait for the video?  I think not.  You may not be able
to follow the important scenes that demand you close-read the grainy 8MM
footage of Abraham Zapruder's film.
     ...can be dispensed of quickly.  Yes, Oliver Stone knows how to
make a good film.  In particular, I liked the pacing in Costner's
summation at the end of the trial, for it treated the audience as mature
adults able to sit still for far, far more than a sound bite.
     This is the hot potato.  Having seen the film, I believe that JFK
was killed in a "silent coup" by elements of the defense establishment.
It is true, as an article on page 1 of the NEW YORK TIMES indicates
today, that Stone could be faulted for combining "real" footage
including the Zapruder film with "fictional" footage such as an
imaginary recreation of the autopsy.  I'd say that given the fact that
the government won't release documents on the assassination until 2029,
Citizen Stone is perfectly justified in reconstructing incidents, for he
does not have access to the facts.  That is, secrecy creates a poetic
license.  
     Readers should note that the assassination of JFK and possible
dealings in October 1980 between the Reagan reelection team and Iran
mean that essentially the same elements *may* be responsible for not one
but two silent coups.  On the other hand, when Costner (speaking
obviously for Stone) speaks of "fascism" I did reflect that it is an odd
sort of Fascism in which the film JFK can be shown.  Perhaps I speak too
soon; perhaps there still will be a violent reaction to the film, with
attempts to keep it from being seen, if the snotty and condescending
tone of the New York Times article I mention earlier fails to convince
people that it is unhip to believe Stone.  
       Noam Chomsky describes ways of Manufacturing Consent which are far
more sophisticated than merely preventing a movie from being shown.  For
example, one troubling question raised by the movie is the fact that the
day of the assassination marked the creation of a modern urban legend,
that of the crazed, murderous loner.  If Stone is right, Oswald was a
schmoe, caught up in nut politics; but he was a fall guy, not a
murderer.  It is a troubling thought that almost every assassination and
almost every mass murder since the JFK assassination (a sort of Ur event)
has been given the following spin by the press: "folks, something
terrible has just happened.  A popular leader (or many people) has/have
just been tragically murdered.  The guy who dunnit, however, is a crazed
loner or (at best) a cult leader ... not one of us or our leaders."
Such is the power of the "crazed loner" theory that almost any American
male is at risk for being associated with the outcast group of "crazed
loners" unless he is careful to lead a circumscribed and above all
married existence.  Any intellectual interest outside of careerism puts
one at risk for association with this outgroup.  Perhaps, however, our
murderers are *not* crazed loners (just as, statistically, our child
abusers are upstanding married men).  Perhaps our murderers are our
kindly father figures like Stormin' Norman.  Perhaps are murderers are
the Texas schoolchildren who cheered when Kennedy's death was announced,
who grew up to be upstanding members of the community (not crazed
loners).  Perhaps our murderers is us.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith.
If anything, Oliver Stone's 1991 pseudo propaganda film 'JFK' certainly
infuriated many who believed that Stone had no right to mix together
film clips of authenticity with his own injection of the truth.
Outraged media jackals still draw references to Stone and this film when
making a point, mostly to complain about the inaccuracies of a certain
scenario.  It just so happens that I admire Stone for his complex and
PROVEN statement that a conspiracy took place in the murder of John F.
Kennedy.
Because of the shocking nature of the assassination, a quick rush to
judgment, called the Warren Commission, tried to calm America's fears of
a government over throw and blamed everything on a half baked ex-Marine
using a rifle with a faulty scope.  Like most important fragments of
historical documentation, they sometimes aren't recognized for what they
are at the time of their occurrence until years later when the whole mix
has time to settle and the public ranks it in order of importance.  Most
surveyed at the time 'JFK' came out, believed that the Warren
Commission's findings were severely flawed.  A much different opinion in
contrast to the first release of the report in 1964.
I'm not about to go over the entire process of re-creating the
assassination scenario but over 80% of people surveyed believe there was
a conspiracy.  Where Stone makes a mistake in his film is in the
outright declaration of multiple government forces strung together to
kill the president.  Certainly, it is a good theory that some body of
government probably had a hand at bringing down Kennedy's presidency but
Stone should have pin pointed one theory instead of speculating on many
different organizations.  Television's 'The X-Files makes assumptions
that a government conspiracy is on its way to changing the outright 
lifestyle of America's (and perhaps the world's) civilization, but the 
show only portrays dark figures in the commission of these crimes and 
points the finger directly at no one.  A smart style of presentation.  
In fairness, Stone does point out that Kennedy was killed because he
would have withdrawn troops from Vietnam and eventually the profitable 
war machine would have slowed down and the war never would have taken
place.  A good theory but as debatable as any other to come along.
The film opens with a startling mix of edited clips from documented 
history which have a narrative added to them and the moments leading up 
to the assassination are pin pointed.  Word of this reaches New Orleans
district attorney Jim Garrison (Kevin Costner) who witnesses the
breaking news of it all on television along with a colleague and the 
weekend that follows is as crazy to everyone in the D.A.'s office as the 
entire staff witnesses on television the murder of JFK's accused
assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald (Gary Oldman).  Things settle down but 
Garrison is strangely drawn back into the investigation of the
presidents death three years later, in 1966.
Throughout the course of the investigation which wraps up after a trial 
in 1969, when Garrison unsuccessfully prosecuted an internationally
known businessman named Clay Shaw (Tommy Lee Jones), 'JFK' movies like a 
high tech thriller which combines the most gripping photography and 
impressive editing ever seen in motion pictures.  Both the editing and 
camera work were awarded well deserved Oscars.  
Oliver Stone's "in your face" style of film presentation is done with
the most multi-media like tools.  Using echoed and sharp sound effects,
black and white photography, slow motion and many other mixes of film
enhancement, Stone certainly holds nothing back and those who criticized 
the film as fiction only did more to enhance the film's appeal in making 
people want to see it.
'JFK' answers no serious questions for most who were around at the time
of the assassination, but the film raises some very interesting points
and although Oliver Stone's career has been sagging somewhat since it
came out, at least Stone's protest against the alleged cover-up that
took place in 1963 is a testament to one man's courage using the world's 
most emotional medium.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1991, R, 189 minutes [3 hours, 9 minutes]
[drama/mystery]
starring: Kevin Costner (Jim Garrison), Gary Oldman (Lee Harvey Oswald), Joe
Pesci (David Ferrie), Tommy Lee Jones (Clay Shaw/Burtron), produced by Oliver
Stone, A. Kitman Ho, written by Oliver Stone, Zachary Sklar, directed by
Oliver Stone, based on the novel by James Garrison.
"JFK" is like a music video with a story, with hyper editing and an
absorbing and thrilling mood. It grasps you, moves you, and makes you think.
At times it can be something more than a movie, like some kind of window into
another reality. 
Kevin Costner delivers an outstanding performance as New Orleans D.A. Jim
Garrison, upon whose novel and life story the film is based. Garrison has
some small connections with the JFK assassination when it first occurs, but
nothing comes out if it until three years after the incident. He becomes so
obsessed with the case it becomes his life's driving force. He knows there's
more to it than he has been told and decides to solve a mystery even the
federal government could not. 
Mysteries are never simple stories, especially as told by Oliver Stone.
Stone's use of hyper editing and surrealistic direction make for a moving,
and at times, scary mood. Certain words are emphasized and dramatic camera
angles and high contrast film also add to the mood. I didn't care so much
about the mystery as much as I was fascinated by the process used to tell it.
The focus of the story is not the government or the assassination, it is the
people. Garrison isn't just some obsessed lawyer, he is a real man with a
family. He is so focused on "saving" the rest of the country eventually his
home life starts to crumble - which is more important? Perhaps this element
is a little melodramatic but it also emphasizes the theme because of the
contrast.
Most of the film depicts Garrison and his staff's efforts to find out why,
how, and who killed Kennedy. All of the theories uncovered seem unbelievable
and yet logical at the same time. Stone's perfect depiction of mood is what
makes it all realistic and the excellent acting clinches it. 
"JFK" takes many different theories and puts them together in a complicated
but professional way. Stone doesn't want us to think this story is the
"correct answer," but just to realize how powerful those in power really are.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
