Title
Review for Fly, The (1986)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Canadian director David Cronenberg remakes the original 1958 Vincent
Price semi-classic film and warns all audiences to "Be afraid...be very
afraid." This film was followed by a supposedly lame sequel, FLY II,
starring the omnipresent Eric Stoltz, and directed by the man who won
the "Best Makeup" Oscar for this film, Chris Walas.
PLOT:
Cooky & brainy scientist invents a method of teleportation, wherein a
human being could be transported from one place to another in a matter
of seconds. While testing his own invention, el geeko scientist does
not notice the presence of an insect in his transportation pod, and
soon finds himself fusing into an amalgamate of two living creatures.
Geena Davis plays the roving reporter who begins to follow the story on
the grounds of historical posterity, but ultimately maintains her
interest by the strength of her love.
CRITIQUE:
Creepy, moody, and downright gory science-fiction horror flic that
generates many moments of utter disgust, revulsion, pleasure and
sympathy. This film was wonderfully stylized by Cronenberg, with a true
feel for the life of this poor soul, and the solitude that roomed with
his extreme intelligence. Goldblum seems to have finally found a place
for his stammering acting bit, and works wonderfully as the goofy, and
wildly intelligent, scientist with a plan. He brings caring to the
character, and allows you to give a crap about his future.
This film does actually contain a few extremely graphic scenes of
ickiness (which Mrs. JoBlo could've done without), and worked as a
complete slithering piece of pulp-sci-fiction. Many horror and
science-fiction movies have a tendency to overplay their fiction, while
dismissing the reality check that audiences look for in a credible
film. But this film moves along at a decent pace, always keeps you
informed on what and why everything is going on, and eventually turns
into a wild make-up fest that truly does make you feel and sympathize
with the Goldblum character (The horror, the horror!!).
Having said that, if nachos are your game for this one, I suggest you
salsa down during the first thirty minutes or so, because soon
thereafter, many of the gory scenes make their move. All in all, this
film does still manage to creep you out after all these years, with
kudos going out to Cronenberg's grisly mood setting, Goldblum's kickass
performance, the incredible makeup job and the solid plotline that
makes us all want to believe in this unbelievable scenario set forth by
this man.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Cronenberg has a small cameo in this film as the gynecologist
who delivers a "baby". He also had a small cameo as the "man at the
lake" in Gus Van Sant's TO DIE FOR (6.5/10) starring the ever-white
Nicole Kidman. He has frequent references to ``the flesh'' in his
films, and often uses explicit carnage. 
This film won an Academy Award for "Best Makeup" at the 1987 Oscar
ceremonies.
Jeff Goldblum and Geena Davis met on the set of this film, and fell in
love. They got married in 1987, and got divorced in 1990. Jeff stands
6'4 and his middle name is Lynn. Geena stands 6', her real name is
Virginia Davis, she speaks Swedish and is a proud member of MENSA
(Private club gathering smart people with extremely high IQ's.)
Ex-boxer George Chuvalo has a small part as the arm wrestler Marky in
the bar.

Author
Mike Merrin
If "The Dead Zone" opened up a new area of concern for Cronenberg,
then "The Fly" confirmed, not that it should have needed confirming,
that he is much more than just a gore merchant. The love story that is
on the margins of "Dead Zone" is placed centre stage in "The Fly",
which is surely one of the most moving love stories ever made. It is
the ultimate riposte to the banalities of Hollywood romantic trash,
notably "Love Story" in which, you will remember, the heroine dies of
an incurable disease, but does it very prettily and quietly.
The plot of the film is incredibly simple - Seth Brundle, a scientist,
invents a new process to transport matter from one place to another in
a matter of seconds. After a row with his girlfriend, he decides to
try the process for himself, and is successful, with one big
reservation. A fly has penetrated the teleport, and the scientist has
now become "Brundlefly" as the computer so matter-of-factly puts
it. He gradually disintegrates, becoming first a man-fly hybrid and,
ultimately, more fly than man. HIs girlfriend is initially fascinated,
not least by his new status as a sexual athlete, but subsequently
becomes disgusted, and finally pitying. Brundle, on the other hand,
retains his love for the woman who is rejecting him, and relies on her
to deliver the coup-de-grace at the end, when the transformation is
complete.
"The Fly" has been called a metaphor for AIDS, something which
Cronenberg has always been very keen to reject. In truth, there is
nothing very AIDS-like about Brundle's problem. What the film is
undeniably about, however, is the experience of changing from one's
normal state into something different - be it from cancer or simply
from ageing. The patient seems to accomodate themselves fairly quickly
to their new state - Brundle even keeps a video record of his
disintegration, and catalogues the bits that fall off him, keeping
them in the bathroom cabinet. The problem comes for the people around
him who cannot accept the change, and want him back the way he
was. What the film conveys very well is the idea of having someone you
love change beyond all recognition.
Geena Davis is very good at disgust, and very sharp and funny in the
early sections. She even pulls off the difficult final scene, when she
has to put Brundlefly out of his misery. The problem is in the
structure of the film; she does not seem committed enough to Brundle
and their relationship has not been going for long enough before the
changes begin. The film would have been more effective if they had
been having a relationship for a more considerable period of
time. Incidentally, the same problem occurs yet again in "Dead
Ringers", but that's another story.
The strength of "The Fly", however, lies in its essential
honesty. Disease, particularly a fatal disease, is horrible, it's
messy and unpleasant. The film doesn't duck the nastier side of the
transformation; the new method of eating is a show-stopping sequence,
especially when it is later applied to a cartoon baddie, played by
John Getz. What helps a lot is Jeff Goldblum's incredible
performance. He gets over two important things; the self disgust at
the change, and the scientist's fascination at what is, after all, a
unique situation. He's also capable of unexpected anger, when he tells
his Davis to leave before he hurts her. It's a great performance, one
of the best in any of Cronenberg's films.
The effects, design and make-up are beyond criticism - the acid test
for this is the final scene in the film. Brundlefly, having turned
malevolent, wants to combine himself with Davis to create an eternal
union. Saved at the last moment, Davis escapes and Brundlefly only
combines himself with the teleporter. Dragging himself out of the
machine at the end, the creature picks up the end of a shotgun and
points it at his head. It sounds stupid, but on film it is incredibly
powerful. The look that the creature gives Davis at the end is
heartbreaking, which is perhaps the highest compliment I can pay the
effects team. It's in the great tradition of the tragic monster, which
goes right back to "King Kong".
Interesting that, in several of Cronenberg's films, the hero goes to
his death willingly at the end - even if it isn't suicide, it's a
blissful escape from a life which has become intolerable.  Cronenberg
seems to genuinely believe in the idea of the final redemption through
sacrifice; part of his romantic spirit, I suppose. It's a device which
works well in his films, largely because he plays it straight. There
is no camp in these films - camp being one of the major problems in
"eXistenZ". The emotions are for real, and the most important emotion
in "The Fly" and, even more so, in "Dead Ringers", is love. At the end
of "Dead Ringers", we can only really feel despair, but there is a
sort of hope at the end of both "The Fly" and "The Dead Zone". In
both, the hero dies, but there is also a final reconciliation with the
loved one that suggests, at least, some sort of closure.
Is "The Fly" an anti-science film ? I only raise the question because
I've read critics who argue that it is, but I'm not so sure. The
problems are caused by user-error, not by the computer, which only
does as it is supposed to. I'm not sure that science really comes into
it in "The Fly", because it has the structure of a classical tragedy -
the hero is brought down by one small mistake which then snowballs
into his destruction. Science is the enabler of the tragedy, but not
the sole cause of it.
"The Fly" was a huge hit with audiences, many of whom seem to have
misinterpreted it as a gore-fest.  It's not that simple; yes, it's
gory, but the gore is completely central to the story, rather as it is
in Carpenter's "The Thing", a film with which this shares little,
except an awareness of the vulnerability of the human body. In an
interview, Cronenberg said something very penetrating about this
central theme, one which recurs in many of his films. He talked about
the AIDS epidemic, and asked the interviewer to try to see it from the
point of view of the virus. For human beings, it's a crisis, but for
the virus, which is, after all, a living creature, it's like Christmas
and birthdays all rolled into one. It seems to me that this is very
illuminating, both as an observation, and also as a footnote to
Cronenberg's attitude to horror.
Ultimately though, what makes "The Fly" special is that it has genuine
concern for the problems of the human heart, and acknowledges that
while love may not conquer all, it can at least make an imprint upon
those it touches that they can never forget. Having said that, it also
accepts that in real life, love doesn't always work out, and that, for
some, this failure can be more than they can bear. Indeed, the theme
of the failure of love to work out is central to his next, and best,
film "Dead Ringers".
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE FLY has been considered one of the great science fiction horror
films for many years.  Perhaps millions of children have frightened younger
brothers and sisters with falsetto cries of "Help me!  Please!  Help me!"
It was a natural for a remake and in 1984 Brooksfilm bought a screen
adaptation by Charles Edward Pogue (who also scripted PSYCHO III) and Walon
green.  David Cronenberg was given the screenplay to film; he kept some,
rewrote a lot more, and filmed the result.  On a visit to a cinema shop in
Manhattan I discovered that copies of the Pogue-Green screenplay were
available.  As a fan of the original film with screenplay by James Clavell
(who went on to script films like TO SIR WITH LOVE and THE SATAN BUG and
then to write novels like SHOGUN and TAI-PAN), and to a lesser extent as a
fan of the remake with screenplay credited to Pogue and Cronenberg, the
temptation was too great to pass up.
     Geoffrey Powell is a research scientist just below Nobel Prize caliber.
he works for a high-tech research and development company--Loften
Industries, headquartered in new York City.  Loften, however, has grown
tired of waiting for Geoffrey's researches into "particle transmission" to
bear some sort of useful fruit.  He is ready to replace Geoffrey if the
young researcher does not produce.  Geoff is able to transmit objects,
sometimes successfully ("like STAR TREK," as a friend observes), but often
not so successfully.  He usually transmits souvenir Statues of Liberty.  A
poor touch here is that one appears to be successfully transmitted until
Geoff's wife Katie notices the wording has been reversed.  If the wording
were reversed, the whole statue should have been noticeably reversed.  Under
pressure from Loften, Geoff transmits himself, but the audience knows that a
fly transmitted at the same time has disappeared.
     Now the story is similar to Cronenberg's film.  Geoff at first seems
much improved by the transmission, finding himself a much faster jogger and
able to lift greater weights.  He starts transforming soon, growing new hair
on his body, losing his fingernails.  He does not, however, climb the walls
(at least literally) the way Cronenberg has him do.  But then neither does
he philosophize about his condition either and we can credit Cronenberg for
the strange thought processes that were the high points of the film.
     There is no discussion of how a matter transmitter turned in a gene
splicer--a rather absurd concept from the film.  Instead, the two organisms
were fused into one and we are told, "A fly is a very primitive form of
life.  That's why it's so successful.  Its cells are stronger, they are able
to multiply more rapidly than [Geoff's] own...in mutation the more primitive
structure is always the victor."
     In the end and out of control, Geoff murders a neighbor and his
villainous boss using vomit drops full of burning enzymes (much as in the
film).  An attempt at suicide in his matter transmitter turns him into a
six-foot fly, and finally he is killed by a laser gone wild.  Apparently
Pogue thinks that a laser will flail around like a fire-hose if not bolted
down.  The final scene has his wife Katie giving birth to a giant maggot
only to realize it was a momentary hallucination--or was it?
     If you can turn a blind eye to some of the scientific blunders, Pogue's
script is often more credible than is Cronenberg's rewrite.  The funding for
Brundle research never made any sense in the film and Pogue has a much
better feel for how research gets gone in the R&D community--and under what
kind of pressures it is done.  Neither script will win any prizes for
scientific accuracy.  Neither script is clearly better.  Overall I would say
that the Cronenberg script, while less believable, is the better for having
shown us a little more of the mental processes of a creature part man and
part fly.  I would still contend that of the three stories, the original
film was the best and at the same time the most accurate to George
Langlaan's story.
