Title
Review for Living Out Loud (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Matt Williams
Living Out Loud is a rather unconventional romantic comedy, as if you
couldn't tell that by its unlikely leads: Holly Hunter and Danny DeVito.
However, with strong characters and an unusual storytelling style, it
slowly manages to win us over.
Holly Hunter stars as Judith Nelson, the recently divorced wife of a New
York City doctor (Martin Donovan).  After her husband leaves her for
another woman, Judith is left alone in her high-rent apartment.
She unexpectedly strikes up a friendship with her building's elevator
operator, Pat Francato (Danny DeVito).  Drawn together by a shared sense
of loss, the two discover sense of mutual respect.  Pat has dreams of
his own:  he wants to start an imported olive oil business, but he is
saddled with gambling debts and low self esteem. The attentions of a
beautiful woman like Judith spark dreams he thought long dead...but her
intentions are completely elsewhere.
A third character who enters into their lives is Liz Bailey (Queen
Latifah), a blues singer who becomes an unexpected friend and confidante
to Judith, and later, Pat.
The movie unfolds in an unconventional way, allowing us to listen in on
rambling thoughts, cluttered memories and imagined dreams.  The film
keeps the audience off guard with sequences that seem to be real, but
are shown to be dreams, and sequences that seem to be dreams, but are
shown to be real.  There's a moment, early on, when the style threatens
to overpower the film with its confusion...but it is fleeting.  In the
long run, the unpredictability of the structure adds to the film's
charms.
The biggest strength of Living Out Loud is its characters.  Judith, Pat
and Liz are all wonderful creations.  They bristle with life and
realism.  You get the feeling that these are real people...not just flat
characters quickly jotted down on a page.
However, even amid the vivid characters and quirky storytelling, there's
something that's not quite satisfying about Living Out Loud. Yes, the
storyline seems to flow naturally, and the characters all act as they
reasonably should.  However, many scenes are quickly hurried in and out,
leaving you wanting more.  In a way, the film seems like an
all-too-brief affair.
Living Out Loud does have plenty of good moments, and overall it is an
enjoyable film to watch.  A film that leaves you wanting more is
certainly better than the opposite.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Susan Granger
Richard LaGravanese is one of the most talented screenwriters
around, having won an Oscar-nomination for "The Fisher King" and high
praise for his adaptations of "Beloved," "The Bridges of Madison
County" and "The Horse Whisperer." Now, he's also a first-time
director, fashioning an adult romantic comedy around a wealthy Fifth
Avenue divorcee (Holly Hunter) who has been dumped after 16 years by
her unfaithful doctor-husband (Martin Donovan) for a younger
woman. She's antsy and alone, given to concocting feisty, elaborate
fantasies of what the future holds in store. Longing for human
contact, she hangs out at Jaspers, an Upper West Side jazz club where
she drowns her loneliness in martinis while listening to the soulful
Queen Latifah. Inevitably, she ends up in the arms of a stranger,
Elias Koteas, who thinks he passionately desires her. But it's a case
of mistaken identity. However, his ardor re-awakens her interest in
someone other than herself - which then turns to the chubby elevator
man (Danny DeVito) in her apartment building. She discovers that he,
too, has a life filled with loss and dreams. He's a gambler with debts
and a dying daughter, and she unexpectedly finds comfort in his
company. Wearing a blonde wig, Holly Hunter once again delivers a
touching performance, filled with charming vulnerability, and Danny
DeVito has a gentle poignancy.  When the movie ends, you don't know
what's next for these multi-dimensional characters but you're
satisfied that some kind of contentment has come out of their
emotional chaos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Living Out
Loud" is a bittersweet 6, a sentimental story about lost souls and
middle-aged friendship in Manhattan.

Author
Greg King
LIVING OUT LOUD (M).  
(New Line Cinema/Village Roadshow)
Director: Richard LaGravanese
Stars: Holly Hunter, Danny De Vito, Queen Latifah, Martin Donovan, 
Richard Schiff, Elias Koteas, Mariangela Pino, Suzanne Shepherd, Clark Anderson
Running time: 100 minutes.
Writer Richard LaGravenese (The Bridges Of Madison County, The
Fisher King, etc) makes his directorial debut with this edgy romantic
comedy about a pair of middle aged divorcees looking to put a spark of
romance back into their lives.  He understands the demands of his
perceptive and intelligent script, and probes the quiet desperation of
his central characters with a painful honesty.
Judith Nelson (a strikingly blonde Holly Hunter) has recently
divorced her womanising husband (Martin Donovan), and attempts to
start her life all over again.  Pat Francato (Danny De Vito) is also
recently separated.  He is coping with a terminally ill daughter while
also trying to pay off his mounting gambling debts.  He works as night
watchman in Judith's apartment block.
 The film explores the unexpected relationship that develops between
these two lonely people from vastly different backgrounds, and the way
in which it changes their lives.  Unfortunately, Judith does not share
Pat's depth of feelings, although his friendship is quite important to
her sense of stability.  Hunter has a penchant for off beat
characters, and she is very good in this emotionally demanding role.
She effectively conveys Judith's loneliness and frustrated passion,
and hints at the thinly veiled madness that drives her.  Cast largely
against type, De Vito is quite touching and unusually vulnerable in a
role that allows him few opportunities to show off his acerbic and
sarcastic wit.  Rap singer Queen Latifah (Set It Off, etc) provides
solid support as Liz Bailey, a blues singer who befriends Judith.
Living Out Loud heralds an impressive debut from LaGravenese,
whose direction is restrained and economical.  The film is suffused
with a palpable air of loneliness and sadness, but there is also a
strong undercurrent of warmth and humour.  Living Out Loud is a film
of huge emotions, honesty and small pleasures.
Despite a pair of solid central performances and some classy
production values, it will struggle to find an appreciative audience.
In a crowded cinema marketplace traditionally dominated by movies
aimed at 18-25 year olds there doesn't seem to be much demand for
romantic comedies about two lonely, very ordinary, middle aged New
Yorkers looking for love.

Author
Bill Chambers
LIVING OUT LOUD ** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
[For past reviews, bi-weekly trivia, etc., visit
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers/ ]
starring Holly Hunter, Danny DeVito, Martin Donovan, Queen Latifah
written and directed by Richard LaGravanese
LIVING OUT LOUD started production as "The Kiss" (borrowed from
Chekhov's story), a title dropped because of its associations with a
best-selling, non-fictional account of a father and daughter's
incestuous relationship. LIVING OUT LOUD is not about such family ties;
it's not about much of anything---a sheep dressed in "Girl Power"
clothing. LIVING OUT LOUD is the directorial debut of a wonderful
screenwriter (LaGravanese adapted The Bridges of Madison County and The
Horse Whisperer, in addition to receiving an Oscar-nomination for his
original screenplay The Fisher King) who should stay behind the
typewriter.
A blonde Hunter plays Judith, caregiver to an old, rich woman (Lin
Shaye) and recent dumpee of husband Dr. Nelson (the always-charismatic
Donovan). Judith fantasizes some of the time: about suicide, about
meeting her idol, torch singer Liz Bailey (Latifah)... These day-dream
sequences are weaved into the film without warning; sometimes, we're not
sure whether a scene is unfolding inside or outside of her head. (Echoes
of Le Charme Discret de la Bourgeoisie, Louis Buńuel's anti-narrative
masterwork.) DeVito plays Pat, the down-on-his luck elevator operator of
her building; his teenage daughter has just passed away, so he Judith
unite over their common losses. He falls in love with her quickly, but
she has her sights set on the mysterious stranger (Elias Koteas) who
accidentally (yes, accidentally) made out with her at her favourite
nightclub. Actually, Judith has her sights set on any man who is the
exact physical opposite of chubby, stubby Pat, though the filmmakers
gloss over her shallowness.
LaGravanese has an ear for dialogue-born and raised in a household of
women, he writes exceptionally good, complex female characters. But this
movie has all the trappings of a first-timer's feature: no sense of
economy-otherwise known as I'm-in-love-with-every-frame Syndrome
(DeVito's daughter's silent death scene is covered in so many shots the
cutting disrupts the mood), no sense of pace (though never boring, the
middle section is lumpy), and no idea what to do with anybody else but
the main protagonists (with the exception of Latifah, who has a presence
which extends beyond her slightly underwritten role-I wouldn't be
surprised if she received a Supporting Actress nomination come next
February). DeVito gives it his all-this is the warmest performance of
his career, which makes Judith seem all the more like a cold fish for
shunning his awkward advances; we are supposed to see a little bit of
ourselves in Judith, but I lost my affection for her once she hired a
studly masseuse before DeVito's despondent eyes. Reactions to Hunter's
character will surely vary from person to person (after all, selfishness
is our nature, and to some degree, Judith is a refreshingly flawed human
character), but her actions, compounded by a head-scratching "Mary Tyler
Moore"-esque epilogue, are ultimately what prevent me from recommending
the film.
I have mentally dwelled upon LIVING OUT LOUD for weeks since my initial
viewing, only to come to the above conclusions. At the very least,
DeVito begins a new career path with this film-were he and Latifah only
reason enough to see it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Judith, the attractive, 40-something blonde in LIVING OUT LOUD, has been
lonely and searching since her recent divorce, and her fantasies lately
have been about young hunks.
Short and balding Pat, a divorce who is visibly older than Judith,
thinks he may have just found his soul mate in her.  He loves her, but
she considers him just a good friend and wants to keep it at that.
After 18 years of marriage, she's still suffering the mental anguish of
her last relationship and isn't eager to begin another one.  And even if
she were, he isn't her type.
Holly Hunter, delivering her best performance since THE PIANO, plays
Judith, the newly divorced woman, who is one minute completely lost and
the next minute a bundle of confidence.  In a high nuanced performance,
Hunter gives a complex reading of the difficulties of divorce and of
change in one's lifestyle.
As the sweet but sad Pat, Danny DeVito plays against his usual
boisterous, comedic type.  Pat touches our hearts, not our funny bones.
He has a thousand schemes, but he doesn't understand the importance of
follow-through.  This has left him with a menial, new job as the
elevator operator in Judith's Fifth Ave. coop. and with a large debt to
the local loan shark.
The movie opens with its most sharply written scene.  Judith and her
husband, a wealthy neurologist played by excellent character actor
Martin Donovan, are having dinner at a fancy Manhattan restaurant.  He
has recently been spotted with his arms around another woman, and Judith
suspects there's more to the story.  By the end of the dinner, their
marriage is over.
Hunter's performance is never better than in this scene.  She seethes
yet says relatively little, leaving her facial expressions to tell the
story.  Even with her rage, she never looks less than gorgeous, which
makes the situation so ironic.  Why would the husband want to cheat on
her?  And how did their marriage get into this sad state of disarray?
We will learn more in flashbacks as the movie unfolds.
If the entire script had the depth of the opening, the movie could have
been Oscar caliber.  Written and, for the first-time, directed by
well-known screenwriter Richard LaGravenese (HORSE WHISPERER and THE
BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY), the script is based on 2 Anton Chekhov
stories, "The Kiss" and Misery." The working title for the film, THE
KISS, would have been much better than LIVING OUT LOUD, but it was
retitled in order to avoid confusion with a recent, controversial book
with the same title.
Handsomely photographed by John Bailey and with a dreamy jazz score by
George Fenton, the good-spirited film goes down smoothly even in its
sadder moments.  The director has a respect for subtlety that most
directors lack.  Even in moments ripe for exploitation, as when Pat's
only daughter dies, the movie treats the subject delicately.
Judith has a host of worries ranging from the serious to the frivolous
that overwhelm people in times of crisis.  She's even concerned that,
with the maintenance fees going up on coops, she might eventually be
banished to the outer boroughs.  She conjures up a bleak future in which
she'll be "wrinkled in Queens."
She believes that her life has made a major positive turn when a
handsome man, played by FALLEN's Elias Koteas, accidentally kisses her
in a dark nightclub.  Although he thought she was someone else, he's
seems happy with Judith.
Less well developed, but more touching, is DeVito's character.  He's a
perennial loser who sees Judith as a companion and a potential lover.
The complex chemistry between them evolves slowly and in ways not
usually found in typical straight-line movie romances, in which the
characters go directly from meeting to bed with the only variable being
the length of time in between.
Hunter, in a circumspectly presented erotic love scene with a handsome
stranger, is infinitely more sensual than she ever was in last year's
NC-17 rated CRASH.
LaGravenese's allows LIVING OUT LOUD periodically to fall into idle.
But when the movie is in gear, it really hums.  The romantic film weaves
a magic spell on the audience, not in the emotionally charged moments
but in the subtext with the beauty of the film written on Hunter's
expressive brow.
LIVING OUT LOUD runs 1:42.  It is rate R for profanity, some drug
content and sexuality and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
LIVING OUT LOUD
(New Line)
Starring:  Holly Hunter, Danny DeVito, Queen Latifah, Martin Donovan.
Screenplay:  Richard LaGravenese.
Producers:  Michael Shamberg, Danny DeVito and Stacey Sher.
Director:  Richard LaGravenese.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, drug use, brief nudity)
Running Time:  93 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Judith Moore Nelson (Holly Hunter) is a woman sort of on the verge of
a nervous breakdown.  On the surface she appears to have it all, from a
professional career as a nurse to a spacious Manhattan co-op apartment.
Underneath, she's still reeling from her husband (Martin Donovan) leaving
her for a younger woman.  Alone in her apartment, she fantasizes about
committing suicide; sitting alone in a restaurant, she fantasizes about
being invited into the company of two friendly women.  Living single has
left Judith frazzled, overwhelmed and unsure what her next step in life is
going to be.
     No, it's not the plot for an episode of "Ally McBeal," though it sure
seems like it at times.  Writer and first-time director Richard
LaGravenese sets up LIVING OUT LOUD as a wistful comedy about adults
reaching a point in their lives where they wonder if it's too late to make
up for their bad decisions.  In addition to Judith, we meet Pat (Danny
DeVito), the elevator operator in Judith's building and a man with
problems of his own.  Divorced and coping with the recent death of his
young daughter, Pat is a big dreamer perpetually just one step ahead of
complete financial ruin.  When Judith actually strikes up a conversation
with him one evening and the two begin spending time together, we get to
see the power of simple companionship for people who need a break from the
company of their own thoughts.
     At least initially, it appears that LIVING OUT LOUD is going to
balance the stories of its two main characters, and that's when the film
is at its best.  DeVito's performance may be his best screen work to date,
finding the romanticism at the heart of Pat's irresponsibility.  Playing a
decent guy is one of an actor's toughest challenges, but DeVito makes Pat
a genuinely decent guy who's also an interesting guy.  With Queen Latifah
added to the mix as a singer with unique relationship issues, there's an
earthy counter-point for Hunter's nervous energy.
     The importance of that counter-point is only truly evident when it's
gone.  At 93 minutes, LIVING OUT LOUD feels strangely incomplete, perhaps
because Pat vanishes into the background in the final half of the film and
Judith takes over completely.  Unfortunately, a little of Judith goes a
long way.  While it's easy to sympathize with her situation, it's much
harder to sympathize with her, because -- to put it bluntly -- she grows
annoying to spend time with.  Holly Hunter is a very talented actress, but
here she acts with mannerisms instead of finding the character's emotional
center.  She plays Judith like an alien investigating the world -- an
interesting choice for a character in existential crisis, but one that
underlines things rather than letting them unfold.  In nearly every scene,
you can see Hunter's acting muscles bulging and flexing.
     LIVING OUT LOUD still manages to be somewhat satisfying, largely
thanks to DeVito and LaGravenese.  For a writer making his first venture
into directing, LaGravenese shows a solid cinematic sensibility, though he
does also let the camera linger on people delivering dialogue.  It's
wonderful to find a writer actually writing for grown-ups, and some of his
tart lines and absurdist fantasy situations are fun in bits and pieces,
but ultimately LIVING OUT LOUD is a frustrating experience.  It could have
been an off-beat love story, or even an off-beat friendship story -- in
either case, a story about two people who help each other stop living
inside their dreams and start living out loud.  Instead, it's primarily
about the contributions other people make to one quirky woman finding
herself.  All that's missing is a computer-generated baby dancing to
"Hooked on a Feeling."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "I don't want to be alone," says Vanessa Williams to
Chayanne is the less-than-realized movie "Dance With Me." 
What she is really afraid of is not aloneness but loneliness, a
horse of a different color and an emotional state so frightful to
so many people that high-school kids consistently say in polls
that it is the condition they fear the most.  With so many
people in America now living alone, particular in urban
apartments, it's no wonder that psychotherapists make a
good buck in this country. "Living Out Loud" is about two
lonely people who get together for a while, talk about their
disaffection with life, provide comfort, effect great changes in
each, and then, inevitably, fall out because one cannot give
the other as much as he wants and is willing to give to the
relationship.   As a theme, it's not a wildly original one, but in
the hands of first-time director Richard LaGravenese ("The
Bridges of Madison County") it provides surprises, particularly
when the two people offering consolation to each other are so
mismatched in class, looks, and height.  "Living Out Loud"
features two actors known for their comic roles, Danny De
Vito and Holly Hunter, and highlights an even greater happy
surprise--that of Queen Latifah, heretofore known as a first-
class rap singer, in the role of a sensual chanteuse who can
rivet her sophisticated audience of supper-club denizens.
   Holly Hunter is known to avid filmgoers for her stunning
role in "The Piano" five years ago as a severe Nineteenth
Century woman repressed in everything except silent pride. 
With her current movie, though, she's back in a more typical
role as a fireball of energy, one who is given over to talk, talk,
talk as she was in her successes in a stage role in Beth
Henley's "Miss Firecracker" and an Emmy-winning job in
Gregory Hoblit's "Roe vs. Wade."  Now, as a woman who is
living the good life on Manhattan's Upper East Side courtesy
of a marriage to a successful cardiologist, she is faced with a
forlorn but not withdrawn existence as a newly-divorced
woman who has not lost her taste for living it up, or, as the
title goes, living out loud.  When Judith (Hunter) throws out
her philandering doctor husband, Bob Nelson (Martin
Donovan), she continues to go to fancy restaurants and night
clubs, but alone and feeling none too enviable.  At a club one
night she meets a striking singer, Liz (Queen Latifah), who at
first ignores her but after getting to know her introduces her
to an unusual and packed-to-the-rafters disco in Manhattan's
meat district.  Meanwhile she has established some
communication with her building's elevator operator, Pat
(Danny De Vito), likewise divorced, whose daughter had
recently died of cancer, who owes money to the mob, and
whose ambitions lie in establishing a food importation
business.  The two are in many ways mismatched, but
because of their common dilemma they console each other. 
While Pat is down-to-earth, Judith is given to leaps of
imagination--literally, when she pictures herself jumping from
her 17th story window and landing on her ex-husband and his
new wife, killing all three.  She has a quick, vivid fantasy of
kissing a mysterious man in a bar (Elias Koteas) and a real-
life experience with a strikingly handsome masseur--
photographed with erotic exquisiteness by cinematographer
John Bailey.
   La Gravenese's filming path takes the movie in two
directions: one relatively static, featuring characters sitting
over glasses of wine or cups of coffee commiserating about
their common misfortune; the other active and moving, as
when Judith pictures herself cavorting Fosse-style in a
lesbian night club with some gorgeous models, showing that
disco is anything but dead.  LaGravenese is most effective,
however, as a writer, as the film has drily comic, productive
dialogue that keeps us wondering whether Pat and Judith can
surmount their differences to unite on a more permanent
basis.  It is targeted to a forty-something or fifty-something
audience as opposed to the recent string of date movies
which highlight romances between lively but immature men
and women whose marriages would probably not outlast the
usual one-year honeymoon period.  Looking at a poster of De
Vito and Hunter sitting together in an elegant East Side
restaurant, you'll wonder how these two mismatched folks
can talk about anything romantic except their previous
companions.  But as you get to know them--and they get
familiar with each other--you'll root for them while knowing at
the same time that a durable bond between them is just not
going to happen.  "Living Out Loud," with its quiry characters
and poignant situations, is one of this year's best examples of
adult romantic comedy: a solid choice.

Author
David N. Butterworth
As "Living Out Loud" opens, Judith Nelson's 16-year marriage to a
wealthy, Fifth Avenue cardiologist is about to go kaput.
She's dining with her husband (Martin Donovan), whom a friend has
seen arm-in-arm with another woman.  "Why couldn't you have told me
yourself?" asks Judith, whose bleached blonde hair can't conceal the fact
that she's not as young as she used to be.  "She's probably about thirty,"
she muses.
"She's thirty-four" concedes her husband, with shame reverberating
in his voice.
That "thirty-four" hangs in the air like a lead balloon waiting to
drop and crash through the floor of the restaurant, dragging Judith and
everything she thought she believed in down with it.  As if the humiliation
of losing one's husband to a younger woman isn't enough, a
thirty-four-year-old "younger woman" only adds insult to injury.
Finding herself alone and disconnected in her swank, Upper East
Side co-op, Judith yearns for human contact.  She ventures out to a jazz
club where a chance encounter with a stranger (Elias Koteas, briefly
reunited with the actress after their sexual collisions in "Crash") gives
her a new way of looking at life.
Judith is played by Holly Hunter, an actress who has proven time
and again, with her disparate roles in "Broadcast News," "The Piano," and
"Raising Arizona," that she has talent to spare.  She plays Judith to
perfection, expertly balancing physical and verbal humor with the pain of
sadness, loss, and loneliness.  She's paired with Danny DeVito as Pat, a
divorced, debt-ridden elevator operator who is also struggling with a
recent loss.  Judith and Pat might sound like an odd couple on paper, but
Hunter and DeVito breathe life into these characters, turning them into
believable people with real problems and emotions.
Steering all of this is writer/director Richard LaGravenese, who
wrote "The Fisher King" and adapted "The Bridges of Madison County" and,
more recently, "Beloved."  "Living Out Loud" is his first directorial
effort and he directs with as sure a hand as he writes.
LaGravenese knows when to use words and when to let silence carry a
scene.  He knows when to cut, and when to let a scene run on to its natural
conclusion.  He includes just the right amount of soul searching, and just
the right amount of fantasy--the film's crowning moment is a wonderfully
choreographed sequence of such pure delight that I almost stood up and
applauded.  And he solicits rich, textured performances from Hunter,
DeVito, and rap queen Queen Latifah, who plays a sultry lounge singer who
befriends Judith.
Earlier this year a film called "As Good As It Gets" gained Oscar
nominations for its three leading actors.  It's not too much of a stretch
to think of "Living Out Loud" as a reworked version of that film, with
Hunter in the part realized by Helen Hunt, DeVito in the Jack Nicholson
role, and Latifah filling in for Greg Kinnear.  The key difference,
however, is that "Living Out Loud" has everything that "As Good As It Gets"
was missing: warmth, credibility, and a refusal to succumb to tired,
conventional plotlines.
Not that we should expect anything less from a movie that has the
resourcefulness to encourage Holly Hunter to dance, Danny DeVito to sing,
and Queen Latifah to act.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Living_Out_Loud_ (R) *** (out of ****)
All signs seem to indicate that New Line is at a loss as to how to market
_Living_Out_Loud_: the poster is simply three candid headshots of the stars
(Holly Hunter, Danny DeVito, and Queen Latifah) unimaginatively arranged on
a black background, and the dull trailer left every audience I've seen it
with making audible groans.  It's a shame, for hot Hollywood scribe Richard
LaGravenese's directorial debut is a nice surprise, a refreshingly adult
romantic comedy-drama.
When I say "adult," I don't mean as in raunchy but as in mature--in
attitude and characters.  The central pair are two lonely, divorced people
north of 40.  Judith (Hunter) has lost all direction and meaning in life
after her successful surgeon husband (Martin Donovan) left her for a
thirtysomething (Tamlyn Tomita); she drinks heavily, spending most of her
days in her apartment and her nights listening to her favorite crooner Liz
Bailey (Latifah, who does her own singing) perform at a jazz club.  Pat
(DeVito)'s marriage, already troubled by his gambling, was dealt a fatal
blow when his daughter succumbed to cancer.
There's a lyric in a key song in the musical _Rent_ that goes, "What was
it about that night?/Connection in an isolating age."  Such a connection in
such a night is the pivotal event in _Living_Out_Loud_, but it's not
between the pair one would expect.  One night at the club, Judith receives
a passionate kiss from a mysterious stranger (Elias Koteas), which shakes
her out of her malaise.  Her renewed sense of romantic hope leads her to
engage in idle conversation with her posh building's doorman, Pat, and
gradually their talk grows deeper--eventually resulting in the profoundly
touching connection between Judith and Pat.
There is not much plot in _Living_Out_Loud_, but LaGravenese's main
concern here are, rather, the characters and their relationships, and he
succeeds in creating genuine, recognizably human characters that are
sympathetic to the audience.  This is not to say that they are incredibly
wholesome; they are generally good but flawed individuals, especially in
the case of Judith, who is often angry and more than a little
self-centered.   These characters connect with the viewer because the
viewer can see a little of themselves in everyone: bitter Judith, broken
Pat, and the (mostly) sensible Liz.
The most well-rounded character is, of course, Judith, and the film's
title is what she must learn to do: live "out loud" and not in her head.
LaGravenese delves into _Ally_McBeal_ territory by depicting Judith's
imaginings on screen, and the results, for the most part, are effective,
generating some of the film's best laughs.  (Especially memorable is one
where she jumps from her bedroom window to her death, which is then
immediately reported on the news.)  But LaGravenese sometimes doesn't know
when to quit.  A delightful dance floor epiphany, with Judith and other
dancers suddenly breaking into synchronized, choreographed moves, is marred
by its heavyhanded, unsubtly symbolic conclusion where she literally
embraces her younger self.
LaGravenese makes up for his occasional missteps (the origins of Judith
and Liz's friendship is unconvincing) with his musical choices.  George
Fenton composed the silky score, which effectively extends the mellow
jazz/R&B sounds  beyond the walls of the nightclub.  The smooth, soothing
soundtrack could not be a better fit for the laid-back, low-key, unforced
appeal of _Living_Out_Loud_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LIVING  OUT  LOUD  * 1/4  Written and directed by Richard LaGravenese.
Photography, John Bailey. Editing, Gregory & Lynzee Klingman.  Production
design, Nelson Coates. Music, George Fenton. Produced by Danny DeVito,
Michael Shamberg & Stacey Sher. A New Line release. Cast:  Holly Hunter
(Judith), Danny DeVito (Pat), Queen Latifah (Liz Bailey), Martin Donovan
(Bob Nelson), Elias  Koteas (the Kisser), Richard Schiff (Philly), et al.
A New Line release. 102 minutes. R (language, drugs, sex massage)
Q: Mr. Critic, I have some questions about this movie. Be patient with me.
I have a doctorate from Europe, have been in the USA for some time and
speak English pretty well. But there are a few things about American life,
politics, and some movies that I can't quite understand. Some expressions
too as [ Editor's note: the speaker is foreign-born, therefore he uses "as"
correctly, instead of "like"] when you put in your reviews words like
parsimonious, avuncular, or tropism.
A: Not to worry. I have the same trouble with Finland and Turkmenistan. I
promise to keep things simple. If I can't, I'll put an asterisk * for words
easy to find in a dictionary.
Q: My first question is about the title that, well, confuses me. From the
rather funny previews I thought it was Laughing Out  Aloud. It wasn't, and
it wasn't funny either.
A: I concur (it means I agree with you). I don't get the title either,
except in a very roundabout * way.
Q: How about the subject? It is clear that Holly Hunter has recently
divorced after being married for 16 years to a cardiologist who must make
good money. Their apartment is in an expensive co-op on Fifth Avenue. Holly
is desperate. DeVito, who plays the co-op's doorman-elevator operator is
sad. Long ago his wife had kicked him out. Very recently, his daughter had
died. Danny likes to gamble and owes a lot of money. Those two characters
have been seeing each other for years, but without really seeing. For the
man, the lady was so out of his class that he probably didn't think of her.
For the woman, DeVito must have been like a piece of indifferent furniture.
But now they get together, become friends, and DeVito falls in love with
her. The chance of her reciprocating (hey, I do know some fancy words!) is
like a snowball in hell (I also know some idioms!)
I don't think that the situation is very original, except for the
differences between the two characters. I remember some films with women of
about 40 who suddenly found themselves alone and lonely.
A: You're doing OK. Let me add something from real life and from movies
that also applies here: the cases of some medical students that marry
nurses (Holly was and still is one) who work hard to help their mates, but
after the man becomes a wealthy doctor, he dumps his wife for a younger
woman, as in this film. The script does not go into background details,
however.What it implies,you have to take on faith. And that is that Holly
was defined by her husband, that Holly was not a whole person but merely
Mrs. Cardiologist. So she finds herself at loose ends, mentally,
psychologically, even physically (note the sequence with the masseur, a
hulk *)
Q: Right. That's why she wanders about, tries to find herself (ugh!),  gets
a massage that may or may not includeout-and-out sex. We don't know. But
aren't there more things we don't know?
A: Lots. Holly has fantasies, like a vision of her suicide. That's pretty
clear. But other fantasies are not. The main one is when she is in a bar
during amateur night, looks for a bathroom, opens a door and is seized by a
man who kisses her, then apologizes. He thought she was a woman he was
expecting. Did this happen? Was it a figment * of Holly's imagination? In
any case, it seems to have done her some good.
Q: How about her enthusiasm about the singer of that bar? She is played by
Queen Latifah. I know that she is a rapper who now also does "regular"
music. When I was young, abroad, I saw many movies that had in them what I
believe you call torch singers. Here Queen Latifah (who is very good) is
Liz Bailey. I bet it is a reference to Pearl Bailey (whom we adored in
Europe), in style and appearance.
A: Wish I had thought of that. Latifah's somewhat modernized versions of
older songs were good, yes.  Holly's enthusiasm is partly that phony cliche
where non-WASPs * (think of Charlie Chan) are endowed with wisdom, even
though in this case Latifah herself admits that she is none too wise in her
love life.
Q: Were you interested in the non-affair between Holly and Danny? I just
could not get excited by it, even though there were a few OK moments.
A: I was most uninterested. Those characters are the whole movie, and while
I did sympathize with their problems, this couple is uninteresting. The
movie got duller and duller. It became Sighing Out Loud as I kept looking
at my watch. Even the camera-work was dull. Things became laughable when
Holly took uppers (this means feel-good drugs, pills) and went to a
nightclub recommended by Latifah.
A: It was silly. The club turns out to be an all-lesbian place, packed
wall-to-wall by women in designer * outfits, dancing like choreographed,
well-rehearsed professionals! Holly takes to the floor like a veteran. Come
on!
Q: There were several scenes with Holly that did not seem to add anything.
Agree?
A: Absolutely. Tacked-on * tacky * stuff. Take Nurse Holly at the hospital,
first with an unpleasant, older patient who berates * her equally
unpleasant daughter. Pointless. Then the same lady is all dolled up * and
becomes Holly's confidante. Now, if you asked the scriptwriter, he might
tell you that both scenes have something to do with the fear of being left
alone, especially as one ages. But they really contribute nothing to the
story.
A:  Well-known film writer Richard LaGravenese: The Fisher King, A Little
Princess, The Mirror Has Two Faces, etc. He is the person who transformed
the Harlequin-type * book The Bridges of Madison County, a sentimental
weepie *, into a very nice movie. But here, in his first time as a
director, his would-be moving-feminist-tract *  is a flat yawner *. It was
inspired by two Anton Chekhov short stories which, to my shame, I do not
know.
Q: Still, didn't you like the performances?
A: One does what one can with what one has. Not much in this case. Ms.
Hunter, 40, was given make-up and colored hair that are most un-flattering
(there are too many closeups in any case) and cheapen her character. She
repeats too many mannerisms. Her Georgia accent has sometimes been an
asset, sometimes not, and sometimes was made hybrid by her trying to
conceal it, as in this film. The hybrid approach does not work. Her
voice--which is not the same the thing as her accent -- often grates. After
the premiere of The Piano, she spoke a mile a minute * to the press, as if
trying to make up for her role as a mute. She and her voice raised many
eyebrows.
I admit though that at picture's end (when Holly seems vaguely ready to
have a real life of her own) DeVito's singing of They Can't Take That Away
>From Me was quite good.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Judith Nelson (played by Holly Hunter) is a very married woman at
the beginning of LIVING OUT LOUD.  Having quit medical school and
become a nurse while her husband became a cardiologist, she has wound
her whole life around her husband like thread wound on a spool.  When
he leaves her for another woman it is like removing the spool.  What
remains is a confused and knotted jumble without purpose or
organization.  She fantasizes a variety of crazy thoughts including a
suicide that will take her ex-husband and his wife with her.
     Meanwhile we also follow the story of Pat Francato (Danny DeVito),
a widower with a daughter who is very sick.  He plays poker and has
gotten into trouble with loan sharks.  He is the elevator operator in
Judith's apartment building and has taken an interest in her, though he
is painfully slow in getting around to talk to her.  Pat realizes that
an attractive blond like Judith--uh, Holly Hunter is a blond in this
film--would not want a short bald man who is also in trouble.  He
starts pulling his life together.  Judith, on the other hand, is a much
weaker person and will have a much harder time getting on with her
life.  It is not a romance that has much of a chance.  Judith needs
some good advice and finds it in a blues singer at Jasper's, her
favorite nightclub.  Liz Bailey, played majestically by Queen Latifah,
is a mother figure that Judith desperately needs at this crisis in her
life.
     Richard LaGravenese wrote and directed LIVING OUT LOUD taking his
inspiration from two stories by Anton Chekhov, "The Kiss" and "Misery."
(The latter is available at
http://eldred.ne.mediaone.net/ac/misery.htm.).  I did not realize that
as I was watching the film but it explains a lot about the style and
pace of the film.  Not much can be said to happen in the LIVING OUT
LOUD, which creates its characters, and then lets us look at them
almost affixed in one episode of their lives.  When one thinks of
Hunter one first thinks of the supremely organized women she played in
films like BROADCAST NEWS or even RAISING ARIZONA.  Here she is almost
the antithesis of that role.  She is capricious, flighty, and
internally crumbling.  Above all she is self-destructive.  It is really
Hunter's film.  We see a lot less depth in DeVito who is can almost be
summed up with the phrase "nice guy."  There is a great deal in this
film that stretches the viewer's credulity.  Liz Bailey very quickly
becomes a friend and confidant of Judith.  This seems particularly odd
since Judith seems frequently to be more a pest than an honored
customer at Jasper's.  It even seems a little strange that Pat is
interested in Judith, who is obviously trouble.

Author
Murali Krishnan
It is possible to be surrounded by people and yet still be alone. That is
what happens to Judith (Holly Hunter). Since divorcing her unfaithful
husband, she is isolated in her New York high rise apartment. Her usual
social group was shared by her ex-husband, and because of that link, she
avoids contact with those people. The only outside activity she engages in
is attending a nightclub to hear her favorite Jazz singer, Liz Baily (Queen
Latifah). Judith's divorce has been devastating, but it also offers her a
new beginning. Whereas she had been putting all of her energy into her
troubled marriage, she now can focus solely on herself. She even thinks
about pursuing the medical career that she had abandonded for her husband.
However, she is mostly lost and unsure of where she is and where she is
headed.
The doorman in her Judith's building, Pat (Danny DeVito), is also a kindred
spirit. His adolescent daughter has just died from cancer, and he has been
long since estranged from his wife. She threw him out because of his
restlessness. He has racked up large gambling debts, and he does not settle
into a meaningful job (like working for his brother who inherited a bar)
because he feels he destined for bigger things. He is also blindly groping
his way through a lonely life.
The film is about the two characters, and their relationship with each
other. He is attracted to her, but obviously she will not initially be
attracted to the older, short, balding, rotund man. If this were a
stereotypical story, the focus of the film would be about how the underdog
fights to win the romantic attention of the object of his affection.
However, this is an intelligent drama with much more depth. (Their
relationship has similarities to that of Esmeralda and Quasimodo, from "The
Hunchback of Notre Dame".) Although it is not completely successful in
drawing a total coherent picture, it is engaging and avoids predictability.
DeVito gives a typically superb performance as the confident but vulnerable
Pat. Although the character of Liz Bailey is underwritten and could have
been better utilized, Queen Latifah does a commendable job with the role.
Hunter has a difficult job in playing such a nuanced character. Judith is at
different times devastated, terrified, emboldened, and introspective.
Although the scripted evolution of the character is sometimes awkward,
Hunter is able to keep the character believable.
The film has its share of flaws. Judith's furtive attempt at a new romance
is rather nonsensical. Her friendship with Liz seems improbable. Pat's
suggested background does not match the character represented on screen.
That is, it is not understandable why his wife would have thrown him out.
Judith's husband is unilaterally sinister, but fortunately has minimal
screen time. Also, the epilogue is superfluous because it presents the
characters in exactly the state in which the viewer would have guessed. The
film utilizes an interesting technique of presenting Judith's mental
projections against her reality, so that the viewer can contrast she how
dreams her life to be and how she actually lives it, but this is initially
overused and then abruptly abandoned.
Despite its problems, the story is still enjoyable. Judith undergoes a
rebirth and she reclaims her independence, and the transformance is
realistically achieved in small steps. There are no melodramatic climaxes or
twists that try to overstate the problems and solutions of the characters.
The story always remains subdued and focused.
Recommended. Although it cannot seamlessly join the different parts into a
fully coherent result, the film laudably attempts to avoid formulas and
present an intelligent examination of kindred spirits.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
James Sanford
Like its heroine, "Living Out Loud," the directorial debut of screenwriter
Richard LaGravenese ("The Fisher King," "The Mirror Has Two Faces"), is
something of a mess, but it's an often likable, intriguing one. It's the
story of Judith (Holly Hunter), a fortysomething New Yorker who's looking
for a new life now that her cardiologist husband Bob (Martin Donovan) has
left her high and dry in the sumptuous apartment they once shared. If the
story sounds a trifle familiar, think "An Unmarried Woman."
 In fact, "Living Out Loud" is the kind of movie that hasn't been produced
very often since Jill Clayburgh retired from the screen almost 20 years ago.
Hunter, it should be said, fills Clayburgh's high heels quite nicely,
convincingly veering from neurotic to erotic and back again whenever the
spirit moves her.
 Early on, Judith turns on the TV and finds herself bombarded by bad news
about terrorist bombings and crack babies. This sets off a wonderful,
rapid-fire internal monologue in which she wishes those terrorists "would
just get over it" and wonders if she should adopt a crack baby. Seconds
later she realizes her snotty Fifth Avenue neighbors would never cotton to
that idea and that "my crack baby would never have any playdates."
 It's a moment that establishes "Living" as a writer's movie and an actor's
movie, and it turns out to be exactly that. Although it often veers into
surrealism, "Living" has much more in common with a good play or a novella
than it does with your typical film, and LaGravenese's inexperience behind
the camera occasionally shows, as several scenes consist of nothing more
than talking heads going on at length about this or that. It doesn't exactly
make optimum use of the Cinemascope frame.
 But "Living" does have a certain charm and color as well, through the
bright casting of Danny DeVito as the unlikely knight in a shining elevator
who helps Judith to see a life beyond her high-rise tower, and Queen
Latifah, who's warm and winning as the jazz singer Judith idolizes and
befriends.
 Although the story is mostly anecdotal and doesn't build to any sort of
major point, "Living" has much to offer, including Queen Latifah's easy
renditions of such standards as "Lush Life," a delightfully weird suicide
fantasy sequence, a fairly hot dance number involving Judith and the patrons
of a lesbian bar, and an unexpected but satisfying finale reminiscent of --
surprise -- "An Unmarried Woman." Well, if we've got to have '70s nostalgia,
at least that's an oldie worth looking back on.
James Sanford

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Holly Hunter, Danny DeVito, Queen Latifah
Ingredients: Recently divorced woman, friendship, fantasy
Synopsis: 
The movie opens with the main character, a nurse named Judith (Holly
Hunter), learning from her husband that he has been having an affair
with a younger woman (Tamlyn Tomita). Cut to after the divorce. From
then on, LIVING OUT LOUD is mostly about the crazy little thoughts and
actions that Judith goes through in order to steady her life after the
divorce. Luckily she meets two new friends to help keep her mind off
things. Pat (Danny DeVito) is the gamble-holic divorced elevator man at
Judith's high rise. Liz Bailey (Queen Latifah) is a world-weary jazz
singer at a local club. Will Judith be able to weather life's storms?
Opinion: 
LIVING OUT LOUD is one of those quirky, meandering, interesting,
slice-of-life films. The whole idea is to map out how Judith comes to
grips with her emotions through smaller actions. Holly Hunter, Danny
DeVito, and Queen Latifah all give bravura performances, playing
complicated but thoroughly human characters who form temporary
alliances/friendships with each other for their own personal reasons.
There is no tight plot or easy, satisfying resolution to LIVING OUT LOUD
since it is more of an art house character portrayal (like a quick dab
of the paintbrush on the canvas of human relationships) than a big
screen exaggeration. I would love to see LIVING OUT LOUD adapted to
stage, where it would no doubt achieve immediate and resounding success.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Michael Redman
Middle-aged Judith Nelson (Holly Hunter) is finally discovering what life is
about. Until this point, she's been sheltered by her own choices. "At least
I'm married. At least I'm safe." Now that her cardiologist husband has left
her for a younger woman, she's on her own and it's frightening.
Like many others in life-changing situations, she becomes numbed. Confused as
to what to do, she sits alone in her apartment watching television and eating
dinners for one. When she ventures out to a jazz club and is accidentally
kissed by a total stranger, she awakens to the world around her.
On returning to her building, she notices elevator operator Pat (Danny DeVito)
for the first time. He's not her type, but they become close friends: two
lonely people huddled together for comfort.
Pat's unrequited lover for Judith is painful to watch. He's willing to do
anything for her although he realizes that there is little chance that she
will ever return his affections. You'll cringe as she sends for a buffed-up
"masseuse" who promises to deliver extra services and Pat has to let him in
and out of the building.
Judith experiments with her new world. She returns to the club in search of
that perfect stranger. She never re-connects with him but does form a
friendship with singer Liz Bailey (Queen Latifah), a woman she would never
have met previously. Later she takes an unidentified drug (probably XTC) and
can't resist briefly touching Pat, giving him false hope. Then she heads out
to a lesbian disco with Liz. She's alive for the first time, but she's not
sure where she's going.
Pat is DeVito's best role to date. Understated, he is a real person: desperate
but not blind. Hunter comes across as a three-dimensional woman. 
Unfortunately she's also something of an irritating character and not nearly
as easy to warm up to as DeVito. Queen Latifah is a surprisingly impressive actress.
First-time director Richard LaGravenese has had extraordinary success as a
scriptwriter with "The Fisher King", "The Horse Whisperer" and "Bridges Of
Madison County". He can add this tale of forlorn people in the early stages of
coming alive to the list.
[This appeared in the 11/12/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
DeWyNGaLe
LIVING OUT LOUD by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: B+
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
Living Out Loud is the tale of adults and what life is like for them in their
middle age years.  It portrays life realistically, not like some other films
do.  Judith Nelson, played by Holly Hunter, is the center of attention in this
film.  Judith is a woman who has been recently separated from her husband who
was cheating on her while they were married.  She now lives alone, and doesn't
have a lot to do.  She loves to watch her favorite singer, Liz Bailey, played
by Queen Latifah perform.  She also likes to meet people and talk to people. 
She likes to observe others.  One night coming home, she meets a man who runs
the elevator.  His name is Pat, and he is played by the very talented actor
Danny DeVito.  They get to talking and Judith comes to find out that he
recently lost his daughter.  Out of sympathy, she invites him for coffee, and
the two get to know each other.  Throughout the film, the two become close
friends.  Judith also forms a friendship with Liz after one of her
performances.  The rest of the film just shows these three interesting people
and what goes on in their day to day lives.
The relationship between Pat and Judith is so realistic and developed.  Pat
falls in love with Judith, but she does not have the same feelings for him. 
The two continue to get to know each other and end up being the closest of
friends.  Judith is glad she has another friend, but she still isn't happy with
her life.  She doesn't want her life to be wasted.  She wants to live her life
fully.  She decides she doesn't want to be with a man, because then someone
will be stopping her from doing what she is trying to do with her life.  On the
other hand, the divorced Pat feels completely differently.  He wants to spend
the rest his life with Judith.
Living Out Loud is one of the best comedies of the year.  There isn't much to
the cinematography or the sound to this one, but it is a very open, true to
life comedy, which makes it all the funnier. Some of the funniest sequences in
the movie are when Judith starts daydreaming about the way she pictures things,
or the way she wants life to be.  Sometimes these daydreams are not so funny
though, but they are very sad and emotional.  Judith is very open to life, and
that's what makes her one of the best characters in a movie I have seen in
awhile.
The best thing in Living Out Loud is the fact that the adults portrayed in the
film are very real to life.  They seem like middle-aged people are, rather than
characters that seem like they are still very young.  Danny DeVito in
particular played his part very realistically.  His character of Pat was a very
likable one, and also one that you sympathized for very easily.  Holly Hunter's
character was also a great one that brought tons of laughs.  She was a very
interesting person, and that's what made the character all the more likable. 
Holly Hunter was wonderful as Judith.  Judith was a character that had suffered
many hardships in her life.  All of the characters, including Queen Latifah's
Liz, are extremely interesting people.  There isn't much plot in Living Out
Loud.  It doesn't really seem like the film is a film at all, but more of a
documentary on real life people.  It seemed like I was watching these people
secretly, without them knowing it.
The Bottom Line- A true to life, emotional film about people that almost seem
real. Not actors.

Author
Homer Yen
Judith (Holly Hunter) has been a devoted wife who was comfortable with
her life even if it meant sacrificing her friends and, for the most
part, being invisible to everyone except her husband.  But after 15
years of marriage, it's finally over.  He leaves her for a younger
woman.  She tries to suppress her anger like so many of us would, and
tries to pick up the pieces of her vulnerable life.   But, as you can
imagine, with all that hate and confusion simmering inside of a soul
filled with charity and love, it can be an immensely traumatic time
for her.  Judith is a genuinely kind person who routinely goes out of
her way to make others feel better, whether it's the bed-ridden
patient that she cares for or the elevator man in her apartment co-op
who has just recently experienced a death in the family.  But now she
is alone, and she needs to break free of her self-imprisonment.
She meets up with two individual that help to soften her hard edges
and help her to realize that there's more out there than remorse and
anguish.  One is Pat, the elevator man working in her 5th Avenue
apartment co-op (Danny DeVito).  He has gambling problems, a ruined
marriage and a dying child.  The grief that he experiences is not all
that different from Judith's.  Misery loves company, and they begin to
share some of their thoughts over cups of coffee, wine and precious
moments in the elevator.  A second influence is torch singer Liz
Bailey (Queen Latifah), who befriends her in a way a guide would when
you're on vacation.   She has a weakness for gentle, beautiful men
who, to her dismay, always turn out to be gay.  But that doesn't mean
that she will stop searching, and this philosophy is something that
Judith begins to pick up on.  There's no reason to live if you're only
going to live safe.  And Judith takes small but deliberate steps to
expand her world.  Among other things, she calls in a masseuse to give
her an erotic massage and also accompanies Liz to a lesbian nightclub
that looks like a German Expressionist's wet dream where Judith
discovers that her fantasies are not entirely beyond her reach.  
Holly Hunter turns in a nice performance as a meek woman looking for a
chance to forgive, break out and recapture her identity.  DeVito and
Latifah also turn in competent performances as they bring Judith more
in touch with herself as well as follow through on personal plans of
their own.  Yet, the movie never really achieves any kind of dramatic
oomph.  I also question some of the dialogue in the film, which
sparingly used the `F' word and gay bashed a little too much. This
film seems to cater to a 40+ crowd, but these elements, which left a
strange taste in my mouth, will probably be greeted with greater
disdain among that group.  Nonetheless, I appreciated the all-around
performances and am convinced that `Living Out Loud' is not such a bad
thing to do.


Author
Dennis Schwartz
LIVING OUT LOUD (director/writer:Richard LaGravenese; cinematographer:
John Bailey; cast: Holly Hunter (Judith), Danny DeVito (Pat), Queen
Latifah (Liz Bailey), Martin Donovan (Bob Nelson), Elias Koteas (the
Kisser), Richard Schiff (Philly), Eddie Cibrian (The Masseur), 1998)
A tepid comedy/drama, involving a wealthy nurse, Judith (Holly Hunter),
who is miserable, even talking aloud to herself in public, you know,
like crazy people do. She was dumped for a younger woman after sixteen
years of marriage by her cardiologist husband, Dr. Bob Nelson (Donovan).
In her Fifth Avenue luxury co-op where she lives, we will regularly see
her entering the lobby dressed-up in evening clothes after a night out
on the town. She will regularly come across the also divorced
doorman-elevator man, Pat (DeVito), but never notice him until this one
night when she feels talkative and there is no one for her to talk to
but him. He is feeling blue because his wife has kicked him out some
time ago, after 25 years of marriage, something he has never gotten
over; and, recently his beloved daughter passed away. He also has some
heavy gambling debts, but doesn't have the money to settle up with the
gangsters he owes the money to. The lonely Judith starts a conversation
on the elevator with him and this starts their unlikely friendship.
Admittedly, Pat is attracted to her, having more than a friendship in
mind with the comely woman. Loneliness seems to be her only reason for
making contact with someone she has nothing in common with. Into the mix
of this new friendship, you can add the busty nightclub singer at
Judith's favorite nightspot, Liz Bailey (Queen Latifah). She becomes her
provider of wisdom. Though, she is also divorced and admittedly is no
crackerjack in dealing with relationships, yet she seems to be handling
her divorce in a more worldly manner than her new friends.
As you might surmise from a mainstream film like this, it wants to pull
you along with all the heartaches it can muster from these lonely souls,
and it does so, by making use of semi flashbacks and scenes that have a
mixture of fantasy and reality to it. We continually hear Judith's
bitter thoughts pour out from her, as she tries to get another life for
herself. To a lesser degree, this style of filmmaking also works for the
less complicated Pat, as his mental grief comes pouring out in spurts.
His thoughts are geared to getting all he can out of life, as he tries
desperately to just be himself, needing only a little help from family
to secure a business and get over his gambling debts.
The film's title, Living Out Loud, is deliberately misleading, as it
should really be retitled as "Fantasizing Out Loud." The problem for
these two, is that they never found out who they were in their marriage,
so when their marriages fell apart, so did they. In other words, they
are not living out loud from what is on their mind; they are merely
fantasizing what is on their mind.
This therefore becomes a film more intrigued with self-awareness than
with relationships and loses its edge as a romantic film. Its brightest
hope is how the viewer relates to the film's stars. I didn't, so the
film just seemed to drag for me at times and it seemed manipulative, to
the bargain. My problem is that I didn't really care what happened to
them. Why they were sad and lonely, is a sympathetic enough story, but
there was just nothing served up that made me feel that this predictable
story had anywhere important to go. The only innovative feature of the
film, which did save it from the doldrums, was that we were able to go
inside their heads and hear their thinking process at work. The
filmmaker has borrowed this guise of introspection from the pages of
Chekhov, which works out reasonably well on film, though it is still
better served as a device for the reader of books.
At least the film never turns to mush, as its static atmosphere is
enhanced mostly by some of the lively nightclub scenes, such as when Liz
is belting out her sultry jazz numbers and offering good cheer for
advice (trust me, it wasn't on a par to the Biblical Solomon's advice).
She mops up the screen with her bosomy and glittering presence and
dwarfs the other co-stars when onscreen together.
Fortunately, the story itself was somewhat believable, of the need for
the two loners to use each other in a nice way, to find a path in their
life to take them out of their doldrums, and to find out who they are.
But I couldn't picture them falling in love for even a second and
certainly not for a minute, these two were just not compatable. She,
being cultured and upper-class and aspiring to be a pediatrician, and
Pat, who is unappealing to her physically, and is a coarse, uneducated
man, and he is a dullard. But come to think of it, she's pretty dull
herself.
On a positive note, the self-pity of the two is handled deftly by the
director; and, the releases the two find for their tension are very
human vices to have: his being gambling and hers drinking too many dry
martinis and talking aloud to herself (fantasizing).
The pathetic nature of how their lives have turned out and of how far
down they have sunk, comes across in moments such as when Judith
mistakes the wrong door for the bathroom in a nightclub and is suddenly
pounced on by a man kissing her passionately (Elias Koteas). That he
turns out to have made a mistake, expecting a married woman at the bar
to join him for the kiss, doesn't deter her from not only forgiving him
for the mistake but becoming attracted to him, especially when she finds
him to be harmless and civil. Needless to say, her fantasies sustain her
while she is trying to get a grip on her life, but one can't live by
fantasy alone. Or can they? The fantasy she has of making it with the
hunk masseur (Cibrian), who gives her the sex massage she dreams of, are
the kind of private thoughts that perhaps more people have than what is
commonly thought, but this is certainly not a way to self-discovery and
a way out of her situation, though it seems to help her in someway, but
the film has really not made it clear how she was helped. Her other big
self-discovery about herself, comes when she acts out a fantasy at a
lesbian after-hours nightclub. This becomes another bridge taken between
reality and fantasy, and it was the most spirited moment of the film, as
she lived out her white woman fantasy to become a black queen for the
night, dancing away as if she had been a lesbian all her life. She will
even fantasize for a moment about loving Pat, but the filmmaker has the
good sense to keep this part of the romantic story level-headed, as her
liking for him is driven only by her desperate situation and not because
they are really meant for each other. Their relationship should turn out
to be a limited and probably a temporary one, like many such Manhattan
relationships that singles and divorcees go through when living alone in
a big city.
This bittersweet romance turns out to be too dry for my taste; but, it
is, nevertheless, faultlessly told and seems to be sincere in its
presentation, and what the heck, they seem to be ok people, and probably
merit a tad of sympathy for their plight.
This is the first feature directed by the screenwriter LaGravenese,
whose previous work is a mixture of some good ones, some flops and some
so-so works (The Fisher King,Unstrung Heroes, A Little Princess,The
Bridges of Madison County,The Mirror Has Two Faces, Beloved). His
attempt here to make a combination fantasy and a straight romance film,
has worked with mixed results. I think the major fault for the film's
dullness lies with the co-stars; I couldn't get aroused by Holly
Hunter's performance, as intelligent as it was, it was still too plain
and too staid. While Danny De Vito, who is a natural comic and is best
at being featured as a second-banana, wasn't funny enough here and
couldn't be taken seriously enough as a romantic suitor for Holly. I'm
not saying that he was completely miscast, he did bring some depth to
his character's anguished situation and believability to his role. But
someone else, a more romantic leading man, might have given the film a
romantic tension to it that it desperately needed. Though I realize the
point of the story was that these two weren't really suited for each
other in the first place and that this was the odd twist to their
non-romance. But my point is, that they could have been not suited for
each other all right, but not by such a wide margin as these two were.
It made the ending seem logical, that their real need is not to fall in
love with each other, but to get their life in order and get an identity
of their own. But that was also too predictable an ending, limiting the
scope of the film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Richard LaGravenese. 
Cast: Holly Hunter, Danny DeVito, Queen Latifah, Martin Donovan, Elias 
Koteas, Suzanne Shepherd, Eddie Cibrian, Rachael Leigh Cooke, Lin Shaye.
1998 - 94 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, brief nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 11, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"Living Out Loud," is the type of motion picture we don't often see: it 
is a film about mature, intelligent adults, instead of the usual 
American film, in which children basically dress up in grown-up clothing 
and parade around acting like immature seven-year-olds.
Judith (Holly Hunter), a fortysomething living in New York City, has 
been having a difficult time with life lately. She is extremely 
depressed about her recent divorce to her husband (Martin Donovan), who 
had been cheating on her. She cannot sleep, haunted by terrible 
memories, often imagines off-the-wall things to try and make the world 
seem like a better place, and the only place she can really go to feel 
happy is to hear one of her favorite singers, Liz Bailey (Queen 
Latifah), perform at a local club. Judith's life does start to brighten 
a little when, one night when she gets home to her apartment late, 
strikes up a conversation with the elevator operator, Pat (Danny 
DeVito), a lonely man in his fifties whom has lost his daughter 
recently. Both of them create a sort of emotional connection with each 
other, seeking comfort with the other person, but while Pat starts to 
form a deep love for her, Judith only wants to remain friends.
"Living Out Loud," which was written by Richard LaGravenese ("The 
Bridges of Madison County"), who is also making his directing debut 
here, is a wonderful film from beginning to end, one that is honest, 
genuinely funny, and poignant. The three central characters, that of 
Judith, Pat, and Liz, are all written to be free-thinking, complex human 
beings, and are all likable, but flawed, people who are constantly 
interesting, as is the film itself.
One highly original element of the film is that Judith occasionally 
imagines things occuring in her mind in the way she wishes they would 
happen. Sometimes it results in comedy, and sometimes it turns out to be 
subtle and truly touching. One sequence that stands out is when Judith 
is at a restaurant by herself, reading a novel. An older woman comes 
over to her, mentions that that is a great book she is reading, and then 
goes over to join her own friends. As the woman sits down, she looks 
over to see Judith by herself, and motions for her to come join them. 
Instantly, we realize this was simply in Judith's mind, as we see the 
same woman just sit down at the table and begin talking to her friends.
Holly Hunter and Danny Devito both give the performances of their 
careers here. Hunter, of course, was brilliant in 1993's "The Piano," 
for which she won an Academy Award, but in this film she is even better, 
I think. She finds the right note for each scene and holds it. And 
DeVito has never had such a humanistic role before, which I was 
surprised about. Usually he is used as the butt of a joke, or as a 
caricature, but in this film, has a living-and-breathing, sympathetic 
person to play. Topping it all off is Latifah, also a singer, who is 
quickly turning into a respectable actress herself, and has a juicy, 
natural supporting role as, in some ways, Judith's role model.
Another joy of the film is that it does not somehow form a contrived, 
"happy" ending, but, in staying with its realistic tone, manages to be 
upbeat, but truthful. The last shot is an especially powerful image. 
Nothing is said, but just the image of someone walking down a sidewalk 
says it all.
The relationship that results between Judith and Pat is true-to-life and 
sincere. As we watch these two people talk, and get to know each other, 
all that we wish for them both is to be happy, even if that does not 
include for them to become romantically involved. And as, "Living Out 
Loud," which is one of the best films of the year, proves, sometimes a 
friendship is the strongest bond anyone could possibly ask for.
