Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Melissa Martin
     There has been so much bad press surrounding WATERWORLD, that it
seems to be one big scandal after another.  But if you let this deter
you from seeing the film, feel ashamed--you're missing one hell of a
show.
     There have been tons of action flicks this year: DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE, BATMAN FOREVER.  But WATERWORLD outshines them all.  This is
a blow-away, edge-of-your-seat action adventure with enough secondary
stuff to please the palate: adventure, post-apocalyptic eerieness,
love, a great script, a cool story,  sex, a cute child, and a bad guy
to root for.  This has been said before, and will be said again, but
it's true when they say that every dollar has gone onto the screen.
Every shot is absolutely mind-boggling in its scale.
     Kevin Costner stars as the sullen, loner Mariner, a man who was
born with functional gills and webbed feet.  I was pleasantly surprised
when I enjoyed his performance; my personal views about him (having
nothing to do with the post-WATERWORLD Costner scandals) as well as my
reservations about his acting talent had me preparing to shrug off his
performance on-screen.  But he comes across marvelously, with the
perfect bitter facade as merits an outcast.  Emotions shine through
wonderfully, and you can actually see the relationship developing
between the Mariner and Helen, played by Jeanne Tripplehorn, through
Costner's eyes.
     As for Tripplehorn, I was awaiting her performance with some
degree of gleeful anticipation, and I was not to be disappointed.  She
somehow manages to be a stunner even with grimy, tangled hair, cracked
lips, weather-beaten skin and clothes compiled of what appear to be
mesh and fabric scraps.  She is delightfully strong of will, a true
heroine in an industry dotted with obnoxiously volatile feminist
heroines.  It is pleasant to see a drop-dead gorgeous actress with some
large degree of talent, which is sadly missing in most films today (no,
I'm not naming any names).
     Tina Majorino comes across as the cutest thing the human race has
to offer in her role as the enigmatic Enola, who draws pictures of
horses and trees and has a map-like tattoo on her back.  Her stubborn,
hands-on-hips pouts are absolutely adorable.  Not only does she flash
the right smile and bounce around in an amazingly endearing way, she
also shows that she's one of the few talented child actors out there.
     Dennis Hopper, however, was the actor I was looking forward to the
most.  The guy is so damn good at playing these deliciously evil
villains, that one would almost expect him to walk into the recording
studio of a Disney animated feature.  Only Disneys animated villains
have had the kind of charismatic, 100% pure evil personalities that
make you want to root for the villain, and Hopper becomes something
akin to THE LION KING's Uncle Scar.  He's so delightful that it's a shame
he didn't have more screen time.  The character he played was that of
the almost Koreshian Deacon, who was intent on leading the villainous,
wild-guy Smokers (thusly named for their habit of smoking cigarettes
nearly constantly) to Dry Land ... using, of course, the map on Enola's
back.
     The story is great fun, and has tons of elements.  The movie is
fast-paced, giving you a few minutes of human-appeal in which to
breathe, before diving headlong into another mind-blowing, nonstop
battle scene, which is on the grandest scale ever seen.  The most
impressive sequence is split between the two main battles.  The first
occurs when the Smokers attack the giant, floating atoll--what is the
Waterworld equivalent of a village--in an amazingly long but never
dull explosion-filled battle.  The atoll is a complete set, and built
to patched-up perfection.  There are thousands of wonderfully cast
extras who populate the atoll, and all of whom are very convincing in
their ragtaggedness.
     The second, climatic battle sequence occurs on the Exxon
Valdez ... which survived the coming of the Waterworld to become
the Smokers' refuge.  What is impressive about this is when the Mariner
drops a lighted flare down into the oil-filled belly of the ship ...
causing the obvious results, a massive explosion that guts the entire
ungainly thing.
     There is plenty of human appeal in the form of the Mariner's
heartwarmingly cold bond formed with Enola, who refuses to hate him (no
matter how mean he is to her).  And then, of course, theres the
Mariners oddly realistic desperation-born romance with the
tough-as-nails Helen.
     The special effects--actually, just the whole thing--looks so
incredible that it completely transports you into the place called
Waterworld.  Everything is absolutely amazing.  It would be quite
complex to go into it all here, so Ill suffice to say that the visual
effects look like a million ... well, one hundred and seventy-two
million bucks.
     *Bottom Line*: Go see this film.  It's a completely blow-you-away
action delicacy, and certainly one of the better films out there.  The
trick to enjoying this film is to totally let yourself go, which is
pretty easy considering all the work that's gone into it.  The acting is
superb, the story is wonderful, and the visuals are gloriously
stunning.
     Rating: I'd easily give this an "A", but not an "A+" for the
simple reason that it didn't elate me the way that the "A+" APOLLO 13
did.  It's a haunting film, but not a feel-good one. **** 1/2 stars.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WATERWORLD or HOLLYWOOD GOES JUNK was of the most controversial
films of 1995.  With a budget of over $175,000,000 producer Kevin
Costner apparently asked set designer Dennis Gassner to go to a local
junkyard and construct a set for a future world only out of cast off
pieces of metal.  WATERWORLD looks like a low budget BLADE RUNNER GOES
TO SEA.  How can the most expensive movie ever made look so ugly?
Where did the money go?
     Although not near as bad as it seems at first, this is a film with
an innumerable list of problems.  The script by Peter Rader, David
Twohy, and Joss Whedon is needlessly confusing.  Watching it is like
starting with episode seven of the "The Forsyte Saga" and trying to
decipher what has been happening.  I had the same feeling when trying
to parse the story in the failed movie DUNE.
     WATERWORLD is set in the environmentalist most popular apocalyptic
view of the future.  The polar ice caps have melted, and the world is
all water.  The most valuable possession is dirt so that people can
grow plants, and the most hoarded commodity is oil for water-skis and
boats.
     Some people are beginning to mutate into humans with gills who can
swim underwater for long periods of time.  The Mariner (Kevin Costner)
is one such mutant.  He is a loner who is willing to kill women and
children to ensure his survival, and yet he turns into one of the most
tender characters in the movie.
     He may or may not know where dry land is, and dry land is the holy
grail for everyone in WATERWORLD.  Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn) has a
little girl named Enola (Tina Majorino) in her care.  Enola has a
tattoo on her back that is rumored to be some indecipherable map to dry
land.  Circumstances have cast all of them together on his boat.
     Dennis Hopper loves to overact.  As the Deacon, the leader of the
evil Smokers, he plays his usual part.  He gets to mouth inanities such
as, "if I ever see him again, I'm going to cut open his head and eat
his brain."  The script dares you to take it seriously while for all
intents and purposes becoming a parody of bad science fiction movies.
     The movie consists of The Mariner, Helen, and Enola looking for
dry land with the Smokers in hot pursuit to kill them and to find dry
land.  The movie is filled with stunt after unbelievable stunt in the
battle of the Smoker army against The Mariner.
     Many of the scenes in the show make little sense, and yet for some
reason the film begins to grow on you after a while.  I am not sure
why.  Perhaps you get sucked into the story.  Is there dry land left,
and if so, how exactly will they find it.  Perhaps it is Tripplehorn's
(BASIC INSTINCT and THE FIRM) beauty and toughness.  She can look great
in rags and even while starving to death.  Maybe it is Costner's
beguiling little smile.  I don't know, but I stayed with it until the
end.  I did not need to.  If you've seen part of it, there is little
need to see the rest since it is basically the same.  I found the
ending a let down and did not care for the way the story was wrapped
up.
     There is one quite magical scene in the film where The Mariner
takes Helen on an underwater journey and breathes for both of them.
Here the sets finally have some beauty.  Were that the rest of the film
were of equal quality.
     WATERWORLD runs way too long at 2:14.  It is rated PG-13.  There
is brief nudity, some intense violence, and some bad language.  I was
kind of surprised it didn't get an R rating.  The show should be fine
for teenagers and perhaps for some mature kids ten and over.  Although
the show grew on me, it is too ridiculous for me to recommend it.  I
give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Joan Ellis
     WATERWORLD is definitely a bad hair movie.  Dennis Hopper has none,
Kevin Costner's is thinning, and Hopper's assistant thug looks as if
his has been growing for decades.  In the absence of humor, drama, or
character chemistry, you notice things like that.
     This movie just can't make up its mind.  Should it be a spiritual
sea epic, or should it be this year's violent action movie?  The primal
man/woman/child unit is pitted against the sea in search of any spot of
dry land than might have survived the melting of the polar icecaps.  The
Mariner (Costner), Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn), and Enola (Tina
Majorino), a little girl with a cryptic map to dry land tattooed on her
back, glisten with sweat and grow progressively weaker from sun and
salt in pale imitation of all lifeboat movies.
     Just as we are pondering the seriousness of the problem, a band of
the silliest villains you ever saw streaks over the horizon on Jet
Skis.  Armed with grisly weapons fashioned from the leftovers of
civilization, the Smokers are chasing the mariner, "the gentleman
guppy," whose gills are hidden mercifully behind his ears.
     Dennis Hopper is here to reprise his bad guy personality as the
Deacon, the Mariner's villainous rival.  If there is water, water
everywhere and not a drop to drink (converted urine serves), it doesn't
bother the Deacon, who has an endless supply of scotch, which he swills
while haranguing the world's survivors who are clustered on the rusting
hull of the infamous Exxon Valdez, which serves as their floating
home.
     The Smokers and the survivors, in spite of living in an ocean that
could clean them, are comically and inexplicably filthy.  Clad in
clothes and accents that range from imagined Renaissance to Grunge,
they seem to have passed through Krook's rag-and-bone shop on their way
to a company outing by the ocean.  It's a hodgepodge so ridiculous that
even a good performance by the little girl and some spiffy photography
of fireballs can't lift the leaden mass.
     Standing topside in a three-cornered hat to address the cheering
faithful.  The Deacon, in a charitable interpretation, is a sly
metaphor for the fundamentalist preachers who sermonize about family
values while they drink, womanize, and indulge themselves in luxury
bought with the contributions of their parishioners.  In the
uncharitable view, he's just a jerk.
     Covering his gouged eye socket with a patch and sporting a cleaver
as an artificial hand, Hopper tries mightily to invest his character
with a wink from his remaining eye to tell us this movie is fun.  But
even he can't surmount the deadly dullness of Kevin Costner's vision.
     If this is Costner's warning that we are ruining the planet, he
delivers it with a mailed fist.  This very earnest man has made a movie
without the redeeming qualities of romance, drama, or humor.  Is it
possible that he mistakes seriousness for dignity?  This is a lifeless
movie.  And don't even ask where the money went.


Author
Chad Polenz
Waterworld
Chad'z rating: * (out of 4 = poor)
1995, PG-13, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
[science fiction/thriller]
starring: Kevin Costner (The Mariner), Jeanne Tripplehorn (Helen), Dennis
Hopper (Deacon), Tina Mojorino (Enola), produced by Charles Gordon, John
Davis, Kevin Costner, written by Peter Roder, David Twohy, directed by Kevin
Reynolds.
I feel sorry for the financial backers of "Waterworld," which is supposedly
the most expensive film ever made (at $172 million!), and is also one of the
stupidest - boy did they get ripped off! In fact, this film is not really a
movie, but more of an amusement park ride with a plot. It's not even just
another case of cliches strung together (well, it is that too), it's
something that's painful to watch because it relishes in its flaws.
Kevin Costner stars as a man who is some kind of mutant half man/half fish.
He is an explorer/mariner on an alternate Earth that is completely covered by
water because the polar ice caps melted. He's referred to as The Mariner, but
they "The Meaner" would have been a more appropriate title because he's cold,
rigid, and strict - and he's supposed the be the good guy! He docks at a
small floating village of sorts. He trades dirt for money and this introduces
us to the other important characters. First we meet one of the villains, then
the soon-to-be heroine, a child prodigy, a wacky inventor, and a group of
primitive people that somehow have some of the technology we have today, but
also some of the low-tech tools used by pirates and Vikings. 
Immediately the film's biggest flaw is apparent: are these people primitive
or highly advanced? It doesn't seem like anyone can read yet they have
Ski-Doos and airplanes! How are these things powered? And if they have
airplanes, couldn't they just keep flying until they reached dry land? Also,
if the planet is completely covered in water where did they get the materials
to make these things? I'm sorry, I'm all for checking your brain at the door
when going to the movies, but elements like these cannot go unnoticed because
they draw our attention away from the story and confuse us. There was
potential here for a good pirate story set in medieval times before modern
technology, so why mix the two together? It doesn't make any sense.
There really isn't much of a plot here because the story moves so quickly it
never takes time to explain anything. The only thing we learn is that the
prodigy child, Enola (Mojorino), has a tattoo on her back that is supposedly
a map to "Dryland." Who put the tattoo there and how come it has taken them
this long to figure this out? We never get an answer, just a stupid action
movie about whoever can get the girl will be the victor of sorts if they
reach Dryland. 
To make a long, boring, stupid, and just plain bad story short; the mariner
escapes with a woman named Helen (Tripplehorn) and Enola. They sail for a
long time, encountering some strange people in the process and fight off "The
Smokers" as lead by the idiot villain Deacon (Hopper), who kidnaps Enola. The
story becomes a overly grand adventure with the mariner taking on an army of
goons, rescuing Enola, and bringing them all to salvation (how original).
Even with all its special effects, action, and adventure this film is
boring. Not a single character is likable, therefore neither is the plot.
Dennis Hopper completely rips off Jack Nicholson's Joker, while Costner just
plain rips.
Still, "Waterworld" is professionally made with a good production design and
an original idea but no substance to it. I just hope they don't make a
sequel! 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kevin Costner, Dennis Hopper, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Tina Majorino, 
      Michael Jeter 
Director: Kevin Reynolds 
Producers: Charles Gordon, John Davis, and Kevin Costner 
Screenplay: Peter Rader and David Twohy 
Cinematography: Dean Semler 
Music: James Newton Howard 
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures 
     The makers of WATERWORLD, the current holder of the "most expensive 
film" title, have put a good portion of the money where the viewing 
public can see it -- on the screen.  This production, with its massive 
explosions, amazing stunts, and breathtaking visuals, is one of 
Hollywood's most lavish features to date.  All of the action takes place 
on a wide expanse of ocean, with no land in sight.  It's no easy feat 
for human actors to emulate fish. 
     It's an unspecified date in the future.  As we're told in a quick 
voiceover intro, the polar ice caps have melted and Earth's continents 
are buried under water.  Humanity has been relegated to a tenuous 
existence on shakily-constructed floating fortress-cities.  There is no 
land, and pure water and dirt have become exceptionally valuable 
commodities.  The world is a cruel place, where brotherhood is a thing 
of the past, and anything -- or anyone -- can be sold or traded for as 
little as a sheet of paper.  Possessions, not people, are what matter. 
     There are three kinds of survivors:  those who try to live in 
orderly societies, nomads who roam the seas in their own vessels, and 
members of an outlaw band called the "Smokers."  Headed by the larger-
than-life Deacon (Dennis Hopper), these criminals amuse themselves by 
raping and pillaging while on a quest for the mythical Dryland -- a 
paradise that no one has seen, yet everyone believes exists. 
     The Mariner (Kevin Costner) becomes one of the Smokers' targets 
when he rescues the girl Enola (Tina Majorino) from a raid on a 
fortress-city.  She is no ordinary child -- on her back is a tattoo 
which supposedly identifies the location of Dryland.  The Mariner, a 
mutant man who has developed working gills and webbed feet, has little 
use for Enola or her older companion, Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn), but he 
owes them his life and intends to pay the debt.  Once the scales are 
even, however, they become expendable. 
     WATERWORLD follows two parallel paths.  The first sets the 
Mariner's personality on a course of transformation from self-centered 
to heroic.  The other is the more tangible search for Dryland, which we 
instinctively know is going to appear during the film's last act.  After 
all, how often do movie quests go unfulfilled?  The script doesn't do a 
great job with either the spiritual or the physical trek, but the 
spectacular action sequences occur with enough regularity that strong 
writing isn't necessary to keep WATERWORLD afloat.  A little adrenaline 
can obscure quite a few holes. 
     Kevin Costner, admittedly not the world's greatest actor, is fine 
as the dour Mariner.  With a greater range than Schwarzenegger, 
Stallone, Van Damme, and Seagal combined, Costner is more than capable 
of handling the limited role of an action hero.  Dennis Hopper, on the 
other hand, serves a dual function:  chief villain and comic relief.  
Not content with merely going over-the-top this time around, Hopper 
makes it obvious that nothing about Deacon is to be taken seriously -- 
and the approach works.  There's a strand of unmistakable, completely 
intentional humor running through WATERWORLD.   
     A couple of the more "tender" relationships fail.  The Mariner's 
affection for Enola comes across as forced, despite Majorino's winning 
performance.  ALIENS showed what a pseudo-parent/child bond can do for a 
movie, and that intensity is missing here.  Also, the romance between 
the Mariner and Helen is perfunctory at best, and largely underdeveloped 
and unsatisfying. 
     Although the storyline isn't all that invigorating, the action is, 
and that's what saves WATERWORLD.  In the tradition of the old Westerns 
and Mel Gibson's Road Warrior flicks, this film provides good escapist 
fun.  Everyone behind the scenes did their part with aplomb, and the 
result is a feast for the eyes and ears.  And, though this film may have 
cost Universal upwards of $175 million, the price at the box office for 
the average movie-goer will still be in the $7.50 range -- worth it if 
adventure is your kind of thing. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
J. D. Silvester
     Having read the previous reviews of WATERWORLD that have been
posted in this newsgroup, I decided to check out the movie for myself.
I would like to start by saying that I did not go to the theatre
expecting to walk away with an answer to the meaning of life and as
such was not as disappointed with the film as other critics have been.
If you are the type of person that expects a movie to provide you with
all the answers to your personal problems, or you expect to walk away
having experienced a "revelation," than save your 8 bucks for another
movie!  If, however, you are like me and you go to be entertained, then
by all means go see WATERWORLD.
     WATERWORLD is a "popcorn" movie.  What do I mean by a "popcorn"
movie?  Hmmm ... the easiest explanation would be for you to watch the
movie BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER.  That is a "popcorn" movie!
Personally, I go to the theatre for a mind numbing, wholly entertaining
experience.  I like seeing great action, large explosions, and stunts
that make annal retentive boobs go, "Oh man, that's so fake!"  Of
course it's fake butt-head, it's a damn movie!
     However, for me, WATERWORLD was even more of an experience than I
expected.  Mostly due to the group of six juveniles seated in the row
directly behind me.  Thanks to this group of four girls and two boys, I
got to learn who wanted to give whom a blowjob, how much alcohol they
had consumed the night before, who was dating whom, whose sister had
grown up more since they last saw one another, who could produce the
loudest belch (to my amazement, a girl won that one, and yes, it was the
girl seated directly behind me!), and I had the latest rock and roll
release pounded out on the back of my chair by someone's feet. It also
amazed me how many stupid questions this group could produce ranging
from one girl asking what gills are (I am really unsure of what our
youth are being taught in school today), to another girl constantly
complaining about how boring the movie was then asking what was
happening on the screen and why.  Mostly because she couldn't hear the
dialogue due to her own mouth constantly flapping!
     Theatrical antics aside, WATERWORLD is enjoyable on a purely
physical level.  Large explosions, good stunts (many of which were
performed by Costner himself), and of course Dennis Hopper, one of my
favorite screen stars.  A movie with Dennis Hopper, no matter how
poorly done, always deserves some credit for his appearance in it.  I
found the name printed on the stern of the oil tanker, deservingly
funny, though I almost missed it due to the peanut gallery behind me.
It was at this point, one of the larger girls started beating on one of
the boys.
     If you get a chance to see WATERWORLD, I would suggest though that
you sit at the very back of the theatre so that you don't wind up with
your very own personal group of hooligans!  Though, in my case it made
for some interesting entertainment during the previews, most of which I
had already seen.
     Personally I give WATERWORLD ***1/2 (out of five).  It loses a
little, because for me there were a few dry spots between the action
stunts.  I give the girl's belch and 8 out of 10, her delivery was
good, but she couldn't maintain it long enough to earn those extra
couple of points.
Next time - THE NET, with Sandra Bullock.

Author
Michelle Dean
     I wasn't really expecting much when I went to see this film on
opening night.  I too had read all the articles about this expensive
epic, about all Kevin Costner's problems with it.  I was expecting one
expansive, expensive mess of a movie.  However, surprisingly enough, I
enjoyed it.
     The premise is this: The inhabitants of Waterworld, which is
really a flooded Earth due to melted polar ice caps, are in constant
search for that mythical place they call Dryland.  There are two
"peoples" in Waterworld; the Smokers and the Something-elses (I just
can't remember the name, they only said it once, if at all).  Markings
on a young Something-else girl named Enola's (Tina Majorino) back have
been rumoured to show the way to Dryland, and so the Smokers head off
to raid her "village."  She and her friend, Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn)
escape the battle with the mysterious Mariner (Kevin Costner), a mutant
man who has gills and webbed feet, who says he'll take them to
Dryland.  Upon learning of Enola's escape the Smokers, led by the
Deacon (Dennis Hopper), set off in pursuit of the trio.  Complicated
enough?
     You really have to suspend most of your knowledge to bring this
film anywhere close to believable, of course, but it has its moments.
The biggest problem with the film is the fact that it spend little or
no time explaining what it's doing and why.  We haven't a clue why the
Smokers are pitted against the Something-elses.  We just don't like
them because it doesn't seem like we're really supposed to, although
the Something-elses don't appear to be any better than their neighbours
in the first hour of the film.  We don't really get to know any of the
characters at all.  Granted, it wasn't meant to be any sort of thinking
film but I would have liked to know what was going on at times.  There
are also way too many characters in the film, many of them too
incidental to even remember their names.  It was tough keeping track of
the names of the four main players.  But somehow it manages to all tie
together and be completely watchable.
     The action scenes, which are numerous, do send adrenaline shooting
through your body.  However, they do tend to be confusing, and you
don't always understand what it is that the Mariner's doing until the
result makes it obvious.  There are a lot of explosions and fire and
the special effects waver between spectacular in the scenes on the
tank, and, in a few scenes where the characters are flying in a hot-air
balloon, mediocre.
     The performances are about as dependable as the special effects.
I love Tina Majorino (CORRINA, CORRINA; WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN), and
always have, and she's just as good here.  She isn't really given much
to do but she works well with what she is given and I heard more than
one person walk out of the theatre saying "I love that little girl!"
Kevin Costner (FIELD OF DREAMS, DANCES WITH WOLVES) actually manages to
bring some feeling into that flat dumb-jock speech of his and give a
solid, if not spectacular, performance.  Jeanne Tripplehorn is an
actress I hadn't seen before and will only see again if she's
headlining with someone I do like, because she was perfectly
unremarkable.  Dennis Hopper is horrible.  He spends his whole time
swaggering about and yelling.  He needs to be taught that just because
you yell a line doesn't make it believable.

Author
Christopher Null
     In the future, the polar ice caps have melted, the world is
covered by water, and everyone is left to fend for themselves as
scavengers in a grim reality.  This is WATERWORLD, and you'll be glad
to know: even in this harsh realm, the women still shave their legs.
     The most expensive movie ever made (the final word is $172
million), WATERWORLD will be a true monument in Kevin Costner's
career.  Unfortunately, this film isn't going to have quite the effect
something like DANCES WITH WOLVES had.  The bottom line is WATERWORLD
is a marginal film: always extravagant, sometimes entertaining, often
preachy and dull--a pure formula picture.
     The story is time-tested and painfully simple.  Costner plays The
Mariner, a lone drifter on the watery surface of the earth who talks
about his boat more than Forrest Gump.  Jeanne Tripplehorn (THE FIRM)
plays Helen, the love interest and the protector of Enola (Tina
Majorino), a child with a strange tattoo which just may show the way to
the mythical paradise of Dryland.  The obligatory bad guy is The Deacon
(Dennis Hopper), a slave driver/preacher with heavy artillery that acts
a lot like, well, Dennis Hopper.  I won't be the only one to say, "It's
MAD MAX on water."
     Of course, The Deacon wants the kid.  The Mariner wants to protect
her and falls in love with Helen.  So for 134 minutes, The Deacon
chases the trio, turning up over and over and over, always out of
nowhere (ever try to hide on the ocean?), and always being thwarted by
The Mariner.  Basically, it's Costner trying to be a superhero,
swinging around on a *lot* of ropes and blowing up everything else.
     This gets pretty old after awhile, especially since Costner looks
more concerned with what's for dinner than what's on the screen.  The
other problems are innumerable:  it's hard to figure out where the
story is headed, the bad guys act like members of a bumbling Keystone
Coast Guard, and a number of effects are obvious digital fakes.  There
are a few bright spots, but it ends up being a passable story with
lackluster execution.
     All the hype surrounding this film has really spoiled what there
was to enjoy.  If you see it, you'll probably be trying to figure out
where all that money went, too (I only counted about $100 million).
It's too bad; you'll need that brainpower just to figure out what's
going on.

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: Kevin Reynolds
Cast: Kevin Costner, Dennis Hopper, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Tina Majorino
and others
In WATERWORLD the darkest prophecies have come true: a radical change
of climate melted the pole caps, the world is flooded with water and
the few survivors live on makeshift water vessels. But if you thought
that would make people stick together you're wrong. Even in those hard
times some bad guys, the Smokers, only seek to draw profit from other
people's misery. They, too, have heard the legend of Dryland.
Supposedly there is one last place on Earth not covered with water,
but nobody knows where. To find Dryland they need a map that is
tattooed on the back of Enola (Tina Majorino), a little girl. The
Smokers try to get their hands on her, but they have to get past her
protector first: the Mariner (Kevin Costner), a mutated half amphibian
man.
There are disaster movies and movies that are a disaster. WATERWORLD
belongs to the latter category. When the movie hit the theaters this
was amply discussed. Surprisingly it was a box office hit in Europe.
Maybe over here more people want to see for themselves whether a movie
is really as bad as the critics say it is.
Considering the set and the costume you have to wonder why this movie 
was almost as expensive in the making as James Cameron's TITANIC. At
least TITANIC gives you an idea of where all the money has gone. The
set of WATERWORLD looks like the designers got it from scrap yards all
over the US, so what was so expensive? The costumes? Hardly, unless
the torn rags were designed by some highly paid couturier. Who knows.
Most of the set was blown up at the end of the movie. Who cares about
the resulting damages to the environment. 
There isn't much to be said about the acting. It's like watching a
group of amateur actors performing a play they wrote themselves. Not
even Dennis Hopper turns in a convincing performance. Had this been
the admission test for an acting school the candidate would have
flunked.
The same is true for Kevin Costner as the Mariner. Didn't it cross
his mind that he has outgrown the part of "youthful hero"? I guess
not. Otherwise he wouldn't have set out to ridicule himself with the
world watching. Lack of hair isn't very well concealed by just
letting the remaining hair grow longer, and having it pasted to your
head because it's wet all the time doesn't help either. At least we
get to admire the Mariner's gills. It is never mentioned exactly  how
long Earth has been covered with water, but a few centuries are not
long enough for such a mutation to occur. The term "ichthyosapiens"
is one of the few laughs the movie produces. Is that good or bad?
The less said about the two major female characters the better. They
only serve one purpose: eye-candy. Of course Helen (Jeanne
Tripplehorn) immediately offers to fish and cook for the Mariner if
he takes them with him and her foster daughter Enola will do the
same. The disastrous change of climate at least had the positive side
effect of ending women's lib for good. It's back to the idyllic days
of stone age. According to latest research that idyll wasn't what it
was cracked up to be, but that isn't very likely to influence the way
women are depicted in movies made in Tinseltown. The function of
women in movies very often is just to look good and serve the hero in
every way possible.
Logic isn't even tried in WATERWORLD. Even if all glaciers and the
pole caps were to melt not all the continents would be covered with
water. There just isn't enough water on Earth. It's preposterous to
assume that only a few small islands remain that can't be found for
centuries. But in spite of the fact that the Earth became a water
desert one tomatoe plant survived (for centuries, again ??). And were
did the chain smokers grow their tobacco? Probably from a swimming
factory with some replicators borrowed from Star Trek. Not to mention
the refinery needed to produce fuel for the Smoker's various rides.
There is more to discover on a closer look, but it's not worth the
trouble.
One of the biggest wastes of money in the history of movie making.
All existing copies should be burned in a big bonfire on Walpurgis
Night so the witches can have a decent dance. But that would hurt the
environment again.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://sites.inka.de/sites/darwin

Author
Allan Toombs
     WATERWORLD has suffered some very poor press recently.  It seems
journalists can't resist reference to its cost and many professional
reviewers reveal that either they failed to watch the entire movie
(lazy fools they're paid to do this!) or low IQs.  WATERWORLD rises
head and shoulders above the recent crop of action based blockbusters.
Batman Forever and Judge Dredd merely offer a distorted mirror view of
our crime-ridden urban society whereas WATERWORLD carefully constructs
a scenario where the rules of survival are very different.
     Kevin Costner's character, known in true Campbellian-hero style
only as "The Mariner," is the perfect survival machine for this
all-water environment.  He processes his own urine for the water
content (not as some reports state "drinks his own piss") and the film
opens rather daringly with a back-shot of Costner quite obviously
peeing into a container.  As a drifter he pilots a trimaran and trades
anything the sea gives up to him.  One of the director's real coups
here is to make a yacht chase as thoroughly dynamic on film as any
speed boat race.  Indeed a basic juxtaposition of the film is sail
power versus petrol burning craft.  The (for want of a better term)
baddies are called "Smokers" since they eschew windpower and as their
leader Deacon (Dennis Hopper) dispenses an endless supply of cigarettes
(not a comforting film for the pro-tobacco lobby this as the Smokers
are crude and stupid villains).  In this respect the film is far
clearer than the comparable MAD MAX II where both sides are fighting
over and using oil, yet a world oil-disaster is the cause of their
apocalypse.
     At one point in WATERWORLD there is a moment of pure surrealism
as "Peter Gunn" is played and Hopper and his cronies are pushed around
in the wheeless shell of an automobile.  This underlines the totality
of the water shooting throughout the film.  As you assume the mindset
of a water-bound existence areas of pseudo-solid ground become
surprisingly anachronistic and by the end of the movie when the
legendary "dryland" is found I viewed our world of greenery and
wildlife in a new light of enhanced beauty.
     This film definitely follows the currently dominant 3-Act plotting
model and divides thus: In Act 1 the Mariner arrives at the Atoll and
attempts trade but is captured for being a mutant.  As he is being
slowly put to death there is a mass Smoker attack which successfully
breaches the drift-peoples defenses.  In the ensuing mayhem Costner
accepts heroine Helen's bargain to provide escape for her and the
mysterious girlchild Enola.
     In Act 3 Costner rescues Tina Majorino's little girl from
Hoppers stronghold and because of this he and the remaining
drift-people find dryland, although the Mariner chooses to return to
the sea.
     It is Act 2 which distinguishes WATERWORLD from the its fellow
action adventures such as MAD MAX III; BEYOND THUNDERDOME.  There is
a biting sexual tension between Kevin Costner and Jeanne Tripplehorn
that electrifies the screen, her sudden disrobement amidst the
emptiness of the ocean is as astonishing as his rejection of her.  As
my partner Jackie put it "Kevin Costner beating up women and little
girls!"  Portrayed is no ordinary hero but a brutalised man stripped of
any culture by the need to survive.  Costner takes his anti-hero
further even than Mel Gibson's portrayal in MAD MAX II and I started
to wonder if there was a misogynist subtext to WATERWORLD.  Maybe "a
man's best friend is his boat and there ain't no woman good enough for
him" was the film's message?  Thankfully this was not so and the Mariner
turns out to be waiting for real love rather than the ancient bargain
of sex for shelter.  A thoroughly un-feminist middle then, as
Tripplehorn has nowhere to turn within the claustrophobic confines of
the small boat.  The destruction of Costner's gimmick-rigged trimaran
marks the end of this mid-section and amidst the wreckage left by
Hopper's ambush and abduction of the girlchild our antagonistic couple
finally make-love simply because there is no reason not to do so.
     WATERWORLD is quite a long movie (120 minutes) and it would
have been tempting for the production team to make cuts in this middle
chapter.  Thankfully if there were any cuts made they were from the
Mariner's commando style entry of the Smokers' stronghold (the
revelation of which is one of the films most breathtaking moments and
explains sloppy-criticisms of "where does the fuel for the jet-skis
come from" (Kaleidoscope--shame on you Radio Four)).  This sequence is
given a strange narrative air by Majorino telling the Smoker second in
command how "he (The Mariner) has killed lots of people (as Costner
silently dispatches some guards) and he is going to rescue me."  She
announces this as if it was free-form verse and the stealthy
fight-action gains a bizarre poetic edge.
     Finally WATERWORLD boasts a frisson as moving and yet less
sensationalistic than PLANET OF THE APES's Statue of Liberty buried on
the beach moment.  When we descend beneath the waves we are taken
through the watery remains of a modern city we feel not only the shock
of seeing our civilisation in ruins but Tripplehorn's character's
despair that Costner has no source of soil from dryland only what he
salvages.  To me this underlines the emotional surety of the film as
well as its highly involving projection of the future.  Like SEVEN
SAMURAI you are left wanting more, wondering where the Mariner will go
next and what he will find alone out on the ocean.

Author
Sue Roberts
Directed by Kevin Reynolds
Starring Kevin Costner, Dennis Hopper, Tina Majorino, Jeanne Tripplehorn.
     I enjoyed it. It's more than possible you will too!  If you like
action movies in the STAR WARS vein, don't take any notice of the
journalistic hogwash 'cos if you only see it on video you'll be kicking
yourself that you didn't get out and view all those unbelievable
special FX on the widest screen you could find.
     It doesn't take a movie buff to see what so inspired the company
about Reynold's vision that they weren't prepared to quit.  "The
Mutant" doesn't sound like a promising role, but Costner turns it into
one of his best characters. Hopper moves with alacrity to top his
performance as the "baddie" in SPEED.  The kid is great.
     Any message intended? Well it does rather capture how people in
the third world must feel, often on the knife edge of existence.  Kinda
makes you think.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
"Mad Max 2" recast with lots of water and too much budget.
"Waterworld" is, of course, one of the most reviled and sneered at 
pictures of recent times.  So fierce and scathing was the reaction to 
the picture, even before release, that it was virtually guaranteed to 
fail.  It alone may have terminated the career of its director and 
star, Kevin Costner.  But is it really that bad?  In this cynical post 
"Starship Troopers" era, this question deserves to be asked.
For those who came in late - The icecaps have melted and the entire 
world is covered by water.  Humans eke out an existence on the 
surface, on boats and in floating towns.  Kevin Costner is a mutant, 
shunned by society and forced to rely only on himself.  Strangely 
enough, in this film he also plays a mutant, shunned by society and 
forced to rely only on himself.  He ends up in possession of Jeanne 
Tripplehorn and her surly charge, a child with a map of dry land 
tattooed on her back.  There's also a bunch of pirates who, since they 
are lead by Dennis Hopper, must attack Costner psychotically until the 
end of the movie.  Purportedly this is to get the map, but actually 
it's just so something happens between sailing sequences.
There are a lot of things wrong with "Waterworld".  A decent attempt 
is made at swashbuckling action, with Costner biffing waves of pirate 
rabble.  Unfortunately the Kev-ster is far too stodgy and aloof to 
make a charismatic hero, although to be fair this is probably the 
result of him trying to appear tough and self-reliant.  There is much 
distressed leather and carefully draped rags for fashion.  Should 
Jeanne Tripplehorn ever get her eyebrows plucked, she will be unable 
to act at all.  Given the areactive chemistry generated between her 
and Costner, perhaps it would be best if she retired and sold the 
options on her name to some aspiring porn actress.  And towards the 
end the movie
But having said that, "Waterworld" is not all that bad.  The world is 
preposterous, but no more so that a lot of other films.  As said 
above, there's some decent action.  Dennis Hopper (whose career may 
not be destroyed by conventional weaponry) wheels out his violent 
psycho shtick again, but at least he is having some fun.  There's 
explosions, some nicely setup jokes, a reasonably paced first section 
and some good photography of scenes set against the wide empty sea.
"Waterworld" is no trashier, and no more ambitious, than "Independence 
Day" or "Jurassic Park" or a number of other Big Dumb Pictures (BDPs).  
So why was it reviled so much?  Certainly, if this was a B-grade film 
(directed by, say, Roger Corman) which instead of starring Costner, 
Hopper and Tripplehorn starred Charlie Sheen, Rutger Hauer and 
Tripplehorn, no-one would have batted an eyelid.  Unless we credit 
purely random forces, it may be that "Waterworld" didn't play the 
publicity game well enough and entered a market that was unreceptive 
to a BDP.  The extraordinary budget is another question.  While it is 
an issue that is largely transparent to the movie-goer, it is sobering 
to think that on some level instead of "Waterworld" we could have got 
another "Gattaca", "In the Mouth of Madness" and "Until the End of the 
World".  (Or another "Metropolitan", "Simple Men", "Jesus of Montreal" 
and handful of other independent pictures.) On this level, 
"Waterworld" is flagrantly wasteful, especially since the budget 
really doesn't show to any extent.
I would hesitate to recommend something that is so ephemeral.  But 
count this review as a small rehabilitation of "Waterworld".  While 
not a deep or great picture, the savaging it received was unjustified 
and may have prevented an actor/director from realising his full 
potential.  [**/ok] and a lesser Errol Flynn on the Sid and Nancy 
scale.
"Waterworld"
Released 1995.
Directed by Kevin Reynolds and Kevin Costner
Starring Kevin Costner. Dennis Hopper, Jeanne Tripplehorn Majorino.
--
Paul-Michael Agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au)
Postviews SF/F reviews & mailing-list at www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews

Author
Gharlane of Eddore
"Something is fishy in the state of Universal."
     About ten years back, with the unexpected success of MAD MAX and
THE ROAD WARRIOR, post-apocalypse nitty-gritty survival yarns became
popular at the movies.   We've always had movies of this nature; ON
THE BEACH, THE END OF THE WORLD, DAMNATION ALLEY, THE ULTIMATE
WARRIOR, and so on.
     To date, the most smoothly done were straightforward "haircuts" of
the classic western plot, like the lone gunman who comes to town and
protects the widow and the son against an evil organization, usually
one in possession of some critical resource, like water, feed range, or
a mining claim.  Most of these grew out of venerable, but solid hero
yarns like THE VIRGINIAN and SHANE.  (My personal favorite is a
Patrick Swayze movie called STEEL DAWN, which was fairly well made on a
small budget.)
     Now we have WATERWORLD, which again brings the traditional lone
gunman to town to rescue the young widow and her daughter.  (Well,
she's not a widow, and the kid isn't her daughter, but you
 get the idea.)  The lady is Helen, played by the stunning Jean
Tripplehorn, who isn't given a chance to be stunning, or even
interesting, by the mediocre and unimaginative script.  The child
Enola, played by Tina Majorino, is living proof that a child actor need
not be a bad thing to have in a movie; she outshines her material all
the way through.
     In simple, the scene is Earth, hundreds of years from now.  The
polar ice caps have melted, and somehow produced enough water to
inundate the entire planet.  The few remaining people live in boats and
floating colonies, and survive by trade, theft, or piracy.  Somehow an
oil tanker has survived the centuries, and its inhabitants, called
"Smokers," are able to keep gasoline engines running despite the dearth
of replacement parts and raw materials, so the Bad Guys have outboard
engines, and fast-moving boats, airplanes, and jet skis.
     Enola, found at sea as a young girl, has a mysterious map no one
can read tattooed on her back.  We suspect early on that it is the way
to the mythical "Dryland," the place where trees, crops, and animals
grow, and what plot there is hinges on Who Has Enola.  The psycho ruler
of the Smokers, the "Deacon," is trying to get her and find his way to
Dryland.  Played with typical self-lampooning, rug-chewing histrionics
by Dennis Hopper, "Deacon" is the only thing in the movie that's close
to amusing.  His performance is *almost* laughable, but there just
isn't enough there to be funny.
     The star (and a co-producer) is Kevin Costner.  He's playing an
un-named lone denizen of the sea, a man called the "mariner," who turns
out to be a gilled, water-breathing mutant with webbed feet.  Very
little is done with this.  The script ignores the ineffectuality of
gills in supplying enough oxygen to support a human metabolism; it
ignores the fact that even with both ice caps completely melted, much
of the Earth's surface would still be above water; and it ignores the
blatant impossibility of the cultures and technology shown.  (Canned
meat does *not* last for centuries; ammunition does *not* fire after
it's more than a few decades old; and so on, and so on...)
     I'm quite fond of Tina Majorino's previous work, very impressed by
Jean Tripplehorn's past accomplishments, and still speechless over
Costner's DANCES WITH WOLVES.
     But this movie could destroy the careers of anyone associated with
it!  This movie cost ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-TWO MILLION DOLLARS, and
there's *nothing* in it we haven't seen before, done better on only a
few percent of the cost of this turkey.  At 125 minutes of material,
this movie cost over ONE POINT FOUR MILLION DOLLARS PER MINUTE to
make.  The budget of this movie *could* have given us over THIRTY
movies; it could have paid for SIX YEARS OF A PRIME-TIME SF TV SERIES
WITH EXPENSIVE FX WORK, OR TEN YEARS OF AN SF TV SERIES WITH GOOD
DIGITAL FX.
     In sum, this movie is beneath contempt.  It has nothing new to
offer, it has a script that could easily have been bettered by the
people who write comic books for DC, and it spent more money than the
national budget of a small nation.
     If you *have* to go see it, see it on a four-dollar matinee.
Otherwise you'll find yourself sneering at you every time you pass a
reflective surface, for weeks.
Cast:      Kevin Costner, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Tina Majorino, 
           Dennis Hopper, Michael Jeter 
Director:  Kevin Reynolds 
Producers: Charles Gordon, John Davis, and Kevin Costner 
Screenplay: Peter Rader and David Twohy 
Cinematography: Dean Semler 
Music: James Newton Howard 
>From Universal Pictures 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by    Kevin Reynolds
Written by     Peter Rader and David Twohy
Cast           Kevin Costner, Dennis Hopper, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Tina
               Majorino
MPAA Rating    "PG-13"
Running Time   135 minutes
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (26JUL95)
     DIE HARD, BRAVEHEART, Batman, Spaceman.  Welcome to the Summer of
Acceptance, where even the *best* of the big-gun blockbusters must be
accepted on their own, flawed, faulted terms.  Overlong, overdone, or
overhyped, the ticket sales are the testimony to one simple fact: we're
*willing* to accept the flawed (but still spectacular) visions of
filmmakers like John McTiernan, Joel Schumacher, and, now, Kevin
Reynolds.  (Of course, we also embraced CONGO.  Go figure.)
     WATERWORLD floats, though not very high above the surface.  The
joys of the Most Expensive Movie Ever Made ($175M) include a breezy
tone, good humor, and *dynamite* action.  Director Kevin Reynolds
(ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THIEVES) has clearly beaten his playmates at
the punch bowl.  Sure, it's THE ROAD WARRIOR on water, but the
stunt-heavy set-pieces are more open and relaxed than anything we've
seen in DIE HARD or BATMAN.
     The first hour is the best, successfully suspending our disbelief
that a world covered with water would still support human life.  (And,
for that matter, would still support so many late-20th century relics!)
Into that picture drifts the Mariner (Kevin Costner), a wandering
mutant with slimy webbed-feet and gills that look like little vaginas.
He's at odds with everyone, including the Atollers (who live in harmony
on a man-made atoll) and the Smokers (who like to smoke and kill and
not necessarily in that order).  The Mariner just wants to be left
alone with his ecology lesson, but that proves difficult after he
befriends a little girl (Tina Majorino) with a strange tattoo.
     WATERWORLD starts to sink in the second hour, as the film begins
to feel less and less "finished."  The logic problems are the worse,
ranging from a casual deep-sea dive that offers no mention of
decompression--much less the dangers of tangled support cables!--to
the return of a patchwork airship that looks better suited to
GILLIGAN'S ISLAND than THE ROWED WARRIOR.  Skipper!!  The second hour
also marks the deterioration of the FX, particularly in the matte
department.
     Another albatross is the story, which is thin even by summer-movie
standards.  The plot is essentially an extended chase sequence with a
dash of characterization for Costner.  Numerous dead-end references
don't help, either, and suggest a number of cut scenes.  Hopper calls
for "the trackers," but we're only shown some shark fins in passing.
Tripplehorn talks about a "music box" as something "nobody else has
seen," but when did *she* see it?  And the list goes on.
     (The sexism doesn't make much sense, either.  Why not paint the
future as a place where the sexes are equal, and where the Mariner not
only thinks about selling his woman, but also himself??)
     Despite a production history more difficult than a James Cameron
shoot, the acting in WATERWORLD in surprisingly strong. Costner is
amazing as the brutish, brooding hero who is more prone to throwing
little girls overboard than to waxing wisecracks while killing. For
someone who has never been licensed as an action figure, he's also
*very* nimble on his feet.
     The villain, the Deacon, the bald-headed leader of the Smokers, is
played with customary gusto by Dennis Hopper.  (He's here because of a
new industry rule that requires the actor to play the villain in at
least *one* summer blockbuster a year.  His characterization for *this*
role: Southern accent.)  He gets upstaged, though, by young star Tina
Majorino (WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN).  She's plays the little girl with
the map on her back, and she's a scene-stealer.
     (Only Jeanne Tripplehorn--as the love interest--doesn't fit.  With
her shaved armpits and shiny hair, she's too clean-looking.  The
actress has spunk, sure, but she acts like she walked (trippled?) in
from another movie, entirely.  She's awful.)
     The other technical credits are a mixed catch.  The production
design is a winner, with the Mariner's trimaran as the coolest
contraption next to the Batmobile.  The lighting is inconsistent,
imagine that!, but the photography makes great use of the water, water
that's everywhere.  There's also the slight problem of
overscoring--this is not a story that needs swelling strings.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In 1989, when there seemed to be no end of films about psychotics
terrorizing people, one such film was made that really stood out.
Phillip Noyce made DEAD CALM which set the same basic plot on water.  A
seaman and his wife are menaced when they rescue a stranger from a
sinking yacht.  The seaman finds himself having to salvage the sinking
boat and use it to pursue his own boat to save his wife.  DEAD CALM was
interesting on an intellectual level as well as being a nail-biter
because the seamanship aspect added a whole new dimension.  Done right
a tired plot can be given new life by setting it on water and by having
it be about more than just a cliched situation.  DEAD CALM did it
right.  WATERWORLD did it wrong.  For a long time after the success of
MAD MAX 2 (a.k.a. THE ROAD WARRIOR) there were no end of films--mostly
on cable--about lawless post-holocaust worlds where good people have to
fight against roving bands of nasties against a backdrop of
deteriorating conditions.  WATERWORLD takes that tired, overused plot
and moves it to the water where it becomes a tired, over-used plot on
water.  There is not very much about seamanship in the new Kevin
Costner film.  It is there as a backdrop, but it never really becomes
part of the story.  All that is really in the plot are ROAD WARRIOR
situations set on the ocean, under the false assumption that to make a
scene interesting all that is needed is to add water.  If you get
excited by aerial shots of a line of thirty racing jet skis, this is
the film for you.
     The change of setting for this post-holocaust film raises it above
its cable and video peers, but not nearly enough to justify the
expense, logistics, and technical difficulties of shooting this
probable fiasco.  Even in a summer that has had only one or two decent
films, this one does not make itself memorable.  (Unless, perhaps it
will displace HEAVEN'S GATE as the American film industry's most
notorious mistake.)
     WATERWORLD is set some unspecified time in the future after global
warming has melted the ice caps and the resulting rise in water level
has flooded apparently all of the world.  Humanity has put to sea long
ago and has only mythic memories of the place called "Dryland."
(Sorry, there just is not THAT much water in the ice caps.)  People
have fallen prey to bands of nomadic pirates and it is a constant fight
for survival against them and the sea.  How this world evolved, how
people manage to find proper food, and how they get what is needed to
keep the old wrecks afloat are just some of the details that could have
added interest to the film.  But the most interesting aspects of this
world are nearly or completely ignored.  That the film concentrates
instead on how people fight and kill each other is more a
disappointment than a surprise.
     WATERWORLD is not without its moments of wry humor.  The pirates
are called "smokers" in part because they burn fossil fuels while the
"good guys" use more ecologically sound sails, but also because they
are rarely seen without cigarettes.  It wasn't long ago that it was the
heroes of the film who smoked.  Are we being told that the smokers of
our day, already somewhat social outcasts, are to become the pirates of
tomorrow?  Just a side comment: one wonders how good these cigarettes
would taste in a world where the land needed to grow tobacco is lost in
a forgotten past.  The leader of the smokers is the wise-cracking
Deacon.  Dennis Hopper plays this as the occasionally funny whacked-out
character that is pretty much his trademark.  Some of his lines are
funny and others just bizarre.  He is not great but he steals what show
there is from the ever-mild Kevin Costner playing the unnamed lead, a
mariner consistently upstaged by his own spring-loaded trimaran.  There
is not much more personality from female lead Jeanne Tripplehorn of
BASIC INSTINCT and THE FIRM.
     There are much better stories to make films with a budget of
$1,300,000 per minute of screen time of, and there are much cheaper
ways to make a comic book of a film that rates only a high 0 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Brian Koller
We all know the rap about Waterworld.  It was one of the most
expensive movies ever, but still turned a profit.  It is like
"The Road Warrior" but not as good.  It is overlong.  Well, all
these things are true, and there are other problems as well,
but the movie is still marginally good.  Just maybe it was worth
the cost after all.
Waterworld takes place in a future when the ice caps have melted,
making a planet a landless ocean.  To their credit, mankind has
survived, in limited numbers, on man-made atolls and on various
boats and ships.
Kevin Costner is the mariner, a loner who spends all his type on
his boat, and his interaction with others is purely to trade.
Visiting an atoll to trade his dirt (more valuable than gold),
Costner meets Jeanne Tripplehorn (JTH to save keystrokes) and
buys all her supplies.  He meets trouble at the colony, however,
and is discovered to a mutant, with gills behind his ears.
For some reason, he is then put in a cage and condemned to death.
Just as sentence is being passed (his cage is slowly descended
into a mudpit) a band of Smokers (described later) attack the atoll.  
In the carnage that follows, JTH makes a bargain with Costner: she 
will free him from his nearly-submerged cage if he takes her away 
on his boat with him. They also take her adopted daughter, who has a 
tattoo on her back that may be a map to dry land.
Much time is then spent developing the bonds between Costner,
JTH, and the child.  At first Costner considers dumping the both
of them overboard, especially the bratty child, but gradually they
become a family unit, protected by Costner.
The Smokers are after Costner's boat, because they want to kidnap
the child in order to find dry land.  The Smokers are led by
Dennis Hopper, who has apparently survived getting beheaded in
"Speed" although he has only one eye now.  Hopper is the comic
relief, necessary since no one else has a sense of humor,
and has several good lines.  His band of outlaws also supply
several good stunts with their willingness to perform dangerous,
often fatal maneuvers on speedboats.
The inevitable happens.  Hopper kidnaps the child and torches 
Costner's boat.  Some guy in a helicopter, that we met at the 
atoll early in the film, has good timing and rescues Costner and JTH.
The child is now on Hopper's battleship, annoying Hopper and 
his sidekick with her brave prattling about how her new stepdad 
will come to rescue her.  The odds that Costner would get to
the battleship, find the girl alive, successfully confront the 
villian, destroy the ship, and save himself and the girl are
about the same odds that a snowman would survive a Dallas summer.
But it happens.
Using the helicopter, the girl's tattoo, and some old National
Geographic maps, dry land is discovered.  Even more amazing,
no one else has settled it yet.  But the mariner does not want to
enjoy bliss on Eden, and returns to the sea.
The film is full of non-sequitors.  How can a large group of
Smokers continue to consume cigarettes when there is no arable
land to grow tobacco?  How can man develop gills in a few
hundred years when whales, seals, penguins etc haven't in millions
of years?  I could go on but you get the point.
But I shouldn't be too hard on the film.  The big budget delivers
good sets, stunts and explosions.  I like the movie's attitude
as well: humanity finds a way to survive despite the odds.
No, it isn't as good as "The Road Warrior", but don't tape 
over it just yet.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Eric Grossman
     For its first half hour, WATERWORLD looked as if it might be a
decent movie.  Huge sets and big action sequences offered some hope
that this film would not be the total disaster many had predicted.
Then the trouble started and WATERWORLD became a big, overproduced
bore.
     In this monstrosity, Kevin Costner plays the Mariner, a mutation
that is mostly man but has gills and fish feet.  The Mariner travels
the ocean on his tricked-out trimaran, trading, scavenging and fighting
off evil bad guys called Smokers.  The Smokers are lead by the Deacon
(Dennis Hopper) and their goal is to find a young child named, Enola
(vociferously played by Tina Majorino), who bears a birthmark that
holds the way to a mythic place called Dryland.
     The Mariner arrives at a huge atoll to trade pure dirt (a most
precious commodity) for hydro (fresh water).  While there he meets
Enola and her mother Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  When the Smokers
attack the atoll so they can capture Enola, the Mariner escapes with
the help of Helen and the young girl and the three head out into the
open sea.  At first, the Mariner doesn't want their company but he
eventually grows fond of them and together they set out to find
Dryland.
     Up until the point where the Mariner escapes the atoll, WATERWORLD
moves along in a swift, entertaining fashion.  After that, the story
slows to a crawl and all we are left with are the paper thin
characters.  Director Kevin Reynolds has a good eye but he and
cinematographer Dean Semler can't make up for the lackluster script by
Peter Rader and David Twohy.
     The only thing as bad as the writing in this film is the acting.
For his part, Costner never seems to find the right tone.  His Mariner
oscillates between a tough, uncaring anti-hero and a sensitive `90's
guy.    Hopper, playing yet another villain,  looks as if he
sleepwalked through his role as the Deacon.  He has a few good
one-liners but he is never menacing and that does not make for much
drama.  As the poorly scripted Helen, Jeanne Tripplehorn, no matter
what she tries, cannot make her character interesting.
 She stares a lot and yells often at the Mariner but we never really
 learn much about her and she does not give us much reason to care to.
     Technically, WATERWORLD is a great achievement, except I would
like to know why on a film that costs $175 million, things still look
fake.  Production designer Dennis Gassner's sets, which include the
atoll, a super-tanker and the trimaran give a sense of where some of
that enormous budget went.  The editing by Peter Boyle is slick and
James Newton Howard's score, while it is nothing memorable, works just
fine.  Unfortunately, despite all its technical bravado, WATERWORLD is
a lousy movie.
