Title
Review for Distinguished Gentleman, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN is a film directed by Jonathan Lynn,
from a script by Marty Kaplan.  It stars Eddie Murphy, James Garner, Joe
Don Baker, Lane Smith, Sheryl Lee Ralph, Grant Shaud, Kevin McCarthy.
Rated R, for language and mild sex scenes.
     THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN is Eddie Murphy's most likable film is
a long time.  Working for Disney's Hollywood Pictures, he brings a
freshness and sense of having fun to this film that have been missing
from his most recent Paramount vehicles, BOOMERANG and HARLEM NIGHTS.
Neither does he have a mean-spirited, violent action film this time out,
making it altogether easier to watch.  The script was written by Marty
Kaplan, a Disney executive who once wrote speeches for Walter Mondale
and who has some first-hand experience with Washington, D.C., and its
less endearing folkways.  Kaplan also edited the "Harvard Lampoon" and
has some pretty good academic credentials (Harvard, Cambridge,
Stanford).  The end result is an argument for the idea that a good
script is still important.
     The story, as you may know, concerns a small-time con man who uses
"name recognition" to get a seat in the U. S. House of Representative.
Murphy qua con man is probably as good an idea for letting Murphy be
Murphy as turning Robin Williams loose as the genie in ALADDIN.  He gets
to do almost all his shticks -- Jewish, ghetto Black, WASP, Black
without Soul (in the words of B. B. King in John Landis' AMAZON WOMEN ON
THE MOON), females of various sort -- without doing his fag-bashing
Effeminate Black (he limits his homophobia to one line: "You're not
going to pull any of that homo shit, are you?").  Murphy proved his
genius by selecting this script, then rest is more or less on autopilot.
     He also lets himself be backed up by a lot of talent.  Lane Smith
as the venal Chairman of a particularly venal Congressional committee
almost dominates the film; one reviewer pointed to Smith's performance
here as a comic variation on his role as Richard Nixon in the TV
miniseries, "Final Days."  Kevin McCarthy, as the insider superlawyer,
has a great scene instructing the freshman Congressman on the facts on
PACs and foundations and fundraisers.  James Garner puts in a cameo at
the beginning of the film.  Grant Shaud, who plays the neurotic director
on TV's "Murphy Brown," lights up the scenes he's in.  Victoria Rowell
is convincing as the public-interest lobbyist who helps open the new
Congressman's eyes to the slime around him.  Sheryl Lee Ralph was funny,
charming, and outrageous as Miss Loretta; we've previously seen her as
Robert DeNiro's mistress in the production of the same name.  Joe Don
Baker plays a major lobbyist with suitable disregard for the niceties.
And Sarah Carson is the beautiful, frosty staffer who has a unique way
of serving with satisfaction.
     It's not a perfect movie -- the transformation is more magical than
motivated -- but it offers some engaging fun as Murphy's character wakes
up to the corruption around him.  It's a movie that wants to take the
same moral ground as MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON, but only achieves
the lesser moments of Capraesque preachiness.  (Frank Capra III is
listed in the credits, for what that's worth -- irony if nothing else.)
It has energy and good intentions, and while the humor is not of the
laugh-out-loud variety, it is entertaining.  And it is less cynical,
more optimistic than the trailer had led me to believe, and that is a
relief.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
120 min., R, Comedy, 1992
Director: Jonathan Lynn
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Lane Smith, Sheryl Lee Roth, Joe Don Baker,
      Victoria Rowell, Grant Seud, Kevin McCarthy, Charles S. Dutton,
      Victor Rivers, Noble Willingham, James Garner, Della Reese,
      Sarah Carson
     Con man Eddie Murphy sees that the way to make money is to become a
congressman.  When Florida's congressman, James Garner, dies, Murphy
runs for his seat under name recognition.  When Murphy wins the
election, he starts to have a field day in Washington, D.C.
     1992 was a great year for fans of Eddie Murphy.  In the summer he
put out the film BOOMERANG (which is now on video cassette) and then
just recently he put out the film THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN, which is
up to his excellent standard.  I highly recommend THE DISTINGUISHED
GENTLEMAN to all fans of Eddie Murphy.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN a five.  THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN is
rated R for explicit language, adult situations, and adult humor.
     This film has been said by some people to be better than BEVERLY
HILLS COP.  I don't agree with that.  I still feel that BEVERLY HILLS
COP is Eddie Murphy's best film.  However, Eddie Murphy doesn't let his
fans down.  This film is written with the trademark Eddie Murphy humor
that keeps up from beginning to end.
     This is one of those films that it doesn't matter whether you see
it in the theater or not.  I think that a film always looks better on
the big screen, but with the amount that movies are costing these days
some people may want to wait for this film to be released on video
cassette.  However I recommend that big fans of Eddie Murphy see this
film in the theater.
     Eddie Murphy's supporting cast is excellent; especially Charles
S. Dutton ("Roc", ALIEN^3), who plays a minister (and has hair on his
head).  I think that Charles S. Dutton is an great actor and makes
anything that he is in better (he was one of the best things about
ALIEN^3).  Kevin McCarthy also added a lot to the film.
