Title
Review for Faro, El (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mac VerStandig
"Extraordinary people never die." A character murmurs this line in the
latest film from Argentinean director Eduardo Mignogna, "El Faro" (The
Lighthouse). These four words seem to capture the entire essence of this 108
minute masterpiece.
As the production opens, images of a photo album appear on the screen.
Memories. The family being pictured is happy. Then, less than ten seconds
later, the family is no longer. The parents are deceased, the two daughters
orphaned, and one crippled as a result of the car crash that will forever
change their lives. That is where the heartwarming story of these two
sisters commences.
The eldest sister's name is Carmela, but she goes by Meme. She is in the
position of having to take care of her younger sister, Anita, as Meme is
over 18 and legally responsible. Meme's only objective in life is to have
her own baby. That has made her a very sexual and edgy young woman. Anita is
a young girl who seems to live not thinking of tomorrow, but concentrating
only on today.
Where Meme has a direction in life, Anita has none. Meme is sinful, with
addictions to cigarettes, alcohol, and sex. Anita is young, pure, and
innocent. However different, they both are still orphans surviving on a day
to day basis, needing each other more than anything else in the world.
A classic plot would only damage, if not ruin, this fine film. The
Lighthouse is a movie that chronicles two young girls trying to make the
best out of a shattered life, and grow up while doing so. The interesting
element is that they slowly seem to grow closer and switch positions. The
film begins with Anita as young and immature and progresses until she is a
woman. Meme starts off responsible and almost perfect. However, her
drinking, smoking, unprotected sex and lack of care for a crippled leg,
slowly turn her into the one needing care.
To Eduardo Mignogna's credit, he didn't attempt any complexity in his choice
of filmmaking style. One of the simple, yet extremely effective things he
did do was to use black out and white out editing effects from time to time.
By allowing certain scenes to depart or arrive by fading, it gives the
audience that little bit of extra time they need to absorb the incredible
scenes they have just witnessed.
As much as the simplicity may be part of The Lighthouse's beauty, you also
must wonder what it really cost the film. It seems that the independent
budget may have denied the film some of the help it could have used. The
lighting is often poor, thus leaving otherwise beautiful scenes dimly lit.
The makeup seems to be sub standard as well. The one moment where Meme's
scar is shown is brief, probably due to the extremely fake look that it
carries. Inexcusably, the shot selection also left something to be desired.
Very rarely do we ever get to see the girls' faces, and the only lengthy
shot of either of them occurs when Meme has removed her shirt. But these are
all forgivable flaws, especially when you weigh their magnitude against the
magnificence of this film.
One of the most difficult tests that a film faces is the comparison between
it and another previous work that was successful. Ironically, the best movie
for "The Lighthouse" to be examined against was very much an opposite. The
1992 hit, "A League of Their Own" was unlike Mignogna's work, in that it was
a big budget Hollywood film with big name stars and an accomplished
director, Penny Marshall. However, by closely examining the common plot of
two sisters trying to look out for each other, and growing in the process,
you will find that the two films yield that one major similarity. In that
aspect, The Lighthouse is a far superior film. The character development is
far richer, and the emotional attachment of the audience is far greater. It
also claims the wonderful advantage of not having the typically predictable
Hollywood ending. This production seems to have passed that test with plenty
of room to spare.
The Lighthouse is one of the most touching, heartwarming, and enjoyable
films to emerge in years. It doesn't use any fancy effects, and it doesn't
feature any big names. It is not even in English. Instead it uses a simple
message and touches all that see it through that message: "Extraordinary
people never die."
