Title
Review for Daughters of the Dust (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Manish Malhotra
     There have been a couple of reviews saying two very different
things about this film.  It seems many people don't know the history of
the film, so I decided to post this.  This article contains information
about the film, its history, and a small review.  
     There was a special screening of this film at the University film
theater at Duke.  Before the movie started, there was a brief
introduction about the history of this film and why it was made.  The
film tells the life of people of an African tribe.  Years ago, they were
brought as slaves to America.  Many members of this tribe still live in
islands off the east coast near South Carolina and Georgia.  They have
preserved the original customs despite the fact that few miles across
the ocean lies America, with a culture totally different!
     These people have lived peacefully since the beginning of the
century.  However, their existence is now threatened due to encroachment
on these islands (I don't remember exactly what, perhaps commercial
construction and tourism development.)  The film is supposed to bring
awareness to the American society of what these people stand to lose if
that process continues.  A court case is going on regarding this dispute
of land of those islands.  There is an organization that is fighting for
the rights of these people and survives on charity money.  The director
(I think a woman) had many difficulties obtaining funding for the film.
It took her almost twelve years to complete the film.
     The language spoken in the film is the language that these people
speak.  I think it is English mixed with their original language.   I
would rather call this film a documentary.  Personally, I did not like
the film.  It is a very poorly made film and sustains the interest for a
while only because of its beautiful photography.  Oh!  I hate to think
that natural beauty of these islands would be spoiled because of
commerce.  Another problem I had with the film was its length.  It is
just too long for what it is trying to say.  The plots don't even have
to be there.  My feeling is that the director wanted to make a
documentary but for the reasons of collecting money (for the same
organization), she tried to make it more commercial by adding loose
plots of which she did a very poor job.  After half an hour of the film,
the audience begin to expect some plot to develop.  But all the plots
are left partially developed.
     If you decide to see this film, don't expect a film but think of it
as a documentary.  If you believe in helping this organization, then
think of the ticket money as the charity.  Enjoy the beautiful
photography and gain some insights into the culture of one of the
African tribes.   

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     The film is about a tribe of African people who used to be slaves
and are now living on a series of islands off the coast of South
Carolina and Georgia.  They have their own culture and speak a mixture
of American and their native tongue.  Their islands are now threatened.
The basic plot behind the film covers one family leaving their island.
     This is going to be a relatively short review because I only
watched half an hour before I got completely bored with this film.
Because of the number of people on the network who disliked this film
compared with those who liked the film I didn't go to see it when it
played at the art theater in my area.   One week later it came on public
television, and I figured I would try it for free.  I found the film to
be incredibly boring, and I am glad that I didn't pay any money to see
the film.   Someone who is really interested in these people might like
this film; I don't know.  On a scale of zero to five I give this film a
zero.  DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST is not rated and doesn't contain anything
objectionable.
     The cinematography was beautiful, and so were the islands.   I
think that this was the best part of the film, and why I lasted half an
hour.  The actors/actresses also did a great job.  The fault lies in the
writing.  The dialogue was boring and the people spoke in a way that was
hard to understand, so it took a lot of concentration to follow the
dialog.
     I don't recommend this film unless you are interested in a
documentary type film on these people or if you will watch a film just
for the photography.  The photography probably looks better in a theater
on a large screen than on a television screen, so if that is your reason
for seeing the film I suggest that you see it in the theater.  If you do
decide to go see DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST, I suggest matinee prices if
available.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST:        Produced in a 10-year labor of love by Julie Dash.
Highest recommendation.  Please go see it.  If you can't catch it on the
big screen, I noticed in the credits that American Playhouse helped
sponsor it, so it might pop up on public television sometime.
Plot/kick-off:        A black family which has been living pretty much in isolation
since the Civil War on Ibo Landing, an island off the coast of South
Carolina (near Kiawah and Edisto, for those who know the area) gathers
in 1902 for a last meal before leaving for the mainland.  Conflicts
between family members will be recognized by anyone who's felt the pain
of wanting to belong to something that's pulling itself apart.
Characters/acting:  Nana, the family matriarch, a "salt-water African"
(or a first-generation child?) who practices the old religion and wants
to stay on the island.  Her children, including the very Christian
Viola, who wants her to come to keep the family together, and Yellow
Mary, the richest of the family, outcast for being raped and becoming a
prostitute.  Nana's grandchildren, including Iona, who wants to stay
with St.  Julien Lastchild, the surviving Cherokee of the island
swamplands, and Eula, pregnant by either her husband or a white rapist.
There are other important characters whose names I didn't catch,
including a citified photographer, commissioned to capture on film the
family's last hours on the island.  I covet his photographs.
Cinematography/FX: Possibly the most uniquely beautiful movie I have
ever seen; certainly in my top 5.  From the gnarled trees with Spanish
moss to the water laying off the beach and shining in the tidal pools,
from the girls in their white cotton dresses running and dancing, to the
close-ups of conversations between Nana and her grandson-in-law in the
graveyard, and between Eula, Yellow Mary and Yellow Mary's friend:  the
deceptively simple episodes are layered together to make a rich, complex
masterpiece.
Score/Sound:  Not much sound, other than the voices in conversation and
sometimes in song; the background noise is formed by the water lapping
on the beach and the ever-present wind
Violence:  None, except the grandson-in-law's taking a board and
smashing up some of his grandmothers' religious symbols, in rage that
neither they nor he were able to protect his wife Eula from rape.
Language:  No profanities that I recall, but people who haven't heard
Gullah (the patois of English with Yoruba/Ibo intonation and grammar
spoken by blacks on islands off the Carolina mainland) before may take a
few moments getting adjusted to it before they can really follow what's
going on (subtitles in the beginning of the movie help), and there were
a few moments of speech which even I couldn't follow near the end, and I
heard Gullah off and on growing up and in college.
Analysis:  One of the best movies I have seen in years.  Maybe the best;
it will take me a while to absorb it, not that it can all be taken in at
one sitting.  Dash is a genius.  This is not some mundane
feel-good-and-forget-it flick, but there are moments which are --  I
can't express it in words without trivializing it -- uplifting,
cleansing, empowering.  It's like a series of poems, pictures and short
stories, interwoven in an outcircling spiral dance, with all parts
touching somehow.

Author
Daniel Barrett
     My wife and I saw DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST this weekend, mainly on the
strength of a previous review in this newsgroup (#1377).  The reviewer
called this "one of the best movies I have seen in years -- maybe the
best."  Well, here's a contrasting point of view:  DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST
was the *worst* movie we have seen in a long time!
     The "story," if you can call it that, focuses on a black family in
1902.  The people are preparing to leave their life on an isolated
island and travel north to join mainstream society.  The central theme
is that of "old versus new": the old traditions of the African
ancestors versus the new culture of the modern (read: white) world.
Various members of the family deal with this dichotomy throughout the
movie.
     With this much information, you essentially know the whole plot.
The "old versus new" theme is systematically beaten to death over a two-
hour period.  The characters are flat and develop little if at all.
Various subplots surface but go nowhere.  For example, early in the
movie, we watch a secret love note get delivered by a Native American to
one of the black daughters.  The Native American and the love affair are
barely mentioned for the rest of the movie, until he rides in at the
end.  As another example, there's the mysterious pregnancy of a central
character, and her husband's anger over not knowing whether or not he is
the father.  Virtually every scene involving this subplot is identical
-- the husband mopes around, gets angry, etc.  So many missed
opportunities....
     The movie's major flaw is that the dialogue is not understandable.
Although everything is spoken in English, it is an unfamiliar dialect
that was 75% unintelligible to us.  This is unforgivable in a modern
movie, and very naive on the director's part.  You can't expect people
to appreciate a movie if they can't understand the words.  This was
particularly pathetic during the climax, in which one of the family
members delivers an impassioned five-minute speech while the others are
held in rapt attention.  We couldn't understand a word of it.
     A second flaw is that some parts of the movie are unnecessarily
obscure.  For example, a central character, "Yellow Mary," is constantly
accompanied by a white woman.  During the movie, this companion laughs,
smirks, runs on the beach, and very occasionally utters a word or two.
Her presence, as far as we could tell, is completely unexplained.
     There are a few aspects of the movie that were adequate.  The
overall "feel" of the unity of the island family was well-communicated.
The hired photographer (making a record of the family's last days on the
island) was an enjoyable character.  And the island photography was
above average.  Finally, I suspect that people who are already involved
in this particular area of Black history might find other enjoyment in
the film.
     My wife and I love "art" films and non-mainstream movies, but this
one was poorly directed and quite boring.  DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST is a
dud.
Dan Barrett -- Dept of Computer Science, Lederle Graduate Research Center
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA  01003  --  barrett@cs.umass.edu
