Title
Review for Black Rain (1989)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     A store near me sells a watch that comes with five watchbands of
different colors and five watch faces to match.  The ad says it is five
different watches in one.  The works, of course, remain the same.  You just
change some superficial outer trappings and the ad would have you believe
that you really have a different watch.  At times I think that the American
film industry thinks that same way.
     The story of BLACK RAIN was a good one at one time.  A cop is trying to
bring a mean and violent criminal to justice.  The cop screws up and his
prisoner escapes.  Now he has got to go out into the hostile environment to
bring the creep to justice again.  Fortunately, he gets someone to work with
him.  Unfortunately, he and his new partner can't stand each other.  But
working together for a common goal, against all odds, they learn to respect
each other and finally get the creep.  But they have also learned an
important lesson in human understanding.  Yes, Hollywood has once again
remade RED SUN, RED HEAT, 48 HOURS, BEVERLY HILLS COP, and by now probably a
dozen other films that have that same plot, give or take a detail.  I will
give whoever first wrote that plot some credit, it would have been a good
plot if it had been used once.  Too bad it has become such a popular
standard that good filmmakers like Ridley Scott feel they can get away
filming it again and calling it a new story.
     Now let's get down to a few of the specific details for BLACK RAIL.
In this case, the hostile environment is Osaka.  The main cop is really two
American cops.  One is Nick a dishonest but basically good cop sleazily
played by Michael Douglas.  Nick's close shaves are many but always
figurative--he seems to be able to go for what must be an entire week with
the same two-day growth of beard.  And if the Japanese think Americans are
barbarians, Douglas's character more than justifies the viewpoint.  The
other cop is played much neater by Andy Garcia.  They stumble onto a Yakuza
execution in New York City and nab a major Japanese hood.  However,
escorting him to Osaka turns out harder than they expected.  So they find
themselves in a strange city in which they do not speak the language,
escorted by a dour-faced Japanese detective, Masahiro (played in a nicely
understated manner by Ken Takakura of THE YAKUZA).  The story is really
about how Nick and Masahiro learn to respect each other and how with
motorcycle chases and gunfights Nick regains his self-respect and becomes
honest again.
     If such a hackneyed plot is to be turned into a watchable film by
anyone, it would probably be a Ridley Scott.  Scott has directed some good
films, though generally their weakness has been plot problems.  His ALIEN is
a very good film but almost entirely because of mood and great visuals, not
because it has a stellar plot.  Similarly, the visual sense of BLADE RUNNER
outdistances the plot by miles.  Scott's plots are acceptable (usually
better than for BLACK RAIN's) but it is the misty atmospheric feel of the
film that makes his work worth seeing.  Watching a Scott film is the health
equivalent of smoking a pack and a half of cigarettes.  Virtually every
scene seems to have smoke or smog in it somewhere.  He has smoggy scenes of
New York, smoggy scenes of Osaka, smoky steel refineries, smoky police
departments.  But even if he is starting to do the smoky bit a little too
much he has a fresh eye, particularly for accenting the alien in an alien
culture.  His Osaka is a Japan we have rarely seen before, from neon buses
to smoky (of course) pachinko palaces.
     I will give BLACK RAIN a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale as an atmospheric
travelogue.  It was worth the $3 I paid just to see a different view of
Japan.  I figure the plot comes along free, and that was just a bit more
than what it is worth.

Author
Greg Goebel
* I've always had ambivalent feelings about Ridley Scott's movies -- they
always seem to be more style than substance, but, then again, they usually have
a LOT of style.  (As another critic said of BLADE RUNNER:  "The package is so
pretty that you don't really care there's nothing inside.")
     And so it is with his latest effort, BLACK RAIN.  In this film, Michael
Douglas is Nick Conklin, a tough and abrasive NYC cop who is under suspicion of
having skimmed off some of the loot confiscated in drug busts.  By chance he
happens two witness a pair of murders; he captures the murderer, who turns out
to be a Japanese Yakuza gangster who is wanted in Japan.  The Japanese request
extradition, and Conklin and his partner take the gangster back to Japan, where
they are immediately bamboozled by fake  Japanese police who spirit the
gangster away.  Humiliated, Conklin sets out to recapture the gangster.
     Okay, except for the Japanese element, this sounds pretty much like a
standard cop flick, and that's precisely what it is.  The story line has an
indifferent predictability, and the dialogue in places is so hackneyed that
it's embarrassing -- particularly as the movie evolves into the classic "buddy
cop" scenario, as the bad-mannered Conklin develops a rapport with a
tight-assed Japanese cop.
     The movie tries to draw strength from culture clash, but unfortunately,
while I have little doubt that technically its depiction of Japan is correct,
the Japanese seem not to be humans that you can understand, like, or hate, but 
simply latter-day oriental stereotypes that may not be as offensive as those of
WWII propaganda films but aren't any more interesting.  (I have to admit,
however, that it might prove difficult to give any depth to characters in the
short time of a movie when the cultural barriers are so high.  Then again, all
the American characters hardly seem to have much more dimension.)
     If all this nitpicking makes BLACK RAIN sound like a terrible film,
forgive me, since it would be a gross exaggeration to say it was.  In some
scenes, Scott demonstrates that sharp sense of cinematic style that is the
saving grace of his pictures -- his depiction of Japan at night are BLADE
RUNNER for real, showing off his ability to turn reality into science fiction.
I would say that your expectations should be set properly:  BLACK RAIN is
nothing extraordinary, but it is reasonable light entertainment if you are in
need of such.

Author
Randy Parker
        BLACK RAIN has all the trappings of a hit movie.  Its director is
Ridley Scott, best known for ALIEN and BLADE RUNNER.  The movie was
produced by the red hot team of Stanley Jaffe and Sherry Lansing, who gave
us THE ACCUSED and FATAL ATTRACTION.  The lead role is played by Michael
Douglas, a proven box office draw.  With this line-up, it should come as no
surprise that BLACK RAIN is as slick as the beaches in Alaska.  But
unfortunately, while it looks great on the surface, BLACK RAIN is empty at
the core.
        Douglas plays Nick Conklin, a street-smart New York detective.
Andy Garcia plays his partner, Charlie.  Together, they're assigned to
deliver a vicious killer to the police in Osaka, Japan.  But at the
airport, their prisoner escapes, and they're forced to stay in Osaka to
recapture him.  The movie offers loads of gritty and gory action, while
also exploring the culture clash between the American detectives and their
Japanese counterparts.
        Conklin is your generic, macho tough guy.  He drives a big
motorcycle, wears black leather, and doesn't like to play by the rules.
And therein lies a major problem with BLACK RAIN: the main character is not
only unlikable, but also an uninspired regurgitation of Dirty Harry and his
imitators.
        Andy Garcia is appealing as Charlie, but unfortunately his
character is woefully underdeveloped.  Kate Capshaw provides unnecessary
window-dressing in a small supporting role.  The stand-out is Ken Takakura,
a Japanese superstar appearing in his first high-profile American film.  He
plays the conservative, Japanese detective assigned to baby-sit the
American cops.  Takakura showers his character with depth and conviction,
but there's only so much he can do with the limited screenplay.  The movie
invests far too much energy into its cops and robbers plot and far too
little into character development.
        The real stars of BLACK RAIN are the stunning direction and exotic
setting.  BLACK RAIN is the first American production to be filmed in
Osaka, Japan's third largest metropolis.  The city streets are crowded and
bustling with life.  The night-time is pierced by more neon than you'd find
in Las Vegas and Times Square combined.  Ridley Scott captures Osaka's
excitement and intensity with a strong eye for composition.  His lighting
and shadow effects are exquisite and live up to the finest film noir.
        The movie's problem is that it asks us to take it seriously as a
character study and as a cross-cultural comparison.  But on those levels,
BLACK RAIN is a washout.

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
Film    :  Black Rain
Director:  Ridley Scott
Starring:  Michael Douglas, Andy Garcia, Ken Takakura, and Kate Capshaw
     You may be familiar with another Scott film: BLADERUNNER.  BLADERUNNER
was taught and suspenseful.  The sets were perfect.  The mood was indelible.
The characters were distinctive and the acting was superior.  Years after
seeing the movie (even only seeing it once), images of the film come to mind
easily.  In short, it was an evocatively stylish film.
     Although BLACK RAIN shares some of those attributes, it's very far below
the standard set by BLADERUNNER.  Still, the film is interesting, as much for
its failures as its successes.  The cinematography is superb.  The film shows
Japan as a *very* foreign country.  The three lead characters are well above
average in their portrayals of flesh-and-blood people.  And the
directing/editing is excellent.  With all those things going for it, you may
well wonder why reviewers (including this one) have generally found this film
substandard.
     One reviewer even criticized Michael Douglas merely for taking on the role
he plays in this movie.  That critic felt Douglas was capitalizing (literally
:-) ) on the current wave of dislike/fear/scorn of all things Japanese.  Other
reviewers have also taken pot shots at the story line.  The movie deserves this
treatment from reviewers.
     You see, there were so many possibilities here.  We could've seen an
exploration of morals that transcend cultural bounds.  Looked at the definition
of good and bad.  Explored the way that different societies deal with violence
and scum.
     What we get instead is an action movie with a xenophobic view of Japan.  A
cheap shot.  A waste of talent.  We are tantalized with glimpses of what the
movie could've been.  The one theme that is actually explored is the
universality of honor.  But we only get little shimmering glances of
intelligence in a film that could've delivered magnitudes more punch.
     So what's it about, you ask.  Well, it's about America vs. Japan.  It's
about the utter lack of comprehension and the contempt that Americans have
about the Japanese.  It's about scum, violence,  and honor.
     Two American policemen journey to Japan with an extradited Japanese
scumball.  The scumball is being returned to Japan courtesy of the U.S.  But
the Japanese police don't get their guy because of, uhm, a handoff problem.
The rest of the film pits the Americans against the Japanese as they attempt
to recapture the scum.  And herein lies the central problem of the movie.
     Do we get to see how the Japanese handle the scum of their society?  Do we
see how the well-established, well-understood hierarchy within the Japanese
police works when apprehending criminals?  Do we learn *anything* from the
Japanese?  Hell no.  They're portrayed as, well, inept.  Formal and inept.
Ritualized and incapable.
     It's up to the Great White Hope.  And, in case anyone in the audience has
trouble picking up on facial expressions and body language, the screenwriters
make sure that we hear Douglas and Garcia (the two Americans) voicing
unrestrained contempt for the Japanese.  Racism.  Not just lack of
understanding.
     The language and the attitude communicated contempt, but I'm sure that was
just supposed to explain to us how very far the Americans would have to travel
to cross over the cultural bridge.  The screenwriters would sincerely protest
their script being called racist--they probably thought it was exactly the
opposite.
     Where the scriptwriters went wrong was in the foundation of the story:
that there would need to be a Great White Hope to save the day in Japan.  That
an American maverick, with complete disregard and contempt for a foreign
culture, would come to respect exactly *one* Japanese man.  And that this would
be symbolic and would somehow let the film off the racist hook.  Nope.  As 
beautifully communicated as some of the moments are between Douglas and 
Takakura (the one Japanese man shown in a favorable light), those moments do
not redeem the movie.
     So it's flawed.  Very fatally flawed.  But it's captivating, and there
are about ten minutes of truly fine ensemble acting.  If you're offended by
the kind of racism that reviewers criticized in MISSISSIPPI BURNING, don't see
BLACK RAIN.  It's got the same type of problem.  If you are a Douglas fan,
you'll probably (but not necessarily) like this film.  If you like Ridley
Scott movies, you'll probably be a bit disappointed.
     Having read the reviews of BLACK RAIN, my own decision was to wait for it
to come out on video.  I'm sure it was more visually satisfying on the big
screen, but I'll sacrifice that in exchange for a $1.88 rental in many cases.
This is one of them.  (And it's probably even worth $3.00.  :-))

Author
Steve Miller
Capsule:  A streetwise superman from the NYPD loses a prisoner upon delivery in
Japan.  While tracking the prisoner down, he finds time to point out some basic
flaws in Japanese society, break a number of laws, witness the death of his
partner and reaffirm the fundamental superiority of western man.
     Michael Douglas is a great actor, capable of range and depth.
Unfortunately, he exhibits neither in Ridley Scott's deeply bigoted film,
BLACK RAIN.  Douglas and his detective partner from New York witness a killing
of and by a Japanese man.  They capture the killer, but are not allowed the
"collar" for themselves.  Instead, they are ordered to return him to Japan,
where he is a wanted man.
     Nick (Douglas) resents his orders, but complies, partly to avoid the
scrutiny of the "suits," who are investigating him for theft.  Upon arrival in
Japan, Nick loses his prisoner to members of Japan's organized crime, disguised
as local police.  Understandably upset, he offers to help in the prisoner's
recapture.  The local police are cool, but courteous, and drag Nick and partner
around as "observers."  Unhappy with that limiting role, Nick bends, breaks and
otherwise nullifies the rules under which his hosts expect him to behave.
     A local detective, whom Nick calls "Mass," since he apparently cannot say
(any more than I can spell) his real polysyllabic name, follows Nick, trying to
keep him out of trouble, while the Japanese police attempt to do their jobs.  
     Further summation of the story would be spoiling, so I won't go on.  The
point, of course, is that Nick is a stranger in a strange land.  As such he is
naturally open to some culture shock.  Being a headstrong cop, Nick responds by
clinging to his own culture, his own ways and by refusing to consider local
customs as options.  The film thereby sets Nick up for a catharsis; some point
must come when he confronts the inappropriateness of his New York bred methods
when they are transplanted to another country.  When Nick is forced to watch
the murder of his New York partner, that moment has clearly come.  Surely, he
must search his soul, finally to take the advice Mass has given him, that he is
"part of a group," and should "consider the Japanese way."  Surely.  Surely....
Nah...  .
     The Japanese way never gets a chance, even though this is Japan.  Nick
finally solves his problems (and some of those he creates for Mass) in a Rambo
fashion; very American.  When the climax came, and Nick refused to admit his
errors, the film changed from interesting to maddening.  He is never made to
confront his own biases, or his own shortcomings.  Instead, fate plays along
with him, granting either victory or good excuses for failure (i.e.  the local
police let the bad guys get away).
     Now, as anti-Japanese as this film is, it is nonetheless a stunning piece.
Scott's vision of Japan is a mirror of his future city in BLADERUNNER.  It is
atmospheric, high-tech and pays its bills by the megawatt.  Visually, this is
great stuff.  And, if one is fond of the street-smart-cop vs.  The Great Big
Machine kind of story, one might like BLACK RAIN.  Not this one.  If once, just
*once*, it had seemed that Nick gained something of value by trying the
Japanese way, I might feel different.  But it didn't, so I don't.
     BLACK RAIN is a brilliantly directed, visually gripping film, with a good
story and some terrific action.  Sad to say, those features will probably
make it one of the highest grossing works of self indulgence and bigotry
of the year.  4 out of 4 for execution, 2 out of 4 for artistic honesty.
-- 
Steve Miller, New York Law School '92 (NO! '91!  I go during the Summer now.)
Big Electric Cat Public UNIX
..!cmcl2!hombre!dasys1!srmiller
