Title
Review for Top o Nerae! (1989) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Gunbuster / Toppu o nerae! ("Aim for the Top!") (1989)
A movie review by Serdar Yegulalp
Copyright 1997 by Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Transcends its juvenile source material to become a really unique
and powerful anime about love, growth and loss.
GUNBUSTER started silly, then grew and grew until it reached a climax that
knocked the wind out of me. The audience I was with expected a lightweight
girls-and-big-robots story, but they got seriously rocked back on their
psychic heels during the three-plus hour course of this remarkable anime.
GUNBUSTER tells the story of Noriko, a young girl hellbent on piloting mecha
for Earth's space navy. From the opening scenes, she has a long way to go:
she barely even knows the controls -- it's like one of those war-movie
sequences where the novice pilot has a crib sheep taped to the windscreen).
But the coach -- named, appropriately enough, Coach -- sees that she has
determination, and nourishes that thoroughly. Noriko eventually befriends
two other pilots: Yuriko, who plays a "big sister" role to her, and Jung
Freud, a Russian girl who is at first a rival, and then an incredible pillar
of strength in the later part of the movie.
As they get into the thick of combat, a new element comes into play: time
dilation. A mission which takes only five minutes subjectively causes six
months to elapse on Earth. This isn't new, but the way the movie handles it
is unique: the time-dilation effect causes Noriko to remain the same age
while the others, especially "big siser" Yuriko, age relativistically.
Ultimately it's Noriko who becomes the big sister, in a perversely brilliant
set of psychological twists, and has to summon her own strength to save the
ones who helped her before. This is the movie's greatest asset: it takes
cliched notions and then slowly turns them inside out over time, revealing a
genuine core of emotion we didn't suspect was even possible.
The long, drawn-out final chapter of the movie is some of the most
emotionally harrowing time I've spent in front of a screen. The filmmakers
letterboxed the final third and filmed it in *black and white* -- extremely
unusual for anime, of course, and with the net effect that we concentrate on
the characters and their climaxing dilemma, and not the pretty scenery.
And then we come to the coda scene, which is almost as jaw-dropping as the
closing shots of 2001 or PLANET OF THE APES. I will not describe it -- but I
will say that it must be seen in context, after the agony and anguish of the
previous segments and the cosmic upping of the ante have come and gone.
