Title
Review for Picture Perfect (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael Redman
So here's the deal: Kate (Jennifer Aniston) is hungry for advancement in her
advertising career but can't get ahead. The owner of the agency tells her that
he's reluctant to put her in charge of a major campaign because she still has
a college lifestyle, isn't head-over-heels in debt and doesn't owe her soul to
the company store.
To look more traditional she fabricates a fiance by claiming that the stranger
with her in a photo is her intended. As the lie becomes more complex, she is
forced to produce him at a company dinner. Locating Nick (Jay Mohr), she
entices him to pretend that they are involved.
The romantic comedy is predictable which is to be expected, but the surprise
is that our star is so cold and unfeeling. Nick is obviously taken with her,
but she treats him like dirt, preferring Sam (Kevin Bacon) who is only
attracted because she is promised to someone else. Nick's naive love in the
face of her manipulations is embarrassing and difficult to watch.
Aniston (from television's "Friends") is fetching, has some almost-humanizing
mannerisms and does a fine job of almost falling out of her clothes, but is an
unsympathetic heroine. Along with the rest of the cast, her character is just
a step above one-dimensional.
As with "My Best Friend's Wedding", the gentlewoman is conniving and hatches
her schemes to get what she wants without regard to the feelings of others.
Then everyone lives happily ever after. Let's hope this model of womanhood
dies a deservedly early death.
(Michael Redman has written this column for a long time and will spend Monday,
the night of the shooting stars, lying on a remote beach under the open skies
awaiting the cosmic skyshow.)
[This appeared in the 8/7/97 "Bloomington Voice" Bloomington, Indiana. Michael
Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Ben Hoffman
If you are looking for a romantic comedy such as we used to get in
years long gone, this is it.  However, don't stop reading: PICTURE
PERFECT is modern in every way.   Given a cast that can do comedy,
screenwriters Arleen Sorkin & Paul Slansky & Glenn Gordon Caron
have come up with a sprightly, fast moving movie.
Kate (Jennifer Aniston) is a beautiful young woman with an
endearing smile.  She would be a cinch for promotion at her job
except that her boss, Mr. Mercer (Kevin Dunn) promotes only those
who are married, have responsibilities and will not readily quit
the job.
In the office is the Lothario, Sam (Kevin Bacon) who needs the
challenge of a woman who is married, encumbered.  Kate has a crush
on him but as she is single, she does not stand a chance.  Back at
home, Mama (Olympia Dukakis) keeps bugging her.  She wants a
grandchild.
To the rescue comes Darcy (Illeana Douglas) a friend and office
colleague who has the brilliant idea of taking a picture of Kate
and some handsome man at a party and having Kate pretend he is her
guy.  That should make the boss happy.  It also makes Sam happy
because now that Kate is engaged to be married, she falls into the
category that he likes.   Kate, for her part, likes this
arrangement because it has gotten her Sam.
Things begin to heat up when Kate has to produce, get off the
dime.  Everyone wants to meet her boyfriend Nick (Jay Mohr).  To
this end she offers to pay Nick to come to her city and pretend he
is her fiance.   But Nick has taken a liking to Kate . . . and who
can blame him?   He comes to her town but refuses to play her game
. . . and the comedy really takes off.
      Aniston is a delight to watch.  She is currently in TV's
FRIENDS and is scheduled to appear in several upcoming films.  Jay
Mohr is very handsome and personable.  You remember him from JERRY
MAGUIRE.  He will appear shortly in SUICIDE KINGS.  Kevin Bacon
was in APOLLO 13 as well as in many other films in as many
different kinds of roles.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Kate Mosley was a highly creative, but relatively unsuccessful
employee of Mercer Advertising until her friend fixed her up with a
fiance.  With a fiance, she is believed by her boss to be less likely
to leave town to go to work for one of his competitors and hence
reliable enough to work on the big Gulden's mustard account.  Afterall,
it was her idea that snagged the client in the first place.
     Now she has a fiance, Kate has become attractive to the office
wolf.  Kevin Bacon, with the best hair in the movie, plays a hunk known
as Sam Mayfair.  He does little apparent work and spends most of his
time romancing women who are already involved.  Kate tells him that,
"you're always going to be the guy at the restaurant, who, when he gets
what he ordered, decides he wants what the other guy has instead."
Commitment is Sam's greatest fear, and dangerous liaisons his prime
turn-on.  He is even more handsome than Kate is beautiful so they seem
eminently well matched.
     Thanks to Nick, her fiance, she wins both the account assignment
and Sam.  But there is a tiny problem.  Nick is a facade.  He lives
only in a picture taken almost by accident when she met him at a
wedding.  Their life together, immortalized in the photo of their
chance encounter, has no basis in reality.
     Written by Arleen Sorkin, and Paul Slansky and Glenn Gordon Caron,
the script of PICTURE PERFECT takes the typical romantic comedy formula
and puts enough spin on it to make it fresh.  The intelligent dialog
has plenty of funny one-liners, but the film's beauty revolves around
the effective character development of the lead.  Kate's would-be
lovers and her challenges at work make for an involving tapestry.  As
directed by Glenn Gordon Caron, the director of the excellent but
relatively unknown CLEAN AND SOBER, the film focuses everything on Kate
and lets her set the show's pacing.
     Kate is played by Jennifer Aniston, a star of SHE'S THE ONE and
the TV series "Friends."  With her terrific looks, her happy and
vivacious demeanor and her tenacity, Aniston gives a compelling
performance as a hyperactive career woman, while making Kate an
incredibly likable character.
     The show opens with a semi-shocking sequence, the upshot of which
has Kate throwing out the guy with whom her mother had fixed her up.
(Kate's mother is played with great gusto by Olympia Dukakis.)  "I feel
like I can be honest with you," says the guy as he is being shown the
door.  "You should ignore these feelings," she replies before she shuts
the door.
     Kate's best friend, Darcy, played in a minor role by Illeana
Douglas, has been "married since birth."  Darcy is the one who devises
the fake picture stratagem.  Their boss, Mr. Mercer, played with a
cherubic smile by Kevin Dunn, is full of advice based on his career.
"You dress for the job you want, not the one you have," he lectures
Kate as part of his explanation of why she was not chosen to be on the
Gulden's account.  But shortly thereafter he sees the infamous picture,
and Kate's career skyrockets.
     Kate at first resists, but most of the show finds her playing her
fake love life for all it is worth.  Her fairy-tale boyfriend and she
have an intricate imaginary life together.  As expected, the big
complication comes when she is asked to produce Nick, underplayed with
a big shaggy-dog look by Jay Mohr.  As anyone who has studied comedy
knows, this means that Kate and/or Nick will fall in love with the
other.  How that plays out makes up the last half of the film.
     Toward the end the story turns bittersweet.  The inevitable scene
where Kate tells the truth is clumsily written and delivered.  The
ending itself is exactly what you would expect from a typical romantic
comedy.  One would have wished that the writers could have come up with
something fresher.  A hard edged surprise ending would have been better
but would probably have been dropped after the first test screening.
Even if the ending is a disappointment, Kate is a fun person to hang
out with for a couple of hours.
     PICTURE PERFECT runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual
situations and language.  The film would be fine for kids around twelve
and up.  I recommend the film to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Roger Rubio
PICTURE PERFECT
Directed by Glenn Gordon Caron
Starring Kevin Bacon, Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Olympia Dukakis
Jennifer Aniston has a terrific smile.  Too bad it wasn't used more in
this movie.
PICTURE PERFECT is about a 28 year old woman named Kate (Jennifer
Aniston) who is having trouble in both her career and in finding a
potential mate of whom both she and her mother (Olympia Dukakis) would
approve of.  Kate's boss doesn't want to promote her because he believes
she has no real commitment to her job.  She also can't seem to find the
right person through regular dating.  So she fixes her efforts on Sam
(Kevin Bacon), a man who is not interested in a woman unless she is
unavailable.  Kate attends the wedding of a friend, at the behest of her
mother, and there she meets Nick (Jay Mohr), a videographer.  In order
to make Kate's boss think she is more committed to her job, Kate's
friend Darcy (Illeana Douglas) gets people to believe Kate is engaged to
Nick.  Kate, thinking she can use this situation to get Sam, manipulates
and uses Nick to that end.  Nick starts to fall for Kate regardless, and
in the end Kate realizes she wants Nick instead.  Complicated for a date
movie?  You decide.
This movie is supposed to be a romantic comedy, but it comes off as a
romantic situation.  I felt as though there should have been some
commercial breaks somewhere in the middle.  It wasn't because the
director Glenn Gordon Caron was a television director before he became a
film director.  It's just that this movie was not endearing enough to be
a romantic comedy.  There are a few scenes which are endearing, but not
enough to carry the entire movie.  A romantic comedy has a gimmick that
makes it work: in PRETTY WOMAN it was a hooker with a heart of gold; in
WHEN HARRY MET SALLY it was two lovers from "just friends;" in GREEN
CARD it was a marriage of convenience.  In PICTURE PERFECT, the gimmick
is a lie to get what someone wants.  The execution of that gimmick is
where the overall problem with this movie lies.
I saw right off the bat what this movie was trying to be.  Have you ever
seen the remarriage comedies of the late 30's and early 40's?  Some of
the best known are THE LADY EVE starring Barbara Stanwyck and Peter
Fonda, THE PHILADELPHIA STORY starring Audrey Hepburn, Cary Grant and
Jimmy Stewart, and IT HAPPENED ONE NIGHT starring Clark Gable and
Claudette Colbert.  These are movies about a woman who is getting
"married," either explicitly or implicitly, to one man, but winds up
spending most of her time with another man.  What she finds out during
the course of the film is that she really belongs with the man she spent
most of her time with and not with the man she is supposed to "marry." 
This formula for a genre was discovered by Stanley Cavell and is
detailed in his book PURSUITS OF HAPPINESS.  It was clear to me that
this movie was trying to be a remarriage comedy.  It falls short in a
few places.
The best modern-day execution of a remarriage comedy I have seen in
recent years is THE CUTTING EDGE starring Moira Kelly and D. B. Sweeney.
Moira Kelly's character, Kate, spends most of her time with D. B.
Sweeney's character, Doug, training for ice-skating championships.  Kate
is engaged to be married to Hale.  Notwithstanding explaining the whole
story, Kate spends most of her time with Doug, believing she is in love
with Hale.  She eventually ends up dumping Hale.  D. B. Sweeney had a
lot more screen time than Jay Mohr did in PICTURE PERFECT, and Hale took
a backseat to the Kate-Doug relationship.  It was easier to see why Doug
would fall for Kate in THE CUTTING EDGE.  In PICTURE PERFECT, more
screen time is devoted to Sam than Nick, and not enough time is devoted
to Nick in order to understand his character.
Nick barely has anything to do with the story; he just comes in when
it's convenient to do so.  I found it hard to see how he would help this
woman who is just using him for her own ends.  I also found it hard to
believe he would take her back at the end.  If the story committed more
time to Mohr's character, I may have been able to see why he would fall
in love with her.  But as the story stands, Nick seems to be a little
stupid.  Stupid with love?  I don't believe it.
I am sorry to say that PICTURE PERFECT is run-of-the-mill Hollywood
entertainment.  The talents of Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Kevin Bacon,
Olympia Dukakis, and Illeana Douglas are put to meager use in this
movie.  On the other hand, I guess you could say that it is the perfect
date movie: the kind where you can pay more attention to the date you
brought to the movie rather than the movie itself.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The preposterous plot goes something like this:  a young lady who
works in an advertising agency (Jennifer Aniston) is told by her boss,
in so many words and with witnesses present, that she won't get any
further in the firm because she (a.) isn't married and (b.) isn't plan-
ning to have kids.  Instead of contacting a lawyer, to investigate her
options-- or a hairdresser, to get those damn bangs cut-- she perpet-
uates this story about a fiancee she doesn't have (Jay Mohr, the guy who
fires Tom Cruise in JERRY MAGUIRE), so she can get promoted *and* get
into the pants of a co-worker (Kevin Bacon, looking almost forty) who,
get this, is only interested in her if she's attached to someone *else*.
All of which, duh, leads to a romance with the faux boyfriend, who, I
guess, finds her meticulous lying to be rather endearing.  Calling Dr.
Laura!
     Okay, okay, I'll admit that Ms. Aniston has better comic chops than
I expected.  And a few scenes are justifiably LOL funny.  (And, at
times, unintentionally so.  I don't know when I laughed harder:  at the
statement that Aniston and Illeana Douglas are playing characters sup-
posedly the same age, or when the ghoulish-looking Kevin Bacon is refer-
red to as a "really beautiful man.")  Pure nonsense, but it's easy on
the brain.  And, for some of us, *exceptionally* easy on the eyes.
Director Glenn Gordon Caron (LOVE AFFAIR, CLEAN AND SOBER) parades Ms.
Aniston around in a number of low-cut dresses, including one garish
green gown that looks like a leftover from ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH
SCHOOL REUNION.  Guys, if your girlfriend picks this week's flick, just
sit back, relax, and enjoy that woody.

Author
Steve Kong
Is Picture Perfect a good date film? No. But, it does redeem itself in some
ways.
Jennifer Aniston ("Friends") is Kate Mosley. Kate is an unmarried woman,
with all kinds of bad luck with men. Kate wants to get promoted in her
company, but her boss tells her that he wants a woman that is married and
that has something to tie her to the company (mostly big bills.) Kate's
best friend, and co-worker, shows Kate's boss a picture that Kate took at a
wedding. The picture is of Kate and a photographer, Nick, (Jay Mohr, from
Jerry Maguire.) Kate's best friend "sells" Kate, and wins Kate a promotion.
Instead of going straight to the boss and being honest about it, Kate plays
along for two reasons: 1) to keep the promotion and 2) to win the heart of
some jerk (Kevin Bacon, who is looking a bit old for the part.) This is the
silly plot that Picture Perfect uses. And at times, if you can forget about
how silly the plot is, the movie is actually pretty funny. Aniston has good
comic timing, and it shows in Picture Perfect.  The film is somewhat
confusing up until the end there is never a real feeling to who Kate really
wants, Nick or the jerk. 
I'm not sure who the costume designer was, or if there even was one, but
the outfits that Aniston wears during the film are horrible. And I'm not
the type to talk about outfits either, but these dresses were completely
awful. The one that was worst, I'm not sure if it was intentional or not,
is the green one that she wears to the first dinner party after her
promotion. The next one, that destroys her figure is the brown one that she
wears to the wedding where she meets Nick.
Next to the silliness of the premise and the bad costumes, Picture Perfect
is a mediocre film, that could have been shorter. The whole movie has a
sitcom feel to it, and that's a hard thing to shake off, especially if your
star is widely recognized as a sitcom actress. If you have time, catch
Picture Perfect on video, but it's a definite skip for seeing in the theatres.

Author
Randy Turgeon
Kate (Jennifer Aniston) is having some problems. It appears the
twenty-eight year old is not happy with her slow progression up the
company ladder, and her love life apparently leaves something to be
desired. She learns that her problems are related, as the owner of her
advertising agency, Mr. Mercer (Kevin Dunn), explains to her that her
single status does not bode well with the company. Her freedom would
make her more likely to leave the company, taking clients with her.
    A solution presents itself in Nick (Jay Mohr), a wedding
videographer who Kate meets through a coincidence and gets
photographed with. Kate's boss, Darcy (Illeana Douglas), uses the
photograph to fabricate a wedding engagement between Kate and
Nick. Kate is at first repulsed by the idea, but after getting
immediate positive results, she pursues it.
    Her first task is to convince Nick to go along with her plan. The
actual plan consists of Nick pretending to be her fiancé. At a
dinner with Kate's bosses he will provoke a fight and they will break
up. She meets Nick to propose the plan. He accepts.
    Kate's new status brings unexpected results in other areas. The
office bad boy, Sam (Kevin Bacon), who wouldn't give Kate the time of
day, now does. Now that she is engaged, he pursues an affair with her,
as doing so would destroy her good girl image, hence Sam's sudden
interest.
    Things start to fall apart for Kate, as it becomes apparent that
Nick really likes her, and does not wish to break up with her. After
some provoking Nick does oblige, but problems continue for Kate. It
appears Sam is no longer interested now that she is available. Or
maybe Kate does like Nick, but "reconciliation" will force her to
admit her lies to her employer. Adding to her mess is the constant
prying of her mother (Olympia Dukakis), who wants her to get married
and settle down.
    There is a scene in this movie where Jennifer Aniston is (from the
waist up) only wearing a bra. It made me chuckle because it is the
only time in the movie when she actually wears one. There is enough
cleavage in this movie to satisfy Russ Meyer. It's like the director
said 'Well, we know the story is formulaic and the performances aren't
that great so, what the heck, let's show Jennifer's assets as often
and as uncovered as humanly possible to keep the PG rating."  Quite
frankly it's insulting.
    I don't think Aniston is a competent enough actress to carry a
movie. She did a decent enough job in Ed Burns' "She's the One"
because it was a smaller and supporting role, and she just doesn't
deliver the goods effectively in this movie. Her performance was not
convincing.
    Unfortunately, as far as romantic comedies go, this movie adds
nothing new to the standard formula for these types of movies. The
film is similar to "My Best Friends Wedding" in a sense that the
leading female character is actually quite vindictive and due her
actions, gets no sympathy from me when things go awry. I didn't care
for how quickly Kate puts down Nick's profession by explaining that
videotaping weddings wasn't glamorous enough for her co-workers.
 At least "My  Best Friends Wedding" changed the formula a bit and had a
somewhat surprise ending. No such luck with "Picture Perfect". 
    Every plot occurrence can be spotted a mile away, including a
couple that really made no sense. After everything Kate had done to
prove her loyalty to her company, why would she blindly throw it all
away when she should have made sure that Nick would even talk to her
first, let alone consider a relationship? Was quitting her job a
prerequisite to making amends with Nick? Throw in the fact that I
don't think Nick and Kate spent enough time together to even warrant
that rash of a decision. I believe that Kate liked him, but liked him
so intensely that she was willing to throw her career away? I doubt
it. And what of the ending scene at a wedding where the entire
congregation feels it necessary to stop everything and stare at the
couple? Are mass groups of people simultaneously that interested in
total strangers? Well, I guess of the congregation consists of movie
extras and the strangers are the movies two lead stars, then that
would make sense.
Kate........................Jennifer Aniston
Nick........................Jay Mohr
Sam........................Kevin Bacon
Mercer.....................Kevin Dunn
Darcy......................Illeana Douglas
Rita........................Olympia Dukakis
Written by Randy Turgeon, February 26, 1998.
Visit my movie reviews! www.xtdl.com/~canran

Author
Scott Renshaw
PICTURE PERFECT
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Kevin Bacon, Olympia Dukakis,
Illeana Douglas, Kevin Dunn.
Screenplay:  Arleen Sorkin & Paul Slansky and Glenn Gordon Caron.
Producer:  Erwin Stoff.
Director:  Glenn Gordon Caron.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     [Overheard in the rec room at the Old Chestnuts Rest Home for
Over-Worked Film Premises in Boca Raton, Florida:]
     MISMATCHED BUDDY ACTION COMEDY:  Hey, D. H., I hear we may be getting
a new arrival soon.
     DIE HARD-IN-A-CONFINED-SPACE THRILLER:  I don't know, Buddy, it feels
pretty cramped around here as it is.
     BUDDY:  Well, this one definitely needs a break.  The name is
Romantic Comedy Where a Couple Pretends to Be Together for an Ulterior
Motive, or some such.
     BUDDY:  Yeah, and she's been a busy little thing.  CAN'T BUY ME LOVE,
GREEN CARD, PRETTY WOMAN, HOUSESITTER...why, she even showed up in a cameo
already this summer, in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING.  The latest is called
PICTURE PERFECT, starring that darling little Jennifer Aniston from
"Friends."
     BUDDY:  She plays an unmarried advertising executive named Kate
Mosley who is feeling pressure from every direction to settle down.  Her
mother (Olympia Dukakis) nags her, her boss (Kevin Dunn) suggests that
only "stable" employees will get the choice assignments, and the office
Lothario (Kevin Bacon), who gets Kate all hot and bothered, is only
interested in girls who are unavailable.
     BUDDY:  You guessed it, D. H.  Enter Nick (Jay Mohr), a nice young
fellow with whom Kate had a picture taken at a wedding.  Everyone is led
to believe that Nick is Kate's long-distance fiance, which works out fine
until Nick becomes a minor celebrity and everyone wants to meet him.  So
Kate finds Nick and asks him to play the part.  And predicaments ensue.
     D. H.:  Predicaments...ha!  Running through broken glass in bare feet
from armed terrorists, now _that's_ a predicament.
     BUDDY:  Yes, well...anyway, Miss Aniston is fetching enough in the
lead role, with that kind of frazzled charm Sandra Bullock turned into
stardom.  The script by Arleen Sorkin, Paul Slansky and Glenn Gordon Caron
has a few clever moments, and Caron's direction is well-paced.  What
really makes it worth a look is an engaging, low-key performance by Jay
Mohr as Nick.  It's uncommon to find an actor who can make earnestness
interesting, or who can make an audience root for him by sheer force of
his good nature, despite an under-written role.  And we know that's not
the only angle Mohr can work, since he did a fine job of playing a
completely slime in JERRY MAGUIRE.
     BUDDY:  The problem, as we both know, is that a script has to be
better than that to keep audineces watching when you know exactly how the
story is going to end.  It's only a matter of time before the two phony
lovers figure out they should be real lovers, and someone learns an
Important Lesson along the way.  Actually, everyone in PICTURE PERFECT
learns an Important Lesson along the way, undergoing an 11th hour
conversion so that there isn't a single moderately unlikeable character
remaining by the closing credits.  Only Mohr seems like a genuinely decent
person; everyone else reads the lines of a genuinely decent person because
the formula demands it.
     GRITTY, PROFANE CRIME CAPER (from the corner):  Hey, will you two
shut the *&%$ up before I blow you the *&%$ away?
     BUDDY:  Sorry.  Anyway, it's a cute enough little picture, but it
strains that thin premise to its limits.  She could certainly stand a few
months here.
     BUDDY:  You see, even though we seem completely different, I knew we
had something in common all along.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
Picture Perfect  * 1/2 . Directed by Glenn Gordon Caron. Producer Erwin
Stoff. Screenplay by Arleen Sorkin & Paul Slansky and Glenn Gordon Caron,
based on a story by Arleen Sorkin & Paul Slansky & May Quigley.
Photography, Paul Sarossy. Editing, Robert Reitano. Production design,
Larry Fulton. Music, Carter Burwell. Cast: Jennifer Aniston (Kate), Jay
Mohr (Nick), Kevin Bacon ( Sam), Olympia Dukakis (Rita), Illeana Douglas
(Darcy), Kevin Dunn ( Mr.Mercer), et al. A 20th Century Fox release.105
min. PG-13 (sex)
Jennifer Aniston (of NBC's "Friend's") has mostly TV credentials. Here she
makes her debut as the lead in a legit movie. The writers of "Picture
Perfect" also have a TV background. So does Glenn Gordon Caron, the
director and co-writer.
The first film feature Caron directed was the very good "Clean and Sober"
(1988), starring Michael Keaton. The second "Wilder Napalm"(1993) is said
to be a total fiasco, was shelved for some time, later hardly seen by
anyone. The next one was "Love Affair" (1994), the dismal re-remake of the
terrific "Love Affair" (1939) by Leo McCarey who had himself remade it as
the good "An Affair to Remember" (1957).
All this TV parentage may explain why "Picture Perfect" is really like an
extended sitcom -- except that sitcom episodes run well under 30 minutes
and don't make you suffer for 105. It may also explain why Ms. Aniston's
unremarkable, overkinetic (but not bad) performance is, in TV style, full
of close-ups of facial expressions. (There's also a plethora of bosom
shots).
All this may fill the screen but does not the story."PP" has a far-fetched
script that tries to pass for a romantic comedy that's neither comic nor
romantic. It is about Kate who has a middle position in an advertsing
agency. She comes up with the best way to hype a new mustard, yet while
Kate cuts it, she doesn't get put in charge of the account. The reason big
boss Mr. Mercer gives is that Kate is single, without obligations or debts,
therefore has no "stability" and could easily quit for another job. Mr.
Mercer adds that she dresses in nondescript casuals instead of "dressing
for the job."
At a very recent wedding Kate had casually met Nick in Boston where he
makes a modest but happy living by taking videos of weddings and such
occasions. Conveniently, days later Nick gets (I'll skip the details) his
fifteen minutes of fame on TV and tabloids. Kate also happens to appear
next to him in one of the hundreds of photographs of the wedding. So Kate's
colleague and good friend Darcy has the brilliant notion of giving Kate
"stability" by inventing a fiance: Nick.
Kate starts reinventing herself by appearing at a reception in an
eye-catching, chic (for some), very low-cut  dress. Her colleague Sam
(Kevin Bacon) is a rake who avoids unattached women, including Kate and in
spite of their mutual attraction. But now he finds the new, affianced Kate
both irresistible and attached. "I like you" he tells her at the party, as
his eyes glance at her breasts. These are outside the frame, the look is a
discreet fraction of a second. Cut  immediately to the new twosome in bed.
I have just mentioned three of the minor editing virtues of a film that I
find lacking in major ones.
Kate parades her new outfits in scene after scene. The plot thickens to the
texture of a  consommé: Kate arranges for Nick to come to New York, stay
with her, go to a dinner given by Mr. Boss in the couple's honor and then
have a fight with Nick and break her "engagement." It makes minimal sense.
In a big switch from his role in "Jerry Maguire" Jay Mohr plays Nick as a
sweet boy who, for much of his screen time with Kate, has the vacuous look
of a college student who doesn't quite get what his professor is saying.
If you fail to guess with certainty where the plot is going it is probably
because you expect certain developments involving Kevin Bacon (who also
shows good pectorals), since he is the single Big Name in the cast. The
fact however is that Bacon has a supporting role. This is an originality
and a red herring that constitute another of the film's small virtues.
More of them include the fleeting digs at the hypocrisies (as in phony
congratulations) and a couple of other depressing aspects of the business
world -- not that you don't get the same in politics, academics and
especially in showbiz. There is also irony in the crass dinner host who
assumes that Nick's videos are porno, and who with second-in-command sings
the praises of marriage. It must be a good institution since all husbands
and wives present are number 2 or 3. As in almost all of today's films, the
fuss about marriages feels like a joke.
The last virtue,  one increasingly common in pictures, is casting in top
roles actors whose looks are far from picture perfect, far from the old
canons of beauty and glamour.
Those are just about the only tasty crumbs in the dumb loaf of "PP." The
dialogue is flat, boring, uninteresting. Characters are woefully
undeveloped. Subplots are limited to giving Kate a widowed mother (a wasted
Olympia Dukakis) who owns or runs a hairdresser shop and is vociferously
anxious to see her daughter marry someone, anyone. The film does not
specify "Jewish Mother" but it does point to the stereotype. Curiously,
both Miss Aniston and Miss Dukakis are of Greek ancestry.
Arguing with Kate, Mom shouts with Mediterranean theatricalism "You are 28,
I am 56, I'm going to be dead soon." She was probably thinking "I'm really
66, and if there were good parts for older women I wouldn't have been
caught dead in this flat tire of a movie."

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Kevin Bacon, Olympia Dukakis, 
      Illeana Douglas, Kevin Dunn
Director: Glenn Gordon Caron
Producer: Erwin Stoff
Screenplay: Arleen Sorkin & Paul Slansky and Glenn Gordon Caron
Cinematography: Paul Sarossy
Music: Carter Burwell
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     As I've said before, predictability can often be a great asset for 
a romantic comedy.  So far this summer, we've had three very atypical 
entries:  'TIL THERE WAS YOU (where the man and woman don't meet until 
the end), ADDICTED TO LOVE (a revenge fantasy), and MY BEST FRIEND'S 
WEDDING (where not everything goes as expected).  Now, August ushers in 
PICTURE PERFECT, a harmless movie intent upon restoring formulaic 
comfort to the genre.  There's nothing remotely surprising about this 
movie, unless it's how embarrassingly bad the resolution is.
     For eighty minutes of PICTURE PERFECT's one-hundred minute running 
time, I found myself smiling quite often.  As obvious and unambitious as 
the film was, I actually liked it, and was prepared to file it into the 
"guilty pleasures" category.  Then came the horrible one-two punch of 
the climax.  I was flabbergasted.  My smile turned into a cringe.  There 
are times when a bad ending doesn't seriously damage a motion picture.  
This is not one of those.  All of the goodwill I had built up during the 
bulk of the film was replaced by irritation at the silly, contrived 
conclusion.  And the worst part is that the movie could easily have 
achieved the same resolution in a far more satisfactory manner.  
Apparently, director and co-screenwriter Glenn Gordon Caron prefers high 
melodrama to something more low-key.
     It's a shame, because the ill-advised finale puts a damper on 
Jennifer Aniston's first starring role in a major motion picture (we'll 
ignore LEPRECHAUN, which is probably what she'd prefer that we do).  
I've never been a big fan of Aniston in her TV series, FRIENDS, but 
she's very good in the role of PICTURE PERFECT's protagonist.  As Kate, 
she's smart, witty, and appealing, yet manages to convey a degree of 
vulnerability, uncertainty, and downright nastiness.  In short, she 
shows the beginnings of three dimensionality.
     Kate is a junior agent for Mercer Advertising.  She has a quick 
mind, but, even after she devises the tag line for a major ad campaign, 
she is passed over as a member of the account team.  The reason:  she's 
too much of a free spirit.  The boss, Mr. Mercer (Kevin Dunn), wants 
someone who's married and living in a house, not a single woman who's 
lifestyle mirrors the one she had when she was in college.  So, while 
Kate is venting her frustration in the lavatory (this one scene single-
handedly earns the movie a PG-13 rating), her best friend, Darcy 
(Illeana Douglas), concocts a story to advance Kate's career.  Using a 
photo of Kate with a guy named Nick (Jay Mohr), whom she only met once, 
Darcy spins a tale to her boss about Kate's impending nuptials.  Mercer 
immediately softens his stance and puts Kate on the team.
     Although Kate is initially horrified by Darcy's fabrication, she 
soon learns to appreciate its advantages.  A co-worker, Sam (Kevin 
Bacon), who will only sleep with married and engaged women, suddenly 
finds Kate irresistible.  Everything seems to be going right until 
Mercer absolutely, positively has to meet Nick.  Unable to string her 
boss along any longer, Kate travels to New England in search of the man 
in the photograph.  When she finds him, she offers him a proposition:  
she'll pay him $1000 if he comes to New York with her, takes her to 
dinner, then stages a public break-up.  Nick, who is attracted to Kate 
and is willing to jump at any chance to spend time with her, agrees.
     For the most part, PICTURE PERFECT has a nice, light romantic mood.  
Caron, who wrote for the TV series MOONLIGHTING and directed the Warren 
Beatty/Annette Bening remake of LOVE AFFAIR, clearly has a feel for love 
stories.  Early in the film, during a wedding sequence, the camera 
subtly captures the bliss of being in a couple and the loneliness of 
being single.  This idealized view of romance is then used as the 
springboard to the movie's central plot.  The movie ends with another 
wedding, but the less said about that, the better.  
     Aniston is ably supported by a group of fine actors.  Kevin Bacon 
is delightful as Sam, a man who enjoys one-night stands with unavailable 
women, then finds that he may be falling for Kate.  Olympia Dukakis has 
a few amusing scenes as Kate's overprotective mother.  Illeana Douglas 
is delightful as the effervescent Darcy.  And Jay Mohr is solid, if 
unspectacular, as Nick (some viewers may have difficulty erasing the 
memory of him as the oily agent from JERRY MAGUIRE).
     In general, I consider myself to be a defender of romantic 
comedies, even if they're not terribly original.  There's something 
refreshing about that kind of pure escapism.  Unfortunately, PICTURE 
PERFECT uses embarrassing contrivances to sabotage what should have been 
a pleasant excursion down a familiar road.  Still, even considering its 
flaws, I think a certain percentage of die-hard romantics will derive 
some satisfaction from this movie.  I wish I had been in that category, 
but PICTURE PERFECT makes a few too many missteps to earn my 
recommendation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Kevin Bacon, Olympia Dukakis, Illeana
Douglas, Kevin Dunn Director: Glenn Gordon Caron Screenplay: Arleen
Sorkin & Paul Slansky and Glenn Gordon
This girl says it all with her hair. Ms Aniston, one of T.V.'s popular
"Friends" would otherwise look ordinary without her healthy, silky brown
locks to toss from side to side. With her hair dominating the screen, I
couldn't help but wonder what conditioner or shampoo she uses, or how
her hair feels or smells. I wanted to caress it, comb it, stroke it --.
No matter how perfect Ms Aniston's hair, the same cannot be said about
her character. She plays Kate Mosley, a young advertising executive
seeking opportunity in a family oriented world of business. The boss
wants ties, roots, and loans to bind the person to the company. In order
to succeed Kate needs a picture perfect family. In order to get the
highly prized promotion she is forced to lie.
The lie, "I'm engaged. Here's a photo of the two of us."
The truth, "The guy in the photo is a perfect stranger"
A small lie only leads to a bigger one, when the simple truth would have
been a better option.
Greater love hath no man than one who is willing to humiliate himself
for the love of a woman. Nick (Jay Mohr), the perfect stranger in the
picture is entirely sincere with his love for Kate. His love carries no
lies, no tricks, and no false motives. He is willing to play along with
her self-destructive charade, up to the point where she chooses her
career over him.
Why is it that we can't see the people who really love us for who we are
until it's almost too late? I don't just mean fiancees and lovers, but
also family and friends. When Kate realises her mistake, it takes a big
heart to forgive her for her cruel actions, and an even bigger one to
accept her for her not so picture perfect trimmings.

Author
Justin K. Siegel
PICTURE PERFECT -- a film review by Justin K. Siegel
Of course I knew this going in. Why is it that whenever a TV-star
makes a movie it's always a romantic comedy, and then they say on
Entertainment Tonight or something, that they were "attracted to the
characters. They were really original."
Original?! Let me give you a run-through of PICTURE PERFECT: Character
A) Kate (Jennifer Aniston, from tv's FRIENDS), a smart, beautiful,
professional woman wants two things she can't have: a new job-title
and the love of her co-worker Kevin Bacon. Her boss will only give her
the job if she gets married and gets a mortgage and gets a lease on a
German sportscar, and Kevin Bacon pnly sleeps with married or involved
girls. WHat does she do?  She invents a fiance! Then when everyone
wants to meet him, she tells some poor schmoe she met at a wedding
that she will pay him $1000 to pretend to be in love with her for a
company dinner, and pick a fight with her at the end, thus breaking
the engagement but still being able to keep her job, since the guy
ends up looking like a jerk and she is the poor, defenceless
female. He, of course, goes along with it.
Gee, I wonder if they get together in the end. I've seen more original
stuff on the WB.  And better stuff too. PICTURE PERFECT also makes the
mistake of being _wayyyyy_ too long at 100 minutes, and expecting us
to like Aniston's character, who comes off as a cold, spoiled bitch.
