Title
Review for Now and Then (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     Let me just start by saying I'm probably not the best person in
the world to be reviewing a film about the coming of age of four
twelve-year old girls in suburban America.  I'm going to give it my
best shot--just bear in mind who you're dealing with here.
     The cutesy premise of NOW AND THEN is this:  Now ... Samantha
(Rosie O'Donnell), Teeny (Melanie Griffith), Roberta (Demi Moore), and
Chrissy (Rita Wilson) are gathering together to help Chrissy through
her pregnancy.  Then ... the characters are the same, only 25 years
younger, played by Christina Ricci, Thora Birch, Gaby Hoffman, and
Ashleigh Aston Moore.  The film plays out over the summer of 1970
(there's a whole lot more Then than Now), where the girls' perform a
seance that leads them to investigate the mysterious death of a 12 year
old boy, long since buried in the local cemetery.
     The girls also struggle with their blossoming sexuality, the evil
boys down the street, practical jokes on each other, female bonding,
and parental-driven teen angst.  It's kind of like THE BIG CHILL meets
THE GOONIES meets LITTLE WOMEN.  If this sounds corny to you already,
believe me, it's twice as corny on the screen.  Slathered in slapstick
humor and lots of female anatomy jokes, NOW AND THEN quickly
degenerates into an occasionally funny comedy with the heart of a sappy
melodrama about "growing up."
     There are plenty of pop culture references to 1970, most notably a
hip retro soundtrack, but unfortunately, not much was going on in
America in 1970.  After all, that's why they sent FORREST GUMP to
Vietnam.  So, to supplement the lack of character in the setting,
director Leslie Linka Glatter has given the film two things instead:  a
lot of celebrity cameos, and a lot of scenes of girls almost drowning.
No, it doesn't make sense, but at least it's distracting.
     I like to think I generally understand shows like "My So-Called
Life," but NOW AND THEN escapes me.  After all, anything featuring Demi
Moore as a novelist comes off as believable as, well, Demi Moore as a
novelist.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In a few respects, NOW AND THEN, is much like Rob Reiner's STAND
BY ME.  It is about four youngsters (age twelve) and their friendship.
The big excitement is that they are seeking to find out how Johnny, a
friend their age, died.  The part I enjoyed was that it was about
girls whereas STAND BY ME was about boys.  For a change, the girls are
given the chance to show they can act.
     Sadly, unlike the excellent STAND BY ME, not much else good can be
said about this film.  The girls meet at night at the cemetery where
the boy Johnny is buried.  This, in itself, is an unlikely scenario.  I
could be wrong but it strikes me as very contrived to have the girls
visit a cemetery at night. There they pledge to always be friends and
never lose track of each other.
     The film's title derives from the story about how the young girls
were THEN and what they turn out to be NOW.  Samantha as a young girl
is played by Gaby Hoffmann with Demi Moore as the adult, a novelist.
Teeny is played by Thora Birch and Melanie Griffith who becomes a
successful movie actress.  Christina DeWitt is played by Ashleigh Aston
Moore and Rita Wilson who becomes a housewife and has a child.
Christina Ricci and Rosie O'Donnell star as Roberta who becomes a
doctor.
     Flashbacks keep us informed about the "Then" and the "Now" but
nothing very interesting happens in the film.  The fine cast, all good
actors, are wasted on an uninteresting story where you find that you do
not really care what happens to them.  While some of the kids look
like they could look something like the grownups they are supposed to
eventually be, Christina Ricci looks nothing like Rosie O'Donnell.  The
big news is that Demi Moore is never nude in the film.   Is that a
first or isn't it?

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I like a good chick movie every now and then, especially if 
the chicks are of the attractive variety. That factor doesn't quite 
apply to NOW AND THEN, where the stars are four twelve-year-old 
girls -- Gaby Hoffman, Thora Birch, Ashleigh Aston Moore and 
Internet favorite Christina Ricci. I don't know if being the teenage 
girl most-lusted after by pedophiles is worth putting on your resume, 
but if you are one of the pedophiles, you'll head for the video store 
the second I tell you NOW AND THEN features a lingering closeup 
of Ricci in a training bra. The rest of you will probably head for the 
bathroom after reading that.
        NOW AND THEN also features the adult counterparts of 
the four girls -- Demi Moore, Melanie Griffith, Rosie O'Donnell and 
Rita Wilson. (Another note for you Internet pedophiles, this film 
tells us Christina Ricci will look like Rosie O'Donnell in twenty 
years. I'm sure that's a real ego-booster for the girl...) The four 
women reconverge in their hometown after being called there 
by Wilson, who reminds them of the pact they made as children 
to be there for d a problem arise.
        The four women only appear in the first ten and last ten 
minutes of the movie, with the main plot revolving around four girls' 
coming-of-age story. So it's a cross between IT and STAND BY ME 
(and it even has a subplot about a dead body), but it could never 
have come from the mind of Stephen King... barring an overdose of 
estrogen pills, of course. It could also be a cross between the 
nostalgic childhood feel of 1993's THE SANDLOT and the 
women-sticking-together ethic of STEEL MAGNOLIAS.
        Whichever of the four films most inspired NOW AND 
THEN, it comes off as an entertaining movie most of the time. The 
film is at its best when focusing on the curiosities of youth -- sex 
and seances, mostly. Ricci is a tomboy who has to tape down her 
overly-developing chest and finally learns the reality behind her 
mother's death. Birch has dreams of Hollywood. Hoffman's parents 
are divorcing. Moore is fat. And so on.
        And we get the obligatory boys-with-cooties and truth-or-
dare scenes here, along with the girls' odyssey of trying to learn the 
mystery of a cemetary tombstone reading "Dear Johnny." (I won't 
give away the mystery, except to say Dear Abby goes to great 
lengths to get rid of her competition.) They also learn to trust each 
other and distrust their parents. Interestingly enough, it's adults like 
Vietnam vet Brendan Fraser and waitress/psychic Janeane Garafolo 
who tell them not to trust adults.
        Since at least 80% of NOW AND THEN is spent in the past, 
the scenes at the beginning and end of the grown-up friends reuniting 
are ultimately expendable. The real attraction of the movie (especially 
for those Internet pedophiles) is those pubescent girls. I suspect the 
only reason Demi, Melanie, Rosie and Rita make appearances at all is 
for the sake of name recognition. They're prominently displayed on 
the front along with their twelve-year-old counterparts, making it 
seem like an equal-time story between past and present, now and 
then. But the movie should have just been called THEN. Forget 
about now. Adults aren't to be trusted.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Gaby Hoffman, Christina Ricci, Thora Birch, Ashleigh Aston Moore,
      Demi Moore, Rosie O'Donnell, Melanie Griffith, Rita Wilson
Director: Lesli Linka Glatter
Producers: Suzanne Todd and Demi Moore
Screenplay: I. Marlene King
Cinematography: Ueli Steiger
Music: Cliff Edelman
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     What is it about females bonding in graveyards?  First, we get the
climax of MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO amidst the quiet solitude of the
tombstones.  Now, two key scenes in this newest women's buddy film take
place in a similar setting.  Unless I'm very much mistaken, this is not
representative of a real-life trend.  The tactic of including these
sequences is symptomatic of the single major flaw suffered by both
films--a contrived artificiality that deadens any possible emotional
response to the characters or their situations.
     Of the two, NOW AND THEN is the worse offender.  Very little in
this film comes across as believable.  When individual moments work (and
it's usually just isolated "moments", not even whole scenes), it's
typically because they involve the kind minutiae anyone can dredge up
from their memories.  For example, consider the rather charming account
of a first kiss.  In penning this, screenwriter I. Marlene King probably
relied more on real experience than imagination.  Unfortunately, this
sort of personal insight is not the norm for NOW AND THEN's hopelessly
mundane script.
     The film opens and closes in the modern time frame.  There, we meet
adult versions of our four heroines:  Samantha (Demi Moore), an
emotionally unstable science fiction writer; Roberta (Rosie O'Donnell),
a down-to-earth, hard-working doctor; Teeny (Melanie Griffith), an
actress; and Chrissy (Rita Wilson), a prudish, pregnant housewife.  The
occasion of their reunion is Chrissy's impending blessed event.
     Between the modern-day prologue and epilogue, we are treated to an
eighty-minute flashback to the Summer of 1970.  There, we encounter
junior high versions of Samantha (Gaby Hoffman), Roberta (Christina
Ricci), Teeny (Thora Birch), and Chrissy (Ashleigh Aston Moore).  For
most of the film, these four are "investigating" the 1945 death of "Dear
Johnny", a young boy whose spirit they believe they have summoned
through an impromptu seance.  In the process, they learn things about
friendship, loss, and death.  Everything, from the overall arc of the
story to individual lines of dialogue, is too obvious.
     The four young actresses are all more impressive than their adult
counterparts, although certain casting choices left me scratching my
head.  As good as Christina Ricci is as Roberta, am I really supposed to
believe that she grows up (and out) to become Rosie O'Donnell?  This
goes beyond a reasonable suspension of disbelief.  At least the other
three transformations are acceptable.
     While the 1970s segments of NOW AND THEN are of the hit-and-miss
variety, the 1995 scenes are uniformly bad.  I had some interest in what
happened with the twelve year olds, but I didn't care about them at all
once they had grown up.  The "now" scenes feel much like an excuse for
four high-profile actresses to lend their names to this film.  At best,
their presence is superfluous.  Yet even had the film remained entirely
in the "then" time frame, it still would have been lacking.  There's
just not enough originality here, no matter what year it is.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
