Title
Review for Desperate Measures (1998)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
James Sanford
      Perhaps there are a few moviegoers who've been anxiously anticipating
their chance to watch Michael Keaton break his own thumb and operate on his
own wounded leg. Maybe these are the same unfortunate few who've dreamed of
the day they'll see Andy Garcia plow through an emergency room on a
motorcycle and get shot through the armpit. Well, folks, your ship has come
in: All this and much, much more await you in "Desperate Measures," an
astoundingly inept thriller that's easily the worst movie ever directed by
Barbet Schroeder ("Reversal of Fortune") and may well prove to be an
all-time low for everyone else involved with it.
David Klass' screenplay is set in San Francisco, although for all the
sense it makes Wonderland might have been a more credible locale. Garcia,
who has now played a cop as often as Teri Garr has played a dizzy housewife,
is cast as Frank Connor, a lawman obsessed with finding a compatible donor
whose bone marrow could save his dying son Matt (Joseph Cross). Jailbird
Peter McCabe (Keaton) seems to be the only one in the world whose marrow
matches, so Connor pulls strings and springs McCabe for a day on the
operating table.
But somehow everyone completely forgot that not only is McCabe a
psychotic, he's also an evil genius who earned his doctorate while in
prison. Who knew?! McCabe escapes, torches a few nurses, shoots some cops
and miraculously manages to hack into the hospital's computer system with
only a couple of keystrokes.
But McCabe's not smart enough to bandage a bleeding leg, which leaves a
trail for his pursuers to follow, or to realize that if you want to go
unnoticed in a medical facility smoking in the hallway is not the best idea.
While Matt's life hangs by a thread, Connor hunts down McCabe (who must
be brought back alive in order for theoperation to proceed), and "Desperate
Measures" blossoms into awe-inspiring absurdity, with random explosions,
ridiculous car chases down the least congested freeways California has ever
seen, and a few bizarre comic inserts from McCabe that are almost as funny
as, well, a bone marrow transplant. After about 100 minutes, Schroeder
simply stops the madness without bothering to give it any sort of proper
ending, perhaps figuring few viewers would bother sticking around for the
finale anyhow.
"Desperate Measures" also deserves special condemnation as one of the
ugliest-looking films in years. The entire picture is drenched in washed-out
blues and greys, as if Tri-Star didn't bother paying the lab bill to have
the visuals color-corrected. Certainly that would have been the easiest part
of this fiasco to fix: The rest of it is far beyond repair.
James Sanford

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Desperate Measures is a film that takes an interesting idea, adds
two great actors (Andy Garcia and Michael Keaton), a director who knows
what he's doing, and ends up giving the audience a lot of action film
cliches. There is so much potential here that it is a little upsetting
to see that the script misleads the film into a by-the-numbers formula.
As standard as it is, the execution is professional, and the acting
superb. I recommend it based specifically on these merits.
    Garcia stars as Frank Connor, a San Francisco cop whose son, Matt
(Joseph Cross), has leukemia and needs a bone marrow transplant. Through
a few illegal maneuvers, Connor learns that the only available donor
that matches his son is Peter McCabe (Keaton), a brutal mass-murderer
with an IQ of 150. McCabe agrees to the transplant, but only to be given
the chance to escape. Naturally, he does escape, and then Connor is
forced to fight against the local police (they are trying to kill
McCabe) in order to save the criminal and ultimately save his son.
    I've read that the story for this film is silly, but I
disagree--during a time of the year in which films bankrupt on new and
clever ideas are dominant, it's kind of nice to see something that is
high-concept. The problem here lies in the regression from good ideas to
overused action cliches. What begins with enticing dialogue between the
hero and the villain ends in car chases and roof-leaping mayhem. It's
not that these elements are purely bad, it's just that we've seen it all
before. There isn't anything new about these particular chase sequences
or roof-jumping stunts.
    I observed another large problem in character motivation. Most of
the film takes place in the hospital, after McCabe escapes. However,
instead of getting out of the building (which doesn't seem like it would
be as hard as getting away in the first place), McCabe sticks around and
takes hostages, almost as if he's trying to give Connor a chance to
catch him. Later, despite his high intelligence, McCabe does some things
that don't quite add up. Nonetheless, Keaton does a good job with the
character (he can say lines like, "I am immortal!" without sounding
dumb).
    Garcia is also good here, but he's given very little to do. Frank is
not an interesting character. The interactions between this man and his
son (Cross does an excellent job as the child) are moving, but Frank as
a character is little more than something to drive the plot. In the end,
we're rooting just for Matt. Marcia Gay Harden, who plays Matt's doctor,
has some good scenes but is ultimately not very interesting because of
the script. Near the start there's also a moment that bothered
me--McCabe warns Connor not to try and get inside his head. This scene
reminded me of The Silence of the Lambs, but neither the dialogue nor
Keaton can recreate the magic of Anthony Hopkins in the role of Hannibal
Lecter.
    There is, however, a lot to like about Desperate Measures; what I
liked most is the cinematography. Barbet Schroeder (Single White Female)
does some interesting things with camera angles and lighting, and the
set production is sharp and ominous. The film feels tight and organized,
but almost too organized, and often predicable. Because of the nature of
the film, it's possible to predict the outcome of the story after just
seeing the preview, although getting there is still entertaining.
    So, Desperate Measures becomes another entry in the long line of
thrillers. And, like most of them, it doesn't have a lot to set it apart
from the crowd. The execution is good, and the magnetic performers do a
lot to help it out, but these elements end up just keeping the film from
being unwatchable. Someone out there needs to make a shocking,
unpredictable film like this. With a sharper script, Desperate Measures
could have easily blown away the competition.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Director Barbet Schroeder takes a wide-turn at the genre section of
movie-making, and trades in his permanent place-card from the human
drama division, and punches up a DIE HARD (8/10)-type thriller for the
intellectually-challenged. 
PLOT:
A feisty police officer's nine-year old son has fallen gravely ill and
needs a bone marrow transplant in order to survive. The only donor
compatible to the child is Peter McCabe (Keaton), multiple murderer
locked up in jail. Agent Conner (Garcia) convinces Peter to redeem
himself by helping his son live longer. McCabe agrees. Once in the
hospital, McCabe escapes, and mayhem ensues. Ironically, detective
Conner must catch the fugitive, but not kill him, for his son's life
hangs in the balance. 
CRITIQUE:
Rudimentary thriller containing some suspenseful moments, many
implausibilities, a standard car chase, a solid performance by Keaton
as the highly enlightened killer, and a cool final scene. This movie is
not extremely original in any way, shape or form, but it does offer an
interesting launch premise, a relatively short run-time, and an even
pace of suspense and interest throughout. Michael Keaton's performance
is also very over-the-top and fun to watch, and of course, the
proverbial Andy Garcia playing "the suit" (I may be mistaken, but I
think Andy's last seven films have him garbed in a suit. Perhaps even
the same suit! Stretch your acting muscles, Andy! Loosen the tie,
dude!!).
Schroeder does not bring anything overtly stylish to the film, but does
maintain a non-stop pace of twists, turns and action scenes. The film
could've used a stronger "reality check" (Garcia asks other police
officers not to shoot Keaton's character in order to maintain his son's
chances of living, while sacrificing the lives of other officers in the
process.), as Garcia's character seems to break every law in the book
by the end of the film (Why couldn't you just shoot the guy in the legs
to slow him down? Just a thought.)
Overall, this film would not be a highly recommendable one by any
stretch of the imagination, but I guess it was some fun for what it
was, and it sure wouldn't hurt if you crashed out after a long day's
work, and needed something to join your brain in shut-down mode for an
hour or so. Keaton's performance is also enjoyable to watch, as is the
"suit's". Also, the final scene of this movie is one of the coolest
that I've seen in a while, so I guess you could always look forward to
that little tidbit of hipness. Otherwise, this film is like a wet fart
on a hot day. Satisfying as it goes along, but ultimately empty and
forgettable when it's over. 
Little Known Facts about the film and its stars:
The article "Inside the Mind of a Sociopath" that the Captain is
reading during the trip to the prison is written "by Michael Keaton".
Andy Garcia was born in Havana, Cuba, under his full name of Andres
Arturo Garcia-Menendez. Upon his birth, Andy apparently had an unusual
growth on his shoulder. It turned out to be a twin that hadn't fully
developed. "They just snipped it off, apparently," says Garcia. He's
been married to Maria Victoria (whom everyone calls Marivi), a fellow
Cuban émigré, since 1982, and vigorously guards her privacy and that of
their three daughters, Dominik, Daniella, and Alessandra.
Director Barbet Schroeder is a man. He was nominated as Best Director
at the 1991 Academy Awards for THE REVERSAL OF FORTUNE (7/10), and
played the French President in the Tim Burton movie MARS ATTACKS!
(6.5/10).
Writer David Klass' first produced screenplay was KISS THE GIRLS
(7/10).

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
'ER'. Wie kent deze ziekenhuisserie niet? Het hectische leven van de
dokters en verpleegsters wordt in deze populaire serie goed weergegeven
en in elke aflevering ligt er minimaal ייn persoon op sterven. Door het
kijken naar zo'n situatie stijgt je adrenaline-gehalte naar ongekende
hoogten, want je weet nooit zeker of hij / zij het haalt. "Desperate
Measures" speelt zich voor een groot gedeelte ook in een ziekenhuis af.
"Dat moet toch wel een spannende film worden!" zul je nu denken. Nou
nee, eigenlijk niet. 
Frank Connor (Andy Garcia) leeft in moeilijke tijden. Z'n zoontje
Matthew (Joseph Cross)heeft een gevaarlijk vorm van kanker en de enige
manier om de kanker te verdrijven is het transplanteren van beenmerg. Er
is maar ייn persoon op de hele aardkloot die hetzelfde
beenmerg als hem heeft en dat is een levensgevaarlijke psychopaat, Peter
McCabe (Michael Keaton). McCabe wil wel aan de operatie meewerken, op
voorwaarde dat een paar wensen van hem vervuld worden. 
Zo gezegd, zo gedaan. Na veel moeite ligt McCabe eindelijk op de
operatietafel. Helaas heeft hij van tevoren een paar maatregelen genomen
en dus weet hij al snel te ontsnappen. Na veel personeel gedood te
hebben, probeert McCabe zo snel mogelijk meester te worden
van de situatie. Intussen zit Connor achter hem aan, maar hij mag in
geen geval McCabe dood schieten. Doet hij dat wel, dan verliest het
beenmerg z'n werking en zal z'n zoon sterven aan de kanker... 
"Desperate Measures" is zo'n film die veelbelovend klinkt. Dat 'n
wanhopige man een boef achtervolgt, is een veel gebruikt idee, maar dat
hij hem niet mag doden, is een interessante twist. Sterren als Michael
Keaton en Andy Garcia beloven ook veel goeds. En Barbet Schroeder is ook
de beroerdste regisseur niet. Dat klinken dus als de perfecte
ingrediכnten om een goede film te maken. 
Helaas wordt alles hopeloos uitgewerkt. De film bestaat voornamelijk uit
lange achtervolgingen, die erg saai zijn om naar te kijken. Hoe groot de
explosies ook mogen zijn en hoe dreigend de muziek ook mag klinken,
"Desperate Measures" wordt nergens spannend of boeiend. Het verhaal is
na een kwartier al niet meer te volgen, want het script bevat net zoveel
gaten als de gemiddelde Zwitserse kaas. En Matthew Connor, gespeeld door
Joseph Cross, lijkt met z'n bizarre dialogen een abnormaal intelligent
kind. Echt zo'n 'Doogie Howser'-type. 
"Desperate Measures" is dus een grote teleurstelling. Michael Keaton
weet nog wat leven in z'n rol te blazen en Andy Garcia is ook goed op
dreef, maar dat de film zo belachelijk slecht is, daar kunnen zelfs deze
topacteurs niks aan doen. 
And you can find my film reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Martijn+van+Turnhout

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Henry Bean, Neal Jimenez, David Klass
Ingredients:
cop who needs the bone marrow of a ruthless criminal for his leukemia
victim son, vicious violent bad guy who'll do anything to escape
Synopsis: 
Frank (Andy Garcia) is a widowed cop whose 9-year-old son (Joseph Cross)
is dying of leukemia. Frank is so desperate to save his son that in the
opening scene of the movie, he breaks into a government computer and
searches for possible bone marrow donors. Unfortunately, he finds only
one match: an incarcerated killer and dangerous genius named McCabe
(Michael Keaton), who is desperate to escape from jail. As the bone
marrow transfusion operation is about to begin, McCabe suddenly and
ingeniously escapes. Because Frank must keep McCabe alive in order to
have the transfusion to save his son, Frank finds himself at odds with
the police, who have orders to shoot to kill. Eventually, both Frank and
McCabe are fugitives from the law, but while evading capture Frank must
somehow capture McCabe and bring him in alive in order to proceed with
the life-saving operation.
Opinion:
I like the premise of this movie, the idea that a desperate cop can be
just as immoral as a desperate criminal. The acting is good. Andy Garcia
fleshes out the cop character nicely, while Michael Keaton does a
particularly good job as Peter McCabe, a criminal character who is
almost as dangerous and intelligent as the character Dr. Hannibal Lecter
of SILENCE OF THE LAMBS. 
On the other hand, the movie seems contrived and predictable. Once
McCabe escapes from surgery, he doesn't do what any normal red-blooded
American criminal would do - - that is, get the heck out of there.
Inexplicably, he hangs around the hospital to harass the cop, the kid,
the kid's doctor for almost the whole length of the movie. 
In addition, good guys seem to bump into each other and pass along
information a little too conveniently. In one scene, as Frank is hiding
next to an elevator, Dr. Samantha Hawkins conveniently runs into him - -
and from nowhere, she produces Frank's lost gun and hands it to Frank as
if it were the most natural event in the world. Another time, when Doc
and Frank need to pass information to each other, by pure coincidence
she happens to be standing next to a window which just happens to be
right next to Frank who is standing outside on catwalk! This all just
seems a little too contrived to me. 
Since DESPERATE MEASURES is essentially a 'chase' movie, it also
contains many gun battles, scenes of running, speeding cars, and
explosions. Unfortunately, all of the action and running around takes
place inside the hospital, until McCabe pops out for an obligatory car
chase ending. 

Author
Matt Williams
To save a loved one, how great a cost would you be willing to pay?
Would you be willing to break the law?  If so, which ones, and how many
times? Is that one life worth the lives of others?  How about a
potential threat to those lives?  These are several of the questions
that float just below the surface of Desperate Measures, which is
otherwise a routine thriller. Ultimately, the film could have been a
better one with a more thorough exploration of these issues, but, as it
stands, it is a mildly entertaining piece of work.
Frank Connor (Andy Garcia) is a San Francisco cop, and a dedicated
father. Those two roles are about to conflict when his leukemia-stricken
son needs a bone marrow transplant.  Unable to find a conventional donor
who is compatible, Frank turns to some ethically improper techniques to
discover the one man who can save his child's life:  Peter McCabe
(Michael Keaton).
However, McCabe presents a problem.  It turns out that he is a
sociopath, a convicted multiple-murderer serving out a life sentence
without parole.  Frank has to find some way to get McCabe to agree to a
bone marrow transfer.  And then there's the procedure itself (ably
performed by Dr. Samantha Hawkins (Marcia Gay Harden)), which could be
McCabe's best hope for escape since he was incarcerated.
The story in Desperate Measures is a straightforward one.  You can see
the end of the film from the beginning.  The ending is never in doubt.
Just ask yourself, how many child-in-jeopardy thrillers actually end up
with a dead kid?
McCabe's scheme is outlined.  We see what he's planning to do, and then
he does it (mostly) without flaw.  Although there's some interest in
seeing how intricately plotted his plan is...it seems mechanical, and
lacks a spark that might have made it totally enthralling.
On the dramatic side, there are plenty of conflicts where McCabe uses
his medical uniqueness to his own advantage.  Frank not only has to
recapture McCabe, but he has to keep him alive...or his own son will
die.  This puts Frank uncomfortably at odds with his own police force,
whose goal is to keep McCabe from escaping at any cost.
Realistically, Frank's actions, carrying a tremendous cost of life and
property, simply to save his son, would land him in a nice comfy cell
(right next to McCabe, perhaps).  Of course, the film never follows up
the matter quite this far.
Andy Garcia is sympathetic as Frank, but beyond his mindless devotion to
his son, there's really very little to his character.  He actually
covered some of the same ground (the conflict between duty and family)
with a much better performance in the neglected Night Falls on
Manhattan. Between him and the villain, Keaton is certainly the one to
watch.  He not only gives the more vibrant performance, but has the
better character of the two.
The action scenes in the film are fun to watch, even if, at times, they
seem a bit unplausible.  Even though the plotting of the film is
straightforward, watching Keaton's plan unfold is interesting, and there
is suspense...mostly of the "how" variety, rather than "what".
Though there definitely are flaws in the movie, it is entertaining. You
might wish the film explored some of its core issues in more depth, but,
unlike many thrillers, it does give you something to think about as you
leave the theater.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: Desperate Measures
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Theirs something about watching deranged, remarkably intelligent screen
criminals that appeals to me.  John Travolta blew me away as a crazed
villain in Broken Arrow, and Dennis Hopper made an eerie, repulsive
presence in Silence of the Lams.  Now Michael Keaton (who I always swore
looks a little crazy) plays possibly the most interesting bad guy so far
this year - a bloke with an IQ of 150 and a craving to kill.
Pete McCabe (Keaton) is a ruthless killer locked away inside a
maximum-security prison.  He "gets the chance to kill again" without
leaving the prison, if he refuses to transfer his bone marrow to a
compatible young boy (Joseph Cross) dying of Leukemia.  He eventually
agrees to the operation, purely for a chance to escape.  When the
surgery does not succeed as the boy's cop father Frank Connor (Andy
Garcia) would like to believe, he refuses to give up on his son and is
in hot pursuit of McCabe.
Although there are certain to be many skeptics, Michael Keaton worked
wonders for me as the ferocious, unyielding McCabe.  Keaton himself
seems so out of place in his role that it ends up beneficial to the
film - we can't predict his next move, because it seems so improvised
that he doesn't know himself.
Director Martin Barbet Schroeder (Single White Female) gives a sense of
solidarity to the film.  All scenes are cleverly interlaced, so that
when the final moment occurs, it feels as if we have experienced a
memorable thrill ride - even though we find ourselves in a similar
position as we were to start with.   This is perhaps the main reason why
Desperate Measures is better than most action films - it achieves some
clever footwork - but ironically, fails to improve on some of the most
common action film flaws.
To start with, Andy Gracia's performance is problematic.  The actor
himself is quite tuned in to the task (and, as I mentioned before, is
very realistic), but the plot's bumbling setup means that his character
will inevitably be caught up in a careless cat-and-mouse chase.  It's
careless because we rarely get to see Garcia and Keaton on the screen
together; on most occasions McCabe hatches his schemes from a distance
which minimizes the tension, and ultimately, interest.  Perhaps
Schroeder's intention was to create suspense so that when the characters
did meet towards the end, it would be a dynamic conclusion - but this
never properly works.  Arguably the most important scene, the final
confrontation on top of a nowhere-to-run-from bridge, completes skips
whatever chance it had to make an upbeat semi-finale.  The strange thing
this, the very last scene - where McCabe chats to a hospital guard -
caps off on an almost perfect, wonderfully twisted note.
This is indeed a bizarre mixture: textbook action sequences with
startlingly realistic performances.  But that's it for Desperate
Measures. It's sharp and well executed in what it does, but this
unfortunately is not much - and is often very unconvincing in its
science, and reason. We are not only expected to believe that McCabe is
the only person available with a compatible bone marrow, but also his
escape using a combination of different chemicals that looks like
something from MacGyver. What's next - give the man a paper clip so he
can destroy the hospital?  I wouldn't be surprised.
Desperate Measures,         although sometimes frustrating to watch, is
ultimately a pleasing flick.  Michael Keaton's performance is alone
worth the price of admission, and he has successfully added himself to
my favorite "deranged criminals" list.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback

Mostly Movies:         http://welcome.to/mostlymovies
"How ironic - my crusade against television has come to an end so
formulaic it could have spewed from the power book of the laziest
Hollywood hack."  --Sideshow Bob
Subscribe to my movie reviews mailing list!  Simply reply to this email
with the subject as "Subscribe:newsletter"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In the movie "Amistad," John Quincy Adams states in his
big monologue that there is nothing a man would not do to
regain his freedom.  Peter McCabe (Michael Keaton), the
superbly played villain in "Desperate Measures," proves it. 
Planning an escape while serving a sentence of life without
parole with a good deal of time in solitary confinement, this
killer has the guts to do things to his body that make some
audience members actually sympathize with him.  He
dislocates his thumb, swallows a vial of a drug designed to
counteract another drug, takes a bullet in his leg, and slashes
himself up a bit on a barbed wire fence.  As cynical and
apparently unfeeling as he is, he has a weak spot in his heart
for two people: one is nine-year-old lad, Mattew Conner
(Joseph Cross) who is dying of leukemia; the other is the
boy's father, police detective Frank Conner (Andy Garcia),
with whom he connects as a man who, like McCabe, will do
anything to realize his goal.
   "Desperate Measures" has frequent moments of tension,
putting the audience often at the edge of their seats despite
the number of time we've all seen the usual accoutrements of
action-adventure films.  We are treated to the blowing up of a
bridge linking two buildings of a hospital, some shoot-ups
involving the murder of additional people by McCabe, heroism
by a doctor (Marcia Gay Harden) who is struggling to save
the life of a small, intelligent boy, and a seemingly endless
chase conducted within the corridors of a big city hospital. 
Filmed in San Francisco and Los Angeles, the movie, directed
by Barbet Schroeder ("Kiss of Death," "Before and After"),
deals with a cop who seeks the bone marrow of a deadly
criminal to save the life of his leukemia-riddled boy--the one
person whom a computer database turns up as possessing a
perfect match.  Conner, who obviously has great love for his
son, is perfectly willing to violate the law himself, by breaking
into a central database in order to locate a match, and then,
by ruthlessly allowing several people in the hospital to be shot
by this rogue rather than allow the man to die.
   Schroeder is toying with a fascinating idea: that there is
good and bad in each of us, that while an officer of the law--
heck--even a country's president--may do things that would
not pass muster with Mother Teresa, likewise the most
seemingly hardened criminal has a recognizable human side.
   Even while granting the originality of scripter David Klass's
story--the determination of an otherwise honest man to break
every law if his actions will keep his son alive--the real
surprise of the movie is Michael Keaton.  Granted: this
performer, who has consistently turned in professional work in
comic roles, has shown a serious side in films like "Clean and
Sober."  But never before has Keaton so successfully
portrayed a guy who is absolutely ruthless, one whose 150+
I.Q. gives him an intelligence and ability to make multiple
escapes and yet recognize so clearly the bond he shares with
the nine-year-old boy and the child's dad.  Keaton is so good
in his role that for the one hundred minutes' running time of
the movie, you'll virtually forget that you've seen him in fluff
like "Batman" and hilarious spoofs like "Mr. Mom."  He is ably
backed up by Andy Garcia who gets his audience to lose
some sympathy for his character despite the nobility of his
cause, and by newcomer Joseph Cross as the traditional
movie cute-kid who elicits our compassion for his bravery in
facing the possibility of death.  Rated R.  Running Time: 100
minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
Chuck Dowling
DESPERATE MEASURES (1998)
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling
Copyright 1998 - The Jacksonville Film Journal
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
"Desperate Measures" was something I was excited about seeing back when it
was originally scheduled to be released: Summer '97. For some reason, it was
delayed until Hollywood's traditional dumping ground: January. Now that it's
out, I see no real reason for that delay, as it's a simple yet highly
entertaining film.
Michael Keaton stars as a maniacial murderer who's bone marrow can save the
life of the dying son of a San Francisco police detective (Garcia). Keaton
agrees to the transplant, only so he can attempt escape. He succeeds, in a
plan that of course could only work in the movies. The police force is now
trying to kill Keaton, while Garcia is working against them trying to keep
Keaton alive in order to save his son.
The film definately has it's flaws. The plot is strictly TV Movie of the
Week fare, but the acting and direction certainly boost it far above that
status. Also, after Keaton's escape, Garcia's captain barks at him "How many
men have to die to save your kid's life?" which the film treats as such an
evil and insignificant remark. The thing is, it's a vaild point. How many
people have to be needlessly crippled, burned, and killed just to save this
one child? What's the greater good here? Many lives or one life? If movies
really had guts nowadays, I would have loved to have seen this movie come
down to a final choice for Garcia's character. Place him in a situation
where he knows that he has to kill Keaton because Keaton is about to kill
someone else. Alas, movies these days generally have no such ambition to
pull the audience's strings in ways which might make the uncomfortable.
Despite a few silly moments (and one or two really stupid ones), the good
things about "Desperate Measures" outnumber the bad. The main highlight
would be Keaton's performance. The character could have easily been an
overacting, scene chewing freak, but Keaton underplays it nicely. He's not
as menacing as he was in "Pacific Heights" or even as menacing as he was in
"Batman" (yes kids, Batman used to be a dark character), but you certainly
get the idea that he's evil. Even the final scene of the film, which
normally I would just hate, seems strangely appropriate for this film. So
much so that I didn't mind it in the slightest. And another bonus: the film
takes place in San Francisco, which usually means a car chase on those hills
that you've seen a billion times before. And for a moment, it looked as
though it was about to happen. But it doesn't, and THAT'S creative. [R]

Author
Jamie Peck
TriStar / 1:40 / 1998 / R (language, violence, wasted talent)
Cast: Michael Keaton; Andy Garcia; Brian Cox; Marcia Gay Harden; Joseph 
Cross; Erik King; Efrain Figueroa 
Director: Barbet Schroeder 
Screenplay: David Klass 
"Desperate Measures" is a generic title for a film that's beyond 
generic. It's also a depressing waste of talent, with the solid team of 
Michael Keaton and Andy Garcia unthankfully thrown thankless lead roles, 
not to mention once-cool director Barbet Schroeder sadly continuing his 
string of not-cool flicks -- this thriller is more "Before and After" 
than "Reversal of Fortune." The movie is a big disappointment, and yet 
it's somewhat easy to see what motivated such big names to attach 
themselves to it -- the premise is both promising and intriguing. Too 
bad the execution's all wrong, though, because the set-up of "Desperate 
Measures" boasts some rather enticing elements that deserve to be put to 
far better use. 
San Francisco cop Frank Connor (Garcia) is a single parent with a 
troubling dilemma -- his son Matt (Joseph Cross) is stricken with cancer 
which only a bone marrow transplant can push into remission. Even worse, 
the only compatible donor is violent sociopath Peter McCabe (Michael 
Keaton), currently serving a life sentence for multiple murders and 
other various crimes against society. Connor tries his best to convince 
McCabe to go along with the surgery; he's at first reluctant, but 
reconsiders after he realizes he can plan his escape at the hospital. 
When he does make a run for it, Connor offers close pursuit, but for 
different reasons than his superiors (including the crusty Brian Cox) -- 
they want to take McCabe down, while Connor needs to keep him alive, or 
all hope is lost for his little boy. 
One misstep "Desperate Measures" makes is in its underdevelopment of 
Matt's illness. What's needed are more details as to exactly why McCabe 
is the only bone marrow match that works; there would seem to be other 
possible contenders somewhere in the country, and thus many of the ways 
that Connor endangers the lives of himself and those around him by 
attempting to keep McCabe alive are just a little too hard to swallow. 
Take, for example, a scene where McCabe is trying to make a getaway by 
climbing over an elevated passage tunnel connecting two sections of the 
hospital. The police have their spotlight and guns aimed right on him, 
and what does Connor do? He shoots the spotlight out so that McCabe can 
continue his flight. Connor knows very well what dangerous deeds this 
guy is capable of, and yet never seems to think that McCabe will 
eventually get to and try to harm his son. Whatever. 
To be fair, though, the lack of story background is the least of the 
movie's problems. First and foremost is how cheaply "Desperate Measures" 
trades the potential of it's opening scenes for the routine action 
ballistics of its final hour. Once McCabe escapes, the film becomes The 
Fugitive in reverse and with no thrills. There are countless scenes 
where the good guys catch up to Keaton only to have him grab a hostage 
and get away. Also, the movie is so intent on giving you a 
hoot-inducing, lip-smacking villain (the ads have compared Peter McCabe 
to Hannibal Lechter, natch) that it completely casts Garcia's Frank 
Connor by the Dullsville wayside; "Desperate Measures" appears to like 
its antagonist so much more than its protagonist, and the movie's 
head-scratcher of a send-off confirms this. 
There is some good to be found amongst this mess, particularly in the 
acting department. Cast against type, Michael Keaton's understated 
menace is highly effective. Although he's not given much believable to 
work with, Andy Garcia plays off a taut emotional chord. Joseph Cross, 
as Garicia's ailing son, is surprisingly unsentimental, and Marcia Gay 
Harden lends solid support as a doctor who becomes a major player in the 
unfolding chaos. This cast does its best to camouflage the sorry plot as 
it chugs towards an inevitably happy ending, but most is lost. It goes 
without saying that "Desperate Measures" needs an operation of its very 
own. 
Š 1998 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
This film would have been a lot better if it was made for TV.  It had
that kind of feel to it.  The formula is: a small sick child, a single
parent who would go to any extreme to save their stupid kid, and the bad
guy.  The only thing that breaks the formula is that Meredith
Baxter-Birney does not play the parent.
Peter McCabe (Garcia) is the Desperate single parent who must find a
bone marrow transplant to save the life of his son before he dies.  He
breaks into the FBI computer to run through a list of potential matches
and finds one in the deranged killer, Frank Connor (Keaton).  Connor,
while initially slow to accept the offer of sharing his bone marrow,
eventually agrees in exchange for restored smoking privileges, library
access, an extra sugar for his coffee and reassignment to the general
prison population.  Little do they all know, he actually plans to escape
before the operation even takes place!
Could this surprise anyone watching?  The characters are completely
stunned.  And to make matters worse, they can't kill Connor because the
kid will die without him.  What a dilemma.
What ensues is a cross between Extreme Measures and an episode of
Chicago Hope.  That's right, boring trifling cliched cardboard shit.
Barbet Schroeder, who hasn't made a decent film since I was legally able
to drink (Reversal of Fortune), does nothing original in his direction.
The opening credits and the poster are both better than the final
product that you see on the screen.

Author
Walter Frith
Picture a product assembly line going through the motions day in and day
out and you pretty much have the same definition of a movie formula.
You know what I'm talking about.  A movie that you've seen over and over
again done with a different idea that frankly, it could be conceived by
a journalism student in his first year of study.
'Desperate Measures' was in trouble when the first ads hit the media
comparing it to such films as 'The Hand That Rocks the Cradle' and for
heaven's sake, 'The Silence of the Lambs'?  Not even close, I'm sorry to
say.  Like all films reviewed, I always keep an open mind because the
talents of Michael Keaton and Andy Garcia are far above average and the
film's director, Barbet Schroeder ('Reversal of Fortune', 'Single White
Female') is pretty good at what he does as well.
There's nothing wrong with using repetition to make a point.  Gene
Siskel (of Siskel & Ebert fame) is always talking about how motion
picture technology is at an all time high while good motion picture
screenplays are at an all time low.  How right he is.  He mentions this
often and speaking for myself, 'Desperate Measures' is just another
example of this.
Set in the beautiful city of San Francisco (I've always wanted to live
there or close by), 'Desperate Measures' stars Michael Keaton as a
convicted killer who has one redeeming quality he doesn't know about.
Upon an illegal infiltration of an FBI database, a San Francisco cop
(Andy Garcia) finds that Keaton is the only hope he has in saving his 9
year old son who has leukemia.  It seems that Keaton is a compatible
donor for a bone marrow transplant that will save the youngster's life
and Garcia is determined in getting Keaton to agree to the procedure.
Keaton refuses at first but has a change of heart later in the film.
Keaton's real motive?  Planning and executing his escape, of course.
His attempt is pretty impressive and the film starts off in a very
promising manner but then the picture hits a brick wall.
It languishes in becoming an action, chase and pursuit picture in the
final process.  However, I hesitate to call 'Desperate Measures' a bad
film.  It isn't.  It is only mildly disappointing because Michael
Keaton's portrait of evil is very impressive and while not always
plausible, the film keeps you watching with constant interest.  I place
this film in the fast food category of motion pictures along with many
other that may at first taste good but aren't good for you.
Andy Garcia has a gritty style of acting well suited in playing the part
of a loving father who will risk his career, his safety and his life to
save his son's life.  Not much chemistry between the two leads but a
good 180 degree portrayal on the part of both actors is worthy of
honorable mention.
Director Barbet Schroeder's interpretation of the script leaves little
room for the director's improvisation, something many directors do quite
well, injecting their own sub text, finale or scenario timed at exactly
the right moment that makes a movie memorable.  David Klass' screenplay
could have used much more creative input from Schroeder, the cast and
other members of the creative process because in the final analysis,
writing is a motion picture's brain.  The director is the heart and this
film has a both of these in medium supply.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Keaton, Andy Garcia, Brian Cox, Marcia Gay Hardin, 
      Erik King, Joseph Cross
Director: Barbet Schroeder
Producers: Barbet Schroeder & Susan Hoffman and Gary Foster & Lee Rich
Screenplay: David Klass
Cinematography: Luciano Tovoli
Music: Trevor Jones
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     When I picture Michael Keaton, the image that comes to mind is one 
of an affable, ordinary guy with a comic edge -- the kind of person who 
has made his mark in films like MR. MOM, MY LIFE, THE PAPER, and 
MULTIPLICITY.  I don't envision Batman or Bruce Wayne (a role he has 
played twice), and I certainly don't think of a sociopath mass murderer.  
Yet, in DESPERATE MEASURES, a preposterous thriller from director Barbet 
Schroeder (SINGLE WHITE FEMALE), that's exactly what Keaton is -- a 
ruthless, amoral killer whose steely eyes and cold-blooded humor inspire 
equal parts revulsion and wariness.  In fact, it wouldn't be too far 
from the truth to say that the actor's work is the only worthwhile 
element of the film.  
     Alas, when the viewer looks beyond Keaton's performance, it's 
pretty much a wasteland.  The story, which begins with a modicum of 
promise, quickly devolves into a series of increasingly hard-to-swallow 
action setups.  There are all the usual explosions, shoot-outs, and car 
crashes (a jackknifing tractor trailer must have been difficult to 
choreograph).  Ultimately, DESPERATE MEASURES is basically one long 
chase sequence, and its appeal is likely to be limited even for those 
who enjoy that sort of thing.  To vary the film's tone and rhythm, the 
movie makers incorporate a number of classic thriller clichés, including 
one of the most overused of all -- the child in danger.  However, the 
realization that children do not die in mainstream American movies 
drains away whatever little tension DESPERATE MEASURES tries to generate 
through this plot device.
     Nine year old Matthew Connor (Joseph Cross) is dying of Leukemia.  
His days are numbered and his only chance is a bone marrow transplant.  
His increasingly desperate father, Frank (Andy Garcia), a veteran of the 
San Francisco P.D., has finally located a potential donor, but it's not 
good news.  The man with a chance to save Matt's life is convicted 
killer Peter McCabe (Michael Keaton), a cold-hearted villain who sees 
the operation as an opportunity to break loose.  So, after stringing 
everyone along by making them believe that he cares about "redemption" 
for the bad things he has done, Peter stages an improbable escape.  
Frank is on his tail, however, but the killer isn't worried.  The bone 
marrow of a dead man is useless, so Frank has to protect Peter at all 
costs, or lose his son in the process.
     Every movie demands a certain level of suspension of disbelief from 
an audience, but the bar for DESPERATE MEASURES is so high that the 
thinking movie-goer will never attain it.  In many ways, this movie is 
more absurd than DIE HARD, and it certainly isn't as tightly-scripted or 
well-produced (nor is it intended to be as blatantly cartoonish).  On 
top of that, the action isn't very original and the degree of tension is 
surprisingly low for a tale that features such high stakes.  Then again, 
as I indicated earlier, it's not hard to guess how the film is going to 
end.  Predictable thrillers are not the most energetic movies.
     Other than Keaton's portrayal, the best performance is turned in by 
a young boy, Joseph Cross, who's making his feature debut.  Cross brings 
a refreshing level of pragmatism to Matt.  The mortally ill child 
understands what's going to happen, and accepts it.  The result is an 
engaging character instead of an irritating whiner or someone who tugs 
shamelessly at our heartstrings with cloying displays of cuteness.  The 
best scenes in DESPERATE MEASURES are those featuring Keaton and Cross 
after Peter kidnaps Matt.
     I've never particularly liked Andy Garcia in thrillers, and his 
flat work here serves only to confirm that opinion.  Garcia is at his 
best in dramas; he seems out of his depth when physical acting takes 
precedence over dialogue.  The two primary supporting actors, Marcia Gay 
Harden (THE SPITFIRE GRILL) as Matt's doctor, and Brian Cox (THE BOXER) 
as the chief of police, aren't given enough substantive material to 
determine whether they're doing good jobs or merely picking up their 
paychecks.
     There's a twist at the end, but it's not much of a surprise, and, 
even without reflection, it understates just how stupid the plot is.  
DESPERATE MEASURES is one of a broad category of thrillers that insults 
its audience with its obvious idiocy.  Worse still, there's not enough 
good action to partially redeem the production.  These features make 
DESPERATE MEASURES an exercise in futility, and, when you consider how 
many contrivances the characters have to endure to reach the ending, you 
may think that the title has more to do with the film makers' approach 
than with anything that happens on screen.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Michael Dequina

Desperate Measures (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
        A pair of shadowy figures lurk about a dimly lit building as the opening
credits crawl ever so stealthily along walls, floors, and windows.  Sadly,
this is the pinnacle of creativity for Desperate Measures, a routine,
sometimes laughable thriller whose originality and intelligence is in
inverse proportion to its overwhelming absurdity.
        Not that David Klass's premise is not without some tinge of freshness,
albeit preposterous.  After a frantic search for a bone marrow donor for
his leukemia-stricken son Matthew (Joseph Cross), San Francisco police
detective Frank Conner (Andy Garcia) finds a compatible match in Peter
McCabe (Michael Keaton).  There's just one pesky complication: McCabe is a
brilliant, psychotic killer serving a lengthy prison sentence, and
conducting the transplant means placing escape-prone McCabe in a situation
where he easily can--and, surprise, surprise, he does.
        There's a germ of an interesting, if somewhat comical, idea here--the cop
wants to catch the bad guy, but, unlike the other police, he wants him to
catch him alive.  But Desperate Measures soon settles into an all-too
familiar series of by-the-book standoff set pieces where Conner catches up
to McCabe, McCabe takes someone hostage and gets away, said hostage is
somehow released, Conner catches McCabe again, etc.  And for all the
gunplay, fights, and assorted mayhem director Barbet Schroeder is able to
pack into his briskly paced 100 minutes, nothing about the proceedings is
very suspenseful--just tedious.
        Not helping things at all is the unintentional laughs that are had along
the way.  Quite a few of the guffaws stem from how Conner wants McCabe
alive.  Consider this one stupefying gutbuster: the good guy shoots the bad
guy and in a standard thriller moment; then suddenly we see the two in a
maudlin rushing ambulance scene, with the good guy holding the bad guy's
hand, telling him he's going to make it as treacly music plays in the
background.  Some things are just insulting.  Much is made about how
Matthew only has hours to live, but for someone near death, he's awfully
energetic; the final act has him running around a lot, exhibiting no signs
of weakness or fatigue, and for someone whose blood has trouble clotting, a
nosebleed stops rather quickly and conveniently.  I'd say that the
transplant could wait a few days.  Make that weeks.  Months even.
        What keeps Desperate Measures watchable is the work of Keaton and Garcia.
Garcia makes you sympathize with Conner's plight, and he is able to lend
the weak material some emotional gravity.  Keaton is allowed to be more
colorful here than he was in Jackie Brown, voraciously sinking his jowls
into the psycho role.  If anything is wrong with Keaton's portrayal, it's
the fault of the script, which paints McCabe as nothing more than a garden
variety loon.  Keaton suggests something a bit more quirky and off-center
(that is, if there is something "centered" about psychotic killers), but
none of that gets any deep follow-through, if any at all.
        But any pleasures to be had with Desperate Measures are just about wiped
away by the film's abrupt finale, which bears the unmistakable stench of
test-screening tinkering.  It's a cheap, gimmicky conclusion, which makes
it the perfect capper to this dopey thriller.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Frederick Vallaeys
"Desperate Measures," a new film by Barbet
Schroeder starring Andy Garcia and Michael Keaton,
is an action-packed production from start to finish.
While the screenplay is based on an unlikely sequence
of events, the events are coherent enough to form a
solid story that doesn't require desperate measures to
retain the audience's attention.
Frank Connor (Garcia) is a San Francisco police
officer who lives to uphold the law. However, when his
young son Matt (Joseph Cross) is diagnosed with
leukemia, his top priority becomes finding a bone
marrow donor who can save Matt's life.
As it turns out, the only person with DNA suitable for
the transplant is Peter McCabe, a sociopathic killer
who is serving a life sentence (Keaton).
While McCabe appears to consent to the surgery in
order to receive redemption for all his previous crimes,
he really has ulterior motives.
After an ingeniously orchestrated escape from the
operating room, McCabe starts ravaging the hospital,
which happens to be connected to a prison ward via a
pedestrian bridge. While the entire San Francisco
Police Department's goal is to eliminate McCabe as
soon as possible, Connor is actually trying to save him
because bone marrow from a dead man is worthless.
Connor figures that the only way McCabe will survive
is if he helps him escape the hospital. The unlikely
partnership between Connor and McCabe and the
interesting hospital / prison setting are the two elements
that make this film so much fun.
Naturally, these two elements alone do not make an
action movie and even though the scenes in the hospital
include everything ranging from gun-fights to hostage
situations, the movie would not have been complete
without a thrilling car chase.
In one particularly spectacular scene, Connor jumps
his police car over the median on Highway 101 and
has to drive backwards to avoid a collision with a
trailer that is sliding right at him.
The characters in this movie were well developed.
Both the antagonist and protagonist invoke strong
feelings of compassion because so much depends on
their success. Both men's actions are driven by
desperation, as each one is fighting for someone's life.
Both Garcia and Keaton play their respective parts
very convincingly.
"Desperate Measures" is a sensible movie pick if you
are looking for action that is nicely packaged with an
unusual story. Not too bad for a measly
