Title
Review for Speed 2: Cruise Control (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I don't know if action movies have gotten worse in general 
or if I've just seen too many of them to appreciate the reworkings of 
the same cliches. SPEED 2 is an action sequel that pales completely 
in comparison to the original. This one is part POSEIDON 
ADVENTURE and part UNDER SEIGE. Very few parts are worth 
watching, due mainly to the fact that director Jan De Bont's creation 
reminds me less of the first SPEED and more of his follow-up 
TWISTER. There is no intelligence to the script -- no interesting 
characters, original plot and only a few clever lines of dialogue. 
And here, there are no tornadoes to cover that up.
        The action this time is centered around a cruise ship. 
Sandra Bullock, almost as annoying here as she was in TWO IF BY 
SEA, is on vacation with her boyfriend (Jason Patric). He's a hero 
cop who's always running off to save the world, as we learn in the 
movie's prologue. The first time we got Keanu Reeves and Jeff 
Daniels defusing a bomb; this time, it's a motorcycle chase with 
Patric's stunt double while Bullock flunks her driver's test. 
Disgruntled DMV employee Tim Conway plays the comic foil for 
the woman driver, in a case of DORF NEEDS A PAYCHECK.
        Anyway, back to the cruise -- everything goes normally for 
a few scenes as we meet the cast of one-note disaster characters. 
There's the deaf child in peril, the charasmatic black man, a few fat 
people, even a female singer (one of many POSEIDON ADENTURE 
flashbacks). And there's the oddball who brings not one but two 
laptop computers onboard. In the Information Age, that spells 
trouble. Yep, he's some kind of computer programmer / hacker, 
and also one of those mad bomber types.
        Played by a very miscast Willem Dafoe, the villain is 
motivated by no more than simple revenge. He designed the ship's 
computer system and they fired him when he turned crazy. Bad idea, 
because he's back and he's got a bathtub full of leeches. The leeches 
provide that "Boy, he's nuts!" moment that's a steady staple of these 
movies. Dafoe takes over the ship's controls and has the ship 
evacuated. All the passengers get off except for that core group of 
idiots who end up either cheating death or dying by the end of the 
film.
        Two of the remaining passengers are, of course, Patric and 
Bullock. In the extremely-long hour or so that follows, there are 
explosions, floods, a rescue from a falling lifeboat, a boat chase, a 
scene where Patric almost gets sucked into the ship's propeller, the 
ship almost crashes into an oil tanker, etc. etc. etc. There's even a 
POSEIDON moment where Patric is in rising flood waters with the 
charasmatic black man and has to dive down, holding his breath. 
Where's underwater swimming champion Shelley Winters when you 
need her? The only interesting sequence is when the cruise ship 
actually crashes through an island town and destroys everything in 
sight, like a scene from TWISTER. I kept looking for a flying cow, 
but never managed to see one. Again I ask, where's Shelley Winters 
when you need her? 
        The original SPEED, which was original and managed to 
mix thrilling action with good characters and dialogue, is a hard act 
to follow. It seems like De Bont didn't even try to make a good 
movie. He just figured if he used enough rapid cuts of the stock 
action sequences, the rest of the movie would write itself. People 
who have seen enough action movies know exactly what's coming. 
With SPEED, if the bus went under 50 miles an hour, it would blow. 
With SPEED 2, if your IQ is over 50, it will blow.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
David Wilcock
After the success of Speed (1994), the Keanu Reeves
vehicle, at the box office, it was obvious that there wuold
be a sequel. Set on a boat instead of a bus, it's about
Patric and Bullock trying to foil a mad bomber played by
Daefoe. Sadly, it is complete and utter rubbish. In fact, I
was almost suprised by it. I didn't honestly reliase that
action movies get much dumber, or boring than this. From
the totally unnessacary car chase at the start, to the
horrible, no thrills at all finale, it was just plain
rubbish.
Firstly, I'll have to say it's the performances of the good
guys, Patric and Bullock. The sad thing about Patric's
performance is that he's taking the whole thing seriously.
He is really trying to ACT through the whole movie, and
it's just not possible to do. So, he just comes across as
really dull, not a big, larger than life character who does
everything in a jokey type of way (e.g Bruce Willis or
Arnie) Bullock has no point in this film, except to say how
she wish this wasn't happening, and trying to calm people
down. The only person who knows this film is naff is
Daefoe, who gives us a fantastically enjoyable
performance as the mad man on the ship, and must have
one of the best psycho laughs I have ever heard. Sadly
though, he hardly has any screen time, but he really picks
the film up when he does. The supporting characters do a
good job at looking scared, but you don't feel anything for
them, unlike the passengers in Speed. 
Another annoying element is the directing. De Bont seems
to think that high action involves the camera jerking
around all over the place. I've seen the camera stay still for
longer in episodes of NYPD Blue. I don't remeber this
being used in Speed or Twister (1996) or any of the films
he did as Director of Photography. Perhaps he was just
trying to make us sea sick, like the people on the boat.
Anyway, instead of reinforcing the action, it just drowns it
out. You're so busy trying to catch up with what's
happening, you just don't enjoy it anymore. It may LOOK
exciting, but you won't feel excitied. 
Other things help the film go downhill. There's a pointless
sub plot involving a little girl trapped in a lift.  There's no
element of danger in the film, like in Speed, where the bus
had to stay over 50 m.p.h, even if that meant crashing
through cars, or leaping over bridges. In Speed 2, there's
not really much to crash through in the middle of the
ocean, except at the end where the boat is heading straight
for a town, but it can't slow down. Even this it gets wrong,
with no idea on how to direct the boat crashing through.
Thankfully, however, we've been spared the swearing of
the original, so younger kids (which was Speed's major
audience) can watch it. In fact, any child under 12 yrs will
probably enjoy this the most. 
Overall, this film is a major disappointment. Speed was a
hugely enjoyable film, with a good villian and hero, lots of
suspense, danger and good supporting characters. Speed 2
has a good villian with too little screen time, and..that's it.
Even the music, usually so easy to do in action movies, is
awful. There's hardly any comedy (very much needed in
an action film) and hardly any danger or suspense. Give
this film a miss. 
Overall Rating=* 1/2 out of ***** (Just saved from * by
Daefoe performance) 

Author
Bill Clark
Crazy guy wants money AND revenge, (hey, it's the '90s; you CAN have it
all).  Decides to rip-off diamonds from a floating jewel show on a
cruise ship.  Hapless, unengaging but spunky characters are put at
risk.  Lame performances.  Crappy effects.
A poor knowledge of physics (watch the oil tanker explode like an atomic
bomb!)
This is the kind of movie that Chuck Norris would have made 15 years
ago, except there would be two dozen bad guys and plenty more
excitement.  
The leads are bad, but the supporting characters are worse.  You will
find yourself not caring what becomes of them.  If you absolutely must
see a movie with bad actors having misadventures on an ill-fated ship,
rent "The Posidieon Adventure."  At least the boat is upside down in
that one.

Thoroughly Enjoyable---Enjoyable---Take it or leave it---Blows---Blows
Goats

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Welcome to Paradise," says Dante (Royale Watkins), the cruise
ship's photographer, to the handsome young couple, Annie Porter (Sandra
Bullock) and Alex Shaw (Jason Patric).  This is a hint -- not that
anyone needs one -- that their cruise will be anything but.  When the
inevitable disaster hits, Annie proclaims, "I'll swear, I'm never
leaving the house again."  This is her vacation, and she wants to dance
with her beau and ignore what feels like a 7.0 earthquake hitting the
ship.
     SPEED 2 shares three links with its ancestor, SPEED: the director
(Jan de Bont), one of the stars (Sandra Bullock) and a psycho (played
this time by Willem Dafoe) bent on destroying a major piece of public
transportation (now a cruise liner replaces the city bus).
     SPEED was a textbook example of how to craft a taut action
thriller with every scene choreographed for maximum adrenaline rush.
Any sequel was bound to disappoint, and so does this one.  Not so much
in comparison to the original as to what it could have been.  A key
casting error (Jason Patric as L.A.P.D. SWAT member Alex Shaw) and a
lack of focus on Bullock, who deserved a more central and better
written role, are the script's chief downfalls.  Still the action does
work, and most audiences will not be disappointed.
     Patric, who played Shakes in last year's SLEEPERS, gives a
completely mechanical performance as a daredevil extraordinaire.  In
the original, Keanu Reeves did some incredible stunts, but he made his
character human and vulnerable.  In contrast, Patric approaches every
disaster with the assurance of an actor who knows that this is only a
stunt so there is no reason to worry.  Need to stop an ocean liner?  No
problem, he'll jump in the water near the propeller, while any sane man
would worry that it would cut him to pieces.  ROBOCOP had about as much
self-doubt, which is none at all.
     Annie and Alex tell us that, "Relationships based on extreme
circumstances never work out."  And their relationship is never
believable.
     Reeves and Bullock oozed chemistry, yet showed little physical
affection.  In contrast, Patric and Bullock talk about sex, even if
they are never shown doing it, but demonstrate little genuine romance.
Never is their affair made plausible.
     Bullock, when not in the shadow of or being courted by Patric,
gives a good performance.  Easily the best scene in the show has her
showing her resilience to adversity.  When a fat-is-cool advocacy group
gets trapped in a hallway, they have to take off their clothes to block
the smoke coming in the vents.  What does she use to rescue them?  A
convenient chain saw.  SPEED 2 never takes itself too serious.
     Willem Dafoe plays a angry computer programmer named John Geiger.
John, who brings his leaches to treat his ailments, designed the
control system for the boat but was fired two years ago when he got
sick.  Seems there is an occupational hazard of copper poisoning
associated with the computer field.  (Most engineering schools probably
don't disclose this.)  In the spirit of the original SPEED, his plan to
take control of the ship is ingenious and full of technical details.
     Dafoe takes a surprisingly understated approach to his character.
I respect him for what he was trying to do, but it drained the show of
too much of its tension.  Andrew Davis's UNDER SIEGE covered a similar
subject with much better results because Tommy Lee Jones gave us a more
explosive and unpredictable villain.
     The movie's best performance is given by first-time movie actress
Christine Firkins as a 13-year-old deaf girl named Drew.  I cannot say
enough good things about Firkins's acting ability.  She is given a
minor role but steals all of her scenes.  A charismatic actress who
takes what could have been a cliched character and transforms her into
a frightened but resourceful girl and a character worth caring about.
     The show ends in a typically cataclysmic event.  Like most recent
action picture endings, this one goes on too long.  Unlike the others,
SPEED 2 manages to throw so much at us that it stays fun much longer
than expected.  My favorite part of the ending is the spunky terrier
happily barking away at the big ship out of control.  The little
pooch's fun becomes so infectious that I found myself applauding at one
piece of the conclusion's campy humor.
     SPEED 2 runs longer than necessary at 2:13.  It is rated PG-13 for
disaster action and violence.  The film would be fine for kids say nine
and up, depending on how well they handle disaster movies.  I had
enough fun to be able to recommend the picture and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Steve Kong
Director Jan De Bont has yet to have a strong script to work with. Look at 
Twister and Speed. But what he's had going for him is a sense of fun in 
directing. Speed was not well received by critics, but the audience thought 
different, and the movie became an instant summer hit. This was rightfully so, 
Speed was a joyride and it was fun. Twister experienced the same from the 
critics and the audience. But Twister was not as fun as Speed, the main 
attraction there was its special effects. Speed 2 has begun to receive the 
warm reviews from the critics and how it will be received by the audience is 
still up in the air. For me though, Speed 2 is just like its older siblings, a 
fun movie that is a joyride and has some spectacular special effects to be 
seen.
Annie (Sandra Bullock) and her new boyfriend Alex (Jason Patrick) are at a 
standpoint in their relationship. She's also not too happy about him being on 
"the suicide squad." He has the perfect plan though, a cruise. Geiger (Willem 
Dafoe) is a disgruntled ex-employee on the cruise also. Geiger has planted 
bombs all over the ship and is ready to sink it. But, why would he want to go 
through all this trouble to sink a ship? You'll have to see the film to find 
that out, he actually has two reasons for sinking the ship. Alex, being the 
tough guy he is, stays behind with some trapped cruise-goers to stop the 
madman. Annie stays to try to help Alex out.
How much can happen on a cruise boat? A lot more than can happen on a bus. 
There are fights with fires, fights with a 12-foot propeller, fun with 
grenades, fun on lifeboats, and even an elevator scene.
Sandra Bullock is still as likeable as she was in the original. I was 
pleasantly surprised with Jason Patrick's performance. His character was 
higher likeable and he did an excellent job at playing Alex. Willem Dafoe 
gives a mixed performance as Geiger. Although he is a sick crazed man, his 
character swings too much. Sometimes seeming very intelligent and other times 
acting like an idiot nuthouse.
The action sequences work really well, though they could have been better. I 
often wondered when watching the action sequences, "Who substituted the home 
hand held cam for the real camera?" The cinematographer, Jack Green, used some 
very shaky shots during the action sequences. And instead of showing how much 
chaos is really in the scene, it serves only to frustrate the viewer. The 
opening motorcycle sequence was a little contrived and had a TV feel to it. 
But after that, the action gets up to speed and is of a higher caliber. I 
enjoyed most the propeller sequence and the Cruise vs. Oil Tanker sequence.
The sound in Speed 2 is worth mentioning. The sound is incredible and should 
be seen in a DTS equipped theatre.
Speed 2 is an action movie and makes no other efforts, and that is what makes 
it so enjoyable. If you got a fancy for some tense action then go see Speed 2. 
This film is fun.


Author
Ben Hoffman
If you are looking for some follow up, a sequel to
SPEED, forget it. Other than Sandra Bullock there was no
legitimate reason to include "Speed" in the title; all
other principals and the film's locale are different
 , . . but hey, that's showbiz.
The excitement that was engendered in the original SPEED
is here not present until the last half hour when the
cruise ship heads for shore.   Frantic, yes; exciting,
no.   Annie Porter (Bullock) is very hyper when she is
careening thru Venice, CA., behind the wheel in a
driving test being given by  Dept of Motor Vehicles' Mr.
Kenter (Tim Conway . . . funny but doing his usual
befuddled routine).  In the film's subsequent scenes
aboard ship  Bullock continues her frantic behavior,
probably trying to stir up the excitement that is not
there.
Alex Shaw (Jason Patric) is the capable, daring hero.
He is also Annie's betrothed.  Because it is the late
1990s it is no surprise that he does not tell his
fiancee the truth, in this case about his job. Instead
he says he is in some kind of law enforcement where he
arrests young pickpockets who frequent the Venice Beach
area when in fact he is on a SWAT team. Conveniently
(for the story), while Annie is careening around town
with one near miss after another she spies Alex crashing
his motorcycle in a chase after a criminal.
Annie is upset about Alex's dangerous job but he gets
around her by telling her what they need is a quiet,
relaxing 6-day cruise to the Caribbean.  Annie readily
forgives him.  That the cruise is anything but relaxing
comes as no surprise.    Aboard ship is John Geiger (as
in "counter") (Willem Dafoe) who is a former employee of
the cruise line where he was the computer expert. Geiger
is more than a little annoyed at having been fired.   He
is maniacal.    He grins maliciously, his eyes roll in
their sockets, and he looks like a caricature of a
crazed villain.   How best to get revenge on the cruise
line than by programming the engines and rudders and
anchors and whatever else it takes to have the ship ram
into another ship and sink
Fortunately, Alex is there to take on the evil genie.
All of the above, it seems to me, may sound more
exciting than the movie.    Where the film became of
interest to me was when the special effects come into
play and we see, with camera low to the ground and
pointing up to make the most of the ship's height, what
appears as an irresistible force (the ship) approaching
its doom with nothing to stop it.  Quite effective.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    Sandra Bullock in high heels and wielding a chainsaw?  Yup, it's
gotta be summer.
    Just when you thought the pointless sequel had gone the way of
franchise films and direct-to-video releases, into port slams SPEED 2:
CRUISE CONTROL, the gloriously godawful follow-up to the 1994 sleeper
about a bus rigged to explode if it slowed below a certain speed.  The
gimmick, this time, is an ocean liner rigged to, well, crash into stuff.
Sound exciting?  Dennis Hopper's disgruntled bomb squader, the villain
of the first film, has given way to Willem Dafoe's disgruntled computer
programmer, a maniac whose main beef has something to do with having to
use live leeches, I kid you not, as a self-treatment for copper poison-
ing.  (And said poisoning induced by prolonged exposure to electro-
magnetic fields, no less!  Calling Dean Edell...) So, he overrides the
boat's computer, convinces the crew to abandon ship, and sends the
remaining passengers, those who couldn't evacuate in time, on a col-
lision course with destiny.  (Oddly, no one thinks to just...  jump off
the back of the boat.)
     With Keanu Reeves electing not to return-- perhaps he read the
script?-- the job of John McClane goes to Jason Patric (SLEEPERS), as
the *second* LA cop and SWAT team member that that bus drivin' babe
Annie (Bullock) has dated.  (What are the odds?) They're on this
Caribbean cruise for pleasure, as are a handful of requisite stock
characters, including a deaf teenager (!) who has a crush on the hero
(!!) who also knows how to sign (!!!).  (And you thought the Raptor Slam
was a cool summer movie move?  Wait till you see the feats that *this*
little girl can do, when stuck on a shipboard elevator!) Bullock is her
pesky, perky self, though she ends up with far less screen time than her
top billing suggests.  (Those paying attention to her bikini- and tank-
tops probably won't complain, however) Patric is the main man in motion
and that's damn good, 'cause when he stops to talk, he's only slightly
less monotone than his predecessor.  (His first LOL line is to Ms.
Bullock:  "I'd like to boogie with you.")
     Of course, nobody in front of the camera embarrasses themselves
quite the way that returning director Jan de Bont does.  He also
produced this mess, which is insulting even by the most lax summer
standards.  (CON AIR, BUDDY, FATHER'S DAY, ROMY AND MICHELLE'S HIGH
SCHOOL REUNION, MURDER AT 1600, 8 HEADS IN A DUFFLE BAG, ANACONDA, VEGAS
VACATION, MEET WALLY SPARKS, METRO, BEVERY HILLS NINJA, THE RELIC, all
is forgiven).  Worse, he's spent a hundred mil on a premise that doesn't
even live up to its title!  There's no sweat-inducing motion of the
ocean here-- just two hours of shaky handheld camera work and a handful
of cross-cut exteriors, all leading up to the big slam, when the love
boat sideswipes an oil tanker and then plows into a harbor town.  (Oh,
how far we've come in twenty years.  Remember the simple fun of seeing a
locomotive smash into railway station in THE SILVER STREAK?) Admittedly,
either of the aforementioned sequences is worth the price of admission.
It's just the rest of the movie-- the other hundred or so minutes--
that's pure nonsense.  And wonderful nonsense at that.  I know he didn't
intend to, but de Bont has done one thing right:  he's created the
hands-down funniest film of the year.
     o plain English, whole-sentence computer instructions
     o Jason Patric's character walks onto the bridge and immediately
       understands everything that's happening
     o Willem Dafoe's amazing arm-mounted keyboard
     o fishing reel.  Pontoon plane.  Memories of WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S

Author
Jesse Kaplan
SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL A Movie review By Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Jason Patric, Sandra Bullock, WIlliam Defoe
In a summer of Blockbuster Movie Sequals, one of the more unnessary ones
made was non other than SPEED 2.  I see no reason for this movie to be
made.  Besides the graet explosion scenes, and there are only a few,
this movie has little plot, little acting, and little enjoyment.
Sandra Bullock (A TIME TO KILL, THE NET) makes her return to the action
genre as Annie, who seems to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Consider her DIE HARD's femals John McClane, minus his funny wisecracks
and ability to fight.  Considering the fact that SPEED star Keanu Reeves
dropped out of the project in the early stages, replacement Jason Patric
(SLEEPERS), basically plays the same role as Reeves did, a Los Angeles
SWAT team member with a knack for saving the day and having no
conscience onto what happens to him.  This time, Patric's character
Alex, is on a cruise with Annie.  Little does he know that evil and
insane William Defoe (CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER) is plotting to steal the
ships jewels and blow up the boat because he ways layed off of his job
as computer specialist for the cruise line.
You've seen this one before entering the theater so take a guess what
happens.  Yep thats it, Defoe out smarts the cruise ship's crew and
takes control of the boat so Alex must save the day. Like I stated
previously, the acting here is week.  After givcing strong roles in THE
NET and A TIME TO KILL, Bullock is genuinly annoying in this picture and
while watching it I didn't really care what happened to her.  Defoe was
absolutely horrible as the mad bomber and hopefully he will stick to
small, supporting roles for the future.  I'm not sure how great Patric
was.His character was completely one-dimentinol so there was no reason
to care about him.  Basically, I could have said his lines the smae and
it would have made no difference.  Temuera Morrison is good as Juliano,
the ship's first mate.  Christine Firkins is wonderful as Drew, a deaf
girl who gets trapped in the underbody of the boat.  She steals every
scene she's in.
Beside's some great underwater shots, a couple of explosions, and Sandra
Bullock in some of those outfits, SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL, may have a
cool name, but thats about it.  ** thats all.
SPEED 2 runs longer than necessary at 2:13. It is rated PG-13 for
disaster action and violence.
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net Jesse A. Kaplan

Author
Chuck Dowling
Speed 2:Cruise Control (1997) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Sandra Bullock,
Jason Patric, Willem Dafoe, Glenn Plummer, Colleen Camp, Joe Morton, Tim
Conway, Kimmy Robertson. Directed by: Jan de Bont. Running Time: 100 minutes.
Having the word "speed" in your film's title carries with it some
responsibility. To use the word "speed" in your film's title, you need to
either have a fast paced story, or at the very least, an object important to
the story which moves very very fast. "Speed 2:Cruise Control" has neither
one, which should almost make you feel cheated as you watch it.
Sandra Bullock returns from "Speed" as Annie. She's dumped Keanu Reeves and
hooked up with another member of the "suicide team", played by Jason Patric.
You can easily tell though, that this whole thing was written for Reeves,
who backed out at the last minute. Anyway, the new happy couple go on a
vacation aboard a cruise ship, and darn the luck, it's being taken over by a
psycho (Willem Dafoe).
Dafoe is a disgruntled former employee of the cruise line who designed all
the computer systems onboard. He developed some sort of copper blood
poisoning illness from the computers (or something like that) and so the
company immediately fired him. Now he's out for revenge. He plans to steal a
fortune in jewelry from the ship's vault and then ram the ocean liner into
an oil tanker.
Willem Dafoe is adequate, yet nothing special as the villain. But it's
refreshing that he's working alone. He doesn't have a team of bad guys, and
none of the crew members reveal themselves to be bad guys during the film.
Bullock's character has gotten awfully annoying, and her main purpose in the
film is to make repeated references to her character's experiences from the
first film. Patric makes a satisfactory replacement for Keanu Reeves, and he
actually fares the best of all the cast. And I always like to keep track of
former cast members of "Twin Peaks" when they get work. Here, Kimmy
Robertson who played Lucy the secretary shows up as the ship's cruise
director.
The film's main flaw is it's big sequence towards the end where the ship is
heading, very slowly, towards an island. This scene goes on forever, and
shockingly is done with a sense of "Wheeee!" as mass destruction occurs,
people's lives and property are ruined and quite possibly many people could
be brutally maimed or killed. This sense of gleeful whimsy in the scene is
almost insulting. And during this sequence there's yet another "dog in
peril" scene, a movie trend which I am completely sick of.
"Speed 2:Cruise Control" isn't a bad film, and it's certainly better that
most of this summer's offerings. But what keeps it from achieving a good
rating is that it's just hopelessly standard action fare. There's nothing
new in it to distinguish it from any other action movie of its type. And
usually when you make a sequel, you want to try and outdo SOMETHING from the
previous film. Not one moment here even comes close to being as good as
anything from the original. [PG-13]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Jason Patric, Willem Dafoe, Temuera Morrison,
Brian McCardie, Christine Firkins,  Royale Watkins Director: Jan de Bont
Screenplay:  Randall McCormick and Jeff Nathanson based on a story by
Jan de Bont and Randall McCormick
A stroll in the park, a bicycle ride, or even a paddle boat ride on the
lake would probably carry more excitement than this ship full of bores.
The only velocity that this movie creates is a hearty yawn, a deep sigh
and perhaps a burp to help the coke go down better. I have fond memories
of the original "Speed" leaving me with breathless anxiety for a bus
full of trapped passengers, an unstoppable train carrying hero and
heroine towards their imminent doom. What has happened to the nerve
racking tension, the bullet hardened action, and the precise timing of
cliff hanging situations???? Well it all sank along with the good
intentions of this boat full of hopeless wannabe action heroes. Yes, the
fast bus has been replaced by a big, big cumbersome slow moving boat.
We all know that Keanu Reeves can't act, so they've filled his missing
shoes with someone of equal talent. Jason Patric, a lad who not only
can't act, but goes a step further when he decides to carry the same
bored expression throughout the movie. Go back to sleep Jason, I'll wake
you up when the movie is over. In fact the only time Jason shows any
interest in his surroundings, is when he flirts with a teenage girl
using sign language; but how does the audience know he's interested?
Work on that smile Jason - it may come in handy in your next movie; and
remember you need to frown when suffering from sea sickness, and don't
forget there's an expression for pain if injured. If you need any help
in that department, my suggestion is - finger in the blender.
Willem Defoe is the vengeful computer expert, whose haematological
"leech" sucking disorder has led him to sabotage the ship's electrical
systems. Much better acting than Jason, but who's comparing. Sandra
Bullock on the other hand is the movie's only likeable element. She
mosies about with good humour and wit. When she starts wielding a chain
saw, you get the strangest feeling that everything is going to be all
right. BZZZZZZZ! She isn't given as much responsibility as in the
original speed, but has her moments usually saving Jason Patric.
So we're back to Jason again. I don't know how to describe his
character, he's not really a hero or an anti-hero, he's just too dumb to
be either. It's not let's have a go at Jason day, but I just have to
mention a couple of dumb things he does.
1.  On saving passengers aboard a dangerously dangling lifeboat. His
option is throw himself and a rope ladder aboard, and to get them out
one by one when there are only minutes to spare. He not only endangers
his own life but everyone else's as well. Sandra comes to the rescue.
Her option is to lower the gang plank so they can all walk safely
aboard. Now why didn't he think of that?
2.  On chasing the enemy, he runs into Willem Defoe's trap like a rabbit
into a snare. Yes, Sandra appears again to rescue her poor little
darling.
3.  On slowing the boat down. "Flood it, flood it" he screams. Ooops.
Jason we should think before we scream. There's that sweet little deaf
girl on the lower deck who is about to be blowing water bubbles soon.
Not to mention that something important in engineering which has just
disappeared underwater.
4.  Still on slowing the boat down. "Let's stuff up the propeller with
cable". Ooops, we almost forgot about the dangerous under tow. Don't
press that button Sandra, you've been saving his arse way too often.
5. On saving Sandra. No Jason, please don't.
My after thoughts are - why didn't they let Sandra steer instead? She
drove that damned bus pretty well! If Jan de Bont directed "Twister" and
"Speed", he should have shown better judgement, than to waste money on a
poorly written sequel of megalomaniac proportions. I mean wasting 30
million on a sea port, for ten very mediocre final minutes - I say
donate the money to UNICEF instead.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Jason Patric, Willem Dafoe, Temuera Morrison, 
      Brian McCardie, Christine Firkins, Royale Watkins 
Director: Jan de Bont 
Producers: Jan de Bont, Steve Perry, and Michael Peyser  
Screenplay: Randall McCormick and Jeff Nathanson based on a story by 
      Jan de Bont and Randall McCormick 
Cinematography: Jack N. Green 
Music: Mark Mancina 
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox 
     If there was ever an action movie that didn't warrant a sequel, 
it's SPEED.  However, the film grossed enough money to be numbered among 
the big summer hits of 1994, and the unfortunate result is this film, 
which reunites director Jan de Bont with leading lady Sandra Bullock, 
while leaving Keanu Reeves somewhere safe and dry, "working on his 
music" with his band, Dogstar.  Considering the dubious quality of the 
final product, this may be the wisest decision of the young actor's 
career.  SPEED 2 can be numbered among the worst second chapters ever 
made. 
     The original SPEED was an entertaining jolt of pure adrenaline that 
took everyone by surprise.  De Bont was an instant success and Bullock 
became a hot commodity.  It was almost inevitable that any sequel, no 
matter how thrilling, would be a letdown.  What no one anticipated was 
how sharply the downturn would be.  Not only is SPEED 2 missing the 
first movie's main character, but the excitement seems to have departed 
with him. 
     This time around, Keanu Reeves' Jack Traven has been replaced by 
Jason Patric's Alex Shaw.  For the most part, they're the same person 
(it shouldn't surprise anyone to learn that Alex was originally written 
as Jack), and their function is identical.  The highest paid member of 
the cast, Sandra Bullock, is back as Annie.  Now, having broken up with 
Jack, she's in the midst of a long-term relationship with Alex.  Things 
are a little rocky between them, so Alex comes up with a solution:  a 
romantic cruise to the Caribbean on the SEABOURN LEGEND.  However, just 
like John McLane in the DIE HARD series, Annie is about to find herself 
in the wrong place at the wrong time.  Also aboard the SEABOURN LEGEND 
is a mentally-unstable computer genius named John Geiger (played without 
any panache by Willem Dafoe) who intends to take over the ship, crank 
the engines up to full power, and crash it into something very big. 
     SPEED 2 is a classic example of "sound and fury, signifying 
nothing."  Only, in this case, that "nothing" isn't bolstered by the 
high-energy tension and tremendous special effects of de Bont's previous 
excursion, TWISTER.  SPEED 2 is lackluster -- the plot methodically 
drives the film from one action set-piece to another, and the visuals 
are merely adequate.  In fact, the only real thrill offered by SPEED 2 
comes during the bloated movie's final half-hour (as the ship's 
collision course becomes apparent).  By then, it's too little, too late. 
     The original SPEED was frantically paced and featured a number of 
individuals that, in spite of their two-dimensionality, were likable and 
exhibited human characteristics.  We felt like we were trapped on the 
bus with them.  This time, the pace and characters are mechanical, and 
it doesn't seem as if we're actually on board the endangered cruise 
ship.  Instead, we're watching form a detached vantage point, noticing 
details that we're not supposed to be paying attention to (like what 
kind of lighting best highlights Bullock's features) or waiting in vain 
for someone to break into a chorus of "The Love Boat." 
     Jason Patric has one mode: serious.  The actor, who is best suited 
to introspective, brooding roles (as in THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING), 
treats this ridiculous screenplay like it's WAR AND PEACE.  There's no 
sense of fun or goofiness.  I never thought I would admit to missing 
Reeves, but that's the situation here -- at least he understood the 
right tone to adopt.  Meanwhile, Bullock plays the same part the same 
way (albeit for a lot more money) -- she looks cute, gets involved in a 
couple of action scenes, and is taken hostage.  But she and Patric never 
click; their chemistry is glacial. 
     Since Dennis Hopper's Howard Payne was decapitated at the end of 
SPEED, the sequel needs a new villain.  Enter Willem Dafoe, who's 
usually a good psycho.  Not here, though.  Geiger has no manic energy, 
and Dafoe doesn't seem particularly excited to be playing him.  SPEED 2 
is the kind of film that demands a strong opponent, but Geiger isn't it.  
Meanwhile, there are a few interesting cameos:  Tim Conway and Bo 
Svenson have small parts, and SPEED veterans Joe Morton and Glenn 
Plummer are on hand for a couple of scenes. 
     Watching SPEED 2, I felt embarrassed for everyone involved.  Sure, 
they're all being well-paid, but no one wants a $120 million flop on 
their resume.  And, once the word gets out about how disappointing this 
movie is, crowds will dwindle.  There are enough action alternatives out 
there to sate the public's summer appetite.  Someone should have 
recognized what an appropriate metaphor the climactic sequence (which 
features massive destruction) is for the entire film.  SPEED 2 appears 
headed for a box office disaster of titanic proportions.  Creatively and 
entertainment-wise, it's already sunk. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Monika Huebner
This movie tries to present itself as the sequel to Jan de Bont's
debut as a director, 1994 surprise hit SPEED. But the only thing the
two movies have in common is Sandra Bullock as the female lead.
Annie (Sandra Bullock) is in the wrong place at the wrong time again.
She's going on a cruise with her new boy-friend Alex (Jason Patric),
and of course it is her ship that is kidnapped by John Geiger (Willem
Dafoe) who has a bone to pick with the shipping line. They sacked him
after he got sick. Now he wants the diamonds stored in the ship's safe
for compensation.
That actually is the whole storyline. SPEED 2 could do without
dialogues. The movie is all about images and remarkable sound. I don't
really know why this is called an action movie. Except for a few
scenes that are vaguely reminiscent of SPEED this goes along the lines
of the desaster movies of the 70ies. First we are introduced to a
number of people who are going to be important later on in the movie.
Then desaster strikes.
Sandra Bullock was said to have been glad that she could take action
this time around. I looked for the "action" but couldn't find it. Most
of the time she is part of the decoration. The only time she is part
of what happens is when she can have a shot at defusing a bomb and
freeing some passengers trapped behind a fire door. Now we know that
she can handle a chain saw. We also know that fire doors on cruise
ships can be cut apart in seconds. The bomb defusal of course goes
wrong, but only the furniture is damaged, not our heroes who still are
needed.
Jason Patric alias Alex spends most of his time flirting with Annie,
helping other passengers and frolicking in the water. His initial
sea-sickness is suddenly gone, because there are ship, crew and
passengers to be saved from evil Geiger. He does a pretty good job but
I can't blame Keanu Reeves for declining this part.
Then there's Willem Dafoe, the villain, who desperately tries to look
as frightening as Frankenstein's monster. He doesn't succeed, though.
An untidy appearance isn't enough to convince the viewer of his
psychopath potential. Before he tries again to make us believe he is a
dangerous man he should practise for a while in front of a mirror.
I can't really recommend SPEED 2. You will probably like the movie if
you like funny situations that aren't meant to be funny. Especially
the showdown, when the ship first runs into an oil tanker and then
dissembles a whole village is a treat. There you get to see the most
superfluous scene in the movie. In keeping with last year's desaster
movie tradition a dog is miraculously saved from certain death. 
A really funny (and meant to be funny) scene takes place on the oil
tanker right before the collision. Some crew members watch two ships
colliding in an old movie. Had they looked out the window they
wouldn't have missed the huge ship racing toward them.
Those of you who still want to see the movie should pick a theater
with a large screen and a good sound system to enjoy the visual
effects and the phantastic surround sound effects. In an adequately
equipped theater it's as if the explosion were going off all around
you and you can feel the seats vibrate. But the ILM special effects
can't save the movie. For all the money they could have done better.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
C.J Hill
Director Jan De Bont certainly knows how to make top quality action
films. You need look no further than Die Hard (he was director of
photography), Speed and last years Twister for examples of his hi-
octane, edge of your seat thrill prowess.
This time, the action takes place on a huge cruise liner, on which
Sandra Bullock and Jason Patrick are trying to develop their
relationship.
Yep, that's right, no Keanu Reeves this time, but fear not, Jason
Patrick is more than up to the job.
Speaking of which, the job at hand is to stop completely bonkers
terrorist, Willem Dafoe, from crashing the liner into a huge island,
after stealing a diamond collection.
The reason for this act of destruction is revenge. After years of
working for the company that builds cruise liner computers, he contracts
copper poisoning and is retired.
Naturally, what entails next is a lot of running/jumping about and
general high quality action as Jason Patrick does his level best to save
the day.
Thinking back on this film, you can't help, but admire it's structure.  
The way, Willem Dafoe initiates his plan and throws red herrings to the
crew and passengers.  The race against time to save the liner from
crashing, and of course, the finale chase scence. (Although this is
ruined by an over the top, one too many stunt and explosion.)
Simple in construction, effective in it's execution, and the result, a
clear and concise, highly enjoyable action film.
The acting is adequate, although it's darned obvious that Sandra Bullock
is only in it to create a 'hot totty' appeal to the men (and she does
that perfectly!), Jason Patrick fills the action hero role superbly and
Willem Dafoe is just great as the crazed terrorist.
Overall, Speed 2 is a most enjoyable thrill ride.  Not up to it's
predecessor's high calibre but very good all the same.
There is plenty going on, some of the thrills are quite tense and it
also proves that you do not need blood and guts to make a good action
movie.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Speed 2: Cruise Control (1997)
Sandra Bullock, Jason Patric, Willem Dafoe, Temuera Morrison, Brian 
McCardie, Christine Firkins, Colleen Camp, Lois Chiles, Jeremy Hotz, Bo 
Scvenson, Glenn Plummer, Tim Conway. Directed by Jan De Bont. 121 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 1 star (out of five stars). 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
There have been a few sequels that were as good as, or better than, the 
originals. "Godfather 2", "Terminator 2: Judgement Day", "Aliens", and 
the even numbered "Star Trek" films come to mind. "Speed 2: Cruise 
Control" doesn't. Listening to the audience as they left an advance 
screening of the film, the most frequent comment heard was "that was cute.
" Be honest, are you really interested in a big action-packed summer 
thrill-ride film that can be summed up as "cute?" 
While it's doubtful that the original "Speed" will ever go down as a 
cinematic landmark, the film was both a fine showcase for Sandra 
Bullock's charm and an efficient little thriller. A big part of "Speed's" 
success came from the simplicity of the storyline. If the bus drops below 
50 mph, it will blow up, so we have to keep going 50, but we're running 
out of road. A simple conceit that confined the action to a set space and 
focused on the people involved in the situation. During the quiet moments 
of the ride, we were able to enjoy the chemistry between Bullock and 
Keanu Reeves.  
"Speed 2" lacks both the chemistry and efficiency of the original. 
Desperate to establish action-movie momentum quickly, director Jan De 
Bont ("Speed", "Twister") keeps the cameras jiggling from the second the 
film begins. Even during the subdued moments, the camera whooshes around 
as if the Tasmanian Devil was filming the story. The movie starts with a 
comic scene of Bullock taking a driving lesson from instructor Tim Conway.
 She jerks the vehicle through traffic as if she was in a high-speed 
chase, while Conway whimpers and cringes. The bit works on a primitive 
sit-com level, but undermines Bullock's character, making her look like 
some half-witted loon. 
She soon hooks up with her new boyfriend, an L.A.P.D. SWAT team member, 
who invites her to take a cruise with him. The two leave L.A. for a 
relaxing Caribbean cruise on the Seabourn Legend.
As the handsome young couple gets acclimated to the ship, you wait to see 
the sparks ignite between them, but it doesn't happen. Jason Patric, who 
played the older brother in "The Lost Boys", is a fine actor renown for 
his intensity. It's in full flower here, as he searches with deadly 
earnestness for the right moment to propose marriage to Bullock. The 
moment doesn't come, as Bullock, determined to take things slow, plays 
her scenes in an odd, distracted fashion. During their romantic 
interludes, she looks as if something really interesting is happened just 
on the other side of the camera. There is absolutely no chemistry between 
the pair.
Of course, all hell breaks loose in short order, as Willem Dafoe, a 
disgruntled ex-employee of the cruise line, takes control of the ship's 
computers. He fakes a series of fires to force evacuation of the ship, 
then standard-issue action movie mayhem ensues. Dafoe is another of 
"Speed 2's" problems. Films like this work best with a memorable villain 
and Dafoe is eminently forgettable. He tries; giggling, twitching, and 
wrenching his eyes into a Charles Manson psychotic gleam, but overall the 
effect is silly, not menacing. "Speed 2" should have borrowed a villain 
from the "Con Air" prison transport plane – they had enough bad guys to 
float a loaner.
As the shipboard action erupts, so do several annoying movie clichés. 
First off, the entire crew of the ship has no idea what to do in an 
emergency. Thank God they had two plucky tourists to take command of the 
situation! Second, the curse of the talking villain strikes as Dafoe 
skips at least a half dozen opportunities to shoot our heroes, choosing 
instead to talk to them at great length, explaining his motivations and 
evil intentions, while giving them time to regroup. Finally, the helpless 
victim syndrome hits as Bullock is taken hostage by Dafoe and doesn't 
escape. Oh sure, she howls, threatens and swings at him periodically, but 
she stays by his side, skipping painfully obvious chances to get away.
"Speed 2" isn't all bad. A number of the action scenes are effective, and 
the film's nods to other movies and TV shows, particularly "The Love 
Boat" and "The Poseidon Adventure" are amusing ("Twister" fans should 
watch the skies for a brief bovine appearance during an explosion. ) 
That's about all the fun there is, though. The producers of "Speed 2" 
should savor their opening weekend receipts, because as soon as word of 
mouth (and this Friday's release of "Batman And Robin") gets around, this 
seaboard mish-mash of missed opportunities should sink like a stone. 

Author
Walter Frith
     The title of 'Speed 2: Cruise Control' is an oxy-moron.  The film is
anything but in control whether it's intentional or not.  What made the first
film so incredible was that confined areas had plausible scenes of tension
with a couple of exceptions.  There was also a genuine acceptance for the
second rate characters and a villain with panache and flamboyance.  A lot of
that is missing from this sequel that suffers from being nothing more than a
crashing bore.
     In one of the first opening scenes of 'Speed 2' we are asked to believe
that reckless driving is funny and is part of being a free spirit as Sandra
Bullock flunks out on her driving test and her boyfriend (Jason Patric) is a
member of the LAPD just as her companion (Keanu Reeves) was from the first
film.  We are told she apparently broke up with Reeves because of the
dangerous nature of his job.  Why would she hook up with a guy in the same
line of work?  You can tell that Patric's role was originally intended for
Reeves who decided not to make this sequel and he is off the hook from a
badly written movie.  
     Bullock is astoundingly annoying in this film and director Jan DeBont
who made the first film and 1996's 'Twister' should have recognized the bad
jokes, frumpy dialogue and razor thin interest that 'Speed 2' would generate.
 I guess his background as a noted cinematographer has not allowed him at
this point to catch these academic errors.  
     Willem Dafoe is a mad bomber this time around who sabotages Bullock and
Patric's cruise in the Caribbean with computers and gadgets of assorted
terror and his motivation is bent on revenge against the system that Dennis
Hopper's villain had from the first film.  Dafoe doesn't look like he's
having all that much fun playing the bad guy this time around and that's
suspicious.  Jason Patric, who is such a good actor is naturally expected to
save the day with his experience as a police officer but this time around his
faceless, dull expressions make Keanu Reeves look like a genius.
     This movie is an example that sometime less is more and while this
sequel is bigger in its presentation of special effects, it's a reminder that
quality and not quantity is what sells and that movie audiences don't want
their intelligence insulted

Author
Jeff Walters
Welcome to your oh-so typical sequel. It tries to be twice as big as
it's predecessor, yet ends up twice as shallow. 
         Shallow....hmm...now there's an idea. Maybe if the ill-fated
cruise liner in this movie had struck a shallow reef early on things
may have turned out better. The first thing that struck me...and
surprised me, was that the camera work (for the opening sequence
anyway) was terrible. Looked like the cameramen were drunk and kept
tripping on their own feet......very different to the original movie.
         The characters? Well, not many of the characters actually
*had* characters, but here's a rundown. Annie, who was the highlight
of the the original, must have seriously banged her head in the train
crash at the end of the first movie. Why? Because something's got to
account for her losing that many IQ points. Even though Annie wasn't
exactly a rocket scientist in Speed, here  some of her actions just
make you want to beat your head against a wall. For instance, after
successfully using a chainsaw to cut a hole in a door so that a group
of people can escape noxious gases - she stands in the middle of the
opening for about five minutes till someone reminds her that the
people can't get ut till she get's the chainsaw out of their
faces....BANG BANG BANG 

     In point of fact Sandra's character is turned into little more
than one of those scantly dressed extras from Hercules, who constantly
has to be rescued.
     Jason Patric? All I can say is Bring Back Keanu. Keanu Reeves
might have the emotional range of a tree stump...but that's
one more tree stump than Jason has. I don't think he changed facial
expressions all movie - Jason, smile for the cameras!! Now
frown!...I said frown....oh...you are...BANG BANG BANG.. Wooden just
doesn't describe this guys performance, but it'll have
to do.
     The Bad Guy.....ahh...William Dafoe - there's a bright move. How
can you go wrong with the star from that acknowledged
classic, Body of Evidence? (Yes, that is sarcasm). His wide eyed
maniac of a character doesn't start out too bad....but goes
steadily downhill as the movie progresses. In the end he degenerates
to chasing Annie around for a hostage, even though he
already has the money and can escape....BANG BANG.
     Though I'd like to give this movie a double thumbs down, there
were some nice sequences. Considering the movie cost
over 100 million dollars - you'd hope there'd be at least a couple.
The real eye-popper for me, even though it was given away in
the trailer....BANG BANG.....was the sequence where the Cruise Liner
sideswipes the oil tanker. This looks terrific and I was
very surprised to hear that the Cruise Liner in it was....completely
computer generated! Wow....I don't think I've ever seen a CG
model look so real before. The sequence where Jason Patric in trying
to disable the propellers from under the ship is also terrific,
and the only time during the entire movie where you get that feeling
of....speed.
     This lack-of-speed problem affects many sequences. Such as the
oil tanker part.....it was - "Oh no, We're going to hit the
oil tanker!", 20 minutes later - "Oh no, We're going to hit the oil
tanker!" 20 min....you get the point. This movie failed simply
because it didn't live up to it's name....there was very little
feeling of speed. In the original movie, the lead characters had to
make split second decisions to survive.....in this movie it felt more
like - "Well people, we're gonna run into that there island in a few
hours - I think I might stroll over to Engineering and see if I can't
turn off the engines...I'm passing the cafeteria on the way, can I
get anybody anything?" 
      The ending of this movie really is terrible. Even though it
features what I've since found out is one of the most expensive
sequences ever in a movie - it just doesn't work at all. The part
where the liner crashes through the town looks very realistic,
but....surprise surprise - it just takes waaaaay too long. It seemed
to go for 15 minutes before the ship finally stopped. One thing
that struck me as extremely poor scriptiing was that as the ship
crashes through the harbour and town, around 25 people are
killed by the ship....and there's only 15 or so people left on the
ship. So when it stops safe and sound and the characters are all
cheering - the audience is sitting back and thinking - "wait a
sec...this is a happy moment because?" BANG BANG
     Then there was the dog.....I almost fell out of my seat when I
saw the bit with the dog dodging the falling debris. Putting a
dog in peril has become the ULTIMATE Hollywood cliche......every movie
seems to have a 'Dog-in-Danger' sequence - Volcano, Dante's Peak,
Independence Day, Daylight, Twister. Lost World......etc, etc.
     This movie is a perfect example of how NOT to make a sequel.
Director Jan De Bont should try watching the orignal
movie and this one back-to-back and see if he realises where he went
wrong.

Author
Michael Redman
Just when you had seen Lost World and thought that the summer crop
couldn't get any worse, this abomination comes along to prove you wrong.
The sequel to the big hit of 1994 will go down in cinematic history as
the big bomb of 1997. Reuniting director Jan De Bont (who also did
"Twister") and Sandra Bullock, the film is missing Keanu Reeves and any
semblance of excitement. Not known for his tremendous acting talent,
turning down this one may have been the high point in Reeves' career.
Annie (Bullock), having broken up with her cop lover acquired at the end
of the original movie because he was a daredevil, is now hooked up with
a new policeman, Alex (Jason Patric). The trouble is that Alex isn't the
mild-mannered beach patrolman that he said he was, but rather a member
of the Los Angeles SWAT team. This doesn't make her happy.
In order to prove his love, he takes her on a relaxing romantic
Caribbean cruise. Surprisingly enough, there are plans afoot to make the
vacation anything but restful. Also on board is John Geiger (Willem
Dafoe), the designer of the ship's computer guidance system. Geiger is
frenzied because the company fired him when they discovered that he
contracted fatal copper poisoning while working for them.
His plan is to take over the ship and run it into something that will
explode. Now there's an action-filled plot for ya.
But there's no action here, much less an interesting plot. Most things
move at slow motion (odd for a movie titled "Speed"). Even when the
action heats up, it's just formulaic pap. The first film worked despite
the two-dimensional characters because it pulled in the audience with
its thrill-a-minute energy. This one leaves you waiting for the
excitement. And waiting. And waiting.
Bullock may have run into a dead end here. After attaining "star" status
with the original, she has turned out one dog after another. Her
performance as Annie has even less spark than usual and that's a dismal
assessment. It's astonishing that she can command a high salary and that
situation can't last much longer.
Dafoe could have made the film tolerable. His history is filled with
fine performances and he usually plays the twisted psycho expertly.
However Geiger is the dullest crazed evil villain ever seen on the
silver screen. Even the leeches used to treat his illness don't add a
spark.
Patric is almost adequate, but the chemistry between him and Bullock
doesn't exist. The scenes with the two of them drag on worse than the
rest of the film.
The saying used to be "Speed kills", now it's "Speed bores".
[This appeared in the 6/19/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]
