Title
Review for Zero Patience (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Max Hoffmann
1993 CANADA
Writer/Director: John Greyson
Composer: Glenn Schellenberg
Lyrics: John Greyson
Cast: John Robinson, Normand Fauteux, Dianne Heatherington,
      Ricardo Keens-Douglas, Michael Callen, Marla Lukofsy
Producers: Louise Garfield, Anna Stratton
Cinematography: Susan McKenzie
     A must see!  Canadian film maker John Greyson has pulled off the
nearly unthinkable: an uncompromising, in-your-face, Queer/Aids
*musical* that is highly entertaining, and is destined to be a cult
classic.  The film makes no apologies for its randy sexuality, and will
offend more conservative viewers.  But it's refreshing to see a
"message" film that, unlike PHILDADELPHIA, wasn't neutered to please
the Blockbuster crowd.
     Borrowing from a variety of cultural icons, on the surface the
film might be initially mistaken for a fluffy piece of entertainment.
But deft direction, inspired casting, punky rhythms with scathing
lyrics and healthy doses of frontal male nudity save the film from
taking on the didactic overtones of most "message" films.
     The whimsical script has Victorian sexologist and explorer, Sir
Richard Francis Burton (John Robinson), still miraculously alive after
over 170 years (due to an unfortunate encounter with the fountain of
youth).  Burton has resurfaced in the Natural History Museum, where
he's working on his upcoming exhibit, "The Hall of Contagion."  When
his most coveted exhibit becomes unavailable, he hits on the inspired
idea of making "Patient Zero" (the enticing Normand Fauteux, as the
maligned French-Canadian flight attendant, accused of bringing AIDS to
North America) in to the centerpiece of the show.  Like the tales of
Scheherazade, the telling of Zero's tale keeps him "alive," as a lusty
ghost that only Burton can see, and eventually touch.
     The film is peppered with imaginative musical segments that run
the gamut from synchronized swimming, to Buzby Berkeley camera angles
on Michael Callen (in drag as "Miss HIV").  Callen fulfilled a lifelong
dream by holding a note longer (19 seconds) than Barbra Streisand did
in any of her films!
     Though it's easy to rave about the film's more innovative visual
aspects, the glue that holds the film together is the corral of strong
performers that Greyson pulled forth from the highly fecund Canadian
performing arts scene.  The highly watchable Normand Fauteux brings
just the right impish charm to his Zero, who still wants to get laid
after years beyond the Grave.  Even still photographic images of
Fauteux holds the audience's attention like fly paper.  Also notable is
the memorable screen presence of Dianne Heatherington, as an ACT UP
leader who takes no prisoners.  Marla Lukofsky nearly steels the film
when she sings "Contagious," as the African Green Monkey.
     Video and film artist John Greyson's previous work includes "The
ADS Epidemic" ("Acquired Dread of Sex'--1987), and "The Making of
Monsters" (1991).  "Because I come from experimental film and video,
but want to reach broader audiences," Greyson relates, "the musical
seemed to be a perfect strategy.  In a perverse way, I loved adopting
such a traditionally 'fluffy' genre, and applying it to the politics of
such a controversial and depressing subject."
     Composer Glenn Schellenberg echoes Greyson's sentiments: "With
Zero, we were interested in creating a musical space where lots of
popular references would quote a whole smorgasbord of styles."  Not
wanting to privilege one style of music, Schellenberg relates that "our
references were everything from Pet Shop Boys and the Jesus and Mary
Chain to Ricky Ricardo and the Pirates of Penzance."  Calypso meets
barber shop.  Hi-NRG meets Broadway.  Gershwin meets Morrissey.
     Greyson and Schellenberg's songs richly deserve a soundtrack.  Not
every number is memorable, but several songs, particularly "Six or
Seven Things," "Zero Patience," and "Positive" stand out.  In
"Positive," school teacher George, who's losing his eyesight from AIDS
medication, sings the sentiments known to all too many:
        They're positive that I'm positive
        They're sure that these doubts are a curse
        I'm supposed to be certainly certain
        Well, I'm sure that I'm getting worse
        I'm positive I'm here, I'm positive I care
        I'm positive that there's nothing to be sure of
        I'm positive I'm positive, I'm positive I'm still alive
        I'm positive that I'm going to die...
        sometime.
     The randy, male sexuality that's in your face through out the film
will stretch the envelope for some mainstream viewers virtually to the
breaking point.  Yet, somehow, Greyson has managed to inform and
entertain, while breathing new life into the musical format.  Far from
being a comedy (there are searingly personal moments of the pain that
comes from living with the disease), it is a film you will not soon
forget.

Author
James Berardinelli
     I don't like being preached to.  No matter how laudable the cause
or how much I agree with what's being said, I don't appreciate it when
a movie wants to tell me how to think.  That's one of the problems with
ZERO PATIENCE.  It takes a narrow view of the AIDS crisis - one that
refutes current theories about the disease's origins and spread without
ever offering an alternative.
     Political and social agendas in movies are more easily acceptable
if the film in which they appear are entertaining.  Unfortunately, ZERO
PATIENCE is virtually bankrupt dramatically.  The script lacks
coherence and intelligence, and the presentation of several probing
questions about AIDS is about the only thing the movie seems to do
right.
     What's more, ZERO PATIENCE is a musical (a what???), and most of
the song-and-dance numbers start up in the most jarring of
circumstances.  Only one, "Six or Seven Things" actually seems to
belong.  When it comes to ribald bad taste, there's a song that has
some rather unexpected body parts singing about the relative benefits
of homosexual sex.  Had the film applied for an MPAA rating, this would
have guaranteed an NC-17.
     The story, such as it is, postulates that the famous European
explorer and author Sir Richard Francis Burton (John Robinson) is alive
and well (as the result of a drink from a fountain of youth) and
working in the Museum of Natural History in Toronto.  There, he is
putting together an exhibit on the origins of AIDS for the "Hall of
Contagions." The subject of his project is Patient Zero (Normand
Fauteux), the supposed carrier of AIDS from Africa to North America.
Burton's initial motives are mercenary, but encounters with Patient
Zero's ghost changes his views on quite a number of things - including
his own sexuality, as he falls in love with the ghost.
     I should mention that amidst all the ridiculousness that marks the
main story, there is a well-told, touching subplot involving a teacher
of elementary students (Ricardo Keens-Douglas) who is going blind as a
result of AIDS complications.  Unfortunately, the amount of screen time
allowed to this element of ZERO PATIENCE is a small fraction of the
whole.
     There are those to whom the outlandish weirdness of this film will
appeal, but I am not one of them.  In some ways, I appreciate some of
the points that writer/director John Greyson is trying to make
(especially what he's saying about the greed of the drug industry), but
his methods leave a lot to be desired.  Then again, ZERO PATIENCE
wasn't aimed at me, nor at most of the movie-going population.  It's
fitting that the inspiration for this movie appears to have been THE
ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW, because my primary reaction after emerging
from the theater was something akin to horror.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
