Title
Review for L-Shaped Room, The (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Leslie Caron may be best known for playing
the love interest in "An American in Paris",
"Father Goose", and "Gigi", but those weren't
the films that earned her two Best Actress
Academy Award nominations.  They came ten
years apart, in the 1953 children's film
"Lili", and in the 1963 character study
"The L-Shaped Room".
In the latter film, a British production
directed by Bryan Forbes, Caron plays a
pregnant woman who is unsure of her future.
Jane is from a well-to-do French family, but
emigrates to England to find her own way
seperate from her lover and family.  She
soon discovers poverty, but also makes friends
in the low-rent apartment building where she
stays.
First among these is Toby (Tom Bell), an
attentive, impassioned but failed writer, and
helpful, gentle Johnny (Brock Peters, fresh
from playing the defendant in "To Kill a
Mockingbird").  There's also a middle-aged
lesbian (Cicely Courtneidge).
Then as now, there is little glory in unwed
pregnancy.  Everyone assumes that Jane is
looking for a then-illegal abortion.  Toby
is the last character to be aware of her
predicament, which Jane keeps secret from
him out of fear of losing his romantic interest.
Jane herself is uncertain of what to do about
her pregnancy and her life, but she knows one
thing.  She won't do anything just because
somebody wants her to do it, and her refusal
to commit to anyone or anything leads to
much suffering.  The major characters are all
sympathetic to Jane, but are frustrated by
her indecisions.
Considered almost shocking at the time of
release, "The L-Shaped Room" actually is much
more conservative than the black comedies of
the era (e.g. "Dr. Strangelove", "Manchurian
Candidate", "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane").
The film itself is sometimes slow, and the
dialogue, especially from Courtneidge, can
be difficult to follow for these Yankee ears.
The sets are drab, which is realistic but
not lending itself to pleasing cinematography.
Caron is a fine actress, but her character's
restless nature doesn't give her enough to
work with.  In the end, "The L-Shaped Room"
is well-intentioned but fails to execute.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
