Title
Review for Beautiful Creatures (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    While a small sector of man-hating women who incorrectly
consider themselves feminists may laud the theme of
"Beautiful Creatures," the all-men-are-slime motif could have
possessed some value as entertainment if not for Simon
Donald's witless script, all-around unfocused acting, and
director Bill Eagles' embarrassingly jagged pacing.  Since film
studios' output is dominated by positing men as action figures
with women standing by their side, there may be some merit
in centering on Petula (Rachel Weisz) and Dorothy (Susan
Lynch) as the beautiful creatures who take destiny into their
own hands like Ridley Scott's Thelma and Louise.  Given that
Rachel Weisz is no Susan Sarandon and Susan Lynch no
Geena Davis--nor are any of the men in the Glasgow location
of the action comparable to Harvey Keitel or Michael Madsen-
-the entire enterprise sinks into a morass of grossly unsubtle
violence.  
   In Bill Eagles' version of a meet-cute, two women, unlikely
to pair save for their common enemies, run into each other
when Dorothy saves Petula from a beating by an inebriated
clod who drags a hiding Dorothy from beneath a car.  Having
brained the guy, Brian (Tom Mannion), who turns out to be
Petula's boy friend, Dorothy joins Petula in dragging the
creep back to the latter's flat where, after Brian wakes up and
dies, the two women connect like lifelong pals excited by the
propect of a big caper.  Pretending that Brian has been
kidnapped, the women engineer a ransom demand from the
poor guy's rich brother, Ronnie (Maurice Roeves)--a fellow
who looks like a refugee from a wax museum but appears to
be Dorothy's boss as well.  When corrupt detective George
Hepburn (Alex Norton) makes a guileless move on both the
ransom and the ditzy Petulia shortly before Dorothy's abusive
boy friend Tony (Iain Glen) turns up to retrieve his stash of
heroin, the stage is set for a pileup of bodies that would
make Shakespeare happy--if the Bard could sit still through
the abysmally clunky dialogue.
   About the only praiseworthy aspect of the film is that the
Scottish version of Milton's language needs no subtitles as
did "My Name is Joe," but perhaps we in the audience would
be better off if we did not quite understand about half of
what's being said.  Rachel Weisz, who supported Brendan
Fraser so well in "The Mummy" as both ancient Egyptian
royalty and present-day traveling companion, does best in
understated roles.  As a bewigged, sluttish-looking platinum
blond, she does not fare so favorably.  We wonder why her
character would put up with the offensive boy friend for an
hour, nor is there much chemistry between her and her co-
caperer played by Andie MacDowell lookalike Susan Lynch.
Rated R.  Running time: 88 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
