Title
Review for Casablanca (1942)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman, Paul Henreid, Claude Rains,
Conrad Veidt, Sidney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, Dooley Wilson.
Screenplay:  Julius J. Epstein & Philip G. Epstein and Howard Koch, with
additional material.
Director:  Michael Curtiz.
MPAA Rating:  PG (adult themes, Nazis)
Running Time:  111 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I suppose it was inevitable given the confluence of trends.  The
surprising success of THE ENGLISH PATIENT, culminating in its sweep of the
1997 Academy Awards, proved that there is an audience for sweeping period
romance with a political dimension; the phenomenal success of the STAR
WARS re-release demonstrated that there was an audience for re-worked
versions of classic films.  Warner Bros. claimed that this "definitive"
version of the legendary 1942 film CASABLANCA has been in the works for a
while to coincide with its 55th anniversary, but the timing seems a bit
too convenient.  Whatever the reasons and however the suits at Warners
might be trying to spin it, this re-release probably strikes fear into the
hearts of movie lovers everywhere, yet it need not do so.  Under the
supervision of the Warner Bros. marketing department, CASABLANCA has been
updated with intriguing results, and may find a new, younger audience it
never had before.
     The story, of course, finds American expatriate Rick Blaine (Humphrey
Bogart) operating a nightclub in Casablanca during the Second World War
with friend and piano player Sam (Dooley Wilson).  Rick is content to let
the swirling political events go on without his interference, but that is
before, out of all the gin joints in the world, Ilsa Lund (Ingrid Bergman)
walks into his.  Ilsa is an old flame, the one that got away, now married
to resistance leader Victor Laszlo (Paul Henreid) after leaving Rick at a
train station in Paris.  Laszlo is wanted by Nazi authorities, and the
letters of transit obtained by Rick are just the ticket to get Laszlo out
of the country.  Rick must choose between honor, love and
self-preservation as the much-desired letters of transit become the most
wanted items in Casablanca.
     The familiar story of CASABLANCA is quite enough to warrant another
trip to the big screen, but the elements added in this new version make it
perhaps even more compelling.  Max Steiner's glorious score has been
digitally re-mastered, providing a lush background for the film.  New
sequences include an additional exchange between Rick and rival club owner
Ferrari (Sidney Greenstreet) which did not make it into the original
version due to technical limitations.  Greestreet has been
computer-generated for this sequence, and the character provides an
amusing reaction shot when Rick steps on his tail while moving around him.
Dooley Wilson's famous rendering of "As Time Goes By" has also been jazzed
up, given a more up-tempo arrangement and the addition of more background
dancers.  Most impressive is the final scene at the airport, where
Laszlo's plane takes off and soon explodes with a spectacular corona
effect.
     A dozen well-known screenwriters have also contributed to this effort
by providing additional dialogue and sub-plots which flesh out the story
and characters.  Joe Eszterhas gives Ilsa a new dimension by making her a
predatory bisexual, fascinated by the innocent young girl whom Rick saves
from the clutches of Renault (Claude Rains).  Quentin Tarantino adds a few
choice expletives to Rick's conversations with Renault and Ferrari,
including an exchange regarding the racial politics of contemporary radio
programs, while Carrie Fisher (who also makes a cameo appearance in a
bronze bikini) gives Ilsa a few barbed comebacks to Rick's hard-edged
reactions.  The least effective additions may be those provided by Woody
Allen, who makes Rick considerably less decisive when he consults a
therapist before deciding what to do with the letters of transit.
     Undoubtedly there will be film purists who consider the mere idea of
such supplementary material to be a travesty, but there is a danger to
such knee-jerk, reactionary opposition to the opportunities modern
technology can provide.  Perhaps the nay-sayers would have denied us the
chance to see Fred Astaire tap-dancing with a vacuum cleaner, or Marilyn
Monroe hawking Chanel No. 5.  This is not your father's CASABLANCA; indeed
it is something more.  Sacrifice is for suckers in the 1990s, and this
version acknowledges that reality when Ilsa slips out through the cargo
hold after planting the bomb which sends Laszlo to the only place where
resistance genuinely is futile.  CASABLANCA: SPECIAL EDITION will only be
available in major markets to begin with, which is a true shame.  Perhaps
intense support in cities will allow others the chance to see the problems
of two people amounting to a hill of beans, and a pile of money.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Humphrey Bogard, Ingrid Bergman, Paul Henreid, Claude Rains, 
      Conrad Veidt, Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, Dooley Wilson
Director: Michael Curtiz
Producer: Hal B. Wallis
Screenplay: Julius J. Epstein, Philip G. Epstein, and Howard Koch based 
      on the play "Everybody Comes to Rick's" by Murray Burnett and 
      Joan Alison
Cinematography: Arthur Edeson
Music: Max Steiner
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     It's probably no stretch to say that CASABLANCA, arguably America's 
best-loved movie, has had more words written about it than any other 
motion picture.  Over the years since its 1943 release, the legends and 
rumors surrounding the making of the film have generated almost as much 
attention as the finished product.  Some of the best-known and most 
often repeated tidbits include producer Hal B. Wallis' near-casting of 
Ronald Reagan and Ann Sheridan as Rick and Ilsa, the "double script 
finale" (one version had the ending as filmed; the other, unproduced 
version had Rick and Ilsa together), and the reported backscreen tension 
between several of the principal actors.
     Ultimately, however, while it's fascinating to examine and dissect 
all that went into the making of CASABLANCA, the greatest pleasure 
anyone can derive from this movie comes simply by watching it.  Aside 
from some basic knowledge of recent world history, little background is 
needed to appreciate the strength and power of the film.  CASABLANCA 
accomplishes that which only a truly great film can:  enveloping the 
viewer in the story, forging an unbreakable link with the characters, 
and only letting go with the end credits.  
     Unlike many films that later became classics, CASABLANCA was 
popular in its day, although some officials at Warner Brothers were 
convinced that it would be a box-office failure.  The movie earned 8 
Oscar nominations, of which it won three (Best Screenplay, Best 
Director, and Best Picture).  The picture went on to have a long, 
healthy life in re-releases, television, and (eventually) video.  It 
contains a slew of recognizable lines ("Here's looking at you, kid", "Of 
all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world, she walks into 
mine", "Round up the usual suspects", "Louis, I think this is the 
beginning of a beautiful friendship", "We'll always have Paris", "The 
problems of three little people don't amount to a hill of beans in this 
crazy world").  Ironically, however, the best-known bit of dialogue from 
CASABLANCA, "Play it again, Sam," isn't even in the movie.  Like Captain 
Kirk's "Beam me up, Scotty," it's an apocryphal line.  The closest the 
movie gets is either "Play it" or "Play 'As Time Goes By.'"
     I remember the first time I saw CASABLANCA, remarking how "modern" 
it seemed.  While many movies from the '30s and '40s appear horribly 
dated when viewed today, CASABLANCA stands up remarkably well.  The 
themes of valor, sacrifice, and heroism still ring true today.  The 
dialogue has lost none of its wit or cleverness.  The atmosphere 
(enhanced by the sterling black-and-white cinematography), that of 
encroaching gloom, is as palpable as ever.  And the characters are still 
as perfectly-acted and three-dimensional as they were more than fifty 
years ago.  
     Just about everyone knows the story, which takes place about a year 
after the Germans invaded France.  Ilsa (Ingrid Bergman) and her 
husband, Czech freedom fighter Victor Laszlo (Paul Henreid) wander into 
Rick's Cafe in Casablanca.  The two are on the run from the Nazis, and 
have come to the American-owned nightspot to lie low.  But the German-
controlled local government, headed by Captain Louis Renault (Claude 
Rains) is on the move, and Laszlo has to act quickly to get the letters 
of transit he came for, then escape.  Little does Ilsa know that the 
cafe is run by Rick Blaine (Humphrey Bogart), the one true love of her 
life.  When the two see each other, sparks fly, and memories of an 
enchanted time in Paris come flooding back.
     Bogart and Bergman.  When almost anyone mentions CASABLANCA, these 
are the first two names that come to mind.  The actors are both so 
perfectly cast, and create such a believable level of romantic tension, 
that it's impossible to envision anyone else in their parts (and 
inconceivable to consider that they possibly weren't the producer's 
first choices).  Bogart is at his best here, as the tough cynic who 
hides a broken heart beneath a fractured layer of sarcasm.  Ilsa's 
arrival in Casablanca rips open the fissures in Rick's shield, revealing 
a complex personality that demands Bogart's full range of acting.  As 
Ilsa, Bergman lights up the screen.  What man in the audience wouldn't 
give up everything to run away with her?
     Less known is Paul Henreid, a romantic lead who was on loan to 
Warner Brothers for this project.  Most viewers know Henreid as "the 
other guy" in the romantic triangle, and, while his performance isn't on 
the same level as that of his better-known co-stars, Henreid 
nevertheless does a respectable job.  CASABLANCA features some other 
well-known faces.  Conrad Veidt plays a Nazi commander who is on 
Laszlo's trail, Peter Lorre is the man who initially steals the letters 
of transit, and Sydney Greenstreet is the city's black market overloard.
     But the best performance in the film has to be that of Claude 
Rains, who is simply magnificent.  Bogart and Bergman are great, but 
Rains is better. This is the role of a very impressive career and it's a 
shame that he didn't win the Best Supporting Oscar for which he was 
deservedly nominated.  Rains is a standout in nearly every scene he 
appears in, but, like the consummate professional, he constantly cedes 
the spotlight to the higher-profile star.
     Another curious thing about CASABLANCA is that hardly anyone ever 
talks about the director.  It's not as if Michael Curtiz is a journeyman 
hack who got lucky here.  From the '20s to the '50s, Curtiz was one of 
the hardest working directors in Hollywood, helming over 100 films 
including THE SEA WOLF, WHITE CHRISTMAS, MILDRED PIERCE, and YANKEE 
DOODLE DANDY.  (Before that, he made nearly 50 movies in Europe, where 
he began his career in 1912.)  Curtis was a well-respected film maker 
and his work on CASABLANCA is first rate, but, for some reason, few non-
cineastes associate his name with this picture.
     It's not much of a stretch to say that Hollywood doesn't make 
movies like this any more, because the bittersweet ending has gone the 
way of black-and-white cinematography.  If CASABLANCA was made in 
today's climate, Rick and Ilsa would escape on the plane after avoiding 
a hail of gunfire (Rick would probably be doing the two-fisted gun thing 
that John Woo loves).  There would be no beautiful friendship between 
Louis and Rick.  Who knows what would have happened to Victor Laszlo, 
but he wouldn't have gotten the girl.  One of the things that makes 
CASABLANCA unique is that it stays true to itself without giving in to 
commonly held perceptions of crowd-pleasing tactics.  And because of 
this, not despite it, CASABLANCA has become known as one of the greatest 
movies ever made.  Maybe the modern generation of screenwriters should 
consider this before they tack on the obligatory "happily ever after" 
ending.
     From time-to-time, someone tries to remake the film, but even the 
best re-tread has been less than a pale shadow of the original.  The 
most recent attempt was HAVANA, Sydney Pollack's ill-advised misfire.  
Despite a good cast (Robert Redford, Lena Olin, Raul Julia) and a change 
in venue, this is clearly an updated CASABLANCA, and CASABLANCA isn't 
CASABLANCA without Bogart and Bergman.  So, although just about everyone 
involved in CASABLANCA is dead, this film has withstood the test of more 
than a half-century to rise, like cream, to the top.  One can only 
imagine that, in another fifty years, its position in the hierarchy of 
all-time greats will be even higher.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Sridhar Prasad
Starring Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman, and Claude Rains
    By now, this movie has transcended even film itself.  I was a late =
bloomer: it was a long time until I saw Casablanca.  Too bad, because =
when it was all said and done, I thought this really was the beginning =
of a beautiful friendship.  If you are one of those extremely rare =
people who have never seen this gorgeously amazing film, go right now =
and rent it.  Then watch it again.  And again.  And again.  It's that =
good. =20
    This, simply, is the best romance Hollywood has ever concocted.  It =
just might be the best picture Hollywood has ever made.  Alright, =
alright, I'm jumping ahead of myself.  Let's start at the beginning.  =
Rick Blaine (Humphrey Bogart) is a bar owner in Casablanca, a travel =
town in Morocco during WWII.  It is controlled by the Vichy French =
Government, but Rick is usually given a free hand to do what he pleases. =
 No one knows what fully goes on in Rick's place but Rick himself, as =
visas are sold, bribes are issued, and a whole host of other things go =
on.  It is a normal night, with many many people trying to flee =
Casablanca to America.  The plot centers around one of these people: =
Victor Laszlo, a French Resistance leader.  He and his wife Elsa =
(Bergman) come to Casablanca to seek visas to America. =20
    The catch?  Elsa is an old flame of Rick.  She used to date him, and =
they frequented a bar with a black piano player named Sam (the =
incomparable Dooley Wilson), who came with Rick to set up shop in =
Casablanca.  Elsa dumped Rick on a rainy night in Paris, and Rick's =
heart has been stone-cold ever since.  Rick holds two visas with him =
that could save the lives of the Laszlos, but he waits, for he feels he =
shouldn't give them to Laszlo at any price.  Finally, after the pleas of =
Elsa, Rick concocts a plan to get her out of the country.
    Bogart and Bergman are simply fabulous in their respective roles.  =
Claude Rains playes police captain Louis Renault to absolute perfection. =
 He is marvelously hilarious, sharing some memorable scenes with Bogart, =
especially the final scene.  The direction is subtly perfect by Curtiz, =
and everything comes together marvelously.  Nothing in this film goes =
wrong, and if it does, who cares?  For all the inconsistencies in the =
script (fog in Morocco?  visas that can't be rejected by the Nazis?), =
the lines are so good that they make up for it.  "Play it again, Sam". =
That's what we want most of all.  After all, "a kiss is just a =
kiss....as time goes by".  The script ends up to be marvelous.  This is =
as close to flawless as Hollywood will ever get. =20
    How can you argue with Bogie?  You can't.  Watch Casablanca again.  =
It'll be the start of a beautiful friendship.
RATING (out of 4): ****
(2nd best movie I've ever seen (only to the Godfather))

Author
M. Pierce
 In one of my many videos I have attained from the local library, Casablanca
was my third classic in some weeks.  The others being Citizen Kane and Vertigo
(yes, I am trying to see as many of AFI's Greatest Movies Ever Made as I can). 
But, Casablanca stood out from the rest for me:  It was actually watchable.
  What most hail as the greatest American film ever, Casablanca isn't so much a
love story as a political frenzy with a love triangle thrown in.  It seems that
star Humphry Bogart spend about 85 percent of the movie with various leaders of
the nation instead of with Ingred Bergman.  That annoyed me, as did the ending.
 Why didn't the plan turn around?!?
  Surprisingly, I enjoyed the film.  I liked Bogart's character and his acting
(not over the top as most actors in his era).  I once read about if you had a
choice to be in a movie, which one would it be, and a women said Casablanca. 
At first I was thinking to myself "why?"  Then, as I watched the film again, I
understood why.  The movie is very well done and the script top-notch, although
I doubt I understood more than half of the political mumbo jumbo.
  Casablanca is, in my mind, no classic (like Solaris), but it is a good film
and stylishly shot.  Hey, Hollywood, how about this:  A remake with Harrison
Ford and Anne Heche?  Now that would be a classic.

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1942, not rated, 102 minutes [1 hour, 42 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Humphrey Bogart (Rick Blaine), Ingrid Bergman (Ilsa Lund), Paul
Henreid (Victor Laszlo), Claude Rains (Captain Louis Renault), written by
Julius and Phillip Epstein, Howard Koch, produced by Hal B. Wallis, directed
by Michael Curtiz, based on the play "Everybody Goes To Rick's" by Murray
Burnett, Joan Alison.
If ever there was a story about "love and war," "Casablanca" is it. It's a
story of love, power, destiny, and doing what's right. The film's theme
serves to disprove the attitudes of the characters within it - that the
problems of a few people do "amount to a hill of beans in the whole scheme of
things."         
As the film opens we learn during World War II many refugees made their way
to Casablanca in French Morocco to escape the Nazis and for a passage to
Lisbon, where they could in turn flee to the United States. There is no
further explanation of WWII but none is needed. Everyone knows the power the
Nazis had and the darkness of man they represent.
Humphrey Bogart stars as Rick Blaine, a dapper American who owns a club, The
Cafe Americain, where all the important people in Casablanca go to socialize.
At the same time we start to meet other key players such as French Police
Captain (and part-time friend of Rick) Louis Renault (Rains). Renault says he
is going to arrest someone who murdered two German couriers for passport
clearance papers in front of his superiors - the German Gestapo.
The importance of the papers is really what the entire film revolves around.
But this is not an adventure or war story, it is actually a story of love and
self sacrifice. This is proved true with the introduction of two more
characters, Victor Laszlo (Henreid) and Ilsa Lund (Bergman). Hints about
these characters had been dropped through some of the characters' dialogue,
but mostly in passing. This is the greatest element to the film - the use of
intelligent subtlety.
Rick and Ilsa had a romantic encounter in Paris some years prior, but Rick
had to escape the Nazis and assumed Ilsa was coming with him... There aren't
many details of their affair, but none are necessary. The characters radiate
such an awesome presence, just their glances and actions tell us all we need
to know.
It's obvious Rick and Ilsa love each other, but she reveals something very
shocking and puts Rick into a very awkward position. Basically, Rick holds
the key to Ilsa's freedom, and he knows that giving it to her is the right
thing to do, but it may cost either or both of them their happiness. What is
the right thing to do?
"Casablanca" is so full of human spirit it seems like Shakespeare himself
might have wrote this great story. This film is quite conservative, it wastes
no shots, actions, nor dialogue in telling its story. Everything works to
tell the story, define the mood, and make for theme. Excellent filmmaking
indeed. 
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Carl S Lau
A few weeks ago, I got a DVD copy of "Casablanca."  I must be reliving
my former years in out-of-date movies.   "Casablanca" was made in
1943.  I don't know how many times that I have seen it on tv but it
must be a movie that I have probably seen more than any other one.
What can I say about it?  There is little doubt that it is a classic,
pure and simple.  It is as fresh today, if not more so, than the first
times that I saw it in the 60's and 70's.  For me, it is the ultimate
Bogie movie.  The performances are flawless.  The cast is simply great
and Ingrid Bergman is scintillating.  I know of no actress today that
can even come close to this kind of performance.  She was in a class
all by herself.  Very few actors and actresses today have the onscreen
presence of Humphrey Bogart or Ingrid Bergman.  Unlike movies prior or
even subsequent to it, "Casablanca" never drags and it isn't even an
action movie.  "Casablanca" has made an indelible impression on me
that has never left.  Most of the actors have since passed on.  The
plus of a DVD movie is that there is usually a special sequence
created just for the DVD, as well as the original trailer shown at the
theater.  That trailer doesn't come even close to capturing the
feeling of the film.   Most trailers promise more than they can
deliver.  There was a special feature on this movie with Lauren
Bacall, Bogie's last wife, on the DVD.  I had known that "Casablanca"
had been made in a state of flux in which the ending of the movie
hadn't been written until nearly the end of the movie - so that none
of the actors or actresses knew how the movie would end.  Somehow or
other this must have enhanced the movie because of the ongoing WWII.
The details were fascinating because this is one time in which
everything came together to produce something that has easily
withstood the test of time.  I doubt that there are any superfluous
scenes, at all, in the movie.  It is a masterpiece put together by
many different people.  For me, this is the number one movie of all
time.  I guess that I am just not sophisticated enough to appreciate
"Citizen Kane."  Long lived "anything," when it comes to literary
creations or movies, seem to inevitably deal with values and
relationships.  "Casablanca" is at the top of the heap for me.  It is
nothing short of pure magic - even 56 years later.  

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are some works of art that are almost impossible to
review, not because of their own complexity, but because of
their legendary status which prevents the reviewer to say
anything original. One of such masterpieces is CASABLANCA,
probably not the best film in the history of the seventh
art, but definitely the most popular one. Its popularity can
be measured not in a multitude of more or less disguised
remakes that were made in more than half a century since its
premiere, but also in countless tributes and references that
movie makers use in their works to this day. CASABLANCA is
also a movie that has the very rare virtue of both being
praised by the critics and loved by general audience.
One of the things that makes this film even more unique was
the fact that it was doomed to fail, at least judging by
conventional movie-making wisdom of its time. It was based
on a Broadway play so mediocre that it hadn't been produced
on stage; screenplay by three writers - Julius G. Epstein,
Philip J. Epstein and Howard Koch - was beeing written as
shooting went along; the main actors were producers' second
choice, and, finally, man behind camera, Michael Curtiz was
considered to be capable, but not great director. However,
the movie was commercially successful and earned three
"Oscars", including the one for the best film. Until this
very day, it is considered to be the best example of
Hollywood film- making in its own Golden Age.
The plot of the movie was heavily influenced by the needs of
WW2 propaganda, yet it also used rather complicated and now
almost forgotten political circumstances of that global
conflict in order to make intriguing story. In December
1941, Casablanca, exotic port on the Atlantic coast of North
Africa is controlled by officially neutral, yet
Nazi-collaborating French Vichy government. Thousands of
refugees from war-torn Europe are stuck there on the way to
Lisbon and safety of America, and ready to pay any price for
precious exit visas. Many shady characters thrive on their
misery, including the corrupt police chief, Captain Renault
(Rains). His best friend is Rick Blaine (Bogart), who used
to be idealistic anti-Fascist, and now owns popular night
club in Casablanca and lives by his own cynical philosophy
of "sticking his neck for nobody". However, everything
changes when he gets in possession of two precious extra
visas. This event coincides with the arrival of two new
refugees to Casablanca. One of them is Victor Laszlo
(Henreid), Czech resistance leader who escaped three times
from Nazi concentration camps and became the legend of
enslaved Europe. He is accompanied by his beautiful wife
Ilsa Lund (Bergman), with whom Rick had a stormy affair in
the eve of Nazi occupation of Paris. The couple needs visas,
especially because of the Gestapo Major Strasser (Veidt)
being on their trail. Rick is now forced to choose between
love, wounded pride, self-preserving interest and his own
hatred of Fascism.
The casting for this movie seems influenced by divine
inspiration - Humphrey Bogart, most legendary actor in the
history of cinema, is one of the rare character actors who
elevated his persona to the star status. Bogart's portrayal
of Rick as complicated man, torn between idealistic past and
bitter present, was so perfect, that his icon would forever
be connected with that character. Another icon in his
company is Ingrid Bergman, great actress of Old Hollywood,
here in her artistic and visual prime. The cinematic
coupling of Bogart and Bergman became one of the main
symbols of that era of filmmaking - some happier times when
the romance on the screen didn't look childish nor trite
like in some more contemporary works. For many people,
CASABLANCA is probably the best romantic film ever made. But
the reason for that isn't the romance itself - it's the
realistic story of people forced to make tough, and often
wrong choices in their life.
The casting of CASABLANCA was right on target not just in a
case of main leads. The supporting actors also did a
marvellous job. Sidney Longstreet and Peter Lorre were here
mainly to give a mystic flavour spotted in a previous Bogart
classic - John Huston's MALTESE FALCON; yet both of them
managed to portray colourful and original characters.
Another shining example of good casting is now almost
forgotten Paul Henreid as the weakest part of love triangle;
character of Victor Laszlo has believable charisma and looks
like a somebody who could inspire millions of people to rise
against Nazi tiranny. Unfortunately, the charisma that
burdened Laszlo, leaves little place for difficult choice,
making his character forever overshadowed by Rick/Ilsa
coupling.
However, Rick and Ilsa actually have a serious competiton
for most memorable character in CASABLANCA. Captain Renault,
brilliantly portrayed by Claude Rains in a role of a
lifetime, was embodiment of perfect, almost unmatched
balance between ethical corruption and physical charm.
Despite being the undoubtful villain in almost entire movie,
Rains managed to make Renault sympathetic character, and his
final conversion to the side of Good, symbolized in not so
subtle gesture at the end of movie looked unnecessary. Rains
also gave another dimension to the movie, making it even
more ambiguous; people who like to analyse movies to death
discovered signs of homosexuality in Renault's relationship
towards Rick, and Rick's final words leave room for even
more outrageous speculations.
Together with well-drawn characters and exciting story, the
movie was good in creating his own atmosphere. Professional
nitpickers would probably have a field day in discovering
numerous historical and geographical inaccuracies, but
CASABLANCA is still a shining example of Hollywood WW2 movie
that is beliavable, if not realistic. Any way, even if we
don't see it as a historical document, CASABLANCA is movie
that can be source of entertainment as well as infinite
inspiration.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Unarguably one of the very best films in Hollywood 
history, CASABLANCA is set in French Morocco just before the 
start of World War II. Humphrey Bogart plays Rick, the nightclub 
owner who has refused thus far to take sides with the French 
resistance or the newly-appointed Nazi officials. He's his usual 
cool, collected self until a ghost from his past walks in on the arm 
of the most wanted man in the resistance. The woman is Ilsa (Ingrid 
Bergman), his lost love from Paris who never made it onto the train 
with him.
        Since then he's managed to suppress the emotional scars 
of jilted love, but finds himself drinking alone that night, pondering 
the reason why, "of all the gin joints in all the cities in all the world,
she had to walk into mine." No one tells him that if she hadn't there 
wouldn't have been a movie, but the Paris past of Rick and Ilsa and 
her reasons for staying behind are what drive the movie, along with 
the exit visas Rick has in his possession that are the only chance 
of Ilsa's man, the resistance leader, to get out of Casablanca 
safely.
        Repeated viewings add a lot of poignance to the early 
scenes, not just in putting the intricate, slowly-unfolding plot in 
big picture perspective, but in fully appreciating the reunion of 
Rick and Ilsa in his nightclub and understanding why Rick comes 
storming out to stop Sam the piano player (Dooley Wilson) from 
playing "As Time Goes By" after Ilsa requests it. The song, for 
anyone who's seen CASABLANCA, is symbolic of so much of 
the movie's meaning that it will be forever identified with 
CASABLANCA, even though it pops up in a great many other 
romances, including SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE.
        In the end it comes down to the age-old love triangle 
scenario. Bergman is still in love with Bogart but feels obligated 
to support her husband, while Bogart is in the situation of being 
in control of the destiny of the man who is married to the woman 
he loves. The ending is one of the most famous and memorable 
in movie history, and just about any line of dialogue is quotable. 
CASABLANCA is a wonderful, must-watch film from the Golden 
Age of Hollywood, one of the few movies that has actually 
improved with age and demands repeat viewings.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Brian Koller
"Casablanca" comes closer to perfection than any other
film that I have seen, and is probably the best film
ever made.  "Casablanca" has everything: a great script,
a great cast, and outstanding cinematography and direction.
If you are reading this, you've probably seen the film
several times.  "Casablanca" stars Humphrey Bogart as
Rick, who owns a popular nightclub in Casablanca, Morocco.
The film takes place during World War II, and the Nazis
have taken France.  Morocco is a French territory.
Casablanca is filled with refugees trying to escape
Nazi influence, and there is a black market for exit visas.
Deeply cynical Rick tries to suppress his anti-Nazi sentiments,
as does corrupt official Claude Rains.  Peter Lorre and
Sydney Greenstreet are simply profiteers.  Conrad Veidt
plays a dislikable Nazi officer, who is chasing fugitive
Paul Henreid.  Henreid is married to lovely Ilsa (Ingrid
Bergman), who once had an affair with Rick.  Rick, whose
motto is "I don't stick my neck out for nobody", is asked
to help Henreid escape.  He is also tempted to resume his
romance with Ilsa.
What makes "Casablanca" possibly the best film ever made?
The most important element is the script, which is the
most quoted in film history.  The script was based on
an obscure unproduced play, "Everybody comes to Rick's",
and according to legend was written hastily during filming.
But more than in any other movie, the script brings out
the depth of the characters, with Veidt's contemptible Nazi
as the only stereotype.  Even minor supporting actors,
such as piano player Sam (Dooley Wilson) and desperate
refugee Annina (Joy Page) are made real.
The glorious black and white cinematography is the
second most important element.  The cinematographer was
Arthur Edeson, who was also behind the camera for two of the
best films from the 1930s, "All Quiet on the Western Front"
and "Mutiny on the Bounty".  But of course the shots were
under the Director's supervision.  The director was
Michael Curtiz, who remains relatively obscure despite
his body of work, over 150 films including "The Adventures
of Robin Hood", "Angels with Dirty Faces", "Yankee Doodle
Dandy" and "Life with Father".  These famous films are all
very different, ranging from crime drama to comedy to
adventure to musical, showing the range that Curtiz had.
As great as the cast is, it is less important than
the script and cinematography.  Rains should have won
Best Supporting Actor, while Bogart and Bergman
are inseparable from their roles.  Lorre is probably
my all-time favorite character actor.  "Casablanca"
was key to Bogart's subsequent career as an anti-hero
male lead, as he previously was noted for supporting
roles portraying gangsters.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
