Title
Review for What Lies Beneath (2000)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
So where the heck has Robert Zemeckis been? Ever since 1994's Oscar triumph
of FORREST GUMP, the man only managed to deliver one other flick onto the
world via Jody Foster and her CONTACT with aliens in 1997. Now comes the new
millennium, and Bobby decides to spring two big flicks our way. The first is
this film, a thriller starring two major stars in Harrison Ford and Michelle
Pfeiffer and come Christmas, expect to see Zemeckis buddy Tom Hanks star in
the highly anticipated CAST AWAY. And if this film is any indication,
Zemeckis should always take this much time between movies.
PLOT:
The life of a happily married couple living in Vermont is suddenly jarred
from its foundation when an entity (yes, that's right people, a ghost!)
invades their home. The haunting is particularly geared towards the wife,
who just can't seem to figure out what the heck is going on. The workaholic
husband is also worried, but mostly because he thinks that his wife is going
bonkers. Together, the couple attempt to solve the mystery of their haunted
home.
CRITIQUE:
A well-crafted thriller, this movie delivers on various fronts including the
creepy suspense, the cheap scares via the excellent camerawork, the superior
score, the even better use of silence, the solid acting card punched in by
one Michelle Pfeiffer and the ending which grabbed me by the nuts and
refused to let go. Does anybody remember a director by the name of Alfred
Hitchcock? (sarcasm, folks). Well, Robert Zemeckis sure does and he's made
certain to watch every single one of his movies in order to recreate a lot
of that superb Hitchcockian feel, and by golly, it seems to have worked. But
before I unwillingly make this film feel like a thrill-ride, please
understand that it isn't one by any means, in fact, the only real "action"
in the film takes place during its final half hour. This film works in a
different way. It's slow, methodical and even a little longer than it should
be, but once it gets going, I was hooked with a line and a sinker. Even Ford
manages to make us forget RANDOM HEARTS for a couple of hours, and
effectively emotes more than one feeling in this film (hey, it's a start!).
And the story, you may ask?
Well, I can't honestly say that this film is original. In fact, it's not. I
recognized various elements from other suspense features roaming around in
this one, with the strongest vibes resounding from REAR WINDOW, FATAL
ATTRACTION and PSYCHO. Okay, the last one is probably because the "bathtub"
scene in this film is comparable to the shower scene in the latter, but only
because it might actually instill a fear in some people to take more baths.
Actually, there is a more than obvious homage to PSYCHO as well, so I don't
think Zemeckis is trying to fool anybody here. But unoriginality aside, the
film does work and work very well indeed. I personally am not a very jumpy
person, but Mrs. JoBlo was bouncing off the walls at every other "boo!"
moment presented in the film, and so were quite a few others. The film is
extremely effective in that non-teen horror flick kinda way because it
actually manages to creep you out before deafening the room with its deadly
silence, and then boom! Fun stuff. The last thirty minutes also slapped me
silly with appreciation for the work of the man behind the camera, and an
excellent ending which had its twists and turns, some very tense moments and
a satisfying resolution. But I would consider myself an ass if I didn't
mention the consistently great work continued here by Michelle Pfeiffer for
this film. This lady is bursting with talent, secures you in the film with
her appearance as an everyday woman, and is completely gorgeous to boot!
Wow. Give her an Oscar already, goddamit!
Don't go see this movie if you're the type of person who is gonna be asking
your cinema partner the same question every two minutes "why don't they just
leave the house if it's haunted?". Listen friends, this is a movie. Work
with a little suspension of disbelief (or naivete in this scenario) and
enjoy the movie for the creeps that it does manage to sway in you. It's
kinda like the movie that THE HAUNTING was billed as being, but wasn't even
close. And this one might actually scare you crapless if sitting at home
alone in the dark. Take a friend, squeeze an arm (or whatever else is close)
and enjoy the first great thriller of the summer.
PS: Pooh on the damn marketing people at Dreamworks for spoiling a good
chunk of this film for everyone. It would've been nice NOT to know some of
the things that they give away in the trailer, but alas, tis the business of
show, and I guess that's all part of the biz.

Author
Susan Granger
The greatest mystery in this psychological thriller is why the
trailer gives away so many of the carefully designed plot twists and
turns. After all, isn't a suspense story supposed to be full of
surprises? That having been said, compliments are due to director
Robert Zemeckis ("Forrest Gump") who uses technology to enhance his
craftsmanship, rather than substitute for it; to Harrison Ford who has
the courage and conviction to play a believably flawed, obsessed hero;
and to Michelle Pfeiffer who manages to be wet and wild at the same
time. They're a supposedly happily married couple - he's a respected
geneticist and she was a concert cellist - who live in a beautiful
house on a lake in bucolic Vermont next to some provocative
neighbors. She has a daughter (Katharine Towne) from a previous
marriage whom they've just packed off to college when she hears
mysterious, whispering voices and spies a wraithlike ghost in their
home. Is it a poltergeist or her repressed anxieties?  "Something is
happening in our house," she wails, oozing paranoia and
vulnerability. Indeed it is. It seems her husband had an affair with a
suicidal woman that may have come back to haunt him. But why?  And
what lies beneath? Obviously influenced by Alfred Hitchcock's penchant
for scary elements that emerge credibly, Robert Zemeckis adds
complicated camera moves and a unique ability as an illusionist, which
he uses to full advantage during the final half-hour. While Harrison
Ford conveys his usual stalwart strength which, in this case, has
creepy overtones, it's Michelle Pfeiffer who carries Clark Gregg's
somewhat predictable screenplay, adapted from his story with Sarah
Kernochan. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "What Lies Beneath"
is a menacing, ominous 6 - if you like the strange and supernatural.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Robert Zemeckis
WRITTEN BY: Steven Spielberg (story), Sarah Kernochan and Clark Gregg
CAST: Harrison Ford, Michelle Pfieffer, Diana Scarwid, James Remar, Joe Morton
MPAA: Rated R for violence/gore, language and some sexuality
>From the director of "Forrest Gump" and from the creators of "Saving Private Ryan" and "American Beauty" comes..."What Lies Beneath". DreamWorks SKG rules the box office once again, only this time riding on cheap shocks, beautiful visuals and ancient clichés. 
Being some sort of alternative for "The Sixth Sense", "What Lies Beneath" is a classical "lady-in-distress" story supported by great performances and special effects. Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer play Norman and Caitlin Spencer, a middle-aged couple experiencing the empty nest syndrome when their daughter leaves for college. Having just moved into the home of Norman's deceased father, Norman throws himself into work, while Caitlin tries to decide what she is going to do with the rest of her life. But Caitlin begins hearing noises in the house. Whispers. Quiet voices. Her front door opens mysteriously, time after time. A picture frame keeps dropping onto the floor and breaking. And then, she starts seeing dead people. The house is haunted! And the ghost is trying to tell Caitlin something -- something about her past... 
Beneath this shallow premise is nothing much. Most of the time is spent on Pfeiffer who moves in slow motion from one room to another, hearing noises. The dialogue is carried out either in whispering or high pitched screaming, and worst of all -- nothing happens. Director Robert Zemeckis ("Forrest Gump", "Contact") has publicly stated that he tried to make his film in the spirit of Hichock. And it does have all the necessary components: strange noises from the attic, falling pictures, the light goes off, mirrors, doors moving, windows opening. It is slick, elegant and beautifully executed. Water is vital and the most frightening scenes obviously happen in the bathroom. And yet, the most important element is forgotten -- the story. It's too long, too obvious and filled with all the ancient clichés that you wanted to forget. An hour passes by before we see a slight development in the story. Hichock said once that it is better to wait for a pay-off than to actually see one. That'!
s true, except Hichock didn't expect us to wait too long, certainly not 130 minutes for the most obvious and predictable. The film is simply not as clever or complex as it likes to think of itself. 
However, it is fortunate that Zemeckis is steering this movie. Only because of his incredible taste and talent the movie is mostly enjoyable. Zemeckis is constantly keeping us on the edge, structuring his movie as several intense scenes, with looong times of lurking an waiting in between. There are moments when there is no music at all, no sound, and no one is even eating their popcorn, and then suddenly -- bang! Everyone screams, and it is only the dog. Moments like that are effective, but they create merely an illusion of horror. In fact it's not terrifying at all. Films like "The Shining" and "Blair Witch Project" made a lasting impression that haunted the viewers for days. This film won't do that. There is nothing that is frightening about it. There is nothing to discuss, nothing to remember. You'll forget it as soon as you go out of the theatre. 
Acting is another positive element. Casting Pfeiffer and Ford was a stroke of genius. Not only do they portray their individual roles beautifully, but have also a magical chemistry. It's too bad that Ford (cast against type) didn't get much screen time. I realize that no matter what I write, there will be unavoidable comparisons to "The Sixth Sense", but unfortunately this film is not  quite that. The films are on completely different levels. "The Sixth Sense" was scary because it had a frightening story and a certain psychological effect. "What Lies Beneath" on the other hand, is reaching for simple shocks, ending in a way that is more embracing than scary. With such great actors and crew, and with Zemeckis behind the camera, you might wonder what might have happened if they had a better script. 
In the end, I can't say that this is a bad effort. It's an entertaining film that provides shocks, mysteries and conspiracies, screams and laughs. It's beautiful and well acted. Unfortunately, there is not much that lies beneath. And even at its best, when the intensity is peaking and the film theatre is completely quite -- even then, it's nothing more than a good Hichock imitation. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
WHAT LIES BENEATH
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford, Diana Scarwid, James Remar,
Joe Morton, Amber Valletta.
Screenplay:  Clark Gregg.
Producers:  Robert Zemeckis, Jack Rapke and Steve Starkey.
Director:  Robert Zemeckis.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A word of sympathy, first, for WHAT LIES BENEATH's director Robert
Zemeckis: It's probably not his fault that DreamWorks has been marketing
the film with one of the most appallingly wrong-headed trailer and
advertising campaigns I've ever seen. My critic colleagues and I often
respond to certain overly-expository trailers with the comment, "Well, I
don't have to see the movie now." Never has that been more true than in
the case of WHAT LIES BENEATH. If you've seen the theatrical trailer for
the film -- or virtually any of the commercials or plot summary blurbs,
for that matter -- you've been cheated. WHAT LIES BENEATH is one half
creepy, effective suspense thriller and one half predictable, over-wrought
suspense thriller ... and the creepy, effective half is utterly destroyed
by too much foreknowledge.
     If you have the good fortune to enter WHAT LIES BENEATH without that
foreknowledge, you'll be introduced to Norman (Harrison Ford) and Claire
Spencer (Michelle Pfeiffer), a married couple in a newly empty nest after
sending their only child off to college. Norman, a noted genetic 
researcher, at least has is work to keep him busy; Claire was once a
gifted cellist, but gave up her career for family and is now left to
putter about their over-sized Vermont home. And with all that time on her
hands, she starts to notice things. Their next-door neighbors seem prone
to violent arguments, and she sees strange comings and goings in the
night. Soon, there are also some alarming events in the house itself.
Doors open by themselves, pictures fall from the shelves ... and Claire
becomes convinced that a dead woman is trying to contact her.
     You will find no reference herein to a later turn of plot that
dominates advertising for the film. There may be someone out there who
could be thoroughly caught up in Zemeckis' knowing homage to Hitchcock
(most specifically REAR WINDOW), with its instantly loaded atmosphere of
menace and a notable absence of underscore that makes many scenes even
more unsettling. Unlike that hypothetical someone, however, I knew what
was coming. I knew the developments that would dominate the second half
of the film, and their relationship to the events in the first half of the
film. I realized that my time was being wasted on a set-up that had been
blasted into irrelevance by some marketing wizard with an itchy trigger
finger, the sort of cinematic thickhead who would have looked at PSYCHO in
1960 and said, "Hey, let's put that girl getting stabbed in the shower in
the trailer -- that's good stuff." And I grew angrier, and angrier, and
angrier.
     I grew angrier still when I saw the frantic mess that DreamWorks had
seen fit to promote so hard. It's bad enough that the potentially eerie
ghost story of WHAT LIES BENEATH's first act turns into run-of-the-mill
run-from-the-killer movie. Worse yet is the way the film's conclusion is
drawn out to such an agonizing degree that the approximately 2,647
individual shock scenes -- each one accompanied by a burst of Alan
Silvestri's strings, of course -- become numbing in their every-60-seconds
predictability. The final 25 minutes of WHAT LIES BENEATH eventually
degenerate into such an absurd parody of scary movie climaxes I kept
waiting for a Wayans brother to appear and exclaim, "Whazzup?!?"
     I won't deny that much of WHAT LIES BENEATH works on a purely
visceral level -- I jumped a few times, I was tense a few more times, and
so on. There's also one great sequence near the end involving a threat of
slow drowning that works on almost every possible level. It's the kind of
sequence that makes it hard to hate a film, even when the people selling
the film show such open contempt for the audience. And really, there's no
other way to describe what DreamWorks has done. Their marketing department
has decided, "Our job is to get the people into the theater; we don't care
if we've ruined the experience of actually watching the film in the
process." I don't think WHAT LIES BENEATH would have been a particularly
good film even without that disastrous decision -- there's far too much
laughable dead weight down the stretch -- but it would have been a much
more watchable one. Critics are often accused of being too hard on films
because of expectations based on how much we know about them ahead of
time. At least this time we're going to have plenty of company.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Robert Zemeckis.
Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford, Diana Scarwid, Miranda Otto, James 
Remar, Joe Morton, Wendy Crewson, Amber Valletta, Katharine Towne.
2000 - 130 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, violence, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 22, 2000.
"What Lies Beneath," directed by Academy Award winning filmmaker Robert 
Zemeckis (1994's "Forrest Gump"), is so very good in so many scenes that it 
almost makes you angry the movie is hampered by an uneven, flawed screenplay. 
In teaming with A-list actors Michelle Pfeiffer and Harrison Ford, Zemeckis 
has set out to create a mature, sophisticated supernatural thriller, and his 
visual talents are consistently at the forefront of the picture. The movie is 
quietly taut, eerie, and deliberately paced, as it gradually builds momentum 
to a climactic twist that not only is difficult to swallow, but leaves a sour 
taste in your mouth once the end credits roll. Still, despite the 
disappointing finale, the film is undeniably suspenseful and beautiful to 
look at, and that is the complication with not being able to wholeheartedly 
recommend "What Lies Beneath." It does its job more than effectively, but, if 
the superbly paced first hour is any indication, it could have clearly turned 
out to be so much more than the cliched "Friday the 13th" knockoff it resorts 
to. 
Claire Spencer (Michelle Pfeiffer) and her husband, Dr. Norman Spencer 
(Harrison Ford), are a happily married couple living in an idyllic waterside 
home off the coast of Vermont. With their daughter Caitlin (Katharine Towne) 
away at college, and Norman often at work for long hours into the night, 
Claire suddenly find herself home alone for much of the time, without anyone 
to rely on her, and with little to get into. That is when she begins to 
witness doors opening and closing by themselves, and pictures abruptly 
falling. The bathtub keeps mysteriously filling up with water without anyone 
around to have done it, and the computer keeps getting turned on. Claire 
starts to suspect that their house is being haunted by a young, blonde woman 
who looks a great deal like herself, and with her next-door neighbor (Miranda 
Otto) having strangely disappeared, she thinks she knows the entity she is 
being visited by.
As is sometimes the unfortunate case in the thriller-horror genre, the setup 
of promised greater things to come is far stronger than the final outcome. 
Such is the trap that "What Lies Beneath" falls into. The opening sixty 
minutes, which is primarily a one-character show, as we follow Claire through 
her lingering days at the house by herself, and the increasingly supernatural 
and frightening things that begin to occur to her, is somewhat deceptive, for 
when twists and characters are brought up in the film, they disappear almost 
as quickly as they appear. And the plot development concerning Claire's 
suspicions about her neighbors is only present to bide its time while it 
turns up the fire and reveals its more complicated and extravagant (but not 
necessarily more successful) master plan. 
With the exception of possibly 1992's "Batman Returns," Michelle Pfeiffer has 
never been more confident and powerful in a performance as she is here. As 
the increasingly paranoid and scared Claire, Pfeiffer never overplays any of 
her scenes, appropriately donning a tricky balancing act between believing 
the things she sees, and wondering if she is possibly delusional. She is a 
sympathetic protagonist, a woman in her forties who begins to realize how she 
has traded in her chances as a great cellist for almost the last twenty 
years, to instead raise a family and support her husband's work. Seemingly 
setting itself up to be an allegory of a woman who comes to terms with the 
choices she has made in her life, but recognizes that it's never to late to 
start over, the film disappoints on this level also, once again not following 
through with a subplot it has brought up.
Although top-billed, Harrison Ford constantly plays second fiddle, but holds 
his own remarkably well in many of his scenes with the radiant Pfeiffer. Ford 
portrays Norman as a caring husband who, nonetheless, simply isn't around 
nearly enough, and has made many mistakes in his past that he regrets (one of 
which plays a key role in the film, as well as in the misleading advertising 
campaign).
The supporting cast all equip themselves amicably, but each of them are 
wasted and not given a full character to develop. Diana Scarwid (1981's 
"Mommie Dearest") is vibrantly unconventional, but sorely underused, as 
Claire's best friend, Jody. The same goes for Miranda Otto (1997's "Love 
Serenade"), as troubled neighbor Mary Feur; James Remar, as Mary's 
no-nonsense husband, Warren; and Katharine Towne,  as Claire and Norman's 
daughter, Caitlin, who exits after the first five minutes and never reappears 
or is heard from again. Strengthening the supporting characters, or deleting 
many of them altogether, would surely have done a world of good in Gregg 
Clark's misguided screenplay, which relies heavily on plot twists and jumpy 
scary scenes, where someone enters the frame suddenly and there is a 
startling musical sting.
Where director Zemeckis does excel is in building up the tension, and if the 
movie is never truly scary, it does leave you on the edge of your seat on 
more than one occasion. It's strange, really, how even during the concluding 
twenty minutes, when things grow increasingly preposterous and the concluding 
twist feels more like a betrayal than a genuine surprise, Zemeckis uses his 
camera in a sly way that heightens the suspense even when that aspect should 
be falling apart too. One silent sequence that is set in a bathtub is a 
technical masterpiece, where just the subtle use of running water makes you 
want to grasp onto the theater seat's armrest. And another moment, in which 
the camera swings down to shoot below the floorboards, is almost 
awe-inspiring. 
Everything in "What Lies Beneath" seems to be in place to create a rare 
supernatural thriller that not only works on a visceral level, but is also 
intelligent and classy, yet screenwriter Clark botches its chances. While the 
slasher movie-style finale is entertaining, simply to see such big stars 
involved in carrying it out, couldn't the movie have remained more of a 
psychological telling, rather than a violent and ghastly one? All could have 
been forgiven, however, with a satisfying epilogue, one that stays true to 
the character of Claire, a woman we as an audience have grown attached to, 
but the film unexpectedly ends with very few explanations or answers given. 
Whereas the viewer should walk away from a motion picture like "What Lies 
Beneath" with a giddy, satisfied feeling inside, all we are ultimately left 
with is the question, "What was the point?"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 DreamWorks Pictures/Twentieth Century Fox
 Director: Robert Zemeckis
 Writer:  Clark Gregg, Story by Sarah Kernochan and Clark
Gregg
 Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford, Katharine Towne,
Mirando Otto, James Remar, Victoria Bidewell, Diana
Scarwid, Joe Morton
   Horror stories and ghostly tales have generally been the
province of the teen audience and twenty-somethings,
although there's nothing that bars the older crowd from
enjoying parodies like the "Scream" series and parodies of
parodies like "Scary Movie."  When a film goes off the wall
like "Alien" and "From Dust Till Dawn," conjuring up the
ugliest monsters that the special effects departments savor, I
think the film studios accurately write off any possibility of
attracting people of a certain age.  This is why "What Lies
Beneath" should be (but alas, is not) an occasion for
rejoicing.  Here is a specter-driven tale which, if told to adults
sitting around a campfire during a warm and cloudless
summer eve at the beach could conceivably arouse
their trepidation.  But when put on a screen by the
accomplished director Robert Zemeckis--known for a cross-
genre competence in such movies as "Forrest Gump," "Used
Cars," "Who Framed Roger Rabbit," and "Back to the
Future"--the overlong piece goes off in all directions
needlessly, confusing the audience without handing us a
villain who is at all believable.
   I think the reason for the farrago is that Zemeckis--who
tries to give cinematic life to Clark Gregg's screenplay (based
on a story by Sarah Kernochan and Mr. Gregg)--is that the
entire tale depends on a single major twist that arrives only
toward the conclusion of the enterprise, after which the
slowly-paced story picks up the momentum and strives for
blockbusting sheer fright that the audience rightfully expects
of the genre.  Were it not for the importance of this gimmick,
Zemeckis could have more adequately developed the various
relationships he struggles to define, thereby avoiding the
unwanted audience laughter that the conclusion will likely
provoke.
   In referring to Norman Spencer (Harrison Ford), a
celebrated biologist who is the son of an even more
acclaimed man in the field, the studio tagline states, "He was
the perfect husband until his one mistake followed them
home."  Norman's error in judgment is not one which is
altogether unusual in real life, but in his unique case, his
lapse in judgment leads to a series of spooky events in the
rambling Vermont home that he inherited from his dad and
shares with his lovely wife, Claire (Michelle Pfeiffer).  Since
this is presumably an adult ghost story, the occurrences that
begin to drive Claire to the brink of insanity are subtle ones,
and Zemeckis restrains himself from introducing anything too
blatant and sophomoric, holding even the obligatory false
scares to a minimum.  At first, Claire notices that the front
door opens even so slightly just before she gets a chance to
insert the key.  As the story progresses, the eerie
phenomenona become less insinuated and more obtrusive:
the note on the mirror; the reflection in the bathtub water; the
tentative and fearful growling of their dog Cooper; the
appearance of steam that emanates from the bathtub and
spreads ever so lightly throughout the house.  When the
Spencers' computer begins rapidly delivering a repetitive
message and Alan Silvestri's original music becomes
increasingly meddlesome, Zemeckis crosses the border into
kid-stuff territory.  From that point, "What Lies Beneath"
becomes more like the proverbial roller-coaster ride that no
longer scares even the small fry.  And how many adults do
you know that want to spend any time on dizzying Coney
Island outings?
   If you've been listening the buzz about the film, you'll
inevitably hear comparisons made to Adrian Lyne's
groundbreaking 1987 film, "Fatal Attraction."  Remember,
though, that the Michael Douglas-Glenn Close-Anne Archer
piece gained its just reputation on a careful development of
Douglas's relationship with the sexy but psychotic Glenn
Close.  Both "Fatal Attraction" and "What Lies Beneath" give
the audience the Rambo-like conclusion that pleases the
thrill-seekers, but lacking an intricately developed and well-
focussed script, Zemeckis's picture cannot hold a candle to
Lyne's.
   Arthur Schmidt edits the film competently, cutting from
scene to fragmented scene to give the picture a vague sense
of continuity and photographer Don Burgess takes good
advantage of the lovely Vermont landscape, the sort of
panorama that arouses the envy of apartment dwellers in the
big city (but might bore them after a week or so). Harrison
Ford displays his signature smirk when gazing at the beautiful
but increasingly panicked Michelle Pfeiffer.  But when Pfeiffer
in one scene turns on Ford in an emulation of rough sex, you
can't help thinking how much better Glenn Close would be in
the same setting and how Michael Douglas would have been
the finer choice in this cast.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 130 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
WHAT LIES BENEATH
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford, Diana Scarwid, James Remar,
Joe Morton, Amber Valletta.
Screenplay:  Clark Gregg.
Producers:  Robert Zemeckis, Jack Rapke and Steve Starkey.
Director:  Robert Zemeckis.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A word of sympathy, first, for WHAT LIES BENEATH's director Robert
Zemeckis: It's probably not his fault that DreamWorks has been marketing
the film with one of the most appallingly wrong-headed trailer and
advertising campaigns I've ever seen. My critic colleagues and I often
respond to certain overly-expository trailers with the comment, "Well, I
don't have to see the movie now." Never has that been more true than in
the case of WHAT LIES BENEATH. If you've seen the theatrical trailer for
the film -- or virtually any of the commercials or plot summary blurbs,
for that matter -- you've been cheated. WHAT LIES BENEATH is one half
creepy, effective suspense thriller and one half predictable, over-wrought
suspense thriller ... and the creepy, effective half is utterly destroyed
by too much foreknowledge.
     If you have the good fortune to enter WHAT LIES BENEATH without that
foreknowledge, you'll be introduced to Norman (Harrison Ford) and Claire
Spencer (Michelle Pfeiffer), a married couple in a newly empty nest after
sending their only child off to college. Norman, a noted genetic 
researcher, at least has is work to keep him busy; Claire was once a
gifted cellist, but gave up her career for family and is now left to
putter about their over-sized Vermont home. And with all that time on her
hands, she starts to notice things. Their next-door neighbors seem prone
to violent arguments, and she sees strange comings and goings in the
night. Soon, there are also some alarming events in the house itself.
Doors open by themselves, pictures fall from the shelves ... and Claire
becomes convinced that a dead woman is trying to contact her.
     You will find no reference herein to a later turn of plot that
dominates advertising for the film. There may be someone out there who
could be thoroughly caught up in Zemeckis' knowing homage to Hitchcock
(most specifically REAR WINDOW), with its instantly loaded atmosphere of
menace and a notable absence of underscore that makes many scenes even
more unsettling. Unlike that hypothetical someone, however, I knew what
was coming. I knew the developments that would dominate the second half
of the film, and their relationship to the events in the first half of the
film. I realized that my time was being wasted on a set-up that had been
blasted into irrelevance by some marketing wizard with an itchy trigger
finger, the sort of cinematic thickhead who would have looked at PSYCHO in
1960 and said, "Hey, let's put that girl getting stabbed in the shower in
the trailer -- that's good stuff." And I grew angrier, and angrier, and
angrier.
     I grew angrier still when I saw the frantic mess that DreamWorks had
seen fit to promote so hard. It's bad enough that the potentially eerie
ghost story of WHAT LIES BENEATH's first act turns into run-of-the-mill
run-from-the-killer movie. Worse yet is the way the film's conclusion is
drawn out to such an agonizing degree that the approximately 2,647
individual shock scenes -- each one accompanied by a burst of Alan
Silvestri's strings, of course -- become numbing in their every-60-seconds
predictability. The final 25 minutes of WHAT LIES BENEATH eventually
degenerate into such an absurd parody of scary movie climaxes I kept
waiting for a Wayans brother to appear and exclaim, "Whazzup?!?"
     I won't deny that much of WHAT LIES BENEATH works on a purely
visceral level -- I jumped a few times, I was tense a few more times, and
so on. There's also one great sequence near the end involving a threat of
slow drowning that works on almost every possible level. It's the kind of
sequence that makes it hard to hate a film, even when the people selling
the film show such open contempt for the audience. And really, there's no
other way to describe what DreamWorks has done. Their marketing department
has decided, "Our job is to get the people into the theater; we don't care
if we've ruined the experience of actually watching the film in the
process." I don't think WHAT LIES BENEATH would have been a particularly
good film even without that disastrous decision -- there's far too much
laughable dead weight down the stretch -- but it would have been a much
more watchable one. Critics are often accused of being too hard on films
because of expectations based on how much we know about them ahead of
time. At least this time we're going to have plenty of company.

Author
Laura Clifford
One year after a near-fatal car accident, Claire Spencer (Michelle Pfeiffer)
must face the trauma of empty nest syndrome as her daughter goes off to
college.  But Claire's nest is the newly renovated lakeside home of her
deceased father-in-law, a spectacular house that she shares with husband
Norman (Harrison Ford).  Their marriage appears to be as solid as their
neighbors across the way is troubled until Claire comes to believe they're
being haunted by the ghost of the neighbor's wife in "What Lies Beneath."
What lies beneath this technically superior production are ripoffs of
many, far better, horror films ("Rear Window," "Vertigo," "Psycho,"
"Stir of Echoes," and "Ghost" to name a few).  It's too bad that
screenwriter Clark Gregg and producer/director Robert Zemeckis ("Forrest
Gump") didn't know when to quit while they were ahead because their
film features some genuinely creepy thrills and a fine performance
by Michelle Pfeiffer before it implodes under the weight of genre
cliches, a truly awful and stupid ending and a wooden performance from
the miscast Harrison Ford.
The film begins just like "Stir of Echoes" - in the tub.  Claire has
a vision that displays a watery death.  When she spies their neighbor
Warren Feur (James Remar) carrying a body-shaped bundle out to his car
one rainy night (this film is soggier than "The Perfect Storm"), Claire
is convinced he's killed his wife Mary (Miranda Otto, "The Thin Red Line")
with whom he constantly fought (we know this couple is bad news because
their house looks as shabby as the Spencers' looks spiffy).  Claire's
front door keeps opening mysteriously, a picture keeps falling to the floor
and the bathtub fills with steamy water in which the reflection of a 
dead blonde woman can be seen.  Claire even attempts a bathroom seance
with a Ouija board and her best friend Jody (Diana Scarwid, "Mommie Dearest")
before Norman insists she see a shrink (Joe Morton, "The Astronaut's Wife").
Up until this point, the film is edgy and suspenseful even if the 
filmmakers resort to cheap jolts too often.  But at the 70 minute mark
of this 130 minute film, the Macguffin is revealed for what it is and
'the truth,' which has been readily apparent all along, sidetracks the
film into "Sleeping With the Enemy" territory.  Zemeckis and company
even manage to somewhat turn the impending disaster around with a really
good bathtub climax only to derail themselves once again with an 
unnecessary, overextended groaner of an additional ending.
Michelle Pfeiffer gives her all as Claire and helps maintain interest in
the film even as it begins its downward spiral.  Also good is Diana
Scarwid as Claire's goofy, psychic-friendly chum and Micole Mercurio as
the dead girl's mother.  Joe Morton is wasted in the superfluous role of 
Dr. Drayton (the psychiatrist scenes should have been cut from the film).  
Harrison Ford has simply never been as bad in a film as he is here, giving 
absolutely no depth to Norman Spencer.
Technically, the film is a jewel with superlative cinematography by
Don Burgess ("Forrest Gump") and sharp sound work by William B. Kaplan,
who makes ambient noise spooky.  Production design by Rick Carter and Jim 
Teegarden may be a little obvious, but it's effective and the team even manage 
to insert a little joke late in the film with the name of an inn.  Visual 
Effects by Rob Legato ("Titanic") are top notch.
"What Lies Beneath" is all the more disappointing for its early promise.
Robert Zemeckis charmed the viewing public with "Who Shot Roger Rabbit" and
"Forest Gump," showing a flair for both the funny stuff and the sentimental.
Now, he departs from his usual lighter fare and delves into a supernatural
murder mystery starring Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer in "What Lies
Beneath."
Zemeckis, who also co-produced the film, drives his big star vehicle in what
turns out to be a cliched effort that lacks originality. It's a cross between
"Ghost Story" and "Stir of Echoes" as the story begins with Claire Spencer
(Pfeiffer) preparing to see her only daughter (from a previous marriage) off to
college. Their tearful separation is kindly watched by Claire's second husband,
a respected genetics professor, Norman (Ford), who has taken a prestigious
research post in Vermont.
The couple returns to their newly renovated house, the home that Norman grew up
in with his brilliant geneticist father. Norman, even now, lives in the shadows
of his father's great accomplishments, even as he himself is on the verge of a
scientific breakthrough. His work forces him to leave his wife alone in their
beautiful, but isolated home. Claire putters in her garden and suffers from
empty nest syndrome. Things begin to happen that she can't explain - the front
door keeps opening by itself, even when firmly latched; a photo of her with
Norman as he accepts an award mysteriously breaks; the bathtub fills up on its
own; and, the stereo turns itself on. When she catches fleeting glimpses of a
dead girl, she rushes to her husband for help.
Norman believes that his wife needs psychiatric help and ships her off to a
shrink, Dr. Drayton (Joe Morton), but the visitations increase and are more
powerful. Claire comes to realize, with the help of her best friend Jody (Diane
Scarwid), that the ghost is seeking her help. Using a book on witchcraft that
Jody gave her, Claire conjures up the spirit of the girl, becoming possessed by
the spirit. She learns that the girl died in her home and the story turns into
a ghostly murder mystery. I won't say any more about the plot so as not to give
anything away. But, I will talk about the pros and cons.
On the pro side are Michelle Pfeiffer's perf and the terrific tech work behind
the camera. Pfeiffer is the central character and the focus of the story
despite Harrison's name being billed first. (As a matter of fact, his is really 
a supporting role, but I'll get to that later.) Claire is a sensitive and
talented lady who opens herself to the tortured spirit in her home. Pfeiffer is 
called upon to not just be Claire, but also takes on a completely different 
character when she is possessed. The actress is as beautiful as ever and she 
shows some fine acting chops to boot.
The behind-the-scenes artistry is populated by a bevy of Academy Award nominees
and winners. The film's beautiful, haunting images are captured nicely by
lenser Don Burgess, a longtime Zemeckis collaborator. The lush production 
design, by Rick Carter, is simple in locale but quite stunning visually. The 
Spencer house, itself, takes on a character as the story progresses. Special 
F/X work, led by Rob Legato ("Titanic"), when used (though not enough, in my 
opinion) are spooky and startling. Less is more when it comes to the ghostly 
effects and subtly rules here.
Now, let's get to the cons. A mediocre story that virtually telegraphs every
plot twist well before they happen is the biggest problem. Cheap shot scary
bits that consume the story's first hour are frequent and totally manipulative: 
the dog jumps out of nowhere unexpectedly; a startling eye-looking-back-at-you
shot; someone behind the door ( a harmless someone); and, there are many more. 
I will say on other thing about the plot. As the story nears its never-ending 
ending, it twists away from the supernatural murder mystery and turns into a 
monster movie a la "Friday the 13th."  This is not a good thing as the mystery 
dissolves and the unstoppable monster bit kicks in. There is an obvious end 
point that the makers should have used to terminate the film, but they ignore 
the sensible and go for the scary. They could have had a decent ghost 
movie/murder mystery, but they blew it.
Another problem, mainly due to the writing, is there are no other real
characters in the film besides Pfeiffer. Harrison Ford, playing against his
usual stalwart hero type, is wooden as husband/villain and lacks any of his
usual charisma. Scarwid's Jody is little more than a plot device to intro
Claire to the supernatural. She apparently has no problem trekking out to the 
isolated Spencer home for visits that are, literally, five minutes long. James 
Remar and Miranda Otto, as the mysterious, troubled next door neighbors, the 
Feurs, are little more than a McGuffin to distract you for a while. Joe Morton 
is given little to do in his couple of emotionless scenes. Supporting cast is 
sparse in numbers and development.
"What Lies Beneath" is like a poor suit made with good material. It looks nice
but doesn't wear too well. Besides the unintentional send up to Jason movies,
Hitchcock's "Psycho" gets a major nod, too. The problems are: there just aren't
enough scary moments, way too many cheap shots and a hack script. You will find
Pfeiffer's a compelling performance. Because of that and the top techs, I give
it a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Act I: _Rear_Window_.  Claire thinks that the strange happenings in her
house could be a result of some suspicious goings-on with her neighbors
(James Remar and Miranda Otto), so she starts poking around where she
shouldn't.  Every once in a while, things predictably jump into frame
accompanied by a stinger chord on Alan Silvestri's score.  The only real
shock of this section is what a long waste of time it is (if you've seen
any of the advertising, you'll know exactly why).
Act II: "I see dead people."  The supernatural bent comes to the fore,
with Claire trading in amateur sleuthing for novice witchcraft in hopes
of contacting whatever apparition is haunting her home.  Zemeckis is able
to create some moments of tension and creepiness, particularly in one
sequence where Claire gets a bit too close to the ghost (again, if you've
seen any of the commercials, you'll know exactly what I'm talking about).
 But as Norman voices his increasing disbelief, so will you.
Act III: Slice and dice.  In a turn I was not at all prepared to take,
the disco
very of the rather down-to-earth truth transforms Claire into a helpless
and idiotic B-movie scream queen, paying no attention to common sense and
the rules of a horror movie.  Again, Zemeckis pulls off some impressive
moments and images.  The extended _Diabolique_ reference works better
than it rightfully should (a blatant _Psycho_ lift, however, far less
so), and in one bravura camera move, Zemeckis swoops the camera from
regular P.O.V. to right under the floor, as if it had magically become
transparent.  Still, this is your basic slasher movie climax, with Claire
running for her life as evil things have their way of grabbing at her.
Everyone involved in this film is clearly above the material.  As I have
stated, Zemeckis is able to generate some suspense out of some very silly
situations.  Ford acquits himself well in a fairly small role.  But the
one who maintains the most dignity--and rather ironically at that,
considering the ridiculous wringer she's put through--is Pfeiffer.  Her
character undergoes just as many radical shifts as everything else in the
film, but Pfeiffer's conviction and innate likability go a long way.
But, ultimately, she and what good there is in _What_Lies_Beneath_ isn't
quite enough to successfully bring together what is essentially three
movies in one--and despite the ready-for-a-promo sound of that
description, that is _not_ a good thing.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Robert Zemeckis. Screenplay by Clark Gregg, from a story by
Sarah Kernochan and Gregg. Starring Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford,
Diana Scarwid. Running time: 129 minutes. Rated AA by the MFCB. Reviewed
on July 25th, 2000.
When I went to see "The Sixth Sense" for the first time last year, I was
dismayed by how much of the first two-thirds of the film was spoiled by
the trailer. The movie was obviously constructed with the assumption that
the viewer was unaware Haley Joel Osment's character could see dead
people. Otherwise, the entire opening act constituted a thinly-veiled
exercise in misdirection, and I have more respect for the picture than
to believe that. In the end, although I was very much entertained "The
Sixth Sense", I was left wondering how much more enthralled I would have
been had so much not been revealed to me in the promotional material.
A year later, and wouldn't you know that history has repeated itself.
This time, the offending party is the preview for "What Lies Beneath", the
new thriller starring Michelle Pfeiffer and Harrison Ford, and directed by
Robert Zemeckis ("Back To The Future", "Forrest Gump"). As
poorly-conceived as the trailer for "The Sixth Sense" was, its "What Lies
Beneath" counterpart is infinitely more risible. In this day and age of
inspired, creative marketing strategies like the "Blair Witch Project"
website and the "X-Men" political campaign, it amazes me that we are
still forced to endure such hamfisted efforts as this one.
However, I refuse to review "What Lies Beneath" on the basis of its
trailer alone (although I am rather appalled that Zemeckis has actually
condoned it because, essentially, he doesn't think people will see his
movie without knowing the plot beforehand). It is true to say that my
enjoyment of the film was hampered because I had too much foreknowledge of
the events. But I will make every effort to set this aside, and review
"What Lies Beneath" on its own merits.
As the film opens, Norman Spencer (Ford) and his wife Claire (Pfeiffer)
are seeing their daughter off to college, leaving just the two of them
alone in their old lakeside Vermont cottage. Spencer is a genetics
professor who sometimes seems married more to his work than to his wife.
As a result, Claire is often left alone in the house. When neighbour
Warren Feur's wife Mary (Miranda Otto) goes missing after an argument,
strange things start happening. Doors open by themselves, electronics
misbehave, and Claire thinks she sees a face in the water. She becomes
convinced that Warren (James Remar) has murdered his wife, and that she is
now being haunted by Mary's ghost. Norman, however, thinks his wife is
going insane.
With "What Lies Beneath", Zemeckis is clearly trying to evoke Hitchcock. 
Most obviously, the entire subplot about the Feurs is a lift right out of
my own all-time favourite movie, "Rear Window", as Claire spies on the
neighbours through binoculars and finds disturbing but circumstantial
evidence of foul play. But here is one way the trailer helps to undermine
the picture (and if you haven't seen it, skip to the next paragraph now).
We know that the ghost isn't Mary Feur, so the entire sequence -- which
occupies most of the first half of the movie -- feels exactly like the
elaborate red herring that it is. As a result, I found myself impatiently
wanting the movie to just get on with it.
Zemeckis does successfully create a creepy atmosphere; there are plenty of
scares in "What Lies Beneath", and some of the effects (the face in the
water, a message in the condensation on a bathroom mirror) are understated
but work very well. The movie is cheapened, though, by the use of several
thriller cliches -- the sudden appearance of a family pet, the best friend
with coincidental occult inclinations, the killer who just won't die. Most
notably, Zemeckis badly overuses the device of having a character suddenly
appear in the frame. This was effective the first few times, but it got
rather silly when I lost track of the number of times it occurred.
Helping to foster the sinister atmosphere is a fine performance by
Pfeiffer, whose character is vulnerable and confused, but not weak. She
remains a captivating actor, able to communicate more with her eyes than
many performers can with their whole body. Pfeiffer is particularly good
in scenes where she becomes possessed by the ghost, seemlessly assuming
an persona without exaggerating the change.
Ford starts off weakly, mumbling his way through the early scenes, but 
finds his stride in the latter half. It is good to see the actor return to
roles with a bit of an edge to them, unlike the straight-laced,
do-no-wrong heroes he has portrayed for much of the past decade in films
like "Patriot Games" and "Air Force One". Ford was always at his best
playing characters with something of an anti-hero bent, like Han Solo or
"Blade Runner"'s Deckard, and to an extent, "What Lies Beneath" is
reminiscent of that.
"What Lies Beneath" rides a consistent upward curve, as the supernatural
events (or are they?) continue and Claire gets closer and closer to
uncovering the secret behind the apparitions. Things fall off the rails a
bit when the identity of the villain (which, I'll admit, came as a
surprise to me) is finally revealed and the film takes a plunge into
"Scream"-type slasher fare. Rather extreme measures are taken to demonise
the character (like a reference to the villain's attention focussing next
on Claire's daughter) which come across as more than a little
heavy-handed. But things end well with a spooky, beautifully photographed
climax which is carried out with just enough conviction to make it work.
Although it by no means achieves the heights of deep-rooted, psychological
terror as, say, "The Blair Witch Project", "What Lies Beneath" is very
successful on a more visceral level, and is certainly one of the scarier
movies of recent times. It's not the sort of film that will give you
nightmares -- the frights are too immediate and short-sighted for
that -- but it is a lot of fun all the same.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/WhatLiesBeneath.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Steve Rhodes
Welcome to SCREAM 4?  With first-time screenwriter Clark Gregg's clichéd
script for WHAT LIES BENEATH, containing the worst ending of any movie
this year, the only hope for director Robert Zemeckis (CONTACT) would
have been to try for a horror movie spoof.  But this was not to be.  He
and his fine actors (Harrison Ford as Norman and Michelle Pfeiffer as
his wife Claire) approach their work with dead seriousness.
To be fair, most of the movie isn't bad, it just treads water.  The
characters' actions are easily guessed and the movie borrows liberally
from many other films, including, among others, REAR WINDOW, FATAL
ATTRACTION and IN DREAMS.
But then there's that last reel when all hell breaks loose on the
screen, and the script dredges up every unbelievable cliché you've ever
seen.  The characters' actions become so preposterous that you'll be
laughing out loud at how ridiculous it all is.  Insulting the viewer's
intelligence left and right, Claire will do everything that anyone who
has ever seen a horror movie knows not to do.  Not many movies make me
angry, but this one did.  Doesn't the director think we deserve better
than this?
As the film starts, we meet Norman and Claire, two relatively happy new
empty nesters.  Their daughter is off to college, so they are ready to
see if they can have such wild sex that they can make more sexual noise
than their neighbors.
Soon this state of bliss is interrupted when a ghost starts disturbing
Claire.  We can't be sure it's a ghost.  Claire had this big accident a
year ago, you see, and she has lingering problems, which are only
alluded to.
Just like Jimmy Stewart did in REAR WINDOW, Claire starts spying on her
new neighbors.  She becomes convinced that the husband has killed his
wife, and that the ghost is the dead wife.  After all, the neighbors had
a fight.  The wife's car is in the garage, but she isn't at home.  And
-- the real proof -- Claire sees the "murderer" eating a TV dinner
alone.  This whole episode is kind of cute and the high point of a show
that doesn't have many.
Finally, there are those ubiquitous trailers that contain more spoilers
than I've ever seen.  If you haven't seen the trailers, you may be able
to enjoy the first part of the movie a bit more since it puts a little
suspense into it.  Knowing the key points given away in the trailers
make that impossible.
Still, whether you've seen the trailers or not, nothing would make a
movie with such an insulting ending bearable.  If you do go to the
movie, walk out before the last ten minutes or so.  You'll be glad you
did.
WHAT LIES BENEATH runs a long 2:10.  The film is very incorrectly rated
PG-13 for terror, violence, sensuality and brief language.  It should
have been an R given the intense level of violence and fright.  It would
be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Chad Polenz
What would happen if Robert Zemeckis did an impression of M. Night Shyamalan 
doing an impression of
Alfred Hitchcock? "What Lies Beneath" is the answer. It's this year's "The 
Sixth Sense" only with an all-adult
cast and a more intense plot about supposedly happy people who aren't as 
happy as they seem and when
their secrets are revealed the plot gets thicker and suspense ensues. 
The problem is it takes the film a really REALLY long time to get to said 
secrets. The first two thirds are all
just build-up without much development of the story. There's practically no 
second act, it goes straight to
the major conflict and then a series of plot twists and action sequences and 
ends at the climax of the story.
There's no epilogue. 
So why am I giving this film a positive review? Because it works. It's a 
thriller that's not dumbed down and
a horror movie not about gore. It's the kind of film that doesn't come around 
that often so we must be
appreciative. It's got two of the best actors in showbusiness as the leads 
(Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeifer
for all of you who have been living underwater for the last year or so). It's 
directed by a master autuer
doing something different from his usual style. He's clearly drawing from 
Hitchcock and Stanley Kubrick,
but they're legends of the film world and Zemeckis is on his way to being one 
too. In any other director's
hands this probably wouldn't have worked. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Jerry Saravia
Director Robert Zemeckis ("Back to the Future") describes the
screenplay of "What Lies Beneath" as "written in the language of
Hitchcock." I am not sure if that is as insulting as Gus Van Sant's
abominable "Psycho" remake but it comes close. Not only does such a
statement make me want to vomit, but it further illustrates how
audiences today might be compelled to agree, since they will accept
anything with two glamorous movie stars. Actually, it is written in
the language of "Scream" and every slasher flick post-"Halloween," and
the truth is that all of those films are superior to this monotonous,
suspenseless and incredibly silly thriller.
Let's look at what lies beneath the episodic structure. The beautiful,
luscious Michelle Pfeiffer plays Claire Spencer, the morose wife to
Norman Spencer (Harrison Ford), a successful geneticist. They live in
some country house by a lake in Vermont, and their daughter has just
gone away to college. Claire misses her tremendously, and is beginning
to feel the effects of loneliness and isolation, especially since her
husband is working late hours. At home, she finds there are problems
with the electrical outlets in the bathroom (well, she gets a little
shock occasionally). Soon, she finds the front door to her house opens
by itself. Then picture frames begin to fall by themselves. But
wait!!! Who is the bearded gentleman living with his wife in the house
next door? And could the wife have been killed by her husband? And is
the possibly dead wife a ghost who is haunting Claire? And is this
another remake of "Rear Window," but without Christopher Reeve?
So far, so good. I must say that this is a fine setup for a possibly
supernatural thriller. And Pfeiffer plays her role straight, lending a
sympathetic hand for this melancholy heroine. Is she seeing things, or
is there really a ghost in the house? But, oh my, does Zemeckis and
writer Clark Gregg screw it up by installing one too many red
herrings. If you are one of the unlucky few who saw the trailer for
this movie, you know the inevitable denouement and everything that
leads to it. Suffice to say, I will not disclose much more except to
say that the setup is completely ruined and fabricated, leading to a
hodgepodge of other movies entirely.
Basically, "What Lies Beneath" is a hybrid of Hitchcock, "Sixth
Sense," "Stir of Echoes," "The Stepfather" and anything else you can
think of. Ask yourself this one question: are we seeing a thriller, a
drama about a potential tryst, a ghost story, the latest slasher
picture, or all the above? Apparently, Zemeckis and Gregg have no idea
so they copy and paste it all together hoping it will make sense and
surprise audiences. No sale.
I must say that I enjoyed the climactic, tense bathtub scene
(recalling "Fatal Attraction's" bloody climax) and the lovely
Pfeiffer's performance who invests more weight in the role than is
necessary. There is also James Remar as the suspicious, curt neighbor
(worth mentioning because he gives the best performance in the film,
and he also bears an uncanny resemblance to Harrison Ford's bearded
Richard Kimble in "The Fugitive") Unfortunately, Ford is left in the
sidelines, barely registering any chemistry with Pfeiffer, and
director Zemeckis is intent on throwing in the "fake scares" cliche,
one after another, not to mention the old "the killer is never really
dead" syndrome. From Ford, Pfeiffer, and Zemeckis, all that lies
beneath is a lack of purpose.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluer.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Robert Zemeckis
Written by: Sarah Kernochan (story), Clark Gregg
Claire and Norman Spencer (Michelle Pfeiffer and Harrison Ford respectively) 
have just sent there daughter, Caitlin (Katharine Towne), off to college. 
Now Claire is home alone every day while Norman, apparently a brilliant 
geneticist, works on a project which would be the crowning achievement in 
his career. While home alone, Claire begins to notice strange events 
occurring around her, like whispering in an empty room and doors opening 
without being touched (I couldn't help but keep thinking she really needed 
to get that door fixed). The new neighbor, Warren Feur (James Remar, 
previously seen in the beyond merely awful "Mortal Kombat: Annihilation"), 
and his wife, Mary Feur (Miranda Otto), have been fighting every evening; 
now Mary has disappeared. Claire begins to think the strange events are 
actually Mary's ghost trying to contact her so Claire can catch Warren as 
her murderer. Yet, as Claire pursues this belief, events begin to make her 
suspect the ghost is actually someone from her own past, with whom her 
husband may have been involved.
Anyone who has seen the trailers for "What Lies Beneath" knows exactly how 
events transpire after my brief plot summary. When I first sat down to write 
this review I was going to write a mean, scathing review which smashed the 
movie for being predictable. After I pondered this awhile, I decided the 
film's lack of surprises was more the fault of DreamWorks than Robert 
Zemeckis ("Forrest Gump") and company. This brings up an interesting point: 
can a film be blamed for its trailers giving the whole story away? While I 
could sit here and display point after point in defense of and against this 
theory, I'm sure you'd prefer to hear a review of the actual movie. "What 
Lies Beneath" is, at its core, a mess of a film; borrowing from a dozen 
different genres, and stealing outright from Hitchcock (particularly "Rear 
Window") on several occasions. If that's the case, why didn't I rate it 
lower you ask? Simply because if you haven't seen the previews, it's 
probably going to throw quite a few delightful surprises and legitimate 
startles (although I don't know about actual scares) at you.
You would think that any movie starring both Michelle Pfeiffer and Harrison 
Ford would feature some outstanding acting. Strangely enough, the acting in 
"What Lies Beneath" is one of the film's weaker points. Michelle Pfeiffer, 
one of the more gifted actresses in Hollywood, turns in a performance which 
fluctuates back and forth from over-the top antics to looking bored out of 
her mind. Harrison Ford, the man who actually managed to make "Six Days, 
Seven Nights" bearable, turns in his most wooden performance to date. I'm 
beginning to think Ford is just burned out on acting. I think he wants to 
make his last Indiana Jones movie and retire from acting, so he can pursue 
being a carpenter to his heart's content. If that's not the case, and he's 
just losing his acting skills, then I hope he does decide to retire from 
acting so he won't be remembered for roles like the one played here. The 
only other person given any screen time is Diana Scarwid (whose career is 
full of TV movie appearances), playing Claire's best friend, Jody. Jody is a 
very unusual character, being a hippy-like woman obsessed with the occult, 
yet frightened when confronted by the real thing. She also uses words like 
"trippin", which I didn't think even hippyish older people used anymore. 
Scarwid does an adequate job playing Jody, and actually outdoes Pfeiffer in 
a few scenes (just to give you a hint of how below average Pfeiffer's 
performance is in this film).
Perhaps most troublesome about this film (aside from the trailers of course) 
is Robert Zemeckis' normally astute directorial abilities vanishing into 
thin air. This was the man who brought us the magnificent, multiple Oscar 
winning "Forrest Gump"; with its perfect pacing, soundtrack, and acting, and 
he now gives us a film so languid in its pacing I saw people falling asleep 
in the theater. The reason for this is simple: the only "scares" that come 
out of a movie like "What Lies Beneath" are from objects and people suddenly 
appearing on screen, while music blasts out of dead silence, and scenes like 
Harrison Ford sneaking up behind his wife for no other reason than to scare 
her and movie goers (I don't know, but I'd think most wives would smack 
their husbands upside the head for sneaking up on them like that). In a 
movie where these are the only scares, the audience sits and waits anxiously 
for the next startle effect. In "What Lies Beneath", Zemeckis has spread 
these effects out so thinly that one can only wait anxiously for so long 
before not caring anymore. Sarah Kernochan and Clark Gregg don't help much 
when they seem to place the movie's significant events in the wrong order. 
We are granted supposedly startling revelations at certain points in the 
movie when we have no idea what is going on (take Claire finding a box full 
of old things in the basement, for example).
Clark Gregg's script may have one or two really good startle effects, and 
one really creepy looking scene near the film's end, but it's also full of 
horror movie cliches. We get everything from the dog being present only so 
it can sense danger that the humans can't tell is near, to someone looking 
dead multiple times only to keep springing back to life. My second largest 
complaint with the movie was in regards to the ending, which just seems to 
go on and on for a good 45 minutes or so. I don't know about you, but I 
start losing interest in the end of a film once it breaks the twenty five 
minute mark. In "What Lies Beneath" Zemeckis gives us big final climaxes not 
once, not twice, but thrice. By the third one, I was getting more than a 
little bored. The other problem with the ending is that while those classic 
"yeah right" moments are essential to any horror film, "What Lies Beneath" 
uses them perhaps five or six times too many. I felt like I was watching the 
latest "Friday the 13th" film rather than a classy, dramatic scare flick. 
The film's score, by composer Alan Silvestri ("The Abyss"), starts off low 
and eerie, yet sadly underused; then just as it gets loud, dramatic, and 
obnoxious, Zemeckis decides to start using it non-stop. I'd recommend "What 
Lies Beneath" to fans of Hitchcock as long as they can handle seeing the 
master's work stolen several times. I give it three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Ross Anthony
A beautiful blond (Michelle Pfeiffer) aims her hair dryer at the
steam-filled bathroom mirror. But there's something wrong ... no
electricity. Still dripping from the shower she presses that little red
reset button on the outlet with her moist finger. ZAP! Just a spark! But
that's all it takes to set you on edge and keep you paranoid as you try to
see what's on the other side of every camera pan, every plot or doorknob
twist.
If you liked Hitchcock's "Rear Window" and Spielberg's "Poltergeist" and
uhm, I don't know, "Terminator 1" ... well I think it's safe to say, you'll
like this mix of the three. Me? Though the genre of suspense-driven films
isn't my fancy, I must admit I was quite compelled for the first two acts.
Director Robert Zemeckis does an absolutely scrupulous job of keenly keeping
his audience balancing precariously on the edge of their seats - simulating
the sensation we feel at a roller coaster's peak. Freeze that crested car
and peer hundreds of feet to the ground down two rickety wooden rails atop
the track's largest drop ... what lies beneath? Indeed!
It's the third and final act that lets go of all that careful teasing and
toying and begins (well, it's hard to say without spoiling for you) ...
suffice ... the climax that's not as smart as the first two acts.
Pfeiffer and Ford forge fantastically. Pfeiffer fans fear only the phantasm.
Her acting is grand. But resounding kudos must be song strongly to the audio
engineers, creators and mixers whose huge hits will enter through your ears
shattering your deliberately crystallized belly then setting the bits to
drift like glistening frost into your legs and arms.
Pfeiffer and Ford should be relaxing now that only-daughter Katherine Towne
has taken off for college. That might have been the case if it weren't for a
haunting past slowly surfacing. AHHHHHH!
"What Lies Beneath" is scary. If you're looking for intensely thick drama or
rich comedy, you should know that though both tastes are sampled, this film
is dead set on one thing only - to scare you.
What Lies Beneath. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford, Diana Scarwid, Miranda Otto,
James Remar, Amber Valletta.
Directed by Robert Zemeckis.
Written by Clark Gregg. Story by Sarah Kernochan and Clark Gregg.
Produced by Steve Starkey, Robert Zemeckis, and Jack Rapke at
Imagemovers/Dreamworks/20th Century Fox.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1b8ff19b819922a68825691c001aab94?OpenDocument
        So far, this summer's supposed blockbusters could have used a free
course on filmmaking from Robert Zemeckis.
Lesson number one: Take time to acclimate the audience to the
characters.  Unlike The Perfect Storm, What Lies Beneath completely
absorbs the main character's personalities into the dramatic mix-
frailties and all, through an intense look into their psyche,
practically forcing the audience to become emotionally attached.  This
is not an original concept in cinema, but after watching Clooney and
Wahlberg jump on that fishing boat and mournfully pronounce their
goodbyes as if they already knew the ominous storm was on its way, you
can't help but root for the ship to capsize.
Lesson number two: The film should have a pace that at least feels
natural.  The Patriot is a story about revenge, yet I couldn't shake the
dreadful notion of an overly contrived plot, and I could practically
smell the "sap" in those birch trees as Mel wreaked havoc.  In contrast,
the plot in What Lies Beneath is clever throughout, filled with suspense
and surprises, each scene linked in perfect transition with the next.
Lesson number three: Less is more!  We've seen Braveheart, and now
Gladiator and The Patriot in the same summer?  Both films were
successful, but movie moguls seem to have forgotten that the most
exciting and thrilling effects can be found in the main characters'
performances.  By keeping special effects subtle, What Lies Beneath
proves that you can still create a supernatural film that is downright
chilling, without all the grandeur.
        From his grave, Hitchcock would have given this picture two decrepit
thumbs up.  Zememckis pulls one straight from the Master of Suspense's
hat by casting legends Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer in an eerie
and isolated setting, which really allows their performances to resonate
throughout.
Set in affluent and rural Vermont, Ford plays Dr. Norman Spencer, a
geneticist and professor from Harvard who is on the verge of a
breakthrough with a nerve manipulation drug.  His wife, Claire (Michelle
Pfieffer) has been the pillar of strength in her husband's quest for
academic glory, and has even sacrificed her promising music career. 
Their marriage appears perfect, but ever since a terrible car accident
one year earlier, Claire has been facing emotional problems, which makes
her the perfect victim to be haunted by an unsettled entity from
beyond.  Frightened out of her wits by strange phenomena around the
house along with the disappearance of a new neighbor's wife, Claire
decides to confront what she believes is a ghost haunting the house. 
What she unearths could cost her her life and that of her husband, as
the will for revenge seems able to conquer death.
        Michelle Pfeiffer's performance is dazzling.  There's something
mysterious about the glow of her blue eyes that mesmerizes.  Half the
time you don't know whether she's possessed, depressed, or just
completely loony.  Plus, her disconcerting appearance suits the Quixotic
setting so perfectly that I found myself truly sympathizing with her
plight.  Harrison Ford also shows that his judgment in scripts is not
permanently kaput after Air Force One and the awful Random Hearts.  This
role will put him back in my good graces just in time to start more
rumors about the next Indiana Jones movie.  In addition, screenwriter
Clark Gregg deserves credit for putting together a script that is
frightening and somehow totally believable.
        I have a feeling that What Lies Beneath will be compared to the remake
of Cape Fear several years ago.  What Lies Beneath is absolutely precise
in its production.  But it's the puzzling and original plot that will
have fans of movies like The Sixth Sense in for another giddy shocker.
Starring: Harrison Ford, Michelle Pfeiffer, Diana Scarwid, Joe Morton,
James Remar, Miranda Otto, Amber Valletta
Director: Robert Zemeckis
Producers: Steve Starkey, Jack Rapke, Robert Zemeckis
Screenwriter: Clark Gregg
Year of Release: 2000
MPAA Rating: PG-13
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WHAT LIES BENEATH (director: Robert Zemeckis; screenwriter: Clark
Gregg/based on a story by Sarah Kernochan & Gregg; cinematographer: Don
Burgess; editor: Arthur Schmidt; cast: Harrison Ford (Norman Spencer),
Michelle Pfeiffer (Claire Spencer), Diana Scarwid (Jody), Miranda Otto
(Mary Feur), James Remar (Warren Feur), Joe Morton (Dr. Drayton), Amber
Valletta (Madison Elizabeth Frank), Victoria Birdwell (Beatrice),
Katharine Towne (Caitlin Spencer); Runtime: 126; 2000)
A mindless psychological thriller set in Vermont, that starts out in a
promising mysterious fashion but ends badly, ruining any credibility it
might have generated. It tries very hard to be both a mystery and a
supernatural story, but it goes off course on both its aims way before
it sinks to its low abyss. It was a film that was all foreplay but
couldn't come to a climax, and as the film started to clear up the
mystery mood it created while moving at its snail pace, the revelations
of the mystery weren't worth exploring. The only thing the film did
well, was provide a lot of schlock.
The result is a dull film, with uninteresting and poorly developed
characters, and too many manipulative fright scenes that I have seen
before in too many other horror flicks. The only thing this film did
really well aside from all its schlock setups, was photograph the
lakeside Lake Champlain area and use the Champlain Bridge for some eerie
shots. The story seemed to drag from the onset, as the director wasted
time taking irrelevant long shots aimed to be frightening and then
turning away from those shots without drawing anything out of them; it
should have been an eighty minute film, like the B- movies of the 1950s,
and then it might have been a more tolerable venture. Robert Zemeckis
("Forrest Gump"/"Contact"/"Back to the Future") is such an emotionally
empty director, his characters seem more like robots than humans, that
the movie seems to be such an effort in draining the life out of it that
it becomes mostly a special effect movie with characters becoming
secondary in importance.
Zemeckis has built a story around a lady-in-peril, one with too much
idle time, who is overwrought with a healthy dose of neurotic tension,
talking herself into thinking she sees ghosts, but who doesn't know how
to internalize that fright. Michelle Pfeiffer is asked to carry this
film, but without an adequate script, even if she is a good casting
decision for that role, her task is too difficult to accomplish.
Norman Spencer (Harrison Ford) is a genius in genetics and has moved to
Vermont to accept the prestigious Dupont seat at the university. He is
doing lab reseach at the same university his father taught at. Claire
(Michelle Pfeiffer) is the beautiful cellist who gave up her career to
marry the genius. She comes with some baggage, she had a daughter
(Towne) by another man before she married Ford. Claire is a little
unnerved that her daughter has just been enrolled in an away college and
that she will be left alone in the house. The couple has just completed
the fixing up of their stately manse, and the roses in the garden, that
Michelle takes such pride in, look wonderful in the early New England
autumn. Everything seems blissful between the Spencers, now that she has
recovered from the car accident she had a year ago.
Claire is upset that her new neighbors, the Feurs (Miranda Otto & James
Remar), are loudly fighting outside in their driveway, where the
Spencers can plainly hear them (Jimmy Stewart did that eavesdropping
part in "Rear Window"). On one occasion Mary is uncontrollably sobbing
in her yard but is unreceptive to Claire's willingness to help, as they
converse through a wooden fence. Mary mysteriously blurts out that she
believes she will just disappear one day, a statement that frightens
Claire into believing that her husband is a killer. Norman checks out
Warren Feur to calm his wife's fears, and finds out that the psychology
professor at the university, is completely harmless. These suspicions of
hers come to a fruitless conclusion, as Claire hysterically lashes out
at Warren for murdering his wife when she is not seen for a few days,
but when his wife makes her grand entrance at the university function,
to the chagrin of Norman and the terrible embarrassment for Claire, the
Feurs disappear from the picture as possible suspects to their haunted
house.
The film then moves into the supernatural for its story and the typical
Hollywood ghost story scenes: doors mysteriously open, a solitaire game
on a computer is flashing the initials of the local university coed who
has been missing for a year, a stereo system turns on unaided, a bathtub
fills up by itself, and most importantly, visions of the dead girl
(Amber Valletta) Norman had a secret affair with a year ago, the
green-eyed blonde vixen, keep popping up whenever Michelle is home
alone.
Pfeiffer in the meantime has turned a ghostly pale color for the
remainder of the film and has become hysterically possessed by the ghost
she keeps seeing in the house. She starts losing contact with her
workaholic hubby, who is more enmeshed in the paper he is to present in
New Haven than with her hysterics. So she turns to her divorced friend
(Diana Scarwid) for psychic advice, but is given only cynical giggles
for help. Upon her husband's request, she also sees a dogmatic Freudian
shrink (Morton), as the film wastes too much time on these dead-end
trails.
The last shocking scene takes place in a bathtub, one that could have
been ordered from the Sears catalogue before World War 11, and seems to
be ready-made for a horror flick. Michelle will lie in the tub drugged
and in a paralysed state awaiting her fate, as the water rises. All the
edgy middle-aged lady did, was bring up ghosts from the past and now
someone must answer for those buried lies that brought on the ghosts.
If this is supposed to be like a Hitchcockian thriller, then why wasn't
I thrilled by what I saw!
Zemeckis has created an unaffecting haunted house thriller, with samples
from many other films thrown into this derivative stew, but nothing
seems to work here. This is just a boring movie about a couple that are
as unreal as the ghosts in their house.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Here^Ňs another textbook example of a film^Ňs preview giving away too much
of its plot.  What Lies Beneath is a full three-quarters over before you
get to the content revealed in the trailer.  Fortunately, it doesn^Ňt
much matter ^Ö Beneath is a taut psychological thriller that would make
Hitchcock proud.  In fact, it could do for bathtubs what Hitch^Ňs Psycho
did for showers.
Beneath features Harrison Ford (Random Hearts) and Michelle Pfeiffer
(The Story of Us), two stars with box office clout fading faster than
the Baltimore Orioles' chance at a playoff berth.  They play Dr. Norman
and Claire Spencer, a genetic biologist and an ex-concert cellist,
respectively.  They live in a picturesque waterfront Vermont home that
was formerly owned by Norman^Ňs recently deceased father.
While Norman is completely consumed by his work, Claire stays at home
and begins to experience strange and spooky stuff in their new house.
It^Ňs your typical poltergeist fare ^Ö doors opening on their own,
pictures crashing to the floor ^Ö but nobody^Ňs sure if it^Ňs just Claire
suffering from Empty Nest Syndrome (her only daughter just left for
college) or if she^Ňs really experiencing some type of otherworldly
force.  And if Claire is being haunted by an apparition, whose ghost is
it?  Norman^Ňs dead father or perhaps the Spencers' new neighbor, who
Claire believes was murdered?  In an homage to Hitchcock^Ňs Rear Window,
Claire thinks she sees her body being removed from the house one night
in the pouring rain.  Like I said, if you^Ňve seen the trailer, you
already know the answer.
Claire also seems to be suffering from selective amnesia, forgetting
important events that happened in her life, especially those surrounding
a social event where Norman was awarded a Chair at a prestigious
University.  The whole role kind of reminded me of Emma Thompson in
Kenneth Branagh^Ňs wonderful Dead Again.  Claire has to piece her own
life back together with virtually no help from her unsympathetic
husband, who seems to only care that her kookiness is inconveniencing
his career.
There are about a dozen jump-out-of-your-skin moments in Beneath.  You
can see most of them coming, but they^Ňre so well done that it doesn^Ňt
matter.  The ending is very maddening and takes so long to develop
(about thirty minutes) that people at my screening nearly became
physically ill.  I can^Ňt ever recall being at a film before and hearing
a group of men shouting out loud in fear or a woman shrieking at the top
of her lungs. Beneath is a terrific popcorn thriller that plays better
than The Sixth Sense and its sucker-punch ending.  Just don^Ňt eat too
much popcorn.
Pfeiffer gives one of her best performances ever, but Ford has just
turned into a really bad actor.  He^Ňs becoming more and more like
Frankenstein with each film he makes.  I^Ňm not sure if he^Ňs actually
wooden or just grumpy.  Even Beneath^Ňs tagline could be interpreted as a
poke at the fifty-eight-year-old actor ^Ö ^ÓHe was the perfect husband
until his one mistake followed them home.^Ô  What was it?  Sabrina?  Six
Days, Seven Nights?  Random Hearts?  It doesn^Ňt matter ^Ö when Ford takes
off his shirt, studio executives roll around in money like Demi Moore in
Indecent Proposal.
Director Robert Zemeckis (Contact) fills Beneath with a bunch of
technically dazzling long shots, some of which left me scratching my
head and wanting to see the film again.  He^Ňs one of the better
mainstream directors out there, and the fact that Zemeckis and crew are
able to sustain such a level of sheer terror for the last thirty minutes
is a real testament to the director and the script, which was written by
Clark Gregg.  Beneath is Gregg^Ňs debut screenplay, but he^Ňs appeared in
a myriad of films with amazing scripts (Magnolia, The Usual Suspects,
The Spanish Prisoner) and was nominated for an Independent Spirit Award
last year for his performance in The Adventures of Sebastian Cole.
Zemeckis, who won an Oscar for Forrest Gump, reassembled his top-notch
crew for Beneath (namely, editor Arthur Schmidt, cinematographer Don
Burgess, score-meister Alan Silvestri and production designer Rick
Carter ^Ö all Oscar nominees for Gump).  They do a fantastic job of
making a beautiful lakefront home seem warm, cozy and inviting, as well
as creepy, ominous and terrifying.  Beneath is the first of two
potential blockbusters helmed by Zemeckis this year - Cast Away, which
re-teams the director with Gump star Tom Hanks, is set to be released
this Christmas.
2:08 - PG-13 for terror/violence, sexual content and mild adult language

Author
Frankie Paiva
What Lies Beneath tries to be two different movies. At times it is a taut 
adult thriller with plenty of jolts, sure to make many people jump in their 
seats. Other moments are standard horror flick material filled with fake 
shocks and predictable conclusions. When the movie starts getting easy to 
foresee, it is still thrilling. This is the type of movie where one event 
impacts the next one. Seemingly trivial lines and occurrences influence most 
of the characters' actions. Only the attentive viewer will get rewarded. The 
prizes here are many, and worth waiting for.
Claire (Michelle Pfeiffer) lives in a beautiful New England home with her 
husband Norman (Harrison Ford). Their only daughter just went away to 
college, so they are enjoying some peace, quiet, and more time with each 
other. One day when Claire is working in her garden, she hears her new next 
door neighbor in hysterics. Becoming increasingly paranoid, Claire begins 
spying on the couple and their home. The husband is more than a little 
frightening, and Claire thinks she saw him put his wifeâ^Ŕ^Ůs body in the back of 
a car trunk. Shortly after, Claire receives her first visit from the spirit. 
Someone or something not of this world is trying to contact her. Getting 
increasingly distant from her husband, she begins searching for an answer to 
the ghost and what he or she wants. Piece by piece, the clues come together 
to form a horrifying conclusion.
To those who have not seen this movie, it sounds very similar to M. Night 
Shyamalanâ^Ŕ^Ůs The Sixth Sense. It is not. What Lies Beneath has more 
similarities with Stir of Echoes, the Kevin Bacon thriller released last 
September. The plotline is strikingly similar, and both movies clean up and 
answer all questions quite nicely. In addition, there is the obvious Rear 
Window element that works for the film. The unneeded fake frights, like a 
scratching noise that reveals itself to be only a dog, and people that bump 
into each other in badly lit rooms, come straight from Halloween: H20. These 
hurt the film somewhat.
There is a suspenseful music overkill. The score tries to be haunting, but 
works only when accentuating the thrills onscreen. Whenever the audience 
should shriek, a loud twang almost instructs them to do so. I would have 
screamed without the music. There hasnâ^Ŕ^Ůt been any movie so far this year 
thatâ^Ŕ^Ůs this exciting or scary. 1998â^Ŕ^Ůs A Perfect Murder with Michael Douglas 
and Gwyneth Paltrow comes to mind as the last grown-up thriller this good. 
While the film runs a bit long, and frequently confuses being slow with being 
mysterious, itâ^Ŕ^Ůs still a good time. Michelle Pfeiffer reminds us why she is a 
star. Her performance is excellent. Harrison Ford is particularly good as 
well, especially since he hasnâ^Ŕ^Ůt gotten any good roles lately.
Director Robert Zemeckis has been very secretive about this movie. No one can 
interview him, and he refuses to give away anything about the plot. He has a 
great reason for this. The trailer for this film shows way too much of the 
mystery that unfolds, and really spoils the fun. Anyone who hasnâ^Ŕ^Ůt seen the 
trailer should turn off any TV ads or close your eyes and ears during the 
preview at the movies. The experience will be more enjoyable. Zemeckis also 
comes up with some very inventive camera angles. Instead of just focusing on 
a characterâ^Ŕ^Ůs face, he looks at their shoulders, stomach, and toes. This 
isnâ^Ŕ^Ůt just a thriller either. Some great lines get sandwiched in between the 
screams.
A thriller that really thrills with its comedy and story, but never its 
creativity. Excellent performances make What Lies Beneath above average. This 
is an ideal adult escape during this action film filled summer.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
What Lies Beneath (2000)
Harrison Ford, Michelle Pfeiffer, Diana Scarwid, Miranda Otto, James
Remar, Joe Morton, Amber Valletta, Victoria Birdwell, Katharine Towne.
Music by Alan Silvestri. Screenplay by Clark Gregg. Story by Sarah
Kernochan and Gregg. Directed by Robert Zemeckis. 130 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
The question applies to all involved parties: writers Clark Gregg and
Sarah Kernochan, stars Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer, director
Robert Zemeckis, and the marketing department at DreamWorks.
First up are the writers. It's easy to imagine Gregg and Kernochan
sitting in a room, kicking around ideas. Sadly, most of the ideas belong
to other people. "What Lies Beneath" begins with a healthy dose of "Rear
Window," sprinkles in a bit of "Sixth Sense," pours the results into the
shower scene from "Psycho," then ladles on heaps of "Fatal Attraction"
and even a little "Friday the 13th." What were they thinking?
Incidentally, when perusing the writers' list of cinematic "samples,"
please note that they start by stealing from exceptional films and end
up ripping off dreck. To no surprise, the movie follows the same
downward spiral.
Claire Spencer (Pfeiffer) has too much time on her hands. With her
daughter off at college and husband, Norman (Ford), preoccupied with
work, she wanders the grounds of their Vermont home, looking for
something to fill the gap left by the absence of her loved ones. After
overhearing a fight between the neighbors, she finds herself spying on
the house, fearing that the husband may have done harm to his wife.
Then things begin to happen at Claire's own home. The front door opens
on its own just as she reaches for the handle. She hears a barely
audible voice from the shadows. Initials appear on a computer screen.
And then Claire glances into the tub and sees the reflection of a
woman's face. Terrified, she turns to Norman, who, of course, doesn't
believe her.
That's as much as I can tell you without revealing key plot points.
Unfortunately, the brain trust at DreamWorks advertising department had
no problems in that area. Trailers for "What Lies Beneath" casually
spill roughly three-fourths of the storyline. While not as extreme as
some ad campaigns (such as the one for "Double Jeopardy," which provided
a Cliffs Notes version of the whole damn plot), it remains an annoying
example of marketing at its most idiotic. What were they thinking?
And what was Robert Zemeckis thinking? Why is the man who directed such
original fare as "Back to the Future" and "Forrest Gump" slumming with a
movie like this? To his credit, he handles the material with style, at
least for the first hour. I appreciated the way he eased into the ghost
business, ever so gently pulling the viewer into Claire's nightmare.
Equally impressive is his use of camera angles and lighting, which
transform Claire and Norman's picturesque home into something quite
ominous.
But Zemeckis is so intent on drawing shrieks from his audience that he
doesn't know when to quit. As the film progresses, he tightens his
framing so much that anything that enters the screen startles the
viewer. Sure, the technique makes people scream, but it's an awfully
lazy way to get it done. Late in the film, some of the camera angles
become downright embarrassing, especially in a
menacing-hands-approaching-the-camera-lens shot that looks like an
outtake from an Ed Wood horror flick.
And then there's Michelle Pfeiffer and Harrison Ford. As always,
Pfeiffer is fascinating to watch. Those cat eyes and that angular face
are mesmerizing  the woman has a great skull. Her acting is fine here,
although I wonder why she didn't challenge the filmmakers over the
inconsistencies of her character. Alone, Claire takes the initiative,
even as her situation becomes increasingly dangerous, so why is she so
mousy around her husband? We learn that Claire gave up her cello for her
family. Why? Norman certainly didn't give up anything, so why did she
forfeit something so precious? And why, late in the film, did Pfeiffer
consent to behave like a camp counselor from "Friday the 13th? "
For Harrison Ford, "What Lies Beneath" marks the latest in a recent
series of odd career moves. As in "Random Hearts," Ford plays a dour,
brooding husband. Oh sure, he livens up in the second half of the film,
but I didn't buy the transformation for a second. Harrison, please, sign
up for another Indiana Jones or Jack Ryan movie as fast as you can and
don't ever take a role like this again.
Come to think of it, that would be my advice to everyone involved with
this movie. "What Lies Beneath" delivers more than its share of cheap
thrills, but the operative word here is "cheap." Movies like this should
be left for actors and directors on their way up, or on their way down,
not for talents as vital as Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford and Robert
Zemeckis.
