Title
Review for Erskineville Kings (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
After a two year absence largely spent cutting cane in
Australia's remote north, Barky (Marty Denniss) reluctantly returns
home for his father's funeral, and walks into an emotionally charged
encounter with his estranged older brother Wace (Hugh Jackman).  A
couple of years earlier, Barky fled their drunken, abusive father,
just as their mother had done a decade ago, leaving Wace alone to put
up with his drunken rages.  Wace also nursed their father after he
grew ill, and is full of rage, frustration and guilt.  Barky's return
offers a chance for some sort of reconciliation, but the bitter Wace
is not going to make it easy for his younger brother.  Their conflict
is played out amidst the familiar backdrop of their local pubs and
billiard halls.
Erskineville Kings is a potent and powerful examination of
mate ship and the relationship between brothers, and there is
something of a Cain and Abel feel to the drama.  Yet this brutally
honest and frank drama also depicts a vastly different view of the
tough, laconic and unforgiving Australian male than is normally
represented on the screen.
In a change of pace from the nice guy image he has projected
through his recent work in theatre and musical comedies, Jackman
delivers a blistering and intense performance that sears across the
screen.  This performance marks a return to Jackman's early roots on
tv dramas like Corelli, and should garner him plenty of attention come
the AFI nominations this year.  In a less showy role, Denniss brings a
hint of vulnerability to his performance as the prodigal son returning
home and discovering that much has changed during his absence.
Erskineville Kings is pretty much an ensemble piece, and the
supporting performances are also quite solid.
Denniss, who also wrote the screenplay under the pseudonym of
Anik Chooney, has developed the film from the short script he
originally wrote several years ago exploring the tense, strained
relationship between two brothers.  The early scenes add to the
tension of the final, emotion charged encounter between the two
brothers and the shocking revelations that shape their relationship.
The film's structure has a theatrical feel to it.  However,
director Alan White and cinematographer John Swaffield have opened up
the potentially claustrophobic drama by filming linking scenes on the
desolate streets of this decaying inner city industrial suburb.  These
gritty locations beautifully underscore the desperate humanity of the
action.  Some of these external scenes don't quite work - the scene in
Nick's garage is one example - and deflect from the film's emotional
core.  The assured visual style, a legacy of White's background as a
director of commercials, belies the film's ultra low budget.
          Erskineville Kings is not the best local film of the year
(Gregor Jordan's black comedy thriller wins that prize hands down),
but its raw emotional honesty, strong performances and powerful
insights make a wonderful tonic from the quirky Australian comedies
and tired rustic dramas that have long since worn out their welcome.
