Title
Review for Lost & Found (1999/I)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Steve Rhodes
Here's a helpful hint for would-be filmmakers that I offer free of charge.
If you're dead set on ripping off the funniest movies of the previous year
(THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY), make sure that your film's opening sequence
has at least some humorous aspect.  Jeff Pollack's LOST & FOUND has an
opening that is a Guinness Book of World Records contender for the movie
with the fastest time to put an audience to sleep.
To be fair, there is much more wrong with the picture than Pollack's clumsy
directing and the lame script by James B. Cook, Marc Meeks and David Spade.
The story's star, "Saturday Night Live" veteran David Spade, as Dylan
Ramsey, sleepwalks through the movie, which features him in almost every
scene.
French actress Sophie Marceau, who was so intelligently intriguing and
sensuously romantic last year in FIRELIGHT, is completely wasted playing
opposite Spade as Lila Dubois, an attractive woman who lives in Dylan's
apartment complex.  The picture allows you to admire her beauty but nothing
more.  Mostly you feel sorry for her for getting stuck in such a bad movie.
Typical of the story's recycled humor is the oven that belches fires when
opened.  And then there are the flatulence jokes.  Dylan plays cards with
some plump old ladies, who let off gas and make crude comments about it
being "crop dusting."  The game?  A strip poker game in which Dylan loses
every hand, forcing him to leave their apartment naked.  It plays just as
badly as it sounds.  This movie is more likely to elicit groans than laughs.
The movie features a stream of dog abuse jokes.  We get to listen as a sweet
little terrier flips around and around in the heat of a dryer, and we watch
as he is force-fed a bottle Pepto Bismol.  Supposedly, someone will find
such humor funny.
The movie isn't a complete waste as we get tidbits of Dylan's philosophy.
"Never date a girl who pays her rent in singles," is one.  We also get a
putdown line that I'm sure you guys will want to include in your mental bag
of tricks.  When you ditch a woman or she ditches you, just tell her,
"Honey, when the phone ain't ringing, that isn't me calling."  That's sure
put your ex-girlfriend in her place.
LOST & FOUND continues the recent trend of bad movies whose only decent
segments occur during the closing credits.  As the credits roll, the actors
ham it up as they dance to an energetic rock beat.  This two-minute music
video is the only portion of the movie worth seeing.
LOST & FOUND runs a long 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for crude humor,
sexuality, brief nudity and profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christian Pyle
With "Lost & Found," David Spade steps onto the center of the stage.  In his
previous film work, he's either played second fiddle to another comic ("Black
Sheep," "Tommy Boy," "Senseless") or filled a supporting role ("PCU," "8 Heads
in a Duffel Bag").  So, "Lost & Found" is a test of Spade's mettle as a comic
actor; if he passes at all, it's barely.
"Lost & Found" is also Spade's debut as a romantic lead.  He plays Dylan
Ramsey, a restaurateur who's just broken up with his stripper girlfriend.  He
becomes smitten with his new neighbor, French cellist Lila Dubois (Sophie
Marceau).  In an attempt to trick Lila into spending time with him, Dylan
kidnaps her dog, Jack.  He plans to spend the day walking around the
neighborhood with Lila looking for Jack, then to "find" the dog and be her
hero.  The plan becomes complicated when Jack steals a diamond ring that Dylan
is holding for his best friend and business partner (Mitchell Whitfield).  So,
Jack has to remain "lost" until the ring reappears.  Enter Rene (Patrick
Bruel), Lila's rich ex-fiance, who's come to win her back.  . . . And hilarity
ensues.
The plot is (forgive the pun) doggedly predictable.  Boy meets girl, boy lies
to girl, girl falls for boy as boy tries to cover up lie, girl finds out about
the lie, boy is chastened, girl forgives boy.  A rigidly formulaic film like
this depends on its details--the gags, the characters--to work.  "Lost & Found"
is funny in spots; the trouble for Spade is that they're the wrong spots.  As a
charming romantic lead, he's a washout.  Spade is funniest when he's a
malicious elf.  His funniest scenes are ones where he is cruel, verbally and
physically, to others, particularly the dog.  (If Lila knew everything Dylan
did to Jack, we'd never get to "girl forgives boy").  But, the callousness that
makes him funny in the abusive scenes also works against him in scenes where
he's trying to be sweet and sensitive.
That conflict between cruelty and kindness pervades the movie.  The script is
funny but uneven; it has jokes which are very crude (some involving dogshit)
and others which are endearing.  People impressed by one sort of humor will
probably be put off by the other. None of the three screenwriters (James B.
Cook, Marc Meeks, and Spade) has had a screenwriting credit before.  They could
have used an experienced editor.
Just what is Sophie Marceau doing in this movie anyway?  She became known on
this side of the Atlantic playing the princess in "Braveheart."  Her upcoming
films include the new Bond movie ("The World Is Not Enough") and  Shakespeare's
"A Midsummer Night's Dream."  She has way too much class to be in this movie
(although it is fun to see her clowning around during the end credits).
The rest of the cast is a bizarre mix.  Artie Lange plays Wally, Dylan's
dimwitted sidekick.  Wally has the crudest of the crude scenes, and "Lost &
Found" would be much more pleasant to watch if he were edited out entirely. 
(Besides, the inclusion of the rotund Lange seems a vain attempt to replace
Spade's late partner, Chris Farley.)  Dylan's landlady (Estelle Harris of
"Seinfeld") plays poker with a group of lusty, beer-swilling broads (including
Rose Marie of "The Dick Van Dyke Show" and Marla Gibbs of "The Jeffersons"). 
Jon Lovitz has a cameo as a "dog whisperer," and Martin Sheen (whatever
happened to his career? or his dignity?) is the banker that Dylan has to
impress to get a loan for his restaurant.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Lost and Found (1999)
Reviewed by Eugene Novikov
http://www.ultimate-movie.com/lostandfound.html
Member: Online Film Critics Society
Starring David Spade, Sophie Marceau. Rated PG-13.
In many comedies, energy is everything. The quickness of the pace, the feel
of the script and the gusto of the stars can make or break a comedy. A movie
with energy can easily involve the audience in the action, while a film
lacking it has to work harder to obtain momentum in other areas. Energy is
especially important if a movie lacks some of the other qualities necessary
for a good comedy, such as originality, or a solid script. Sheer energy is
where David Spade's new vehicle Lost and Found almost overcomes its many
faults. Most of David Spade's major movie roles have come as a
"second-stringer", usually surrendering the spotlight to two-time co-star
Chris Farley, in movies such as the cult hit Tommy Boy and the despicable
Black Sheep. The untimely death of Farley and the fact that Spade is just a
very funny guy, finally earned him a starring role, and it's a doozie. He
plays Dylan, a struggling restaraunt owner who falls for his beautiful new
neighbor, Lila. The problem is that while he's a pop-culture American, she
speaks five languages and is a professional (although career-less) celloist
and she's got a cocky ex-husband who tags along and is determined to compete
with Dylan for her, although she tends not to like him. So to get the upper
hand, Dylan decides to steal her dog, in the hopes that he, benevolent as he
is, could look for it with her, and that she'd get to like him. He was only
planning on it being a few hours, tops, and then he would return the dog and
be a hero. But the dog eats his brother's diamond engagement ring that he
asked Dylan to keep, so now returning the animal is out of the question. He
must wait until the dog passes the ring out. The only problem: Lila's
conniving ex finds out about Dylan keeping the dog and wants to expose him as
the jackass that he is.
Indeed, the film elicits quite a few laughs during its short running time,
many of them thanks to the divinely funny David Spade, whose ordinary guy
charm not only gets his character out of many compromising situations but
also engages us in him and the movie's mediocre script. And the climactic
scene, which I will not reveal except to say that it is an odd ode to Neil
Diamond, featured Spade -- for the first time in his movie career -- being
daring.
Unfortunately, we've seen all of this before. Much of Lost and Found was
clearly inspired by the success of last year's There's Something About Mary,
with the same kind of humorous dog abuse (if such a thing exists) and raunchy
humor. The subplot about trying to save the business by catering a big party
is straight out of the box-office flop (but cinematic success) Simply
Irresistible. Sucking up to the banker to obtain a loan is also nothing new.
David Spade manages to squeeze a serviceable amount of laughs out of tired
devices, but face it, it's not as funny the second time.
This would be forgiveable if only Lost and Found was as sap-less as There's
Something About Mary or Simply Irresistible. Unfortunately director Jeff
Pollack settles for that old hanky (panky?) ending, complete with a heart-
wrenchingly lame apology, followed by a jokey line of acceptance, the
obligatory kiss, immediately followed by the vomit on the person sitting in
front of me. It never fails to disgust me how modern filmmakers are always
willing to insert the "couple reunion" conclusion into so many comedies. I
think audiences are too smart to fall for that anymore. The formula is no
longer a hanky-fest, it's a cringe-fest for nearly everyone watching.
It's a shame that David Spade's exuberant efforts are wasted, because he
can't quite save this comedy, although he sure comes close. I choose to look
at this as a sign of a bright future for a talented comedian, rather than a
complete waste. If more people see this movie the way I do, perhaps we've
found our next Jim Carrey.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       David Spade is a "Saturday Night Live" alumnus who survived
"Black Sheep" and is now on TV's "Just Shoot Me."  In this movie,
however, he's a cloying wimp who's better doing what he knows how to
do - sketch comedy - than what he doesn't. Meaning - he can do a
wickedly clever caricature of Neil Diamond but developing a
fully-fleshed character is beyond his grasp. In this lame, derivative
romantic comedy, which he co-wrote with J.B. Cook and Mark Meeks,
Spade plays a snide, smug, wise-cracking restaurant owner who attempts
to woo his dream-girl neighbor, a beautiful French cellist, Sophie
Marceau, by stealing her cairn terrier and then pretending to find the
hapless animal when she thinks he's lost. Of course, his plan is
somewhat foiled when her obnoxious ex-boyfriend (Patrick Bruel) flies
in from Paris to help with the search and Jon Lovitz is summoned as a
"dog whisperer," who senses the pooch's pain and recommends pampering.
There's a tasteless sub-plot that revolves around Spade's partner's
diamond anniversary ring that's swallowed by the dog and his frantic
determination to be there when it comes out the other end. As a
result, there are lots of poop jokes. Directed by Jeff Pollack, Sophie
Marceau shows some deft comic timing in her pink lingerie but Spade is
all attitude and grin, nothing more, which leaves a lot to be
desired. Estelle Harris ("Seinfeld's" Mrs. Costanza) does a cute
comedy bit with some lascivious elderly poker players. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Lost & Found" is a cheesy 3. It's a geeky TV
sit-com that never should have made it to the big screen.

Author
Ross Anthony
"Lost and Found" is a laid back romantic comedy starring David Spade as the
rather unassuming, unlikely lover. His restaurant partner and best bud tells
him, "We thought you were kind of a jerk, until we got to know you." This
line sums the movie. In fact, David Spade's persona sums the movie. At first
look, you don't expect much, the second look is with narrowed eyes as you
contemplate other options for the night, but Spade's low-key humor and
resiliently idling charm eventually quietly worm into your heart.
Spade kidnaps the puppy-dog of his new neighbor (Marceau) in hopes of
winning her heart (Sophie's, not the dog's). Marceau's rich, handsome and
talented ex-fiancée flies over from France after her giving Spade a run for
his money.
The film begins below ground zero, with no action and poor dialogue wrought
with less than funny one-liners. Spade (who is perhaps more charm than
actor) is unfortunately the strongest actor on film until the fair maiden,
Sophie Marceau appears. Aside from the gratuitous French the filmmakers felt
compelled to have her spew, she is perfectly lovely and an interesting
contrast to Spade.
>From a hole, one can only crawl upwards. Surprisingly, this dud pulled
itself up by the bootstraps and even ascended a few feet above sea-level --
giving it's title an unexpected ironic meaning. Eventually, "Lost and Found"
becomes a mellow, romance-lite, comedy with a few good zingers and the heart
of a puppy-dog.
Starring David Spade, Sophie Marceau, and Patrick Bruel.
Directed by Jeff Pollack.
Written by J.B. Cook, Mark Meeks and David Spade.
Produced by Wayne Rice, Morrie Eisenman, Andrew Kosove, and Broderick
Johnson at Warner Brothers/Alcon/Rice/Dimano.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Matt Williams
In Lost and Found, David Spade has gained his first leading role in a
non-buddy movie.  It's too bad he's not up to the task.
Yet again, Spade is cast as another smarmy loser, this time an Italian
restaurant owner named Dylan.  The love of his life, French cellist Lila
(Sophie Marceau), has just moved into his apartment complex.  However,
she refuses to even give him the time of day.
One day, when Dylan discovers Lila's lost dog, he gets a brainstorm.  He
kidnaps the dog himself, and helps Lila with the hunt.  The two
bond...but what will happen when Lila discovers the truth?
Dylan's chief rival is pianist Rene (Patrick Bruel), who has followed
Lila to America.  He's annoying, rude and extremely irritating.  In
fact, his only good quality is that he's not David Spade.
Spade truly suffers without his previous screen partner, Chris Farley.
Lost and Found makes a fatal misstep by presenting another
overweight-but-good-natured sidekick (played by Artie Lange).  By trying
to fill the hole Farley left, they only make his absence all the more
noticeable.
The core problem here is that David Spade cannot carry a movie on his
own.  His smarmy style of barbed wit is ideal for a colorful supporting
role, but not the stuff leading men are made of.
The gags in Lost and Found are miss and miss.  Whether intentionally or
not, the film constantly hearkens back to There's Something About Mary.
With it's cruel dog jokes, frequently disgusting humor, and even an
end-credits lip synch track, Lost and Found continuously makes
comparisons to a film that is well beyond its league.  That is a
mistake, as it only serves to make Lost and Found seem more bland.
It's not that the film doesn't try to be funny...it's just that it tries
in all the wrong ways.  I mean, the film's penultimate joke is a set
piece about Neil Diamond.  Even the film's quick cameos by Jon Lovitz
and Martin Sheen are wasted.
Even if you're in tune with David Spade's unusual wavelength of humor,
there's nothing worth finding here.  Lost and Found is better off lost.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Alcon Entertainment
 Director:  Jeff Pollack
 Writer:  James B. Cook & Marc Meeks & David Spade
 Cast: Jon Lovitz, David Spade, Sophie Marceau, Patrick
Bruel, Artie Lange, Mitchell Whitfield, Martin Sheen, Estelle
Harris, Rose Marie, Marla Gibbs, Carol Cook, Christian
Clemenson
   If you were a beautiful, talented woman, which guy would
you pick?  Your first suitor is tall, dark, incredibly handsome
and smooth, and as a virtuoso pianist is entirely capable of
accompanying you on your cello.  What's more he speaks
your language and owns a Mercedes 500.  He has come
from your native France solely to pay court to you.  The other
admirer is shorter than you, witty in English in ways beyond
your comprehension, but at a total loss in your own language. 
He plays no instrument but dedicates his time to opening a
restaurant and desperately needs a loan to survive.  Hint:
This is a romantic comedy.
   Now that you're guessed correctly, you realize that in this
genre, the object is to keep the two would-be lovers apart
throughout the story, bringing them together only at the
conclusion.  "Lost and Found" varies not at all from its film
category, and while the movie is eminently watchable and
enjoyable, the fable rarely rises above the caliber of TV
sitcom.  Featuring the usual objects of sitcom derision, "Lost
and Found" highlights strange and laughable people such as
a group of biddies who wile their hours playing strip poker
and a kitchen staff which headlines the idiotic Turtle (played
by Turtle), who unleashes a fire extinguisher on a pan of
flaming goodies, and a blobby guy, Wally (Artie Lange), who
wants only to be a disciple of his boss.
   With David Spade in the lead role of Dylan, a struggling
California restaurateur, director Jeff Pollack launches a series
of skits in the style of Saturday Night Live rather than a
single, unified design.  Unoriginal that the assortment of
scenes may be, most of them work, thanks largely to the
talents of Coby, a clever, wily and handsome cairn terrier in
the role of Jack and to the beauty of Sophie Marceau who, as
the angelic Lila, has successfully taken on the challenge of
her first English-language comedy.  
   Dylan seeks a relationship with his next-door neighbor, Lila,
who has set herself up in California to pursue her goal of
playing cello with a philharmonic orchestra.  Dylan's
competition for the woman's affections is Rene (Patrick
Bruel), whom Rene has thrown out of her life in Paris after
she has caught him cheating but who has come repentant to
America to rekindle the tie.  Suspecting that he is way out of
his league, Dylan conjures a design to gain her attention by
kidnapping Lila's dog, Jack, and offering to help her look for
the terrier all over town.  In a secondary plot, Dylan has lost
a diamond ring entrusted to him by his friend Mark (Mitchell
Whitfield), who intends to present the jewel to his wife as an
anniversary surprise.
   "Lost and Found" does not exactly push the envelope,
given the recent run of vulgarity in "Trainspotting," "Clerks"
and "There's Something About Mary," but you can't help
chuckling at the movie's big poop joke--and this is a big one. 
When the feisty Jack swallows the ring, Dylan must wait until
the dog passes the stone.  When Jack does his business
along with a dozen other dogs in a park, Dylan collects all the
fertilizer in one huge trash bag, graphically sifting through the
treasure with his loyal employee, Wally.  Jack is used for
comic ends as well by winding up in a running dryer,
emerging with a bad-hair day that could bring a scowl to the
face of the dog people in the audience.
   Patrick Bruel, a French rock star, turns in a believable job
as David Spade's rival, who uncovers the shorter man's
designs and uses the information to put an end to the
competition, while some nice short roles are put in by comics
like Jon Lovitt--who plays the part of a "dog whisperer" who
advises on methods of separating the ring from the dog.
David Spade comes across as a soft-spoken, likeable guy,
not at all the loudmouth that you might expect in a Roberto
Benigni movie. "Lost and Found" opens on Ginger (Ever
Carradine), the wife of Dylan's friend, who sums up her
impression of Dylan: "I thought you were a jerk but you were
sweet--intermittently--when I got to know you.  That pretty
much sums up the picture.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jeff Pollack.
Cast: David Spade, Sophie Marceau, Artie Lange, Patrick Bruel, Mitchell 
Whitfield, Estelle Harris, Marla Gibbs, Ever Carradine, Martin Sheen, 
Jon Lovitz.
1999 - 97 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, potty humor, and the comedic torture of a 
dog).
Reviewed April 24, 1999.
Comedian David Spade, he of the nerdy, skinny, and practically cheekless 
type, has made a film career (if you can call it that) out of playing 
supporting "friend" roles in low-brow comedies, particularly with the 
late Chris Farley (1995's "Tommy Boy," 1996's "Black Sheep"). In "Lost & 
Found," directed by Jeff Pollack, Spade is the main star, which comes as 
somewhat of a problem since he isn't very funny (admittedly, neither was 
Farley). To make matters worse, the film is such a rip-off of 1998's 
box-office hit, "There's Something About Mary," via the screenplay by 
J.B. Cook, Mark Meeks, and David Spade, that the Farrelly Brothers 
should consider sueing on the basis of plagarism.
Spade stars as Italian restauranteur Dylan(!?), a man whom has gone 
through one unfortunate relationship after another with women. In the 
prologue, we see him have an argument with his latest girlfriend (Ever 
Carradine), only to discover that they are in the dressing room of a 
strip joint and she is about to go out and perform. Living in an idyllic 
Los Angeles apartment building, Dylan immediately grows infatuated with 
his new sexy French neighbor, Lila (Sophie Marceau). Knowing that she's 
way out of his league but still desperate to get to know her, he fakes 
the kidnapping of her terrier dog, Jack, so that they can spend time 
together looking for him. Things get even stickier when Jack swallows an 
expensive diamond ring and the doctor informs Dylan that the only way to 
retrieve it is to wait for Jack to, well, you know...
Credit "Lost & Found" for one thing: it does have a few big laughs and a 
couple small ones (which is more than I can say for some of the recent 
so-called "comedies"). But detract point since, aside from this, there 
are long stretches that were so dull and unfunny that I was almost bored 
to tears. Luckily, everytime I got a little bit too discouraged there 
would be a funny moment that would make me laugh, therefore forcing me 
to give the film a still very bad * 1/2 rating. One of the brightest 
comedic moments involves a little boy at a pet store who proves that he 
has his speech all made out for the police involving a false case of 
child molestation. We also must endure Spade impersonating Neil Diamond 
as he lip-syncs to "Brother Love's Travelling Salvation Show," an 
excellent song, but not brought to humorous life. It should be noted, 
though, that this scene does end with perhaps the film's largest guffaw 
(which will remain unmentioned in case you see this movie, even though 
you really shouldn't).
Most of the other funny moments come from the dog, Jack, who really gets 
a licking but keeps on ticking (in the course of the 97-minute running 
time, he is thrown out a window; dropped to the floor on his back; 
literally thrown into rooms; put in the dryer; etc.). Too bad this whole 
dog subplot is lifted directly from the aforementioned "There's 
Something About Mary," and even the dogs look alike. Not only that, but 
the end credits come complete with the whole cast singing to a popular 
song (ring any bells?). And if you've seen the television ads for the 
film, you'll know that it is in the exact same format as "...Mary." 
Obviously, the T.V. spots are due to the studio, Warer Bros.', 
desperation, since they know the movie is most likely to not make a blip 
at the box-office. And director Pollack should have realized that if you 
are going to blatantly copy another movie, at least don't make the 
similarities so downright obvious and shameful! 
"Lost & Found" runs at a deadeningly slow pace, and pretty much is a 
black hole in the art of filmmaking. The plotting is so manufactured and 
predictable that you know what's going to happen before you walk into 
the theater, and then you have to suffer through the ridiculous romance 
between the odd couple of Spade and the beautiful, charismatic Marceau. 
They look and act as different as night and day, and Marceau has to be 
nearly a foot taller than Spade, which does add a bit of unintentional 
humor to the penultimate scene. Although she could have done much, much 
better following her first American film appearance in 1995's Academy 
Award-winning "Braveheart," at least she shows that she does have a 
sense of humor, can be occassionally pretty funny, and yet still takes 
her performance seriously. Spade might be the "star" of "Lost & Found," 
but Marceau is the real star, if you know what I mean. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Bob Bloom

 Lost and Found (1999) 1 star out of 4. Starring David Spade and Sophie Marceau.
 David Spade is at his best - if such a word is applicable to this annoying
little man - when he plays the sarcastic twerp.
 Trying to turn Spade into a romantic lead is like trying to convert me
into a figure skater. In other words, it can't be done.
 However, director Jeff Pollack manfully tries to achieve the impossible in
"Lost and Found," a very uneven and dull comedy.
 Spade plays Dylan Ramsey, owner of a small Italian restaurant whose dream
is to expand his operations into the vacant space next door.
 He also would like to find the girl of his dreams.
 Another stretch, trying to convince an audience that Spade is an
entrepreneur, a go-getter. That takes people skills, something most of his
characters lack in abundance.
 "Lost and Found" revolves around Dylan's attempts to win the heart of his
new neighbor, Lila Dubois (the ethereal Sophie Marceau). She is a cellist
trying to start a professional career in the United States and, at the same
time, put a lot of distance between her and her smarmy ex-boyfriend Rene
(Patrick Bruel).
 The love of Lila's life is Jack, her terrier.
 So, how does Dylan go about winning her heart? He kidnaps Jack and then
spends a lot of time with Lila scouring Los Angeles for the "lost" pooch.
 There's a pall that hangs over "Lost and Found," a shadow that grounds the
entire experience. And that is the late Chris Farley.
 One of Dylan's employees is an oversized, not-too-bright, happy-go-lucky
slob named Wally who idolizes his boss to the point that he dyes his hair
to match Dylan's and dresses like his mentor.
 Wally, as played by Artie Lang, does nothing more than remind you of
Farley's absence and how well he and Spade worked together.
 Without him, Spade is like a tricycle with a missing wheel. He continually
spills.
 "Lost and Found" tries very hard to be funny and, honestly, it offers a
couple of cute moments, especially that of Spade filling in for Neil
Diamond at a swank affair.
 But aside from that, "Lost and Found" has little to recommend. Spade is a
comedian whose antics can only be tolerated in small doses. And when he
tries to act sincere, it's as believable and Bill Clinton swearing he never
had sex with that woman.
 "Lost and Found" merely wanders aimlessly from sequence to sequence,
offering stale jokes and very few punch lines.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Jamey Hughton
David Spade has a snide, sarcastic sense of humor that works perfectly
on the TV sitcom Just Shoot Me. It also served as a good showcase for
him when he co-starred, opposite the late Chris Farley, in Tommy Boy and
Black Sheep. Lost and Found marks the comedian's first attempt at going
solo in a movie, and it also reveals that when Spade doesn't have a
reliable back-up system, his brand of humor seems more desperate than
one may expect.
David Spade is not the problem with Lost and Found. He plays Dylan
Ramsey, the sweet main character, to the best of his abilities. The
story revolves around Dylan's obsessions with his beautiful new
neighbour, Lila Dubois (Sophie Marceau, from Braveheart), and her
terrier named Jack. Dylan believes that the best way to a woman's heart
is through her dog. And so he kidnaps Jack, planning to stage a fake
rescue, in hope to win Lila over.
There are three good things about Lost and Found. The first is Spade.
The second is Sophie Marceau, a lovely actress who's been planted into
the wrong movie. Lastly, there's the dog, who is used here in a similar
context to Puffy from There's Something About Mary. Unfortunately,
director Jeff Pollack finds more humor in putting Jack through a cycle
in the drier than he does with simply making him look cute. This kind of
physical humor is dead. Pollack does everything but beat the poor pooch
with a baseball bat to get laughs, and this procedure is cheap, unfunny
and resoundingly cruel.
This is where I start to get fuzzy. Also in this unusual blend is
(apparently) a sweet-natured love story between Dylan and Lila. Given
the mean-spirited comedy that the movie is obviously striving for, I
found this hard to swallow. And, why does Dylan even deserve someone
like Lila, after kidnapping her precious dog and putting it through such
pain? Predictably, Lost and Found opts for a happy ending, one that
feels so sentimental, gooey, and rings so false that it sets off a siren
in your head that makes you feel a bit cheated.
David Spade (who also co-wrote the movie) tries hard, so very hard, to
make this project amusing. There are some choice scenes that are quite
funny, but the movie is only sporadically funny. Patrick Bruel plays the
stock character of Rene, the pompous jerk who also wants to win Lila
over, with his good looks and money. Jon Lovitz and Martin Sheen are
welcome additions in two tiny supporting roles.
Despite a few positive attributes, Lost and Found just doesn't work. If
you're searching for an enjoyable romantic-comedy, you could do far
better than this obvious, misguided failure  that shows a blatant
disregard for what it's trying to present.
Jamey Hughton was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the YTV Achievement Awards
and writes a Published Column in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon Sk. Canada).

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://www.sick-boy.com
I can't decide which is more sick  seeing Hollywood cast my
grandfather's classmates as the romantic interests of girls that are
still waiting for their adult teeth, or the oddball casting of Dungeons
and Dragons club president David Spade and the ravishing French beauty
Sophie Marceau.  Or is it more twisted to make Spade, in his biggest
theatrical release since the death of Chris Farley, have a big, fat,
loser guy (Artie Lange, MAD TV) to hang around with?
Golden Globe nominee Spade (Just Shoot Me) stars as Dylan Ramsey, the
owner of a struggling Italian eatery who falls for the new tenant in his
L.A. apartment building.  She is Lila Dubois (Marceau, Braveheart), a
transplanted Parisian cellist who fled her country in an attempt to
ditch her smarmy ex-boyfriend Rene (Patrick Bruel).  Lila also has a
yapping little dog with a penchant of jumping out the window and hanging
out by the pier.
Dylan sees the dog as an attempt to get close to Lila, so he kidnaps the
dog while pretending to help her look for it.  As she grows fonder and
fonder of her seemingly kindhearted neighbor, he is horrified to find
out that the dog has apparently eaten the engagement ring of Dylan's
best friend and restaurant chef.  And, yes, there is a great scene where
he has to sift through the dog poop.
Spade, who co-wrote the film with first-timers James B. Cook and Marc
Meeks, is a slightly more sensitive version of his television character,
though his lines don't have the same gratifying sarcastic bite.  And he
is a little more successful than Just Shoot Me's Finch, as he is able to
woo both strippers (like Dylan's previous girlfriend) and women of
Marceau's caliber alike.  Conversely, Marceau really makes you
appreciate Emily Watson's cello-playing in Hilary & Jackie, although
when Sophie wraps her legs around the instrument, you don't so much care
about her acting chops.
Directed by Jeff Pollack (Booty Call), Lost & Found features a
hysterical cameo from hysterical cameo messiah Jon Lovitz, who plays a
dog whisperer (a la the Robert Redford film of a similar name).  There
are also a few great scenes involving some poker-playing grannies -
Estelle Harris (Seinfeld), Rose Marie (The Dick Van Dyke Show) and Marla
Gibbs (The Jeffersons).  For what it is, Lost & Found is not
disappointing and good for more than a few laughs.
1:40  PG-13 for adult language, sex jokes and a little dog violence,
but nothing like There's Something About Mary

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
David Spade finds himself without his funnier sidekick, the late Chris
Farley, in a story that attempts to photocopy the high points from last
year's major comedy hit THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY (7/10), with poop, fart
and dog jokes, and a romantic struggle among suitors of a beautiful woman.
PLOT:
A man falls for a woman who does not see him for the self-professed great
guy that he is. In order for her to get to know him better, the man kidnaps
the woman's dog, and sets out to win her favor by spending more time with
her, in search of the lost pooch. Her ex-fiance from France also wants her
back. Wackiness ensues.
CRITIQUE:
This is David Spade's movie. If you don't like his style of funniness, you
will not like this film. If you do like his humor, you might want to check
this movie out, but even then, only on video. There is no reason to catch
this movie on the big screen because it only contains some chuckles, one or
two big laughs (And yes, the shit joke was one of the funnier ones), zero
believable romance between Spade and Marceau, and a weak and inconceivable
ending. One of the biggest laughs that I got out of this movie was in its
premise that wants us to believe that the gorgeous French actress Sophie
Marceau, would even look twice at the much shorter Spade, a man with the
absolute worst haircut in show business, and who gives very little reason
for anyone to like him in this movie. Bad acting aside, the man just doesn't
fly as a romantic lead.
I personally do like Spade's deadpan, sardonic humor, but even with that, I
found about 50% of his jokes as flat as a week-old Coke. And when you
consider that the only scenes that were even half-witty were the ones with
him in them, you kind of get a feel of what we're dealing with here. And
despite co-stars Marceau and Bruel's decent performances and admirable
attempts at humor, their scenes together only made me feel uncomfortable and
wonder aloud as to why two lovers from France would speak English together
when alone (The fact that I had time to think about this, tells you how
engaging their scenes together were.) Add a few music-happy montage scenes
to kill some time, an annoying sidekick via Artie Lange, and no romantic
believability whatsoever, and you've got yourself a video movie prime for a
lazy, summer night for folks interested in seeing a gorgeous woman go for a
geeky, sarcastic guy with awful hair. Either that, or you're a huge David
Spade fan and you want to check out a few of his funnier zingers.
PS: In keeping with the tradition of THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, this film
also ends with an elaborate dance sequence during its end credits, featuring
the entire cast dancing to Dee-Lite's delicious tune "Groove is in the
Heart".
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
David Spade graduated from Arizona State University in 1988. His father left
his family when David was still was very young. Years later, his stepfather,
a war veteran, committed suicide. David is also the brother-in-law of
fashion designer Kate Spade. He stands 5'7, and his first movie appearance
was in 1987's "classic" POLICE ACADEMY 4: CITIZENS ON PATROL, playing the
character of Kyle.
Sophie Marceau is probably best known to American audiences for her U.S.
debut performance in Mel Gibson's BRAVEHEART, as Princess Isabelle.
Recently, she's been living with director Andrzej Zulawski, who is the
father of her first child, Vincent, born on the 24th of July 1995. She was
born Sophie Maupu.
Actor Patrick Bruel remains one of France's most popular talents, an
acclaimed actor with lauded performances in film and television and an
award-winning recording artist with chart-topping success in rock music. One
of his bigger musical hits was titled "Qui a le Droit".
Chubman Artie Lange also comes from a TV sketch comedy background, as one of
the regulars on TV's "Mad TV".
Following his graduation from University of Southern California Film School
in the early 1980s, director Jeff Pollack traveled through Asia both as a
tourist and documentarian. After three years on the road-and in the rice
fields and jungle, Pollack returned to the U.S., dabbling in real estate
development before devoting himself to an entertainment career. He created
and executive produced the long-running NBC sitcom "The Fresh Prince of Bel
Air," starring Will Smith, before crossing over into feature film.

Author
James Sanford
The spectre of Cameron Diaz hangs heavily over "Lost & Found," and not
just because the film climaxes with David Spade rocking out with a
version of Neil Diamond's "Brother Love's Travelling Salvation Show"
that outdoes Diaz's tuneless rendition of "I Just Don't Know What To
Do With Myself" in "My Best Friend's Wedding.
Long before that unnerving sight, anyone who went to the movies last
summer will recognize "Lost" for what it is: a diluted variation on
Diaz's blockbuster "There's Something About Mary." Instead of bodily
fluids in hair, "Lost" offers dog excrement being smeared on the face;
in place of the now-infamous zipper gag, we get Spade trying to
conceal his naked figure in an apron after losing big in a strip poker
game.
For the under-12 crowd who couldn't persuade Mom and Dad to rent
"Mary" for them, this might serve as a decent substitute. But anyone
who's not a dyed-in-the-wool Spade fan might be crying "Just Shoot Me"
well in advance of the closing credits - which, by the way, try to do
for Deee-Lite's "Groove is in the Heart" what "Mary" did for the
Foundations' "Build Me Up Buttercup."
Spade, with customary smirks intact, plays Dylan Ramsey, a bistro
owner who spends considerably more time trying to put the make on
comely French neighbor Lila (Sophie Marceau) than he does putting out
kitchen fires and dealing with customers.As part of his plot to catch
Lila's eye, Dylan kidnaps her beloved dog Jack, and when Lila becomes
distraught over her chien's disappearance, Dylan is right there with a
shoulder to cry on.
Unfortunately, it's Dylan's turn to weep when the voracious Jack
swallows a diamond ring Dylan was holding on to for a friend. And the
tears just keep on coming as one of Dylan's employees, the
relentlessly jolly Wally (Artie Lange) decides to turn himself into a
clone of the boss.
Lange, in a part obviously designed to position him as a replacement
for the late Chris Farley (Spade's co-star in "Tommy Boy" and "Black
Sheep"), comes off as merely a pale imitation; say what you will about
Farley, but he had considerably more bluster and gusto than this new
model. As for Marceau, she's adorable and earned every franc of her
paycheck.
But the primary fun here comes from an unbilled cameo by Jon Lovitz as
a "certified dog whisperer" Dylan enlists in the hopes of retrieving
the ring. To call the rest of the humor in "Lost & Found" hit or miss
would be kind.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     If I were writing a film project for myself, I can't say I wouldn't
include a scene where I got to kiss Sophie Marceau.  That's the thing
about a commercial art form like film -- sometimes it's difficult to
separate your emotions from your better judgment.  David Spade has proven
himself extremely funny as a certain kind of character in a certain kind
of context, and he's extremely funny again in LOST & FOUND when he decides
to be that character in those contexts.  Then he starts trying to stretch
in a dozen different directions at once, and the whole thing collapses
into a tries-too-hard comedy without a distinct identity.
     LOST & FOUND casts Spade as Dylan Ramsey, struggling Los Angeles
restaurateur and serial monogamist.  His latest infatuation is his new
neighbor, a French cellist named Lila Dubois (Sophie Marceau) recently
relocated to L. A. to make it as a professional musician.  Lila's only
infatuation, however, appears to be her cairn terrier Jack, a dog with a
propensity for running away.  Dylan, spotting a chance to spend some
quality time with Lila, decides to kidnap Jack himself so he can help Lila
find the missing dog.  Complications ensue when Jack is responsible for
losing a diamond anniversary ring Dylan is holding for his business
partner (Mitchell Whitfield), making it impossible to return the dog.
Further complications ensue when Lila's womanizing ex-fiance (Patrick
Bruel) arrives to challenge Dylan for Lila's affections.
     Leaving aside for a moment the improbable pairing of the elfin Spade
and the porcelain Marceau, LOST & FOUND actually has a number of solid
comic moments, assuming you're in tune with Spade's routine.  He's from
the cynical and sarcastic school, an acid-tongued character who takes
simple lines and twists them into something better with his delivery.
He's also not shy about throwing in sly pop culture references without
providing moutains of context, like asking his frighteningly devoted
personal assistant (Artie Lange) if he ever worked for Selena (the singer
was shot and killed by her former fan club president).  Spade is at his
best when he's smarter than everyone else around him and knows it; even
his killer karaoke rendition of Neil Diamond's "Brother Love's Travelin'
Salvation Show" shows him in winking command of kitsch.
     Much of LOST & FOUND, however, suggests that he either doesn't know
his own strengths or doesn't trust them to carry a film.  In fact, Spade
and his co-writers often seem desperate to make viewers like the film by
association with other films.  The traumas to which Dylan inadvertently
subjects the dog evoke thoughts of THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, as does
the musical closing credits sequence.  The presence of corpulent "MadTV"
alum Artie Lange, meanwhile, suggests an attempt to revisit Spade's
successful pairings with the late Chris Farley.  Spade never seems
comfortable with dumbed-down material, but he's present for such comic
delights as a foraging expedition through a mountain of dog droppings and
a poker game with a quartet of elderly women who -- hilariously enough --
have dirty minds, dirty mouths and flatulence problems.  When LOST & FOUND
fumbles to connect with viewers through idiocy rather than Spade's
intelligence, it flounders.
     It also flounders when trying to make Spade a romantic comedy
protagonist.  Director Jeff Pollack tries hard to convince us that Dylan
can be a sensitive guy, but the attempts fall dreadfully flat.  You just
know that every time Dylan has to make nice-nice with Lila he'd rather be
cutting loose with another put-down, which makes Marceau's performance all
the more impressive for making it seem remotely plausible that Lila would
fall for this guy.  LOST & FOUND has its moments when David Spade does
what he does best, or when he brings on Jon Lovitz for a cameo as a "dog
whisperer."  He just wants to be all things to all people, and the writer
in him indulges the performer in him who wants to be the funny sidekick
_and_ the guy who gets the girl.
