Title
Review for Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland
Rated  [G]
Starring elmo, Mandy Patinkin, Vanessa Williams
Story by Mitchell Kriegman
Screenplay by Kriegman and Joseph Mazzarino
Directed by Gary Halvorson
website: http://www.sony.com/elmo
IN SHORT: The best li'l kidflick of the year.
And, yes, I know that kids past the age of five or so think Elmo is for
"babies". We'll get to the guts of the flick in a second. For those of
us to whom the Muppets of Sesame Street (or otherwise) were our teevee
pals growing up, and we're talking over 25 years of growing kidlets
here, Elmo in Grouchland  makes everything complete in the Sesame Street
Universe.
Unless something to the contrary has happened on Sesame Street (which I
don't watch), Bert and Ernie were retired as active characters when Jim
Henson died a number of years ago. The first thing you see in Elmo is
the pair, directly addressing the audience -- a brilliant idea by
screenwriters Mitchel Kriegman and Joseph Mazzarino, all of whom seem
aware that kidlets have limited attention spans and love to bother their
parents with questions throughout any movie they watch. Well, Bert and
Ernie are just like the kids, Bert moreso, and every couple of minutes
the film stops and Bert comes frantically into frame, wondering what is
happening and why. Ernie plays parent, the pair exit and the film moves
on. More important, they make the viewing experience an interactive one,
asking the kids to yell at the screen, counting down the timing strip
that precedes every film. It's a great idea, and is used several times
during the film.
Elmo is, after all, a li'l monster who communicates on a one to one
basis with his audience. He's polite but extremely self centered (think
of a terrible two year old screaming MINE! MINE! MINE!) which has always
annoyed the heck out of me on the small screen. On the big screen, it's
not so bad.
Elmo loves his blanket (didn't we all??) which seems to have a life of
its own. Possessive li'l monster that he is, he gets annoyed when his
friend Zoe wants to cuddle with blankie. Push comes to shove, the
blanket tears (oh! the horror!) and before you know it Elmo is climbing
into Oscar the Grouch's garbage can to get it back. But it's not a trash
can, it's a portal to another place called Grouchland populated by more
of Oscar's kind all of whom live in fear of the monstrous Huxley (Mandy
Patinkin), who covets everything he sees. Which includes the blanket.
Sure, other residents of Sesame Street take the trip down the can to try
and help Elmo. The joy here is the appearance of dozens of new
characters and non-stop jokes that work for both kidlets and parents.
Aided by Grizzy Grouch (Stephanie D'Abruzzo), Elmo must climb Mount
Pickanose to Huxley's Castle, avoid a giant chicken and an "ultimate
test" by the luscious Vanessa Williams as the Queen of the Dump. The
kidlets were yelling at the screen to help the Red One (though they got
help from the surround soundtrack) and this grownup couldn't believe
what a blast it all was. And lots of Bert and Ernie. Oh happy happy joy
joy!
Lest I forget, a tip of the hat to the Muppet Players: Kevin Clash
(Elmo), Carroll Spinney (Big Bird and Oscar), Martin P. Robinson (Telly
Monster), Frank Oz (Bert, Grover, Cookie Monster), Fran Brill (Zoe),
Steve Whitmire (Ernie), Jerry Nelson (The Count). First time bigscreen
director Gary Halvorson does a bang up job keeping everything moving
quickly (but not too quickly -- us adults are a lot slower than the
kidlets), dropping in a musical nod to STOMP! and concentrating more on
story and muppets, than on songs and cameos as have other Muppet flicks.
Technically, this can't be called a "Muppet" movie, which has something
to do with trademarks and creative rights and the original deal made
between Henson and the Children's Television Workshop. Luckily, I can
call Elmo what it is. It's the best Muppet movie since The Muppet Movie.
And you know how almost every kidlet flick gets the rental rating 'cuz
that's where they all wind up? Think again.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Adventures of Elmo in
Grouchland, he would have paid...
Gee. I haven't thought about my blankie in years . . .
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland (G) ***
Starring Mandy Patinkin, Vanessa L. Williams
Directed by Gary Halvorson
A Review by Frankie Paiva
Everyone in the world must be avoiding the good children’s movies. If the
failure of The Iron Giant, a terrific film about the relationship between a boy
and his pet robot wasn’t proof than the flop that Columbia Pictures
experienced with this should be proof enough. After Muppets From Space bombed,
and The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland didn’t do that well, all of us are
left to wonder what is to become of Sesame Street and the Muppets which many of
us have grown up with and still love and adore. At least this film stays true
to it’s original formula, Elmo is aimed 100% directly, on target at kids.
This isn’t to say it’s like the recent Rugrats movie, a huge success that
sickened parents, this one will actually (gasp) have the adults in the audience
having fun with their children. Plus the interaction with the audience (much
like that of the enormously popular Blues Clues) helps to form a bond between
movie and audience. This is a fun family film and I’m glad to give you this
review.
Elmo loves and adores his fuzzy blue blanket more than anything in the world.
He loves it so much he doesn’t want to share it with his friend Zoe, while
they are in a struggle over who gets the blanket, it gets caught by a blast of
wind and flies through the air, eventually landing in Oscar’s garbage can.
When Elmo goes to retrieve it, he and the blanket are sucked into a vortex that
magically sends them to Grouchland, a place where everything yucky and smelly
reigns supreme.
In Grouchland there is an evil person named Huxley (Patinkin) who steals
everything he can from all of the people who live in the area. However, no one
in Grouchland is willing to do anything about it because working together to do
anything is considered bad. Grouchland is basically the opposite of everything
they teach you on Sesame Street. When good-hearted Elmo discovers Huxley has
his blanket, he immediately goes to his dreaded castle to retrieve it. But not
without being sidetracked and chased by the evil villain’s henchmen. 
All of the characters you know and love make an appearance hear. Even classic
cast members Bob McGrath and Sonia Manzano make an appearance. Vanessa L.
Williams does a musical number as the Queen of Trash, her song, which is all
about how beauty is everywhere, it just depends on your point of view, eerily
sums up the message of American Beauty. But it’s really Bert and Ernie that
steal the show. Everytime a major point of action occurs Ernie is there to tell
the frightened Bert (and perhaps audience) that everything is going to be OK. I
really enjoyed watching The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, even though I am
12. The makers of the film stuck with the original Street formula and didn’t
screw it up at all (even if the songs sounds a little like those of The Lion
King.) If you’re looking for a fun family film that the whole family will
like, take the kiddies to see The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, which gets
*** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film is aimed directly as young ones and has no
objectionable content. Good For All Ages
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Adventures_of_Elmo_in_Grouchland_ (G) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
Everyone who's grown up in front of a television during the last 30
years has memories of _Sesame_Street_--but not just any type of memories:
fond memories.  So it's hard to bear any ill will toward the warm and
cuddly _The_Adventures_of_Elmo_in_Grouchland_, which brings to the big
screen all those familiar faces--human and Muppet--from "where the air is
sweet."  Accordingly, the film is sweet, and technically accomplished. 
But the film is strictly for those who are currently watching the PBS
series: that is, the preschool/kindergarten audience.
And that target audience will eat up this high spirited-musical
adventure as if it were a piece of candy.  Elmo (performed by Kevin
Clash), that fuzzy little red monster known for his ticklishness, loves
his blanket, which he expresses in a bouncy curtain-raising tune.  He
loves it so much that he refuses to let his friend Zoe so much as hold it
for a moment.  It's obvious that Elmo has to learn a thing or two about
sharing, and his lesson comes the hard way when he and his blanket are
sucked into the world of Grouchland, where the evil and greedy Huxley
(Mandy Patinkin) claims the blanket for himself.
Writers Mitchell Kriegman and Joseph Mazzarino and director Gary
Halvorson do make an effort to keep the adult audience (read: parents)
somewhat caught up in the proceedings.  In addition to the regular
_Sesame_Street_ cast (Bert, Ernie, Big Bird, Oscar the Grouch, Telly,
Cookie Monster, et al. as well as flesh-and-blood regulars Maria, Gordon,
Bob, and the others), on hand as "guest stars" are Patinkin as well as
Vanessa Williams as the Queen of Trash; of course, these seasoned musical
performers are each given a big production number to call their own.  And
very once in a while, a bit of smart dialogue that goes over kids' heads
creeps in.  For example, when Huxley is confronted by the entire
_Sesame_Street_ gang, he says that the look like the types who would
"sing your A-B-Cs and 1-2-3s all day long."
But there's no mistaking that when Bert and Ernie appear periodically to
let the audience know that things will be OK, they're talking to the wee
ones; and that when Elmo turns to the camera and asks for help, he's
asking the kids in the crowd (after all, an audio track of kids yelling
and laughing is tacked on during these moments).  So while the adults may
not exactly be bored during _The_Adventures_of_Elmo_in_Grouchland_, they
may feel left out, making the film a much better bet once it reaches home
video, for it would be more functional as a 77-minute babysitter.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
John Carroll
   For as long as time can tell, Disney has always enthralled children and
parents alike.  Whether it be the artful A Bug's Life or the beautiful Lion
King, Disney always has something new, unique and interesting to offer children
and their parents.  For those of you who have not caught on yet, I keep
mentioning parents.  That is because you rarely see six-year-olds attending
movies by themselves.  The parents always tag along.  Part of the reason Disney
is so successful is that they not only entertain children, they keep the
parents involved as well.  For some reason, other studios have not caught on
with this aspect, and if you are looking for a recent example, look no further
than The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland.
   Elmo has always been a classic character on Sesame Street.  Big Bird and
Cookie Monster always get the headlines, but children are enthralled by the
cuteness of Elmo.  So, it must seem like a great idea to put Elmo up on the big
screen for all children to see.  Wrong.  In The Adventures of Elmo in
Grouchland, Elmo is cute for the first ten minutes.  Then his act gets old,
fast.  Very fast.  You can only take so much cuteness, but The Adventures of
Elmo in Grouchland lays on the cuteness by the handful.  The only time you get
relief is when the ensemble cast of Sesame Street hits the screen for two or
three minutes.  Then it is back to Elmo, yet again.  Part of what made Elmo so
popular was that he never was on screen for that long.  But, he is the main
objective in The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland and you will find yourself
snoozing before long.
   Obviously this is a children's movie, and despite boring the parents to
sleep, the kids may be entertained.  Although, most of them will not. 
Considering the demographic, not many kids over eight years old will be seeing
The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, so the audience is already limited. 
Plus, considering that kids under the age of eight have the attention span the
size of an ant, not many parents will be enthralled by the aspect of trying to
control their kids in a movie theatre for an hour and ten minutes.  It would be
a lot easier for parents to keep their kids under control had this film been
entertaining; unfortunately, the fun only comes in small doses.
   Elmo does lay on the cuteness, but the kids will have some fun once and a
while.  While most of the film is a drag, the kids will certainly being
enthralled by the upbeat song sequences.  Also, when the rest of the Sesame
Street gang make their appearances, which are few and far between, the kids
will get some laughs.  However, considering kids are easily entertained, I
found it a shame that I heard only one or two laughs from the children in the
theatre.
   There are a few bright spots in the film.  As always on Sesame Street, a
lesson is to be had, and this time it is sharing.  Although it is pretty
obvious, and most kids will not even get it anyway, the point is still conveyed
well and if Sesame Street attracted an older audience, perhaps the point would
have been important.  Also, the kids will love seeing their favorite Sesame
Street characters on the big screen, despite losing a lot of time to Elmo, who
basically becomes a screen hog, despite not being Jim Henson's intention.
   Overall, there is not much to say about The Adventures of Elmo in
Grouchland.  Coming in at a skimpy hour and ten minutes, the film is still too
boring to sit through.  It does teach a good lesson, for those young ones who
are intelligent enough to understand, and the flashy song sequences will have
your kids smiling.  But besides that, The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland are
not that fun and should only be viewed by those children who love the Sesame
Street gang.  Hopefully, they can be mature enough to sit by themselves so the
parents can go see the wonderful American Beauty or entertaining Three Kings.
Two Stars Out of Four Stars
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ELMO IN GROUCHLAND" (Columbia Pictures)
          Anyone who's ever had toddlers knows there are certain
taboos - like separating a kid from his security blanket. In this
latest of the "Sesame Street" movie spin-offs, stemming from the
genius of the late Jim Henson, lovable Elmo, the shy, little,
red-tufted yarn puppet with an orange nose and eggshell eyes, loses
his beloved blue blanket, named Blanket. The story starts as Elmo gets
very, very upset when his best friend Zoe wants to hold Blanket. In
fact, a tug-of-war breaks out and neither of them sees Telly coming at
them on his new roller blades. An accident occurs and Blanket winds up
in Oscar's mysterious trash can - which, in turn, leads him
Grouchland, a stinky, yucky place where everyone's irritable and
smiling is forbidden. And there's a cranky villain in
Grouchland.. That's greedy Huxley, played by Mandy Patinkin. He's a
selfish bully who stamps everything "Mine" and sucks up Blanket with
his Hoxocopter and won't give it back. Moppets will not only love
watching but they're invited to yell, sing and clap along, and that's
about as interactive as cinema can be these days. And the best part -
insofar as parents are concerned - is that whenever the going gets
tough - like Blanket might rip - Bert and Ernie interrupt the story to
reassure viewers that they shouldn't worry and things will turn out
all right. With the Muppeteers, there's light-hearted humor and
good-natured fun which makes for lots of laughs - and Vanessa Williams
makes a great Queen of Trash. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Elmo in Grouchland" is a warm, fuzzy 8, teaching pre-schoolers a
gentle lesson about sharing.

Author
Richard Bean
This was a happy film concerning the red furball from Sesame St, Elmo,
and how he learns about unselfishness from the negative example of a
"greedy selfish villain" called Huxley, played by Mandy Patinkin.
Elmo loves his blanket but won't allow his friend Zoe to hold it, and
through a series of misfortunes ends up in Grouchland ("Positively NO
Smiling!") where everyone is very unfriendly and Huxley (singing "I
Make It Mine") is the most selfish of all. Elmo needs to retrieve his
blanket from Huxley's castle and encounters a series of difficulties
along the way, including a meeting with the "Queen of Trash", played by
Vanessa Williams, who teaches him about giving.
I am 22 and I enjoyed it, particularly the musical parts.  The signs in
Grouchland are funny for adults, e.g. a movie theatre "Sharon Groan in
Basically It Stinks", and the self-deprecating comments made about the
show - Huxley, "I bet you have a grand old time together just saying
the alphabet and counting *all day long*." Grouchland saying - "You
look like a million yuks." In jail, some people are told, "You have the
right to scream your head off, and if you choose not to exercise that
right, you can have someone scream their head off for you."
At one point Elmo encounters a humongous chicken. This scene, in the
tradition of Gonzo the Great (_The Muppet Show_) and his bohemian flock,
lends itself readily to Freudian analysis. We can see Elmo retreating
into childish verse to flee his realisation, in light of his dawning
sexuality, of a prepubscent Oedipus complex.
Grouchland is like a ghetto, so the producers had to be careful to
avoid any racist suggestions at that point (witness the outcry over
Phantom Menace). The background music is a Latin/South American
rhythm.  The Queen of Trash's dump has an African/Andean rhythm with
the pipes in the background.  This could be intrepreted as symbolic of
North American hegemony over Third World countries.
The incipient bourgeois mentality evinced throughout the film was its
most disturbing aspect; apparently we are supposed to find both the
ghetto dwellers and the prosperous of Grouchland (the socialist,
Huxley) reprehensible.  The writers attempt to de-emphasize this
dialectical tension in the aforementioned jail scene.
Also, had this film been made in any country except the U.S., there
would surely have been some reference to recycling.  When Sesame Street
first screened in November 1969, trash cans were omnipresent in the
inner city street; however, today's film producers should be more
environmentally conscious.
Postmodernist doctrines are blatantly promulgated in the Queen of
Trash's song concerning her dump (or creation?) "It's all about your
point of view".
Bert and Ernie often break in and get the audience to "participate".
They are very fond of using each others' names in their conversation in
every sentence, even more than once.  My friend detected homosexual
overtones in this tendency and in their interaction generally, although
I failed to notice.  I don't think kids would either.  Jerry Falwell
might.
Another unusual aspect of this film is that Elmo refers to himself in
the third person all the time.  "Elmo loves his blanket", "Elmo wants
to find his blanket" etc.  This may promote narcissism in children.
The opening scene with Elmo's blanket is endearing and yet his
selfishness should be censured.  Kids will quickly notice that the main
characters are abstractions of children's moods.
My conclusion, though, is that this is a funny film suitable for all
ages.
Richard Bean (rwb@maths.uq.edu.au)
Thanks to Raymond Smith for helping me with this review.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Gary Halvorson's THE ADVENTURES OF ELMO IN GROUCHLAND, Elmo (voice of
Kevin Clash) has lost his prized possession, his blue blanket. It has
fallen into the trash can home of Oscar the Grouch (voice of Caroll
Spinney) and from thence to a place called Grouchland, U.S.A.
After the simple setup, Halvorson uses every excuse he can to get his
characters to break out into another song and dance number. With
hyperactive pacing, the Sesame Street regulars, along with some guests,
sing their hearts out. Indeed, the musical numbers are the film's best
part, even if none come close to being memorable.
Mitchell Kriegman's script is the movie's weakest link, giving the film
slightly less punch than a typical television episode from the series.
In our packed audience, filled with kids from toddlers on up, the laugh
quotient was remarkably modest. Typical of the picture's humor is the
location of the villain's home -- it's "high atop Mount Pick-a-Nose."
Kriegman throws the adults in the audience a few random funny lines.
("You have the right to scream your head off," Grouch Jailer (Spinney)
says to his prisoners in a muppet version of the Miranda rights. "If you
give up these rights, someone will be provided who screams their head
off for you.")
With its 3 to 5-year-old target audience, the movie stops the action,
literally, whenever anything threatening occurs. As the frame is frozen
behind them, Bert (voice of Frank Oz) and Ernie (voice of Steve
Whitmire) step out to reassure the audience that nothing bad will
happen. Bert and Ernie steal the show with these antics.
Also interactive, the movie requires audience participation, lest bad
things happen to its protagonist. Elmo, for example, needs us to come up
with 100 raspberries in less than 30 seconds to convince the Queen of
Trash (Vanessa L. Williams) that he isn't a cohort of the nefarious
Huxley (Mandy Patinkin). The movie keeps a dynamic count on the screen,
so you may want to practice in advance.
Even if the film isn't all it could be, some scenes are special. The
most magical is one filled with fireflies. Like a hundred Tinkerbells,
they come together to form an arrow to guide Elmo out of danger.
THE ADVENTURES OF ELMO IN GROUCHLAND runs 1:13. It is rated G and would
be fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, gave it **, liking mainly the music. His friend
Alan, age 10, gave it ***, finding the movie hilarious but the plot
weak. His friend Nickolas, age 10, gave it ** 1/2, liking the songs and
the excitement about what would happen next. Nickolas's sisters,
Danielle and Kaity Rose, ages 7 and 5 respectively, both gave the movie
**** with their favorite part being the queen's song.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
