Title
Review for Fatale (1992)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Grant Heinrich
Directed Louis Malle.
Stars Jeremy Irons, Juliette Binoche (Teresa in THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS
      OF BEING).
     Irons and Binoche play two aliens stranded on earth in human form 
and only able to communicate through involved eyebrow wiggling and 
insertion without foreplay.  Irons is a wacky English MP.  Bincohe 
reprises her role from THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, only this time
without the benfit of good scripting--certainly, Damage allows no room
for anything resembling characterisation or, indeed, any form of acting 
whatsoever beyond stoicism and the occasional smirk during orgasm.
     Here's the plot:  Irons is a talented actor who picked a bad
script.  Dressed as an well-toned MP, he drags Binoche around France and
Britan, looking for some place more uncomfortable than the last to fuck.
Binoche is his son's girlfriend.  The rest is easily filled in: the
octopus position, the half-nelson with triple pike position, the losing
control of a two-wheel scooter because of an inexplicable manifestation
of  Cthulu position.
     Since it's impolite to giggle in the cinema (even when everyone
else does), wait for the video.  Personally, I enjoyed Damage, but I'm
a big fan of the badly-executed highbrow wanking flick.  Well, not a
fan.  Not really.  But I seem to see a lot of the things.
     Good points: the first ten minutes.  The last half hour works.  
The closing music is stirring.  The actress playing Binoche's mother 
has a grey stripe through her hair; she looks and sounds like a Python 
character--doesn't suit the movie, but she's fun to watch.
     Winnner: the 1993 "Close my Eyes" award for sexual banality.  This
award is named for the '92 film, notable for trite dialogue, inept
direction and anatomical correctness.
--- Grant Heinrich  ( leroy@socs.uts.edu.au )

Author
Pedro Sena
Louis Malle's films have always been about the interaction between two, or
more, characters.  DAMAGE is not any different at all.
It would be very easy to call Louis Malle, the quintessential film  director
one can study in academic circles.  DAMAGE is another fine example of what
the art of directing is all about.  Nicely tied moments, and a cohesive
story.  Made even more so, by the actions of the director.  Malle, despite
his American connections  ( married to Candace Bergen ), has never lost his
feel for directing something, and is ( and will ) be remembered for it for a
long time  to come.
DAMAGE is the story of an English diplomat that is on the verge of becoming
a prime minister, but his ability to get his job done has met an enemy.  It
is his 'double', or his other personality.  And for his indiscretion, he
loses his whole life.  Society can be cruel, but then so can the
individuals, be they the Stephens intertwined in their chances of success,
or Anna, whose life seems to be a series of tragic incidents she happens to
bring to a close everytime.  While Stephens  sees and understands that he
can not continue what he is doing, Anna is engaged to his son, he still does
it.  And it costs him
his own son.  And social position.
As the film closes, the older Stephens is admiring a picture of Anna on his
wall.  He observes that he saw Anna once more, but she didn't  see him.  She
had had a child with the Frenchman that helped her
before.  And that he had lost her special feeling.  The wildness.
I suppose that there are a couple of things this fine film would like  to
make us all see.  why is it that the impossible is always so attractive, so
clear, so desirable -- and yet, so utterly destructive.  Or is
it, as the credits suggest, that woman, while strong to pursue her desires,
is still weak -- just like any man -- when it comes to drawing a line, or to
stop.
Louis Malle's best strength has always been centered on the characters he
works with, and their inner strength, or inability to work with it.  And
their interplay in the face of disaster.  The ones that show
the weaker and emotional sides, generally fail.  The son is the example
here.  society manages to hurt, or damage, the rest.
Carefully shot, with beautiful musical passage strewn throughout, this film
is slow, but it is attractive, with excellent acting throughout, and it
manages to keep us wondering where it will all lead.  But while
Stephens is still stuck in a time warp, has everyone else gained, or lost.?
Excellently directed with very intricate and delicate dialogue exchanges.
Tender when it needs to be.  Sexual when it needs to be ( the angles are
faster, and the style cuts faster ).  This film is one of those that is sad,
but it is a triumph of tenderness about one side of our nature, which has a
tendency to hurt us in this modern day and age.  Is it us, or is it the
social mold that has done us wrong.?  Anna is having the same problem on
another scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     DAMAGE, based on the book by Josephine Hart, tells the tale of
Member of Parliament Dr.  Stephen Fleming (Jeremy Irons) as he falls
madly in love with Anna Barton (Juliette Binoche), the latest flame of
his son Martyn (Rupert Graves).  As the relationship between Martyn and
Anna becomes more serious, Stephen's infatuation grows into an
obsession.  He becomes blind to all concerns except being with Anna.
     Louis Malle, the talented director of such films as PRETTY BABY and
MURMUR OF THE HEART, has not used his cast to their best advantage in
his latest effort, DAMAGE.  As a treatment of obsession and its
consequences, the film is effective, but there are many avenues left
unexplored.
     Irons and Binoche are both underutilized, with their ability only
occasionally shining through.  The relationship between their characters
seems unlikely--Anna doesn't come across as the kind of woman to drive
a man to obsession--and the supposedly "erotic" sex scenes aren't that
steamy.  Why Malle had to snip and clip to get the original NC-17 down
to an R is beyond me.
     One of the main problems with the pairing of Anna and Stephen is
that their introduction to each other is mishandled.  The long,
lingering look that they exchange when they meet doesn't ignite sparks.
There's no heat in it.  And because that moment doesn't work, the rapid
development of the affair feels contrived and unnatural.
     The meat of the film--the part that focuses on Stephen's obsession
and the lengths to which he will go to be with Anna--is absorbing, and
occasionally riveting.  Irons clearly knows how to play a tormented man.
This isn't his first such role, but he continues to bring a
believability and humanity to the flawed protagonist.
     There are a number of intriguing psychological issues raised by
DAMAGE.  Unfortunately, all but the central one are unceremoniously
dropped with little or no exploration.  One of the most interesting of
these is the relationship between Irons and his daughter (played
brilliantly by Gemma Clark).  An estrangement between the two is hinted
at, but what could have been a potent subplot, using a capable young
actress, is ignored.
     Miranda Richardson is solid throughout, and may be the only adult
performer in the film to get the most out of her role.  In less than
half the screen time of Irons' Stephen, Ms.  Richardson manages to
create a more real personality.  She is as good here as in her other
recent releases, ENCHANTED APRIL and THE CRYING GAME.
     The denouement of DAMAGE is unsatisfying, although there isn't much
deviation in the tone and focus of the ending from that of the rest of
the film.  Again, too many issues are glossed over.  This is
frustrating, because the film seems to be bursting with potential that
is never allowed to escape.
     Despite numerous faults, DAMAGE is still a worthwhile motion
picture.  It presents a stark depiction of a man on the edge who is
driven to act by needs he can neither understand nor control, and the
amount of pain that such an obsession can cause.  Irons, although not in
top form, still impresses more often than not.  There's quite a bit
here, just not nearly as much as there could have been.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the early 1990s, following the surprise success of BASIC
INSTINCT, Hollywood launched whole series of films labelled
as "erotic thrillers". Usually, such films were
disappointments - unsatisfying both to the fans of
thrillers, and those who like to be engrossed in erotica.
However, they proved to be modest commercial success, mostly
due to the hype caused with rating controversy. One of the
films that was mistaken for such "erotic thriller" was
DAMAGE, British erotic drama, directed by veteran French
director Louis Malle. This film also had to fight with
American censors, but, when the film actually had hit the
markets, the viewers, expecting another interesting thriller
or fleshfest, turned out to be quite disappointed.
The movie was based on the dark, depressing novel by
Josephine Hart. Its protagonist is Dr. Stephen Fleming
(played by Jeremy Irons), member of the British Parliament
whose life on the surface seems flawless. His family life
looks ideal, his wife Ingrid (Miranda Richardson) loves him,
his two children are grown, and his rising political star
might bring him to the post of Prime Minister. However,
everything shatters when he meets Anna Barton (Juliette
Binoche), beautiful young woman who just happens to be the
girlfriend of his son Martyn (Rupert Graves). After a single
glance, two of them engage in wild, passionate but
clandestine affair. Stephen is aware of the risks, but he
can't control his desires. Same as Anna, despite being
emotionally scared in the tragedy from her past.
Louis Malle made reputation, among other things, by breaking
taboos and making films about forbidden expressions of human
sexuality - like incest or paedophilia. However, unlike some
authors, who went after cheap sensationalism and excuses to
present gratuitous sex or violence, Malle was just exploring
favourite subject of many "artistic" European filmmakers,
especially French ones -huge gap between the nominal
morality of European bourgeoisie and the actual depravity
that controls the life of many of its members. Being
provided with excellent characters, both by novelist and by
talented screenwriter David Hare, Malle could engage in his
favourite way of portrayal - clinical, cold dissection of
protagonist's life and his hypocrisy. Malle's style is cold
and clinical, and it shouldn't surprise anyone that the sex
scenes, although definitely explicit, aren't erotic at all.
Actually, hardly anything is appealing in this film that
takes place on the grey interiors and exteriors of London
and under the eternally cloudy sky.
One of the reasons why the film is rather unappealing is
miscasting. Jeremy Irons, although being one of the best
actors from British Isles, is good in his role, but he lacks
the charm, able to convince that he could bring the girl
half of his age to the bed with a single look. Also, even in
the worst moments for his character, Irons seems somewhat
too dignified and cold to really makes us empathise with
him. Same goes for Juliette Binoche, talented actress that,
although physically attractive, simply seems too plain to be
femme fatale. Other actors save the day - versatile and
always reliable Miranda Richardson as Stephen's wife and
veterans Ian Bannen and Leslie Caron in two minor, but very
effective roles. In the end, what we are left with is a
paradox - technically great, excellently paced film with
good scenario, that in the end leaves us indifferent to the
story and characters.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:54, unrated version (NC-17 version), Drama, 1993
Director: Louis Malle
Cast: Jeremy Irons, Juliette Binoche, Miranda Richardson, Rupert Graves,
      Ian Bannen, Peter Stormare, Gemma Clarke, Julian Fellowes, Leslie Caron
     Jeremy Irons is having an obsessive affair with Juliette Binoche.
Binoche falls in love with Rupert Graves, Irons's son.  As Binoche and
Graves relationship gets more and more serious, Irons tries to end it.
     DAMAGE is an incredibly slow-moving boring film that is a complete
waste of time.  I can't recommend this film to anyone, unless you enjoy
watching grass grow in the dark.  DAMAGE is now available on
videocassette in two versions, the R rated theatrical version that runs
for 1:50 and the unrated (original NC-17 version) that runs for 1:54
(the version that I am reviewing).  On a scale of zero to five, I give
DAMAGE a zero (too bad it doesn't go lower).  DAMAGE is unrated and
contains female nudity, brief male nudity, adult situations, and
explicit language.
     Louis Malle, the director of the good film PRETTY BABY, has made a
real loser of a film.  Hopefully this film will be a low point in his
career.  Jeremy Irons (whom I have heard is a good actor) was not at
all impressive in this film.  The only way to describe his acting is
wooden and uninspired.  Juliette Binoche (a newcomer to films I
believe) also didn't do a good job.  She didn't ever seem to be with
this film.  Miranda Richardson (who did such a good job in the recent
THE CRYING GAME) is not at all interesting in this film.  I was very
disappointed, especially considering she received an academy award
nomination for best supporting actress.  Rupert Graves (WHERE ANGELS
FEAR TO TREAD) does the best job out of the cast.  He seemed to put
some life into his role.
     This film is poorly written and moves along slowly.  The
characters are boring and invoke no interest from the viewer.  I have
something to say about the "hot and steamy" sex scenes too, they were
neither hot or steamy.  Jeremy Irons and Juliette Binoche have about as
much sexual chemistry as two eggs.  The sex scenes look fake and are
erotic in no way.  If you are looking for a good erotic drama, may I
suggest THE BLUE LAGOON with Brooke Shields and Christopher Atkins or
WILD ORCHID with Mickey Rourke and Carre Otis.  And if you are looking
for a well done film, may I suggest that you just skip this one.

Author
Gerard Foley
        Partly moved by Louis Malle's recent death and partly because it
was on the library shelf, I looked again at "Damage", the 1992 film which
he produced and directed.  The screenplay is by David Hare from a novel by
Josephine Hart (I have not read the novel.  I believe David Hare writes
fiction about British politics). 
I think the film is extraordinary on several levels.  It is the
most convincing tale of eroticism that I have ever seen.  It also
maintains a moderately high level of suspense, not enough to distract from
my enjoyment of other aspects of it.  The performances Malle has obtained
from his three stars are outstanding.  Jeremy Irons and Juliette Binoche
have, properly enough, top billing.  In addition to her surprising
delivery of her lines, without the least sign of a French acccent, as
Malle says in his epilog, she tells volumes without speaking at all.  So,
for that matter, does Irons.  I do not remember him giving a performance
of such range in any other film or TV vehicle.  He convinces me that he is
an upper level politician and technocrat, an even smoother performance
than we have grown accustomed to from other British actors playing
politicians and civil servants.  Part of this, of course, must be credited
to Hare, the screenwriter, and Hart, the novelist, but some credit should
go to Irons and Malle too. 
The story is of a middle aged politician whose instant infatuation
with his sons girl friend is as instantly reciprocated.  Miranda
Richardson plays the wife-mother, a much smaller and less flashy role than
that of the other two actors but equally convincing.  Malle makes you
perfectly aware, by the end of the film, that a woman like the one Binoche
plays is an all around menace, but you still mourn Irons characters loss
of her as much as you do his loss of his wife and son. 
As I write this, I am reminded of Polanskis "Bitter Moon". 
Superficially one might want to compare the male villain of "Bitter Moon"
with the female protagonist of "Damage", but to me Polanski reveals a
really deep hatred and contempt for all of his characters, while I think
Malle really loves all of his. 
The video includes a very warm interview-epilogue with Malle.  Weve
lost one of the great film makers. 
