Title
Review for Running Man, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Craig Good
     In a future somewhere between MAX HEADROOM and ROBOCOP, the number-one
television show is a gladiator fest where the contestants (read "victims") are
convicted criminals.  Arnold Schwarzenegger plays a cop who refuses to gun down
unarmed citizens in a food riot and winds up in a labor camp, framed as "The
Butcher of Bakersfield."
     After a prison break and arrest, he becomes the featured player on Richard
Dawson's RUNNING MAN show.  Ratings go up as bad guys go down.  One after
another, government gladiators go after Arnie in the large game area, and one
after another he dispatches them.  So far I've told you nothing you couldn't
learn from the trailer, and that's the problem with the movie.
     THE RUNNING MAN is a film with motion-picture ideas and television
sensibilities.  Director Paul Michael Glaser, formerly of Starsky and Hutch
fame, delivers numbingly endless action sequences and no direction for Arnold.
I've maintained for a few years that Schwarzenegger is underrated as an actor.
To continue making that argument I'm afraid I'll have to ignore this particular
data point.  The man does have talent, but he needs a decent script and a
little help from the director or he comes off as a muscled mannequin.
     I can't totally pan the movie because it does have its moments.  For a
while I thought it would approach ROBOCOP's humor.  Soon, though, the formula
of setup/action/wisecrack wears real thin.  The most redeeming feature (aside
from some deftly-handled visual effects by SFX) is the treatment of editing for
TV "news."  I can only hope that after seeing THE RUNNING MAN the audience
approaches everything they hear and see from the "news" media with renewed
suspicion.  I just suspect that the audience will be rather small, and more
interested in the action than the story.  But, so was the director.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Somewhere along the line, Arnold Schwarzenegger actually 
developed a passable acting technique, but THE RUNNING MAN 
comes before that time. His wooden performance is just one of the 
reasons this movie will never be more than a mediocre movie 
experience for people who don't have the sense of humor to 
appreciate just how dismal the 80's action formula was working 
by this point in Arnold's career. This movie, like the far superior 
TERMINATOR and TOTAL RECALL, provides a science-fiction 
backdrop for the mindless violence, in a more extreme, futuristic 
version of "American Gladiators."
        In the year 2019, we read at the beginning, America has 
become a police state where the only thing citizens care about is 
television. And the most popular game show is "The Running 
Man," where convict contestants are promised great prizes if 
they can escape the "stalkers," bohemoths like Subzero (the 
hockey killer), Buzzsaw (the chainsaw biker), Dynamo (the 
operatic electrocutioner) and Fireball (blaxploitation star Jim 
Brown with a flame thrower).
        Schwarzenegger is the only contestant to ever offer the 
stalkers a serious challenge, and he is of course an innocent man 
fighting for his freedom. The savage media has edited a newsreel 
video of Schwarzenegger in such a way that it frames him. It's up 
to Arnold to fight for his life against the stalkers so he can draw 
attention to the deceptions of the media (because, obviously, 
savage violence is the only way to bring about truth). We all know 
the Reverend Wildmon would be twice as successful in his crusade 
against TV violence if he'd put on a lyrca jumpsuit and kick some 
Gladiator butt.
        Adapted from a Richard Bachman (a.k.a. Stephen King) 
book, THE RUNNING MAN at least has a sense of humor about 
itself, making game show host Richard Dawson into a celebrity. 
As for the serious parts, well, they don't seem so serious anymore. 
Pretty much the entire movie is laughable at this point, and it's safe 
to say the best place to preach about people's lives being influenced 
by what they see on TV is not a violent Arnold Schwarzenegger 
movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
oz@netsys.UUCP
     One of the cuter bits on the new SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE is the movie
reviewer who always gets the kind of movie she was at mixed up.  "I saw OUT OF
AFRICA and just didn't find it funny.  Where was the slapstick that I
expected?" and stuff like that.  I bring this up to point out that when I go to
a movie, my expectations are usually pretty realistic.  I don't go to a musical
expecting a well constructed plot, I don't go to John Hughes teenage movies
expecting reality, and I don't go to Arnold Schwarzenegger movies expecting to
see great acting (although it *is* a sad state of affairs that Richard Burton
dead acts better then Mr. Schwarzenegger does alive).  So as you go through
this review bear in mind that, yes, Your Honor, I knew what I was getting into,
and it is on that level that I didn't like the movie.
     THE RUNNING MAN fails because it takes itself too seriously.  It is set in
the future.  An evil government has taken over the United States (and indeed
most of the world).  They control the masses via their television and other
mind control and propaganda methods.  Mr. Schwarzenegger is a poor schnook,
policeman actually, who refuses to gun down some civilians who are rioting and
is then framed for their murder anyway.  He is sentenced to a prison camp (why
they don't kill him if he is "such an enemy of the people" I don't know) and
attracts the attention of the emcee of the most popular TV show on the air (a
drum roll please) THE RUNNING MAN where convicts get to run for friends pursued
by crack trackers.  The emcee is played by Richard Dawson who has the time of
his life and was a delight to watch.  Dawson's character is the only one in the
movie that seems to be well thought out and consistent.  Mr. Schwarzenegger
ends up on the show and ... well, you can take it from there easily.
     My complaints are major lapses in logic (our hero refuses to kill one man
because "I can't kill an unarmed man" and then the next time he disarms one of
his stalkers, seems to change his mind), a strange cast and poor writing
("There are women and children in the crowd.  I refuse to shoot them." ...
George S. Kaufman it's not).  Even Mr. Schwarzenegger's famous one-liners fell
flat for me.  When I was a kid ( M A N Y moons ago) my father had the Tom
Lehrer album "That was the Year that Was" and he would play it all the time.  I
listened to the album and saw where the grownups laughed and liked to use the
lines.  A 7-year-old saying "Base 8 is like base 10 really....  If you're
missing two fingers!" got a laugh, but not as big a one as Tom Lehrer got
because I didn't know what I was talking about!  (There are those that are kind
enough to point out that they feel I still don't.  But I digress...)  
     The same is true of Mr. Schwarzenegger and his one-liners.  They are
cute, but seem wrong coming from him.  They are not said with humor, feeling,
or "conviction."  They sounded a hell of a lot better when we talked about
them than when I saw it.
     Anyway, on the monetary scale of rating movies, I rate this a "see it on
HBO since it would be for free anyway," one of my lowest rankings.  If you want
to see an action movie which is fun because it *doesn't* take itself too
seriously and is therefore enjoyable, catch LETHAL WEAPON (now available on
videotape) or EXTREME PREJUDICE, both excellent movies of this type.  As for
Mr. S., I've got a lot of respect for you as a body builder and a businessman,
but don't give up the day job....
