Title
Review for Female Perversions (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Its title, FEMALE PERVERSIONS, almost guarantees that most people
will write off the film as a soft porn exploitation flick.  Those who
do see it for cheap thrills will probably be disappointed.  But those
viewers expecting thought provoking material, will not be.
     Although the film opened to uniformly good reviews, first-time
director Susan Streitfeld had difficulty obtaining financing for it.
She wanted to make a sexually explicit film about the perversions women
are forced into by society and about the unlocking of the erotic chains
for women.  She succeeds in one of the more provocative films in a year
already filled with them (KISSED, CRASH, FETISHES, and RIPE to name a
few).
     Evelyn "Eve" Stevens, played with explosive power by Tilda
Swinton, is an accomplished and hard driving attorney, who has a
tremendous sexual appetite as well as a troubled childhood that haunts
her every action.  Eve's bravado will likely shock many viewers.  One
moment she is on her way to an interview with the Governor for a
judgeship, and the next she is off for a bizarre erotic tryst with her
male friend John (Clancy Brown), where she makes sure that his office
door is unlocked to increase her thrill factor.  A constant dabbler in
things sexual, Eve has a lesbian affair with Renee (Karen Sillas), the
new doctor in her building.
     What makes the film sad and troubling are the nightmares which Eve
has day and night.  Although they relate back to some incident with her
father, they seem much broader in context.  To reinforce this notion
are numerous sayings written on everything from pillow embroidery to
billboard signs.  ("Perversions are never what they seem to be."  "In a
perversion, there is no freedom, only a rigid conformity to
stereotype."  "Perversion scenarios are about desperate need.")
     Eve's actions in the film can only be examined within the context
of her trying to break the bonds of what society expects of her.
Although she gets great satisfaction from her secret life outside of
her profession, she is the source of constant criticism from her
nightmare images.  ("Nothing about you is genuine.  Everyone knows
you're a fraud.")  The more successful she becomes, the more she has
self-doubts.
     Society seems fixated on Eve's sexuality, which troubles her.
When she delivers an argument in court, we see the males mentally
undressing her.  In her interview with the governor she becomes
obsessed with a loose thread on her skirt.
     Amy Madigan plays Eve's sister Madelyn.  Madelyn, with her casual,
rugged clothes, looks like someone who might work at a health food
store.  Her image is quite a contrast to Eve's tight fitting
professional image with her suits, pancake makeup, and bright lipstick.
Madelyn is a kleptomaniac -- "I steal to stop me from killing myself"
-- who is about to defend her Ph.D. thesis at UCLA.  The two sisters,
who appear on the surface to be polar opposites, actually share many
traits.
     This complex and troubling show, which covers much wider territory
that it might seem, ends abruptly.  The confusion left in the viewer's
mind appears intentional.  A richly textured movie that demands a
second viewing to comprehend it all.  But the film has such intensity
that most will be reluctant to sit through it again.  Still, the
journey the picture takes you on is enlightening.
     FEMALE PERVERSIONS runs 1:59.  It is rated R for full frontal male
and female nudity, explicit sexual acts, two self mutilation scenes and
strong language.  I think the film should have been rated NC-17, and I
do not think it is appropriate for teenagers.  I recommend the film to
adults willing to explore troubling ground and give the movie ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(October)
Starring:  Tilda Swinton, Amy Madigan, Karen Sillas, Laila Robins, Dale
Shuger, Paulina Porizkova, Clancy Brown.
Screenplay:  Susan Streitfeld and Julie Hebert.
Producer:  Mindy Affrime.
Director:  Susan Streitfeld.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Some people have facial features which seem to come from another era;
Tilda Swinton has features from another world.  Her almost translucent
skin, high cheekbones and wide blue eyes conspire to give her a faintly
alien appearance, intelligent and curious but isolated.  Those striking,
androgynous features made her perfect for the gender-bending title role in
1993's ORLANDO.  In a different way, they also make her perfect for the
role of FEMALE PERVERSIONS' protagonist Eve Stephens.  In Susan
Streitfeld's compelling character study, Eve's psyche becomes the
battleground between a hundred different social images of womanhood.
Watching that battle in Swinton's face is, quite simply, electrifying.
     Eve is an up-and-coming Southern California prosecutor, up-and-coming
enough that the governor is considering her for a seat on the Court of
Appeals.  An impending judgeship should make Eve a very confident woman,
but instability seems to define every aspect of her life.  She carries on
sexual relationships simultaneously with a man (Clancy Brown) and a woman
(Karen Sillas); a strained relationship with her sister Madelyne (Amy
Madigan) becomes even more complicated when Madelyne is arrested for
shoplifting.  As her interview with the governor approaches, Eve is forced
to confront insecurities inspired by years of mixed messages about what it
means to be a woman.
     FEMALE PERVERSIONS takes its title the non-fiction text by Dr. Louise
J. Kaplan in which she defines "perversions" as deviations from strict
societal proscriptions on female behavior, sexuality and fantasy.  It's a
great jumping-off point for a sociological study of modern American
femininity, but Streitfeld shows a peculiar and ill-advised devotion to
her source.  The film's most awkward conceit involves the periodic 
appearance of quotes from the book in odd locations -- embroidered into
pillow-cases, as advertising on billboards and in magazines -- offering
modestly insightful epigrams like "Perverse scenarios are about desperate
need."  It's a Peter Greenaway type of stunt from a rookie director
(Streitfeld is a rehabilitated...sorry, _retired_ Hollywood agent) which
tosses generalities into the path of individual characters.
     Those characters, and Eve's interactions with them, really are the
"plot" of FEMALE PERVERSIONS.  Each one feels like something which began
as a case study but grew into a unique and fully-realized individual.
Madelyne's landlady Emma, who is obsessed with getting her latest
boyfriend to marry her, is played with a heartbreaking desperation by
Laila Robbins; Frances Fisher turns Emma's sister Annunciata into a tutor
in sexual manipulation; Emma's pubescent daughter Edwina (Dale Shuger) is
so terrified of her impending sexuality that she chops off her hair and
hides her body in baggy clothes.  The performances -- by Amy Madigan,
Karen Sillas, even Paulina Porizkova -- are uniformly superb, taking
snapshots of different women coping with life and giving them unexpected
vitality.
     We see them all through Eve's eyes, eyes which watch herself in a
news conference after winning a big case and can only see the lipstick
smeared on her teeth.  Swinton takes on the incredibly challenging role of
a woman living multiple lives -- she has to seem plausible as a competent
and effective professional who exposes herself in her lover's office,
and who flies into a disgusted rage at her fumbled response to an
interview question about her marital status.  Over the course of FEMALE
PERVERSION, Eve's confidence waxes and wanes, her remarkable face
alternately displaying confidence and deep feelings of inadequacy about
her physical appearance.  It is a performance so rich and detailed that it
feels like part of a documentary.
     Streitfeld stumbles when she reduces Eve's complex psychology to the
result of one childhood trauma.  FEMALE PERVERSION is about much more than
one woman's issues with Mommy and Daddy; Eve's story deals with the state
of being a woman as much as it deals with a specific woman.  Give credit
to Tilda Swinton for bringing life to an archetype, for giving a face to
the struggles of modern women.  And what a face it is.

Author
James Berardinelli
Germany/United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: May 1997 (limited)
Running Length: 1:58
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, nudity, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Tilda Swinton, Amy Madigan, Karen Sillas, Frances Fisher,=20
      Laila Robbins, Paulina Porizkova, Clancy Brown
Director: Susan Streitfeld
Producer: Mindy Affrime
Screenplay: Julie Hebert and Susan Streitfeld
Cinematography: Teresa Medina
Music: Debbie Wiseman
U.S. Distributor: Transatlantic Entertainment
     Before FEMALE PEVERSIONS, I never thought of Tilda Swinton=20
(ORLANDO) as possessing much sexual allure.  Her performance here, the=20
best thing about this sporadically effective exploration of sexuality=20
and gender roles, has convinced me otherwise.  With her finely-chiseled=20
features, alabaster skin, and ruby red lips, she radiates eroticism,=20
whether she's wearing a designer suit, transparent neglig=E9e, or nothing=20
at all.  If there's a reason to see FEMALE PERVERSIONS, it's Swinton.
     Had this film been directed by a man, I would have been tempted to=20
call it soft porn, but, since there's a woman (Susan Streitfeld) putting=20
all the naked female flesh up on screen, it seems a little less=20
exploitative.  Besides, there are times when the nudity is important to=20
the script, and FEMALE PERVERSIONS is nothing if not rich in ideas.  In=20
fact, that's part of the problem.  The movie is so focused on presenting=20
its agenda that it frequently lapses into pretentiousness.  The=20
characters don't always speak dialogue; occasionally, they start=20
mouthing slogans.  And there's some embarrassingly heavy-handed dream=20
imagery that features a naked woman being bound after falling off a=20
tightrope.
     FEMALE PERVERSIONS is inspired by FEMALE PERVERSIONS: THE=20
TEMPTATIONS OF EMMA BOVARY, an non-fiction book by feminist Louise J.=20
Kaplan.  There are times when Streitfeld tries a little too hard to get=20
Kaplan's points into the film, and the result is less-than-successful. =20
A pillow has the following phrase on it:  "Perversions are never what=20
they seem to be."  A television has this caption crawling across the=20
bottom of the screen: "Perversion keeps despair, anxiety, and depression=20
at bay."  And a roadside bench offers the message: "In a perversion,=20
there is no freedom, only a rigid conformity to stereotype."  I'm not=20
sure what all of this means, but, despite the unsubtle manner in which=20
the ideas are presented, it's impossible to deny that FEMALE PERVERSIONS=20
says provocative things.=20
     Swinton plays Eve Stephens, an aggressive attorney who's up for an=20
open position on the Court of Appeals.  From the outside, Eve appears to=20
have everything -- she's a smart, powerful, attractive go-getter whose=20
career is on the rise and whose love-life would be the envy of many=20
professional women.  She knows how to use her body to get what she wants=20
-- her cleavage and subtle body language are as much a part of her=20
closing arguments as are her words.  Deep-down, however, Eve is=20
troubled.  She is haunted by feelings of inadequacy, has recurring=20
visions of herself failing, experiences nightmares of a violent=20
confrontation between her parents, and hears babbling voices.  One of=20
those voices, referring to her use of sexuality to sway opinion in her=20
favor, comments: "Nothing about you is genuine.  Everyone knows you're a=20
fraud."  Driven ever closer to the line between madness and sanity, Eve=20
begins taking risks in every aspect of her life.
     It's a good thing that Eve is such an interesting character,=20
because no one else in FEMALE PERVERSIONS is better than paper-thin. =20
Each of the other females represents some aspect of womanhood.  Amy=20
Madigan's Madelyn is the intellectual asexual, Laila Robbins' Emma is=20
the insecure submissive, Frances Fisher's Annunciata is the seductress,=20
and Karen Sillas' Renee is the lesbian.  Unfortunately, these=20
individuals aren't just described by their characteristics -- they're=20
defined by them, and that makes FEMALE PERVERSIONS' entire supporting=20
population profoundly uninteresting. =20
     Ultimately, FEMALE PERVERSIONS is frustratingly incomplete.  As a=20
character study, it has flashes of brilliance, but strong ideas, erotic=20
sex scenes, and a lot of naked flesh can't make up for the lack of a=20
compelling story.  In a way, this film reminded me of KAMA SUTRA; the=20
two share a number of similarities.  Both feature attractive main=20
performers, have a lot to say about gender and sexuality, and lack a=20
strong narrative.  The one advantage FEMALE PERVERSIONS has is Tilda=20
Swinton, but she can't quite tip the balance in the movie's favor. =20
FEMALE PERVERSIONS is often too pretentious to be profound.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
