Title
Review for L5: First City in Space (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Aileo Weinmann
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Aileo Weinmann.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/03095c15a1e715098825682d0020b9fa?OpenDocument
A film review by Aileo Weinmann – Copyright ? Aileo Weinmann
What should you expect from an IMAX? 3D film about a future space colony
where 10,000 people live while orbiting Earth?  Turns out, very little.
Hokey animation, overdone and often-pointless sound effects, and a story
that feels like an after-school special combine to create an overall
waste of time and the IMAX? experience.  In short, this is a huge
disappointment for anyone expecting a realistic glimpse into the future
of space colonization.  Although publicity promises wildly creative
computer graphics combined with data from NASA, L5 delivers more like
Buck Rogers meets Nickelodeon.
Set 100 years in the future, the film is narrated in by Chieko (voice of
Martha Henry), a seven year-old girl (played by Rachel Walker) native to
the flourishing colony.  A brief history of space exploration includes
the sole thrill of a slow motion shuttle launch from the Kennedy Space
Center as only IMAX? can deliver.  After an overview of L5 that is
devoid of any detail or serious scientific facts/processes, the story
quickly turns to a mission to save the colony from a water shortage.
Sound disjointed?  Yep.
Chieko's grandfather (Colin Fox) plans to solve the crisis by attaching
a rocket to a water-filled comet that can be used as a reservoir once
its path is altered to orbit L5.  When the rocket jams, however,
Chieko's father (Denis Akiyama) must embark on a daring – maybe absurd
is more accurate – voyage to land on the comet and fix the problem.
Mind numbing suspense, happy ending, cheesy last words, yawn, `Glad
that's finally over' as the lights come up.
Basically, L5 is a children's movie pitched to an older crowd in the
hopes that space enthusiasts will be sucked in by the gravity of IMAX?'s
enormous screen.  Unfortunately, neither audience will be satisfied by
this half-baked attempt to stretch 45 out of maybe 10 minutes of
worthwhile material.
*1/2
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out the G-Rex Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in the 1950s and 60s the film industry wanted to give the
public something they could not get on TV.  They invented a wide-screen
process using three strips of film and a screen that wrapped around the
audience.  The process was called "Cinerama."  And the films made in
this process were mostly just demonstration films to show what could be
done.  The films had names like THIS IS CINERAMA, CINERAMA HOLIDAY,
WINDJAMMER, and THE SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD.  Eventually the public
got bored with just picturesque documentaries and the filmmakers had to
start putting plots into the films, but they kept them simple and
episodic with big action sequences.  After all audiences did not need
Cinerama for MACBETH.  They wanted exciting action sequences.  So they
made films like HOW THE WEST WAS WON which was really more a set of
short stories which featured thrill scenes like runaway stage coaches.
THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF THE BROTHERS GRIMM actually had a story that
went the length of the film, but it also had sequences of fairy tales.
The films were intentionally kept big and kind of stupid to make the
best use of the process.  The final film I remember being made in the
process was supposed to take the viewer on a scenic ride into space.
I suspect it was originally intended to be that and to have only the
faintest whisper of a plot.  It was given a kind of vacuous name to
imply that it was a sort of WINDJAMMER in space.  It was to be called
2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.  By the time this film was finally made some of
the people behind it had sort of meddled with the concept a little.
For one thing it was not really an odyssey any more, but it was still a
sort of futuristic, science-fictional demonstration of the new medium.
And it proved to be the most popular of the Cinerama films.
     For the new IMAX 3-D process they did not wait so long to try
science fiction.  One of their first films is a voyage into space.  And
not to mix my analogies, but just as the film THE CONQUEST OF SPACE was
heavily based on a speculative non-fiction book, THE CONQUEST OF SPACE
by Willy Ley, L5: FIRST CITY IN SPACE is based heavily based on Gerard
K. O'Neill's THE HIGH FRONTIER, in which the author describes in detail
a mammoth space station that will be placed at the L5 point.  L5 is a
point first described by the mathematician and astronomer Comte Joseph
Louis Lagrange which will hold onto matter in a stable equilibrium.  As
soon as the matter starts to move away from the point gravitational
forces from the Earth and the Moon will pull it back.  A space colony
placed at the L5 point will need to expend no energy to remain at the
that point.  O'Neill described a sort of perfect world, nearly self-
sufficient, hanging in space at the L5 point.  L5: FIRST CITY IN SPACE
is a story set in this future world.
     Director Toni Myers seems to share Stanley Kubrick's belief that
in space the furniture will not be wooden but all the people will be.
The story seems to be performed by catatonics.  There is not a lot to
the story here, since the entire film is only 34 minutes long (and
sports a hefty ticket price of $9).  The film starts with a sort of
tour of the interior of the L5 station, much as it was described in THE
HIGH FRONTIER.  Interiors are short live-action but the exteriors are
done in 3-D animation, but using art very much the style of O'Neill's
illustrations.  We meet Chieko, a little girl living in the L5 colony
with freshets of water feeding long rows of perfect palm trees,
hydroponically grown to produce perfect fruit of exotic types.  But her
parents and grandfather are worried (note the worried expressions on
their faces).  The L5 colony has a problem, just about the most prosaic
problem imaginable.  It is not the same problem that plagued the
runaway forest in SILENT RUNNING, but it is just as basic and it is
just as amazing that it takes the characters by surprise.  But it is a
serious problem, enough so that the actors can look worried.  Fixing
the problem involves travel to a comet that happens to be hurtling by.
But the story is told with little dramatic tension in explaining threat
so there is not much excitement.  There is just quiet worry that is
eventually alleviated.
     Among the things that bothered me about the film was that in the
exteriors the stars seemed to be in 3-D with some appearing closer than
others.  In a word we got parallax on stars.  This is a total absurdity
added to use the 3-D effect.  The film shares the book's optimism that
everything on the L5 colony would be just about ideal.  The fruit grown
from hydroponics is just perfect looking.  And even the view of Earth
from the colony is perfect and beautiful.  On the dark side the cities
show up as perfect little jewels of bright light.  I could believe some
pinpoints, but not as big as the film shows them to be.  The final
unlikely element is the presence of a Holodeck sequence--I know of
nothing else to call it--whose technology is unexplained.
     Some comments should be made about the IMAX 3-D process itself.
First the screen in New York seems smaller than other IMAX screens I
have seen, at least as I remember them.  Even sitting close to the
screen, due to arriving late, I could see both edges at the same time.
The fact that we are seeing a 3-D process makes the screen look even
smaller.  I do not know exactly why that is, but 3-D processes I have
seen seem to make the screen look smaller than it looks without the
goggles or glasses.  This 3-D process is actually quite primitive, in
spite of the supposedly advanced presentation.  The goggles use simple
polarized lenses and if one tips ones head only the slightest, a ghost
image comes into view.  The ghost image often would show up even
without tipping.  The 3-D process, in short, presented little
technology that was not present for DIAL M FOR MURDER in 1954.
     It is not clear that you can rate a little demonstration film like
it was a feature film in a more standard theater, but this one
satisfied like a film that would have gotten a low 0 on the -4 to +4
scale.
