Title
Review for Stiff Upper Lips (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Cowboy Booking International
 Director: Gary Sinyor
 Writer:   Stephen Deitch, Paul Simpkin
 Cast: Peter Ustinov, Prunella Scales, Georgina Cates,
Samuel West, Sean Pertwee, Brian Glover, Frank Finlay,
Robert Portal, Richard Brain, David Ashton, Mac McDonald,
Kate Harper
   Beauty can be effectively satirized by movies.  Look only to
the recent opening of "Drop Dead Gorgeous" to receive
parody upon burlesque (however ineffectual) of American
beauty pageants.  If beauty contests can be satirized, why
not beautiful movies?  There's no better target for spoofing in
that sense than the productions of director James Ivory and
his producer, Ismael Merchant, whose Masterpiece Theater-
type films are perfectly lovely--too much so.  Theirs are the
kinds of works that lead elderly folks to stop outside the
marquees and reminisce, "They don't make 'em like that
anymore."    Merchant-Ivory movies highlight lavish mansions
with groaning-board banquets, exquisitely dressed people,
and subtle dialogue amid the natural splendor of English
landscapes.  How utterly useless!  At least that's what
Esquire film critic David Thomson thought when he once said,
"The loveliness of Merchant-Ivory gives me the creeps!"  And
that's what director Gary Sinyor considers when in his "Stiff
Upper Lips" he concocts a story about a woman who tries to
force her niece to marry a big English bore when she guides
her and a coterie through Italy and India in the hope that the
young woman will forget her handsome and fascinating love
interest--who is of a far lower social class.
   Mavens of Merchant-Ivory, Masterpiece-Theater movies will
sit gloating as they check off which of that team's films are
parodied at which moment.  Is that shot of two English
university students involved in a hurdles race--one bearing a
crucifix about his neck while the other sports a Star of David--
from "Chariots of Fire"?  Does that sign outside the train that
points to the town of Ivory's End have anything to do with
"Howard's End"?  When one character wonders, "Why do you
need a room with a view," could that just possibly be from "A
Room with a View"?  And does the servant who urinates into
the soup and later into the fruit cup bear any resemblance at
all to the Anthony Hopkins guy in "Remains of the Day"?
   But you'll get no answers here. You'll have to see the film,
which to its detractors is merely a series of Saturday-Night-
Live skits but to aficionados of this sort of film is a stroke of
luck.  Unlike satires like the awful, no-joke "Drop Dead
Gorgeous"--which does not have a single likeable character--
"Stiff Upper Lips" may ridicule the pretentiousness of Ismael
and James, but displays quite a bit of affection toward them
and their genre.  (In fact Ismael Merchant was even offered a
small role in the film.)
   The story centers on the relationship between Agnes Ivory
(Prunella Scales, who is not unlike the maiden aunt in Oscar
Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest") and her
independent-minded and lovely niece, Emily Ivory (Georgina
Cates).  Emily wants to marry whom she chooses while her
more "responsible" aunt wants her to marry someone of the
right social class, specifically the boring stick, Cedric Trilling
(Robert Portal).  At first neither aunt nor niece could be said
to favor the view of Sir Arthur Sullivan's admiral in HMS
Pinafore who insists that "love levels all classes. " Emily is
horrified that a hunk who saves her from drowning, George
(Sean Pertweek), is from the lower orders, a man who
regularly drinks at a tavern called "The Scum of the Earth." 
Agnes makes a reluctant servant of George and together with
Emily and Emily's effete brother Edward (Samuel West) she
heads for Italy and then India in the hope of bringing Emily
and Cedric closer together.  What follows is a roundelay of
sexual situations, wherein Emily's brother (who has sexual
feelings only for his stuffed teddy bears)  and the monocle-
clad Cedric (who has "this strange feeling" for him) decide
that they are well-suited for each other.
   If "Stiff Upper Lips" does not retain the beauty of the real
Merchant-Ivory films, director Gary Sinyor nonetheless does
well by India and Italy, photographing elephants, sahibs, and
marvelous Roman-style monuments on location.  Georgina
Cates is drop-dead gorgeous as usual and Prunella Scales
furthers her reputation as one of England's top character
actresses.  Peter Ustinov should have been in more scenes. 
He does fine as both a judge, stiffly explaining British law to a
congregation of Indian subjects in a courtroom, and as a
suitor to Aunt Agnes--rounding out a happy ending for all in
which each character finds the person who is just made for
him or her.  Though Merchant-Ivory metaphors are skewered-
-compulsive letter-writing, racial animosities, suggestive
carvings, huge loads of luggage--you can easily sense the
affection that Sinyor and his co-writer Jeremy Bolt have for
the target of their barbs.  You won't keep your stiff upper lip
for long as you watch the entertainment unfold.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "STIFF UPPER LIPS" (Cowboy Booking International)
        This parody of stuffy, austere, Edwardian-era costume dramas is almost as formulaic as the Merchant-Ivory genre it satirizes. In 1908 England, upper class inbreeding is definitely weakening the gene pool. The story revolves around Edward (Samuel West) who takes a fellow Cambridge undergrad, Cedric (Robert Portal) home to "Ivory's End" to meet his tightly-corseted sister Emily (Georgina Cates), hoping it might be a suitable match. But Emily takes an instant dislike to Cedric who, in turn, has "strange feelings" for Edward. So Aunt Agnes (Prunella Scales) plans a diverting trip abroad, hoping that the exotic sights might inspire romance. That happens, of course, except not the way anyone plans when Emily leaps the line of class separation and falls in love with her lusty luggage-bearer (Sean Pertwee), declaring, "I want my sexual awakening, and I want it now!" Screenwriters Paul Simpkin and Gary Sinyor, augmented by Mr. Sinyor's direction, spoof the steadfast British tra!
dition of straight-backed, stoic acceptance of duty to class, school, and country - in that order. Their mocking, socially observant visual humor is amusing but not as clever as it could and should be. The primary problem lies with the fatal flaw of winking at the audience. Parody should be played absolutely straight, full out, with total conviction, rather than a smug, self-knowing smirk. Only Peter Ustinov, as a cranky, eccentric Indian tea plantation owner, and Frank Finlay, as the genteel family's aging butler, achieve their poker-faced comedy objectives. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Stiff Upper Lips" is a flimsy 4. I'd advise waiting for the video and using it as a counter-culture antidote to a Merchant-Ivory film festival.

Author
John Smyth
Peter Ustinov, Prunella Scales and Sean Pertwee make complete fools
of themselves in this unbelievably feeble comedy. Ostensibly a spoof
on Merchant Ivory productions (particularly   A Passage To India)
and the English class system, it is simply dreadful. A bunch of
upper class twits, the Ivorys (Scales, Georgina Cates, Samuel West
and Robert Portal) wander about India, accompanied by their servant
George (Pertwee). Emily Ivory (Cates) prefers Pertwee, who is a
commoner, to her upper-class male companions. Since they are closet
homosexuals anyway, they haven't the slightest interest in her.
However, their love affair leads to trouble and dire consequnces
for George.
I have a confession to make - I may have given the impression that
there is a coherent plot. There is not. Instead, there is a series
of desperately unfunny scenes, which don't deserve a description.
The film attempts to emulate the Carry On movies, but fails miserably,
since it lacks the sense of fun and cheekiness of that series. God
knows what director and writer Gary Sinyor was thinking - this film
is a huge step down after his promising debut (Leon the Pig Farmer)
and his follow-up, Solitaire for Two.
One can't help wishing for something like Top Secret or Hot Shots!
while watching Stiff Upper Lips - and any movie that makes you wish
for a Charlie Sheen performance should probably left well alone.


Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Stiff Upper Lips
Starring Peter Ustinov, Prunella Scales, Georgina Cates, Samuel West,
Brian Glover, Robert Portal
Screenplay by Paul Simpkin & Gary Sinyor
Directed by Gary Sinyor
website: http://www.cowboybi.com
IN SHORT: An almost outrageous parody of period films
The point of Stiff Upper Lips, a dead on parody of films made by
Merchant Ivory and Miramax, was to take apart the character value of
legendary British reserve, to savage the class structure imposed by the
royalty and upper class upon the lower (or "scum of the earth") class
and, in short, to pop the balloon of overinflated Brit Empire ego. What
the producers wanted to do was apply a Zucker Bros. comedy mentality (a
la Airplane! or The Naked Gun) to Merchant Ivory period piece dramas to
create the kind of Brit humor not seen since the halcyon days of Monty
Python's Flying Circus. Would that they had waited a year to make the
film, for in that intervening year the Zucker Bros. production deal was
terminated, and they could've landed the real thing.
Here's the setup: Facing old maid-hood at the ripe age of 22, young and
fair Emily (Georgina Cates) is introduced to the black-suited,
Latin-spouting bookworm Cedric Trilling (Robert Portal), a friend of her
brother Edward (Samuel West). When sparks fail to fly (and Cedric is
such a priss you'll wonder if he would rather be with Edward) the
matriarch of the family, Aunt Agnes (Prunella Scales) packs everyone up
for a holiday in Italy. Believing that a piece of England should always
be with them, they also pack up the lawn and employ local "scum of the
earth" handyman George (Sean Pertwee) to lug it, and a multitude of
luggage, around.
When he's not packing up the lawn, George is packing up Emily, proving
once and for all that the hired help is usually a man's/woman's best
friend. This, of course, doesn't make Cedric any more attractive for
Emily, so our merry band is off to India, where they guest with Cedric's
right-lunatic great uncle Horace (Peter Ustinov). Horace, in turn,
introduces Agnes to the joys of extra large bathtubs, probably the
funniest jibe on youth oriented period pieces. True, the idea of fat
wrinkled bodies doing the prune thing amidst torrents of bubbles may
turn your stomach, but it's a very funny bit.
And once Emily starts tossing her cookies at breakfast, well, Cedric may
be a priss, but he's of the right class, right?
Stiff Upper Lips, on the whole, is a funny, but not hysterical, take on
English period piece movies. It is slow paced; not the three gags a page
humor that was the standard in Airplane! Sure, half of the jokes in
Airplane! fell flat on their butts, but the audience never had time to
think about it before the next zinger came, um, zinging their way. Stiff
Upper Lips allows you too much breathing room.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Stiff Upper Lips, he would have
paid...
Rental level. Samuel West looks so much like the late Graham Chapman of
Monty Python that you'll wonder why the film didn't capitalize on that
visual connection.
