Title
Review for Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid (1982)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
It helps if you're both a Steve Martin fan and an old Hollywood movie buff 
to get the most out of this fastidiously engineered conceit.  Martin, who 
co-wrote with George Gipe and director Carl Reiner, plays a private eye who 
is approached by slinky Rachel Ward (who brings her own performance to what 
might have otherwise just been a mock bombshell role) to find her missing 
father.  The first-person narration, black and white photography, art deco 
titles, and opening score by Miklos Rosza establish within moments that this 
is going to be spoof on Raymond Chandler crime thrillers, but if you were to 
enter this film without knowing its central joke, then you'd no doubt be 
surprised to suddenly see Alan Ladd walking down a corridor while Martin 
rummages through an office.  What DEAD MEN DON'T WEAR PLAID sets out to do - 
and it makes my head spin to think how many viewing hours must have been 
spent in order to knit this story together - is to seamlessly insert clips 
from classic Hollywood pictures into Martin's investigation.  Among his many 
encounters he has telephone conversations with Bogart, shares a train 
compartment with Cary Grant, and makes a date with Ingrid Bergman.  All in 
all, 18 different films and 18 different Hollywood players (some of them 
interweaving in and out of the same films) are edited effectively into the 
story.  It's the visual equivalent of David Thomson's one-of-a-kind novel 
'Suspects' - fortunately all the stars and their films are listed in the 
final credits so you don't have to drive yourself crazy trying to figure 
them out afterwards.  The mixture of material makes it hard to determine 
what era DEAD MEN DON'T WEAR PLAID is supposed to be set in - Martin's 
reference to the Kinsey Report would place it somewhere in the 50s, which 
seems a bit out of place considering that all but one of the contributing 
films were made in the 40s.
I admire the effort that's been made with the matching.  Not only the 
photography, but the sets, props and costumes (by no less than Edith Head!) 
are also tailored in service of the original footage.  For the most part, 
the clips have also been well selected.  The more familiar moments (e.g. 
Burt Lancaster getting plugged in THE KILLERS, James Cagney performing a 
casual execution in WHITE HEAT) don't work nearly as well - in fact it's 
annoying to see the Cagney scene, which was effectively chilling in the 
original, lifted out of context.  Contrast this to Veronica Lake's bit, 
which is funny even though she says only two words.  DEAD MEN DON'T WEAR 
PLAID was never meant to be a laugh riot - it's more an affectionate 
pastiche, if anything else - but some of Martin's hardboiled dialogue is 
hysterical.  There's a few in-jokes (the 'You know how to whistle' line from 
TO HAVE OR HAVE NOT; a reference to Charles Laughton's star turn as THE 
HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME) but the fun comes mainly from watching Martin 
delivering offbeat lines to Hollywood stars who are playing their scenes 
straight.  It should be noted that unlike many other comedies that integrate 
found footage, the tone of Reiner's film is never campy or patronizing to 
its older source material.  Finally, and most importantly, DEAD MEN DON'T 
WEAR PLAID has one rare distinction: it includes the only scene with an 
actor in drag that I've actually ever found funny.  Poor Fred MacMurray just 
didn't know what hit him.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DEAD MEN DON'T WEAR PLAID (director/writer: Carl Reiner; screenwriters:
George Gipe/Steve Martin; cinematographer: Michael Chapman; editor: Bud
Molin; cast: Steve Martin (Rigby Reardon), Rachel Ward (Juliet Forrest),
Carl Reiner (Field Marshal Von Kluck), Reni Santoni (Carlos Rodriguez),
George Gaynes (Dr. Forrest), 1982)
This is Carl Reiner's cleverly adapted spoof on noir films of the
post-World War11 days. The comedy film relies on creative editing of the
classics of the forties, somehow including a host of stars from Bogart
to Cagney to Ava, as part of its story. Steve Martin plays the private
eye Rigby Reardon, who is a cloddish imitation of Bogart in "The Big
Sleep." Any scene could have Martin conversing with someone like a Cary
Grant or a Veronica Ladd, or being shot at by Alan Ladd. Rachel Ward is
the sexy doll with the husky voice who plays his client Juliet Forest.
She comes into his office and faints at seeing the newspaper headline
announcing that her father, Dr. Forrest, has died in an auto accident
and she awakens to Martin's breast rearrangement of her. But she hires
him, anyway, for $10 a day plus expenses to find the killer of her
father, as she doesn't believe his death was accidental.
This is basically a one-idea film, and that idea, although cleverly
worked out as far as special effects, begins to run dry after a while,
as the story lags in character development. It seems cute to have the
stars of the forties say their straight lines from their film and then
have Martin put his comedic routines into it in order to fit it in with
the present story. But enough's enough! What keeps the film hopping are
some very funny quips and some dumb bon mots that were infantile but
amusing.
Dr. Forrest is a renown scientist and his hobby is in making cheese
molds. After Ward gives Martin the key to her father's lab, he goes
there to search his lab for clues and tells us he found the lab in room
no. 2 because it smelled like that number. His first clue is in the form
of a cryptic list he finds on the tip of a money bill, which is labelled
"The Friends of Carlotta." Unfortunately there are others who are after
that list, as the shamus must take precautions, even getting a bullet in
his shoulder for his troubles.
Back in Ward's house, Martin is about to faint and the haughty butler
(Reiner), when asked to catch him, says, "Sorry, I'm a butler not a
catcher." Ward uses her skill she learned at summer camp for taking care
of snake bites, to suck the bullet out of him.
With the help of Bogart's detective work ala Marlowe, Martin finds that
Carlotta is not the name of a woman, but an island off South America. If
you've seen "The Bribe," you've got the rest of the film's story, as the
Reiner team ran out of ideas and winged the ending the lazy way, with
old film clips. Martin does his best to pump energy into the tank, doing
sight gags, abetted by the manic role of Reni Santoni, as the friendly
policeman on the island who tells him the Nazis have landed. Nazis and
cheese go together in this film like Vincent Price to villainy.
A knowledge of some of the more popular noir classics like The Big
Sleep, Double Indemnity, and Suspicion, might help in soaking up the
films' nostalgia. The overall effect is not bad for a few belly laughs
and to marvel at the skills of 1980s technology, but no Cuban cigar for
the film, as the story went up in smoke somewhere over the hills of
Hollywood.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
