Title
Review for Pacific Heights (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        With PACIFIC HEIGHTS, screenwriter Daniel Pyne has shot himself in
the foot by destroying a promising premise with two frustratingly idiotic
characters.  Melanie Griffith and Matthew Modine play a cute (but fatally
dumb) couple who buy a decrepit Victorian house in Pacific Heights and sink
all of their savings into restoring it.  However, the only way they can
afford their dream house, which is located in San Francisco's ritziest
neighborhood, is to rent out the rooms on the ground floor.  A devious con
man (Michael Keaton) maneuvers his way into one of the apartments and sets
into motion a fiendish plot to ruin their lives, their home, and their
credit rating.
        PACIFIC HEIGHTS blows its chance to be a stirring and compelling
psychological thriller.  Keaton, playing a frighteningly sinister
sociopath, holds up his end of the deal with a penetrating performance.
Guilty of excessively self-conscious direction, director John Schlesinger
lets the movie slip away from him.  He doesn't receive any help from Pyne's
hopelessly inept screenplay.  Griffith and ESPECIALLY Modine are so
excruciatingly stupid that you quickly lose all sympathy for them, even
though their predicament is tragic.  It gets to the point where you even
root against them.  The young couple makes one mistake after another and
blindly walks into traps that you can see from miles away.  If the
protagonists showed even a shred of intelligence, Keaton's scheme would
collapse like a house of straw in a tornado.  PACIFIC HEIGHTS is a
resounding disappointment.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Law favors the tenant.  Nobody likes to see people thrown out on the
street where they have no place to go.  It is generally assumed that the
landlord if better off than the tenant, so in many states the law favors the
tenant.  This does not seem to be a very likely fact on which to base a film
thriller.  Most of us have heard horror stories about landlord/tenant
relations with one side or the other doing monstrous things, but that sort
of horror story is rarely made into a movie.  It is much easier to make and
sell a horror film about, say, a vampire, than it is to make one about
rental relations though I somehow suspect there are more bad tenants in the
world than there are vampires.  In the past real estate horror has generally
been mixed with comedy in films, as in the classic MR. BLANDINGS BUILDS HIS
DREAM HOUSE and its recent pale shadow, THE MONEY PIT.  So PACIFIC HEIGHTS
gets points for some originality and even some clever plotting.
Unfortunately, both seem to run out about two-thirds of the way into the
film.  Then the film starts showing us things we've seen before and finally
falls into cliche.  And contrived cliche at that.
     Patty Palmer and Drake Goodman (played by Melanie Griffith and Matthew
Modine) are two young people starting out life together buying a house and
renting out the first floor as apartments.  Think of them as minnows.  And
as their new tenant they have attractive, persuasive Carter Hayes (played by
Michael Keaton).  Think of him as a shark.  Carter does not just know his
legal rights as a tenant; he understands how to use those rights in
intelligent and creative ways to grind up and swallow his unsuspecting
landlords.  And all the while he is doing this grinding, the law is on his
side and pulling for him.
     Had this been a film about a monster whose powers were all granted him
by the law, PACIFIC HEIGHTS could have been a terrific thriller that would
have been making a powerful statement.  Unfortunately, at some point someone
decided that Carter Hayes would be more than a crooked tenant: he would also
be a psychopath.  It may be the first horror film about real estate law
ever, but it is probably the second or third film with a psychotic villain
this month.  When the psychotic side of Hayes becomes more important than
his legal savvy, PACIFIC HEIGHTS just falls apart.  The screenplay is Daniel
Pyne's first and is inspired by his own experience as a landlord.
Presumably he had an axe to grind.  Curiously, his screenplay starts
faltering only when he stops grinding it.  I give PACIFIC HEIGHTS a low +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
