Title
Review for Liam (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The very thought of a film about an Irish-Catholic family struggling to make
ends meet in pre-WWII Liverpool is enough to make some people lapse into an
Angela's Ashes-induced coma.  Leave it to director Stephen Frears to breathe
a bit of much-needed life into the gloomy, dreary genre of
early-20th-century films about dirt-poor drinking-class UK families living
in their own filth.
While he's probably best known by the U.S. masses for directing John Cusack
in High Fidelity and The Grifters, or perhaps for his frocky flicks like
Dangerous Liaisons and Mary Reilly, Frears spent a big chunk of the '90s
making the two oft overlooked sequels in Roddy Doyle's Barrytown Trilogy
(the first was Alan Parker's The Commitments).  Working with the Rabbittes
in The Snapper and The Van must have honed Frears' skills in directing films
about close-knit families - something that shows with his latest project,
Liam.
The winner of two awards at last year's Venice Film Festival, Liam begins on
New Year's Eve, where a happy mum (Claire Hackett) and dad (Ian Hart,
Aberdeen) celebrate at a local pub while their three kids watch them.
They're a cheery lot, with Dad bringing home the bacon after hours of
grueling labor at the local shipyard.  But when the Depression costs him his
job, the man slips into one deep funk.  It doesn't help that his two oldest
children have to get jobs to pay the bills.  Con (David Hart) follows in his
father's blue-collar footsteps, while Teresa (Megan Burns) cleans houses
after school.  Even though Dad has consistently given to the church
throughout the years, he refuses their handouts in this time of need.
Most of the film is told through the eyes of Liam (Anthony Borrows), a
stuttering seven-year-old who has had the fear of God beaten into him by a
dominating Catholic-school priest (Russell Dixon).  The film's humor comes
via Liam's complete fear of religion and the consequences of committing the
tiniest sin.  Borrows, like most of the actors in the film (other than
Hart), has no acting experience, but does a remarkable job as his character
watches his family life disintegrate.  The finale is unbelievably tragic.
Liam was written by Jimmy McGovern, a working-class Brit who penned the
controversial Priest as well as the extremely dark television series Cracker
(both the U.S. and British versions).  The film is a bit of an emotional
biography for McGovern (as Frears explained after the world premiere of the
film at the Toronto International Film Festival), and it's not at all a
biopic about the lead singer of Oasis, you silly sod.
1:30 - Not Rated but contains nudity and adult language

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "LIAM" (Lions Gate Films)
     British director Stephen Frears, who set "High Fidelity" and "The
Hi-Ho Country" in America, goes back to the smoky pubs and cobbled streets of
Liverpool in the 1930s for this gritty story of a working-class family.
Stammering seven year-old Liam (Anthony Borrows), who attends a strict Catholic
school and is preparing for his First Communion, observes the gradual
disintegration of his family when his dad (Ian Hart) and brother (David Hart)
lose their jobs as  dockworkers. Feeling bitter, disempowered and helpless at
their poverty, they blame the Jews and the Irish and join the angry Black
Shirts, fascists who turn neighbor-against-neighbor and resort to fire-bombing
violence. In the meantime, Liam's teenage sister (Megan Burns) becomes a maid to
the wife of the shipyard's wealthy Jewish owner. While she's thrilled to be able
to bring home their discarded leftovers to feed the family, she's guilt-ridden
not only about being an accomplice to her employer's adultery but also about
denying being Catholic in order to get the job. Screenwriter Jimmy McGovern
("Priest") cleverly blends subtle comedy with his drama and, once again,
presents the Catholic clergy as not only terrorizing but hypocritical,
subversively droning on about how sin "blackens your soul with filth." And Liam
has a great big sin to worry about - since he inadvertently glimpsed his kindly,
penny-pinching mother (Claire Hackett Liam) emerging nude from the bathtub.
Andrew Dunn's photography is truly stunning and Stephen Fineran's production
design succeeds in depicting that era far more poignantly than the film version
of "Angela's Ashes." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Liam" is a serious
7, underscoring the inevitable tragedy resulting from religious intolerance.

Author
Laura Clifford
In 1930s Liverpool, seven year old Liam (Anthony Burrows) stutters under
stress, a state he's in frequently at his Catholic school.  His Dad's
(Ian Hart, "The End of the Affair") proud to hold a job, but times are still
tough Mam (Claire Hackett) is fiercely protective of her family and the potent
love between her and her husband provides an aura of joy in dismal
surroundings.  The fragility of happiness is dealt a harsh blow, however, when
Dad loses his job while maintaining his pride in director Stephen Frears' 
"Liam."
"Liam" is sure to suffer from its overwhelming likeness to "Angela's Ashes,"
the unsuccessful film adaption of the wildly successful Frank McCourt novel.
While the Dad in this tale is not an alcoholic, his inability to swallow his
pride in order to provide for his family has tragic consequences.
Dad would rather buy his former boss a beer he can ill afford, then hold out
his hand for a work ticket with the others in his predicament.  When his
gesture is returned the next morning with a patronizing sneer and no work,
Dad spits in the man's face.  Mam sends daughter Teresa out to work for a
wealthy Jewish family, admonishing her to refuse to clean the toilets (the
first chore we witness her performing).  Older brother Con (David Hart)
works at the shipyards while Dad picks up cigarette butts and grows
increasingly furious at the Catholic Church and the Jews whom he sees as
bringing in cheap Irish labor to deny him of his rightful wage.
Liam faces a crisis of faith after accidentally seeing his mother naked
and being too afraid to 'confess' his sin before his First Communion.
His teacher Mrs. Abernathy (Anne Reid) brings in Father Ryan  (Russell Dixon) 
to impress upon Liam and his classmates the ease with which they could damn 
themselves to hell, complete with graphic descriptions of hellfire and
frightful
metaphors for eternity.  Teresa must face the guilt of preferring her kind 
employer, Mrs. Samuels (Jane Gurnett), to the mother who's growing 
increasingly pinched with the burdens placed upon her.  To make matters worse,
Teresa finds herself shielding the affair Mrs. Samuels is having, and, driven
to the confessional, is told she can no longer work there.
Screenwriter Jimmy McGovern ("Priest") depicts a family being battered by
the circumstances of its time and place, but even as he provides motivation
for Dad's misplaced resentments, his transformation of the loving family
man into a black-shirted Fascist is alarmingly abrupt.  The fire bombing
of the local Jewish pawnbroker's transports us out of Liverpool into Nazi
Germany.  For all its bleakness, "Angela's Ashes" often became quite
funny during schoolroom catechism scenes while McGovern merely manages to
elicit a smile or two.  McGovern's horrifically ironic climax is too symbolic
and coincidental, draining the scene of its intended emotional impact.
The cast is uniformly strong.  Claire Hackett makes Mam more than just the 
strong survivor - she's a woman, too.  Ian Hart shows how resentment can make
a good man capable of horrible actions.  Young Megan Burns conveys the
conflict of liking a person but not their actions, while on the flip side,
Jane Gurnett creates a privileged woman of kindness and understanding with
an inexplicable weakness.  The cherubic looking young Burrows is an
adorable Liam, even if his stutter isn't entirely convincing.  However,
if it was the filmmakers' intent to have Liam act as our point of view, they
don't succeed, as Liam's comprehension of events would be quite different
than what's presented here.
"Liam" certainly isn't a chore to sit through, and it does have its moments,
but its flaws and release behind a similar, higher profile work place 
it in the minor leagues.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
LIAM, a lackluster rendition of an ANGELA'S ASHES-type story by director Stephen
Frears (HIGH FIDELITY), connects all of the usual dots.  About a family facing
unrelenting poverty due to "the yards" being closed, the 1930s British story
concerns the usual themes of the rich vs. the poor, the haves vs. the have-nots
and upstairs vs. downstairs.  
The out-of-work dad (Ian Hart) vows never to accept a helping hand from the
Catholic Church, lest he end up beholding to the local priest.  That the dad
won't accept help from the church is a key to the plot since it is the church in
general and the Catholic Church in particular that serves as the movie's chief
whipping boy.  Just as secular religions like environmentalism are universally
acclaimed in films without question, Christianity generally appears in movies
only to present an easy villain.  In LIAM, the Catholic teachers and priests are
sadistic figures that make the devil look pretty attractive by comparison.  One
of the film's themes contrasts Christianity and Communism, with Communism coming
out more compassionate.  In the movie's least credible part, Jews enter the
story only so that the movie can boldly beat its chest against both
anti-Semitism and Fascism.
Most of the story, however, is more tedious and clichéd than political.  It is
in Jimmy McGovern's script that most of the problems lie.  The acting, with one
notable exception, is fine.  With a single dour expression, young actor Anthony
Borrows plays Liam, a lad of about eight.  The over-the-top script feels it
necessary to give Liam a horrendous stutter, as if his character weren't tragic
enough already.  When Liam begins to speak, he looks as if he is suffering
through an especially difficult bowel movement.  In contrast, Ian Hart, as the
sullen and prideful father, is palpably poor.
The ending to LIAM is not to be believed.  It has one of those horrible and
ridiculously improbable ending incidents that occur only as plot devices in
movies.  If you're looking for a LIAM-type story, rent the genuine article,
ANGELA'S ASHES, instead.  The latter has its problems, but it's much preferable
to LIAM.
LIAM runs 1:30.  It is rated R for "some nudity and language" and would be
acceptable for teenagers.
The film is playing now in nationwide release in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the Camera Cinemas and the Century Theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films 
 Director: Stephen Frears
 Writer:  Jimmy McGovern
 Cast: Ian Hart, Claire Hackett, Anthony Borrows, David Hart,
Megan Burns, Anne Reid, Russell Dixon, Julia Deakin, Andrew
Schofield, Bernadette Shortt, David Carey, David Knopov, Jane
Gurnett, Gema Loveday, Martin Hancock
   It would be easy to look at the first few frames of "Liam"--the
sepia photography, the Liverpudlian row houses, the depressing
furnishings inside the home of a family of five being supported
precariously by one breadwinner, and think, "Uh, oh, another one
of those biographical sketches of the writer's or director's or
novelist's childhood seen through the eyes of a little tyke.  Does it
seem like yesterday that we saw 'Angela's Ashes'?"  You
wouldn't be entirely wrong, because "Liam" does indeed draw on
the scripter, Jimmy McGovern's early life experience.  But I know
of no film that better illustrates how trying economic conditions
can lead to the rise of extremist movements, in this case
fascism--and fascism not where you expect it in, say, France,
whose local people collaborated all too often with the Nazi
occupation, or Poland, where Jews were executed by local
fascist gangs when they returned home after the war was over. 
We're talking England, the European land that took in 10,000
Jewish children while Nazism was rising on the Continent (think
"Into the Arms of Strangers") and who bravely stood up to the
Luftwaffe despite attack after tiring and devastating assault.
   Featuring a stunning performance by Anthony Borrows as the
8-year-old title character through whose eyes the drama takes
place, "Liam" hones in on an occasionally happy family in
Liverpool during the 1930's, part of the city's minority Catholic
population which occasionally enjoy spats with their Protestant
neighbors, each belting out patriotic songs that embrace their
separate identities.  The head of household (forcefully played by
the wonderful Ian Hart) makes a decent living in the local steel
mills, but when bad times force the closing of the plant, Dad is
compelled to line up with his fellows every morning hoping
desperately to get day work.  His wife (Claire Hackett) becomes
increasingly nasty as the family faces near starvation, while Liam
is repeatedly browbeaten in his Catholic school by Father Ryan
(Russell Dixon) and his teacher Mrs Abernathy (Anne Reid)--who
conjure up the fires of hell and warn them that their souls are not
just dirty but filthy.
   Given the hardships faced by the families in the neighborhood,
it becomes almost inevitable that some would fall under the
influence of local extremist groups. At one meeting verbal
pyrotechnics break out between a Leninist speaker who urges
the men to join the Communist party but is opposed by another
who warns that the Reds would destroy the churches.  As the
family fortunes spiral downward, Liam's dad eventually joins the
Blackshirts, or the Union of British Fascists, leading him on a
private war against the local Jews--particularly the wealthy and
kind Mrs Samuels (Jane Gurnett) who employs his daughter,
Teresa (Megan Burns) as a maid, paying her extra to deliver
messages to her lover.
   Considerable time is taken up by director Stephen Frears ("The
Snapper," "My Beautiful Launderette," "Prick Up Your Ears") in
displaying the intimidation of the eight-year-olds in their Catholic
school--not surprising when you realize that the screenwriter,
Jimmy McGovern, shocked many Catholic moviegoers with his
1994 film "Priest."  That film, which featured Linus Roache and
Antonia Bird, is a provocative drama about a man of the cloth
who finds himself caught between sacred vows and his own
personal beliefs, especially his closeted homosexuality, and pulls
out the stops in presentation of what Mr. McGovern saw as
messy Church politics. "Liam"'s Church-bashing will remind
movie buffs  of a more recent picture, Sydney Macartney's "A
Love Divided," highlighting  a Protestant woman married to a
Catholic who defies the local priest and kidnaps her daughter
Eileen rather than allow her to attend a Catholic school.
    Filmed and edited by Andrew Dunn and Kristina Hetheringtom
respectively, "Liam" does not linger too long on any scene, as
Frears keeps the momentum through frequent changes of scene
   People like to blame others for their troubles, and why not?  We
have difficulty accepting responsibility for our own failures and
when hard times are the fault of an abstraction known as
business cycles--as was the case during the Great Depression--
we look to something concrete to condemn.  The government? 
Not a bad target, sometimes.  But it's even easier to ascribe our
problems to a relatively defenseless group.  Minorities and
immigrants might be the target du jour given the right political and
economic conditions and we do know that both Communism and
anti-Semitism rose during the Depression in both England and
the U.S.  Given the presence of skinhead movements today--and
a slew of race riots just the other day in London--we wonder how
much worse the chaos would be if times got really bad.  Having
observed convincing performances all around in "Liam,"
especially by the very young title character, we may consider
ourselves warned.
Not Rated.  Running time: 91 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
