Title
Review for Mambo Kings, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE MAMBO KINGS is a film directed by Arne Glimcher.  The
screenplay is by Cynthia Cidre.  It stars Armand Assante, Antonio
Banderas, Cathy Moriarty, Maruschka Detmers, and features several Latin
music greats, including Tito Puente, Celia Cruz, and others.  It is
rated R for simulated sex, nudity, and some violence.
     THE MAMBO KINGS is derived Oscar Hijuelos' novel THE MAMBO KINGS
PLAY SONGS OF LOVE.  By all reports something was lost in the
translation from print to screen.  However, what survives is a pleasant,
likable movie with two wonderful performances, several interesting
character performances, and a lot of first rate Latin music of the early
Fifties.
     It is both unfortunate and a saving coincidence that AMERICAN ME
and MAMBO KINGS opened on the same Friday.  AMERICAN ME, which I
reviewed separately, is the superpessimistic view of the Mexican-
Americans of East Los Angeles.  MAMBO KINGS is a rather fluffy,
optimistic paean to the success of Cubans in the United States.  It is
nostalgic and sentimental.  At its best, it is the love story of two
brothers who have good cause to leave Cuba for New York and who start
their own mambo band there.  As such, it may be an anecdote to the
emotional hangover of the other movie, or its fluffiness may be seem
more than so that it really is.
     The brothers are literally overnight successes, but then the usual
predicaments and impediments slow down their rise to fame and fortune.
On the way we have admirable performances from Armand Assante as Cesar
and Antonio Banderas as his brother Nestor.  Assante is an actor who
seems mostly to have been fated to playing maniac heavies, usually a
drug lord with an attitude.  Here he develops a complex portrait of
Cesar, the ambitious Mambo King who despite his hunger to succeed stands
up for personal freedom.  Assante reminds me to a remarkable degree of
Robert DeNiro, there being a physical resemblance, but ever more
importantly a similarity in the intensity and energy he brings to his
performance.
     Banderas, who has starred in several of Pedro Almodovar's Spanish
films, turns in another excellent performance; this is Banderas' first
English-language role.  His portrait is of a Nestor who is a real artist
in turmoil, whose internal sufferings inform and inspire his art.  He is
sweet, a little passive, and a late-comer to rebellion against his
domineering brother.
     It is no small part of the charm of this slight movie that we get
some fine performances by Tito Puente and the fabulous Celia Cruz, whose
smile could light up all the Havanas of the world.  We also get an
extended cameo, if that's the expression, by Desi Arnaz, Jr., playing
his father.  And as a special treat Arnaz and the Mambo Kings are
seamlessly edited into an episode of I Love Lucy.
     There's a lot of love in this movie, love of brothers, love of the
music, love of Cuban culture.
     It's an enjoyable and worthwhile escape and as such I can recommend
it at matinee prices, but don't, as I did, see it too close to seeing
AMERICAN ME.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There are by now *a lot* of films about popular music in the 1950s.
They are nearly all about rock and roll, and treat the coming of rock with
a reverence usually accorded only to major world events.  The impression you
get is that music before rock and roll was all pretty dull stuff like opera
and "How Much Is That Doggie in the Window?" though there are begrudging
nods to jazz.  It is true that Latin music was also very popular in the
Fifties and I do not remember seeing a post-1960 film that has ever
acknowledged that popularity.  THE MAMBO KINGS breaks the mold and tells the
story of a middlingly popular Latin band, their ups and downs.
Unfortunately, there is somebody in your family whose life was every bit as
interesting as the life of Cesar Castillo (as played by Armand Asante).  The
story has some action, but it is almost all in the first ten minutes.  The
rest of the film is just a bland story.
     The year is 1952 and Cesar and Nestor Castillo (the latter played by
Antonio Banderas) are playing good music in a Havana nightclub.
Unfortunately, the boss has eyes for Nestor's girl, Maria.  Maria decides to
go with the boss after some arm-twisting.  The boss is ready to kill Nestor
to be rid of him, and gives this message to Cesar.  Not wanting to see his
brother's throat cut, Cesar convinces Nestor to come with him to New York.
Cesar succeeds in impressing Tito Puente (playing himself forty years
younger), but fate steps in to screw up the Castillos joining Puente's band.
Instead, we see the Castillos forming their own band.  The film follows
their career, their loves, and their disagreements.  The story is at best
lackluster and occasionally descends into soap opera.  This sort of laid-
back story-telling may appeal to fans of THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS.
     I personally have only limited interest in Latin music so quite
surprised myself by enjoying some of the numbers.  But the story is just too
little about too many things.  It tells of the Castillos' love lives and
their family lives.  It shows them doing a little creating of their music.
It shows them deciding if they should give control to a promoter who could
give them big-time bookings, but who will insist on being a boss.  And we
see them at their day jobs in a meat-packing plant.  Meanwhile, Nestor pines
for his Havana girlfriend, forever rewriting a song dedicated to her.
Armand Asante goes a long way to make this film watchable.  He is a fine
actor, certainly, though I would more recommend that the viewer find his
BELIZAIRE THE CAJUN, which was a much better film that this condensation of
a Pulitzer-Prize-winning novel.  Also notable in the cast are Celia Cruz as
a popular entertainer and Roscoe Lee Browne as the semi-sinister promoter.
     THE MAMBO KINGS starts well, but never really says much of interest.  I
would give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
