Title
Review for Aladdin (1992)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
     Walt Disney and Company have done it again.  They've managed to
take a well-known tale of a boy and his lamp and infuse new life into
it.  This movie is the kind that all critics call an 'instant classic.'
Well, I don't know about that, but it will definitely take it's place
among the other Disney masterpieces.
     If you don't already know, ALADDIN is the story of a young street
rat who is the only one who can enter the Cave of Wonders and retrieve a
magic lamp, which, of course, houses the famous genie that this story is
so famous for.  Aladdin himself, however, doesn't know this, and the
only one who does know is the evil Jafar, counsel to the Sultan.
Meawhile, Princess Jasmine, daughter of the Sultan, is trying hard to
escape from any kind of arranged marriage, so she runs away, only to
bump into our hero, Aladdin.  The rest is, shall we say, a la Disney.
     Disney is famous for taking fairy tales and turning them into
movies so happy that audiences scream for them.  Not to be cynical, but
movies like this are in large demand and short supply.  You might think
that Hollywood would supply more of these kinds of movies, but I guess
there's all that killing and raping and psychological torture out there
to cover.  Hollywood can't forget about that.  If Hollywood can't
forget, then why is it that G-rated movies are among the top grossing
movies at the box office?  You would think Hollywood would get the
message.
     Well, Disney has certainly gotten the message.  Even though ALADDIN
has the prerequisite evil person (in this case Jafar) who's purpose is
to scare the beejeezers out of the little kids, the movie as a whole is
still a delight.  I've noticed that the Disney films as of late have
been getting a little violent even for their G-ratings, but I believe
it's just a function of society.  And society is demanding more violence
in their movies, mostly due to desensitization.
     But don't let that scare you away.  ALADDIN is still a treat.
Unfortunately, it is the last effort of Alan Menken and Howard Ashman as
a song-writing team, because Ashman died of AIDS during the making of
this film.  As a result, ALADDIN doesn't have as many songs as their
other collaborations, THE LITTLE MERMAID and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  It
is also a little different from those two.  But it stands on it's own,
and should not be discounted.  The animation is first-rate, the
characters are varied and, as usual, very distinct from each other, and
the story is the perfect vehicle for the Disney style.  The genie (voice
by Robin Williams) is hilarious, and it is he who really gives this
movie it's life.  After all, what is the story of ALADDIN really famous
for?

Author
Eric Walker
     After BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was became the first animated feature
film to be nominated for the Best Picture Oscar last year (Disney's
hypesters have done everything possible to make the public remember
this), the Disney Studios have once again proven that when it comes to
making audience-pleasing animated films, they are second to none.  These
days, the only standards they can top are their own.  But how do you top
a film that everyone has gone out of their way to rain praise upon,
calling it the best animated feature since the days of BAMBI and
PINOCCHIO?
     Once again, the Disney folks have made the right choice: you don't.
Instead of going for heart-warming romance this time, they've toned down
the myth-making and have instead aimed for a much more down-to-earth
target, namely laughter.  We now have ALADDIN, the latest addition to
the ever-growing list of successful Disney animated films - and Disney
money-makers.  But this time it's not going to be romance or realistic
characters or even the always-impressive animation that will win over
the audiences.  The success of ALADDIN is going to be summarized in two
words: Robin Williams.
     Williams runs away with the entire movie, lock, stock, and barrel.
He plays the voice of the Genie, a non-stop cloud of blue energy who
saves the day, helps Aladdin get the girl, lets the Disney animators get
away with more sight gags and throwaway bits since THE NAKED GUN, and
keeps the audience rolling in the aisles.  There are other good
characters in this movie, such as a wisecracking parrot (played by
another comedian, Gilbert Gottfreid), a flying carpet, and a little
monkey sidekick, but this movie belongs to Williams.
     The Disney animators deserve an award for being able to keep up
with Williams' 90 m.p.h. dialogue, with impressions, puns, and yuks
galore.  The Genie puts the pedal to the metal (like Williams himself -
he even *looks* like Williams), shape-changing into an infinite variety of
forms to keep up with the jokes.  Look fast and you'll see references to
the Marx Brothers, Delta Airlines, Ed Sullivan, THE LITTLE MERMAID,
PINOCCHIO, Walt Disney World ... in fact, the Genie's routines are so
packed with Disney in-jokes that if they weren't so funny, one would
think Disney was shamelessly plugging its theme parks.  I suppose a
cynic would say that this is exactly what's going on, but I don't think
so.  Williams is obviously having a ball here, biting the hand that
feeds him and satirizing the famous Disney merchandising machine with
his constant references to 20th Century icons.
     However, these in-jokes and allusions to the modern era do have one
other effect on the movie that is noticeably missing from other Disney
animated films: they date it.  It's been pointed out that the Disney
films can credit their everlasting popularity to their timelessness.
The problem with contemporary films is that in twenty or thirty years
time they can look terribly dated, and no one will want to watch them
anymore.  (WEST SIDE STORY is a notable example of this - singing and
dancing 1950s street gangs look absolutely ridiculous when viewed from a
1990s perspective.)  ALADDIN obviously doesn't worry as much about being
an "immortal Disney classic," going instead for the immediate laughs.
     Perhaps this is the influence of Jeff Katzenberg, the Disney head
honcho (second only to Michael Eisner) who has been re-shaping the
animation studio in his own image.  Like most of the Hollywood moguls
today, Katzenberg seems concerned with what sells *now* and what can make
the quickest profits; he doesn't think about the future.  Since ALADDIN
will be released on video for the 1993 Christmas season - you can count
on it - we may not be seeing a theatrical re-release of this film the
way we've seen revivals of 101 DALMATIANS, PETER PAN, LADY AND THE
TRAMP, and the other Disney classics (all of which have now also been
released on video); but in the long run, Katzenberg may regret his
decision to make ALADDIN a "1990s" film.  Still, this is a topic to be
discussed at a future date.  What matters right now is that ALADDIN is a
very funny film.
     However it does have its flaws: primarily the fact that it is
nothing *besides* a funny film.  The hero and heroine, Aladdin and
Princess Jasmine, are carbon copies of Prince Eric from THE LITTLE
MERMAID and Belle from BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (during one musical number
Jasmine sounds exactly like Belle - or Ariel); and the villain, Jafar,
comes a long list of Stereotypical Disney Villains: he's evil,
threatening, clever, and he's got a talking animal sidekick as well.
The story is, of course, predictable - in fact, it's almost a carbon
copy of the classic Max Fleischer cartoon, "Popeye Meets Aladdin and his
Wonderful Lamp."  Aladdin is a fun-loving, clever thief and Jasmine is
another 1990s-era heroine who Thinks For Herself (until Aladdin comes to
her rescue), while Jafar puts in a passable, entertaining performance.
     But aside from the Genie, it's the sidekicks who get all the
attention and all of the laughs.  Jafar's loyal stooge, a loudmouthed
talking parrot, steals every scene he's in - he's almost as effective as
the Genie in his own way.  He's loud, annoying, and rude; so of course
we love watching him get dumped on again and again.  Likewise, there's
Abu, Aladdin's loyal pet monkey, who makes fun of Aladdin's crush on the
Princess and who has big eyes that show his emotions - and elecits even
more laughs from the audience.
     And there's a magic carpet as well, with no voice - but whose
personality shines through nonetheless.  The carpet is a triumph of
animation, as it expresses its feelings better than Aladdin himself
does.  Its intricate detail comes once again from computer animation.
     And once again, computer animation is used in a Disney film to
augment the hand-drawn method and make it even more impressive.  More
emphasis on hand-painted backgrounds is used this time, and in the
beginning of the film during the scenes in the (unnamed) desert city,
the animation does not seem quite up to Disney standards - it's good,
but it's "ordinary."  (Perhaps I'm spoiled by computer animation.)  Once
we enter the Sultan's Palace, however, the film becomes a feast for the
eyes to behold.  There's a Cave of Wonders that is truly wonderful, with
treasures galore and awe-inspiring animation to boot.  One scene being
pushed in the television commercials shows Aladdin on the flying carpet,
moving through a series of caves that reminds one of a video game;
seeing this sequence on the big screen is exciting and delightful.
Computer animation is seamlessly blended with the hand drawings this
time; it's the best combination of the two styles of animation since THE
RESCUERS DOWN UNDER.
     There are several songs in the movie as well, though none of them
are very memorable.  Ever since the success of THE LITTLE MERMAID,
Disney has been milking the success of its song-writing crew (even using
Howard Ashman-Alan Menken songs in their live-action musical NEWSIES
earlier this year) and using the same song-writing team over and over.
While the songs of MERMAID were a delight, I didn't think the music of
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was quite as good - and here, it's simply generic.
Music and comedy don't mix very well; one is reminded of the films of
the Marx Brothers, when each movie would come to a standstill while one
song-and-dance number was performed, and the audience would patiently
wait for the song to end so that they could continue laughing.  It's the
same way here; the best song of the movie is "You've Never Had A Friend
Like Me," sung by the Genie as he dazzles us (and makes us laugh) with a
phantasmagoria of shapes, sizes, impressions and gags galore.  The
song's entertainment comes not from the music (which is by Alan Menken
and Tim Rice, Andrew Lloyd Weber's co-conspirator), but from Robin
Williams.
     However, no one is going to complain about the weak main
characters, or any flaws in the animation, or the musical numbers.
ALADDIN aims to do one thing only - to make you laugh - and it succeeds
admirably.  After a year where the biggest movies have been either
disappointments (BATMAN RETURNS, BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA) or deep, serious
"epics" (UNFORGIVEN, MALCOLM X), here's a movie that's just a lot of
fun.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Watching the same film as a child, and then watching it again when you’re
older is a totally different experience. I can’t tell you how many times
I’ve watched this film when I was 6 or 7, but the grand total has to be
somewhere between 30 or 40. Aladdin was another warped Disney fairytale that
has been brought to life with great songs, flashy animation and effects, and
lots of funny characters and gags. This is one of the finer examples of Disney
animation because it was made during the golden age. In my opinion the golden
age started in 1991, when Beauty and the Beast premiered, to 1994 when The Lion
King came out. I think this is when Disney’s animators where releasing their
finest work. I can officially say that I now know all of the words that
confused me as a child, and have a new appreciation for this classic
children’s film. 
Aladdin is a street rat in the city of Agrabah who has a pet monkey named Abu.
He dreams of becoming rich and living in a beautiful palace, much like that of
the sultan’s. Princess Jasmine (the first Disney character in the long line
of female heroines to have jet black hair) is legally contracted to marry a
prince by the age of 21. She refuses all suitors because if she marries, she
wants to marry for love. When Jasmine runs away from the palace to discover
life on her own, and the two of them meet, they instantly fall in love. Then
the sultan’s evil chief advisor named Jafar kidnaps Aladdin because he’s
the only one who can enter a cave where a magic lamp has been for millions of
years. When Aladdin goes in after it, the cave collapses on itself and Abu and
Aladdin are trapped inside with a magic flying carpet.
That all changes when he rubs the lamp he was supposed to retrieve, instantly
the crazy blue genie (Robin Williams at his best) pops out and tells him he has
three wishes. Aladdin wishes to be a prince so he can win over the heart of
Jasmine, but this gets in the way of Jafar’s plan to become sultan. Will the
genie earn his freedom? Will Jafar take over the kingdom? Will Aladdin’s true
identity be revealed to Jasmine and the rest of the kingdom? These are all
questions that will be answered, even if your child may not get the main plot
of the movie.
This is Disney at it’s best. Williams comes up with several very funny bits
(transforming into Groucho Marx, Jack Nicholson, and Julius Caesar, among
others) that make the film different from typical Disney fair. The songs are
also very well written, and the animation the accompanies them is very fitting
to the lyrics of the song. Your child’s favorite will probably be Abu or Iago
(Jafar’s parrot) but almost all of the characters are instantly likable. The
plot does have some problems (Whatever happened to the narrator? Why is the
sultan so dumb?) but they will either be unnoticed or just barely recognized by
you or any of your kids. The ending is a bit abrupt, but I still think that
this is a great film for your entire family to watch again and again. I think
that they should re-release it for its 10 year anniversary in 2002 for
generations to come. Wacky, fun, and great animation are what Aladdin is all
about, so this Disney classic gets *** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: Jafar turns into a scary snake and there are lots of Arabian
belly-dancers. Otherwise, the film is aimed right at the kiddies and they
should enjoy it. Good Age: 3 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Frank Maloney
     ALADDIN is an animated film from the Walt Disney Pictures.  It
features the voice of Robin Williams.  Music by Alan Menken, with lyrics
by Howard Ashman and Tim Rice.  Rated G, suitable for all audiences.
     ALADDIN, which ought to be called GENIE, is more properly a remake
of THE THIEF OF BAGHDAD than a telling of the story of Aladdin.  (I
wonder who here has seen Tim Burton's ALADDIN AND HIS WONDERFUL LAMP,
which he made for "Faerie Tale Theatre," with Valerie Bertinelli, Robert
Carradine, Leonard Nimoy, and James Earl Jones?)  THE THIEF has been
made four previous times, including one of the greatest of all silent
films with Douglas Fairbanks, Sr., and directed by Raoul Walsh; others
are the 1940 special-effects extravaganza with Sabu, music by Miklos
Rozsa, directed by Ludwig Berger, as well two newer and more dismissible
versions (one with Steve Reeves, the other made for television with
Peter Ustinov as the king along with Roddy McDowell, Terence Stamp,
Frank Finley, and Ian Holm).
     The Disney version is totally dominated by two entirely different
forces, Robin Williams and computer animation.  Undoubtedly the great
achievement of ALADDIN is yoking these two disparate elements into one
seamless whole.  The other elements of a big animated Disney musical, in
the manner of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and THE LITTLE MERMAID, at least, are
unfortunately either lacking or sadly diminished in this film.
     For one thing, the music is quite dismissible.  There are no really
memorable songs.  The best number is a high-speed patter
song-cum-production-number sung by Robin Williams's Genie.  Nothing can
compare with the score of MERMAID, where the only problem was the small
number of songs (compared to a live musical).  Nothing can compare with
individual songs from BEAUTY, either, like Mrs. Potts singing the title
song.  Alan Menken's lyricist Howard Ashman died of AIDS while working
on the ALADDIN score, and Menken's new collaborator, Tim Rice (who had
previously collaborated with Andrew Lloyd Weber), no doubt was given a
nearly impossible job to do.  The results are forgettable, and I doubt
the score will get an Oscar nomination, as did those of the previous two
Disney musicals.
     For another, the story line is skewed away from developing an
interesting human character, especially in the form of Beauty, in favor
of Genie's pyrotechnics.  This results in a less resonant, less
universal quality, and reduces the value of the film to the value one
brings to Williams's unique talents.  Neither the Thief nor the Princess
can hold our interest on his or her own.  The villain, the sorcerous
Vizier, his parrot-familiar, and the bemused little king provide
entertainment value, but not much in the way of human elements.
     So what about Robin Williams's Genie?  Nothing much, except his
performance is the core of the film, the only real reason to see it (and
resee it).  It is a marvel of breath-taking free association, of verbal
shape-shifting, and of a distinctly un-Disney sense of humor.
Everything about Genie reminds one more of the Warner Bros.  Looney
Tunes that were constantly tweaking Disneyesque pretensions to high art.
But in addition, Genie and his treatment also put me in mind the
distinctly hallucinatory quality of some of Disney's most interesting
films, such as THE THREE CABALLEROS, parts of FANTASIA, or even ALICE IN
WONDERLAND.  Genie is more alive, more intriguing, than any merely human
character, and Robin Williams finds himself in the character.  The fact
that the animators could visualize the free-form flow of Williams's mind
is a tribute to their skills and to their willingness to take chances in
a very un-Disneyesque way.
     All of us computer geeks will be fascinated to see the computer
animation used here.  I think that it must be more extensive, and better
integrated, here in either of the two previous musicals.  Instead of one
or two set pieces, such as the chandelier and ballroom in BEAUTY, we
have here computer animation in virtually every sequence; we have
swooping rides on the magic carpet, we have the streets and alleys of
Aqaba and the palace itself, we have a rolling cylinder, and a lot more.
I look forward to the day when I won't be able to spot computer
animation, and quite possibly that day has already come in some scenes
and effects, but not in all.  It still has a tendency to draw attention
to itself, to look cold and mechanical, if I may so inexactly
characterize the look.  It allows animators to do things that they would
not attempt otherwise, and for that I am grateful; but still one does
look forward to day when it not so distractingly clever and
self-apparent.
     In general, ALADDIN was not the success BEAUTY was, but it still
has powers and attractions and entertainment values that more than
justify a matinee ticket.  Remember that there will lots of kids in the
audience and be patient.  Once the movie starts you will hardly hear a
peep from them.  And of course, if you are a parent, this is your chance
to get out of the house and not have a qualm.  The kids will like it and
you will like it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I am not a great fan of the animated versions of fairy tales and, in
this case, Arabian Nights tales, as produced by Disney Studios.  I frankly
questioned that proclivity when I saw BEAUTY AND THE BEAST just about a year
ago.  It seemed to me at that point Disney (the studio, not the man) had
learned how to hell a story with complexity and one that worked on multiple
levels.  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, it seemed to me, was a film that said
something about the human condition.  Now the same company makes ALADDIN.
Is it as good as BEAUTY?  Try asking if it is even as good as THE LITTLE
MERMAID.  This one is a solid disappointment.
     Let us start with the story.  I think we all know the story of Aladdin,
right?  Good.  Will somebody tell it to the good folks at Disney, please.
Disney is often less than faithful to source material.  In this case perhaps
one or two scenes of the story made it to the film.  The screenplay by Ron
Clements and John Musker (who also produced and directed) in fact is almost
a reasonable version of the modern story "The Thief of Baghdad."  The
setting has been moved from China to Arabia for reasons best know to
Clements and Musker.  In this version Aladdin falls in love with the
princess of Aqaba and sets out to win her.  Even telling that story would
not have been a bad idea, but the film goes desperately wrong with its use
of Robin Williams as the genie of the lamp.  When the genie is on the screen
we go from the usual timeless story-telling to a bunch of topical allusions
that may be amusing on first viewing, but will not be a second time.
Williams lampoons Arnold Schwarzenegger, William F. Buckley, Jack Nicholson,
Robert DeNiro, Groucho Marx, and a host of other celebrities.  Williams
totally derails any style that the film has been able to build up.  The
story-telling often just stops dead as Williams does his thing or the film
goes off into slapstick.
     At least there is something positive to say about the art and
animation, some of which is actually quite nice.  There is a cave whose
mouth is the head of a tiger that is both well drawn and well animated.
Backgrounds are intentionally blurred and then focused sharply to shift the
eye of the viewer and give a feeling of depth.  There is a very nice
sequence involving a rolling cylinder--I will not describe how it fits into
the plot. The animation is sufficient but the extremely uneven tone and the
almost total lack of fidelity to the story make this a lesser effort from
Disney.  My rating is 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Stian M. Landgaard
ALADDIN is a very spectacular and thrilling adventure in the Arabian
nights.  The young and handsome thief Aladdin meets with the Sultan's
run-away daughter, and falls in love with her. At the same time, the
Sultan's evil vizir, Jafar, and his amusing side-kick, Iago, are in
search of a magic lamp containing a Genie who can grant the owner's
every wish. But only one person may enter the cave where the lamp is
hidden, and fetch it, and Jafar discoveres that it's the one and only,
Aladdin.  Aladdin is tricked into helping Jafar, and finds the magic
lamp. But when Jafar betrays him, Aladdin disappears with the
lamp. Then Aladdin releases the Genie and is granted his most desired
wish: to be a prince, so that he can marry the Sultan's daughter, whom
he loves. Everything goes according to plan, but Aladdin is beginning
to understand that he cannot pretend to be someone that he is
not. Jafar realizes that the prince is the boy whom he hired to get
the lamp, and soon everything is set for a masterfully depicted
struggle between good and evil.
ALADDIN's best aspects are the stunning animation, background scenes,
voice talents and music. (Are there more aspects to talk of?) Although
one of the first scenes, where a thief is mercylessly destroyed by
a certain cave, is a little too dramatic for small children, the rest
of the movie runs at a generally low violence level. There is evil,
but it's far more cartoonish and "harmless" than in THE LION KING or
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME. Where Scar and Judge Frollo were sincerely
cruel, Jafar is more of a comedian attempting to look bad (although he
gets tougher in the end). Iago is a very fun character, and his position
as Jafar's talking parrot is extremely enjoyable. His imitations of
others are hard to avoid laughing of. The Genie (Robin Williams' voice 
is perfect for him) has a lot of impressive imitations of real people 
and brilliant fast-talk all the way. He certainly steals the show.
All in all, Disney has managed to create a spectactular and very
humorous animated feature that is one of the most light-hearted of
them all.  Romance, enchantment, magic, a little violence, some pretty
innocent cruelty, and a good deal of humor mixed together makes
ALADDIN a wonderful movie for everyone.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, March 27th, 1998

Author
Jeff Meyer
Short, concise review:
    I HAD A GREAT TIME.  IT WAS MUCH BETTER THAN "CATS."  I'M GOING TO
    SEE IT AGAIN AND AGAIN.
I leave the amazingly-detailed, minutae-infested reviewing of this film
to Kathy Li, and provide some short, non-spoiler observations on
ALADDIN:
 * I haven't had this much fun at the movies....  Honest-to-God, folks,
   I plan to go see this at least two more times.  Yes, the animation is
   very good, yes, the it has fine songs (which I plan to listen to on
   the CD when I get the chance)...
   Okay, short and sweet -- I went with two other people, and we were
   still buzzing about that film hours later over a late dinner.  I
   laughed at the gags, I laughed because I enjoyed the characters and
   the situations; in short, I had a helluva good time.  Definitely my
   favorite film of the year, and one of the five best films (I think
   ... well, let's wait until MALCOM X and A FEW GOOD MEN come to town.)
   But skip all that good/bad crap.  It was fun.  *FUN*!!  (And if
   you're a fan of classic Looney Toons animation:
   >>>>>
 * I think that this is something of a departure for Disney (at least in
   their animated feature-length film area), in that some of the humor
   is, well, wacky.  Looney.  Tex Avery/Bob Clampett like.  There are
   fourth wall gags in it.  There are references to other Disney films.
   In other words, they're occasionally winking at the audience this
   time -- not what you expect from Disney.  However, I don't think it
   hurts the story any.
   The gags aren't all over the place -- much of it is the usual Disney
   slapstick/character humor.  However, humor does seem to have it over
   romance this time around (at least compared to THE LITTLE MERMAID and
   BEAUTY AND THE BEAST).  Perfectly valid change in the recipe; as you
   can tell from my yammering, it went down very well.  (Frankly,
   though, it would be hard to imagine casting Robin Williams in a part
   like this, and then expecting him to just read his lines....)
 * Regarding The Williams Boy: Technology is a wonderful thing.
   Whenever we've heard Robin Williams do his improvisations, he's been
   handicapped by having to channel all that energy through a mortal
   shell.  From now on, all Robin Williams comedy routines should be
   animated, because this medium was designed specifically for him.
   Frankly, I missed 1/3 of his gags, because I and the audience were
   laughing so hard at the previous ones.  (Again, this is defintely a
   more-than-one-viewing film.)
   Really, it's a shame that the Academy has shifted to giving Best
   Actor awards, for the most part, to non-comic performances.  If
   Williams does as well as I suspect he may with Levinson's TOYS,
   this could be a killer year for him.
   (P.S.  This is the first, and I suspect only, time I have ever
   enjoyed seeing Gilbert Gotfried in anything.)
 * Technically, it's very good.  I've probably seen better individual
   examples of various bits in other animated films (mostly Disney)....
   But it's right up there.  (The rug is particularly impressive.)  I
   think the songs are less memorable (on their own) than those in THE
   LITTLE MERMAID; in how they're "staged" in the film, I think they're
   every bit as good as those in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
 * Yes, the inevitable comparison:  I liked it differently (but as
   well) as THE LITTLE MERMAID, and more than BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  I
   love good romance, but I like to laugh; and Hell's bells, I'm glad I
   didn't cough up a lung.
P.S. Just to satisfy curiosity (I missed it in the credits): who did the
    voice of the narrator/peddler who opens the film?  Williams?
P.P.S. Damn, do I want this on laserdisc!  (I and the rest of the Holy
     Trinity who accompanied me to the film (Jerry Boyajian and Rob
     Ferguson as The Holy Ghost) would gladly sell Jeffrey Katzenberg's
     soul to get a good, letterboxed CAV edition of this film tomorrow.
     (But, given JK's position, it's probably too late.))
P.P.P.S.  My remaining question: What will Dan Parmenter find horribly
     wrong with this Disney film? :-)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     While on vacation we decided to check out some of the Disney
movies that we missed at the theaters.  The top on our list was the
1992 picture ALADDIN, Disney's loose retelling of the story of Aladdin
and his magic lamp.
     ALADDIN starts slowly and aimlessly as if it is killing time
before the big event.  In a movie filled with Academy Award winning
music (Alan Menken) but mediocre songs (Alan Menken, Howard Ashman, Tim
Rice), a couple of the most forgettable songs occur in the beginning.
     The film has two distinct parts -- let's call them BG and AG --
before the Genie, played with tremendous comedic gusto by Robin
Williams, appears and after.
     In BG, we are introduced to the beautiful princess Jasmine (voice
by Linda Larkin), who has never left the palace walls.  (The rich
always have it rough in the movies.)  Her father, the Sultan (voice by
Douglas Seale), reminds her that she must marry a prince before she
turns 21, and there are only 3 days left.
     Jafar (voice by Jonathan Freeman), the Sultan's "most trusted
advisor," and his smart mouthed bird Iago (voice by Gilbert Gottfried
but you'll swear it is Danny DeVito) hang around the palace looking
sinister.  Jafar wants to marry the princess as a way to abscond with
all of the Sultan's riches.
     As soon as you hear that Jasmine has never left the palace, you
know she will, and the inevitable scene occurs in short order.  While
outside the confines of the palace, she meets our hero Aladdin (voice
by Scott Weinger) and his cute monkey Abu (voice by Frank Welker).
Aladdin falls immediately and desperately in love with her.
     Aladdin ends up with the magic lamp and accidentally summons the
Genie (voice by -- drum roll -- Robin Williams).  After half an hour,
BG is finally over, and we enter the dramatically more interesting AG
period.
     The Genie explains the rules about Aladdin's three wishes to him,
including the one that he cannot ask the Genie to make anyone fall in
love.  At the end of his witty, quasi-legal oral contract, the Genie
informs him that there are, "three wishes - no substitutes, exchanges,
or refunds."
     During AG, the show bursts with all of the energy it lacked in BG.
Williams does his shtick as only he can.  The Disney animators follow
along creating images of equal intensity to his routine, right down to
a neon sign that says "applause" at the end of one of his numbers.  One
could make a cogent argument that this vaudeville routine has no place
in a story about Aladdin, but who cares, it is extremely funny.  And
the first rule of a comedy, especially a cartoon, is that, if it is
funny, go with it and don't worry too much about logic.  Williams, for
the many adults in the audience, even includes some fun impersonations
of other actors like Jack Nicholson.  Again, it doesn't make any sense,
but it's funny.
     Disney animators show off their talents in many ways.  The regal
movie uses a palette of colors worthy of the Arabian Nights.  Royal
blues and rich crimsons are outlined in gold.  Watch especially how
well the animators can imbue human life and motion into animals and
normally inanimate objects.  The magic carpet is a perfect example.
They give a real personality to what otherwise looks like just a high
quality throw rug.
     Almost as a byproduct, the story teaches some nice moral lessons,
but the script by Ron Clements, Ted Elliott, John Musker, and Terry
Rossio puts all of its creativity into the humor.  The result is a
satisfying film that will keep the whole family laughing.
     ALADDIN runs 1:30 with the last hour being the good part.  It is
rated G and would be fine for all ages with the possible exception of a
brief snake scene.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, thought the show was "very
good," but when pressed for a comparison with one of his favorite
Disney films, THE LION KING, he said he liked THE LION KING better, and
I agree.  I recommend ALADDIN to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Raul Cairo 
     Disney has done it again.  After thirty animated feature films, it
is still surprising that Disney can still surpass themselves.  I
remember walking out of the theatre and staying in awe of the animation
that I saw.  It may be to early to say, but this movie is definitely
destined to be a classic in its own realm.
     The movie starts off with the introduction of an old artifacts
salesman who tells us the story of this old magical lamp which he is 
selling, then we go into flashbacks and we are soon introduced to Jafar,
the wicked and power-hungry counselor of the sultan.  He is anxiously
trying to find someone who is worthy enough to go into the mystical
cave of wonder and try to retrieve the lamp.
     And like all fairy tales we are introduced to the hero, the worthy
one who can go and retrieve the lamp.  His name is Aladdin.  One thing 
that definitely must be learned is that all Disney animated features have
been in their own rights classics, and ALADDIN is not to be ignored,
With magnificent animation, truly entertaining songs, and most
definitely terrific performances.  The shining and truly glimmering
light in this movie, is Robin Williams, who portrays the voice of the
genie.  Just his performance in this film makes the movie great.  Of
course there are others such as Lea Solonga who does the singing voice
of Princess Jasmin, and Gilbert Gottfried who supplies his talent for
the voice of Iago, the cruel and malicious parrot who rides on the 
shoulder of his master Jafar.
     In short, if you believe that ALADDIN is a movie that is just for
kids, you are truly mistaken.  Don't miss this movie that will forever
remain a permanent fixture in the Disney family of film.  A terrific
must see--10 points out of 10.  
