Title
Review for Thinner (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Edwin Jahiel
STEPHEN KING'S THINNER *   Directed by Tom Holland. Written by Michael
McDowell and Holland, based on the book by Stephen King. Photography,
Kees Van Oostrum. Editing, Marc Laub. Production designer,Laurence
Bennett. Music,Daniel Licht. Produced by Richard Rubinstein & Mitchel
Galin.Cast: Robert John Burke(Billy Halleck),Joe Mantegna(Richie
Ginelli),Lucinda Jenney(Heidi Halleck),Joy Lenz(Linda Halleck),Kari
Wuhrer(Gina Lempke),Michael Constantine(Tadzu Lempke), Stephen King(the
pharmacist),et al A Paramount release. 93 min. Rated R.
(language,violence,a sexual act,ghoulish faces)
Famously, the socialite wife of William S.Paley (he founded CBS) once
decreed that "You can never be too rich or too thin." I don't know about
rich, but too thin won't do. This film is proof of this. 
The title may be confusing to some readers who may take it as a
declaration that writer Stephen King has lost weight. Wrong. It's lawyer
Billy Halleck, the tall (fat?) story's grossly overweight protagonist
who does.
In court, Billy has just won for his mobster client Richie Ginelli. As
he drives home, his wife Heidi, until now frustrated in intimate
relations by  Billy's bulk,is elated. Sitting next to her husband,she
tries again.(It's unlikely given the man's heft, but let it pass). In
the throes of sensuality, Billy hits and kills an old gypsy lady who's
crossing the street uncautiously. In one of many messy plot elements,
it's unclear to what extent Billy is at fault. Thanks to a well-disposed
judge and a friendly cop, he is found not guilty -- except in the eyes
of the gypsies.
The old woman was the daughter of 106-year-old Tadzu, who proceeds to
put a curse on Billy by touching him and mumbling "Thinner!" The lawyer
starts losing weight with miraculous speed. Though puzzled, he is at
first pleased, until he realizes that he is thinning down to nothing, no
matter how much food he stuffs into himself. The malediction has also
affected, with ghoulish results, the judge and the cop. Billy embarks on
a search for Tadzu, to have him take off his curse...
"Thinner" is at least the 25th King story made into a feature film, not
counting television items. Some movies are good or very good: "Carrie,"
"The Shining," "Christine,""Stand by me," "Misery," "Dolores Claiborne,"
"The Shawshank Redemption," and perhaps "Cujo." None of them had a
screenplay by King. Most other King-inspired and/or written films range
from mediocre to miserable. 
As to the fidelity of the various screen adaptations, I cannot judge.
Having attempted a few times to read a King story,I was defeated by
writing of the potboiler kind that disregards style and grammar and is
of the school of "This was given to my wife and I." Sure enough, in
"Thinner" Billy declares "He put a curse on Cary and I." The curse may
also have been for using bad English.
"Thinner" starts well. The prosthetic and makeup devices that take Billy
from a balloon to a rail are sometimes detectable, yet most skillful. 
Billy's daughter Linda gives a cute imitation of Marlon Brando as the
Godfather. (Minor mystery. Billy is on the pale side, his wife is a
blonde, but Linda daughter looks Brazilian or something close).  A
witness says that Billy "was sober as a judge... " (pause) "...Judge." 
Tadzu's greatgranddaughter Gina is a gorgeous, sexy gypsy given to
come-ons followed by irreverent gestures.This just about covers the fun
part of the film. 
As the movie leaves its long prologue for the realm of horror, it falls 
apart. Some bits are predictable: a disfigured man presses Billy to
accept his gun, Billy refuses, leaves the house and -what d'you know!-
we hear the expected revolver shot. Worse yet, there is an accumulation
of loose ends, gaps, holes and abysses of logic,continuity and
arbitrariness --even by the elastic standards of fantasy flicks.
In these days of celebrating cuisine ("Babette's Feast," "Tampopo" "Eat
Drink Man Woman" "Like Water for Chocolate" etc. and the recent "Big
Night"), "Thinner" is a bulimic, anti-food concoction  which, however,
does not push itself far enough into the surreal realm of eating with
the black humor of, say, "La Grande Bouffe." 
There is, however, an encouraging side to the movie. Some people would
like to meet a furious gypsy who, unlike Tadzu, is not totally
vindictive and would merely make them shadows of their former selves.
Then they could start feasting and gorging from scratch. What a happy
thought.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Tom Holland.
Screenplay:  Tom Holland and Michael McDowell, based on the novel by
Stephen King.
Director of Photography:  Kees Van Oostrum.
Producers:  Richard P. Rubinstein, Mitchell Gallin.
Starring:  Robert John Burke, Joe Mantegna, Lucinda Jenney, Michael
Constantine.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
     In 1984, a novel called THINNER came out, attributed to an author
named Richard Bachman who had four previous horror novels to his credit.
Soon, however, several readers noticed a strong resemblance between the
prose of Mr. Bachman and that of another popular horror novelist.  Sure
enough, Stephen King admitted to the pseudonym, and THINNER quickly
climbed the best-seller lists, proving that the King name was an important
selling point.  Over a decade later, a film version is being sold as
STEPHEN KING'S THINNER, and it might be enough to make the author wish he
had never claimed it.  THINNER is a positively dreadful piece of
supposedly suspenseful dreck, positively obese with miserable decisions
and laughable acting.
     Robert John Burke stars as Billy Halleck, an overweight attorney with
a gift for using the system to his advantage matched only by his gift for
putting on pounds.  One evening, a bit of automotive-erotic activity
between Billy and his wife Heidi (Lucinda Jenney) results in the death of
a gypsy woman, but Billy's friends in the courts see to it that there are
no legal consequences.  That does not guarantee no consequences of any
kind, as the gypsy's father Tadzu Lemke (Michael Constantine) curses Billy
with the single word "thinner."  Soon Billy finds his diet is really
starting to work...a bit too well, as the pounds begin to disappear
uncontrollably.  Wasting away and desperate, Billy calls in a favor with a
mobster named Ginelli (Joe Mantegna) in an attempt to force Lemke to
remove the curse before he vanishes entirely.
     While most of the basic plot elements in STEPHEN KING'S THINNER match
those in the novel, director and co-scripter Tom Holland (who brought the
nearly-as-wretched STEPHEN KING'S THE LANGOLIERS to TV screens last year)
has somehow managed to abandon every thematic thread which made the story
interesting.  King's popularity is based, I think, largely on his
identification with the horror comics of his youth; his stories have been
contemporary morality tales with good triumphing over evil and poetic
justice meted out in spades.  THINNER depends on the understanding that
Billy is a weak, unscrupulous man trying to weasel out of a punishment he
deserves, and that the gypsies are an unjustly persecuted minority.
Holland, on the other hand, apparently doesn't believe that we can handle
a protagonist who is in the wrong, so he turns the gypsies into cackling
villains and Billy into the poor, persecuted hero.
     That portrayal of Billy is turned into a joke by Robert John Burke,
whose performance is simply appalling.  As the fat Billy, he is the worst
kind of stereotype of overweight people, a grinning happy-go-lucky buffoon
who rolls his eyes and mugs at every opportunity; as the thin Billy, he is
a rasping cadaver who never seems to register the full weight (pardon the
expression) of his predicament.  In both cases, there is not an ounce of
intelligence in Burke's performance, and not a trace of humanity.  In
fact, it is so broad that you might be tempted to believe that Holland is
playing the whole thing as a goofy horror-comedy like his CHILD'S PLAY,
with Burke his punch-line-spewing Chucky stand-in.  If so, it is not
nearly outlandish enough to be entertaining, and every scene is directed
with such a plodding obviousness that it STEPHEN KING'S THINNER becomes a
black hole of suspense.  As just one example, imagine every possible way
it might have been presented creatively that Ginelli had poisoned the
gypsies' dogs, then compare your idea to having Mantegna say to the dogs,
"How about a little strychnine?"
     With bad readings of bad lines in badly directed scenes, THINNER
offers little but the opportunity to watch Burke's prosthetic
transformation from 290 pounds to 130 pounds.  The makeup is the creation
of Greg Cannom (MRS. DOUBTFIRE, THE MASK), and it is impressive work.  The
"fat suit" (full-body in one shower scene) is excellent, but it was an
even greater challenge to take 50 pounds off, and superb lighting helps
Cannom achieve that effect.  Still, all the latex in the world can't turn
a cow pie into a chocolate mousse, and STEPHEN KING'S THINNER reeks of
incompetence.  It is going to be hard for King to distance himself from
this one given his cameo as a pharmacist.  Perhaps he just wanted a little
something for the headache it is bound to give him.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert John Burke, Joe Mantegna, Lucinda Jenney, 
      Michael Constantine, Kari Wuhrer, Joy Lenz
Director: Tom Holland
Producers: Richard P. Rubinstein and Mitchell Gatlin
Screenplay: Michael McDowell and Tom Holland based on the novel by 
      Stephen King
Cinematography: Kees Van Oostrum
Music: Daniel Licht
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     It's always good around Halloween to have one really bad horror 
movie to look forward to.  Alas, this year's lone October horror 
release, THINNER, falls considerably short of the level of awfulness 
established by last year's HALLOWEEN 6.  While this latest adaptation of 
a Stephen King novel doesn't approach "good" film making, it's at least 
watchable (if just barely) -- a quality that no one would ascribe to the 
most recent chapter of the unbearably moronic Michael Myers saga.
     There are two kinds of movies based on Stephen King stories -- the 
dramas (STAND BY ME, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION) and the horrors (PET 
SEMATARY, THE MANGLER).  In general, the former are quite good while the 
latter are terrible.  So, since THINNER falls somewhere between genres, 
it's fitting that the film's quality is also somewhere in the middle.  
THINNER is a rather shallow and unsatisfactory examination of some 
potentially-worthwhile themes and ideas.  Equally unfortunately, it's 
not at all scary.  
     The film opens in Fairview, Connecticut, where attorney Billy 
Halleck (Robert John Burke) is the toast of his law firm, having just 
won the acquittal of mobster Richie Ginelli (Joe Mantegna, sporting a 
chic beard).  On the personal front, however, Billy is having far less 
success in his war against weight.  He's tipping the scales at 300 
pounds, and his habit of sneaking snacks is defeating his latest diet.  
His wife, Heidi (Lucinda Jenny), and daughter, Linda (Joy Lenz), despair 
of him ever losing the undesirable mass, and they're seriously concerned 
about his health.
     Then, one night, while Billy is driving through town, he 
accidentally hits and kills a gypsy woman.  With the connivance a couple 
of friends -- a cop and a judge -- Billy escapes without being charged.  
But the dead woman's father, the gypsy king Tadzu Lempke (Michael 
Constantine), curses Billy to become thinner.  Suddenly, he's losing 
weight at the rate of three pounds a day.  For a while, this is a boon, 
but, as his physique goes from bulky to normal to emaciated, he becomes 
panicky, crying out, "I'm being erased!" (Maybe he should consult with 
Arnold Schwarzenegger, star of this summer's ERASER.)  And, as his body 
wastes away, his life begins to collapse.  Soon, his wife is trying to 
have him committed, and Billy is forced to enlist Richie's help in 
delivering a curse of his own upon the gypsies.
     THINNER could have been an opportunity to examine the ethics of a 
slick lawyer who refuses to accept responsibility for his actions.  
Billy successfully defends guilty clients and uses friendships to escape 
manslaughter charges, thinking that nothing can touch him.  But justice 
is waiting, although it has nothing to do with the law.  Unfortunately, 
questions of morality are of secondary importance to a film that 
emphasizes its DEATH WISH aspects.  The most energetic parts of THINNER 
are those that focus on Billy's revenge, and this is no accident.  
     The makeup that transforms 175-pound Robert John Burke into his 
300-pound character is embarrassingly unconvincing, especially in the 
wake of the much better job done to expand Eddie Murphy's waistline in 
THE NUTTY PROFESSOR.  It looks like Burke is wearing latex strips on his 
face and rubber padding under his clothing, which, of course, is exactly 
what he's doing.  For that matter, the prosthetics on Michael 
Constantine and several other actors don't look all that impressive, 
either.  
     On top of its other problems, THINNER is too long.  There's not 
enough story here for a forty-five minute motion picture, not to mention 
something twice that length.  As a result, there's a lot of pointless 
running around, a protracted dream sequence, and some meaningless 
"character building" scenes that don't build anything.  The movie drags 
through the middle part, only jumping to life when Joe Mantegna's 
character comes on the scene and starts getting violent.  On the whole, 
though, a slimmer running time, not to mention an astute script, would 
have made THINNER go down a lot more smoothly.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael Redman
As I write this, it's a rainy night with severe wind gusts and only two
evenings away from Halloween: Stephen King atmosphere. It'd be
appropriate to talk about King's new film and how frightening it is.
Yeah, it'd be appropriate, but it ain't gonna happen.
Films from King supernatural horror tales haven't done so well in recent
years. There hasn't been a well-crafted one since....well, since before
some of you were born. King movies, a genre unto themselves, started out
with great promise, but over the years "Carrie" turned into "Children Of
The Corn". He's had more luck with "Stand By Me" and the psychological
thrillers "Misery" and "Shawshank Redemption".
"Thinner", based on the novel originally released as written by "Richard
Bachman", attempts to combine the two Kings for an occult thriller. It
almost succeeds for a short while, but rapidly deteriorates into another
schlockfest. The film's beginning draws you in and then takes a wrong
turn to go where almost every Stephen King movie has gone before.
Attorney Billy Halleck (Robert John Burke) lives the good life as a
distinguished member of the good ole boy network, complete with wife,
daughter and supposedly happy home life. He's fighting a losing battle
with his 300 pound weight while continually stuffing one thing after
another into his mouth. This all changes when Halleck runs into and
kills an old gypsy woman as he and his wife engage in an activity that
got Hugh Grant arrested.
His legal buddies rule the death accidental, but the ancient Gypsy king
isn't going to let him get away with killing his daughter and puts a
grisly curse on the lawyer. At first he is thrilled as the pounds melt
away, but then panics as he continues to lose weight no matter how much
he eats. He is literally wasting away. Desperate, he turns to a local
mobster for help and they both hunt down the band of Gypsies.
The major problem with the film is that there is not one sympathetic
person in the entire story. The main character, Halleck is initially the
one we identify with as the accident leads to his tremendous misfortune,
but as the film wears on (and it does) he turns into a vengeful dolt.
Even his loving wife is unmasked as a scheming liar.
The movie isn't helped by its perpetuation of the racist depiction of
Gypsies. They're easily the most interesting characters in the film, but
It makes you wonder how a people could survive when all of its members
are whores, killers and thieves. If this were any other minority group,
they'd be up in arms, but Gypsies probably don't go to the movies,
right?
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
10/31/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]
