Title
Review for Three Musketeers, The (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
There have been many film versions of the Alexander
Dumas classic, but Richard Lester may have directed
the best one.  A great looking movie, the costumes,
sets and cinematography are also backed up with an
excellent cast, a solid script, and some good
slapstick and action scenes.
The story takes place in renaissance France.  Young,
energetic D'Artagnan (Michael York) leaves home to
seek his fortune as a swordsman.  He makes friends
with three musketeers: world-weary Athos (Oliver Reed),
comically arrogant Porthos (Frank Finlay), and
chivalric Aramis (Richard Chamberlain).  Their enemy
is aristocratic schemer Cardinal Richelieu (Charlton
Heston), who plots to prove the infidelity of the
Queen (Geraldine Chaplin) to the King (Jean-Pierre
Cassel) to increase his own power.  The Queen's lover
is Englishman Duke of Buckingham (Simon Ward).
Racquel Welch plays the Queen's handmaiden.  Faye
Dunaway is entertainingly evil as Milady, who along
with proud Rochefort (Christopher Lee) is part
of Richelieu's intrigue against the Queen.
As you might expect, there are many swashbuckling
scenes.  Lester does his best to give them variety,
changing the sets for each swordfight.  One takes
place in a forest at night, another by a windmill,
another in a tavern, another by a castle among
fireworks.  Comic slapstick is cleverly mixed among
the tragedy of injury and death by the sword.
While the Musketeers fight for France, the King,
and the Queen's honor, they do have other interests.
D'Artagnan is obsessed with Welch (who can blame
him?) while the others are not above gambling and
plundering.  Their adventurous and fearless spirit
is charming in this more cynical age.
Perhaps "The Three Musketeers" is too plotty, with
an overabundance of characters.  Perhaps the
slapstick could be more effective at times, and
perhaps the King is just too stupid.  The setting
seems more like England than France, since so many
of the cast are Brits (Reed, York, Finlay, Lee, etc.).
These complaints are more than compensated for
the quality of the direction, sets, costumes,
cast and screenplay.
"The Three Musketeers" had a sequel, "The Four Musketeers",
which was released in 1975.  It was no problem to
reassemble the cast, since the two films were made
at the same time.  This resulted in a lawsuit when
the sequel was released, since the cast had only been
paid for a single film.  "The Return of the Musketeers"
(1989) was an unsuccessful second sequel reuniting
much of the original cast.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
