Title
Review for Girls Town (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Somewhere near the middle of GIRLS TOWN, after its three female
protagonists have begun to assert themselves, Emma (Anna Grace) notes that
the experience "feels like a movie."  "If this was a movie," retorts Patti
(Lili Taylor), "we would've killed, like, fifty people by now."  It's the
THELMA & LOUISE model of female empowerment -- sisters only start doin' it
for themselves when men are doing them wrong, and then they do it up with
a vengeance.  The result is often self-righteousness without much of a
story to tell, with shallow female characters who are supposed to deserve
our sympathy because they are less shallow than the shallow male
characters.  In the space of two weeks, we have two films -- GIRLS TOWN
and FOXFIRE -- which continue to show what a hard time film-makers are
having creating real drama out of the perils of being a young woman.
     In GIRLS TOWN, the focus is on three best friends at a New Jersey
high school, college-bound Emma and Angela (Bruklin Harris) and their
single-mom cohort Patti, who are forced to confront harsh truths when
their friend and classmate Nikki (Aunjanue Ellis) commits suicide.  When
the girls get their hands on Nikki's journal, they discover that she had
been raped, and begin to discuss the various wrongs men have done to each
of them.  Eventually, talk isn't enough, and they decide that it's time to
take action.
     Move the story to Portland, and basically you have FOXFIRE.  It
begins when a drifter called Legs (Angelina Jolie) walks into a high
school biology class and stands up for a shy girl named Rita (Jenny Lewis)
who is being taunted by the teacher, Mr. Buttinger (John Diehl).  When
several girls -- including Legs, our artsy narrator Madeline (Hedy
Burress), pot-smoking Goldie (Jenny Shimizu) and promiscuous Violet (Sarah
Rosenberg) -- learn that Mr. Buttinger has been sexually harassing Rita
and other students, they join together to confront him.  That
confrontation results in a group suspension, and a week where the five
girls meet at an abandoned house to become inseparable friends.
     There are a few fairly significant things GIRLS TOWN does right that
FOXFIRE does not.  Most notably, the girls in GIRLS TOWN talk like high
school seniors, not like some vague melodramatized approximation.
Co-stars Harris, Taylor and Grace all contributed to the script, and they
have given the dialogue a real punch.  GIRLS TOWN also gives its
characters' acts of defiance a kind of offhandedness which makes them
considerably more interesting.  When Emma, Patti and Angela trash the car
of a boy who assaulted Emma, there is a casual glee in their retaliation;
when they confront the man named in Nikki's journal as her assailant,
their actions do not seem pre-meditated.  These are young women with
little if any idea that their actions are political, and it would seem
absurd to play their scenes of vindictiveness as though "I Am Woman"
should be playing in the background.
     That is exactly the opposite of the impression you get from FOXFIRE,
where Legs walks into the lives of her four comrades like the
Ur-Feminist, and where cries of "It's not fair!" resound through
courtrooms.  That might lead you to expect a hearty round of man-bashing,
with Legs providing the bashing primer for her less hardened friends, and
to a certain extent you would be right.  But FOXFIRE, despite being based
on a novel by a woman (Joyce Carol Oates) and being written and directed
by women, plays decidedly like a male fantasy of female bonding.  In a
sequence which seems to last several hours, the five principal characters
take turns getting a flame tattooed on their breasts to signify their
shared trials.  It's just like we men have always hoped...when women get
together, they sit around topless in a candle-lit room drinking liquor
from the bottle with a subtle-but-recognizable atmosphere of lesbian
eroticism permeating the proceedings.
     The basic problem with both films is the basic problem with so many
female bonding films:  they define the characters almost exclusively in
terms of their problems with men.  Lili Taylor's Patti in GIRLS TOWN is a
notable exception, a spunky, lively but not terribly bright young woman
who is doing all she can just to keep running in the same place, but Emma
and Angela are given little genuine personality.  It's even worse in
FOXFIRE, where there is so little effort made to understand the characters
as individuals they might as well be hand puppets.  Madeline develops an
intense bond with Legs, but we have virtually no idea why because we know
nothing about her life; there are vague references to Goldie's home life,
and no reference to Rita's or Violet's at all.  They're just female
figures to occupy the car in which they take a joy ride, stolen from one
of the shadow males who try to keep them down.  GIRLS TOWN at least has a
bit of verisimilitude working for it, but both GIRLS TOWN and FOXFIRE
mistake vandalism for character:  I kick ass, therefore I am woman.

Author
Bryant Frazer
For the first reel of Girls Town, you just can't get over Lili Taylor. 
Is it possible to remain unperturbed that a woman of this age is playing 
a high school student? Harder still, can you avoid astonishment at how 
perfect she is in the part? With the sure, showy expertise of a De Niro, 
Taylor imbues unwed mother Patti with all the faux fuck-you confidence 
she can muster. It's a deeply felt, dead-on performance, and by the 
halfway point you've forgiven Taylor her own maturity. For all its 
verite pretenses, Girls Town is less about a bunch of high-schoolers 
than it is about a movie director and a cadre of writer-performers 
examining their own feelings about rape, relationships, and American 
womanhood.
The movie's opening scenes sketch an easy friendship between a group of 
four smart/sassy high school outsiders on the verge of graduation: 
Patti, Angela (Bruklin Harris), Emma (Anna Grace), and Nikki (Aunjanue 
Ellis). But about 10 minutes into the film, we get word that Nikki has 
swallowed a fistful of pills and bowed out of life. The remaining girls 
manage to smug Nikki's diary out of her grieving mother's home, and page 
through it at Patti's place, investigating the root of Nikki's despair. 
What they find is cruel and galvanizing -- Nikki had been raped by an 
editor at a newspaper where she interned, and was privately questioning 
the sanity and value of a world where such a thing could happen.
Shell-shocked by the truth of the matter, the three girls begin to talk 
among themselves and come to a realization about their own lives. Emma 
says she was raped last year on a date with a football player. Patti's 
barely sympathetic, wondering what the hell Emma thought she was doing 
with her shirt off in a jock's car. And anyway, Patti's had her own 
share of guys who wouldn't take no for an answer. Pained, acrimonious 
debate ensues as the trio grow more and more angry -- angry about the 
impossibility of saying no, and angry with themselves for being weak, 
for being naive, for putting up with it. "Why do we put up with it?" 
Emma finally asks, once the argument has reached a fever pitch. "We try 
to talk about it, and look what happens. We fight for 20 minutes."
There's the admirable crux of this picture. Girls Town is a political 
film, in that it calls for action. But it's incomplete-it's never quite 
sure how to justify that action, or what form it should take. The trio 
become crusaders for their right to dignity, and it's surely one of this 
year's most stirring movie moments when Emma lobs a concrete block 
through the passenger-side window of that damn jock's car (doing the 
right thing?). They hang out in the bathroom, chatting incessantly and 
scrawling slogans and naming names on the door to a toilet stall. 
"Subvert the patriarchy," Emma writes, and then starts a hall of shame 
list underneath that other students begin to contribute to. The girls 
silence their hecklers, take revenge on the deadbeat father of Patti's 
child, and eventually come face-to-face with Nikki's tormentor. Still, 
the movie has a desperately unfinished quality, and none of these 
subsequent exploits is particularly satisfying. (You keep waiting for 
someone to call the cops on these brazen girls, but nobody thinks of 
it.) Perhaps searching for a resolution missing from the material at 
hand, the film borrows its epigraphs from Audre Lorde and Queen Latifah 
("Who you callin' a bitch?"). The points are well taken, but they should 
have been unnecessary.
Long on characterization but a little short on story, Girls Town is less 
than it could have been, and too self-congratulatory for my own taste. 
Director Jim McKay is best known as a consort of R.E.M.'s Michael Stipe 
(he directed the nearly unwatchable Tourfilm for that band), and Girls 
Town is his first foray into feature filmmaking. The movie was created 
and scripted by committee, but McKay and his lead performers had to 
shoot on a shoestring when, predictably, the group couldn't secure 
funding. 
Then again, Girls Town on a budget would hardly be the same film. The 
movie's slapdash quality is key to its significance. Truth be told, all 
three of the leads look too wise for high school, but that's OK -- 
there's a once-removed quality to their fine, spontaneous performances, 
as the women take a very skillful look back at the girls they once were, 
the girls they wish they had been, or some combination. For all its 
flaws, this one gets extra points for having its uncertain head and 
heart in the same noble place. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
I saw this film at the press screening. It will open nationwide on
Friday, August 30.  Locally it will be playing at one of the Camera
Cinemas in the San Jose area.
     GIRLS TOWN is the first narrative film by music video and
documentary maker Jim McKay.  It is his attempt to make a female DINER
fused with BOYZ N THE HOOD.  The press kit proudly proclaims that it
won one of the many awards at the 1996 Sundance Film Festival.
     GIRLS TOWN is also McKay's shot to earn a spot in the Guinness
Book of World Records.  By my estimate, approximately ninety-eight
percent of the sentences include the F word, and on several he was able
to make it be every other word in the sentence.  Certainly a record
albeit perhaps not an enviable one.  Take out the F words and the
parsimonious script just about vanishes.
     Angela (Bruklin Harris), Emma (Anna Grace), and Patti (Lili
Taylor) are three close friends who are about to graduate from an inner
city high school.  Angela and Emma will be going to college, and Patti
will stay home and raise her toddler.  Emma is so bright she will be
going to Columbia, but I did not catch where Angela is going.
     One of their friends commits suicide, but it happens so suddenly
that any effect on the audience is muted.  Most of the time the girls
just hang out together and make small talk, small filthy talk that is.
It seems they despise just about everyone in their lives except each
other.  They carry markers, spray paint, and screwdrivers with them so
they can vandalize places wherever they go.  In the film they destroy a
car and steal from an apartment, but the script attempts to justify
their actions.
     The girls are fond of cavorting in the school bathroom where they
write graffiti on the walls while they talk.  If they are typical
college material, then no wonder the SAT scores keep dropping in our
country.
     In one of the few good and poignant scenes in the show, Emma talks
about her experience with date rape.  Patti puts her down with a
comment about that being typical so what is she complaining about.
     The credits describe the film as "a collaborative process."  The
script is credited to the actresses and the director.  It sounds like
there was no written script, and they ad-libbed most of the lines.  Too
bad it didn't have some directing.  The actresses demonstrate little
energy and almost no talent.  This is not to say they do not have
talent, but that there is little in evidence in this film.  The film
wanders around aimlessly like a ship without a rudder or a captain.
     Parents and boyfriends hardly appear at all in the show and when
they do, it is clear that they don't get it.  The girls are extremely
hostile to them.  When Angela gets expelled, her mom (Stephanie Berry)
tells her, "This is your life Angela."  Angela sarcastically retorts,
"Exactly.  My life."
     When Emma's boyfriend tries to talk to her and reason with her,
she puts him down with, "It's not what you say, it's what you think."
Kind of hard to win against that Orwellian logic.
     Angela is also a poet.  One of her poems ends with, "What you see
is what you get.  It ain't cheap.  It ain't free, but it's undeniably
me."  As the ending credits roll, she says, "I'd just like to get out
of here."  My sentiments exactly.
     One final comment on the use of the F word in films.  I asked one
of the other critics at the screening about the plethora of F words in
it, and he said it did not bother him since that is how teenagers in
New York City talk.  True perhaps, but not enough justification for me.
I love PULP FICTION and gave it my highest rating.  Other films like
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS I also praised highly.  Both of these pictures are
full of the use of the F word, but in them the script was strong and
the F words were appropriate in the context.  Here, there is nothing
but cussing.  Take it away, and you have almost nothing left.
     GIRLS TOWN runs 1:30.  It is rated R.  There is incessant foul
language including a surfeit of F words.  There is some drug use, a lot
of vandalism, but no sex or nudity.  I think it gives a horrible
message to our teenagers so I hope as few as possible of them will ever
see it.  I hated the film, and I give it 1/2 of a star only because I
have seen worse.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GIRLS TOWN ** 1/2. Directed by Jim McKay.Written by McKay, Denise
Casano,Anna Grace, Bruklin Harris and Lili Taylor.  Photography, Russell
Fine. Editing, McKay and Alex Hall. Production design, David Doernberg.
Music, Guru. Producer, Lauren Zalaznick.  Cast: Aunjanue Ellis (Nikki),
Bruklin Harris (Angela), Anna Grace (Emma), Lili Taylor (Patti),
Guillermo Diaz (Dylan), John Ventimiglia (Eddie), Antony Imperioli
(Michael) An October Films release. 90 minutes. Rated R (language) 
Coincidences again, or better call them connections. The current  "The
First Wives Club" is about four older women,  once best college pals,
now abandoned by their husbands for chicks. One woman commits suicide.
The surviving three are reunited and unite against their spouses.
In "Girls Town" four young women, two black (Nikki and Angela),  two
white ( Patti and Emma), have their own clique. When they are close to
graduating from high school, Nikki, the academically smartest of the lot
and a future Princetonian,  unexpectedly and inexplicably commits
suicide. After swiping Nikki's diary, the surviving three conclude that
she had killed herself because she had been date-raped by a co-worker
outside the school. His name, Richard Helms, sounds like a dig at
politics.  
The diary helping, discussions among the trio reveal to them how little
they had really known their best friend Nikki, induce self-analyses.
bring to light that Emma had also been the victim of a date rape.
The most forceful member of the three, and the oldest one, is Patti,
played with unbound energy by Lili Taylor, the star of  "I Shot Andy
Warhol." She is a single mother. Her ex-boyfriend Eddie is an abusive
brute. She dresses so horribly in bulky overalls that it makes your eyes
hurt--not that her friends are fashion models either. Nor is any of the
three a looker, which fact reinforces some anti-Hollywood aspects of the
movie. (The overalls may be a sign of defiance or seeking and affirming
one's identity, like the graffiti of names in the school bathroom). 
The trio more or less affirm their feminism in long talks, unstructured
and coming to a large degree from sessions of improvisations between the
film's director-co-writer, members of the cast, and others. The ladies
avenge themselves by trashing the car of Emma's rapist, attacking (not
too violently) on the street Nikki's rapist,vandalizing Eddie's place
and pawning his TV set. 
While "The First Wives Club" is a costly Hollywood Establishment
production and "Girls Town" an independent, micro-budget film, and while
one is set in ritzy Manhattan and the other in a pronouncedly grungy,
working-class neighborhood somewhere in New York, both aim at a female
audience, respectively mature and young. And while "Girls," which is by
far the better of the two movies --early this year it won the Sundance
film festival's filmakers trophy and special jury prize-- it is not
without raising some questions.
Both "Wives" and "Girls" have weighty subjects, which the first film
chooses to treat as entertainment for the audiences, unlike the  second
which is eager, serious and heavy on naturalism, "Girls" tries to
involve the audience by having it peep and eavesdrop into the concerns
of its young women. As this is done mostly through talk, the process
exacts the price of inducing some fatigue in the public. No matter how
true to life and to the speakers, the improvised, diffuse babbling is of
uneven interest to the viewers-listeners. It can hit arid passages, lead
to rambling rather than to crystallizing specific points. (The
first-time director is a lover of documentary cinema and has a
background of music videos).
Art has to go beyond literal reproduction. It must select, prune and
structure, ideally in ways that seem to be natural. The organization of
"Girls" lacks tightness and simply does not go far enough.  
Then there's the Political Correctness factor that balances
symmetrically the black and the white girls and shows a remarkably
endearing, entirely natural non-consciousness of race. This goes beyond
the original quartet. When there are only three women left, another
black schoolmate eventually becomes a marginal confidante. There is an
additional black-and-white pair of best friends around, with whom the
threesome fights. 
"Girls" goes way beyond plain old racial harmony and tolerance. 
Blackness or whiteness matter to the friends as much as the Man in the
Moon, which means not a whit. Think about it: this wonderful
indifference is taken light-years farther than in any other movie I can
think of. It is, for me, the core of the picture, the high point I will
remember above all others.  Is this genuine?  An artifice? Wishful
thinking? I cannot tell, but no matter. This is what gives the film its
warmth and its positive thinking.
Hard to judge is Nikki's suicide because we have not enough clues. Was
it her rape that caused it? Was the rape the last straw in some problems
unknown to us?  Unexplained too is the original relationship between
Patti and Eddie, The lack of antecedents makes it confusing. Was Patti a
patsy who, peculiarly, used to put up with Eddie's brutality? Did she
become an activist-leader almost overnight, with her pent up feelings
and thoughts catalyzed by Nikki's death and the reinforcement of the
group? 
The film knows its three Rs, race, rape and rap.  Its soundtrack adds
much female singing of rap. As Jean-Luc Godard might put it in one of
his playful but not necessarily meaningful wordplays, remove the "e" and
rape becomes rap. 
In the movie's mix of weaknesses and virtues add to the latter that 
"Girls" qualifies for inclusion in the lists of BBNMM, the Bring Back
the Ninety Minute Movie Society.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 8/21/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:30
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     It's a legitimate question to ask why, in the realm of the female 
coming-of-age story, there are far more FOXFIREs than GIRLS TOWNs.  
Sadly, it doesn't take someone with a great deal of insight into 
American culture to figure out the answer.  FOXFIRE is crisply filmed, 
features three pairs of naked breasts, and has a storyline that often 
strays into the realm of the preposterous.  GIRLS TOWN, on the other 
hand, is a gritty, somewhat grainy, look at the realities of growing up 
in America.  There's nothing glamorous about the picture painted by Jim 
McKay's film -- it has the ring of truth, and that's something mass 
audiences seem progressively less interested in.
     The urban high school featured in GIRLS TOWN fits somewhere in 
between that of CLUELESS (where girls obsess about credit cards, makeup, 
and boys) and that of DANGEROUS MINDS (where girls worry about being 
gunned down).  In short, it depicts a setting that is refreshingly 
devoid of Hollywood conventions and cliches.  No one in this film gets 
shot or stabbed.  No one ODs on drugs (except one girl who commits 
suicide by swallowing a bottle of sleeping pills).  The violence, which 
is mostly off-screen, tends to be more psychological than physical.
     McKay's GIRLS TOWN proves that a film about three teenage girls 
doesn't have to be exploitative and melodramatic to be dramatically 
viable.  The movie pulls us in simply because the characters are 
interesting, and are worth spending ninety minutes with.  We regard them 
as human beings, not a writer's invention, and this illusion of reality 
is amplified by street-wise dialogue and unforced performances.  GIRLS 
TOWN also has the right look for this type of feature -- the print is 
slightly grainy and the photographic style is very basic (no oddly-
angled shots or rapid-fire edits).
     As GIRLS TOWN opens, we're introduced to four best friends:  Patti 
(Lili Taylor), a "juvenile delinquent" with a baby and an attitude; 
Angela (Bruklin Harris), a would-be poet and writer; Emma (Anna Grace), 
a "good" student bound for Columbia in the fall; and Nikki (Aunjanue 
Ellis), an even better student headed to Princeton.  With their High 
School senior year drawing to a close, the girls are thinking about the 
future, and Nikki doesn't like what she sees.  So, one evening, she 
downs a bottle of sleeping pills and leaves her friends behind feeling 
betrayed and wondering why she did it.
     As a result of Nikki's death, Patti, Angela, and Emma question 
things they formerly took for granted.  They start to fight back against 
life's injustices rather than playing the victim.  Emma avenges a date 
rape by vandalizing the car of the boy who attacked her.  Patti chooses 
an unorthodox method of getting support money from her baby's father.  
And Angela confronts her mother about taking charge of her own life.  
GIRLS TOWN is about female empowerment, but it presents its case without 
rhetoric.
     The script for this film wasn't just written, it was developed as 
part of an improvisational workshop attended by the director and actors 
(the three female leads are given co-screenwriting credit).  This is the 
kind of picture where such improvisation works well.  There's a lot of 
dialogue, and the actors' contributions make it clear that they 
understand their characters.  One scene in particular stands out -- 
early in the film, after Nikki's death, the friends gather to grieve and 
try to understand.  They don't have any answers, but a lot of pain and 
frustration emerges.  It's not the most comfortable sequence to watch, 
but it's very believable.
     Although a few of the supporting players are a little stiff, each 
member of the lead trio gives a fine performance.  While the characters 
have numerous surface differences -- intelligence, skin color, and 
temperament -- they are fundamentally alike.  They use false bravado and 
trash-talking to cover an inherent vulnerability that comes from 
uncertainty about themselves and the future.  From our fly-on-the-wall 
viewpoint, we see the girls not only as their schoolmates see them, but 
as they see each other and themselves.
     GIRLS TOWN does an excellent job of uncovering the angst, pressure, 
and doubt associated with the late teenage years.  Its a refreshing 
film, not only because it shines the spotlight exclusively on girls (all 
the male characters are incidental) but because it does so without a 
whiff of exploitation.  At one point, Patti remarks, "This ain't no 
90210," which is thankfully true.  Instead, GIRLS TOWN is as stark and 
unfeigned as anything that doesn't bear the "documentary" label.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
