Title
Review for Okno v Parizh (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WINDOW TO PARIS is a fantasy and a comedy set in St. Petersburg
(Leningrad to you hard-line Bolsheviks).  It starts in present-day
Russia and the point is made early and often that the present
conditions are the same miserable conditions as under the Communist
regime.  The boulevards and the alleyways are a cross between medieval
Europe and the sets from Blade Runner.
     The hero of the tale, played by Serguei Dontsov, is literally a
pied piper of a music teacher at the local school.  His fellow teachers
hate him because he is not more of a capitalist like them.  He objects
for example when they fill his classroom with boxes of computer
equipment that they have gotten a good deal on.  We have many lines
about how the disks hold 120MB.  His second job is tuning pianos and to
do that he carries a wrench type instrument that looks like a gun.
     He moves into an apartment where an old woman died.  He makes
instant friends with everyone in the apartment complex since they are
major alcoholics and love to have more people to drink with.  They
spend the evenings getting filthy drunk.  Although he is slim, tall,
and sort of handsome, his friends have beer bellies the size of small
whales and they are crude and unkempt.  The wives look just like the
husbands.
     After a night of heavy drinking, they discover their window to
Paris, and the fairy tale begins.  Our hero meets a pretty French girl
played by Agnes Soral.  Most of the movie happens in Paris with
periodic sojourns back to St. Petersburg.
     The movie is funny at the level of watching a local amateur
theater group.  The scenes of our hero as a pied piper were my
favorites.  The movie has a fun ending in the spirit of the rest of the
film.  Actually, the comedy was too slow and crude to keep my interest
most of the time.  What I found fascinating was how depressingly awful
the portrayal of modern day Russia was.
     Although there was nothing outstandingly good about the movie,
there was one negative standout--the camerawork.  In Camcorder 101
class we learn to go easy on zooms or your audience will hate you.
Worst of all are lots of very fast zoom outs to a wide-angle.  The
camera operator had clearly never been to any class.
     WINDOW TO PARIS runs about right at 1:31.  It is in Russian and
French with English subtitles.  The movie is rated PG-13 for a one
second nude scene and for some profanity.  It would be fine for any kid
over 10.  I do not recommend the show although it does have several
nice moments, and I award it * 1/2.

Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is a fairy tale that, despite moments of comedy, illustrates
the life in Russia now that the USSR is a thing of the past and
everyone is on his own.  The current Russia is compared with the
outside world ... and vice versa.
     In a no-frills apartment house in St. Petersburg an old woman has
recently died.  A young man who is a music teacher, Nikolai (Sergei
Dontsov), rents the room which is part of Gorokhov's (Victor Mikhailov)
apartment where he lives with his family.  One evening, after a night
of drinking, Nikolai and Gorokhov, in a "Through The Looking Glass"
scene, discover that behind a closet in Nikolai's room there is a
window which leads on to a roof.  Climbing down a fire escape ladder,
they head for the nearest bar to do more frolicking. Morning reveals to
them that they are in Paris.  The window that led to the roof, they
discover, leads to the rooftops of Paris.
     On the Parisian side, an almost similar situation is unraveling.
Here lives Nicole (Agnes Sorall) a taxidermist whose skylight faces the
same rooftops of St Petersburg.  Although Nikolai falls in love with
Nicole, the Russians are more in love with the merchandise they are now
able to get while Greed takes over.
     This could be the greatest deal if it were not that they discover
that the magic window closes every twenty years and that date is just
about to show up on the calendar.  What now?
     Director Turi Mamin takes careful aim at both sides of the newly
opened world as he shows what we already know: people are people and
that is where the world's trouble starts.  "Neighbor" means not only
someone who lives near you; it also means someone to whom you should be
kind and helpful.  Director Mamin leaves that small option up to you.
