Title
Review for Skinned Alive (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Matherly
Cast: Mary Jackson, Scott Spiegel, Susan Rothacker, Floyd Ewing Jr.,
Lester Clark, Barbara Katz-Norrod, Jon Killough, J.R. Bookwalter 
Written and Directed by: Jon Killough 
Running Time: 78 minutes 
Crawldaddy (Mary Jackson) and her children Phink (Scott Spiegel) and
Violet (Susan Rothacker) travel the highways and byways in their mobile
tannery, skinning people who get in their way for use in the products
they make.  When their van breaks down, they are invited to spend the
night with the friendly mechanic Tom (Lester Clark) and his annoying
wife Whinnie (Barbara Katz-Norrod).  Tom and Whinnie have no idea that
their guests are cold-blooded murderers, but Tom's neighbor Paul (Floyd
Ewing Jr.), an ex-policeman kicked off the force for mistakenly shooting
a Hispanic woman in a junkyard (which led to him becoming an alcoholic
and also forced his bitchy wife to divorce him), starts to suspect that
things aren't right with Crawldaddy's clan. 
Skinned Alive is an ambitious but ultimately insufficient film (that
owes more than a simple debt to The Texas Chain Saw Massacre).  There is
a pervasive feeling throughout the film that it should be more epic than
it actually turns out to be.  Most of the action is localized to the
homes of Tom and Paul and rarely ventures beyond that (save for a few
scenes that take place on rural roads and in Tom's auto shop) and very
few other people are shown except for the main characters and eventual
victims of Crawldaddy's evil.  I understand that this was a completely
low budget film and locations and extras would be hard to come by, but I
just couldn't help but feel there should have been more to the story. 
The ending is a real surprise though and was an incredibly gutsy move on
the part of Mr. Killough. 
The gore effects in the film are all well done though, and do lend a bit
of authenticity to the film.  Characters are impaled, shot, run over,
and of course, skinned (although I don't recall ever seeing anyone
actually skinned alive as the title suggests, even though it's really
not made clear whether or not the Jehovah's Witness character played by
producer J.R. Bookwalter is actually dead during his skinning scene). 
Except for a few shots of a "body" being cut into that look more like
someone cutting into a birthday cake, the majority of the remaining
special effects are decently done. 
The cast is largely made up of stock actors and crew that should be
familiar to anyone who has seen the films of J.R. Bookwalter, and the
director Jon Killough even makes an appearance as a hitchhiker who
becomes the film's first victim of Crawldaddy and her children.  The
most "famous" cast member though, is Scott Spiegel.  Spiegel is best
known for his co-writing credit on the cult favorite Evil Dead II and
more recently as the co-writer/director of From Dusk till Dawn 2 (and he
is also responsible for writing the universally panned Clint
Eastwood/Charlie Sheen effort The Rookie!).  Here Spiegel shows what he
can do as an actor (a trade which he is not unfamiliar to) and turns in
an eccentric performance as the unstable Phink.  For most of the film he
seethes and bares his teeth at the camera while hissing his lines in a
performance that would give the slimiest person in the world a run for
their money.  (Note: See J.R. Bookwalter's film The Dead Next Door for
the restrained side of Scott Speigel).  
Skinned Alive is available on VHS from www.tempevideo.com in a special
pre-release remastered version.  A soundtrack is also currently
available for the film.  A DVD special edition is planned for the summer
of 2000 featuring the shorter cut of the film with commentary by J.R.
Bookwalter, cinematographer Michael Tolochko Jr., makeup effects artist
David Lange, and Scott Speigel.  There are also plans for the DVD to
contain a deleted scene (added to the original feature to pad the film
out to a feature length running time), behind the scenes footage, and an
isolated score. 
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
