Title
Review for Scenes from the Class Struggle in Beverly Hills (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Miriam Nadel
     I went to see this SCENES FROM THE CLASS STRUGGLE IN BEVERLY HILLS for
pretty much the same reason that everyone else who's seen it did -- I thought
Paul Bartel's EATING RAOUL was hysterically funny and was looking forward to
more of the same.  Unfortunately, the operative word in the title is "scenes."
Some individual scenes are very funny but the movie as a whole would have
benefited from judicious editing -- including the removal of at least two of the
numerous subplots.
     The plot is basically one of everyone trying to sleep with everyone else.
Frank is trying to seduce the recently widowed Claire (played with  surprising
humor by Jacqueline Bisset) in order to win a bet he has made with Juan; if he
wins the bet he gets Juan for a night.  In the meantime, he's also carrying on
an affair with Claire's daughter.  Meanwhile, Juan, who happens to be Claire's
houseboy, is trying to seduce Frank's employer -- usually referred to as "the
divorcee" -- so he can win the bet and get the money he needs to pay a gambling
debt.  Now, the divorcee's ex-husband (Wallace Shawn overdoing the pathetic
whiny part in the most disappointing performance of the movie) also shows up
only to discover that the woman he had run away with is now married to his
ex-wife's brother, a playwright who gets into the act by entering the
competition for Claire.  Rounding out the cast are a diet doctor (played by
Bartel), the divorcee's crippled son who has the hots for Claire's daughter but
is willing to settle for his new aunt, an Aztec housekeeper, with a penchant
for dire predictions involving jaguars tearing people apart, and the ghost of
Claire's husband who is trying to keep his marriage alive, even if he isn't.  
     Now this has a fair amount of potential for comedy.  However, Bartel seems
to have had trouble remembering that comedy is most effective when it is
unpredictable.  He's certainly capable of great moments -- the opening sequence
is one of the funniest I've ever seen -- but the middle of the movie lapses into
predictable "musical bedrooms" and, with one exception, the ending is obvious.
     Overall I'd give it 2 stars.  Wait for a bargain matinee or, even better,
a videotape so you can fast-forward over the parts which plod.
Miriam Nadel
mhnadel@gryphon.COM !gryphon!mhnadel   nadel@aspen.aero.org
