Title
Review for Longtime Companion (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  The tragic effect of AIDS on the gay
     community is movingly brought to the screen.  This American
     Playhouse production may be the most adult and substantial
     film released this summer, albeit one of the least expensive.
     Rating: high +1.
     Some of the best films being shown in theaters are actually made for
television.  They are productions for PBS's "American Playhouse" that get
their initial release in movie theaters before getting shown on public
television.  It is a positive-sum strategy since a theatrical release will
help pay for the film.  Since the film is already made for another venue the
investment to get it into the theaters is relatively meager.  And it is nice
to see a film a little more substantial than BACK TO THE FUTURE III or FIRE
BIRDS playing on the wide screen.
     Norman Rene directed Craig Lucas's screenplay.  The subject is a group
of gay friends living on Fire Island and in Manhattan and how AIDS changed
their lives.  They go from an apparently carefree existence in the early
Eighties through somber and often frightening changes as the disease claims
victims from among their numbers.  The behaviors we see are very much
universal to epidemics and plagues.  Initially the diseases are taken with
concern but also with an occasional flippant optimism.  We see weird
explanations of what the epidemic "really is."  Paranoia poisons the former
carefree friendships.  All the while the disease is taking its toll in the
decreasing circle of friends.
     LONGTIME COMPANION has too many major characters to keep them all
straight (no pun intended), particularly because they all look like
wholesome, male WASPs, but the center of the group is David, played by Bruce
Davison.  Davison's acting goes unnoticed until his character is placed
under a severe emotional strain.  Then Davison does some excellent acting
that must be about the best he has ever done.  Also notable is Mary-Louise
Parker as a close (heterosexual) friend.
     A couple of touches in the script are worth mentioning.  There is a
reference in the 1982 sequence to William Hurt playing a gay character.  I
believe they are alluding to Hurt's performance in the 1985 KISS OF THE
SPIDER WOMAN.  Also, there are about ten dated sequences and all but the
last four take place on Fridays.  That seems too many for coincidence, yet
none of the last four is a Friday.  (I am probably the only one who notices
these things.)
     LONGTIME COMPANION is not great.  I would give it a high +1 on the -4
to +4 scale.  But at a reported $1.5 million in production cost and with a
timely subject, this film is probably a very good choice for a theatrical
release.

Author
Rodney Hoffman 
     Monday night I attended the benefit premiere of the new film LONGTIME
COMPANION.  You may have read about it in the ADVOCATE, the Los Angeles Times
or elsewhere.  It's the one that follows a small group of friends from 1981 to
1989, as they learn of and battle AIDS.
     From the promotional material:  "LONGTIME COMPANION is a tale of courage
and personal heroics; a chronicle of people who face an unknown and frightening
opponent with love, hope and friendship.  The film is the fictional story of a
small circle of friends and changes in their world beginning from that fateful
day in 1981 when the first New York Times article noted the outbreak of a 'rare
cancer' in the gay community, known today as AIDS."  (Directed by Norman Rene,
written by Craig Lucas, starring Bruce Davison and others, produced by Stan
Wlodkowski and Lindsay Law, distributed by Samuel Goldwyn Co.)
     This is an important and difficult movie -- the first big-screen attempt
to tell the story we all know.  It is a true-to-life, unsparing chronicle of a
generation of gay men.  There's a lot there: Gay Men's Health Crisis, ACT UP,
Louise Hay, hospitals, home care, friendship, love, anger, despair, and the
full panoply of awful AIDS acronyms -- PCP, KS, Toxo, CMV, HIV, ....
     It's not fully representative; how could it be?  It does an outstanding
job of portraying what has happened in the lives of many gay white men in the
last decade -- those of us who "grew up" (metaphorically speaking) in the wild,
exhilarating 70s only to crash into AIDS in the 80s.
     Despite the subject matter, there are many funny moments.  Some of them
are brief lines, often alluding to some part of gay life.
     And the final scene, which hit me unawares, is just right.  It gave me
chills.
     I can't imagine how this movie will fare at the box office outside of the
gay community, although anyone concerned about the world around us should see
this film if only to learn about a story that's been largely ignored except for
sensationalized accounts.
     If you care about honest media treatment for lesbians and gays, if you are
gay and you want to see all of our other stories equally well covered, support
this one!
