Title
Review for Waterboy, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Susan Granger
Adam Sandler summarized this and his whole string of
lightweight movies ("The Wedding Singer," "Billy Madison," "Happy
Gilmore") when he said, "We're just having fun, and I hope everyone
has fun right along with us." And there's something funny and
endearing about Adam Sandler, even if his moronic movies are simply
variations on each other and he always plays the nerdy, hapless
hero. This time, he's a seemingly dim-witted, socially inept 31
year-old from the swamps of Louisiana who works as a lowly water boy,
although he loves dispensing H2O to dehydrated athletes and truly
believes that it's life's greatest calling. His over-protective
mother, Kathy Bates, has home-schooled him in the bayou, so his only
contact with his peers is his job, where the jocks rib him
relentlessly and his coach won't let him fight back. Then, one day, he
gets a new coach, Henry Winkler, who consults "The Idiot's Guide to
Coaching." After years of holding in his fury, Sandler's finally
allowed to release his pent-up Cajun rage, and he's suddenly
transformed into the most devastating tackle on the team. Problem is:
he has to go to college at the same time - behind his mother's
back. And Kathy Bates is hilarious, cookin' snakes 'n' biscuits 'n'
'gators, shootin' off her mouth, and muggin' in front of the TV
cameras at a game. Fairuza Balk is amusing, too, as his wacko,
knife-wielding, jailbird girl-friend. Directed by Frank Coraci,
written by Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler, the comedy is primarily
visual, and the zaniest bits are often at the edge of the main action
- like the depressed, unkempt, bourbon-drinking cheerleaders on the
loser football team. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Waterboy" is a silly, fumbling 3, delivering a bucketful of laughs.

Author
Matt Williams
After his attempt to broaden his appeal with The Wedding Singer, Adam
Sandler returns back to familiar ground in The Waterboy.  It may not be
terribly innovative, but Sandler's in peak form, and he delivers a
humorous (if predictable) comedy.
This time, Sandler stars as Bobby Boucher, a dimwitted Cajun man who
makes his living as the waterboy for a local college football team.
Water is his life, and though socially inept, he makes water-serving an
exquisite art form.  However, it's not one appreciated by the team,
which torments and picks on Bobby incessantly...until one day Coach Red
Beaulieu (Jerry Reed) finally fires him.
Not to fear, however, for Bobby soon finds work down at South Central
Louisiana State University, where the country's worst collegiate
football team plays.  Coach Klein (Henry Winkler), a bit of a loser in
his own right, gives Bobby a chance as waterboy.  However, when one day
Bobby loses his temper on the field, a hidden talent for sacking
emerges. Coach Klein immediately recruits Bobby to play linebacker...but
there's one problem:  Bobby's mama (Kathy Bates).
You see, Bobby still lives with Mama, and she's the disapproving sort.
She doesn't want Bobby to get hurt, either playing football, or even
mingling with girls (such as the white trash Vicki Vallencourt (Fairuza
Balk)).  After 31 years, will Bobby get the backbone to stand up to his
mama? (Or at least sneak around behind her back?) Hmmm...would there be
a movie otherwise?
To those who have followed Sandler's career, the character of Bobby
Boucher is a familiar one.  The character seems like an amalgam of
Canteen Boy, Cajun Man and Happy Gilmore.  Yet, this is obviously
Sandler in his element.  He's played this character so many times before
that he does play it well.
The Waterboy is extremely formulaic...but it's also funny.  If you've
seen one sports movie, you know exactly where The Waterboy is going. But
The Waterboy isn't about plot...it's about setting up the quick laugh,
and delivering it home.
At times, watching The Waterboy is like watching one of those NFL
sacking videos (you know, like The NFL's Greatest
Career-Ending-Injuries). It's a little painful, but disturbingly
humorous.
There are no epic moments that will go down in comedy history here. But
there's enough funny stuff to keep you amused throughout the movie, and
for a little while thereafter.  What more do you want from an Adam
Sandler film?
The Waterboy is the epitome of the "Adam Sandler" movie, and as that
it's very unlikely to win any converts.  If you love Adam Sandler,
chances are you'll love this movie.  If you can't stand him, this film
won't change your mind...you'd best check the other theaters in your
local megaplex.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Frank Coraci
Cast:  Adam Sandler, Fairuza Balk, Kathy Bates, Henry Winkler
Screenplay:  Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler
Producers:  Jack Giarraputo, Robert Simonds
Runtime:  
US Distribution:  Beuna Vista/Touchstone
Rated PG-13:  language, crude sexual humor
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
There are critics out there who want you to believe that Adam Sandler
is the devil.  I, myself, must disagree, because he makes me laugh.  In
fact, he makes me laugh so hard that I doubt I'll ever dislike one of
his films.  The guy is so funny.  He also has range (another point that
could probably be heavily debated), and isn't unbearable when he's
forced to do a little bit of acting.  I really noticed him in Happy
Gilmore (Sandler plays rage so well), and he was slightly more serious
in The Wedding Singer.  It seems now that he can only get better.
And here comes The Waterboy, a movie guaranteed to make a killing at
the box office.  It's a profoundly dumb film, and probably wouldn't be
much without Sandler, but he's in it nonetheless.  I am of the opinion
that Sandler can make any film funny.  He'd be funny in a documentary,
or in an infomercial, or in a sappy romance with bad dialogue.  For
those of you who hate Adam Sandler, I offer a half-apology for my
gushing.  Actually, I think you should wake up and realize that here we
have one of the most talented comedians ever to utilize a silly voice on
the big screen.
The Waterboy, directed by Frank Coraci and written by Sandler and Tim
Herlihy, is not a wealth of insight into the sports world, but it offers
a little bit of intelligent satire and a whole lot of laughs.  Sandler
plays Bobby Boucher, a social moron who works as a waterboy for a
college team.  Everyone hates him, and his only friend is his Mamma
(Kathy Bates).  It's inevitable that the evil coach Beaulieu (Jerry
Reed) fires him, and that he gets a job as the waterboy of a lousy
college team.
The lousy team makes fun of him, too, until he loses his temper one day
and tackles one of the guys.  But Bobby doesn't just tackle him -- the
guy gets laid out, and so Coach Klein (Henry Winkler) begs Bobby to play
for the team.  Despite his Mamma's warnings, Bobby plays for the team. 
>From there, the picture is pure formula -- Bobby helps the team win, his
Mamma gives him a guilt trip, the other team tries to thwart him, etc.
-- but at least we're never expected to take all of this seriously.
The real problem with an Adam Sandler movie is that there's not much to
look at besides Adam Sandler.  In this case, the supporting cast holds
up pretty well -- Bates is good as Mamma, though her role is perhaps a
bit larger than I would have liked.  Winkler is also pretty funny, and
Fairuza Balk, who plays Bobby's love interest, is interesting to watch. 
But Sandler is the star, and the film is really pretty dull when he's
not doing his dopey-eyed silly-voiced routine.  
I prefer Sandler when he's in his violent mode -- as he was in Happy
Gilmore -- but he's still a pleasure to watch in The Waterboy.  I think
it's a good idea to let Sandler write his own characters, because he
knows his capabilities and what makes people laugh.  Not everything hits
the mark -- a few of the running jokes fall flat, and the story, as I
said, is little more than glorified nonsense.  Still, if an evening of
laughs is all you want, then look no further than The Waterboy.  If
you're the type who thinks Adam Sandler is the devil, I'm more inclined
to send you my condolences. You're missing out on the early years of a
funny guy who will be around for a long time to come.

Author
Michael Dequina
The premise is as absurd as one would expect from an Adam Sandler vehicle:
Bobby Boucher (Sandler), a softspoken 31-year-old college football
waterboy, becomes a gridiron star himself as a lean, mean tackling machine.
 However, what makes this film more tolerable than most of Sandler's
previous work is that his character isn't such a prick.  Bobby is nice, if
more than a little naive, guy who, above all else, loves his domineering
mother (Kathy Bates, who should do more comedy), with whom he still lives
in a backwoods cabin.
That said, _The_Waterboy_ is the definition of an "average" film--a
hit-and-miss affair that in neither bad nor especially good.  For every
chuckle-worthy gag (Bobby's mother's taste for, to put it lightly, exotic
cuisine), there's another that never gets off the ground (a perpetually
drunk cheerleading squad).  The familiar sports movie formula (a big,
climactic game) gets a workout here, but it does have some charm in this
context.  And, of course, there's Sandler's mugging, which can be either
amusing or flat-out annoying.  In short, _The_Waterboy_ exactly what the
trailers and TV commercials advertise.  Based on those, you should know
whether or not this film's your cup of tea (or, rather, H2O).
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Jason Wallis
Starring Adam Sandler, Fairuza Balk, Kathy Bates, Henry Winkler, Jerry
Reed, Blake Clark and Larry Gilliard, Jr. 
It's amazing how a comedian can have the some of the funniest stand-up
around but completely fall flat in the movies. Take Adam Sandler. On the
basis of his first two CDs ("They're All Gonna Laugh at You!" and "What the
Hell Happened to Me?"), he's the best thing to hit comedy since Robin
Williams. But when you put him in front of a camera, it just isn't the
same. I kind of enjoyed Happy Gilmore and thought that it warranted a
marginal recommendation, but his latest film, The Waterboy is about as
funny as a root canal. 
Seriously, I'm willing to wager than there were more laughs in Saving
Private Ryan than there are here. In fact, I found this movie to be more
depressing than comedic. The first half hour generated not one smile in me,
with it's scenes of emotional abuse towards Adam's character of Bobby
Boucher not only by the cruel football players, but also by his very
disturbed mother (Kathy Bates - what is the world coming to?). Granted,
after the film gets rolling, there are a few mild chuckles throughout (I'm
even willing to admit that it actually had me laughing once or twice), but
not nearly enough to sustain The Waterboy for it's nearly hour and a half
running time. 
You're all familiar with the plot because you've seen it at least a million
times before; everyone picks on the hero until he shows a hidden talent and
leads the underdog team to victory over the champions, in the process not
only winning the respect of his teammates but also getting the woman he
loves. And believe me, I'm not giving anything away by saying that
Sandler's team wins. If you would actually feel any degree of suspense
watching this movie, then God be with you. 
The only things that keep this bomb from getting the big banana are the
winning performances from Henry Winkler as the insecure coach and the
severely underrated Fairuza Balk as Bobby's love interest. I mean, they
should be lending their talents to some loftier purpose, but they do
extremely well with what they are given here. Kudos to both of them. 
My advice to Adam is to try and follow in the footsteps of veteran
comedians like Williams and Steve Martin, who made a very smooth and
successful transition from stage to screen. Rely more on actual comedy
rather than strange voices and rude noises to make people laugh. Or maybe
even show what dramatic talent he might have, like Jim Carrey did with the
recent Truman Show. With the obvious and considerable talent that he
possesses, he just can't keep going on like this. 
See all of Jason's reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Scott Renshaw
     So much for Adam Sandler, "normal" guy.  In THE WEDDING SINGER, it
looked as though Sandler were trying to shrug off the infantile,
silly-voiced persona he took from "Saturday Night Live" to BILLY MADISON
and HAPPY GILMORE.  While still fairly silly in its own way, THE WEDDING
SINGER was a somewhat more mature, somewhat more clever vehicle for
Sandler, and his first attempt at actual screen acting.  In THE WATERBOY,
Sandler is once again in infantile, silly-voiced rare form, the kind of
character that strikes unholy terror in a critic's heart.
     It would be a gross exaggeration to call THE WATERBOY a smart film,
but it's funny in ways I didn't quite expect.  Sandler plays a 31-year-old
simpleton bayou boy named Bobby Boucher who still lives with his
domineering Mama (Kathy Bates) and has been the University of Louisiana's
water boy for 18 years.  When U. of L.'s nasty Coach Beaulieu (Jerry Reed)
finally fires Bobby, the hydrophilic lad hooks up with the hapless South
Central Louisiana State University Mud Dogs, led by jittery Coach Klein.
Coach Klein inadvertently unleashes Bobby's inner linebacker when he
encourages Bobby to defend himself against the taunting of team members,
discovering in the process one of the greatest pass rushers in college
football history.  Thus are the Mud Dogs on their way to their greatest
season -- and, naturally, a showdown with the University of Louisiana --
provided they can keep over-protective Mama from finding out her baby boy
is playing "the foosball."
     The opening minutes of THE WATERBOY don't hold out much hope for
anything beyond 12-year-old comic sensibilities.  Sight gags predominate,
from a football hitting Bobby in the head, to pratfalls over a water
cooler, to Sandler motoring about on a riding lawn mower.  Yawn-inspiring
running jokes involve a perpetually drunken cheerleading squad, a pair of
dim-witted die-hard fans (Clint Howard and Allen Covert), and an assistant
coach (Blake Clark) who speaks in an incomprehensible accent.  A few
giggles leak out of the predictabe sophomorism, while Sandler's
stuttering, soft-spoken variation on Cajun Man threatens to wear out his
welcome very early on.
     Then something strange happens some time after the fourth or fifth
reference to Bobby's backwater, snake-and-squirrel-eating background.  The
dialogue starts getting sharper, including Bobby's bizarre cover story to
Mama for his football-related bruises.  Sandler starts getting more
endearingly innocent rather than acting like an oblivious moron.  And the
sight gags start getting funnier, perhaps as much related to a build-up of
good will as to any change in approach.  The incongruous presence of Bates
and Winker (the latter sporting decidedly un-Fonzie-esque love handles)
certainly helps, but there's something about the writing in THE WATERBOY
that kept sneaking up on me, delivering a left-field laugh at times when I
was expecting an obvious bit of slapstick idiocy.
     Many people probably associate Sandler with moron comedy in the
Ernest/Pauly Shore/Carrot Top vein, perhaps without having seen any of his
films.  He and frequent writing partner Tim Herlihy are considerably more
sly than that.  They've learned a few lessons in grown-up comedy from THE
WEDDING SINGER, and bring that sensibility to the lower common denominator
audience targeted with THE WATERBOY.  They certainly miss the target
plenty of times -- Rob Schneider's extended cameo gets more insufferable
every time he appears -- but they also don't fire at the same stupid
target over and over again.  Between the lethargic opening and the
who-cares romance between Sandler and bad girl Fairuza Balk, THE WATERBOY
offers goofy entertainment.  It appears Sandler doesn't have to be
"normal" to be funny.

Author
Jamie Peck
THE WATERBOY
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
So if these raucous antics will remind audiences of vintage Sandler, 
it's a pity that the star himself doesn't make it to the endzone. The 
crude comic is at his best when he's rough and abrasive, qualities that 
made his turn in "Gilmore" a vulgar delight; his "Waterboy" role, a 
bayou man-child named Bobby Boucher and pronounced Bobby Boo_shay_, is 
naive, soft-spoken and genuinely sweet. What's worse, the movie can't 
seem to make up its mind whether he should be laughed at or felt sorry 
for. Bobby's not the kind of character you'd care to kick while he's 
down. 
Thank goodness for some genuinely funny supporting actors, or "The 
Waterboy" would have drowned fast. Kathy Bates, a farce MVP based on her 
stellar work here, is a delight as Bobby's no-nonsense mama, whether 
she's whipping up an extravagant snake dinner (complete with an apple in 
its mouth) or constantly referring to all influences in the world 
outside their swamp-shack home as "the debil" - even Dick Clark. Henry 
Winkler also racks up a hefty laugh quotient as the coach of the Mud 
Dogs, a low-rent college football team on a seemingly non-stop losing 
streak. 
Coach recruits Bobby as the Dogs' "water distribution engineer" after 
he's fired from doing the same job for the University of Louisiana's 
oft-winning Cougars. It is then when Bobby reveals a bang-up talent for 
tackling; imagining his opponents are the assorted hecklers and jerks 
who have taunted him all his life is all he needs to flaunt his on-field 
prowess. The plot mechanics are painfully obvious from there, but 
Sandler and Tim Herlihy's screenplay sometimes coats them with a 
deliciously naughty sheen. What they insert into the climactic, 
slow-motion victory montage is a base keeper. It has to do with pierced 
nipples. 
The one-joke "Waterboy" almost falters under the same sloppy sentiment 
that crippled "The Wedding Singer," but the amusing combination of 
throwaway lines and outlandish sight gags may prove that Sandler's more 
clever than his creative detractors might claim. That "Happy Gilmore" 
and this diversion are career highs in a career that also lays claim to 
the dreadful "Billy Madison" and "Airheads" might not be saying much, 
but maybe it's not without payoff to hope that Sandler ventures back to 
the recreational arena for his next funny flick. Badminton, anyone?

Author
James Brundage
There's a reason why there are more romantic comedies than slapstick movies:
they cost less, are easier to make, and are a more sound investment. After
all, we all want to fall in love, and what better place to do so that at the
movies? In nearly makes me shudder at the number of relationships that were
broken up last year by Adam Sandler's previous attempt at humor The Wedding
Singer, an exercise not in creative humor but uninspired dryness.
So he tried to make people fall in love; who can blame him? Well, I can,
but, as a critic, I have to not hold a grudge, or an opinion going in, or
any hold on reality inside of the theater because otherwise I'd have gone
insane long ago. So what has Sandler done now? He has atoned for his sins.
The Wedding Singer, well beyond sin and into blasphemy, which made me laugh
once, was perfectly counterbalanced by the slapstick comedy The Waterboy,
about a slow waterboy who decides to take his aggression out on the football
field. If it were a sports movie, it would be trite, but instead it is a
comedy, and we get to all enjoy ourselves.
At this point The Waterboy has a special place in my heart. Only a few
movies have tried to kill me with unexpected laughs. There's Something About
Mary almost did it with a kernel of popcorn that went down the wrong tube at
an unexpected second and this comedy, which I will never drink soda during
again. Make more like it Adam: your sins have been forgiven.

Author
John Carroll
Jim Carrey was regarded as the funniest man in Hollywood. Then, things started
to change. He started doing serious comedy, then moved onto drama. Who was the
torch passed down to? Adam Sandler. But, people thought he might change after
the success of his "normal" comedy, The Wedding Singer, a clever film that did
not rely on Sandler's goofball antics. But, diehard Sandler fans should not
fear, because Adam is back with a vengeance in The Waterboy, a film that gives
us some great laughs, but not consistently.
Adam Sandler is a goofball. He made us roll in the aisles in Happy Gilmore then
progressed to hilariously mocking the 80s in The Wedding Singer. In The
Waterboy, he's back to his Gilmoreish antics. His character, Bobby Boucher is
the waterboy for the local football team, but eventually gets fired. He is a
loser. He watches wrestling, lives with his mom and has he voice of a
twelve-year-old. This character is pure Sandler. Unfortunately, Sandler is not
that good. In the beginning, hearing his voice and seeing his tackles are
hilarious. But, a half-hour into the film, it gets boring. I thought this film
was gonna bomb at that point, but luckily, Sandler's supporting cast delivers
in a big way.
Henry Winkler, The Fonz, is in The Waterboy? I was asking the same question,
but he turns out to have the best performance in the whole film. I thought they
would try to throw in some jokes from Happy Days or do something to make
Winkler somewhat like The Fonz, but he's not. And the audience benefits. He
sets up- and knocks down- a majority of the jokes in the film and makes up for
a mediocre performance by Adam Sandler. Winkler plays the coach of another
local football team, which is much worse then the team Boucher (Sandler)
previously worked for. He hires Sandler to be the waterboy, and then finds out
Boucher's rage on the field. Winkler delivers a great performance, and shines
on the screen every time he appears.
Kathy Bates also helps the cause by making up for Sandler's lacking
performance. She is clever and funny as Mrs. Boucher, Bobby's overprotective
mother. Whether she is try to keep the girls away from her son, or make sure he
is not playing football, Bates delivers in The Waterboy and helps make up for
Sandler's average performance.
The plot is nothing extraordinary. It moves along at a decent pace, although
the film tends to get boring near the last quarter of it. Despite the short
time of the film, it still is too long, because the script is extremely
underwritten. They do not even attempt to write Sandler's character anything
clever. They basically just have Sandler making a fool of himself in an attempt
to get laughs. Sometimes he does, sometimes he doesn't.
The rest of the cast is ordinary. Besides the performances of Winkler and
Bates, nothing else is above average. This keeps the film locked down to
mediocre status. After seeing The Wedding Singer, I expected Sandler to be
great in this film. I was glad to see his return to goofball comedy, but it was
not done right. They should have written his character more and given him some
jokes, not just stunt jokes.
Overall, The Waterboy is a funny movie. It's just not consistent. For fifteen
minutes of the film you may be on the floor laughing and the other you may be
wondering what they're talking about. Either way, if you are looking for a good
laugh, check this film out. It may not be consistent, but it is Adam Sandler
and The Fonz, so just seeing that is worth the price of the rental.
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler
Starring: Adam Sandler, Henry Winkler, Kathy Bates, Fairuza Balk
Ingredients: 31-year-old Louisiana bayou mama's boy, football 
Synopsis: 
In HAPPY GILMORE (1996) written by Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler, Adam
Sandler plays a loser raised by his loving grandmother, who learns to
channel his aggression into golfing prowess, and becomes an instant
sensation. The subplot involved a love interest and a big important
game. 
In THE WATERBOY (1998) written by Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler, Adam
Sandler plays a loser named Bobby, raised by his loving mother, who
learns to channel his aggression into football prowess, and becomes an
instant sensation. The subplot involved a love interest and a big
important game.
Opinion: 
Call it the Forrest Gump factor. Underdog Bobby Boucher has a
prounounced southern accent and the formidable intelligence quotient of
a box turtle, but he also possesses a kind heart and a steadfast
devotion to Mama (Kathy Bates, parodying a hillbilly). Of course, Bobby
the Kindhearted makes it to the big time, has a crisis of confidence,
and plays a high stakes finale. Sure, THE WATERBOY is as original as
ROCKY V, and annoyingly predictable, but we're suckers when it comes to
rooting for the underdog till we get sick of the sequels.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: November 6, 1998
Starring: Adam Sandler, Henry Winkler, Fairuza Balk, Kathy Bates, Jerry
Reed, Blake Clark, Larry Gilliard Jr.
Directed by: Frank Coraci
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (language, some crude sexual humor) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/waterboy.htm
You might argue that MAJOR LEAGUE started it this one, back in 1989,
spawning the misfit sports genre. The formula isn't unheard of: a bunch
of unlikelies suddenly find themselves in the middle of the league
championship and the media spotlight for the first time in an insanely
long amount of time. Or perhaps you'd argue that the real fuel for this
movie came from 1994's FORREST GUMP, a classic pearl of a movie about
those with less-than-average IQs finding the real hero inside of
themselves. But maybe you'd most like to argue that Adam Sandler - of
all people - could never do justice to either. 
You'd be right on all three accounts, because the latest from the people
that brought you THE WEDDING SINGER is a step down for Sandler and
company. Although the comic himself undoubtedly finds his newer role
more comfortable, he sacrifices a lot of charm and uniqueness simply to
play the buffoon. The producers won't mind - Sandler is in a league of
comics that can draw a sufficient box office minimum and often do more -
but Sandler himself is lacking the maturity that is necessary for him to
have an extended career in Hollywood. 
The cast is one big stereotype dictionary, and a lot of the supporting
roles add to the idiot humor. Sandler himself is the Forrest Gump town
idiot and experienced waterboy named Bobby Boucher. At 32 years old,
however, he's finding it hard to keep a job, and eventually winds up at
the degenerate South Central Lousiana State University. There, a
football coach named Klein (Henry Winkler) recognizes his newfound
waterboy as a tackling savant and immediately recruits him to play
linebacker. Although against his overprotective mother (Kathy Bates)'s
wishes, he's cheered on by his girlfriend Vicki (Fairuza Balk) and the
rest of the university as he leads the team to the conference
championship. 
Anything on the character side of this movie is taken straight from
FORREST GUMP - be it Bobby's mother, his girlfriend, or the friend in
Coach Klein. And everything else, on the football side, is MAJOR LEAGUE
redone for gridiron glory - the screwloose announcer, the drunken
cheerleading squad, and the two fans sitting in the bleachers. Neither
works particularly well in a Sandler movie - the humor isn't intelligent
enough for that - but between the two, enough of the movie manages to
come out above water. In all, there's a certain bottom line to Sandler
movies: if you've been out of college for a good while, you're never
going to get it. But for the adolescents, it's their night away from the
folks, and THE WATERBOY is worth the bucket of popcorn.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Waterboy (1998)
Adam Sandler, Kathy Bates, Henry Winkler, Fairuza Balk, Jerry Reed, Larry 
Gilliard Jr., Blake Clark, Peter Dante, Jonathan Loughran, Al Whiting, 
Clint Howard, Allen Covert, Rob Schneider, Todd Holland. Produced by 
Robert Simonds and Jack Giarraputo. Written by Tim Herlihy and Adam 
Sandler. Directed by Frank Coraci. 
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Call it "Happy Gilmore Meets the Bad News Bears" or "Billy Madison Opens 
Up a Big Ole Can of Whup Ass." Either way, you get the idea: Adam Sandler 
is back and he's up to his old tricks again, with yet another broad 
comedy starring a culturally-arrested adult with violent tendencies. Hard-
core Sandler fans will cheer his antics and the up-with-people storyline, 
while everyone else will wonder why he keeps cranking out variations of 
the same movie.
Now Adam Sandler is no dummy (though he plays one onscreen) and he knows 
what elements are required to satisfy the target audience for a film like 
this. His story introduces a lovable loser, simple-minded Cajun Mama's 
boy, Bobby Boucher. Athletes love picking on the childlike waterboy until 
they discover his formidable skills as a tackle. Everybody loves an 
underdog, so the tale pits Bobby and a sad-sack football team with a 
neurotic coach against a bunch of overgrown, self-satisfied bullies, led 
by former "Smokey and The Bandit" second banana Jerry Reed. As if that 
wasn't enough, Sandler further loads the deck by making Bobby's home life 
equally oppressive, with the kid's ferociously smothering mother (Kathy 
Bates) deeming everything from young ladies to Dick Clark as tools of the 
devil. 
Add a sexy girl (Fairuza Balk), a Nick-At-Night co-star (Henry Winkler, 
leaving the Fonz behind to play a timid coach), loads of cameos by 
celebrities playing themselves (Lee Corso, Bill Cowher, Dan Fouts, Chris 
Fowler, Jimmy Johnson, Brent Musburger, Dan Patrick, Lynn Swann and 
Lawrence Taylor), the requisite surprise appearance from a "Saturday 
Night Live" alumnus (Rob Schneider), a feel-good plot, plus well-staged 
slapstick out the wahzoo, and you've got yourself a surefire moneymaker. 
The only thing missing is even the vaguest hint of an original idea.
The explanation for Sandler's artistic rut may lie with his creative team.
 One of the film's producers is Jack Giarraputo, a college buddy of 
Sandler's. "Waterboy" director Frank Coraci was another college pal, and 
Sandler co-wrote the story with former college roomie Tim Herlihy. 
Sandler states that the group, also responsible for three of his other 
films, creates a comfortable environment, explaining "I like working with 
people I've seen in just a towel."
That's a good line, and "The Waterboy" has quite a few genuinely funny 
moments. The slapstick works more often than not, there are some great 
sight gags, and a number of strong one-liners (one crack-related joke 
works on two levels, due to the recent headline-making substance abuse 
problems of the man who delivers the line). But despite the laughs, this 
is a tired production. There is nothing wrong with low-brow humor, but 
Sandler and his frat-house friends have done the infant-in-an-adult-body 
shtick to death. To paraphrase Danny Glover (from all four "Lethal 
Weapon" movies), aren't they getting too old for this shit?
A film like this wouldn't be quite as frustrating were it not for 
Sandler's breakthrough performance in "The Wedding Singer." In that hit 
comedy, Sandler proved he could charm a wide audience, hold his own as a 
romantic lead and even play an actual adult, all without sacrificing his 
trademark style. After enjoying his winning turn in "The Wedding Singer," 
it's hard to watch him climb back into the playpen.
The cast of "The Waterboy" is varied, to say the least. Kathy Bates has a 
whale of a good time playing Bobby's Louisiana swamp mama and her 
performance, cartoonish as it may be, is one you won't soon forget. As a 
dangerous young woman smitten with Bobby, Fairuza Balk is terrific, 
projecting confidence, charisma and an edgy trailer-park sexuality. Henry 
Winkler has a certain odd charm as Bobby's whipped-puppy mentor, while 
Jerry Reed haplessly blusters as the chief villain of the movie. 
As is his norm, Sandler peppers the story with some really strange minor 
players. Clint Howard, Opie's little brother, leaves a greasy impression 
as a fanatical redneck football fan, and Rob Schneider somehow manages to 
be filthy and smarmy simultaneously as a hillbilly booster. Other 
eccentrics include Robert Kokol as a Kentucky-Fried windbag professor and 
Blake Clark as assistant coach Farmer Fran, whose incomprehensible Cajun 
mutterings is a running gag that might have been funny, had we not seen 
the same joke 24 years ago in "Blazing Saddles."
But, of course, that brings us back to "The Waterboy's" central problem. 
We've seen this all before, at least twice by Sandler and his pals, and 
countless times by other "Saturday Night Live" graduates. Speaking of 
graduating, perhaps it's time for Adam Sandler to graduate; from the 
comforting sameness of his college roomie production team and from 
reworking the same movie over and over. Hopefully Sandler will look at 
"The Wedding Singer" as one small step, and his next movie as one giant 
leap to a new level of more sophisticated comedic filmmaking.

Author
Homer Yen
Actually, if you've seen any of Adam Sandler's films, you know that
you can expect a film that is likably dim-witted.  Sandler was affable
in his last film, theWedding Singer.  Here as the meek Bobby Boucher,
he hasn't lost any of his charm as a doofus whose greatest desire is
to become a respected water distribution engineer for the local
college football team.  He talks about PH levels, temperature, purity
and other snippets that could make him the top sales person for Evian.
 But his doltish demeanor doesn't wash well with the players.  They
constantly make fun of him, and he is eventually fired by the
mean-spirited coach (Jerry Reed).
He eventually finds work at another local college, whose football
team, the Mud Dogs, is the laughing stock of the region.  Those
players also make fun of Boucher, but here the coach (an affable Henry
Winkler) tells him to stick up for himself.  During a scrimmage play
when the school's quarterback pushes Boucher too far, he begins to
visualize all of the people that have ever been mean to him and then
Presto - he charges him with the fury of a raging bull and levels him
flat on his back.  This act of tackling brilliance catches the coach's
eye, and he begs Boucher to become the new linebacker for the team. 
But there are lots of obstacles.   Boucher has never played football. 
He'll have trouble in a college atmosphere because he was
home-schooled (he declares in animal biology class that alligators are
not aggressive because of an enlarged medulla oblongata, but that they
are ornery because they have lots of teeth and no toothbrush.'). 
He'll need to win the respect of his team.  Finally, his eccentric
mother (Kathy Bates) opposes her son playing foozball'.   What's a
dim-witted doofus to do?  Well, you can expect Boucher to make enough
of an impact to guarantee them a spot in the highly touted Bourbon
Bowl where Boucher will have the chance to face the football team and
the mean-spirited coach that made his life Hell.
Admittedly, there were several parts of the movie that I found fairly
funny, and the crowd seemed to enjoy the humor of it all as well. 
Sandler has a boyishness that is endearing and even sympathetic.  The
movie gave us enough to keep us involved for the 90-minute duration,
and I liked this movie a little bit better than The Wedding Singer
because there was more of a story to tell and more things to laugh at.
Still, the film itself is only about as good as the Mud Dogs, whose
current losing streak of 41 straight games is enough to make you
wonder if one man can change the fortunes of a whole team. Sandler
gives it the old college try.


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Another comedy pic starring the ever-loving, dumbass character that Adam
Sandler's been portraying ever since he ended his days as a regular cast
member of TV's "Saturday Night Live".
PLOT:
An ignorant football waterboy from the Bayou suddenly discovers a unique
talent for crunch-tackling the opposition, and against the orders of his
overly-protective mother, joins the worst team in the league.
CRITIQUE:
Uninspired, one-joke film gathers very little in momentum, is forgiven for
its obviously standard plot, but not for its lack of constant humor or
originality. This Cajun movie can't even hold a candle next to Sandler's
best comedy up to date, HAPPY GILMORE (8/10). That movie was filled with
jokes left and right, enjoyable characters all around, and many fresh ideas.
Sandler is okay in this one, and does receive a wonderful supporting
performance from Kathy Bates, in a role that seems to have been inspired by
Elvis and his momma, but overall, this flick offers very few chuckles, many
repeat gags, and Henry Winkler. I love "stupid comedies" as much as the next
guy, but this Bourbon-bred story just doesn't have enough mustard to
complete the sandwich. Mind you, if you're really in the mood for some fun,
not-to-be-taken-seriously humor, check out the aforementioned HAPPY GILMORE,
Woody Allen's classic BANANAS (8/10) or the Farrelly brothers' overlooked
KINGPIN (8.5/10). Unfortunately for Sandler and crew, there is very little
in comedic "whoop-ass" in this dud.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film grossed close to $160 million domestically, and is famous for
turning actor Adam Sandler into the $20-million-salary-man.
Look for Rob Schneider in an uncredited role as the "townie" who keeps
shouting "You could do it!".
The late comedian Chris Farley's two brothers both have roles in this film.
John Farley plays the character of Tony Dodd, while Kevin Farley plays Jim
Simonds.
Many actual football personalities make appearances in this film as
themselves, including Lawrence Taylor, Lynn Swann, Jimmy Johnson, Dan Fouts,
Chris Fowler and Brent Musburger.
The director of this film, Frank Coraci, also directed the Adam
Sandler-vehicle, THE WEDDING SINGER (7/10). He also plays the role of Adam's
crazy dad Roberto in this picture.
Writer Tim Herlihy, producer on TV's "Saturday Night Live", has co-written
four of Adam Sandler's films with Adam himself. They consist of this one,
HAPPY GILMORE, BILLY MADISON, and the upcoming BIG DADDY. He was the only
one credited for writing THE WEDDING SINGER. He is also a member of the New
York State Bar.
The writer, Tim Herlihy, director, Frank Coraci, and producer, Jack
Giarraputo, of this film were all roommates with Adam during his days at New
York University.


Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Where's Bob Barker when you need him?  Seeing him pound Adam Sandler
senseless in 1996's 'Happy Gilmore' was a scream (because this guy
sucks!) and that film along with 1996's 'Bulletproof' are the only two
films I've enjoyed seeing the amateur comedian in, but just mildly.
'The Waterboy' is filled with enough stereotyped comedy to offend
everyone and while most people are expected to have at least some sense
of humour, this film clearly crosses the line and enough is enough.
Let's see, we are to believe that everyone in the southern United States
is a redneck, a bible thumping fanatic who thinks everyone and
everything is the devil, that they all are incoherent when they speak,
that they're cross-eyed or just plain backwards.  Am I from the south?
No.  I'm a Canadian but it still filled me with a sense of indignity to
see such politically incorrect humour taken to the extreme.  P.I. humour
is fine here and there but not to the point where it scars your
equilibrium so you can't think straight after the film is over.
In 'The Waterboy', Sandler plays a 31-year old water boy for the worst
college team in Louisiana.  He talks with a lisp, and an unappealing
southern accent that whines.  Sandler is no Meryl Streep or Laurence
Olivier and his attempt at accenting is not acceptable nor is it
convincing.  He lives with his mother in their bayou home where
everything is decorated for the classic southern stereotype.  Mama
(Kathy Bates) believes that girls are the devil and even has her pet
donkey tied up in the living room and it drinks from the toilet and
hee-haws at will.  I'm glad it didn't have to sit through this movie.
It seems that dad left many years ago and Sandler and his mama are the
only ones at home.  The players tease and torment Sandler as the water
boy to the point where he gets himself fired by the redneck coach (Jerry
Reed).
Sandler gets re-hired by another school football coach (Henry Winkler)
to be the team's water boy and after experiencing the same torment from
the players the same as in his last job, Sandler's boiling point erupts
and he tackles one of the players on the field in anger and devastates
him.  The coach is so impressed he asks Sandler to play on the team as a
linebacker.  He has no clue how to play ball but learns the hard way.
He is inspired to play by a girl he always fancied (Fairuza Balk), a
woman with tattoos and a criminal record who mama refers to as
the.....well, you know.
Sandler clearly wants to aim his meager abilities at the under 18 market
where a film like this would get an Academy award if they had their
way.  Just as in 'Happy Gilmore' when Sandler discovered he had a hidden
athletic ability to drive a golf ball 400 yards each time, he finds here
that he has a hidden athletic ability to tackle.  The only tackling
dummy here is the audience as we get our intelligence insulted at every
turn and to be fair, while the film does have some good football field
action and a few genuine laughs, it's shallow stuff at best.
Director Frank Coraci was clearly hired to supervise the editing, sound
and other technical mixes because he looks about as capable to direct a
movie as a water boy on the set of a movie.  No, wait, that's the guy
that gets coffee for everyone, isn't it.  Since Sandler co-wrote the
film with Tim Herlihy, it's clear that he called a lot of the film's
shots as the film is similar in nature to other films bearing Sandler's
childish humour.
I'm glad 'The Waterboy' was released in November as it becomes a fresh
minded candidate for one of the worst films of 1998.  By the way Adam,
the title of your movie, just so you can learn how to spell, is actually
two words. Some teenagers I'm sure would like to "moon" me for this
review but I would consider it a compliment after viewing this mess of a
movie.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Frank Coraci.
Cast: Adam Sandler, Kathy Bates, Fairuza Balk, Henry Winkler, Jerry 
Reed, Larry Gilliard Jr., Blake Clark, Clint Howard, Rob Schneider.
1998 - 86 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed November 7, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
Like Jim Varney in the "Ernest" movies, Adam Sandler has made his living 
almost consistently playing a dim-witted doofus, as in 1995's 
embarrassing, "Billy Madison" and 1996's slight, but funny, "Happy 
Gilmore." This all changed, however, this past February, with the 
release of his first great film, "The Wedding Singer," in which Sandler, 
for once, actually had a normal character to play, but proved that he 
could still be funny. Going into Sandler's latest picture, "The 
Waterboy," I was optimistic since it was written by Tim Herlihy and 
directed by Frank Coraci, the same people who worked on "The Wedding 
Singer." The fact that that film was good only makes "The Waterboy," an 
even more diappointing follow-up. Sandler has sadly gone back into his 
"idiot" mode, and gone, also, is any real hints of charm or wit.
Sandler plays Bobby Boucher, a constantly made fun of 31-year-old 
waterboy for a small-town Louisiana football team, who, in the opening 
scene, is fired by the hateful coach (Jerry Reed). Bobby still lives 
with his overprotective, but loving Cajun mama (Kathy Bates), who 
constantly warns him of women, who, she says, are the "devil." Although 
she desperately wants Bobby to stay with her all day and keep her 
company, he goes behind her back and becomes the waterboy for another 
football team, headed by distraught Coach Klein (Henry Winkler), and 
after defending himself by tackling one of the players, he is actually 
offered a spot on the team, and a chance to go to college. 
One of the surprises about, "The Waterboy," is that it isn't very funny. 
The typical sports stuff has been overdone to death, and is now just 
boring. And to top it all off, it inevitably ends with "the big game," 
and if you have an IQ north of 20, I'm sure you can guess how it all 
turns out. Since all of the football material was dead-in-the-water, it 
should have been scrapped, instead, focusing on Bobby's relationship 
with the only two interesting characters in the film, his mother (played 
effervescently by Bates) and his potential girlfriend, bad-girl Vicki 
Vallencourt (Fairuza Balk). Balk, who I have always liked, is 
wonderfully likable and surprisingly funny, so much so that it's 
unfortunate she wasn't given more screen time. It is these two fine 
performances that save, 'The Waterboy," from being a complete misfire.
The material in "The Waterboy" is so cliched and recycled that I wonder 
why Sandler, Coraci, and Herlihy decided to make this after the huge 
success of, "The Wedding Singer." They should have known this was a big
step down for all involved. They should have known that Sandler was 
much better off actually having a realistic character to play, and they 
also should have known that sports-type movies have been way overdone. 
"The Waterboy," is the type of film that must have been made for 
8-year-olds. It is sophomoric, and it is dumb. 

Author
Fox Davidson
  Adam Sandler is the luckiest man on earth.  After leaving Saturday Night
Live, he descended into the movie business. Such movies as the exquisite
Bulletproof with Damon Waynes, the classy Billy Madison, and, the sensationally
dead Happy Gilmore.
  In 1998, Sandler starred in The Wedding Singer, a clunker of a movie that was
a surprise hit with pubescent teen boys.  Now, riding on the success of that
movie, along comes The Waterboy, which isn't as annoying as Gilmore or Madison,
but, not as refreshing and funny as it wants to be. 
  Sandler plays 31-year-old Bobby Boucher, a waterboy for a local football team
in the swamps of Louisiana.  He lives with his mama (Kathy Bates, who saves the
movie from complete boredom), and has never gone to school.  But, as the coach
(Henry Winkler) for the football team finds out, Bobby has a gift.  When Bobby
concentrates hard enough, he can see the faces of all the people who made fun
of him through his life, and this sets him off, knocking down the opposite team
mate so hard, the can't get up.  Think Forrest Gump on steroids.
  The Waterboy, directed by Frank Coraci, is too lame-brained for most adults,
yet, too filled with blue humor for kids, who will be the only ones to like
this utter fiasco.  It will probably be the funniest thing for a 12-year-old,
while, at the same time, the perfect spot to snooze for his parents.
  Aside from Bates being a highlight, Winkler also makes for a couple of smiles
here and there, especially when he shows Bobby a tatoo on his ass (just the
look on Sandler's face is worth sitting through the soggy 30 minutes that
proceed it). I also liked the fact the Winkler's character turns out to be sort
of gay.  Fairuza Bulk is also a plus, as Bobby's wannabe girlfriend.  She
offers so much spunk and energy to a small, dead-weight role that her character
is somewhat more interesting than Sandler's.
  The DVD of Waterboy is nice.  The soundtrack is loud and crisp, while the
special features are mediocre. For the Sandler fan, it will be the ultimate
gift.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Adam Sandler; Kathy Bates; Henry Winkler; Fairuza Balk & Jerry Reed
I still can't figure out why people went in droves to see this movie. Now
before you go assuming I'm some sort of high brow snob, who can't appreciate
a little dumb humor, let me say that I love cheap humor. I thought There's
Something About Mary was one of the funniest films that I have ever seen and
it was certainly one of the best films of 1998. Low brow adolescent humor
can be a lot of fun, the problem with The Waterboy is that it is just low
brow and adolescent, there is no humor component. I wanted to like The
Waterboy, I really did. I think I only laughed maybe 2 or 3 times throughout
the entire movie. Actually, I smiled a couple of more times on top of that.
Not a great record for a 90-minute film. The problem with The Waterboy is
the same as most other Adam Sandler movies. Those responsible for this mess
seem to think that the sheer fact that Sandler walks around using a goofy
voice and playing dumb the entire movie is a substitute for actual funny
material. Nothing could be further from the truth, as matter of fact,
Sandler's idiot voice started to get on my nerves at points in this film.
It's really a shame too, because this film had the potential to be very
funny. I personally believe that Sandler is probably a very talented
comedian, it's just that so far he hasn't been able to find the right film
to showcase his talents. If his only talent is making goofy voices and
playing morons, my guess is that his career in the movies will go down the
same road as the vast majority of the former stars of Saturday Night Live.
Most of whom are now happily no longer in the entertainment industry.
Sandler plays a 31-year-old, somewhat mentally challenged, waterboy for a
college football team. The team's somewhat mentally disturbed coach (Henry
Winkler) realizes that his waterboy has a great deal of pent-up rage, which,
if harnessed properly, would make him a force to be reckoned with on the
football field. You can figure out the rest from here. Sandler joins the
team and this once lowly waterboy becomes a football star.
As I said, the film had a great deal of potential. The idea was a decent
one, but the main potential of this movie is a result of the cast. All of
whom are very good, just hamstrung by really, really, lousy material. Even
Sandler, annoying goofy voice and all, has enough charisma and natural
comedic ability to overcome some of his bad material. Even as unfunny as his
character is, I still found myself rooting for him throughout the film. But
it is the supporting cast that I feel most badly about. If their material
had been just a bit better, this film could have been such a funny movie.
Fairuza Balk plays Sandler's leather-wearing biker-chick love interest and
does a great job playing sleazy and sexy at the same time. Winkler is great
as the coach who uses a "Coaching For Dummies"-style book to help him get
through games. The real standout though, is Kathy Bates. Even with some of
the worst material of her career to deal with, she is still a treat to watch
in her role as Sandler's overprotective and overbearing Mama.
Even with the performances of Bates and Winkler, there is absolutely no way
I would recommend this movie. Although I get the distinct impression that
without them, this film would have ranked in negative numbers for me. Which
is sad, because I can't really put my finger on a particular element of the
movie and single it out as the cause of the disaster that it became. It's
obvious that those involved, specifically the actors, tried very hard to
make what they thought was going to be a funny movie. It's just too bad that
99 percent of all of the jokes fell flat.

Author
Steve Rhodes
HAPPY GILMORE's Adam Sandler is back in THE WATERBOY, an over-the-top
slapstick movie. He plays a moron with a speech impediment in a movie
full of such overdrawn characters.
As a waterboy named Bobby Boucher, who accidentally discovers his
ability to tackle with the force of King Kong, Sandler delivers his
lines with a heavy lisp that overlays a thick southern accent. The net
result is a grating sound that, thankfully, causes half of his inane
lines to be indecipherable.
Henry Winkler plays Coach Klein, a hopeless loser who reads "The Idiot's
Guide to Coaching" as his bible. Coach Klein is the first person other
than Bobby's mama to believe in him.
Kathy Bates hams up the part of Bobby's mama. They live together in a
shack in the Louisiana Bayou, where Mama serves bite-sized baby
alligators and large snakes for dinner. She keeps their mule in the
house, and it drinks out of the toilet. If you are already laughing from
these descriptions, you'll probably love the movie. To be fair, our
audience full of twenty-year-olds certainly did.
The characters in the cliched script have an intelligence level
inversely proportional to the intensity of their southern accents. If
African Americans were parodied this much, they would be picketing the
theaters, but the southern white hick is considered fair game for
merciless ridicule.
The script by Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler has all of the depth and
originality of a failed pilot for a television sitcom. A character with
crossed eyes is one of the many sight gags.
The team Bobby plays for is so poor that they have to share crotch
protectors.  Typical of the story's unoriginal jokes is the way that the
football players taunt Bobby, they spit in the team's water. Most of the
humor, however, is confined to poking fun at Bobby's speech handicap and
calling him a moron for his reduced mental capacity.
Eventually Bobby's team, the CSLSU Mud Dogs, which basically has only a
defense, makes its way to the big game in the Bourbon Bowl. (Oh, did I
mention that the cheerleaders and the mascot drink bourbon during the
games until they pass out on the sidelines?)  At any rate, the big game
does have some well-choreographed football scenes, the one thing
director Frank Coraci gets right.
Let's hope Sandler's next movie includes Drew Barrymore as did his last,
THE WEDDING SINGER. She saved that movie, but there was no one on hand
to rescue him this time.
THE WATERBOY runs 1:28. It is rated PG-13 for mild profanity, brief male
nudity and sexuality and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Simon Calloway
Cast: Adam Sandler; Kathy Bates; Henry Winkler; Fairuza Balk
 I have read numerous critical reviews on The Waterboy.  Enough negative ones
to rate this film the worst movie of the year.  Now, in my oppinion, I don't
think it is the worst.   More like the second to worst.
 Yes, everything you've heard about Waterboy is true.  It is an unfunny,
jaw-droppingly stale piece of toast of a comedy, but, what did you expect from
the star of such other bombs as Happy Gilmore and The Wedding Singer. 
(Waterboy was likely dug up from script-reject hell after the success of
Wedding Singer.)
 A huge hit within the male 10-12 category, Waterboy is a fairly simple movie. 
Bobby (Sandler) is a "waterboy"  for a college football team in his hometown. 
He lives with his mother (Bates; does she need work this bad?) in a small cabin
in the middle of a swamp, and is rather physically challanged.  Did I mention
he is, I think it was,  31 years old.
 When the coach (Winkler, never looking more at home) finds out about Bobby's
enormous tackling abilities, he puts Bobby on the team, and they start to win
all their games.
 That's it.  Not much else is circulating in this film, aside the ominous
sexual jokes and Bobby's slurred speech.  While in the theater viewing this
film, I heard laughing I had never heard before.  It was so loud and forced, it
made me wonder if that person was actually getting an hilarious response from
the movie, or if he was just a Sandler fan who felt bad for the actor and felt
he had to laugh at all the jokes, even the unintended ones
 The Waterboy is very juvenile.  Only kids are likely to like this waterlogged
movie, yet they are hardly the right age for Sandler's frank blue humor.  But,
compaired to Happy Gilmore, Waterboy is Lawernce of Arabia.

Author
Greg King
THE WATERBOY (M).  
(Touchstone/Buena Vista International)
Director: Frank Coraci
Stars: Adam Sandler, Kathy Bates, Fairuza Balk, Henry Winkler, Jerry 
Reed, Larry Gilliard jr, Blake 
Clark, Peter Dante, Jonathan Loughran, Clint Howard, Rob Schneider, Todd 
Holland, Robert Kokol
Running time: 86 minutes.
With his role as the endearing hero in the wonderful romantic
comedy The Wedding Singer, goofy comic Adam Sandler reached a wider
audience.  His effortless charm won over many who had previously been
immune to his whining, obnoxious, dumb screen persona and his
outrageous brand of manic humour.  His latest comedy has already
proven to be very popular in the States, although it is a backward
step following the broadly appealing The Wedding Singer.  The Waterboy
heralds a return to the sort of crass, unsubtle and juvenile humour
that drove his earlier movies Happy Gilmore and Billy Madison.
In a tailor-made role, Sandler again plays the familiar
gormless loser who eventually triumphs against all odds.  Sandler
plays Billy Boucher, a naive lad from the bayous of Louisiana, who has
been sheltered by his domineering and over possessive mother (Kathy
Bates, from Misery, etc).  No stranger to life's hardships, Mama
Boucher has protected her little boy from the wilder world and its
influences, which she claims are "the devil's work."  Consequently, he
lacks a real education and any social skills.
He works as the water distribution engineer (i.e.; waterboy)
for a local college football team, but he is basically treated as a
joke and constantly put down by the players.  When he is fired by
Beaulieu (Jerry Reed, from the Smokey And The Bandit series, etc), the
arrogant, conniving, and very successful coach, Bobby approaches his
less successful rival coach Klein (Henry Winkler) for a job as the
team's waterboy.  Klein's second rate team has lost the past forty
games, and seems in no danger of turning around its losing streak.
When Klein discovers that Bobby's anger makes him the most
fearsome tackler in the college league, he takes a punt and puts the
waterboy on the team.  Bobby becomes an integral part of the team's
improbable, and fairy tale-like success.  But can he take the team all
the way to the championships without Mama finding out?
Along the way, the shy Bobby finds love with the tough Vicki
Vallencourt (Fairuza Balk, from The Craft, etc), and helps coach Klein
overcome his fear of long time rival Beaulieu.  Sandler has created
The Waterboy with several of his former college friends, including
director Frank Coraci (The Wedding Singer) and regular co-writer and
collaborator Tim Herlihy (who has written his last four movies).  They
seem to have enjoyed themselves enormously making the film, and some
of their infectious humour will spill over onto the audience.
 
The cast also seems to have enjoyed themselves immensely.
Cast largely against type, Oscar winner Bates throws caution to the
winds here.  Her over the top performance lacks restraint, but it
perfectly suits the mood of the film.  Winkler's performance as the
confused and dithering coach Klein is a far cry from the days when he
played the legendary Fonz, two decades ago.
The parade of cameos from American sporting commentators and
real life football identities will largely go unrecognised by
Australian audiences, as will a lot of the parochial humour.  A
passing knowledge of the rules, strategies and complex game plans of
American football would also be a big help in understanding much of
the action here.
The Waterboy is a very silly, very crass film, but it will
undoubtedly prove very popular with Sandler's legion of fans.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Call him juvenile, call him sophomoric, call him annoying,
but don't call him poor.  Adam Sandler, the most recent "Saturday
Night Live" alumnus to graduate to the big screen, has made a
career out of playing eccentric, offbeat characters that terrify
critics while simultaneously endearing themselves to the masses.
(Witness "Airheads," "Billy Madison" and "Happy Gilmore.")
Appealing primarily to teenage boys, Sandler's movies perform
respectably at the box office, even as confused adults scratch
their heads in bewilderment.  But 1998's "The Wedding Singer,"
co-starring Drew Barrymore, broke with convention and allowed
Sandler the chance to experiment with a more low-key acting
style.  The result was arguably his best film to date, and the
new, more "mature" actor seemed poised on the brink of bigger
and better things.
        "The Waterboy," alas, is a step backwards.  Full of
cheap humor, stereotypes, and jokes that misfire as often as
not, the film drags us through a story which contains not an
ounce of freshness or originality.  One set-up leads to another
so predictably that the only thing that surprises us is the fact
that director Frank Coraci thought he could get away with it.
        Sandler plays Bobby Boucher, a 31 year-old Louisiana
simpleton whose only passion is serving as waterboy for his
local college football team.  After the despicable Coach
Beaulieu (Jerry Reed) fires him, our lowly hero accepts a
similar position with a rival team, headed up by the eccentric
but friendly Coach Klein (Henry Winkler, in a performance
that's definitely the movie's bright spot).  Although Bobby
lives for the team, they despise him and his feeble mind.  Even
though he's kind and friendly to them, they call him names and
subject him to cruel pranks.
        But when the shy, introspective waterboy is finally pushed
to his breaking point, he reveals a side no one previously suspected:
sheer animal rage.  Noting this, Coach Klein devises a plan to end
the team's losing streak.  Giving him a defensive position on the
team, Klein instructs the confused Bobby to pretend that their
opponents are people who have personally insulted him.  With this
mental trick, Bobby becomes an unstoppable tackling machine.
        From this point on, things progress exactly the way we
expect them to.  The team gradually gets better.  The people who
hated Bobby at the outset of the story will eventually come to
respect him.  Everything will culminate in a big game, which Bobby
will have a chance to single-handedly win or lose.  And naturally,
our hero will fall in love.
        The gal in question is Vicky, a tomboy played by Fairuza
Balk (the spooky gal from "The Craft").  Her character serves no
purpose whatsoever other than to provide the requisite sexual
titillation and "falling in love" scenes (once again proving the
BArlow Theorem of Cinematic Amour (B.A.T.C.A.), which states:
"A movie's main character is never in a happy relationship at the
outset of the story").  Balk is a fine young actress, but I wish
she'd actually had a reason to appear in this film.
        Other facets of the movie are also disappointing, not the
least of which is the silly voice Sandler uses throughout the
tale.  A high-pitched, mumbly, lip-smacking Louisiana drawl, it
starts out moderately amusing, but begins to grate on one's ears
after... oh, three minutes or so.  Sandler uses the exact same
voice for a character called The Southerner in some of the
stand-up routines on his comedy CD, "What the Hell Happened to
Me?".  It's funnier on the album, possibly because the skits
last no longer than two minutes each.  After twenty minutes of
hearing him speak in "The Waterboy," I wanted to crawl under
my chair.
        Henry Winkler, on the other hand, is tremendous from start
to finish.  His performance as Coach Klein is eccentric, goofy, and
impossible not to like.  I admired the way Winkler threw self-
consciousness to the wind, going all-out for a role that certainly
didn't deserve his considerable talents.  But Kathy Bates is more or
less wasted as the fretful mother who wants to make sure her Bobby
isn't playing "da fooz-ball."  She's a walking stereotype, included
only for cheap comic effect.  This is the same actress who won an
Oscar for "Misery?"
        Is "The Waterboy" funny?  Yeah, at times... like when Bobby
tells his mother that his black eye was caused by a rampaging gorilla,
to disguise the fact that he's playing football.  Other scenes, such
as those involving the mule that the Bouchers keep in their house (as
though it were a cat), border on the surreal and are equally
entertaining.  But most of the other gags are standard physical comedy
fare (including a shot of the former Fonz's uncovered bottom, which I
quite honestly could've done without).  The movie's not exactly
overflowing with intellect, but it does have spirit, and is neither
the best or worst of Sandler's offerings.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director:  Frank Coraci
 Writer:  Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler
 Cast: Adam Sandler, Fairuza Balk, Kathy Bates, Henry
Winkler, Blake Clark, Allen Covert, Peter Dante, Jonathan
Loughran, Dan Patrick, Jerry Reed
   Those who can, play. Those who can't, manage.  Those
who can't manage, become assistant managers.  In high
schools around the country, kids who want to be part of their
sports teams but just can't cut it become managers, often the
butt of jokes by members of the team and by fellow students
alike.  They're called everything from waterboy to stuff that's
unprintable in a family review.  But vengeance is theirs in
Frank Coraci's film, "The Waterboy," about a nerdy guy who
proves that he can hew wood, draw water, and throw a mean
tackle all at the same time.  The difference here is that the
waterboy is not a high-school kid but a 31-year-old who
appears mentally challenged but who, in reality, has been
kept out of school and away from girls by a backwater mama
who is afraid of being deserted by her little boy as she was
by her husband some time back.
   How good can a movie be if it centers on a waterboy? 
Well, maybe you've heard the statement that critics like to
throw around, "This movie is not resonant enough to be taken
seriously and not stupid enough to be funny."  No problem. 
This one really IS moronic enough to be entertaining and
could inspire the fabulously successfully IDT publications to
put out a "Dummies' Guide to Football."  Nope, it probably
would better meet the standard for "The Complete Idiot's
Guide to Football."  While lots of films have been dumbed
down so that the lowest common denominator among
moviegoers can enjoy (witness, for example, "A Night at the
Roxbury"), the folks who put this one out could not possibly
have THAT low an estimate of the audience, so we've got to
assume--in the words of its star, Adam Sandler, that "We're
just having fun and I hope everyone has fun right along with
us."  As one critic has said about the movie, "If you like the
Chris Farley stuff, and if you're one of Adam Sandler's
regular fan club, you'll have a rollicking good time.  If not,
stay away."
   While the talented Mr. Sandler had a more intelligent role
in "The Wedding Singer," this time he goes all out to be
Thoreauvian, paring away all the complexities of life and
becoming as simple as a human body can get.  As the
eponymous waterboy, Bobby Boucher, he speaks with a
stutter and is the perfect student of his backwater mother's
(Kathy Bates) homilies.  He has never been with another
woman, has no friends because (his mom insists) "he doesn't
have social graces" and gets his fulfillment by taking the job
of waterboy seriously enough to sterilize the H20 and to
check it repeatedly for Ph content.  His concern is not
appreciated by the jocks he serves on a college football
team.  They spit in the water at best, and at worst take turns
tackling him amid a flurry of insults, turning over the table on
which he so carefully tends to his product.  
   One day, infuriated by yet another affront to his dignity cast
at him by a member of the team, he dashes into the field
tackling the offender so viciously that Coach Klein (Henry
Winkler) puts him into a game, counsels him to visualize
people who have humiliated him in the past, and turns him
loose against some of the most brawny contenders south of
the Mason-Dixon line.  It's the sort of feel-good movie in
which games are won in the final seconds and women swoon
over their sportsman-heroes--in this case, the sexy, criminally
inclined Vicki Vallencourt (Fairuza Balk) pushes her man to
victory with a promise to introduce the 31-year-old to the
mysterious of love.
   Directed conventionally by Frank Coraci, the screenplay by
Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler has fun at the expense of the
deep south, portraying the Louisiana Bayou country as a
hillbilly heaven of snake-eaters and of folks with accents that
not even a southerner could understand.  Great fun is had at
the expense of Farmer Fran (Blake Clark), who cannot utter a
single understandable word and Mama Boucher (Kathy
Bates) as a grasping, lonely woman who covers up her
insecurities behind falsely fundamentalist religious
convictions.  Insisting that football (which she pronounces
"foosball") is just plain silly and out of bounds for her boy and
that Vicki Vallencourt is the Devil (she's on safer grounds
there), she keeps Bobby locked into arrested development for
her own selfish ends.  
   Henry Winkler turns in the best performance as the coach
who is afraid of the other team's trainer until Bobby imparts to
him the safe advice he received: to visualize the man you
fear as though he were a baby, a cocker spaniel, or a guy
who has mortified you in the past.  It's a toned-down
discharge of a role that the Fonz would have played as low
comedy back in the seventies.  Ms. Balk plays to type as the
low-life girl friend much as she was in the quite different film,
"American History X" in a movie whose quality is, well, as we
said, dependent on what you think of the Adam Sandler
genre.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) In spite of Roger Ebert's extremely negative review,
The Waterboy was the sold-outest show of the day when we went. After
just a few days in release, it has now set a box office record for
November openings.
If you're not a fan of Sandler's, you might not like this movie. The
plot is as dumb as Sandler's character, Bobby Bouchet, a 30-year old
dunce.
For example, Bobby gets his job as a waterboy by providing fresh water
to the local football coach. The coach (Henry Winkler) had been using
some slimy brown sludge until Bobby came along. Bobby won the coach's
respect with his knowledge of H20, and he got the job. 
Bobby gets razzed as the waterboy, and he takes the abuse with good
humor, as his mom (Oscar winner Kathy Bates) has no doubt taught him.
But Coach Klein tells Bobby he needs to stand up for himself. He needs
to fight back or else the razzing will never stop. So the next time a
player teases Bobby, he drives the bully to the ground with the force of
a pro wrestler. Klein is so impressed he signs Bobby up for the team as
a tackle.
Dumb as this all sounds, the setup has a certain film-plot logic to it.
It follows all the conventions and rules of a sports movie - the young
kid has to prove himself before he gets his first big break. Then he's
allowed to join the big boys and make a splash. The specifics are silly
and dumb, but they do fit the bill.
Coraci, screenwriter Tim Herlihy, and Sandler never let the movie go
above this level. It would be easy to imagine some sly wink at the
audience that says "we know this is a dumb plot and we're really above
this." Instead, the movie stays firmly rooted in its silly reality, and
I think that's important for this type of comedy. Once you start
winking, you're merely TALKING ABOUT comedy, not actually performing it,
and you end up with a dog like SPY HARD.
What's also funny is that in your average sports movie, the hero would
be a placekicker or a pitcher or a golfer. He would have some special
skill that set him apart. So the idea that tackling is a "special skill"
is actually pretty funny. It's even funnier from Sandler, whose comic
persona includes a dark, violent side (in BILLY MADISON he plays
dodgeball with first graders and shows no mercy).
THE WATERBOY wasn't as funny for me as THE WEDDING SINGER, Sandler's
last film. The Southern dunce character is funny, but it's almost too
much to endure for a whole movie. It almost seems as if THE WATERBOY
should have come first in the evolution of Sandler's career.
Sandler's character in THE WEDDING SINGER seems so much more mature and
well-developed (if such adjectives could EVER describe Sandler) than the
hulking slack-jawed dunce in THE WATERBOY, that I wonder if perhaps they
were written in reverse order.
Regardless, Sandler has established himself in American movies. Dumb as
his movies may be, Sandler can always make me laugh. It's a sure bet
that whatever he comes up with next will sell lots of tickets, including
one for me. No matter what Ebert says. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
jasanfor

 It's probably damning the picture with faint praise to say "The Waterboy"
may well the best Adam Sandler movie ever. Certainly, for those who can't
abide Sandler even in the smallest doses, that statement won't entice them
into the theater.
 But this gleefully silly movie may go a long way toward swinging the votes
of those who are still undecided about the former "Saturday Night Live"
star; art it ain't, but "The Waterboy" is pure, undiluted Sandler, in the
kind of role only he could pull off. The movie also owes much of its success
to divinely hammy Kathy Bates and the spooky-sexy Fairuza Balk, a zesty and
offbeat love interest. "The Waterboy" is little more than a live-action
cartoon, but it's a pretty funny one.
 Sandler plays Bobby Boucher, a dim but devoted "water distribution
enginner" for the Mud Dogs, a twelfth-rate college football team, who ends
up on the playing field after channelling his years of repressed rage into
some spectacular tackles. Smothering Mama (Bates) will hear nothing of her
baby playing "foosball," as she calls it, so Bobby must keep his gridiron
fame a secret from her. You see, when Mama has to deal with adversity, she
gets "the brain pain" and Bobby loves her much too much to ever hurt her.
 The screenplay by Sandler and Tim Herlihy is full of the kind of twisted
little jokes that turn a passable comedy into a good one. The Mud Dogs'
cheerleaders, for example, have become so depressed by the team's 40-game
losing streak they now spend their time drinking heavily on the sidelines.
And when over-protective Mama tries to scare just-out-of-jail Vicki (Balk)
away from Bobby by remarking that her 31-year-old son still wears Deputy
Dawg pajamas, Vicki replies, in an aroused purr of a voice, "I happen to
find Deputy Dawg very, very sexy."
 Speaking in a voice that sounds like he has a crawfish stuck in his throat,
Sandler makes Bobby appropriately dopey-adorable, easily his least abrasive
screen character to date. Much of the rest of the movie's humor comes from
Bates' willingness to go to extremes in pursuit of a laugh, and while her
more high-brow fans may cringe when they see this Oscar-winning actress
struggling to play badminton with a mule, so what? She appears to be having
a pretty good time, and she's certainly providing the audience with one.
James Sanford
