Title
Review for Under Siege (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Frank Maloney
     UNDER SIEGE is a film directed by Andrew Davis, from a screenplay
by J. F. Lawton.  It stars Steven Seagal, Tommy Lee Jones, Gary Busey,
and Erika Eleniak.  Rated R, for violence, profanity, brief female
nudity.
     UNDER SIEGE was filmed on the USS Alabama, anchored in Mobile Bay,
but is supposed to take place on the Missouri, now back in mothballs
across Puget Sound from me in Bremerton.  The film was written by
J. F. Lawton (PRETTY WOMAN), who proves he does know about whoring as he
mixes DIE HARD and Tom Clancy.  Lawton is a totally corrupt hack with a
fresh angle on a dead idea.
     The result is Seagal's best movie to date, at least of the ones I
seen.  (I want to say right now that I go to these things because Lyndol
has the hots for action movies.)  Andrew Davis provides slick, bland
directing as he reteams with Seagal (ABOVE THE LAW).  Seagal is
amazingly wooden, as always, but the story may point us in the direction
these flicks are going to go to find a replacement enemy for Godless
Communism, in this case, the Enemy Within, the traitorous CIA superagent
who goes into business for himself.
     The spook-from-hell is played by Tommy Lee Jones with huge gusto.
Jones is great fun here and probably worth the price of a matinee
admission.  Jones has teamed up with Gary Busey as the traitorous XO,
executive officer, who's quite a case himself.  Seagal, on the other
hand, teams up with the pouty, big-bosomed Erika Eleniak as a Playboy
Playmate who's really "an actress.  I did an episode of 'Hunter' and a
'Wet 'n' Wild' video."  Eleniak is pretty irritating at first, even as
comic relief, but later develops into something only wildly improbable.
     This film is a nothing in terms of any kind of honesty.  You
nitpickers will have a field day.  You tit-watchers will do ok, also.
This is mind candy.  Either you go or don't.  I'm not recommending that
you do, but if you're inclined to like Seagal movies and such, you will
like this one.  Just don't pay full freight.  Or wait for the video.  It
ought to be out by Christmas.

Author
Jose R. Perez
     Okay, okay.  Maybe I wasn't in the mood to watch a mindless action
movie; I am the same person that liked LETHAL WEAPON III, even while
admitting that it wasn't as good as the others.  Howewer, the latest
Segal picture didn't look that bad, and since none of my friends would
go see a Woody Allen movie even if I paid them, I went to see it
expecting a mild DIE HARD rehash.  Boy, was I wrong!
     In the first half of the movie, we are already assaulted with
Segal's acting, (he is not simply wooden; he is like a wall), gratuitous
violence, an incredible plot, sexist and even more gratuitous nudity,
and bad lines that obviously were meant as jokes.  By the end, it is
obvious that hundreds of Navy men are no match for thirty armed Special
Forces soldiers.  Not once in the movie did Segal appear worried or
undecided, which did not do much for increasing the unexistent suspense.
     Of course, in movies like these, there must be a sidekick, and a
love interest.  In these one we are given a two for one package in the
form of a Playboy model (in the movie), which only functions as a
supposed comic relief (by the way of extremely stupid unfunny lines),
and to have watering eyes and look away every time something bad happens
in the movie.  Oh, of course, she appears naked from the waist up, and,
of course, Segal kisses her at the end after no development of their
relationship; they did not even seem to be interested in each other.  I
have never seen so little chemistry between two people in a movie.
     Often, the villain saves the movie; unfortunately, the villains
here are cartoonish, stupid and unfunny, unmenacing.  How many movies
have psycho ex-Special Forces bad guys?  Too many.  I was able to
predict the action all throughout the movie, including the moment where
the sidekick saves the hero from certain death, the scene where the bad
guy can kill the hero but proceeds to explain his plan to him, the
scene where we are shown the hero's superiors are stupid, the scene
where the bad guy loses his gun and has to fight the hero hand to hand,
etc...  Simply said, this is movie-making by the numbers, boring, and
potentially offensive in going for the lowest common denominator of the
audience.
     The real sad thing is that there are a lot of movies out that I
would rather have seen; once again, dragged in by my friends, which by
the way, liked the movie halfheartedly.  They probably like wrestling
too :-).

Author
Steve Kong
Steven Seagal is not known for making good movies. And I admit I don't like
him very much. But, most of the time I find myself watching his movies. I
think it's out of the hope that one day he'll be able to make a good
enjoyable action movie. After I saw Under Siege, I have just about stopped
meandering into his movies, why? Because this is the Steven Seagal movie
that I like and think is good and enjoyable.
Under Siege is a typical high-concept film. The concept: one man, trapped
in an enclosed area taken hostage by bad guys who don't know he's there.
The "Die Hard Concept". In Die Hard it was Willis' John McClane in a
building, in Under Siege it's Seagal's Casey Ryback in a boat. Casey Ryback
is a cook aboard a battleship. During a party for the captain a group of
over-the-top bad guys lead by Tommy Lee Jones take the ship over. The one
person that the villains didn't expect to stop their evil plan? Yes, the
cook. Seagal's Ryback is a one man fighting machine able to take out a
whole group of heavily trained killers. The story is simple, a group of
terrorist wants weapons and the battleship has them. Jones leads the
terrorist to get the weapons.
Yes, the plot is understandably absurd, but it works and director Andrew
Davis (The Fugitive) finds some inventive ways of making the film work. He
puts enough action in the film to keep the audience from thinking, adds to
this some cool gadgets and some incredible shots of the ship and wraps this
all together with the great performances of Jones and Seagal (something I
thought I'd never find myself saying, Seagal? Good performance?)
Seagal's characters never seem to get hurt, but in Under Siege that
changes, he actually bleeds. There is blood running through this character.
And though Seagal does a good job with his role, Tommy Lee Jones is the one
to look for in this film. His over-the-top performance as the villain is
great. The one character that I don't quite understand why they added was
Erika Eleniak's Playmate Jordan Tate. The only reason I see for this is for
a scene of gratuitous nudity and for her to, for some scenes, play the
damsel-in-distress.
There are certain films from action stars you hate that stand out, for Van
Damme it was Hard Target, for Seagal it's Under Siege. This is a well
directed and well put together movie. It has some excellent action
sequences and a good insane villain. This is the only film with Seagal as a
lead that I can really say, Don't Miss this film.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., R, Action, 1992
Director: Andrew Davis
Cast: Steven Segal, Tommy Lee Jones, Gary Busey, Erika Eleniak,   
      Colm Meany, Andy Romano, Patrick O'Neal, Michael Des Barres
     Aboard a heavily armed warship, the captain's, Patrick O'Neal,
birthday is coming up.  The crew plans a surprise party for O'Neal and
brings aboard a centerfold girl, Erika Eleniak, and a band.
Unfortunately for them, the band is a gang of revolutionists lead by
Tommy Lee Jones, who take over the ship.   The only man on board who can
stop them is the cook, Steven Segal.
     I just saw Steven Segal's newest film UNDER SIEGE and loved it.  I
highly suggest that you go and see this film.   I think that it is
Segal's best film yet.  This film is all that the television
advertisements made it out to be, and much more.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give UNDER SIEGE a five.  UNDER SIEGE is rated R for explicit
language, graphic violence, and brief female nudity.
     The special effects for this film are great.  This film is a lot
gorier than most of Segal's earlier films, but the gore doesn't feel out
of place.  In my opinion, it only adds to the film.  The sets for the
film are excellent and really place the film well.  This is definitely a
film to see in the theaters, because it will lose so much on a small
screen.
     Segal gives his normal unemotional performance, that I feel makes
him the popular actor that he is.  He seems to have no problem running
around a warship breaking people's arms and the like.  Tommy Lee Jones
gives the best performance in this film as the crazy revolutionist.  His
performance is extremely realistic, and at some points even scary.  Gary
Busey also played a person who is not entirely there.  Like Tommy Lee
Jones, Busey gave an excellent performance.  Erika Eleniak was a
surprise in this film; she started out as the typical action movie bimbo
that Hollywood seems to stick into most of this kind of film.  At first
the only reason that I thought that she was put in the film was to
provide the one brief scene of gratuitous nudity, but part way through
the film she changed and actually became a use to Segal.
     There isn't much to say about the writing.  It is of the usual
"slam bam" action film quality.  It doesn't hurt or help the film much
at all.  The direction by Andrew Davis, who has done ABOVE THE LAW which
also starred Steven Segal, is good and certainly doesn't hurt the film.

Author
Steve Hastings
     Terrorists have taken over a Navy warship.  They control the whole
thing, including its cruise missiles and its nuclear warheads.  Their
plan is going by the numbers.  They have only overlooked one thing: the
cook.
     Steven Segal is the cook, and of course he is no ordinary cook but
a former Navy SEAL.  The stage is set for lots of gunfights, explosions,
and general mayhem.
     If any of this sounds like you might like it, you probably will.
The movie is well-done for what it is.  You never really doubt that the
cook will save the day, but there are many surprises along the way.  The
action scenes are well-done, and Segal doesn't ruin things by
overacting.
     One thing I didn't expect: the background for the action, the Navy
warship, is a major part of the appeal of the movie.  I enjoyed seeing
the action move all over the ship.  I particularly enjoyed a sequence
involving the main guns -- able to propel a shell that weighs as much as
a VW Bug for miles, they don't make 'em like that anymore, and I enjoyed
getting a close look at them in the movie.  Contrast that with the
high-tech Phalanx close-in defense system which you also get a close
look at.  If Naval hardware interests you, you'll enjoy these parts,
too.
     The plot is good.  It doesn't require too much suspension of
disbelief; I was wondering how terrorists could take over a warship, but
the plot hand-waves that issue nicely.
     There is one moment where the buxom blonde is shown bare-breasted.
If you blink at the wrong moment you will miss it, so they won't have
any trouble rendering this movie nudity-free for the inevitable TV
showing.  The woman character starts out useless and annoying, but the
more the movie goes on the better the script treats her.
     Star Trek fans take note: Colm Meany is one of the villains, using
language you aren't used to seeing him use as Chief O'Brien.
     I saw this movie in THX Dolby Digital Stereo; the sound was
awesome, from explosions that shook me in my seat to the little pinging
noises empty cartridges made as they hit the deck.  This very much added
to my enjoyment of the movie.  By all means see this on the big screen.
     If you enjoy violent action movies, I recommend this at full ticket
prices.
