Title
Review for Another Man's Poison (1952)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The fourth husband of Bette Davis was actor Gary Merrill.
They would make three films together over three years.
The first was "All About Eve", which was perhaps the best
and most successful film of Davis' long career.  Davis had
just a minor role in "Phone Call From a Stranger".  However,
in their third film together, Davis and Merrill were the
leads.  And are they nasty to each other!
But then, Davis relished roles that had her playing selfish,
bitchy, even murderous characters. "Another Man's Poison"
gave her such a role.  She poisons two men, and enjoys
watching them die.  She also impetuously breaks up an
engagement between the perfect couple.  But there's something
good to be said about her character.  She's in love with her
horse, Fury.
This only begins to explain the hopelessly implausible plot
of "Another Man's Poison".  Set and filmed in England, Davis
plays a mystery writer with an absentee, bank robber husband.
He returns, she kills him, and her husband's partner in crime
(Merrill) pays a visit and decides to take his place.  He
thinks it makes for a good cover, but delightfully
inquisitive neighbor Dr. Henderson (Emlyn Williams) is
suspicious.  While Henderson gradually and cleverly unravels
the crimes of Merrill and Davis, Davis keeps herself busy
stealing much younger Larry (Anthony Steel) from his fiancee
Chris (Barbara Murray).  Chris is secretary for Davis, and is
as sweet and gentle as Davis is cynical and cruel.  The
character contrast makes Davis' mistreatment of Chris all
the more entertaining.
Based on Leslie Sands' play "Deadlock", the stage origins
are apparent.  Most of the scenes take place in Davis' mansion.
And the story is overripe, especially when Davis cons Merrill
into driving a jeep at night during a thunderstorm on a
dangerous winding road.  It is unlike Merrill's suspicious,
ill-tempered character to eagerly agree to such a stupid task.
Still, it is almost as fun to watch Davis' campy 'bad girl'
performance as it must have been for her to play it.  Davis
seems to know every affected pose and cunning facial expression,
and her voice practically drips with venom.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
http://briankoller.epinions.com/user-briankoller
