Title
Review for Tailor of Panama, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Tailor of Panama (2001)
Pierce Brosnan, Geoffrey Rush, Leonor Varela, Jamie Lee Curtis, Brendan
Gleeson, Harold Pinter, Catherine McCormack. Screenplay by Andrew
Davies, John Le Carré and John Boorman, based on the novel by John Le
Carré. Directed by John Boorman. 109 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"The Tailor of Panama" is a different kind of spy movie. Despite the
presence of Pierce Brosnan, there is nary a hint of James Bond flash
here. Instead of big action scenes, leering super villains and
empty-headed femme fatales, we get interesting characters and an
intriguing situation. Based on the novel by John le Carré, who also
co-wrote the screenplay, the film offers viewers something rarely seen
in theaters this time of year: a solid, well-told story.
Brosnan plays Andy Osnard, a British operative walking on thin ice. His
British superiors ship him off to Panama, making sure he understands
that he had better not screw up the placement. Osnard arrives in the
tropics virtually oozing contempt for his new co-workers and his new
home base. When shown the Bridge of the Americas by a person marveling
over the fact that, since the creation of the Panama Canal, the
structure is the sole connection between North and South America, he
barely keeps from yawning. Brosnan clearly relishes the chance to be the
antithesis of 007, investing the suave spy with a distinct reptilian
quality coupled with an air of indifference that irks his fellows to no
end.
Searching for a way to get information on the government, Osnard sets
his sights on Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush), an unctuous tailor serving
the Panamanian elite. Harry claims to be a transplant from Britain's
renowned Saville Row, but Osnard knows his secret: The tailor is an
ex-con who served five years in prison after torching his uncle's shop
in an insurance scam. He also knows that Harry is up to his ears in
debt, having spent a fortune on an unsuccessful farm.
Osnard offers Harry a way out. He will pay for information Harry has
gathered from his upscale clientele. Eager to comply, Harry offers what
he knows, then starts concocting tidbits to keep the money flowing.
Before long, he is forced to spy on his loving wife, Louisa (Jamie Lee
Curtis), an aide to the Canal director.
Harry's little lies build, eventually taking on a life of their own.
Osnard turns in reports about the "silent opposition," a group
threatening to upset the balance of control over the canal. The bogus
revelation proves explosive, leading to meetings in Washington D.C. over
how to best protect the vital waterway. Meanwhile, Osnard wallows in his
newfound status, enjoying the best the city has to offer and wooing an
attractive co-worker. And Harry grows ever more fretful, fearing the
consequences if his clients, not to mention his wife, learn about his
lies.
Geoffrey Rush is wonderful as Harry, fawning over his customers by day
and savoring his rich family life in the evenings, all while playing
secret agent in the off hours with his new benefactor. Rush makes Harry
a credible figure, presenting the various levels of the character so
effectively that he remains sympathetic despite his duplicity. After
gaining fame playing larger than life characters, Rush flips everything
around for this role, using his energy to depict the quiet desperation
of a man slowly realizing that the solution to his troubles may be worse
than the original problems.
Although she gets far too little screen time, Jamie Lee Curtis imbues
Louisa with a depth greater than the screenplay provides her. Of the
central characters, she is the only one that exhibits maturity and
genuine self-confidence. Curtis is one of my favorite female actors;
whiplash smart, sultry and charismatic, she deserves more than
supporting roles.
Speaking of supporting characters, there are some great ones here.
Harold Pinter is amusing as Harry's Uncle Benny, who pops up throughout
the story in a number of creative ways. Also shoring up the proceedings
is Jon Polito as a corrupt banker and Dylan Baker, who is a riot as a
United States general straight out of the Dr. Strangelove school of
armed patriotism.
But the most important secondary performers are Leonor Varela and
Brendan Gleeson, both outstanding as two wounded activists. Their
presence adds weight to the story, reminding us that beyond the charades
of the leading men, there are real people that have suffered greatly
over the politics connected to the Canal. Director John Boorman adds
additional verisimilitude by shooting the film on location. Instead of
using Panama City merely as a colorful backdrop, he adroitly weaves in
footage of all aspects of life there. The metropolis, described by one
character as "Casablanca without heroes" pulsates with life, underling
the folly of the two foreigners playing dangerous games that could have
a disastrous impact on a great many people. "The Tailor of Panama"
succeeds because the principals behind it were bright enough to make it
more than a simple entertainment.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 TAILOR OF PANAMA, THE (director/writer: John Boorman; screenwriters:
 John le
 Carré/Andrew Davies/based on the book by Mr. le Carré;
 cinematographer: Philippe Rousselot; editor: Ron Davis; cast: Pierce
 Brosnan (Andy Osnard), Geoffrey Rush (Harry Pendel), Jamie Lee Curtis
 (Louisa Pendel), Leonor Varela (Marta), Brendan Gleeson (Mickie
 Abraxas), Harold Pinter (Uncle Benny), Catherine McCormack
 (Francesca), Leonor Varela (Marta), Lola Boorman (Sarah, Harry's
 daughter), Daniel Radcliffe (Mark, Harry's son-he will be the actor to
 play Harry Potter), Martin Ferrero (Teddy), John Fortune (Ambassador
 Maltby), David Hayman (Luxmore), Jon Polito (Ramon), Dylan Baker
 (American General), Mark Margolis (Rafi Domingo); Runtime: 120;
 Columbia Pictures; 2001-USA/Ireland)
An amusing and sophisticated espionage thriller, only slightly flawed by
some of its contrivances. This British spy spoof is about a colorful
tailor who gets off on being respected by the prominent people he
surrounds himself with, who is a storyteller with a shady past. The
self-exiled tailor lives in Panama by the decree of his Uncle Benny
(Harold Pinter). He reluctantly becomes a spy for an unscrupulous
British agent. The British agent is Andy Osnard (Pierce Brosnan), who is
coming off a sex scandal in his last botched assignment. He's a
disgraced M.I.-6 agent exiled to Panama City to cool his heels. But Andy
is a go-getter, a schemer and an opportunist without scruples. He's one
of those handsome womanizer types (he's not exactly James Bond in this
role, but plays a parody of that role), who only looks out for himself
and is quite adept at leaving others in the lurch after seducing them.
The drug trafficking and gun-running climate of Panama will prove to be
a place just right for him to fit into.
Arriving in Panama the first thing he does is look up the fidgety tailor
Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush), a half-Jewish cockney ex-convict who
reinvented himself as the Saville Row tailor who makes up a tale that he
was partners with the WASP Brathwaite. He learned the craft in prison
and after serving his time, his beloved Uncle Benny set him up in
business far away from him. Here he sells old-fashioned custom-made
suits at steep prices, working out of a shop decorated with leather club
chairs where he serves class and Scotch to his pampered wealthy
clientele. He always speaks with utter praise for his late partner, the
revered Brathwaite; even though, Brathwaite never existed for him. The
oil painting that hangs on Harry's fitting-room wall that is supposed to
be a portrait of Brathwaite is actually a portrait of Harry's late Uncle
Benny, an East End rag man, whose dreamlike face appears at troubled
times to offer Harry advice on how to deal with his current state of
being. Harry lives a bourgeois life in his suburban villa, driving his
luxurious Land Rover around town, and enjoys being a doting father to
his two kids and a loving husband to a wife he adores.
Andy knows all this already and also knows that the tailor owes $50,000
on a farm he bought where he mortgaged his business and home, and now
the loan is being called in by the bank. His American wife, Louisa
(Jamie Lee Curtis), the respected daughter of an engineer who worked on
the canal, doesn't know Harry's dark secret from the past or how he has
put their two children Sarah and Mark in financial danger because of his
rash actions. But Harry has an offer from Andy he can't refuse. If he
sells Andy info about what's going on in Panama the loan will be paid
back by the Brits, as the Brits like the Americans are worried about the
canal now that it has been handed back to Panama. They are worried that
those in power shouldn't sell this very valuable trade route to another
country. And, since the tailor's wife is the high-powered executive
assistant to the Canal director, Andy gets him to spy on her. Harry
can't resist this temptation to tell tall stories and soon he's telling
Andy what he wants to hear. Andy knows that he's making this up, but
pays him anyway because it fits in with the scheme he's cooking up.
Geoffrey Rush is the timid man trapped in the post-Noriega Panamanian
intrigues, and Pierce Brosnan is the seducer without morals. They play
one another off in a most refreshingly joyous way, as for a while is
hard to tell who has the upper hand. Under John Boorman's
(Deliverance/Hope and Glory) competent direction, the film has air to
breathe for its smart storytelling tale and parody. It is based on the
popular 1996 novel by John John le Carré, who also was the screenwriter
and the executive producer, making sure his work was translated onto the
screen in a reasonable facsimile from the book. Which he said it was.
The supporting actors of note that lent a hand in making this spy story
edgy: were Chilean actress Leonor Varela's role as Harry's receptionist,
whose one side of the face is scarred because of the beating Noriega's
henchmen gave her. Noriega is the puppet the CIA head man Bush put in
power, but when his criminal activities and dealings in drugs became too
great for even President Bush, he was forcibly removed from power in an
invasion of the country. The country is now supposedly a democracy, but
as Boorman wryly points out these are the sames faces running the
country who were with Noriega. Brendan Gleeson plays the wino, a one
time rebel against Noriega, who is now too weak after spending some jail
time to be anything but a broken down man. Harry's tale to Andy is that
he's head of the 'silent opposition.' He says that this freedom-fighting
organization, headed by Gleeson, is planning to take back control of the
Panama Canal from the corrupt government. The joke is how readily the
Americans buy into this unreliable info without thoroughly checking it
out, and how this quickly turns into an international disagreement
between Panama and the U.S.. Catherine McCormack is part of the British
Embassy staff, who succumbs to Andy's sexual charms.
This farce works out fairly well. The script is tight. The directing is
impeccable, the acting finely tuned, and the mood it sets is for a
thinking man's picture to develop amidst all the comedy. Boorman gets
his digs in on what is going on down Panama way, now that Noriega is in
jail. The digs I liked best were: 'You know what the poor call those?'
pointing to the city's skyline, 'Cocaine towers! And the 85 banks?
Launderettes!' This is not an ordinary commercial formula film, but it's
more like Harry's handmade suits rather than those suits bought off the
rack.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
What's a spy to do if he can't even land a decent assignment?
THE TAILOR OF PANAMA, based on a John Le Carré novel, is directed in a 
laidback fashion by John Boorman (THE GENERAL). Not exactly a spy story 
or a comedy, although it has aspects of both, the movie is basically a 
character study. Although the acting by the leads, Pierce Brosnan, 
Geoffrey Rush and Jamie Lee Curtis, is consistently dead-on, it isn't 
until the last act that the story finally comes together.
After some dalliance in Madrid, MI6 operative Andy Osnard (Brosnan) is 
relegated to the backwater assignment of a post-Noriega Panama. Deciding 
that there must be some major international incident afoot if he can 
just find the right source, Andy turns to a tailor, Harry Pendel (Rush), 
since he figures that everyone confides in their tailor. Moreover, since 
Andy knows that Harry has a secret criminal past, he uses that to 
blackmail him. Rush, who has a tendency to overachieve with his acting, 
is decidedly reserved this time. Harry, wanting to please and scared to 
do otherwise, manufactures some political intrigue for Andy.
Brosnan, famous for his 007 role, plays Andy as the anti-Bond. Although 
Andy, like Bond, sleeps with as many women as possible and speaks fluent 
double entendre, he is as slimy and oily as Bond is slick and debonair. 
It is a wonderful against type performance by Brosnan and the best 
argument for seeing the movie.
In a smaller but equally important part, Jamie Lee Curtis plays Harry's 
loyal and loving wife. With a quiet intensity, Curtis manages to 
dominate scenes that others should own. And in an age in which actors 
have no problem with massive violence but carefully write no-nudity 
clauses into their contracts, Curtis has a good body and is more than 
happy to flaunt it. She has some simple but erotically charged scenes 
with Brosnan. The best of these has her breast literally falling out of 
her low-cut dress. This incident has more genuine sexuality than a dozen 
canonical scenes of humping actors on squeaking bed frames. 
THE TAILOR OF PANAMA is a small movie that ages well. The more you think 
about it; the more you appreciate its subtle charms.
THE TAILOR OF PANAMA runs 1:49. It is rated R for strong sexuality, 
language and some violence and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by John Boorman. Screenplay by Andrew Davies, John Le Carré and
Boorman, based on the novel by Le Carré. Starring Pierce Brosnan,
Geoffrey Rush, Jamie Lee Curtis. Running time: 110 minutes. Rated AA for
mature subject matter and coarse language by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 
28th, 2001.
Synopsis: British spy Andy Osnard (Brosnan) is banished to Panama, where 
his superiors believe he will be incapable of stirring up trouble. But 
Osnard soon enters into a shady arrangement with tailor Harry Pendel 
(Rush), whose wife Louisa (Curtis) works in the administration of the 
Panama Canal. With Harry's reluctant assistance, Andy begins to weave a 
complex plan involving rebels and the Canal to hoodwink his bosses; and 
Harry may get caught in the crossfire.
Review: "The Tailor Of Panama" comes across as the most cynical James Bond 
movie ever filmed. Brosnan is an obvious casting choice, devilishly toying 
with the audience's preconceived expectations; where Bond is stylish, 
charismatic and heroic, Osnard is stylish, charismatic and utterly 
selfish. And whereas the typical James Bond movie is larger than life, 
full of explosions and colourful villains, "Tailor" is more of a character 
piece, and avoids vilifying anyone in particular. This is a tale of the 
greed of men and the stupidity of nations: how some choose to profit from 
it, and some merely try to survive it. Rush is excellent as Harry, a man 
who quickly realises he is caught up in something over which he has no 
control. Curtis, though, feels a bit wasted as Louisa, and her character 
is the most ill-defined of the principal cast. Boorman impresses with his 
careful direction, achieving an even balance between the script's more 
adrenaline-fueled moments and its essential intricacy. He also takes great 
advantage of the lush Panamanian setting, the whole movie looking as 
though it was filmed through a haze of heat and humidity. The ending does 
feel a bit unsatisfying, with events moving so quickly that it threatens 
the movie's coherency. But as an example of an espionage picture without 
the usual cartoonish superheroics, "The Tailor Of Panama" is impressive.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A disgraced British spy is sent to Panama to dig up some dirt on the latest
governmental regime. He quickly strikes a deal with a debt-ridden tailor, by
which money would be exchanged for information that the tailor overhears
from his distinguished clientele. But how much of what the tailor is saying
is actually true and how far will this information ultimately go? See the
movie for more of those details...
CRITIQUE:
Pierce Brosnan playing a British spy? Say it ain't so! Poor guy, I hope that
he does eventually work his way out of this typecast-from-hell role, but 007
aside, let's break this puppy down. I didn't know anything about this movie
going in, and seeing it under the naked eye was quite refreshing indeed. I'm
generally interested in most films which offer insight into different
countries, different religions, cultures, and this one puts you right in the
thick of things down in Panama. The story is intriguing, the performances,
nicely done on the whole, and the conclusion, most fascinating and hilarious
to see wind down. On the negative tip, the film did feel a little redundant
at about the halfway point (although it picked up near the end), has a
couple of underdeveloped characters, notably Jamie Lee Curtis, who felt more
like window dressing (Can someone please light Ms. Curtis' left boob? Okay,
action!), and didn't do much for Brosnan's attempt to stretch his acting
muscles away from his staple character, but all in all, the negatives
weren't all that bad.
In fact, on the whole, the film was actually quite amusing. And despite it
being set more as a "drama" per se, the film ultimately turns into a major
 type of flick, as the lies pack onto the facades, the bribes
onto the blackmailings, until almost no one really knows what end is up
anymore. There's also a re-occurring conscience character who pops in and
out from time to time, and keeps things light-hearted. But you have to go in
knowing that this film does not have any action, elongated car chases or
fistfights. It's a political drama, with some tense moments, lots of
intrigue, lots of maneuvering about, some ironic humor and generally
entertaining results. I'd also have to give a major nod to its star,
Geoffrey Rush, who plays the sap trapped in the middle of all of this
international manipulation (but does he know it?) very well. It was funny to
see him squirm from scene to scene, and he reminded me a lot of William H.
Macy's Oscar nominated character from FARGO. Another great showing by Rush!
In fact, the whole relationship between the disgraced spy and the shaky
tailor was the cornerstone of the film, as each man so obviously tried to
overcome the failures of their respective pasts.
So if politics and the spy-game interest you in the least, this film should
definitely delight you to some extent. But even if you're just looking for a
pretty original story, told via certain familiar routes, and an ultimately
fascinating denouement, you should also check this trickster out. The
"humor" might not be appreciated by everyone, since it really isn't an "in
your face" type of funny, but as a whole, I think that the film develops
enough successful elements to satisfy most film fans.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
13 Days (8/10) - Before Night Falls (4/10) - The Contender (8/10) - The
Jackal (4/10) - Mission Impossible 2 (7/10) - No Way Out (8/10) - Proof of
Life (7/10) - Ronin (8/10) - The Siege (6/10) - The Talented Mr. Ripley
(6/10) - The World is Not Enough (7/10)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Rush's son in this movie is played by Daniel Radcliffe, a name which we will
be all too familiar to us in a few months, as he's to play the lead
character in the highly anticipated HARRY POTTER movie. Rush's daughter in
the film is played by one Lola Boorman. The director's name is John Boorman.
Hello!?
This movie is based on the 1996 novel by John le Carre, who also co-wrote
and executive produced this project.
Pay close attention and you will note several in-jokes in this movie,
including one in which Rush says to a client, "That was Mr. Connery's
choice", an obvious nod to Sean Connery, the actor who played James Bond
years before Pierce took over the lead. Brosnan also makes two references to
other movies, including CASABLANCA and THE FULL MONTY.
This film was shot entirely on location in Panama.

Author
Christopher Null
Somebody told Pierce Brosnan to change his image.
In The Tailor of Panama -- based on John Le Carré's novel and directed
by John Boorman (Beyond Rangoon, Zardoz) -- Brosnan trades in the
sophistication of James Bond for the identity of crude, disgraced spy
Andy Osnard, an MI-6 operative that has to be shipped off to Panama on
account of his loathsome behavior.  Once he arrives in Panama City, the
bad behavior doesn't stop: Osnard immediately sets upon the task of
uncovering "what's going on" with the Panama Canal.  Rumors swirl that
it will be sold to another country now that Panama has it back from the
U.S.  Or perhaps there will be a coup from a populist underground?
Osnard's first task is to hook up with an informant, and he quickly
ferrets out that Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush -- Shine, Quills) is not
the mild-mannered expatriate tailor he pretends to be.  Not only does he
serve as the tailor for virtually everyone in Panamanian society
(including the President), he also has a past that includes a stint in
prison.
Stricken with financial troubles, Pendel uses Osnard as much as Osnard
uses him.  Andy pays the tailor for information gleaned from his
government clients.  Pendel, a peon in their eyes, simply makes stuff up
in order to get the payoffs.
Of course, this spirals out of control until a real crisis develops --
but who knows how far it will go, all based on the lies of a lowly
tailor?
To be honest, who cares?  The outrageous and wholly unbelievable plot
developments of The Tailor of Panama are hardly its selling points. 
Instead, it's fun to delight in the performance of Brosnan as a
borderline bad guy -- an unrepentant lech who spews invective and
innuendo at every turn.  Rush's character, playing opposite him in
virtually half the movie, blurts his responses out well enough so that
he just about keeps pace with Osnard.  Their interchanges are fun, and
the opposite actors work well onscreen together.
Less interesting but also worthy are the supporting players, including
Jamie Lee Curtis (somewhat miscast as Pendel's brazen wife), Catherine
McCormack, and Brendan Gleeson -- all pawns in the various plots going
on.  Boorman's direction is vintage Boorman -- which is to say, there
isn't much of it, but at least it doesn't get in the way.
The Tailor of Panama is hardly a great movie -- but maybe it's because
it's just too soon for Noriega-era nostalgia.  I mean, we're only on our
second President Bush.  But if it were 20 years later, or if the plot
were a little more straightforward or if they picked up the pace, would
it really have mattered?  I doubt it; ultimately, The Tailor of Panama
is no more unlikely a tale than your typical Bond movie -- it's just a
lot less fun.
Director: John Boorman
Producer: John Boorman
Writer: John Boorman, Andrew Davies, John Le Carré
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Geoffrey Rush, Leonor Varela, Jamie Lee
Curtis, Brendan Gleeson, Harold Pinter, Catherine McCormack, Daniel
Radcliffe, Lola Boorman
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/tailorofpanama/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Andy Osnard (Pierce Brosnan, "The World Is Not Enough") has just about used up 
the good will of MI6 when he's assigned to Panama to keep an eye on British
interests in the Canal.  In order to gain contacts and information, Andy
ferrets out Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush, "Quills"), an ex-convict with a
Saville Row front in "The Tailor of Panama."
Adapted from the John le Carre novel by the author, director John Boorman
("The General") and Andrew Davies, "The Tailor of Panama is a cheeky lark
about an immoral agent playing colleagues, superiors and countries against
each other to his own benefit while spinning an 'innocent' tailor into a
duplicitous stew.  While family man Harry Pendel doesn't deserve Andy's 
blackmailing, he's susceptible to it because he's duped his wife along 
with his customers and is facing financial difficulties.  Harry's a decent 
fellow who remains loyal to  anti-Noriega freedom fighters Marta (Leonor 
Varela, TV's "Cleopatra"), who was brutally disfigured, and Mickie Abraxas 
(Brendan Gleeson, "The General") now a brokendown alcoholic.  Yet he uses 
these two to concoct a story about "The Silent Opposition," a group 
purportedly arming up to defend the Panamian President's selling of the Canal 
to a) Japan, b) France or c) China/Taiwan. 
Andy's bs detector is on, but he figures Pendel's story will be bought.  
It is, and soon offers in the millions rain down from the U.S. via 
Osnard's boss Cavendish (Johathan Hyde).  That hasn't stopped Osnard 
from attempting to also get at Harry via his wife Louisa (Jamie Lee Curtis),
an American who just happens to work for U.S. Government interests in
the Canal with unshakeable loyalty.  She's already sensed something amiss
with Harry, though, and goes on the offensive.  Meanwhile, Harry's 
make-believe has caused events to take such a dramatic turn that he's 
shaken to his core.
"The Tailor of Panama" works wonderfully in its playful setup right up
through the beginning of an American invasion of Panama City (played
for yucks and getting them!).  Deceit is everywhere, from Harry's seemingly
sympathetic banker (Jon Polito, "Stuart Little") calling in a loan to 
naive Cavendish's handling of the U.S.  Osnard plays hard and fast to bed 
British diplomat attache Francesca (Catherine McCormack, "Braveheart").  
Harry amusingly gets advice from Uncle Benny (Harold Pintner), the 
deceased Jewish Uncle who set him up in Panama.
The film goes into a nose dive, however, as the two leads get into serious 
business trying to outmaneuver one another.  There's no satisfaction in 
the wrapup, in which the (marginally) 'good' guy barely squeezes out of 
harm's way as corruption still reigns.
Rush gives another delightful performance as the put upon Pendel, whether
he's chalking up a suit pattern, making breakfast for his kids or trying
to keep one step ahead of Osnard.  He gains audience empathy as a man 
deserving the second chance Uncle Benny provided.  Brosnan has a ball 
turning his suave Bond agent sideways with malicious glee and his is a 
fun performance to watch.  Gleeson is odd casting as a Panamian rebel, 
but he takes ownership of the character and makes us believe he's a 
Central American hero destroyed by his own fighting spirit.  Jamie Lee
Curtis brings little to her role as the bewildered wife in a lackluster
performance.  Get your first screen glimpse of the boy cast as Harry Potter, 
Daniel Radcliffe, as Harry and Louisa's son Mark.
The film, shot on location in Panama by cinematographer by Philippe
Rousselot ("Remember the Titans"), looks sweatily slick.  Editting is
comical while the film remains in hijinx mode.  Bush family supporters
will have their noses tweaked.  
"The Tailor of Panama" is best when it's shaken, not stirred.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
British MI-6 agent Andrew Osnard (Pierce Brosnan) really screwed up his
last assignment and is reassigned to the armpit of the Foreign Service -
Panama. Trying to make the best of a bad assignment, Andrew recruits the
local tailor to the Panamanian elite, Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush), for
information and unleashes a series of events that may lead to America
taking back the Canal in the John Le Carre story, "The Tailor of Panama."
Andrew Osnard is the antithesis of the always-honorable James Bond
character that we have viewed, for many years, as the quintessential
example of the British secret agent. Brosnan, himself, has made a career
playing the legendary 007, and takes a dark departure with his spy who is
left out in the cold by his bosses for his previous "indiscretions." Andrew
is the kind of suave, yet slimy, guy who can seize opportunity when he sees
it. That's when he has the idea to bring Harry into his control and milk
the tailor for information about his well-to-do clients, to get the pulse
of Panama, so to speak.
Harry has built his business on a Saville Row reputation and has become
quite well off as the clothier to Panama's stars. But, a bad, costly
investment in a failing farm forces Harry to act as an info-for-pay
resource for Andrew. To get enough money to cover his debts, Harry invents
a story about the country's "Silent Opposition," led by a former Noriega
foe, Michelangelo Abraxus (Brendan Gleeson). Mickey, Harry reports to
Andrew, is the new hope of the Panamanian people to end the government's
continued repression. The only trouble is, Mickey, Harry's good friend,
isn't told about the deception. As the money starts to roll in, the
indebted tailor perpetuates his lies with even bigger ones, digging himself
in deeper and deeper into a quagmire.
Andrew's controllers in Britain aren't satisfied with Harry's reports and
demand hard proof before giving their tailor a penny more. Desperate, Harry
involves his own wife, Louisa (Jamie Lee Curtis), assistant to the manager
of the entire Canal, without her knowledge. As things spiral out of Harry's
control, he sees everything he has so carefully built for so many years
come crashing around him.
As I watched the first two thirds of "The Tailor of Panama" I could not
help but to compare it to the 1960 Alec Guinness spy spoof, "Our Man in
Havana." Both films are about a hapless everyman who is drawn into the spy
game. But, since there is nothing, really, to spy on, he invents intrigue
and develops a fake spy network. In both films, the hero's intentions are
the best, but go wrong nonetheless. Both start out whimsically, but only
"Our Man in Havana" sustains it. Le Carre's story departs as it moves away
from its early whimsy and takes on a dramatic tone that reps a sudden
change of direction for the story.
This is where "The Tailor of Panama" runs into problems. The light-hearted
nature of the bulk of the film is smothered by the serious episodes that
represents Harry's final fall, losing him nearly everything he has worked
for - including his beloved wife. This sharp turn in the story occurs very
late in the film and is handled perfunctorily, making the viewer shift
gears abruptly. This may be faithful to Le Carre's novel, but the
screenplay, cowritten by the author, is, on the whole, unsatisfying in its
conclusion.
Performances, both in front of and behind the camera, are uniformly solid.
Geoffrey Rush is always a pleasure to watch and he gives nuance and
dimension to his Harry Pendel. Harry is not all he seems or says, but
preserving his family and life are his reason for his deceptions. He is a
good man who, in the end, must pay the price for trying to grab the gold
ring.
Pierce Brosnan appears to being having one heck of a good time as the
anti-Bond. His out-of-favor Andrew is cunning and underhanded enough to get
his way. He is not beyond using Harry's misinformation for his own gain,
even feathering his own nest with millions of dollars of espionage funds.
Brosnan comes across as sexy and sleazy at the same time.
The rest of the cast is made up by a bevy of talented actors, from Curtis
and Gleeson to Leanor Varela as Harry's disfigured (from the Noriega days)
secretary Martha, keeping the supporting cast close to the central action.
There is also a plethora of small and cameo performances, including
Catherine McCormack as Andrew's foreign service lover, Francesca, Jon
Polito as a deceitful banker and Harry's supposed friend, and Dylan Baker
as a gung ho US Army general. Playwright Harold Pintner plays the pivotal
role as Harry's dead Uncle Bennie, who appears to the tailor at critical
times, advising his nephew to give up his dangerous life.
Cinematographer Philippe Rousselot gives the film a lush, crisp look that
has a coolness belying the heat and humidity of the Panama location. As you
would expect from a story about a tailor, costuming, by Maeve Paterson, is
exceptional, especially the suits of Harry's design and the casual suavity
of Brosnan's attire.
"The Tailor of Panama" had me for the bulk of the film, but its sudden turn
from whimsy to drama left me out in the cold. I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christian Pyle

The Tailor of Panama
Reviewed by Christian Pyle
Directed by John Boorman
Written by Boorman, Andrew Davies, and John Le Carre (based on a novel by
Le Carre)
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Geoffrey Rush, Jamie Lee Curtis, and Brendan Gleeson
Official site:  http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/jump/f_tailorofpanama.html
In his latest film, Pierce Brosnan plays a British secret agent.  Imagine! 
What a range! 
In his defense, though, this spy, Andy Osnard, shares with James Bond only
his profession and his knack for pissing off his bosses.  After a series of
personal scandals, Andy is being exiled to Panama.  As soon as he gets off
the plane, Andy makes contact with Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush), a British
tailor who claims to have a Saville Row pedigree.  Since Harry cuts suits for
everybody who's anybody in Panama, Andy figures that Harry can provide him
with info juicy enough to convince London to send money.  As it happens,
Harry is deeply in debt and is willing to take Andy's offer.  So he spins
Andy tales of a group of revolutionaries planning to overthrow the gangsters
who control Panama.  Harry points to his friend Mickie Abraxas (Brendan
Gleeson), once a vocal opponent of Noriega but now a drunken shell of a man,
and his receptionist Marta (Leonor Varela), whose face was scarred by
Noriega's thugs, as leaders of the opposition.
Andy sees that Harry's stories, true or not, could be profitable.
This movie reminds me of "The Silver Bears," an obscure 1977 film in which
the Mafia takes over a Swiss bank and finds itself the victim of an elaborate
silver-mine scam.  Like that movie, "Tailor" presents a satiric world where
most people are corrupt to some degree and where the few innocents suffer
from the machinations of the guilty.  In "Tailor" someone describes Panama as
"Casablanca without heroes."  That's an apt description; in this movie Bogie
would have sold the letters of transit to the highest bidder, seduced
Bergman, and left Paul Henreid holding the bag.
But I wouldn't be surprised if "Tailor" was a more accurate depiction of how
real-life spies and governments operate than any other movie on the subject.
Although Brosnan gets higher billing, Geoffrey Rush is the lead actor, and he
does his usual top-notch job.  Harry Pendel is a complex character.  He's a
sweet person, a devoted husband (to Jamie Lee Curtis' character), father, and
friend.  He tries to embody the Saville Row tradition, believing that all the
best values of Civilization can be summarized by a well-cut suit.  However,
his whole life is built on lies.  The ghost of his criminal mentor Uncle
Benny (playwright Harold Pinter) appears to Harry whenever Harry is in danger
of telling the truth.  Rush plays the contradictions of Harry's character
expertly. 
Pierce Brosnan has a less challenging job than Rush but does an excellent job
of playing off his image.  Here the natural charm that he plays as suave as
Bond and Remington Steele is played here as slick and smarmy.  The line
between suave and smarmy proves the be surprisingly thin.  Perhaps that is
why Brosnan chose this role.  Since he's planning to leave the Bond series
after the next installment (due next year), one would think that he'd want to
play anything except a British secret agent.  Although he's only been playing
Bond since 1995, the shadow of 007 has lingered over him his entire career;
it's almost as if he had a visible tattoo saying Born to Be Bond.  Leaving
the role is a very risky move for his career.  Consider the post-Bond careers
of the other actors who've had the role; even Sean Connery had a lonely,
hitless decade before his Oscar-winning comeback in "The Untouchables."
Bottom line:  A cynical, entertaining antidote to Bond-inspired spy flicks
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Robin Clifford
British MI-6 agent Andrew Osnard (Pierce Brosnan) really screwed up his
last assignment and is reassigned to the armpit of the Foreign Service -
Panama. Trying to make the best of a bad assignment, Andrew recruits the
local tailor to the Panamanian elite, Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush), for
information and unleashes a series of events that may lead to America
taking back the Canal in the John Le Carre story, "The Tailor of Panama."
Andrew Osnard is the antithesis of the always-honorable James Bond
character that we have viewed, for many years, as the quintessential
example of the British secret agent. Brosnan, himself, has made a career
playing the legendary 007, and takes a dark departure with his spy who is
left out in the cold by his bosses for his previous "indiscretions." Andrew
is the kind of suave, yet slimy, guy who can seize opportunity when he sees
it. That's when he has the idea to bring Harry into his control and milk
the tailor for information about his well-to-do clients, to get the pulse
of Panama, so to speak.
Harry has built his business on a Saville Row reputation and has become
quite well off as the clothier to Panama's stars. But, a bad, costly
investment in a failing farm forces Harry to act as an info-for-pay
resource for Andrew. To get enough money to cover his debts, Harry invents
a story about the country's "Silent Opposition," led by a former Noriega
foe, Michelangelo Abraxus (Brendan Gleeson). Mickey, Harry reports to
Andrew, is the new hope of the Panamanian people to end the government's
continued repression. The only trouble is, Mickey, Harry's good friend,
isn't told about the deception. As the money starts to roll in, the
indebted tailor perpetuates his lies with even bigger ones, digging himself
in deeper and deeper into a quagmire.
Andrew's controllers in Britain aren't satisfied with Harry's reports and
demand hard proof before giving their tailor a penny more. Desperate, Harry
involves his own wife, Louisa (Jamie Lee Curtis), assistant to the manager
of the entire Canal, without her knowledge. As things spiral out of Harry's
control, he sees everything he has so carefully built for so many years
come crashing around him.
As I watched the first two thirds of "The Tailor of Panama" I could not
help but to compare it to the 1960 Alec Guinness spy spoof, "Our Man in
Havana." Both films are about a hapless everyman who is drawn into the spy
game. But, since there is nothing, really, to spy on, he invents intrigue
and develops a fake spy network. In both films, the hero's intentions are
the best, but go wrong nonetheless. Both start out whimsically, but only
"Our Man in Havana" sustains it. Le Carre's story departs as it moves away
from its early whimsy and takes on a dramatic tone that reps a sudden
change of direction for the story.
This is where "The Tailor of Panama" runs into problems. The light-hearted
nature of the bulk of the film is smothered by the serious episodes that
represents Harry's final fall, losing him nearly everything he has worked
for - including his beloved wife. This sharp turn in the story occurs very
late in the film and is handled perfunctorily, making the viewer shift
gears abruptly. This may be faithful to Le Carre's novel, but the
screenplay, cowritten by the author, is, on the whole, unsatisfying in its
conclusion.
Performances, both in front of and behind the camera, are uniformly solid.
Geoffrey Rush is always a pleasure to watch and he gives nuance and
dimension to his Harry Pendel. Harry is not all he seems or says, but
preserving his family and life are his reason for his deceptions. He is a
good man who, in the end, must pay the price for trying to grab the gold
ring.
Pierce Brosnan appears to being having one heck of a good time as the
anti-Bond. His out-of-favor Andrew is cunning and underhanded enough to get
his way. He is not beyond using Harry's misinformation for his own gain,
even feathering his own nest with millions of dollars of espionage funds.
Brosnan comes across as sexy and sleazy at the same time.
The rest of the cast is made up by a bevy of talented actors, from Curtis
and Gleeson to Leanor Varela as Harry's disfigured (from the Noriega days)
secretary Martha, keeping the supporting cast close to the central action.
There is also a plethora of small and cameo performances, including
Catherine McCormack as Andrew's foreign service lover, Francesca, Jon
Polito as a deceitful banker and Harry's supposed friend, and Dylan Baker
as a gung ho US Army general. Playwright Harold Pintner plays the pivotal
role as Harry's dead Uncle Bennie, who appears to the tailor at critical
times, advising his nephew to give up his dangerous life.
Cinematographer Philippe Rousselot gives the film a lush, crisp look that
has a coolness belying the heat and humidity of the Panama location. As you
would expect from a story about a tailor, costuming, by Maeve Paterson, is
exceptional, especially the suits of Harry's design and the casual suavity
of Brosnan's attire.
"The Tailor of Panama" had me for the bulk of the film, but its sudden turn
from whimsy to drama left me out in the cold. I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Andy Osnard (Pierce Brosnan, "The World Is Not Enough") has just about used
up 
the good will of MI6 when he's assigned to Panama to keep an eye on British
interests in the Canal.  In order to gain contacts and information, Andy
ferrets out Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush, "Quills"), an ex-convict with a
Saville Row front in "The Tailor of Panama."
Adapted from the John le Carre novel by the author, director John Boorman
("The General") and Andrew Davies, "The Tailor of Panama is a cheeky lark
about an immoral agent playing colleagues, superiors and countries against
each other to his own benefit while spinning an 'innocent' tailor into a
duplicitous stew.  While family man Harry Pendel doesn't deserve Andy's 
blackmailing, he's susceptible to it because he's duped his wife along 
with his customers and is facing financial difficulties.  Harry's a decent 
fellow who remains loyal to  anti-Noriega freedom fighters Marta (Leonor 
Varela, TV's "Cleopatra"), who was brutally disfigured, and Mickie Abraxas 
(Brendan Gleeson, "The General") now a brokendown alcoholic.  Yet he uses 
these two to concoct a story about "The Silent Opposition," a group 
purportedly arming up to defend the Panamian President's selling of the Canal 
to a) Japan, b) France or c) China/Taiwan. 
Andy's bs detector is on, but he figures Pendel's story will be bought.  
It is, and soon offers in the millions rain down from the U.S. via 
Osnard's boss Cavendish (Johathan Hyde).  That hasn't stopped Osnard 
from attempting to also get at Harry via his wife Louisa (Jamie Lee Curtis),
an American who just happens to work for U.S. Government interests in
the Canal with unshakeable loyalty.  She's already sensed something amiss
with Harry, though, and goes on the offensive.  Meanwhile, Harry's 
make-believe has caused events to take such a dramatic turn that he's 
shaken to his core.
"The Tailor of Panama" works wonderfully in its playful setup right up
through the beginning of an American invasion of Panama City (played
for yucks and getting them!).  Deceit is everywhere, from Harry's seemingly
sympathetic banker (Jon Polito, "Stuart Little") calling in a loan to 
naive Cavendish's handling of the U.S.  Osnard plays hard and fast to bed 
British diplomat attache Francesca (Catherine McCormack, "Braveheart").  
Harry amusingly gets advice from Uncle Benny (Harold Pintner), the 
deceased Jewish Uncle who set him up in Panama.
The film goes into a nose dive, however, as the two leads get into serious 
business trying to outmaneuver one another.  There's no satisfaction in 
the wrapup, in which the (marginally) 'good' guy barely squeezes out of 
harm's way as corruption still reigns.
Rush gives another delightful performance as the put upon Pendel, whether
he's chalking up a suit pattern, making breakfast for his kids or trying
to keep one step ahead of Osnard.  He gains audience empathy as a man 
deserving the second chance Uncle Benny provided.  Brosnan has a ball 
turning his suave Bond agent sideways with malicious glee and his is a 
fun performance to watch.  Gleeson is odd casting as a Panamian rebel, 
but he takes ownership of the character and makes us believe he's a 
Central American hero destroyed by his own fighting spirit.  Jamie Lee
Curtis brings little to her role as the bewildered wife in a lackluster
performance.  Get your first screen glimpse of the boy cast as Harry Potter, 
Daniel Radcliffe, as Harry and Louisa's son Mark.
The film, shot on location in Panama by cinematographer by Philippe
Rousselot ("Remember the Titans"), looks sweatily slick.  Editting is
comical while the film remains in hijinx mode.  Bush family supporters
will have their noses tweaked.  
"The Tailor of Panama" is best when it's shaken, not stirred.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
SSG Syndicate
  Pierce Brosnan may play a British spy but he's no 007 in
John Boorman's stylish adaptation of John Le Carre's 1996 post-Cold
War thriller. Instead, Brosnan plays a sleazy, disreputable and
disgraced M16 agent who's been sent to Panama City. "It's 'Casablanca'
without heroes," he's told.  His job is to check on drug trafficking
and money laundering. Armed with bribes and a bit of blackmail, he
coaxes debt-ridden Geoffrey Rush to pass along information about his
wealthy customers at the elite Braithwaite & Pendel
custom-tailors. ("That was Mr. Connery's choice," Rush murmurs about a
fabric - wink, wink!) Plus, Rush is married to Jamie Lee Curtis, an
American who works as assistant to the Panamanian director of the
Canal. (Their son is Daniel Radcliffe, the future Harry Potter, and
their daughter is the director's child Lola Boorman.) So when there's
no gossip, Rush invents tantalizing if dubious tidbits, like selling
the Canal, perhaps to China, which immediately ignites a political
drama. Writer Andrew Davis collaborated with Le Carre and Boorman on
the amusingly sophisticated screenplay which evokes memories of Graham
Greene's "Our Man in Havana" and "The Quiet American" with ironic
touches of wit and whimsy, like having Brosnan chat with Rush as they
dance in a gay bar to Irving Berlin's "Let's Face the Music and
Dance."  There's a superb supporting cast: Harold Pinter as Rush's
deceased mentor and conscience, Brendan Gleeson as an alcoholic
revolutionary, Catherine McCormack as a sultry embassy attache, and
John Fortune as the Ambassador. And Philippe Rousselot's
cinematography captures Panama's skyscrapers and squalor. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Tailor of Panama" is a caustic,
clever 8. It's a tantalizing romp of international intrigue.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Based on John LeCarré's popular novel, The Tailor of Panama is a clumsy spy
flick that fits like a bad suit.  It's a bit more sophisticated than a James
Bond film but without the gadgets or the pyrotechnics, which is kind of like
ordering a chicken sandwich with mayo and asking the waiter to hold the
chicken. Tailor is receiving mostly glowing marks from critics around the
country, but I have a suspicion that their praise has more to do with the
crappy teen flicks that have populated 2001's calendar than the film's
actual merit.
Pierce Brosnan (The World is Not Enough) stars as Osnard, an overly
ambitious, womanizing British spy who has been relegated to Panama after
dipping his wick where it didn't belong.  His assignment is to befriend a
person of power in Panama City in an attempt to learn whether the government
plans on selling the Panama Canal to a country that the U.S. and Britain
aren't particularly fond of (the opening credits feature a weird history
lesson on the Canal).  Osnard is given a list of about 200 Brits living in
Panama and, after quickly scanning the roster of names and occupations,
immediately chooses a tailor over the dozens of lawyers, bankers and
politicians you'd think would be a better source of information.
But ol' Osnard is a crafty little devil.  He figures the revered tailor to
be the perfect mole, as he has regular contact with the country's movers and
shakers.  Osnard also learns that Harry (Geoffrey Rush, Quills) has the
added benefit of being an ex-con with a secret past who is in hock up to his
eyeballs, as well as a wife (Jamie Lee Curtis, Drowning Mona) who is an
assistant to a high-ranking government employee.  Osnard feeds Harry thick
envelopes full of cash, and Harry gives Osnard information about the sale of
the Canal.  The catch is that he's making it all up.  A tailor weaving a
fake story - get it?  It's funny.
There are supposed to be a bunch of twists and turns in Tailor, but nothing
too surprising happens as the actors go through the same motions we've seen
over and over again in films of this genre.  Also detracting from potential
entertainment is the fact that there isn't anyone to root for in the film.
One character says Panama is "Casablanca without the heroes," an obvious
poke at the picture's lack of a protagonist, which illustrates Tailor's
other big problem - its tongue is planted too far in its cheek and it can't
decide whether it wants to be serious or silly.  One thing is for sure - it
ain't either.
Brosnan seems like he's having fun playing Bond's alter ego here.  His
Osnard is a sleazy pussyhound who even gets a sexy dance scene just like the
one in The Thomas Crown Affair.  Rush, who is always better when he's cast
in subtle roles like this (as opposed to, say, Quills, Mystery Men or House
on Haunted Hill), does well as the harried, slightly delusional suitmaker
who converses with his dead uncle (playwright Harold Pinter) during
particularly stressful moments.  Curtis basically reprises her
oh-my-God-my-husband-is-a-spy! role from True Lies (although, at times, it's
hard to tell if she or Rush has more testosterone pumping through them).
Brendan Gleeson (M:I-2) is nearly unrecognizable as a bearded drunk who may
or may not be running a group in opposition of the sale of the Canal that
may or may not be taking place.  And look out for little Daniel Radcliffe;
he plays Harry's son here, but in a few months, he'll be portraying Harry
himself - Harry Potter, that is.
Tailor is mostly unsatisfying, especially since it's John Boorman's
follow-up to the brilliant film The General (which also starred Gleeson).
Boorman adapted the novel with help from Le Carré and Bridget Jones's Diary'
s scribe Andrew Davies.  The film is certainly pretty enough, with lovely
photography from Philippe Rousselot (Remember the Titans) and unobtrusive
editing from Boorman regular Ron Davis.  If nothing else, Tailor helps
perpetuate the myth that all countries south of Texas have daily,
street-blocking parades complete with giant religious icons (it's always the
Day of the Dead in Central America, right?).
1:49 - R for strong sexuality (nudity), language and some violence

Author
Ross Anthony
The film starts slowly, sleepily slowly, but builds well. Like Ravel's 
"Bolero," the first pages play so faintly you might think the film 
hasn't yet begun, but by the middle, the canal's waters are flowing so 
well that the current will take you rapidly to the climax. 
As an alternative punishment for his snaky behavior, Brosnan is sent to 
Panama in hopes of finding an assignment potentially less embarrassing 
to the British government. Some mundanely simple task that even a 
scheming womanizer like Brosnan couldn't screw up, for instance, keeping 
tabs on the canal and who's running it since the Yanks handed it back to 
Panama. 
Effortlessly bored, Brosnan slithers into Rush's suit shop in search of 
an unbiased insider with a good ear, loose tongue and empty pockets. 
Threatened with publication of his own imperfect passed, Rush tailors a 
story for which any slippery intelligence officer would be happy to 
grease palms. 
This is not the action-thriller Bond fans might expect. Instead, Panama 
rolls like a filmed stage-play. Dialogue (sometimes enjoying it's own 
cleverness a bit too much) and character relationships spin this yarn. 
Nod, nod, wink, wink. 
Sex and sexier, Brosnan has little patience for flirting, "There are two 
ways we can do this. We can wait till the six months have passed and 
then fall into each other with farewell passion, or we can begin an all 
out affair right now." 
I enjoyed the ever-increasing line of tension and complexity so evenly 
sewn through careful direction; however, the production should have 
begun with a stronger initial pace. The first twenty minutes are as 
slumberous as the last are captivating. The story, keen and interesting, 
whirls well, building nicely to an ending not easily predicted. While 
leaving its audience entertained, this climax lacks a moving emotional 
component. 
The Tailor of Panama. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Pierce Brosnan, Geoffrey Rush, Jamie Lee Curtis, Brendan 
Gleeson, Xatheine McCormack, Leonor Varela, Martin Ferrero, David 
Hayman, Jon Polito. 
*  Directed by John Boorman. 
*  Screenplay by Andrew Davies, John le Carre, John Boorman. Based upon 
the novel by John le Carre. 
*  Produced by John Boorman at Merlin/Columbia. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When Harriet Beecher Stowe, the diminutive author of
"Uncle Tom's Cabin," was introduced to President Abraham
Lincoln, the first words from Lincoln's mouth were, "So you're
the little woman who started this big war!"  The pen can
indeed be mightier than the sword.  If we go along with
scripters Andrew Davies, John Le Carre and director John
Boorman's often humorous interpretation of John Le Carre's
novel, a tailor who learned his trade in prison could have led
the U.S. into a war with Panama in 1999.  "The Tailor of
Panama" is one of two movies opening within a week of each
other (along with "Blow") that will be of particular interest to
one segment of the movie-going population while
disappointing another.  If "Blow" is an urbane biopic about a
major drug lord responsible for the majority of cocaine that
came into the U.S. in the 1970s and not an updated version
of "Scarface" as some might expect, then "Tailor," while
featuring a womanizing James-Bond sort of feller, is more for
lovers of chess matches than video games.  An ultra-
sophisticated, sardonic spy story in the tradition one of the
genre's most famous novelists, "The Tailor of Panama" is
loaded with ironies and twists and enough surprises to keep
even the most passionate fans of the species on their toes.
   Featuring Philippe Rousselot's lavish, widescreen lensing of
the Panama Canal and the capital city of that Central
American nation--which captures the free-spirited people of
that ravishing, hot, sulty and diverse expanse--"The Tailor of
Panama" is the story of a bizarre friendship of convenience
between a burned-out, forty-five-year old spy about to turn in
his cloak and dagger and retire when he is given a final
warning.  Having been caught in a compromising position
with the wife of a European ambassador, Andy Osnard
(Pierce Brosnan) is relieved of his assignment in London and
sent to the backwater post of Panama to finish out his career
and to unearth information about the future of the Panama
Canal.  A rumor is circulating that Panama's president is
considering the sale of the waterway from which the U.S.
retreated in 1999 and that the vital conduit could pass into
the hands of enemies of Britain and the United States.  
   Being the sort of chap who would rather swing in
hammocks and swing in more active ways than do any dirty work
himself, Osnard hires his own spy, a subcontracting job if you
will, playing up to a man he believes can give him the
information he needs.  That would-be informant is the title
figure, Harry Pendel (Geoffrey Rush), a high-class tailor to
the bankers, lawyers, and other movers and shakers right up
Panama's president, and what's more his wife Louisa (Jamie
Lee Curtis) is the administrative assistant to the canal's
director.  If the tailor cannot provide juicy details, no one else
can.  Luring Pendel into the conspiracy with envelopes
loaded with cash, Osnard is pleased to learn from the tailor
that a dangerous deal is indeed going down for the sale of
the canal and that the whole operation, which could spell
disaster for the West, could be halted if a leader of Panama's
resistance movement known as the Silent Opposition can be
financed to wage an insurgency.  Osnard and Pendel are
more interested in skimming some big bucks for themselves
than in getting reasonable proof of Panama's course of
action.  They would as soon put a phony spin on frail
evidence even if their testimony leads to an international
cause celebre.
   While "The Tailor of Panama" is fiction, the story makes
one think of just how unfair the foreign policies of
superpowers could be.  For example, when President Clinton
ordered the bombing of an alleged weapons-making plant in
the Sudan, was his information accurate or was the bombed-
out works just a legitimate pharmaceutical operation as the
Sudanese claim?  And was the Bay of Tonkin Resolution
which led to an escalation of the war in Vietnam based on
appropriate details about the plans of the Viet Cong and
North Vietnamese to expand their influence even beyond their
own borders?
   Our doubts about our own state department are evoked
when things turn out seldom what they seem in the lush land
whose travel posters once used the tagline, "So romantic that
even the oceans get together."  Osnard himself, however, is
not exactly a romantic, but a cynical soon-to-retire snoop who
is so certain of his looks and charm that he boldly seduces
women, even those who appear as difficult as Francesca
(Catherine McCormack), the ice princess administrator
working out of the British Embassy in Panama City.  Told by
an expected conquest, Harry Pendel's wife Louisa, that he is
a wicked man, Osnard coolly responds, "That's part of the
appeal, isn't it?"  Brosnan is Bond, but an evil one this time
around and Geoffrey Rush, who can play an emotionally
disturbed concert pianist with the same fortissimo as he can
a sadistic inmate in a French asylum, is magnificent as a
sewer of tall tales who under stress gets visions of his
departed Uncle Ben (Harold Pinter).  
  The entire ensemble pulls off this complex tale of intrigue
will alacrity, including Brendan Gleeson (who was the title
character of John Boorman's masterful "The General") and 
Jamie Lee Curtis as the suspicious wife of Panama's most
accomplished but prevaricating tailor.  Watch especially for
the scene in a gay bar highlighting a dance in which Osnard
leads Pendel to the tune, "Let's Face the Music and Dance."
Rated R.  Running time: 109 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
