Title
Review for Gothic (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
Ken Russell's "Gothic" is one of the crudest, most excessively
overwrought, unimaginably worst films ever made - a travesty of the
memory of Percy Shelley, Mary Shelley, Lord Byron and anyone else
involved in that hallucinatory evening back in the summer of the early
1800's. Yes, the film purports to be about that evening but I am sure
it was a lot classier and civilized than Russell's version of it.
Not to say that it was not a sexual, druggy romp for all involved, as
I am sure it was, but this often looks like wild outtakes from
"Woodstock" crossed with "Caligula." Natasha Richardson is the
tranquil Mary Shelley, Julian Sands is the laudanum addict Percy
Shelley, and Gabriel Byrne is the laughably miscast, brutish, devilish
Lord Byron, in exile at the Villa Diodati where all the hanky-panky
takes place. Also on hand is the highly loony Dr. Polidori (Timothy
Spall) and Mary's stepsister (Miriam Cyr), who all indulge in
debauchery (free love as Percy calls it), and hallucinatory fever
dreams where reality and fiction sort of cross over. There are snakes
(a typical Russell visual), corpses, stillborn babies, hands
puncturing nails, abortions and lots of sex. The question is that in
all of Russell's mishmash of fiery, bloody images, when did Mary
creatively think of her idea for "Frankenstein" or Polidori think of
his "Vampyre" story? The film only shows the hallucinations b!  ut
precious little time is invested in any of the characters. They are
vapid, one-dimensional cartoons in Russell's universe, and the fact
that these literate minds read horror stories to each other during a
brutal thunderstorm is only barely hinted at. It's all fire and
brimstone played to the hilt, and likely to bore anyone to tears who
is not interested in a Heavy Metal music video with Thomas Dolby's
overused electronic score groping for our attention.
"Gothic" has the stylish look of a rock video but none of the
atmosphere or subtlety of a Universal horror flick. It sputters, spits
itself out in stylistic strokes and tries to thrill us with
nightmarish overkill, but it ultimately fails to enlighten. I admired
some of Russell's other visionary trips but "Gothic" is strictly
subterranean junk.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Pedro Sena
The stories surrounding the Byrons's and Shelley's that abound, and have
been turned into many a myth, are looked at, here, as a link into the
creation of the novel of Frankenstein.  This film, is the  story of the
forces that created some literature, the best known of which is Mary
Shelley's opus work.
But looking at these romantic writers, in the mountains of the Swiss alps,
amidst many thunderstorms, is a bit more than one can really expect, under
the hands of the director Ken Russell.  The film starts and ends as a freak
show.  And in between, it REALLY
is a freak show.  But then, what price creativity, it seems...???
In a suggestive ambience, and amidst many creative binges, this acting
ensemble manages to bring forth a bit of the feeling, and lines, that are so
famous to many people in the world of literature. I doubt that anyone will
appreciate the context through which any of this is done, specially the
literati, but much of it has been documented, and told in many stories
regarding these romantic heroes and their women, and their jet set life
style.  The fact remains, that both Byron and Shelley became two of the best
poets of the 19th century, and that Mary Shelley's novel was magnanimous,
and scared the wits of all of those writers.
The story, that became within the story, is basically what this film is
about, and although the imagery is a bit on the weird side, it does kind
bring about the many sides of things.  Shelley is a bit of a flake, but
inspired.  Byron is serious, but his seriousness
creates some lovely rhymes.  Polidori, is a gay, disturbed person, a doctor
who decries not having been able to become an alchemist. And the women,
well, at first they were just the women.  Mary had a long history of
political intrigues, her parents having been famous for the women's rights
movement in England.  Clare was a rich girl
having some fun.
The story suggests that their meetings included many sexual adventures, but
given the stature of their work later, it is hard to believe that sex was
all that their get togethers were all about.  The film tries to bring out
that point, but gets lost in the shuffle.  We do end up looking at things as
a bit of the jaded minds at work, all the time.
Gabriel Byrne as Byron, is interesting.  Julian Sands as Shelley, comes off
as a bit effeminate, and I wish that someone had infused a bit more of the
poetical mind.  Natasha Richardson as Mary Shelley is the most interesting
of them all, in that she is the curious type amidst it all, and a bit of the
nurse trying to keep everyone together.
In the hands of the director Ken Russell, this is an interesting endeavor,
and probably one of his less celebrated orgies of visual garbage, but the
film is a bit on the loony bin, kept there because the characters inside are
a freak show by any standard, even if they were famous.  It's a sad
treatment, because there is much more literature, than mere words, that
affected all of these people, in order to create the minds that changed
literature at the time.  This, is obviously missed in the hands of Ken
Russell, or perhaps we don't care anymore, unless it is a freak show in the
first place.
Interesting, but then again, only if the story of the times appeals to your
sense of curiosity, as to how these creative forces came  together and
helped each other write.  The one thing that the film does not clarify, is
that Byron insisted that some of these meetings be done STRICTLY for writing
purposes.  The results are famous.  The
film will be forgotten.
