Title
Review for Sands of Iwo Jima (1949)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark O'Hara
SANDS OF IWO JIMA ranks as one of John Wayne's finest films, including 
his Westerns.  It's story follows a tough platoon commander and his men 
through some of the bloodiest battles of the Pacific theater, including 
Tarawa and Iwo Jima.
Wayne's performance is a classic.  I'm fairly sure it was my 10 year-old 
daughter's first exposure to Wayne, and I'm glad she saw him in a 
representative role.  When you first see Wayne, he should be doing his 
best tough-guy act, like he does with Sergeant John M. Stryker.  What a 
hard-as-nails name!  (Isn't there a professional wrestler named Sergeant 
Striker?)  To give a fictional character a middle initial is another nod 
to realism.  Anyway, your first time seeing "The Duke" should be when 
he's unsentimental, doing a difficult job and shunning credit, all the 
while using his one-of-a-kind talk and walk.  
Here his character was more challenging than many of his typical roles.  
Stryker is hard-nosed almost beyond tolerance, to the point that many of 
his men complain and begin the rumblings of mutiny.  But when we find 
out that Stryker's wife has left him and taken their child, and that the 
boy does not write to his father, we see some of the motivation behind 
his behaviors.  We understand better - though not completely - why he 
goes on drunken binges. Although the subplot concerning Stryker's 
personal life follows the formula of many war films, it certainly makes 
for good psychological study, and contributes a freshness to the film.  
Two of Stryker's men take his treatment personally.  As Corporal Thomas, 
Forrest Tucker hates Stryker's guts because Stryker beat him in a 
divisional boxing match some time earlier.  The old grudge surfaces 
until they are, once again, engaged in fisticuffs.  Only this time a 
colonel spots the sergeant beating up on his own man, and we watch one 
Marine show his loyalty to another Marine, when Thomas claims Stryker 
was only instructing him in combat judo.  In Thomas' confession to 
Stryker just after their make-up, we see the effects of a very sticky 
moral situation, a scene that would hold its own with any ethical 
dilemma I can think of in movies.  Pfc. Peter Conway's hatred of Stryker 
is more complicated.  He is a Harvard-educated businessman, an amateur 
soldier here to fight the war and then return home.  When Conrad marries 
and later receives a letter from his wife, telling of their newborn 
baby, we see Stryker's jealousy.  The only question at this point is how 
will Conway (played by John Agar) come to terms with his sergeant?
Real footage from Pacific campaigns is used convincingly in the film.  
When we see flame-throwing tanks igniting the battle-scarred hills of 
the islands, we form at least an idea of how devastating war can be.  
The smoothness of the film clips is pleasing too: the battlefields of 
the movie set match the real battlefields closely.  And the difference 
in film quality is not much.  Most remarkable is the planting of the 
flag atop Mount Suribachi.  Director Alan Dwan uses an almost corny 
method of drawing our attention to the scene immortalized in the Iwo 
Jima Memorial - Marines struggling to raise the Stars and Stripes.  But 
the effect caps the film nicely.
A recent trend in movie-making takes another look at standard genres and 
revises their supposed goals.  Clint Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN showed us a 
Western whose hero was a gun-toting murderer.  Steven Spielberg made 
perhaps the finest war movie ever in SAVING PRIVATE RYAN.  My point is 
that RYAN has been advertised not as a war movie, but an "anti-war" 
movie.  Taking a look at John Wayne's efforts in SANDS OF IWO JIMA, I 
cannot see how he or the film praises war.  I cannot see, especially 
with the anti-climatic ending, how this narrative uses war for the 
mindless support of political causes.  
I would recommend anyone watch this John Wayne film.  And if you are 
watching with Wayne  first-timers, withhold your comments about this 
grand old actor, and let them form their own opinions.  The man is 
impressive enough to leave his mark on many generations.


Author
Dragan Antulov
Many years ago I used to watch television show hosted by
Irish comedian Dave Allen. One of the gags in that shows
parodied American WW2 movies, featuring tough sergeant,
determined to mold bunch of his soldiers into single combat
organism. The scene had been funny in its own sense, but
only after many years I managed to find the source of the
inspiration. If parody could be viewed as an ultimate form
of flattery, Allen must have liked SANDS OF IWO JIMA, 1949
war film directed by Allan Dwan and one of the best known
examples of that particular genre.
The movie plot deals with the platoon of US marines in the
Pacific Theatre of WW2. The year is 1943, and Sergeant John
N. Stryker (played by John Wayne), platoon leader and
battle-hardened veteran of Gualdacanal Campaign, receives
new group of fresh, inexperienced marines. He begins
training them for the upcoming battles in the island-hopping
campaign and he trains them very hard, bullying them at
every opportunity. Since Stryker happens to be embittered
man after his family leaving him, many question his real
motives. But Stryker's hard lessons become very valuable for
the men when they experience their own baptism of fire
during the landing on Tarawa Island.
This film is often referenced as an example of militaristic
propaganda in Hollywood. On the surface, it really looks
like the canticle for American military and the
scriptwriters Harry Brown and James Edward Grant spare no
effort to teach the viewers about patriotism, self-sacrifice
and other virtues that embody US Marine Corps. On the other
hand, they were subtle enough to allow characters to be more
than one-dimensional. John Wayne, who was often seen as
embodiment of American gung-ho militarism, gave rather
realistic performance here; his Sergeant Stryker is tough,
capable and very valuable to men in combat, but he is hardly
a superman nor a perfect human being. His "Oscar" nomination
for this role was well- deserved, although some scenes
contained unnecessary sappiness. The other actors are
shadowed by him, especially those playing stereotypical
ethnic characters that were obligatory ingredient to this
type of film. The real value of this film is not in the
acting, though. Director Allan Dwan did a really impressive
job in editing documentary war footage into the film, and
the black-and-white photography works splendidly, making
SANDS OF IWO JIMA one of the most realistic and exciting war
films of that era. On the other hand, Dwan's zeal towards
authenticity has hurt the film - some of the real life
Marines and heroes of Iwo Jima appear in cameo roles playing
themselves and their wooden, uninspired performances shatter
the illusion. Which is real shame, because this celluloid
monument to US Marines could have been as impressive work of
as the one made of bronze.
