Title
Review for Murder in the First (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Scott Tobias
     There's a good, and timely, story trapped deep within the excess
of MURDER IN THE FIRST, a new movie about the abuses of our prison
system.  With a country wrapped up in feverish debate over the crime
issue and the rights of the accused and the incarcerated in jeopardy,
this expose would offer something rare to recent American movies--a
point of view.
     But director Marc Rocco makes it clear from the beginning that
pretentious, often nauseating, camera movements and slick, MTV- style
lighting and editing are far more important.  There's not a moment in
the picture where he surrenders technique for pure storytelling.  And
everything suffers.
     Christian Slater and Kevin Bacon star as defense attorney and
Alcatraz inmate, respectively.  After spending an unprecedented amount
of time in an isolated cell for attempting to escape, Bacon murders
another prisoner and faces trial.  His young lawyer (Slater) is fresh
out of law school but determined to "put Alcatraz on trial" for the
abuses of it warden (Gary Oldman).  The result is the usual courtroom
theatrics- imagine a Stanley Kramer production shot by hyperactive film
school students.
     There's very little to praise here outside of Kevin Bacon's
earnest overacting and the appropriate story.  There's a lot of
overacting from everyone--you know you're in trouble right away when
R. Lee Ermey (the drill sergeant in FULL METAL JACKET) is cast as a
judge, the center of reason and moderation.  Slater has never been
convincing and certainly isn't here and Oldman is on a bad streak of
hammy performances.
     But the worst feeling you get while watching MURDER IN THE FIRST
is that the man behind the camera could care less about telling a good
story.  There are long exchanges of dialogue where the camera is not
even moving near the characters, let alone with them.  How frustrating
it must be for actors to work under these conditions.
     If there's anything that has alway distinguished American films
over the rest of the world, it is our ability to tell a good story.
Have we forgotten?

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in the 1930s and 1940s Warner Brothers was known for its
crime and gangster films.  And while they were generally indictments of
Organized Crime, Warner Brothers also occasionally would make a film
such as I WAS A FUGITIVE FROM A CHAIN GANG criticizing the barbarities
of the system.  In that tradition and considerably stronger is MURDER
IN THE FIRST, also from Warner Brothers.  This is a fictionalized story
of an actual case history of petty thief Henri Young (played by Kevin
Bacon) sent to the maximum security Alcatraz Federal prison because
they had space and he had stolen $5 from a post office.  After an
escape attempt he is placed in solitary confinement in a nearly pitch
black underground cell for 38 months--19 days should be the maximum.
During the confinement he is tortured brutally and reduced to little
more than an animal.  He is abused by Associate Warden Glenn (Gary
Oldman) who takes the escape attempt as a personal affront.  Glenn's
sadistic torture and his diatribes are reminiscent of Amon Goeth in
SCHINDLER'S LIST,  Upon release from solitary, Young is manipulated
into murdering the only other prisoner survivor of their four-man
escape attempt.
     Young is assigned a Public Defender, a young lawyer who is given
the case only because it is absolutely hopeless.  James Stamphill
(Christian Slater) has in Young a client who was seen to commit the
crime by two hundred convicts and who refuses to talk to Stamphill or
even react to his presence.  And Stamphill is under strong pressure to
lose the case.  MURDER IN THE FIRST is a harrowing and powerful drama
set in a Kafkaesque world of omnipresent abuses of power and trust.
With the possible exception of the judge (R. Lee Ermey) just about
everybody in this film in a position of power abuses that power.
Bosses verbally abuse their employees, prison officials and guards
abuse and torture the inmates, trolley car conductors abuse their
customers, even family members exploit each other.  The script by Dan
Gordon has a strong anti-establishment message and a powerful noir-ish
tone.
     Top-billed Christian Slater does his best to hold on to the film
but he is still just Christian Slater in a 1940s business suit.  Slater
never conveys more than muted emotions at the best of times.  In this
film he is acting with Gary Oldman, the Robert Duvall of his
generation.  Oldman nearly always turns in a terrific performance, and
as the sadistic Glenn he is genuinely chilling.  Kevin Bacon is
generally not so impressive, but this is the best role of his career so
far.  Robbed of his soul by the cruelty of 38 months of unspeakable
tortures, harrowingly portrayed in the first half hour of the film, he
is little more than a wounded automaton.
     Director Marc Rocco has a style that verges on the
expressionistic.  He uses a very dark and bleak photography throughout
the film.  Nearly all of the scenes, particularly in and around
Alcatraz, are painted in grays, blues, and blacks to underscore the
somber noir-ish feel.  Rocco gets the downbeat feel he would have had
in black and white.  Or perhaps he gets it more so because the viewer
is aware that these depressing tones are in full color.  The only time
we see much color at the prison is a shot through some colorful weeds
up at the gray prison.  But even more noticeable than the artificial
color scheme is the use of the camera.  Fred Murphy's camera gives us
overhead shots, sideways shots, pan shots, dolly shots, track shots,
steadicam shots and a few shots there may not even be names for.
Initially it seemed to be showing Young's disorientation because of his
confinement in darkness, but the lively and active camera lasts through
the whole film.  In mock 1940s newsreels we are treated to hand-held
camera shots that I thought were not invented until decades later.
This and the pretentious usage of Christ images during Young's
suffering add a mild irritant of pretentiousness.
     This is a powerful message film at a time when most films'
strongest statement is political correctness.  MURDER IN THE FIRST gets
a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     With the possible exception of THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE, few of
the recent flood of "based on a true story" motion pictures have been
particularly concerned with adhering to the facts behind the tale.
MURDER IN THE FIRST is another example of a movie that strays from
historical reality to create a more dramatically-appealing product.
And, regardless of how this version raises the hackles of Alcatraz
aficionados, Marc Rocco's movie is a solid and affecting example of
film making.
     It's March 25, 1938, and an escape attempt from the maximum
security federal penitentiary at Alcatraz has failed.  Two of the four
escapees are dead, a third--the informant--is returned to his cell, and
the fourth--a twenty-five year old named Henri Young (Kevin Bacon)--is
placed into a dark, grimy cubicle deep beneath the ground.  There, for
three interminable years, his only respite from loneliness are the
frequent visits of guards and Associate Warden Glenn (Gary Oldman), and
the beatings they administer.
     When his long stint in solitary confinement ends and Young is
re-integrated into normal prison-society, revenge consumes him--a need
to lash out against the man who blew the whistle on the escape.  This
he does, driving a spoon through the victim's throat, tearing away his
life.  With no regard for the barbaric treatment which turned a petty
thief into a killer, the government tries Young for first-degree
murder--a crime that carries a death sentence.  Assigned to defend him
is an up-and-coming member of the public defender's office named James
Stamphill (Christian Slater), perhaps the only man to believe in his
client's innocence.
     As a court drama, there's little to distinguish MURDER IN THE
FIRST.  Sure, there are the theatrics we expect from high voltage
clashes between the defense and the prosecution, but little in the
trial sequences set MURDER IN THE FIRST apart from numerous
predecessors, many of which are far more memorable.  After all, who can
forget Tom Cruise and Jack Nicholson facing each other down in A FEW
GOOD MEN?  Nothing here approaches that level.
     However, MURDER IN THE FIRST is as much an indictment of the penal
system as an account of one man's fight against a first degree murder
rap, and that's where the picture's strength lies.  The events leading
to Young's actions are graphically rendered, and little doubt remains
about where the responsibility lies.  The questions that arise are
whether Stamphill can prove it and, in the process, how much of his
personal security he's willing to sacrifice.
     Ultimately, however, it's Bacon's performance that elevates the
film.  With his astounding depiction of a man who has endured the
torments of the damned and is waging a losing battle against his own
dark fears, the actor draws the camera's focus to himself and
mesmerizes the audience with his haunted eyes and agonized cadence.
When Young says that all he really wants is a friend, Bacon's delivery
gives impact to the plea.
     Christian Slater is competent as Stamphill, an unusual role for an
actor who has often been likened (sometimes unfavorably) to a young
Jack Nicholson.  Here, his usual cocky cynicism is replaced by an
erstwhile sincerity.  Meanwhile, the ubiquitous and versatile Gary
Oldman is a notch more subdued than in his other recent roles (THE
PROFESSIONAL and IMMORTAL BELOVED), but the intensity has merely been
redirected.  Associate Warden Glenn is a man bubbling with internal
turmoil.
     Unlike THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, this movie isn't about triumph
behind prison bars.  Instead, MURDER IN THE FIRST is an unrelenting
look at the dehumanizing effects of prison life, and what can happen
when power is abused.  Some scenes may be too graphic for audience
members to view comfortably, but "comfort" isn't on director Rocco's
agenda.  Little that occurs towards the end to affect a false sense of
dramatic closure reduces the power of bearing witness to the exposure
of Henri Young's soul--or what's left after Glenn and Alcatraz have
finished with it.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
I was asked by the publicist for MURDER IN THE FIRST to write a book
review based on a copy of the novel by Dan Gordon she gave me a few
weeks ago.  This makes it difficult to now see the film and write a
review of the movie with the book fresh in my mind.  (The book review
is in the following message.)
     For one thing, the book is more exciting than the film.  For a
second thing, why was it necessary to change the fictional names the
author, Gordon, had given the characters?  Does everything have to be
twisted around when making a movie from a book?  Willie Moore (in the
book) sounds better than Henry Young (Kevin Bacon).  Henry Willard
Davidson (Christian Slater), the young lawyer in the book, becomes
Stamphill. Oh, well.
     There have been many books on prisons and prison life but none so
clearly describes the utter authoritarian brutality visited on anyone
when a jailer, Mr. Glenn (Gary Oldman), wishes to punish.  This film is
based on a true story, an attempted escape of Alcatraz and the
subsequent events that made present day Alcatraz a tourist attraction
in San Francisco bay.
     When Warden Humson asked Mr. Glenn why number 532 (the number was
also changed!) was in solitary confinement for three years, the reply
he got was that the records will show that no one has attempted an
escape since Young received his punishment.  "You let those animals
think escape is possible you might as well stick in a revolving door.
Is that what you want, Sir?"
     Nevertheless, the warden decides Young has learned his lesson and
he is released from solitary, half crazed.  Gordon has described the
darkness, in the cave-like one-room, the little peephole in the "door,"
the smell.  Three years.  In the film, it is too dark to see much of
the "dungeon" as solitary was called.
     In all the time Young was holed up, his mind was on learning who
was the snitch who gave away the escape plan.  It was the one thing
that kept him alive.  When, his first day out of the dungeon (as it was
called) and on line in the mess hall, another convict whispers the name
of the snitch. A few moments later, Young gets his revenge and once
more is thrown under Mr. Glenn's authority.
     Gordon details the new punishment Young must now endure.  The
story then switches to the young Public Defender and his efforts to get
a fair trial for Young ... with Young not responding.
     While Gary Oldman and Christian Slater are let loose to give forth
with their histrionics, most of Kevin Bacon's work is in the dark ...
as is most of the film.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Road trip!  On their way to L.A., driving companions Whoopi Goldberg and
Mary Louise-Parker stop to pick up a friend (Drey Barrymore) in
Pittsburg.  She's just ko-ed her abusive husband with a baseball bat and
needs to both get away and stay away.  So they head out to the highway,
ready to play tunes and paint toenails.  Sound familiar?
Call it another "chick flick," but this logical successor to THELMA AND
LOUISE delivers an intriguing message about the price of freedom.  From
the POV of screenwriter Don Roos, the cost of empowerment includes
pregnancy, AIDS, and a six-month jail sentence.  Directed by Herbert
Ross (STEEL MAGNOLIAS).
As an old science-fiction geek from long, long ago, I thought I'd find
at least *something* to enjoy in the doomed HIGHLANDER III.  Wrong.
This is direct-to-video fare at it's finest, with plotting that would
shame even the cheapest comic book.  Mario Van Peebles (!) plays the
sword-wielding villain, who returns from a 400-year imprisonment to
battle Christopher Lambert and his mysterious accent.
AMADEUS it ain't.  Gary Oldman is certainly right for the role of Ludwig
van Beethoven.  He can brawl like the best rock star and brood like the
most serious composer.  He even plays his own piano, which, in this
film, is no small feat.  Too bad the CITIZEN KANE-like structure of
writer/director Bernard Roses's biography-as-a-mystery never uncovers
anything interesting.  Great soundtrack, though, if you don't mind the
conspicuous absence of period instruments.
Horror helmer John Carpenter is behind this painfully slow story of a
hard-boiled insurance investigator (Sam Neill) trying to track down a
missing Stephen King-sort (Jurgen Prochnow).  The I.I. believes the
disappearance to be a publicity stunt, until he ends up trapped in the
author's fictional town.
The premise is great, but Carpenter's pacing is all wrong.  He doesn't
even frame the story very well.  Neill does what he can with a very
unappealing character.  He's no fun to watch.  A better mystery might be
to figure out how John Glover, David Warner, and Charleton Heston (!)
were corralled into this mess.
They are a pair of pranksters from Queens who specialize in abusive,
obscene phone calls.  Their strengths are their voices, which help
breath to life such unforgettable characters as the irate Frank Rizzo
and the hapless Sal Rosenberg.  What the Jerky Boys are *not* are
actors, and this movie makes the mistake of trying treat them as same.
A truly innovative script would've kept the Boys (Johnny Brennan and
Kamal) hidden off-screen for the entire film.  This slop reveals their
identities within the first five minutes--a mistake from which the film
never recovers.  Sure, the two recreate some of their better-known bits
to amusing effect, but the bulk of the film is just one, long chase
scene.  And what are William Hickey, Alan Arkin, Ozzy Osbourne, and Tom
Jones doing here?
Executive produced by Tony Danza and Emilio Estevez (!).
This overdirected courtroom drama would like to be as exciting as A FEW
GOOD MEN, but director Marc Rocco doesn't have enough sense to keep his
camera still during the best parts.  He swirls and twirls through every
scene as if he were filming a wrestling match.  Both Kevin Bacon and
Gary Oldman (again!) are quite good, but Christian Slater is a loss.
He's too much of a lightweight for this sort of stuff.
You don't have to see either BLUE or WHITE to enjoy RED, director
Krzysztof Kieslowski's final installment in his TROIS COLOURS trilogy.
RED is also the final film for the director, who has announced his
retirement.  Chance encounters are one of the many ways that this
captivating--and puzzling--film explores the idea that we are all
connected in ways we never realize.  Front and center is a love story
between a fashion model (Irene Jacob) and a retired judge (Jean-Louis
Trintignant).  Subtitled.
If you're in the mood for another sweeping family saga ala LEGENDS OF
THE FALL, then try TO LIVE.  Director Zhang Yimou (RAISE THE RED
LANTERN) recounts three decades of Chinese history as seen through the
eyes of a poor, working-class couple (Ge You and Gong Li).  You won't
see anything like Brad Pitt here, but you *will* get a remarkably
detailed portrait of Life Under Mao.  Winner of two awards at last
year's Cannes film festival including Best Actor.  Subtitled.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Honestly, if I never see another courtroom scene in a movie, it
will be too soon.  As soon as I see a witness stand, a couple of
guys in suits, and twelve good persons and true, I know I'm in for
nothing less than a good old-fashioned lecture.  It's Jello drama:
ready instantly, but usually without much texture.  MURDER IN THE
FIRST has an inherently interesting story at its core, but its
makers don't know what to do with it except dress it up in cliches
and impress us with cinematographic gymnastics.  It's not a bad
film; it's just lazy, a classic example of a writer and director
failing to make the most of an idea's potential.
     MURDER IN THE FIRST is loosely based on the true story of Henri
Young (Kevin Bacon) a petty criminal sentenced to the Federal prison
at Alcatraz in the 1930s for stealing $5 from a post office.  After
a failed escape attempt, Henri is placed in solitary confinement for
over three years, routinely beaten and tortured by the prison's
associate warden Milton Glenn (Gary Oldman).  When he is finally
released from solitary, Henri attacks and kills the inmate who blew
the whistle on the escape attempt.  His case is assigned to rookie
public defender James Stamphill (Christian Slater) because everyone
believes that it's an open and shut case that no one could screw up.
But Stamphill decides that Henri does have a defense:  that the
brutality Henri suffered in Alcatraz turned him into a killer that
he wasn't when he entered.
     MURDER IN THE FIRST opens with a risky but effective sequence
which shows Henri's treatment while in the "dungeon."  The sequence
goes on for several minutes, but it is necessary considering how
much Henri's state of mind comes into play.  In fact, director Marc
Rocco doesn't really go far enough.  The torture sequences are too
romanticized, filmed in slow-motion and backlit like an S&M version
of FLASHDANCE, when it would have been more appropriate to play the
scenes straight so that Henri's plight seemed more real.  It is a
lack of restraint typical of Rocco's direction, which looks like he
put cinematographer Fred Murphy in a gyroscope and just set him
spinning.  You get the impression that Rocco thinks this story is
basically about crane shots and funky angles.
     What it should have been about, first and foremost, is the
relationship between Henri and Stamphill, but again Rocco and
screenwriter Dan Gordon don't take advantage of opportunities.  As
the film goes on, we learn about several things the two men have in
common, particularly that both lost their parents at a young age,
but these similarities aren't exploited.  Instead, Rocco just
indulges his camera, doing so to distraction during the first
meeting between Henri and Stamphill where the camear swings around
Henri's cell so noticeably that the actors get lost in the scene.
It's too much a case of the tail wagging the dog, such that by the
end of MURDER IN THE FIRST I didn't feel the friendship between
these two men which should have created its greatest emotional
impact.
     That said, the scenes between Bacon and Slater are the best
thing about MURDER IN THE FIRST.  Though Bacon's performance is
occasionally indulgent, coming off like Renfield with a Midwestern
twang, he is mostly extremely affecting.  It is by far the meatiest
role he has had, and he is effective at maintaining the shred of
humanity behind Henri's glassy stare.  Slater stays right with him
in the less showy role, very much the young go-getter in his early
scenes who only gradually comes to know the person at the heart of
his case.  One scene in particular, in which Slater compares the
punishment he received for stealing five dollars to Henri's, is a
great piece of work because Rocco lets the inherent power of the
moment work.  But then, inevitably, he must return to the courtroom,
and there things become trite and overblown again.  Gary Oldman
turns in another foaming-at-the-mouth performance as the sadistic
(gee, there's a surprise) warden, while R. Lee Ermey as the judge is
so similar to his role as the drill sergeant in FULL METAL JACKET I
thought he was going to call Slater "Private Pyle."  MURDER IN THE
FIRST, which should have been most about a connection between two
very different men, instead becomes a shouting match, and by trying
to make his film Important with a capital "I," Marc Rocco instead
makes it Mediocre with a capital "M."

Author
Vijay Ramanujan
Story: A prison inmate, originally jailed for petty theft, is abused
and tortured after a prison escape.  Three years in solitary confinement
leave him incapable of dealing with the world.  Immediately upon release
into the general prison population he kills the man who foiled his
escape.  The trial turns into a condemnation of Alcatraz and the prison
system.
Cast: Kevin Bacon (Henri Young--inmate), Christian Slater (James
Stamphill--lawyer), Gary Oldman (Glenn--warden).
     Opening in blackness with the sounds of a botched prison escape,
this movie starts out black and horrifying.  The first half hour of
this movie is powerful, well executed and, at times, hard to watch.
Gary Oldman is menacing, as usual, and has (necessarily) dispensed with
the wicked charm he has shown in previous movies such as Dracula and
The Professional.  The torture of the Henri Young is shown brutally,
with only occasional flashes of lighting, and a soundtrack of screaming
from Bacon and hushed talking from Oldman.  Taken out of solitary after
three years, Young is incapable of mixing with the prison population.
Every noise startles him, and he cringes, hiding from everyone and
everything.  When a fellow inmate points out the man who ratted on his
escape scheme, Young kills the man with a spoon in full view of the
prison population.
     These opening scenes are the most effective in the movie.  They
are grittier and more difficult than anything else the movie has to
provide.  Moving from the prison life to the scenes of interrogation of
Young by his young attorney, James Stamphill, the movie is occasionally
brilliant, mostly watchable and sometimes slow.
     Stamphill, in a series of alternatingly great and corny scenes
tries to get Young to say anything, managing only to get him to talk
about Joe Dimaggio and baseball.  As Young opens up to his new friend,
the news of brutality comes as a shock to Stamphill, who tries to turn
the impossible case into a name-making chance to indict the entire
prison system.
     As the trial progresses, the movie picks up some of its grit
again, shying away from the character study of James Stamphill and
Stamphill's interplay with his brother and his associate.  Instead, the
focus once again becomes the case, and the lengths to which the warden
and others are willing to go to surpress the case.  The trial scenes
are once again powerful, instead of simply interesting.  There is very
little in the way of brilliant courtroom tactics, and the courtroom
serves only as a forum in which Stamphill can confront the warden and
others in the name of Henri Young.
     The ending is neither too happy to be realistic nor too sad to be
watchable.  It stays in character with the rest of the film.
     The acting is probably the main draw in this film.  Kevin Bacon is
fantastic in his role, doing more with his body language and facial
expressions than his lines, which are often not-connected to the matter
at hand.  Slater is solid in a part which requires him, more than
anything else, to not take anything away from Bacon, and Oldman is his
usual self.  There really are few other characters worthy of note.
