Title
Review for Tatie Danielle (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Every once in a while there is a film that just plods along, and finally you
realize you like it.
This film, starts, and moves, as the grandmother you just hate.  No matter,
since she already hates you anyway.
Tattie D. lives in a small apartment in a small town and is bored senseless
with her maid, and the constant family visits of the terribly boring people
who are always nice to her, which she disdains.  The maid after much
teasing, finally gets to clean the dusty chandelier, and of course, falls
and dies ( or Tattie kicked the stepladder ) and now the old lady finally
gets her wish in going to Paris.  But she has to stay with her son, whom she
likes, but can't stand all the same.  As usual she gets to witness
everything in the house ( animals, she calls them ) and turn about every
good cause into a hellish nightmare for everyone.  The son has a vacation
planned and has to figure out a way to get someone to take care of the old
lady.  His sister is chosen.  But the old lady can't stand her because she
is a real dud ( gets pregnant and the guy walks ) and of course the real
story begins.  A maid is hired.  A young girl with a temper, but an ability
to stand up for herself, and not put up with the old lady's guff. Getting a
taste of her own medicine finally gets through and the old lady becomes a
bit more likeable.  The girl meets an English boy, they don't speak each
other's language, and the old lady happens to be able to translate.  The boy
is leaving, and the girl panics.  The girl wants to spend a few days with
him at the beach.  The old lady says no.  The girl speaks her mind and goes.
The old lady destroys the house, and tries to kill herself.  She gets taken
to an old folks home where she resumes her activities of nasty old lady with
a penchant for a good pastry.  One day she disappears.  And the next scene,
she is in the Alps with the young  girl, the only friend she has been able
to make, and share time with.
The film has a lot of funny gags with many people, and situations, and the
old lady's feet are lethal. And the actors in this film are fun to watch, as
they go through their motions. Rarely has an old lady dominated so much, and
then get hers in the end.
