Title
Review for House on Haunted Hill (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
After recently watching William Castle's spooky, funny classic "House on
Haunted Hill," one is instantly reminded of the innocence that existed in
horror films of the past. Director William Castle pushed for publicity and got
it by promoting wild gimmicks in theatres. In the case with this film, a
plastic skeleton would emerge from above the screen and terrorize the audience
- the gimmick was known as "Emergo." Kids would toss popcorn at the skeleton
but Castle's brilliance was in attracting an audience and he did. "House on
Haunted Hill" does not need such external effects because it does succeed on
its own merits. 
This quaint horror item stars the benelovent Vincent Price as Frederick Loren,
a millionaire who invites a group of selected guests to stay at a haunted house
for one night for $10,000 - the trick is to spend an entire night in the house.
Unfortunately, once the servants leave at midnight, there is no way to leave
the house, no electricity (candles are in abundance) and the phone line is
dead. 
The guests include Elisha Cook Jr. (the Steve Buscemi of his day) as Watson
Pritchard, a believer in ghosts who has a disturbing family history in the
dreaded house, Carolyn Craig as Nora Manning, a secretary who needs the money
to support her family, Richard Long as a suave, brave pilot who thrives on big
thrills, Julie Mitchum as a gossip columnist aiming to pay back some gambling
debts, and Dr. David Trent (Alan Marshal), who uses the opportunity to do a
study on hysteria. And the coup de resistance is not a walking skeleton but a
lovely, duplicitous blonde, Mr. Loren's young wife (Carol Ohmart) - afraid that
her husband will poison her as he has the former wives. 
The movie begins with lots of wicked, black humor touches such as the hearses
that arrive in unison at the house, the delicacy of Price's line readings when
offering booze to the curious guests and explaining the strategy of the long
evening, the chandelier crashing down on some guests while Price looks on with
amusement, the first conversation between Price and Ohmart as they talk about
poison, death and jealousy, and so on. 
The first half of "House on Haunted Hill" is chock full of moody atmosphere and
shock effects, some of it surpassing even 1963's "The Haunting." After a while,
director Castle can't resist the obligatory "who's there?" routine and the
seemingly ghostly, floating apparitions appearing outside windows and darkly
lit rooms. Oh, and there is an awful lot of screaming courtesy of Nora (a
whiner if I ever knew one, and why does nobody ever hear her in the entire
movie?). There is also a surprise ending that is more anticlimactic and
illogical given the numerous plot holes preceding it. For instance, what is the
deal with the caretakers? Why is one blind woman who seemed to be a ghost
involved in scaring the bejesus out of everyone? Was she part of some master
plan? And how does one keep a vat of acid in a basement for so long?
Of course, I am nitpicking a movie that should not be picked out for logic or
narrative cohesion, nor is director Castle the kind of man to care as long as
people are entertained (imagine what he might have done with "Rosemary's Baby"
if Polanski was not hired to direct). If you want an innocent, good old time at
the movies with some spooks and occasional scares and the pleasing presence of
the reliable Vincent Price, then by all means go and enjoy. If you are
expecting the seriousness and chilling air of "The Haunting," look elsewhere.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail with any questions, complaints or general comments at
jerry@movieluver.com or at FGaust667@aol.com
