Title
Review for Heart Condition (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        HEART CONDITION is all over the map; it's a high-concept mess,
suffering from multiple personalities.  Every few minutes, the film changes
genre, switching from buddy movie, to ghost comedy, to dramatic character
study, and to cops and robbers action.  The movie is a case study in
schizophrenia.
        Bob Hoskins plays an overweight cop who smokes and eats greasy
food.  He's a heart attack waiting to happen.  And ten minutes into the
movie, it does happen: Hoskins nearly dies of heart failure.  His life is
saved thanks to a last second transplant; Denzel Washington plays the
donor, a debonair lawyer who's been murdered.  The hook is that Washington
returns as a ghost to haunt Hoskins, pestering him to bring the killers to
justice.
        Writer-director James Parriott seems to be striving for the glossy
mix of comedy and action that raked in big bucks for BEVERLY HILLS COP.
And in Washington, the movie has an actor with enough charisma to blow
Eddie Murphy off the screen.  Unfortunately, thanks to Parriott's inept,
cliche-ridden script, HEART CONDITION never gels.  The running joke is that
Hoskins can see Washington, but no one else can see him.  So you have
countless scenes in which Hoskins argues with Washington in public.  To
everyone else around him, it looks like Hoskins is yelling at himself.
Gee, what will they think of next?!?
        The movie is pretty dumb, but luckily the performances make it
bearable.  Washington is simply captivating; he's an exciting screen
presence, even in a corpse like HEART CONDITION.  Hoskins is a tremendously
gifted comic actor, but regrettably he is betrayed by inferior material.
As Hoskins' ex-girlfriend, Chloe Webb makes her mixed-up character seem
reasonably convincing.  But it IS hard to believe that she's actually
attracted to Hoskins' grungy character.  In fact, when she kissed him at
the screening I attended, someone in the audience responded with a
resounding "Yuck!"
        Perhaps the most amusing aspect of HEART CONDITION is Washington's
wardrobe.  After he dies and becomes a ghost, Washington's clothing
magically changes in every scene to match his environment.  At the beach,
he's in shorts and a T-shirt.  In the hospital, he's in a spiffy blue
bathrobe.  Apparently, ghosts can change their wardrobe at will.  Oh, the
joys of the afterlife...
