Title
Review for Hard Rain (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
They say that bad things come in threes.  For Christian Slater, I guess
the three bad things would be:
1. He's the star of Hard Rain
2. He's the Associate Producer of Hard Rain
3. He's in frigging jail for biting someone
You know you're in trouble when Betty White (denture wearerRogaine
needer) is the big scene-stealer.
Hard Rain is the kind of movie where the bad guys chase the good guy
(Slater) around, but can't kill him because he has some special secret.
It is also the kind of movie where the good guy finds some hot babe
(Driver) while he's running about.  It is also about errrroh, who am I
kiddingit's not about anything else.
Slater plays Tom, an armored truck guard partnered with his Uncle
Charlie (human Chia Pet Ed Asner).  They've got $3 million and get
stranded during a flash flood in a small town.  Then the aforementioned
bad guys appear, led by Jim (Freeman).  Trouble soon ensues.
The best intentional part of the movie is when Tom is chased by bad guy
#3 (Wayne Duvall)on jet skisthrough a middle school.
The best unintentional part of the movie is the inconsistent levels of
the floodwaters.  At one point, the water nearly reached the traffic
lights but the one story sheriff station remained bone dry.  And I
didn't even hear a sump pump.  In fact, most places where the acting was
trying to happen had very little water until the actors showed up.
Then, it seemed to rise at an astonishing rate of about a foot per
second.
There is also a great unintentionally funny scene at the end when Karen
(Driver) signifies that killing is, in fact, bad by tossing her gun into
the flood water.  These scenes were finely crafted by Graham Yost, the
creative genius behind the recent Oscar hopeful Firestorm. Mikael
Salomon, whose only previous directing credit is the yawner Far and
Away, shows that he may be the second greatest helmer of water films
(after GodI mean James Cameron).  Next upThe Olsen Twins Splash-a-Bath
Christmas?

Author
James Brundage
Okay, here's what I think happened with Hard Rain. The producers of Speed
(Ian Brice, Mark Gordon, Allison Lyon Segon) went out after their big hit
and partied a little too much, poured one too many drinks down the hatchet.
They figured, hey, I've got the perfect tag line for a movie: A simple plan.
An instant fortune. Just add water.
So they take this idea and put it together, just adding water (5 Million
gallons of water) and a bunch of special effects, use their success with
Speed to muster Christian Slater, Randy Quaid, Minnie Driver (what a drop
from Good Will Hunting), and Morgan Freeman on board this ill-fated voyage.
The realize at this point that they forgot a script so they get the guy who
wrote Speed off from the set of HBO's From the Earth to the Moon and have
him draft one up in, say, three or four days. They don't even ever look at
the script and just pass it on (along with money in a crumpled envelope) to
cinematographer Mikael Salamon, figuring "The last time we got a
cinematographer to direct (Jan de Bont, Speed), it was a hit."
Then, with a couple more martinis, they all began the shoot. It dragged on
forever because they kept revising the script and puking and all of them got
sea sickness so they re-titled from The Flood to Hard Rain, put a biblical
quote in front of the trailer and said: all right, we're done.
Of course by this point in time the movie was landed not only in the worst
film month of the year (January), but while James Cameroon's epic Titanic is
still on its way to the top ten movies of all time. But, hey, they're still
drinking away so they don't notice that. At the end of it all they have a
terrible movie out making next to no money and pretty soon they're going to
wake up with one huge hangover. I don't want to have to foot the bill for
their four year long party night.

Author
Christian Pyle
In "Hard Rain," an armored car carrying $3M is caught in a flood.  A gang of
thieves led by Morgan Freeman attack, and the surviving guard (Christian
Slater) must run off and hide the money.  The gang pursues Slater through the
flooded streets of a small, evacuated Indiana town.  Along the way, he runs
into a woman restoring a church (Minnie Driver), the sheriff (Randy Quaid), and
a bickering old couple (Richard Dysart and Betty White).  (Dysart and White
provide excellent comic relief.)  The various characters fight each other as
the waters rise and the dam nears the breaking point.
Though burdened with the dumbest title in recent history, "Hard Rain" is an
entertaining blend of the genres of disaster and action.  It offers many
thrills but little depth.  The script by Graham Yost  has the same strengths
and weaknesses of his other work (which includes "Broken Arrow" and "Speed"): 
interesting premise and effective pacing but little attention to character,
i.e. plenty of style, little substance.  The lack of character development in
"Hard Rain" seems especially disappointing because the characters are
intriguing.  The gang of thieves includes a kindly leader (Freeman), a
slow-witted teen (Michael Goorjian), a Bible-quoting young man (Ricky Harris),
and a school teacher (Dann Florek); I kept expecting this odd collection of
people to be explained and developed.  (It wasn't.)
So, what we have is action and thrills.  The action moves well, and Slater and
Driver find many opportunities to nearly drown.  Director Mikael Salomon  has
experience making a movie in and under water; he served as cinematographer for
James Cameron's "The Abyss."
Š 1999 Christian L. Pyle
">http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Christian+Pyle>

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Hard Rain (1998)
Christian Slater, Morgan Freeman, Randy Quaid, Minnie Driver, Betty White.
 Directed by Mikael Salomon.
2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
It would be easy to dismiss the entertaining, but decidedly lightweight 
action film "Hard Rain" as mere fluff, were it not for the memories of 
last summer's dreadful "Speed 2: Cruise Control." That leaden monstrosity 
served as a primer on how to screw up an action movie. Bloated and dull, 
"Speed 2" was two hours of forced spectacle and frantic movement that 
generated little tension and virtually no fun. Conversely, "Hard Rain" 
takes a simple concept and turns it into an unassuming, efficient action 
film. Sure, you'll probably forget about it an hour or so after you've 
left the theater, but at least you'll have a good time while you're in 
there.
Set in Huntingburg, Indiana, "Hard Rain" is about an armored car heist 
and a whole lot of water. After flood waters force the evacuation of the 
small town, the local sheriff (Randy Quaid) and his deputies patrol by 
boat, searching for any local stragglers and keeping an eye out for 
looters. Meanwhile, an armored car breaks down on the outskirts of town, 
stranding drivers Tom (Christian Slater) and his Uncle Charlie (Ed Asner.
) A radio call for help results in the arrival of Jim (Morgan Freeman) 
and his crew, but their goal isn't assistance. They want the armored 
car's treasure, $3 million in cash. When the "rescue team" opens fire, 
Tom snatches the money and takes off on foot into the ever-deepening 
waters. The chase is on, with everyone pursuing Tom. Shifting allegiances 
and some snazzy action sequences keep the proceedings lively, as the 
flood waters continue rising higher and higher.
Water is notoriously hard to handle, so the creators of "Hard Rain" moved 
the production into a contained environment, building an extremely 
detailed replica of Huntingburg in a massive aircraft hangar in Palmdale, 
California. 50 wooden buildings were set in a tank two football fields 
long and one football field wide. Behind the faux downtown setting, the 
largest backdrop ever made, 72-feet high and 2,000 feet long, completed 
the Huntingburg re-creation. Then the whole set was flooded with five 
feet of water, deep enough for the actors to flail about convincingly, 
but shallow enough to allow them to find their footing when necessary. To 
simulate the rising floodwaters, the filming was divided into several 
stages. At the end of each sequence, all of the structures were lifted 
into the air, allowing crew members to cut away the bottom portions of 
the buildings. When the sets were lowered, the illusion of rising waters 
was complete. Ultimately, flood waters 16 feet deep were simulated for 
the production.
After finishing 75 days of shooting on the Palmdale set, the crew finally 
moved to the real Huntingburg, for a week of outdoor location filming. 
For the first time in Indiana history, a highway was closed to traffic 
for filming, as sandbags were placed at the junction of Interstate 231 
and Main Street, which was then covered with a few inches of water to 
simulate the early stages of the flood. 
"Hard Rain" was originally called "The Flood" and was scheduled for 
release last summer, but the film was pulled from the schedule and the 
name changed due to fears it would be mistaken as a disaster movie. In 
press materials, producer Mark Gordon stressed the difference between 
"Hard Rain" and a disaster film. "In those type of stories, the twister, 
flood or volcano serves as the antagonist. In our picture, Morgan Freeman 
is the antagonist, Christian Slater is the protagonist and we play out 
the action against the flood."
The action gets pretty spectacular, highlighted by two particularly nice 
set pieces; a jet ski chase through the flooded halls of a school, and a 
nifty dual speedboat crash through the stained-glass windows of a church. 
The acting isn't bad, either. Christian Slater mercifully avoids his 
chronic Jack Nicholson impersonation, underplaying Tom in straightforward 
heroic fashion. Morgan Freeman is grimly effective as the very focused 
leader of the bad guys, and Randy Quaid puts his snarky qualities to good 
use as the town's morally ambiguous sheriff. Minnie Driver, excellent in 
"Good Will Hunting," has a minor, but pleasing turn as a restoration 
expert who reluctantly gets drawn into the action, and Betty White makes 
an amusing cameo appearance as a feisty local who refuses to vacate her 
home. 
Despite the qualifications of the cast, don't look for any deep personal 
insights. Like its storyline, the characters in "Hard Rain" are 
streamlined; archetypal players making fast decisions in a volatile 
situation. "Hard Rain" is simply an action movie, but it has a certain 
elegance because of its lack of bombast or pretension. They're just 
trying to show us a good time here and, bless their little hearts, that's 
exactly what they do.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"Hard Rain" has some of the most exhausting-looking stuntwork and mechanical
effects I've ever seen in a movie.  They are used to prop up one of the
thinnest and most inept stories I've ever seen in a movie.  Times like this, I
fear the "Making Of" featurette is more absorbing than the flick itself.
Hell, the story's almost an afterthought.  An armored truck gets stuck in the
middle of a town that's being evacuated due to severe flooding.  A thief
(Morgan Freeman, who manages to be interesting even when given nothing of
substance to do) wants the $3 million in cash inside the truck.  There's a
shootout, one of the drivers is killed, and the other (Christian Slater)
escapes and stows the cash in a drowned mausoleum.
Up until this point the movie isn't bad, but then it quickly becomes an
exercise in -- dare I say it? -- soggy futility.  Freeman's character is
flanked by several inept (and wretchedly played) sidekicks, who tear through
the town on waterskis and shoot everything that blows bubbles.        Slater gets
mixed up with the local cops, who think he's a looter and slam him in a
holding cell.  (This actually leads to one of the better scenes in the movie,
where Slater has to figure out how to break out of the cell while the entire
building is slowly being flooded -- although the filmmakers cheat on the
outcome.)
I mentioned stunts and mechanical effects.  The whole film takes place within
the town -- a masterpiece of engineering, which just gets more and more
treacherous as the movie unspools.  I didn't doubt for a moment that I wasn't
looking at a drowning landscape.  What I did doubt was whether one atom of the
plot made any sense.
The film's confused in more ways that one.  I guess after Freeman came on
board, the script was rewritten to make the thief less of a monster and more
of a philosophical sort.  This, unfortunately, only makes us wonder why a
sensible fellow like him doesn't simply give up and head for dry land.
The monster role gets taken by the town sheriff (Randy Quaid), who behaves in
ways that say he is less greedy than stupid.  You might say that greed often
causes people to behave stupidly.  I imagine the screenwriters who dreamed
this nonsense up would have something to say about that.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Luke Buckmaster
It was once said that in order to truly enjoy some of todays movies or novels,
you must suspend disbelief.  However, there is a distinct separation between
opening your mind to ridiculous situations and believing a bunch of flat lies.
It came as no surprise to me to learn that Huntingburg, Indiana (where the film
is set), does not have a McDonald's, a Sears store, a statue of a man on a
horse, nor even a dam close by.
Even if you can ignore these somewhat white lies (even though the dam is
crucial to Hard Rains plot); there is still a bunch of things that just dont
gel.  Firstly, Morgan Freeman, possibly the greatest actor alive (after such
films as Driving Miss Daisy, The Shawshank Redemption and Se7en), was cast as a
shifty goon intent on stealing enough money for a healthy retirement.  He
_should_ have played the town sheriff, an experienced and somewhat intriguing
policeman.
As a massive flood started by a dam accident overwhelms Huntingburg, its
residents presumably flee as the water level steadily increases.  I say
presumably simply because we never know what happened to them; and it seems a
tad strange that an entire town (with the exception of some folk who get
introduced along the way) can vanish before the flood has actually started.  But
nether the less, armored guard couriers Tom (Christian Slater) and his Uncle are
carrying three million dollars in the back of their van.  With a heavy rainstorm
causing depressing conditions and slippery roads, it doesnt take long for the
van to end up stuck amongst mud and water off the side of the road.
Jim (Morgan Freeman) and a small gang of thieves locate the van and attempt to
steal the three million dollars.  But of course Tom is more than willing to save
the day, so he takes the money and hides it elsewhere in town.
The local sheriff (Randy Quaid, whom most will remember as the drunken pilot in
ID4) and a couple of police men investigate the situation, but their morals are
soon overpowered by greediness as each character contemplates what he/she would
do with their share of the three million dollars.
Director Mikael Salomon has made sure that Hard Rain ends up turning everything
topsy-turvy, and whilst the film may at first appear to be a definite goodies
versus baddies, there are numerous twists in its plot that make this a
slightly more enjoyable experience.  But by the time these interesting changes
occur, its far too late in the film for them to have much affect.  Hard Rains
continuos corniness and lack of originality washes out whatever hope the script
may have had; and although its cast is somewhat appealing most of its stars act
well below par.
Not at one stage capturing what could have been a fabulous on screen battle
between Slater and Freeman, we are left to reminisce on films that dared to do
something different and achieved more than what was expected.  Such titles as
Broken Arrow (Slater and John Travolta) and Face/Off (Nicholas Cage and John
Travolta) come to mind as films that have mastered silver screen confrontations.
Strangely enough, they were both directed by John Woo and both star John
Travolta.
We can forgive Morgan Freeman for giving a slightly disappointing performance
since he is newish to the action genre, but Christian Slater could have achieved
so much more had the amount of crummy one liners been reduced and some
personality added to his character.  If you had asked me whether Slater could
perform well enough to substantially boost a movie prior to the release of
Broken Arrow, my answer would have been a definite no.  I now know that he has
no excuse, and _can_ do better (if you dont believe me rent a copy of Broken
Arrow from your local video store).
Although Hard Rain never really works from the start, I somehow felt feelings of
missed opportunity when the credits filled the screen.  The addition of an
enticing sub-plot would have given the film time to breathe, rather than try to
cram 96 minutes of action and disaster into a story that cant handle anything
else.  Despite the fact that Hard Rain fails on almost every account, if your
standards are low enough you may find this to be a mildly enjoyable film.
No creative flair and no inventive scenes means that Hard Rain does not stand up
well against its many competitors, but it doesnt really matter since the last
thing you would want to do after shelling about $8.50 is compare this to other
films.


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Here it is, the next chapter in the ever-so-popular DISASTER! genre.
Hard Rain, however, goes the extra mile: it sets up a big burglary in
the middle of the disaster, and then the characters have to deal with
both situations simultaneously. There is a problem, though--the disaster
looks good, but everything else in the film is bad. I truly believed I
was seeing a real-life flood on screen, but in the end the
implausibility of the situations and the depthlessness of the characters
is what stuck with me. Somehow, I don't think this is what was intended.
    Christian Slater stars as Tom, an armored car guard. The film jumps
right into action, and we immediately see Tom, with his partner Charlie
(Edward Asner), getting robbed by a bunch of guys led by Jim (Morgan
Freeman) who "just want the money." After they make short work of
Charlie (accidentally), Tom takes off with the money and hides it, while
the bad guys chase him, of course, because they "just want the money."
So, after Tom is smacked upside the head with a crucifix by Karen
(Minnie Driver), he is put in jail for looting. He tells his story to
the Sheriff (Randy Quaid), who leaves Tom locked up in his cell. It
turns out that the sheriff wants the money, too, but he doesn't "just
want the money"--he wants to kill everyone else, as well.
    The screenplay, penned by Graham Yost, is garbage on a fundamental
level. Here we have an intensely standard situation, and the only thing
that makes it even remotely unique is the fact that it's set in a flood.
The film takes approximately zero seconds developing the character of
Tom, so right off the bat, when we're thwarted with all kinds of
troubles for him to deal with, it's very difficult to care, since we
don't know who this guy is (aside from what he looks like). The other
protagonist, Karen, is given this same depthless quality, which doesn't
help in scenes when she's chained to a banister in a sinking house, or
any other scene in which she's in peril and we're supposed to be
concerned.
    I can just see some guys standing around yelling, "Ooooh, wouldn't
it be great if Christian Slater hid under the water while jet skis went
over him!?" "Wouldn't it be wild if there were big power boats crashing
through enormous stained glass windows!?" "Wouldn't it be insane if
damns and houses were broken into little pieces!?"
    The film also goes into some strange territory by developing the bad
guys more than the good guys. Jim (played with conviction by the
ever-watchable Freeman), is at least given an expository scene before
all the mayhem begins; later, we even see that there might be a more
human side to him than this money-hungry old man. And then the sheriff,
played with high camp by Quaid, is simply a force (he isn't even given a
name). There is nothing human about him, and his actions in the film
point towards confusion and psychosis. Like most everything else, he's
present to drive the plot to its inevitable conclusion.
    In addition, we're given moments that are simply absurd. Take, for
instance, the scene in which Tom is locked in the cell in the police
station. The water is rising quickly, and there's no way out. This scene
is actually very intense, and one of the best in the film, but it ends
with a cheap way out--the light in the ceiling just happens to lead to
the roof; by the time he figures this out, Karen, who doesn't even know
him at this point, is on the roof trying to get him out.
    There's also a lot of things that I just didn't like. A big part of
the conclusion takes place in a church, which, of course, includes
religious symbolism; a bullet going through a stain-glass portrait of
Jesus, the church burning in a Holy conflagration--these things are
included, but are given no thought. Also rather irritating are the
endless shootouts in the rain, with no mention of these new types of
rifles and revolvers that can fire when completely submerged in water.
The film also could have done without the attempted rape scene--there
certainly wasn't any need, except maybe to show that a very religious
woman doesn't mind stabbing a man in the bad of the neck with a pocket
knife.
    Okay, okay, the film is a mess. I'm sure you get my point. Here's
the kicker, though--it's entertaining. The director, Mikael Salomon,
seems to know what he's doing as far as images go. There are some really
spectacular moments, like a scene in which the characters speed around
the halls of a high school on jet skis. The flood itself is
spectacularly filmed, and I never once questioned the fact that I was
looking at a true disaster. In fact, there isn't a dry moment in the
film. Every minute is drenched in water.
    I wouldn't be surprised if Hard Rain started out as strictly a
disaster film. I remember its original title being The Flood, so this
leads me to believe that a lot of the gunfire and money grubbing here
was an afterthought by the film makers. It's not a boring film--you'll
watch it and probably enjoy it for the most part. But at the center is
an emotional void, a complete lack in anything of substance. Hard Rain
has an advantage because there haven't been very many films about
water-oriented disasters. The only one I can think of in recent memory
is Titanic, and that film succeeds in every way this one fails. Hard
Rain is mindless fun, but it's *so* mindless that I walked out the
theater wanting to apologize to my brain.

Author
Eric Lurio
 Apparently, now that they know how to film in water, they're doing it with a
 vengence, first `Titanic,' and now this. Blubity blub-blub blub.
 It's raining. The river, it doesn't matter which, is rising Hank(Wayne Duvall)
 is manning the dam and trying desperately to keep it from blowing. The Sheriff
 (Randy Quaid), who's been defeated for reelection, is evacuating the town. He
 is not a happy camper. 
 Meanwhile, other people are making preparations for the disaster that will
 surely come. Henry(Richard Dysart) and Doreen(Betty White), the comic relief,
 are setting bear traps to deter looters, Karen(Minnie Driver) is trying to
 protect the church and those stained glass windows she's been restoring from
 the upcoming deluge. One of the banks in the state is sending an armored car
 manned by Charlie(Ed Asner) and his nephew Tom(Christian Slater)
 to pick up the money and keep it from getting wet.
 ...And in a local bar, Jim(Morgan Freeman) is waiting with his cohorts
 Kenny(Michael Goorjian),Mr. Mehlor(Dann Florek) and Ray(Ricky Harris) to steal
 it.
 The concept of a caper movie taking place in the middle of a natural disaster
 is a new one. It's one of those things where you take an idea and take it to
 it's most ridiculous and extreme. It usually doesn't work, but in this case it
 does.
 The reason is character. The characters are allowed to grow and change during
 the melodrama, and the changing coalitions within frame of the film are
 fascinating. Except for Driver and Slater, you're not one hundred percent sure
 who to root for, something that  director Mikael Salomon well understands.
 Freeman has to remind the audience every now and then he's one of the BAD
 guys.
 This also allows the deputies, Phil(Peter Murnik)  and Wayne(Mark Rolston), to
 show dramatic internal conflict.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Paramount Pictures/Mutual Film Company
 Director:  Mikael Salomon
 Writer:  Graham Yost
 Cast: Morgan Freeman, Christian Slater, Randy Quaid,
Minnie Driver, Edward Asner, Richard Dysart, Betty White
   "You can't ride in that truck without thinking about it," says
one of the principals in Mikael Salomon's suspense thriller,
"Hard Rain."  The thinking is about money; the truck is
armored; the people who ride in that armored truck, carrying
three million dollars in cash have three million reasons to
think about subjects other than women, food, and sports. 
Consider how many relatively low-paid security guards, bank
tellers, postal employees, agents of the Mint, jewelry-store
staff and others handle incredible sums of money and
property.  In a single, two-hour ride in an armored truck, the
driver and guards are transporting more money than they will
earn in a lifetime.  A lifetime!  The wonder of it all is that the
overwhelming majority of shipments get through without
incident.
   But incidents occur aplenty in Salmon's high-concept
adventure story based on Graham Yost's screenplay (which
has a surprisingly sentimental ending considering that
Christopher Young's almost deafening score shakes the
rafters of the movie house).  Featuring one enticing twist that
occurs two-thirds of the way through the 95-minute caper,
"Hard Rain" seems unable to make up its mind whether to be
a disaster movie or a police drama, so Salomon throws both
genres into the picture, even affording us the beginnings of a
romance for our admission price.  Not much is believable: not
the special effects, not the characters.  But the action, which
is virtually nonstop, overwhelms our rational thought, allowing
us to enjoy the show for what it is and to relish yet another
fine performance by Randy Quaid--who, of course, gets all the
good lines.  "Hard Rain" trusts Morgan Freeman, who, despite
his role as a robber seems the most mature person in the
film, to put out the quality acting; Christian Slater to throb the
hearts of the 20-something women in the audience; and
Minnie Driver to turn on her cynical charm as the unlikely
romantic interest.
   Photographed a year or so ago with the title "The Flood,"
the film's name was changed to underscore the suspense
species, which deals with a $3 million heist of an armored
truck taking place with the help of a blinding rainstorm.  With
the breaking of an old dam which harnessed the water of the
Midwestern town of Huntingburg, Indiana, the movie at one
point seems like a relatively inexpensive remake of
"Waterworld" complete with speedboat chases by pirates who,
with one exception, look as though they couldn't navigate their
way out of a bathtub.  Jim (Morgan Freeman), a soft-spoken,
mature fellow who probably never stayed with one employer
enough time to build up a pension, dreams of a single job
which could net him enough money to last him throughout
retirement.  Rounding up a small team of losers to assist him
in the heist, Jim attacks an armored truck, now stalled in deep
water unable to move.  His associates in crime prove more a
hindrance than anything more, as they include one Bible-
quoting man who manages to balance a toothpick between
his front teeth while he is chasing down the truck's driver and
one idiot who talks openly of the planned robbery while
seated in a bar.  The scoundrels did not count on an
obsessively honest security guard, Tom (Christian Slater),
who refuses to leave the money behind and swim for his life. 
Having hid the money in the local cemetery, Tom is mistaken
by the sheriff (Randy Quaid) for a looter, is incarcerated, and
almost at the point of drowning when he is saved by Karen
(Minnie Driver)--paving the way for a flirtation of sorts.  Tom
and Karen join forces in the adventure of their lives, even
running into the town's stereotypical old people, Henry
Richard Dysart) and Doreen (Betty White), who likewise
mistake them for looters--which allows the two seniors to act
like Beverly Hillbillies.  
   Except for a twist which involves a reversal of alliances,
"Hard Rain" is a by-the-numbers caper story with mostly
cardboard characters and just a few bon mots.   The latter
includes a statement by the local science teacher who, having
been fired from the town's high school, has joined the robbers
with his specialty of assembling explosives.  Asked whether
this is the sort of thing he taught his classes, he retorts, "You
haven't been to a high school lately...they taught ME how to
do this."
   A fairly formulaic script is saved by the thoughtful
performance of the always reliable Morgan Freeman--who at
least is not wasted in his role as he was in "Amistad"--and a
genuinely comic turn by the trustworthy Randy Quaid.  You sit
on the edge of your seat wondering whether Quaid, riding the
waves caused in part by the bursting of the levee, will get to
say, "Where can I get some dam bait for my dam fishing rod? 
Rated R.  Running Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey
Karten

Author
Jeff Walters
Sigh. Here stands a movie that could have been so much more. Don't get
me wrong - I still found Hard Rain fairly enjoyable, but there was so
much unfulfilled potential in this flick. The story is very intruiging
as it is an interesting mix of genres. Unlike Twister and
Dantes Peak (your pure disaster flicks), this movie puts the disaster
side more into the background and instead focuses on the
thiller/bank-hiest storyline.
               The movie opens with a stunning piece of cinematography
where the camera starts at the flooded dam, then slowly makes it way
across the country side, into town and ends up with a close-up of the
Sherrif (played by Randy  Quaid) organising the evacuation. After
seeing how this seemingly one shot camera trick was done in the
'Making of....' TV special, it really is quite a brilliant peice of
work.
       This movie doesn't beat about the bush and it's not long before
the armored car heist eventuates and the first of the many chase
scenes ensues. The now jailed Christian Slater plays the part of the
bank security guard (Tom) determined to protect the three million
dollar bank money from the clutches of Morgan Freeman (Jim) and co.
        Slater does a good job with the stand-stock hero, but his
character is not explored in the slightest. To the audience he's just
another characterless good guy trying to do the right thing. Freeman's
character is the only one that is really memorable or interesting, but
what do you expect? It's a federal offence to under-write a Morgan
Freeman character and the script-writers have paid heed to this
fact....to a point.
         Minnie Driver (Karen) is pretty good as the fiery woman
trying to protect the church she's restoring, but like Slater's Tom -
there's little charcterisation and also little chemistry in her
pairing with Hollywood's bad boy.
         The characters I had the biggest problem with in this movie
was the Sherrif, his deputy and the Dam's operator. Halfway through
this movie their characters do a violent 180 and suddenly make Saddam
Hussein look like a sane humanitarian. This plot twist is nice for
the thriller and chase aspects of the movie as it changes the whole
perspective of the  audience - but overall the change in character of
the three is somewhat unconvincing and doesn't entirely make sense
given some of their earlier actions. Oh well - this ain't a
character driven movie and Randy Quaid is fun no matter how flawed his
character - so who really cares? :)
               Where this movie really succeeds is in it's chase
scenes. There is an awesome jet ski chase through the halls of
 the local school that is very gripping and original. Maybe one or two
more stunts could have been squeezed into the sequence, but overall
it's a key highlight. The periodic surges from the bursting Dam are a
interesting element that plays mayhem on all parties involved. The
final surge where the Dam breaks apart could have maybe been a bit
 bigger though in my opinion. The showdown sequence in Karen's
ill-fated church is an absolute ripper though. A very well done scene.
       If I had to pick the scene that puts sets the adrenalin pumping
fastest - I'd have to say it's  when Slater is locked in the jail cell
(heh, talk about ironic) and the flood waters start to rise...
               All in all this was an enjoyable movie that I see as an
oppurtunity lost to make a really break-thru movie much like Speed was
(man I wish they'd used the jet skis more often), but it is still a
very watchable movie. 

Author
David Nusair
Starring Christian Slater, Morgan Freeman, Minnie Driver, Randy Quaid
First it was called "The Flood" and now it's called "Hard Rain".  I don't
see much of a difference, but apparently some executives at Paramount
figured that with a title like "The Flood", it might become another
casuality of the "disaster movie flops", a la "Volcano" and "Dante's
Peak". 
Well, whatever you want to call it, it's a pretty good movie.  It's
written by Graham Yost, the guy responsible for the first "Speed" movie. 
"Hard Rain" is very similiar in many respects.  We have the hero who
doesn't really want to be a hero.  We have the love interest, who is much
wiser than she appears to be.  The only thing different, is that "Hard
Rain" doesn't really feature a clear villian, where "Speed" had Dennis
Hopper.  
This isn't a bad thing, really.  I mean, aren't we all sick of the stock
film bad guy?  It's usually some dude with a grudge, and a lot of
ammo/bombs at his disposal.  "Hard Rain" features Morgan Freeman as the
"bad guy", but once we get to know him, we find that he's really not that
bad after all.  He doesn't want to kill anyone, he just wants to get the
money that Christian Slater is responsible for.  It's through a set of
extreme circumstances that his non-violence plan is thrown off course.  To
say more, would really be unfair, because a large part of the enjoyment of
this film are the unexpected surprises along the way.
Christian Slater, recently jailed for beating up his girlfriend, gives a
fair performance as a man who's just trying to do the right thing under
really difficult circumstances.  The real star of the show, however, is
Freeman.  It's really surprising to see him "slumming" in a film like
this, but he does bring an unexpected air of dignity to what would have
otherwise been a standard action flick.
Anyway, while it's no "Speed", "Hard Rain" is a suitably diverting way to
spend an hour and a half.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Cristian Slater, Morgan Freeman, Randy Quaid, Minnie Driver, 
      Edward Asner, Mark Rolston, Richard Dysart, Betty White, 
      Henry Sears, Wayne Duvall
Director: Mikael Salomon
Producers: Ian Bryce, Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn 
Screenplay: Graham Yost
Cinematography: Peter Menzies Jr. 
Music: Christopher Young
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     All through its production and into the early days of its initial, 
aborted pre-release publicity, HARD RAIN bore the appropriate moniker of 
THE FLOOD.  Ultimately, however, Paramount Pictures, nervous that this 
movie would be confused with 1996's other, underperforming disaster 
films (DANTE'S PEAK, VOLCANO), changed the title and shifted the release 
date by nearly a year.  But, to paraphrase the Bard, swill, by any other 
name, would smell as rank.  No number of name changes can help this 
picture.  It's not just about a disaster, it is a disaster.
     HARD RAIN is the case of a movie that gets progressively worse with 
every passing minute.  The best shot occurs during the opening credits, 
as the camera pans over the streets and byways of Huntingburg, Indiana 
as the water level slowly rises.  The community, protected by an 
overworked dam, is being evacuated as the rain continues to pour 
relentlessly from the cloud-choked skies.  From that moment on, it's all 
downhill.  Whatever initial entertainment value the film possesses has 
long since drained away by the halfway point.  It takes forever to get 
to the end credits -- this is one of the longest-seeming 95-minute 
motion pictures I have recently endured.
     Basically, HARD RAIN is one extended, dull chase sequence 
punctuated by occasional shoot-outs.  There's a lot of water, broken 
glass, gunfire, and explosions.  It's all very routine and uninteresting 
because there aren't any real characters and the plot only occasionally 
makes sense.  The film's conclusion is so preposterous that it's almost 
worth watching for the sheer masochistic enjoyment of seeing the 
monumentally idiotic way that the film makers decide to resolve the 
myriad subplots that are floating around.  
     Action films are supposed to become progressively more invigorating 
as they rush towards a conclusion.  Graham Yost, the writer of both 
SPEED and HARD RAIN, surely understands that principle.  Unfortunately, 
neither he, nor cinematographer-turned-director Mikael Salomon (A FAR 
OFF PLACE), applies it.  The action in HARD RAIN grows tedious through 
repetition.  We see the same kinds of things -- speedboat chases, flood 
damage, shoot-outs, etc. -- over and over again.  The movie constantly 
recycles about twenty minutes worth of material to pad the running time 
out to an acceptable movie length.
     The storyline gives us a number of paper-thin characters in 
contrived circumstances.  There's Tom (Christian Slater), the one-
dimensional action hero who works as a security guard driving an armored 
car full of cash.  He and his partner, Charlie (Edward Asner, TV's "Lou 
Grant"), get stuck on a street that's rapidly turning into a river.  A 
group of men, led by Jimmy (Morgan Freeman), arrive on the scene not as 
rescuers but as robbers.  After Charlie is killed in a shoot-out, Tom 
hides the money, then runs.  As he swims and boats his way through 
Huntingburg's roads, he encounters some of the locals:  Karen (Minnie 
Driver), a would-be love interest; a bickering old couple (Richard 
Dysart and Betty White), who are on hand to provide comic relief; and 
the easily-corrupted Sheriff (Randy Quaid), whose seeming helpfulness 
hides sinister ulterior motives.  
     There isn't any real acting in this film.  Christian Slater utters 
a few lame one-liners and does a lot of mugging for the camera.  Tom is 
easily one of the most lifeless characters the actor has brought to the 
screen.  Randy Quaid sneers a lot, and is totally unconvincing.  Morgan 
Freeman and Minnie Driver both attempt to give legitimate performances, 
but they are defeated by the script.  Freeman, one of the best cinematic 
thespians working today, looks suitably embarrassed to be here, but I 
suppose everyone needs a good paycheck from time-to-time.
     Following in the wake of TWISTER, this is yet another natural 
disaster movie that doesn't trust nature's fury as the chief engine of 
conflict.  As a result, we are saddled with an idiotic good guys/bad 
guys story that effectively ruins any potential that the flood tale 
could have had.  TITANIC proved that there can be a wealth of drama in a 
movie where everything goes under water.  HARD RAIN successfully 
demonstrates that the opposite is equally possible.  Thus far this year, 
Hollywood has already subjected us to its unique brand of moronic mayhem 
by fire (FIRESTORM) and water (HARD RAIN).  Fortunately, there are only 
two elements left.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
James Sanford
         Originally shot in 1996 and scheduled for release last May,
``Hard Rain'' is a costly embarassment Paramount is trying to sweep
under the carpet as quickly and quietly as possible. Of course, the
recent publicity about star Christian Slater's new role as a celebrity
jailbird won't help matters in that area, and although the title was
changed from ``The Flood'' to ``Hard Rain'' - supposedly to more
accurately reflect the film's content, if you can believe that - a
better choice might have been ``Total Washout.''
  All the earmarks of a troubled production are here: slapdash
visual effects, choppy continuity, a plot that never quite seems to
get going.  The direction by former cinematographer Mikael Salomon
dutifully follows the credo of ``when in doubt, shoot it in slow
motion and hope it looks good.''  Unfortunately, one body slogging
around in the water at night tends to look very much like another, and
often in ``Hard Rain'' it's a challenge to tell who's doing what.
  Nor are most viewers likely to care. After a passable first
reel in which armored car drivers Tom (Slater) and Charlie (Ed Asner)
run afoul of hijacker Jim (Morgan Freeman) and his crew, Graham Yost's
screenplay quickly degenerates into water-logged chaos as the few
folks left in the submerged town of Huntingsburg, Ind., spend the
night chasing and shooting at each other, all for the love of money,
in this case some bags containing $3 million that Tom salvaged from
the car. Somehow everyone in town has managed to get ahold of a boat
or a jet-ski, so each cast member gets an opportunity to be thrown out
of his or her watercraft into the dirty canals of this Midwestern
Venice.
  Also lurking around is a derelict former sheriff (Randy
Quaid) and, in one of the film's typically absurd twists, an art-lover
named Karen (Minnie Driver) who has made it her mission to save the
windows of the local church, come hell or, in this case, high
water. As ``Hard Rain'' doggie paddles into its final stretch it
becomes obvious that the real reason Karen is around is to give
Salomon a chance to photograph Driver and Slater in matching clingy
wet T-shirts.
  Although a couple of bickering senior citizens (Betty White
and Richard Dysart) surface occasionally to contribute some put-downs
and profanity, the only real laughs come from the character who
miraculously comes back from the dead just long enough to murmur
crucial pieces of information, and the only words in the script that
seem to ring true are Freeman's frequent declarations that ``I'm only
here for the money,'' an attitude that carries over to his lifeless
performance.
  Technically, the film is sometimes impressive, with a few OK
stunts and one solid sequence detailing Tom's escape from a flooding
jail cell. But when it resorts to throwing in a near-rape scene for
cheap thrills and throws logic out the window by having almost
everyone involved completely change their personalities in the last
reel, it's obvious this mess was created by people who probably don't
have the sense to come in out of the ``Rain.''

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Christian Slater, Morgan Freeman, Randy Quaid, Minnie Driver,
Ed Asner 
Ingredients: 
Pouring rain, small flooded town, damn about to burst, bad guys going
after millions of dollars
Synopsis: 
At one point in the story townsperson Karen asks hero Tom what happened
to her church. He replies something like: "The church is flooded but at
least the floodwaters put out the big fire. Well, the fire wasn't that
bad, since, while the church was burning, looters apparently thought it
was safe enough to break through all the priceless stained glass
windows."
In HARD RAIN a small town is nearly deserted due to flooding. Everyone
has had to evacuate because it's raining, and now floodwaters are rising
so high that buildings are being submerged and the nearby dam is about
to break. Enter a working class smart-alecky new armored car driver
named Tom (Christian Slater). Suddenly his security truck carrying over
three million dollars gets stuck on the flooded street and is waylaid by
armed looters. Tom has no choice but to grab the bag full of money, hide
it, and swim for his life. This makes for an action movie full of jet
skis, speedboat chases, and gun battles, as Tom tries to evade and
outsmart corrupt cops and armed looters until the National Guard can
answer his distress call. He is befriended and aided by a spunky
churchgoing young woman from town named Karen (Minnie Driver). But
unknown to Tom and Karen, the National Guard never heard Tom's initial
distress call. Will Tom and Karen survive the natural and manmade
disasters?
Opinion:
Don't expect thought-provoking issues or dramatics. There's not much
more to this movie than hiding, running, swimming, shooting, and saving
handcuffed heroes from drowning, but that's what makes it escapist and
fun. Relax, take your shoes off, and break out the popcorn.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Four criminals hold up an armored truck during its exit of a
"soon-to-be-flooded" town. Unfortunately for them, one of the drivers
escapes into the town with the dough, and turns the empty town's water
filled streets, into a cat-and-mouse playground between the bad guys,
himself and the local sheriff and crew.
CRITIQUE:
Popcorn Movie (definition): A movie which based on its merits of proper
story-telling techniques, unique style and believable characters, would fail
on all counts. A Popcorn Movie is a film that allows you to turn off your
brain before viewing, crunch down on plenty of nachos and popcorn without
having to worry about missing any relevant dialogue, and revel in its lunacy
of plot, excessive action sequences and shallow objectives. It is NOT a film
to take seriously. With depth of character non-existent, this type of film
allows you to enjoy the unemotional attachment to each person in the movie,
and soak in only its relevant goals of fun, divertissement and campy fodder.
With checks on all counts above, this kind of movie generally doesn't score
more than a respectable 7/10 (ARMAGEDDON topped 8/10 because it actually
managed to add some emotional attachment to some of its characters...a no-no
in "pure popcorn" film), but does provide some brainless entertainment to
all those looking for a quick fix of empty amusement.
Originally titled THE FLOOD, this movie is packed with superficial
characters (save Freeman who pulls off some three-dimension), endless chases
and gunfights, plenty of rain, water and more rain, and enough cheezy
dialogue and plot holes to make any other "Popcorn Movie" candidate beet-red
jealous. All in all, a wonderful representation of a Popcorn Movie done
right, with an extra nod to the editors who managed to keep this puppy timed
to the perfect length of any ideal Popcorn Movie...90 minutes. Bravo to all
involved!


Author
Steve Kong
Ding! Here's movie number two for my top 10 worst films of 1998 list! I'm
building quite a collection: first fire (Firestorm), now water. I wonder
what other natural wonders January will bring me.
Scripted by Graham Yost, Hard Rain follows Yost's formula: high concept,
low characterizations, and even lower plot. Yost likes to write chase
movies, which is OK, but he tends to write them so formulaic that it's
getting tired now, so please Graham come up with something new. Let me give
you a run down of the films that Yost has written so far: Speed, bomb on
bus, chase down time trying to stop the bomb. Worked well because of, then
rookie cinematographer-turned-director, Jan De Bont's excellent eye for
action and tension. Broken Arrow, stolen nuclear bomb, must chase down the
bomb before it gets blown up. Worked well because of John Woo's style and
excellent eye for action. Hard Rain, stolen money, must chase down money
because the bad guys are greedy. Doesn't work because of the eye of
cinematographer-turned-director Mikael Salomon who muddles up the action
and can't build tension.
Yost, as I pointed out in my Broken Arrow review, needs to have a good
director working on his scripts. If not the scripts fall apart because the
audience is given too much time to think about how ludicrous his scripts
are and because the audience is not convincingly wowed by the spectacular
action. We are given more than enough time to think about Yost's script in
Hard Rain. Hard Rain runs a few minutes over an hour and a half, and it has
got to be the longest, and most painful, hour and a half -- next to
Firestorm -- that I've spent in a theatre in the last few months.
Here's a run down of the premise of the story. During a huge storm in
Huntingburg, Indiana, a group of men lead by Jim (Morgan Freeman) tries to
steal a cool three million dollars from an armor truck. Charlie (Ed Asner),
with Tom (Christian Slater) riding along, is driving the armored truck.
After a shootout, Charlie is dead, Tom has hidden the money, and the chase
is on. Throw in a greedy town sheriff (Randy Quaid) and a
damsel-in-distress (Minnie Driver) and this is what Yost calls a good script. 
Next to a sudden twist near the end of the film, this film is very
predictable and boring. The action is bland and when it is not bland, rain
and some bad camera work muddle it.
Mikael Salomon, who's biggest stint so far was as cinematographer for James
Cameron on The Abyss tries hard to make this film work, but the film is
weighted down by a few factors. The biggest would be the script. Along with
this would be the acting, next to Morgan Freeman, who is always great
onscreen, there are no other good performances. The other performances
range from bland (Minnie Driver) to wimpy (Christian Slater) to silly
(Randy Quiad). There is too much "padding-time." Padding-time is what I
consider time onscreen when there is really nothing except to pad the
movie's running time to the requisite 90 minutes or more. Yost fills this
padding-time with silly one-liners and two old folk (Rick Harris and Betty
White) for comedy relief. Talking about one-liners, Yost doesn't seem to
have a concept about conversation or dialogue. Whenever a character
onscreen opens their mouth, it seems to be either to scream or spit out a
one-liner. And lastly, Christian Slater as Tom just does not work. Ever
since I saw Christian Slater try to become an action hero in Broken Arrow I
was convinced that he couldn't. And he proves it in Hard Rain. Slater is
just a wimp.
The studio-heads change the name of this film from The Flood to Hard Rain
after it performed badly with test audiences. My suggestion to the
studio-heads: should have change a lot more or kept it in the vault. Skip
this film, it's awful.

Author
Matt Williams
After stalling for nearly a year, Hard Rain finally makes it to the box
office.  Previously titled The Flood, the filmmakers quickly renamed it
after the deluge of disaster pics, so as not to have it drown in the
public's eye.  In a way, it's fitting, since the disaster portion of the
film is merely a backdrop, not the main focus.  The heart of the film is
a heist picture, albeit one with an ever present supply of water to
provide additional difficulties.  But all in all, the film is not a
disaster in itself.
The small town of Huntingburg is being flooded.  The sheriff (Randy
Quaid) is evacuating the citizenry, even though he lost the recent
election. He and his deputies, however, will be staying to protect the
town from looters, as the sheriff feels doing his job well is the best
revenge.
Also anticipating looters are the local banks.  An armored car, guarded
by Tom (Christian Slater) and Charlie (Ed Asner), is emptying the vaults
of banks up and down the river.
That truck is the target of a group of thieves (led by Morgan Freeman),
who are using the torrential rains to their unexpected advantage.
However, the heist doesn't go exactly as planned:  Tom escapes and
manages to hide the money.
Soon, the band of theives is after Tom to find the hidden money, and the
police don't know whether to trust Tom or lock him away as a potential
looter.
There is a good setup in Hard Rain, with the three sides (the thieves,
the cops, and the hero), each having its own idiosyncracies.  The ragtag
group of robbers is the most interesting, containing not only Freeman
but an ex-science teacher (Dan Florek), a trigger-happy bible-quoting
thug, and a nervous neophyte.
However, after this setup, the characterization goes nowhere.  Morgan
Freeman simply plays the part of "Morgan Freeman as a kindly but
desperate thief", and we're never given any hows or whys for his
character. The same goes for all the other characters as well, who offer
no real surprises (especially if you've seen the spoiler-filled
trailer).  Christian Slater and fellow flood victim Minnie Driver are
paired off, but there's no more depth to their relationship than to
their characters.
While we're on the subject of screenwriting, the dialogue isn't
particularly deep, either.  There are times that it's servicable for
fueling the bare minimums of an action picture, but others (particularly
the comic relief) are purely atrocious. One entire subplot, involving an
elderly civilian couple (Betty White and Richard Dysart) severely needed
to be axed.
But all that said, the movie does work, on its own terms.  This is
nothing that's going to win an Academy Award, but for thrills and
excitement, it will deliver bang for your (matinee) dollar.  A flood
might not be in the same class as volcanoes, twisters and earthquakes,
but after seeing this film you sure don't want to be in one.
The best advice is to watch this film without questioning too many of
the details.  (Such as...with all the shotgun blasts going on, why
doesn't anyone's boat get holed?)  But if you sit back and simply enjoy
the mindless peril, you'll have a decent time.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 500 upcoming releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
     One night, during a torrential downpour that flooded the streets,
we went to see -- what else -- HARD RAIN.
     "So, are we all going to die?" the Sheriff (Randy Quaid) asks in
the story's opening line as he evacuates his flooded town.  The answer
is pretty much yes, but not nearly soon enough.  And to add insult to
injury, the supposedly dead, regretfully, often turn out not to be so.
     Populating this bad TV-movie-of-the-week material are a host of
talented actors.  One can only hope they were rewarded handsomely for
acting in this hopelessly muddled picture.  Besides the obvious
hardships of acting most scenes while dog paddling in the water, they
will all receive black marks on their records for appearing in this
dismal movie.
     Graham Yost's script serves up one cliche after another for the
actors, who thankfully managed to mumble quite a few of the lines.
Director Mikael Salomon's staging is so confusing that you may have
trouble figuring out what is happening.  The befuddled presentation is
exacerbated by Peter Menzies, Jr.'s dark and ugly cinematography.
     The plot concerns an armored car that gets stuck in the raging
water.  Onboard are guards Tom and his Uncle Charlie.  Christian
Slater, who is much better in his tender roles as in UNTAMED HEART,
plays Tom.  Edward Asner drops by briefly to take on the role of the
soon to be dead Charlie.
     Coming to their "rescue" is a gang headed by Jim, played on
autopilot by the great actor Morgan Freeman.  He views the loot, three
million dollars worth, as his retirement plan.
     The entire movie is one big watery chase with the Sheriff and his
posse tracking Jim and his gang, who are in turn after Tom.  Along the
way, Tom picks up a love interest in the person of a crucifix-weapon
wielding woman named Karen, played in a totally wasted performance by
Minnie Driver.
     The action sequences are repetitive and without much interest.
They do feature lots of explosions and gunfire to keep you awake.
Christopher Young's emotionless score for the film has a single trait,
ear-shattering loudness.
     The plot holes are as big as the ones in the dam that breaks,
submerging the town.  The characters have an infinite number of bullets
and rarely do they have to bother reloading their guns.  The weapons
and the ammunition spend most of the time under water or being rained
on but always fire perfectly.  When one of the bad guys drops a gun
into the water, it stays in the same place until much later when Tom
swims to get it, even though the swift water is so strong it is
uprooting large trees.  Counting these improbabilities is one of the
more enjoyable ways to spend your time as you wait for the characters
to kill each other.
     The show has a single, but unprintable, good line.  Betty White
plays an incessantly bossy wife, and, when her hen-pecked husband
finally told her off, our audience roared with laughter.
     The show concludes with a sickening set of twists.  The best that
can be said of the picture is that it is merely stupefyingly awful as
opposed to laughably bad.
     HARD RAIN runs 1:37.  It is rated R for violence and would be fine
for teenagers.  (The two families behind us shockingly had a half-dozen
preschoolers among them.)

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Cristian Slater, Morgan Freeman, Randy Quaid, Minnie Driver,
Edward Asner, Mark Rolston, Richard Dysart, Betty White, Henry Sears,
Wayne Duvall Director: Mikael Salomon
Too much rain and too much water almost sinks this armoured car heist.
Nevertheless, one has to compliment the production team for playing with
water and attempting to create a feel different from the mundane dry
land bank robbery. Add water, lots of water, so much so that everyone
needs to have a grade A certificate in water treading and a breath span
of 2 minutes. Following in the footsteps of TWISTER and DANTE'S PEAK we
watch nature wreak havoc on a small town. Although the special effects
are not as spectacular as the aforementioned, there is something special
about water not found in wind or lava. The level of destruction lies on
a slowly rising exponential curve and drowning is so peaceful.
I started out desperately wanting to hate this movie for the very
reasons it stared Christian Slater (armour car guard) and Morgan Freeman
(robber) - two actors who I don't particularly enjoy watching. You
wouldn't guess, by watching Slater on screen that he's the problem child
he is in real life. Freeman on the other hand is totally miscast as the
outlaw. His demeanour is entirely too dignified and controlled for a man
desperate to secure his retirement plan. Slater's onscreen love interest
is Minnie Driver (stain glass window expert) who is over the top pouty
and far too concerned about her glass windows than staying alive. The
attempts to generate heart felt emotion between the couple Driver and
Slater fails miserably. They take turns rescuing each other from
drowning, but tense life threatening situations does not equate to long
lasting love relationships. It's Randy Quaid (Sheriff) who by far gives
the best performance amongst this bunch of wet actors.
As I watched this movie from start to conclusion, the more I was able to
forgive its annoying flaws. The only reason for this is purely
philosophical and not theatrical. As I left the cinema I asked myself
this question - If I was in a flooding town excommunicated from the rest
of the world, would I kill for three million dollars tied to a
tombstone? My concluding thought was  no. I can't swim and I can't
shoot and I'm way too generous.

Author
Michael Dequina
In an apparent response to the lukewarm reaction to Hollywood's last two
disaster epics, the dueling volcano movies Dante's Peak and Volcano, the
makers of Hard Rain (formerly known as The Flood) have tweaked the usual
disaster formula a bit, melding traditional disaster elements with more
slam-bang action.  While the resulting film is never boring and
entertaining on a superficial level, in the end it remains an uneven mix of
both worlds.
Writer Graham Yost, best known for his script for Speed, fashions Hard
Rain with a similarly thin storyline.  A group of thieves, led by a shady
character known only as Jim (Morgan Freeman) attempt to rob an armored car
carrying $3 million.  Two things stand in their way--biggest of all, Mother
Nature, which has flooded the town of Huntingsburg, Indiana with the mother
of all downpours; and Tom (Christian Slater), the armored car's driver, who
manages to hide the cash before anyone can take it.  With the help of the
town sheriff (Randy Quaid) and church artist Karen (Minnie Driver), Tom
aims to protect the carefully hidden fortune while braving the elements.
Speed was able to overcome its simple plot--madman extorts money from the
city with a bomb on a bus--with crack direction by Jan DeBont and the
personalities created by stars Keanu Reeves, Dennis Hopper, and, most
notably, Sandra Bullock.  Hard Rain's shortcomings do not lie with director
Mikael Salomon, a former cinematographer.  Salomon stages the gunfights and
boat chases with some skill (though no one but John Woo should even attempt
to pull off a church shootout), and uses the waterlogged setting to create
some striking shots.  He also has a sure hand with the water effects, which
give the gushing torrents of water an appropriate air of menace.  One of
the main shortcomings, however, lie with the characters, who, as in too
many disaster films, are poorly defined and/or uninteresting.  Tom is a
cardboard do-gooder, and despite the best efforts of the always-engaging
Driver, Karen is little more than a token action film female.  A couple of
late-inning twists muddy the personalities of the sheriff and especially
Jim; by film's end I was not exactly sure what the audience is supposed to
make of him.
What causes the most damage to Hard Rain is the inclusion of cheesy
disaster movie conventions.  It would have been fine if the flood were used
as a backdrop to the action storyline, the water serving as an ominous
threat looming over the events.  But in keeping with a typical disaster
film's varied "pastiche" of characters, he shoehorns in a grating,
unhappily married old couple (Richard Dysart and Betty White), who linger
in the background and become briefly involved in the action before
virtually (and mercifully) disappearing during the final act.  We also get
served up one of those interminable melodramatic, would-be heart-tugging
death scenes, this one occurring after a character gets electrocuted.
After all is said and done, Hard Rain is a somewhat diverting popcorn
flick that holds one's interest for its fairly brief running time.  It's
just that I cannot help but think that maybe the film would have been
better off being either a disaster film _or_ an action film instead of the
uneven blend that plays out onscreen.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan
