Title
Review for Lepa sela lepo gore (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME (LEPA SELA LEPO GORE) (director/writer:
Srdjan Dragojevic; screenwriter: from war reports by Vanja Bulic/Nikola
Pejakovic; cinematographer: Dusan Joksimovic; cast: Dragan Bjelogrlic
(Milan), Nikola Pejakovic (Halil), Nikola Kojo (Velja), Milorad Mandic
(Viljuska), Lisa Mancure (Lisa), Dragan Maksimovic (Petar), Zoran
Cvijanovic (Brzi), 1996 - Yugoslavia)
Set in Bosnia during 1980 and 1992 (the story swings back and forth in
time, from the break-up of Tito's unified Yugoslavia to the present
ex-Yugoslavia). A tunnel erected in 1971 to symbolize the path of
"Brotherhood and Unity," linking Zagreb to Belgrade, is depicted in fake
newsreels to show how everything went wrong; it is then shown ten years
later, when it is left abandoned and becomes the scene of battle for the
film.
This bleak tale is told from the point-of-view of the Serb soldier who
is severely wounded in a Belgrade hospital in 1994 and flashes back to
his childhood and the war and the hopes that died with Tito, even if he
was a liar and a scoundrel, at least the country was unified. It is
allegedly based upon a true story, one that echoes the director's
universal appeal for everyone to end all their hatred.
The plot focuses upon the longtime friendship of Muslim Halil (Nikola
Pejakovic) and Serbian Milan (Dragan Bjelogrlic), who grow up in
peacetime as best friends in a small village and become partners in an
auto repair shop. They shared a common fear of the ogre that lives in
their local abandoned tunnel. Each child was determined, even in the
childhood games they played, to not give up until they won, as their
somewhat happy childhood is shown in flashbacks. When the ethnic war is
waged in their country, they now face each other as enemies, as Halil's
side traps Milan's side in an abandoned tunnel.
Milan's mother is brutally killed and Halil's home is destroyed, as they
become symbols for the maddening war that is taking place, as even these
friends can't even trust each other anymore and have been drawn into the
hatred of the conflict. The bitter war, seems almost to be inevitable in
this over two hour film, told in a detached style, emphasizing the
bloody battles, as it clearly shows how war is both hell and insanity.
There are some vintage moments; a peace corps chanting "Give Peace A
Chance" outside a war hospital; those trapped in the tunnel drinking
urine out of a diet-Coke bottle to stay alive; and, Milan climbing out
of his hospital bed with an uncontrollable rage and crawling on the
floor to get vengeance on a Muslim wounded prisoner of war who is behind
a glass partition.
If the film could be faulted, it is that everyone in it is used as a
symbol, which takes away some of the spontaneity of their individualism,
so the characters don't really stick with us as much as the arson of the
villages does and all the other catastrophes that result from the war. A
soldier says: "Pretty villages are pretty when they burn. Ugly ones stay
ugly, even when they burn," as the soldiers burn a village without even
knowing its name.
Pretty Village, Pretty Flame mostly takes place inside the musty tunnel
among the trapped Serb troops, who are running out of water, led by a
Communist captain eagerly recalling the good old days under Tito. Among
the beleaguered platoon of soldiers facing periodic Muslim assaults and
psychological taunts (being called Chetniks) are a thief, a drug addict
(forced to join the army or go to prison) and a professor. They are
joined by a young American television journalist who sneaked on their
truck carrying a Muslim visa and a video camera, and who does not speak
Serbian. She becomes the symbol of the United States and its
unwillingness to intervene to stop the genocide.
This is a disturbing film, not one that is easy to watch, even as its
gallows humor tries to lessen the somber tone of the story. Its vivid
images (the villages burning were taken from real newsreels) leave a
bitter impression and very little hope for the future. To understand
this conflict, is to understand how modern Yugoslavia (1929-92) was
carved up among the different ethnic groups by other countries and how
these conflicts have a long history behind them. If the director blames
the United States and the rest of the world for not doing something, he
clearly must blame his own countrymen first.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Dragan Bjelogrlic, Nikola Kojo, Velimir-Bata Zivojinovic, 
      Dragan Maksimovic, Zoran Cvijanovic
Director: Srdjan Dragojevic
Producers: Goran Bjelogrlic, Dragan Bjelogrlic
Screenplay: Nikola Pejakovic, Srdjan Dragojevic, from war reports by 
      Vanja Bulic
Cinematography: Dusan Joksimovic
Music: Aleksandar Sasha Habic
In English and Serbian with subtitles
     Since 1992, when the war in Bosnia began, we in the West have been 
inundated with images of unbelievable carnage -- photographs and 
videotapes of scenes so horrifying that we're almost afraid to believe 
them.  PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME takes us into the Serbo-Croatian 
conflict in a powerful condemnation of war that shares several qualities 
with the German films DAS BOOT and STALINGRAD.  Like those two movies, 
this one causes viewers to think long and hard about the real price of 
war, and leaves a lingering image in the mind that cannot be easily 
banished.
     PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME is based on a true event.  It opens in 
1971 with a mock newsreel depicting the ribbon-cutting ceremony for the 
"Brotherhood and Unity Tunnel."  Ten years later, the unfinished tunnel 
stands abandoned and ignored.  Two boys, a Muslim named Halil and a Serb 
named Milan, play nearby and try to frighten each other with tales of 
the ogre who lives inside.  By the time war breaks out in the early 
'90s, Halil and Milan find themselves on opposite sides.  When his 
platoon is ambushed, Milan leads the survivors into the tunnel for 
refuge.  Outside, Halil's band waits patiently, biding their time until 
the Serbs run out of water and must emerge to face their deaths.
     PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME is told in a non-chronological fashion 
that makes a film like PULP FICTION seem linear.  The movie jumps freely 
across no fewer than four time lines (1980, 1992, and two different 
segments of 1994).  The majority of the scenes take place while the 
soldiers are trapped in the tunnel.  There are also numerous flashbacks 
to the beginning of the war and a time before the conflict, as well as 
flash-forwards to a military hospital.  At first, all of this jumping 
around can be very confusing, especially before you know the 
individuals, but, as the film progresses, it becomes clear how powerful 
this technique is in explaining events and developing characters.
     The film is a variation of the "trapped in a foxhole" story.  
Sandwiched in between bursts of fighting are lengthy sequences of 
character interaction as the disparate members of the platoon (plus an 
American photojournalist who doesn't speak Serbian) come to grips with 
their prejudices against each other, their feelings about war, and, most 
importantly, their fear of death.  PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME is about 
seven men and one women ("Snow White and the seven dwarves," one of the 
soldiers quips) facing their own mortality.  
     Director Srdjan Dragojevic does not spare his audience the horrors 
of war (in fact, some of the scenes showing villages burning is actual 
footage, not a re-creation), and those of a squeamish nature may find 
aspects of this film hard to watch.  Surprisingly, the most disturbing 
scene doesn't involve blood or gore.  As the standoff in the tunnel 
becomes prolonged, the men need water.  With none available, they resort 
to drinking urine.
     Each member of the ensemble cast gives a fine performance, 
resulting in a group of characters that we understand and care about.  
As they prepare for the seemingly-inevitable end, they reminisce about 
the past, joke about life and sex, and gradually put aside their dislike 
for each other.  They are people with a past and no future, and each of 
them recognizes that.
     Gallows humor abounds.  Dragojevic avoids making PRETTY VILLAGE, 
PRETTY FLAME a complete downer by injecting elements of black comedy.  
The characters laugh in spite of their circumstances, and so does the 
audience.  It's a much-needed form of release.  PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY 
FLAME stirs some deep emotions, and it would be torturous to sit through 
it without an occasional break from the claustrophobic tension and 
suspense.  The brilliance of Dragovjevic's approach is that he 
understands this need and provides an outlet for it.
     Although PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME is a much different film from 
another feature about the war in Bosnia, VUKOVAR, both movies share a 
similar theme about the unacceptable human toll of war.  Lives are lost, 
to be certain, but the greatest price paid is the damage done to the 
soul.  War strips away humanity, leaving behind something twisted and 
ugly.  PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME is about finding that which was lost 
in the most unexpected of places -- dim, decaying tunnel in the shadow 
of the Grim Reaper.  If you have an opportunity to see this movie, it is 
an experience not to be missed.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
