Title
Review for Lakeboat (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Written by that poet of profanity David Mamet ("State and Main,"
"Glengarry Glen Ross," "American Buffalo"), co-produced by and starring
Tony Mamet (David's younger brother) and directed by longtime Mamet staple
Joe Mantegna (with music by Bob Mamet, no less), "Lakeboat" is a family
affair from start to finish.
        Adapted from one of the playwright's early autobiographical plays, the
film echoes Mamet's experiences aboard a Great Lakes cargo vessel shipping
freight from Chicago to Canada and back again.  On board the Seaway Queen,
Mamet quietly observes the comings and goings--as well as the comic,
profane, idiotic, and sometimes rather poignant banter--of its blue-collar
crew.  All of this has been lovingly brought to life by first-time director
Mantegna (who, with few exceptions, handles himself admirably) and a
first-class cast.
        The film focuses on grad student Dale Katzman (Tony Mamet), who has opted
to spend his summer working the 10pm-6am shift in the Seaway Queen's
galley, making egg salad sandwiches for a motley crew of seaman who seem to
have very little to do other than talk, talk, talk (in that regard the film
mirrors the very special "Spring Forward" from earlier this year).  These
guys, however, shoot the breeze about sex, booze, and nothing in that
lyrical, repetitive, and very profane David Mamet way.
        With the exception of Tony Mamet, who often looks stranded amid the great
Charles Durning, Peter Falk, Robert Forster and yes, even Denis Leary (in a
pitch-perfect performance as the ship's firemen), the cast is marvelous,
and the situations and vignettes dreamed up by the screenwriter bristle
with wit and inventiveness.
        It's not high drama or fast moving but if you love language (and,
especially, love the way in which Mamet can turn language into music), then
"Lakeboat" is for you.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb
