Title
Review for Music Man, The (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Music Man" is a spectacular, big budget production
of the hit Broadway musical, with Robert Preston reprising
the lead role.  The film was also a great commercial
success.  Seen today, "The Music Man" remains entertaining,
with good choreography, sets, and costumes, and a fine
performance by Preston.
The story has travelling salesman 'Professor' Hill
(Preston) arriving in a small town in Iowa in 1912.
Hill, who is a fast-talking con artist, quickly sells
the town on the idea of a children's marching band,
complete with instruments, costumes and training,
all of which is to be supplied by Hill.  The garrulous
mayor (Paul Ford) and the spinster librarian/piano
teacher Marion Paroo (Shirley Jones) suspect Hill,
but are unable to pin him down.  Hill's assistant
is local resident Washburn (Buddy Hackett), while
Paroo's much younger brother is withdrawn, lisping
Winthrop (Ron Howard).
"The Music Man" is 151 minutes long, and its length
shows.  Some of the lesser musical numbers, such as
"Shipoopi", could have been removed.  Preston's
gutteral growls are more appealing than Jones'
sub-soprano warbling, and the ensemble-sung
numbers are predictably flat.  Still, Preston
is a dynamic entertainer, and everything comes
together for "Marian The Librarian" and the opening
number syncopated with the train's rhythm on the
rails.
The problems with musicals are that the songs tend
to reduce the dramatic tension, distract from the
storyline, and force a simplification to the characters
and plot to make room for the production numbers.
Of course, there have been great musicals, in which
the songs add to the characters and story, and the
script is more than a loose means of tying the
different songs together.  "The Music Man" falls
in between; "Sadder But Wiser Girl For Me" is forced
into the story, while "76 Trombones" extends it.
"Goodnight, My Someone" is a snoozer, but "Gary, Indiana"
is a charmer.
Preston's Hill is an excellent, fully developed
character.  The town council, formed into a barber
shop quartet by Hill, works well.  Less successful
is the silly 'rebellious' teen (Timmy Everett) and
the depiction of every middle-aged woman besides
Jones' mother as affected, eccentric, clucking hens.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
