Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    At the end of Steven Spielberg's emotionally draining masterpiece, 
one gets the true feeling of the depth of man's inhumanity, especially 
to other men.  There is a deep sense of fear and dread that follows a 
viewing of SCHINDLER'S LIST, a feeling that a viewer is about to be 
bombarded with the horror of a time long gone, yet oddly familiar.  
SCHINDLER'S LIST is one of those truly rare films which aspire to 
something more than filmed entertainment: it aspires to be something 
truly powerful, to depict something brutally horrifying and find the 
inner beauty deep inside it, somewhere.  It begs to search the souls of 
men to find the evils and the goods, and tries to explain, give some 
rationale as to man's most tragic failings.  It is a film about how men 
can fall to their most inner hatreds, and how some special men can 
overcome their many failings to emerge as intensely flawed heroes.  In a 
sense, SCHINDLER'S LIST depicts the personal journey of one man, and the 
massive journey of one race, as they both somehow interweave through the 
fates of history's most brutal massacre.  There is that deep sense of 
ominous foreboding, as if we know this story, but the brutal realities 
of it being displayed on screen disturb us, make us vomit and retch, and 
cleanse us of the inner demons which cause man to do such crimes.  And 
yet, there is a flicker, a barely noticeable candle of hope in the 
deepest despair, there is a shining example of what man can be, instead 
of what he often is.  SCHINDLER'S LIST probably probes man's fate in the 
world more than any film since possibly 2001. 
The film, on a personal level, concentrates on the remarkable story 
of Oskar Schindler (Neeson), a German businessman, a womanizer, drinker, 
chain-smoker, greedy, self-centered member of the Nazi party.  Schindler 
is lazy, conceited, and finds joy in the one thing that shall make him 
the most money: war.  He is a classic example of the "war 
profiteer".  At the start of the film, Schindler purchases an enamel 
factory, through which he wishes to make pots and pans for the German 
army, as well as armaments if necessary.  He decides to employs Jews in 
the ghettos of Poland, due to their cheap labor cost, and works with 
Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern (Kingsley) to find Jewish partners to 
gain investors and make his supplies.  Stern comes up with the ingenious 
idea to save those who have no "essential" skills: teachers, 
musiciens, rabbis, and the handicapped, and labels them as 
"essential workers", allowing them to work in Schindler's 
factory.  During the film's middle portion, Spielberg shifts his focus 
from Schindler to the Holocaust in general, and in particular to 
Commandant Amon Goeth (Fiennes), who is in charge of the ghetto, and 
later moves all the Jews to a forced labor camp.  Schindler becomes 
close friends with Goeth in order to have his factory run even within 
the walls of the camp, but he slowly sees the monstrosities committed by 
the Nazis to his workers, and to others.
During moments of the second act, Spielberg focuses on children.  
There are unforgettable moments of power when Spielberg shows the 
inhumane cruelty suffered by innocent children, and the changes that 
happen to these little boys and girls, no older than 10 or 11.  
Spielberg has often been accused of oversentimentality: there is one 
portion, when he colors the coat of a girl as she is walking through the 
ghetto, intercutting with Schindler watching her.  It can be said that 
this is a "Spielbergian" touch of audience manipulation.  
However, Spielberg isn't looking for that: he is demonstrating, in 
frightening terms, the intensenly personal effects of the Holocaust.  So 
often, 11 million people are reduced to a number.  Spielberg is able to 
cast every single one of those 11 million people, including the millions 
of children, into real people in one devastating shot where the red coat 
is on a conveyer belt full of dead bodies.  It is a stunning example of 
how truly atrocious this time period was.
The third act is where Schindler creates his list.  The flawed war 
profiteer has chosen to stop the madness that has been unjustly going 
on.  He spends his entire fortune, bankrupts himself, and literally 
purchases 1000 lives from Goeth.  He takes these 1000 people away from 
the death camps, and puts them to work in his factory, saving them from 
the horrors that were to happen to them.  Kingsley delivers history's 
judgement of Oskar Schindler in a moving scene: "He who saves one 
life, saves the world entire."  It is a touching moment in a film 
full of intensely touching moments.  By this time, the audience has been 
purely devastated in immense heartache: there is no more that can be 
done to further impact a viewer.
When SCHINDLER'S LIST was profiled on AFI's top 100 list, the 
reviewer said that SCHINDLER'S LIST was able to capture death more 
realistically than anything ever before seen.  Death is so realistic 
that it touches the viewer dramatically.  Surely, the brilliant decision 
to film in black and white is a reason, and for that Spielberg and 
Janusz Kaminski have to be thanked.  It is a stunning example of 
cinematography never before experienced on screen.  The script, by 
Hollywood's premier writer of serious fare, is ingenious, deftly mixing 
in humor at times to give the audience the further impression that this 
was real, that this actually happened.  John Williams turns in his most 
moving and haunting score, with sounds that are simply breathtaking.  
The repeating melody is as tragic and somber as anything ever before 
composed.
The perfomances are downright exquisite.  Neeson makes his career 
with a stunning performance that lifts him into the stratosphere of 
great actors.  Kingsley is absolutely magnificent, but the true 
discovery is Ralph Fiennes's dramatically scary turn as Amon Goeth.  
This is one cold-hearted killer, with a complicated, twisted 
personality.  Fiennes is so scary that I still have nightmares of Amon 
Goeth, coming with his gun to shoot me in the snow, make my blood just 
sink into the white surface, like ink spilled on a page.  It is one of 
the century's most horribly frightening, disgustingly repulsing, truly 
brilliant performances. 
SCHINDLER'S LIST is as raw, as punishing, as brilliant, and as 
hopeful as film has ever been on screen.  It is a brutal example of what 
film can do, pushed to its highest limits and taken to its most extreme 
bounds.  It is without a doubt Steven Spielberg's greatest acheivement, 
and one of the greatest films of all time.  Remarkably clear, poignantly 
devastating, and lovingly portrayed by a filmmaker who knows the true 
power of his art, SCHINDLER'S LIST is the best film is a generation, and 
one of the most inspired pieces of art in history.  Magnificent.

Author
Brian Koller
Universally acclaimed as one of the best films ever
made, "Schindler's List" lives up to its reputation.
Far different from director Steven Spielberg's previous
films, "Schindler's List" is never manipulative or
ponderous, and except for the stone-laying ceremony
at film's end, bears its 197-minute length exceptionally
well.  Filmed in glorious black and white, and with
outstanding direction and dialogue, the film is nearly
perfect.  Most surprising is the casting: no mega-stars
appear in the film, particularly in the female roles.
Casting is done to match the character, and not to
increase box office receipts.
The film takes place in Germany-occupied Poland,
during World War II.  Polish Jews are forced to relocate
from the countryside to the large cities, then packed
into a walled-off ghetto, exploited as slave labor,
and finally forced into concentration camps.  The Jews
lose first their property, then their freedom, then their
lives.  What is most chilling about the genocide is
the ruthless efficiency in which it is performed: each
person is continually placed onto one of two lists;
one marked for immediate death, the other for death postponed.
The significance of the film's title is that this list
has an opposite purpose.  It is a list to rescue its
members from near-certain death.
While the plight of the Jews serves as the film's context,
a German Gentile is its central character.  Oskar Schindler
(Liam Neeson) is initially a conceited, manipulative
womanizer, whose cynical goal is to make a fortune during
the war using Jewish slave labor.  His first employee
is taciturn, brilliant accountant Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley),
who sees Schindler's factory as an opportunity to save
Jews from extinction in concentration camps.  Stern's task
is made more difficult by determined, murderous stormtroopers
led by Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes).  Schindler is slowly
converted from capitalist to humanitarian, by film's end
risking his life and giving up his fortune to save Jewish lives.
Neeson's flexibility as an actor is impressive.  His character
is always evolving, yet always convincing.  Although perhaps
becoming too saintly: "Schindler's List" is a dramatization
more than it is a documentary.
"Schindler's List" won seven Academy Awards, including
those for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Cinematography
(Janusz Kaminski), Best Film Editing (Michael Kahn),
Best Score (credited to John Williams, but featuring violinist
Itzhak Perlman), Best adapted screenplay (Steven Zaillian).
Neeson and Fiennes were nominated for Best Actor and
Best Supporting Actor, respectively.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The people who are most revered by the Jewish religion are the great
rabbis and the righteous non-Jews who have risked their lives to save the
lives of Jews.  Unfortunately, history provides ample opportunity for people
to enter the latter category.  One of the greatest of that category was
Oskar Schindler.  He was a real person made famous, or more famous, as the
main character of Thomas Keneally's novel SCHINDLER'S LIST, now adapted for
the screen by Steven Zaillian and directed by Steven Spielberg.
     The Austrian-born Schindler (his home town of Zwittau became part of
Czechoslovakia in 1918) was a self-styled tycoon, a playboy, and an
aristocrat who early in World War II had a scheme to make money in the
recently conquered Poland using Jewish slave labor leased to him by the SS.
The Jews would be willing to work for him, he reasoned, because it really
was in their best interest to be paid off in tradable goods.  Later the
reason became that work is preferable to extermination.  These Jews are
rounded up and sent to Plaszow Forced Labor Camp, so Schindler moves his
operation closer to the camp, actually creating a sub-camp to save lives
within a camp intended to destroy them.  His manufacturing is able to save
most the "Schindler Jews" from being ground up in the worst excesses of the
Holocaust, but not from witnessing them.  So from their point of view we can
see both the best and the worst in people of that time.  And with
Spielberg's startling camera work making extensive use of hand-held cameras
for a feel of immediacy, we witness the excesses also--admittedly toned down
but still shocking.
     At first Schindler's motives are callous exploitation of the condition
of the Jews.  As he explains, if he is going to get labor he would rather
pay the SS for Jewish slaves than hire Poles.  "Poles cost more," he says
simply.  Though Schindler's motives are part selfishness and part humanity,
the audience and probably Schindler himself never know just how much of
each.  And often just when the audience thinks it knows, the rug will be
pulled out.  After a last-instant rescue of his Jewish accountant, Schindler
turns angrily on the poor man asking him "If I were five minutes later, then
where would I be?"
     I think not even the mammoth documentary SHOAH has more vividly shown
the real horror of the Holocaust.  Documentaries do not have the latitude to
expand on people's personalities and involve the viewer in the lives of the
characters to the degree a drama does.  We see in the film a situation in
which people who want to live have no formula, no possible strategy, that
will save them.  In our own times even those who claim to know God's will
give you a formula for salvation.  Nazis would murder people because they
were uncooperative and they would murder people because they were too
cooperative.  There is no way to act or behave that could reliably increase
your chances of survival.  Schindler sees all this and as one of the few
people who can influence Goeth, the commandant of Plaszow, he cleverly
manipulates him to save a few lives.  Schindler treads a dangerous tightrope
always appearing to be acting in his own selfish interest and hiding an
ulterior motive of doing good, apparently often hiding it even from himself.
He is a living contraction to his own philosophy that war never brings out
the good in men, only the bad.
     Spielberg's style has been criticized for getting in the way of the
storytelling, but I did not find myself at all bothered by stylistic
touches.  At times he is even fairly inventive.  During moments of chaos he
will show a montage of apparently random scenes, yet the viewer can pick out
scenes to form small sub-stories.  Spielberg plays with shadow and light
throughout the film.  He focuses in on the smoke from a Shabbos candle and
later on the smoke and ash of the chimney at Auschwitz.  Most of the film is
black and white and that helps to build the atmosphere and gives his visual
images a sharper edge.  When there is violence it really is more shocking in
black and white in part because it does not compete with any number of gory
color films.  Blood is still disturbing when seen in black and white.  The
use of monochrome also allows Spielberg to highlight a point of attention in
a scene much as color was used in ZENTROPA.  In a scene of chaos Schindler's
eye follows one little girl and so does ours because her red coat is the
only piece of color in the scenes.  Unfortunately the film stocks are not
quite matched and one can always tell when Spielberg is about to use a color
effect.
     In some ways the script of the film is more subtle than the novel.  In
an early scene we overhear a small part of a conversation.  "They always
weather the storm," someone says.  In the novel the same phrase is used
saying to whom the word "they" refers.  However, the meaning still comes
across in the film without spelling it out for the viewer.  Small details of
people's reaction to what was happening and details of what people had to do
to survive have never been better depicted in a film.
     Liam Neeson's performance certainly will be noticed as the aristocratic
and enigmatic altruist, Schindler.  But in 195 minutes there is not one
single bad performance.  Ralph Fiennes's Goeth is a vicious child, killing
people like a little boy shoots down plastic Indians.  Ben Kingsley as
Itzhak Stern is small and mousey, constantly on edge.  He is no stranger to
stories of the Holocaust having played Simon Weisenthal on HBO's film THE
MURDERERS AMONG US.  Apparently this gave him the opportunity to begin a
relationship with Weisenthal and Holocaust survivors allowing him to prepare
for this role.
     In the English language words get deflated from over-use.  The word
"genocide" gets applied to many political situations that fall far short of
true genocide.  And the word "searing" applied to a drama is also overused.
If you want to see a genuinely searing drama or to understand the true
meaning of genocide, this is the film to experience.  For twenty-one years I
have considered A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS to be the best film I had ever seen.
I have never said any other film was better in all that time.  I do not
change that choice lightly, but I now think that SCHINDLER'S LIST is the
best film I have ever seen.

Author
Ralf Benner
     America's favorite director Steve Spielberg made in 1993 a movie
no one thought he could.  SCHINDLER'S LIST is not only unlike anything
the artist has done before, there's a new level of maturity in his
artistry, an intellectual ripeness and restraint that, permitting
humility, exceed his own expectations.  And certainly ours: had we not
known who directed this emotional blockbuster, could we have correctly
guessed?  As Holocaust drama, we wait for the mandatory scenes--the
roundup of Jews, the starvation and humiliations, the trains to
Auschwitz, the gas chambers.  They come, but not in the way we
anticipate.  Just as we're steeling ourselves against the coming
horrors, there are interventions not only granting us reprieves but a
few startlingly comic ones.  Sometimes there are no stays of execution;
we're made to watch a Nazi camp commandant use victims as if targets in
a shooting gallery, or, in the one method used most, view random
murders by graphic shots to the head.  As the movie progresses, we
realize that Oskar Schindler, a German Catholic manufacturer-raconteur,
will at some point move beyond his calculated indifference, but what
Spielberg keeps up unrelentingly is the terror of inconstancy--how, as
one of the supporting characters tells, the rules by which one might
believe he'll survive are forever changing.  The only lifeline we have
is the pre-knowledge that the story's about a reluctant hero: when Liam
Neeson's Schindler breaks down over his guilt--a universal guilt--in
not saving more Jews, there can not be a dry eye amongst non-Jews.  I
dare say, not even amongst adult deniers.  Spielberg has worked over
our emotions before, but as fantasy: people still get mushy and teary
thinking of E.T. putting his arms around little Elliott--a sob-soaking
happy farewell that satisfies our dreams for that visitor from another
planet.  Here in SCHINDLER'S LIST, Spielberg is at the apex of his
directorial powers, and never more powerful than at the climax; when
it's over, we're shattered.  As if to one day address the doubters,
Tennessee Williams once wrote that "truth is the only purification,"
and, with all deliberateness, it's now Spielberg's credo.
     Opening and closing in color, the dramatic account of Oskar
Schindler is in a newsreel-like black and white by Janusz Kaminski, who
gives the images a state-of-the-art clarity as well as, at times, a
relieving farawayness, the distance almost a safety factor for us,
keeping us from overloading; at the same time he provides a very
distinctively horrific film-noir effect, in fact, moves beyond it:  the
light and dark and shadows emphasize what the French critics used to
describe 18th and 19th Century British Gothics as --"roman noirs."
Spielberg insisted on non-color because all of his visual memories of
the Holocaust came out of black and white news footage and
documentaries.  Excepting actual witnesses, his memories are ours, and
though both Spielberg and Kaminski have admitted that they often could
not bare to watch through the camera some of the scenes they were
filming, their instincts about what they did film and how they did it
seem guided by their higher powers: in their aversion, they have
renewed the strength of black and white.
     This achievement couldn't have come about without the magnificent
production design, the real technical star of SCHINDLER'S LIST.  In the
reams of just praise being heaped on Spielberg, Kaminski, film editor
Michael Kahn and screen adapter Steven Zaillian, there are few if any
words about designer Alan Starski.  His sets and real locales, street
scenes and backgrounds provide the very basics for the movie's visual
tone; without his selections' eerie rightness, we might have a
production a little too perfectly constructed, looking a little too
fresh to convince us.  And while other Holocaust dramas have had
characters react to the sickening sweet stench of burning flesh or have
included glancing scenes of the belching smoke stacks, they've usually
avoided the human ashfall that occurred.  Not here: the ashfall is
devastatingly beautiful in a most indescribably chilling way, and the
coal conveyer used to dump the dead in gigantic pyres, which would burn
for a week or more, is a surrealist's conception of a Wagnerian
apocalypse.
     When Spielberg's gone serious on us in the past, as in THE COLOR
PURPLE and EMPIRE OF THE SUN, we detected the bogus.  Exempting its
spectacular Shanghai action sequence, EMPIRE OF THE SUN was so veneered
with Fellini-like production values as juxtapositions that we were
neither very sure what was going on nor cared; there was no emotional
investment in the characters and, like his Neverland epics and most
recently in JURASSIC PARK, Spielberg's energy and concentration felt
dispersed in too many directions and he couldn't get all the elements
to mesh.  I fought my displeasure of his version of Alice Walker's
novel due in large measure to the fact that I've never trusted writers
whose books are letters to God. ("Are You Running With Me, Jesus?"
comes to mind.)  Compelling in its phoniness, THE COLOR PURPLE became
episodic black soap, and Spielberg's clamoring for "respect" as movie
maker and not as money maker never more obvious.  You don't feel any
pressure to defer to him in SCHINDLER'S LIST.  Despite the
message-ladened heaviness and his own well-publicized emotional
tribulations while filming, Spielberg's a freer artist than we would
have ever thought he could be, having for so long been held hostage to
computers and story boards.  Similar to Agnieszka Holland's EUROPA
EUROPA, Spielberg de-cliches the Holocaust with wonderments
of incongruity: Schindler flirting with candidates for typing jobs;
Schindler openly kissing a Jewess in front of German military
hierarchy; camp children hiding from death in outhouses, deep in
excrement; dark blood gushing from heads onto snow; German soldiers
listening in silent bewilderment to the chants of Jews at Shabbat
services--a confirmation of the stories in the impacting VOICES FROM
THE HOLOCAUST, in which survivors claim that regular German soldiers
(as opposed to those of the S.S.) were if not sympathetic then tolerant
and, if they wouldn't be caught, agreeable to a conspiracy of escape.
What makes all of this and so much more a continual jaw-dropper is that
while we're aware Spielberg speeded up production to meet a Christmas
release date, there's no sense of rush; the pacing is luxuriant.
     Much praise has been heaped on Ben Kingsley as accountant Itzhak
Stern--especially by the Jewish members of the audience--that I think
it's almost a reflex response, and understandably prejudicial.  He's
masterfully understated, even when he looks like author-AIDS activist
Larry Kramer, but objectively, his character as victim-survivor is
pre-packaged; he's not bringing anything new to Spielberg's vision.
Englishman Ralph Fiennes as Amon Goeth, the commandant of the
concentration camp, doesn't bring much that's fresh, either, in that
Spielberg emblemizes all of his hated Nazis.  He's extremely watchable
however: he revives in memory portions of Marlon Brando in THE YOUNG
LIONS, and Lee Harvey Oswald too, and there's a touch of Oskar Werner
in his voice.  The real adhesive, though, is Liam Neeson.  His face
looking oddly broad and flattened, in what I've read is a
Spielberg-inspired genuflection to late Time-Warner chieftain Steve
Ross, with a subtle pancakey quality of the Joker, Neeson at first
seems rather like a Bela Lugosi as the Phantom from the Cabaret, and
absolutely fitting--the blood of his own humanity having already been
transfused to God only knows where.  In silk suits, drinking premium
booze as fortification, Neeson's faithful to the real Schindler, for he
was womanizer, unrepentant hedonist, fallen Catholic, and
(questionably) apolitical as a means of survival.  And he wasn't above
using forced Jewish labor as means of enriching himself financially or
taking up residence in a previously Jewish-owned home.  (In real life,
Schindler made attempts to find the original owners to pay them for it;
Robert Mitchum's Pug in THE WINDS OF WAR also did.)  It's also true
that for Schindler, as with so many, the lives of a few Jews were
expendable in the name of wider German glory, war having a price that,
he bemoans in the movie, brings out the very worst in people.  It isn't
until Schindler sees the merciless destruction of Jewish ghettos in
Poland that he begins to realize that eliminating all Jews isn't "just
good old Jew-hating talk, it's official policy."  When he's approached
by a daughter of two elder Jews who face death and she begs him to take
them into his factory "haven," he's at first infuriated that, one, his
own business is regarded as such, and two, that it's true: his business
is indeed serviced by those without skills, being used by Kingsley to
keep selected Jews alive.  Realizing that his own country is determined
to annihilate the Jews, his insouciance changes.  But not his demeanor
of Germanic pride; it's still arrogant, still crafty, and he uses it as
a means to stall or stop the Nazis from killing people he's determined
to save.  As we watch him wield his considerable persuasion, we
perceive that the Nazis he's bargaining with secretly admire him,
though they nor we are sure why.  From THE GOOD MOTHER onward, Neeson
has steadily climbed towards the top of the list of actors who have
become so sexually magnetic that critics--especially John Lahr of The
New Yorker, in reviewing the Broadway revival of ANNA CHRISTIE--have
compared him to the Brando of A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE.  Vanity Fair
calls him The Liam King.  The fiery animalism these writers suggest
hasn't yet reached the screen (neither in ETHAN FROME nor ROB ROY),
though none of us who've watched and admired him doubt it's coming.  As
Schindler, Neeson, sometimes with one eye in shadow, extinguishes the
potential heat of this appeal and instead is rather grotesque, even
pallid with his snob appetites.  His Germanic showmanship has an
Isherwood doominess, and while it's off-putting to our sensibilities at
the beginning, it's immediately spellbinding, and stays that way and
grows on us right to the finale.
     Not everything is topnotch: the daughter pleading to Schindler to
save her aging folks gets to see her audacity rewarded in a setup
that's just too neat; the little orphan in the muted red coat--homage
to the famous image in FORBIDDEN GAMES--is regrettably a cheap
expectation; the death of Amon Goeth lacks sting, as if it's an
after-thought, when what we need to feel is the resonance of
retribution.  There's a twinge of criticism to offer that after the
climax, Spielberg didn't know how to end his movie, because he keeps
tagging on additional bits.  The movie seems to really want to end as
we watch Neeson in his car, exiting the factory-camp.  In that we're
barely able to recover, these add-ons were designed for that very
purpose--to give us a chance to collect our disheveled, sobbing
selves.  And, naturally, to honor Schindler.  It's above reproach
morally, but it might have been more effective had Spielberg run the
credits while we watch the surviving Schindlerjuden put the stones on
his grave. (In many respects, Schindler is Judas in reverse: earning
praise from others for saving Jews, he earned the enmity of some
Germans: Writes Keneally, "He was hissed on the streets of Frankfurt,
stones were thrown, a group of workmen jeered at him and called out
that he ought to have been burned with the Jews."  Contemplating Judas's
demise, Schindler said, "I would kill myself--if it wouldn't give them
so much satisfaction."  He died October 9, 1974, in Frankfurt, from
advanced hardening of the arteries of the brain and heart.)
     The utter madness of critics' associations honoring SCHINDLER'S
LIST as best picture but denying its director has method--to enrage
Hollywood to feel compelled to finally honor Spielberg outright.
Besides, if you've made both the biggest moneymaker of all time and
SCHINDLER'S LIST in the same year, aren't you hands down the year's
best moviemaker?  Hollywood likes to keep its eye on the headlines,
too.  With some 20% of Americans willing to entertain the
inconceivable--that the Holocaust never happened--and with Bosnia a
nightly news reminder of "ethnic cleansing," Spielberg becomes the
movies' Elie Wiesel.  SCHINDLER'S LIST is a purifying bris--pulling
back the foreskin of mounting indifference, cutting away the shameful
neglect of Kingsley holds up the sheet with the names of those Neeson
will pay to save, he says, "The list is life."  Translated into
Hollywoodspeak, those glorious four words mean, "And the winner is..."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SCHINDLER'S LIST is a true story about Oskar Schindler (Liam
Neeson), a German businessman who manages to save over 1,000 Jews from
death.   His Jewish assistant is played by Ben Kingsley.  The head of
the concentration camp is played by Ralph Fiennes.  I will leave the
movie to tell the story, and I will concentrate on commenting on the
film.
     I am not a big fan of black and white, but I am glad this movie
was made (Janusz Kaminski) that way.  It made it seem more real since
we all know after seeing all of the 40s newsreel footage that W. W. II
WAS in black and white.  Also, the story was so sad that black and
white seemed a proper metaphor.  Actually, one of the geniuses of the
movie was the use very effect use of a small bit of color in it.  More
great imagery.
     I have mixed feelings about Spielberg as a director.  I was
disappointed by JURASSIC PARK but loved ET.  He always tries hard but
has trouble hitting the mark.  Well, I found SCHINDLER'S LIST just
about perfect.  The last hour of this movie was uplifting and
ultimately very hopeful.  He even managed to make a businessman and an
entrepreneur, a hero.  From WALL STREET to THE JETSONS we have come to
learn in the movies that business means profits and profits means
exploitation.  QED.  I also liked his use of graphic violence not to
titillate or scare, but simply to be totally realistic.  The excellent
script by Steven Zaillian based on Thomas Keneally's book must also
share in the credit.
     The acting is excellent.  Liam Neeson is super, as is Ben
Kingsley.  I thought Ralph Fiennes was especially good; chilling!  This
show and these actors deserve tons of Oscar nominations and awards.
     If I had a complaint, it would be about the overexposed whites in
the center of the screen.  They frequently made the center unclear.  If
the movie had any music I do not remember it.  Perhaps because the
images are still so vivid.
     SCHINDLER'S LIST runs a necessarily long 3:07.  You will be tired
at the end because of the length and the seriousness of what you have
just witnessed, but you will think the editing by Michael Kahn was done
and be glad of the length.  The movie is rated R for some frightening,
bloody, and extremely realistic violence.  It would be okay for mature
teenagers.  This movie gets **** in my book, and I recommend that every
adult on the planet.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Reba M Bandyopadhyay
     I just have to put my two bits in about SCHINDLER'S LIST.  It
moved me so powerfully that I can't keep silent about my
opinions/comments.  I am not normally a profoundly religious person,
but I consider myself to be a good and reasonably observant Jew
(reconstructionist/conservative), but this film produced in me some
*strong* religious feelings.  Apologies to anyone who is in any way
offended by my references to people 'with or without faith', but I
couldn't express my feelings about this film without discussing faith.
Thanks in advance for indulging me.  Posted or emailed responses
welcomed.
     I saw SCHINDLER'S LIST last night and I have to see it again,
preferably several times in fact.  There are no words for this film.
All I can say is that if Spielberg doesn't get best director and the
film doesn't get best picture, it will be a travesty unparalleled in
the history of the Oscars, for then we will know that the Academy is
too petty to overcome its prejudices and give an award to a man and a
film that surpass all previous expectations.  It was astonishing.  This
is going to be added to the list of films like NIGHT AND FOG and SHOAH
that teachers inundate young Jewish children like me with in Sunday
school, only this is better, because while those are only about the
horror and plaintive cries of "if there is a God, how could he let this
happen," SCHINDLER'S LIST is about the restoration of faith in God
and/or in humanity in the midst of all that horror, as illustrated in
the oh-so-subtle transformation of Schindler.  Schindler is truly the
brightest flame of all the heroes of Spielberg's movies, beautifully
realized by Liam Neeson.  The rest of the acting is also phenomenal.
If you haven't seen it yet, run, don't walk to the theatre.  I cried
for about two hours *after* I got home, and found myself unable to do
anything the rest of the night except sleep, and even then Liam Neeson
and Ben Kingsley were dancing through my dreams.  Not entirely
disagreeable, that, to say the least.  If the Holocaust was cause for
the Jews (or any other person with faith) to doubt the existence of
God, the existence of Schindler shows us with faith that there is
indeed a God.  For all people, with or without religion, Schindler is a
case-in-point example of the inherent goodness possible in humanity,
and proof that no matter how many businesses Schindler failed in, he
was a success in life:  his magnum opus will be remembered by
generations of people, especially those who would not exist without
him.  All I could think of during the movie was that it could *so
easily* have been me that he saved ... like when at Passover we Jews
are told to remember that God saved each and every one of us alive
today by bringing us out of Egypt, so Schindler saved each of us
personally also.  "He who saves one life saves the whole world."  I
guess this is what it means to have a Jewish cultural/ethnic/ religious
heritage ....

Author
Jon A. Webb
     SCHINDLER'S LIST is the true story of Oskar Schindler, a German
(from Czechoslovakia) businessman who started a enamelware business
using Jewish labor duing the Holocaust.  He ended up saving the lives
of 1100 Jews who worked in his company.
     This is a remarkable film, which justifiably takes itself very
seriously.  It is Stephen Spielberg's most artistically solid film, and
arguably the best non-documentary film on the Holocaust.  Spielberg
largely stays away from the cute, artsy touches that have made his
films seem a little too commercialized (though I could've done without
the games he played using a touch of color here and there in this black
and white film; it made me think of the technology used to make the
film.)  It could well be that he will finally win Best Director for this
movie.
     The main point of the film is psychological: how it can be the
case that simply keeping one's humanity, and the recognition of it in
others, can be as defiant, brave, and ultimately worthwhile an act as
anything else.  Schindler did what he did not because he was a saint,
but because he refused to, or perhaps could not, shut his eyes to what
was going on around him; he saw everyone, both Nazis and Jews, as
people, and responded to them in that way.
     Schindler is contrasted in the film with the concentration camp
commander, who I thought was portrayed very well (though I don't recall
the actor's name.)  The commander sees the Jews as objects, less than
animals, and loses his sanity in the course of the film.
     The direction keeps the subject of the film a little remote, which
is probably necessary to avoid annoying sensationalism with this
subject.  It is not until the final scene that the reality of the film
strikes home, and then it hits very hard.
     Only Liam Neeson, as Schindler, Ben Kingsley, as Itzhak Stern (the
accountant who ran Schindler's factory), and the concentration camp
commander have a strong personal presence in the film.  The rest of the
characters are merely puppets being pushed around, except in a few
scenes.  I claim that this typical deficiency of Spielberg works for
him in this film; what is happening to the Jews, and what the Nazis are
doing, is simply too horrible for us to accept if it was portrayed in a
way that would involve us personally, as, say, Oliver Stone might.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Steven Spielberg
Written by Steven Zaillian, based on the novel by Thomas Keneally
Starring Liam Neeson, Ben Kingsley, Ralph Finnes
MPAA Rating: "R" (presumably for Holocaust horrors)
Running Time: 195 minutes
     Steven Spielberg's SCHINDLER'S LIST is a three-hours-plus-change,
black-and-white biographical drama about a Nazi industrialist who saved
over 1,100 Jews during the Holocaust.  And it's also grand
entertainment, albeit delivered in a very unexpected fashion.
     SCHINDLER'S LIST is the true story of Oskar Schindler (Liam
Neeson), a shrewd Nazi businessman who smells profit in Poland.  The
year is 1939 and displaced Jews are arriving in the city of Krakow at a
rate of 10,000 per week.  Schindler sees an angle and arranges to open
a manufacturing firm with unpaid Jews as labor.  With a Jewish
accountant (Ben Kingsley) handling the "nuts and bolts," Schindler's
company soon becomes a major supplier of cookware to the German army.
     But as the war progresses, the Jews in Krakow are relocated to a
labor camp outside of town.  Schindler is outraged at the treatment of
his workers and bargains with the base commander (Ralph Fiennes) to
bring his Jews back to the factory--a labor "sub camp" that has become
a haven for hundreds of Jews who are all but assured that they won't
die there.
     Seemingly a strict mercenary at heart, Oskar Schindler nonetheless
finds himself affected by his workers.  Which compels him to undertake
a series of dangerous actions to protect his Jews....
     Most of SCHINDLER'S LIST is unlike anything that Steven Spielberg
(or the rest of Hollywood) has done before.  Gone are the camera
tricks.  Gone are the special effects.  Gone are the swelling strings.
In its place is a new universe: a grim, black-and-white world where the
only rule is realism.
     In near-documentary fashion, Spielberg catalogs horror after
horror of the Nazi war machine.  His camera never turns away from even
the most monstrous of atrocities.  But he never stares, either.
     The effect is remarkable, to say the least, and SCHINDLER'S LIST
delivers a punch rarely felt in mainstream movies.
     Forget persecution, the indiscriminate murders, alone, are
numbing.  But then come the details: a conveyor belt dumping bodies
onto an enormous pyre.  Nurses scrambling to feed patients poison
before the Nazis reach the hospital.  The reaction of a Jewish jeweler
to a satchel full of human teeth.
     As overpowering as it sounds, the Holocaust is just a part of the
film's matter-of-fact background.  Spielberg isn't delivering any Big
Statement here.  Instead, he treats the horror as something that,
simply, happened.  Much as when Schindler himself states that "People
die--it's a fact of life."
     Move into the foreground and SCHINDLER'S LIST lightens up
considerably.
     Despite the sobering subject matter, there's plenty to enjoy about
this story of a rogue, reluctant hero.  SCHINDLER'S LIST contains
action, drama, insight, and humor.  And all in surprisingly equal
proportions.  Call it the balancing act of the year--director
Spielberg and writer Zaillian walk a tight line between too-little and
too-much.  And sometimes they trip.
     The three leads are excellent.  Liam Neeson is a polished but
shadowy presence.  His character is a cipher, though, but that doesn't
detract.  Much better realized is the role of Commandant Amon Goeth,
the labor camp commander brilliantly played by Ralph Fiennes.  He's a
complex study of evil that could find Fiennes friends at the Oscars.
     Mel Brooks notwithstanding, the screen Nazi may never be the same
again.
     The very important third player is Ben Kingsley as Itzhak Stern,
Schindler's accountant and later right-hand-man.  Stern spends most of
the film as the silent partner, wary of his employer--the enemy--but
no less dedicated.
     The supporting cast doesn't make as strong an impression.
Schindler's wife (Caroline Goodall) registers, as do several Nazi
officers.  And many of Schindler's Jews become familiar faces by the
end of the film.  The rest are mostly extras who provide the portraits
in a haunting hall of sad faces.
     Technical credits are exemplary.  Allan Starski's production
design, Janusz Kaminski's cinematography, and Michael Kahn's editing
are all outstanding.  Even John Williams comes through with an atypical
score that's a knock-out.
     SCHINDLER'S LIST lags in a couple spots.  An abused chamber maid
delivers a monologue that restates the obvious.  Some footage appears
to be missing after the Auschwitz incident.  And Schindler's final
speech fails, in spite of the director's obvious restraint. (Neeson
just plays it wrong.)

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     SCHINDLER'S LIST is simply the best movie of the decade (and the
second movie I've ever given a 10 to on "the list").  As upsetting as
the movie is to watch, it is gripping and wondrous.
     The movie opens quietly with a pre-war Polish Jewish family
lighting candles and saying prayers on Friday night.  The family
vanishes, and, in time, the candles burn out.
     The scene switches to a man carefully dressing, stuffing his hand
with money & carefully pinning a Nazi pin to his lapel.  He is a
shadowy figure, paying his way to get a fine table at a fancy
restaurant in Krakow, and catching the eye of some Nazi officers.
Schindler is just a glad-handing business man making contacts and
buying influence.  Soon his wining and dining pays off, as he acquires
a factory recently taken by the government as it was Jewish-owned.
     Schindler's one ambition in life is to retire with several steamer
trunks of money.  He sees running a pot factory in wartime Krakow as
the way to riches.  He finds the accountant who used to manage the
books for the factory and urges him to come to work for him.
Mr. Klein, cautiously played by Ben Kingsley, reluctantly agrees.  Since
Jews are cheap labor, Schindler tells Mr. Klein to find people to work
for him.
     Klein serves as Schindler's conscience at a time when Schindler
does not seem to have one.  Granted, Schindler is not a murdering Nazi,
but he's hardly a "nice" man, either.  So Klein rounds up friends, many
of whom have never worked in a factory, and rescues them from
deportation.  ("But I have a vital job, I'm a history teacher!" one man
protests as the Nazis force him on a truck.)  Schindler does not
complain about all the on-the-job training, and is soon backing the
necessity of his workers after the Nazis shoot one for failing to
shovel snow fast enough for them.
     War and war-atrocities continue to dehumanize the unthinking Nazis
in this film (and if the film does have a weakness, it is that the
Nazis are so unrelentingly bad its as if they were not human), but it
abruptly humanizes Schindler.  The script is intelligent, the
performances feel completely real, and Spielberg deserves enormous
credit for directing this masterpiece.  Liam Neeson, a long
under-recognized actor, gives an extraordinary performance in this
movie.
     One wonders how much of himself Spielberg may have seen in
Schindler.  For years, it looked like Spielberg only wanted to make
money.  He has taken risks at least three times with his films:  THE
COLOR PURPLE, EMPIRE OF THE SUN and now with SCHINDLER'S LIST.  With
SCHINDLER'S LIST, he's completely fled from any hint of commercial
exploitation and has just made a great movie.
**   Laurie Mann  *  lmann@drycas.club.cc.cmu.edu  *  Laurie.Mann (GEnie) 

Author
Michael Har-even
     How can you pass a judgement when the matter is so important?  Is
SCHINDLER'S LIST a great film?  If it is not, is not the fact that it
raised the awareness of the Holocaust sufficient by itself?  How can we
speak about a piece of art when so many feelings are involved?
     All those questions are difficult to answer but we must try to
find answers because the subject is very important.  First, it is
necessary to put all our feelings behind.  Not that those feelings are
not important, their direct connection to the subject might become an
obstacle.  After all, I would like to believe that the Holocaust is
shocking and horrible for every human being.  On the other hand, it is
impossible to treat the film from a purely artistic point of view.  The
ethical side of the film must not be neglected.
     The fundamental issue is whether the theme of the film is
Schindler or the Holocaust.  If it is Schindler, the film has no
historical importance and it must be treated as any other film.  If it
is the Holocaust, we must find out if the film is a good representation
of the subject.  What do I mean by using the word "good"?
     The nature of art is to select, to point out what is important.
The film describes some local events that should reflect the Holocaust
in general.  It is necessary to find out if this reflection is
credible, typical and most important: if all the difficult questions
are tackled.  What are those questions?
     It is very difficult to perceive the Holocaust as a real event.
How could it happen?  How could German intellectuals become vicious
murders?  Why did so many people hate the Jews?  Why, only on rare
occasions, did somebody oppose?
     The film tells the story of 1100 Jews saved by Schindler, a member
of the Nazi party.  Naturally, this story is untypical to the Holocaust
because most of the Jews were exterminated and on every person who
saved Jews (and most of them were not Germans) there were thousands of
people who deliberately turned Jews to the Nazis.  The main characters
of the film are Schindler, Goeth, Stern and several Jewish survivors.
The main problem of the film is disproportion.  On every Schindler
there were not one Goeth but several hundreds.  Even worse, on every
Schindler there were thousands of ignorants who did not care.  Those
ignorants were the majority and their silent approval made the final
solution possible.
     After seeing the film, one might presume that the Holocaust was
caused by the S.S.  The S.S. is not the only source of evil.  It is the
child of hundreds years of Christian hatred.  It is the representative
of the German people, who thought that they were superior.  If fact,
the film is very successful in Germany because every German can believe
now that there were also good Germans, that that were many good
Germans, that the Nazis were only the minority.  Nothing can be further
from the historical truth.
     The only explanation for the Nazis' behavior is given by
Schindler.  He says that Goeth is really a good guy.  It is the war
that made him evil.  The spectators cannot except this opinion because
it is evident that Goeth is very cruel in his nature.  What about
everybody else?
     The film does not describe other persons.  It is only possible to
observe that they follow orders and that they consider Jews as
animals.  Why? What was the source of those opinions?
     It seems that the film fails to treat all those important issues.
Nevertheless, it has an important role in adding credibility to the
Holocaust.  It is  particularly important because many people claim
that the Holocaust never happened.  The source of this credibility is
mainly due to the fact that all the events in the film were real.  In
my opinion, the most sensitive scene in the film is the last scene
where the story turns into reality.  After seeing the film, the
spectator, who was unfamiliar with the Holocaust, will have some sense
of Holocaust.  He will not understand the nature of the Holocaust and
he will not know that the historical details suggest that the Holocaust
was much worst.  For example, Jewish children were shot and the Germans
called it "rat hunting."  German doctors checked how long it takes to
starve an infant to death.  Jews were massacred by people of other
nations.  Jewish doctors were forced to kill babies.
     After all those subjects, it seems that it is impossible to
evaluate the film artistically.  Nevertheless, I shall handle this
matter briefly.  The fundamental artistic tool used in the film is
shooting it in black and white.  It seems that Spielberg used it to
bring a gloomy atmosphere and to reach some kind of detachment.  The
only colored scenes in the film are naturally symbolic and impressive.
Nevertheless, Spielberg has not used all the means of expression at his
disposal.  He failed to use lighting in any reasonable and consistent
way.  It seems that he lacks the understanding of the black-and-white
medium.  As a result, his film is in black and white but is not a
black-and-white film.  The wonderful actors make the situation more
balanced.
     After expressing my opinions, I feel like injuring myself.  Seeing
hundreds of Jewish spectators all being very silent after the film, I
hope that I have not hurt the feelings of any of them.  I hope that
many people all over the world will go to see the film and become
familiar with the Holocaust.  I also fear that most of them will get
the wrong impression.  The Holocaust is not the story of the survivors,
nor is it the story of charity or brutality, it is the misfortune of
the victims exterminated just because they were Jews.
     I believed once that Spielberg is insincere.  I was wrong, he is
simply blind.  I hope that the audience is not blind.  I urged everyone
to find out all the facts, to ask the difficult questions, to remember
and never to forget.  Only then, another Holocaust could be prevented.

Author
Max Scheinin
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
There's a moment in Schindler's List when a number of jews are trudging
through snow, clean and crisp, dark edges and frost on the ground. One girl
waltzes through, wearing a red dress that stings the eyes. It is probably
the finest moment through out the film. When I first saw it I began to cry,
though I could not say why. This landscape is the setting of many small
moments that add up to one big whole. when one man is shot in the head we
see blood oozing out onto the ground -- so black and murky, its almost
pomegranate red. At another time we follow a young boy as he runs,
searching for a hiding spot before finally squeezing into a toilet -- which
is already occupied. Like so ( Citizen Kane, Fargo, The Godfather, The
Godfather Part II, Greed, ) many of the greatest American films,
Schindler's List plays with the concepts of money, power, and soul. But
this is a movie about a man who does the right thing. Starkly emotional,
and brutally powerful,  Schindler's List strips away everything on the
outset and leaves us ony feelings. The following that it has gained is not
suprising -- this is probably, thus far, the best film of the decade. 
Steven Spielberg has always been a skilfull filmmaker -- his assured hand
churned out both Jurassic Parks, Jaws, the Indiana Jones   films, and E.T. 
-- but it wasn't until 1993 that we saw what a brilliant man he can be. The
product of his genuis is really something to see -- it can bring tears to
your eyes just as it uplifts you. Throughout, we sense the deep control
which he so masterfully spreads. We watch Oskar Schindler (Liam Neeson)
grow from an arrogant, self important man who hires Jews only to save money
 into  a moving figure, with  a deep sense of pride and accomplishment. The
film requires much work, and can be a harrowing experience -- go expecting
a quick entertainment and you'll be bitterly dissapointed. It does reward
the patient viewer. This is a mature Spielberg, and his deft hands shape an
absoloute masterpiece. This eqsuisite, beautiful film is a rare gem. It
does a good job of summarizing why I love movies. It leaves one breathless,
uplifted, and with much to think about. Afterwards you can reflect on
individual images, visions, and people. Laconic, removed, Schindler strides
through the film a detached prescence who watches all, does much, and
leaves feeling as if he could, should, have done more then he did and was
able to. The change seems natural -- in the hands of a lesser filmmaker, it
would be crude and would cheat the audience. Instead we are told a tale,
told a story. The film is punishing to watch, yes. But anyone who allows
themselves to get involved will experience a miracle, and a genuine
masterpiece of a movie.   

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SCHINDLER'S LIST (1993) **** Directed by Steven Spielberg.  Screenplay by
Steve Zaillian, based on the novel by Thomas Keneally. Photography, Janusz
Kaminski. Editing, Michael Kahn. Production design, Allan Starski.  Music,
John Williams. Costumes, Anna Biedrzycka-Sheppard. Cast: Liam Neeson, Ben
Kingsley, Ralph Fiennes, Caroline Goodall, Honathan Sagalle, Embeth Davidtz
and many others. A Universal release. 185 minutes. Rated R (violence).
In the hopelessly inexact but perhaps necessary system of rating movies via
stars, I have been hoarding for a long time the full and unambiguous
four-star classification. Until "Schindler's List." In military terms it's
like calling the film  General of the Army or  Field Marshall.
Considerations of newness, surprise or shock do not enter that rating. I
have been studying history all my life --  and, happening in the most
enlightened of centuries, the Holocaust is not only the most unspeakable
mass crime, but it is literally impossible to speak of it since no
vocabulary contains terms to characterize it. And although man's inhumanity
to man has existed forever, and this earth is full of killing fields, it is
still beyond grasp that a major, cultivated, artistic, highly "civilized"
nation could do what the Third Reich did.
In a sense, it is because "Schindler's List" shook me up so much in spite
of my familiarity  with the events surrounding the movie, that I am almost
speechless with admiration for the film. Admiration? Another poor, stupidly
inadequate word.
Every year I screen for my film students Alain Resnais' heart-rending
documentary on the death camps, "Night and Fog" (1956). Near the end of it,
the narrator says "But what can one say?" and when the lights go on, the
viewers cannot find anything to say. To say something right there and then,
to analyze and criticize what we saw  -- as we do for other films -- would
feel like an obscenity and a desecration...
"Schindler's List" too simply requires stunned silence.  Words like
"great," "superb," "masterpiece" simply sound jarring in the context of
both films. Those terms can be used when talking of parts of the film,  but
not the whole.
Steven Spielberg's movie relates the events around a real person, Oskar
Schindler who saved more than 1,100 Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
Schindler, a German (more precisely a Sudentendeutsch from Czechoslovakia),
a member of the Nazi Party and a shady businessman, rushed to Krakow with
only nominal funds, to become a wealthy war profiteer. Ironically, he
accomplished what a number of immigrants (Eastern European Jews fleeing
pogroms among them) achieved after they arrived penniless in  the West,
including the Americas.
Schindler ( Liam Neeson) was a master hustler, a con-man , a sybarite, a
woman chaser, and a consummate bait and switch artist. His strategies for
luring the German authorities into helping him in exchange of gratitude
(bribes of all sorts) were just as good as the strategies of the Desert Fox
(Field Marshall Erwin Rommel) in North Africa. Oskar, that big bear of a
man,  could also use teddy bear tactics to endear himself to the Nazis in
uniform. He he plied them with wine, women and song, with delicacies
plundered from slave countries, with a cut of his profits. And that rake
was such a wizard that he even managed to charm his own wife right after
she caught him "in flagrante delicto" with another woman.
He rapidly managed to take over a confiscated enamelware plant in Krakow,
plunged into the black market for supplies, and with blitz-speed went from
an elegantly dressed facade with nothing behind it (no rags for Schindler),
to riches. His main ploy was to obtain free, unpaid labor, in the shape of
desperate Jews for whom employment in an industry touted by Schindler as
essential to the war effort, was at least a temporary haven from
annihilation.
Gradually though, self-serving, amoral Schindler came to a kind of
ill-defined consciousness of the Jews' tragedy. It was a slow process -- no
sudden revelation, no road to Damascus.  Endangering his own life, he went
to radical efforts of lying, bluffing and cajoling in order to employ more
Jews, saving  many from a death camp and ultimately even snatching them
from another. The train leaving  Auschwitz with a load of living  inmates
is visually extraordinary and historically unique.
The film is the partial tale of Oskar Schindler along with the partial tale
of the Jews around him :   branded and expropriated, moved into a specially
created ghetto, then wiped out in summary executions in streets, houses and
death camps. The film focuses especially on Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley),
Schindler's accountant and right-hand man. It is also the tale of the
Germans, specifically Obersturmbannfuehrer (Lieutenant Colonel) Amon Goeth
(Ralph Fiennes), the local SS Commandant, and a monster.
Contrary to some irresponsible critiques that Spielberg depicts the rest of
the Jews as anonymous masses, a number of reappearing characters do stand
out within the multitude. Spielberg manages the near-impossible coup of
having both anonymity and personalization.
Not every person or happening shown is factual. Stern is a composite
figure, for example. But whether created or recreated, everything is true.
Nothing is exaggerated, embellished or fabricated to dramatic ends. This is
no Hollywoodian flick.It is life and death in the raw, and all done like a
documentary. The film is in black-and-white, framed by color scenes, and
very occasionally adding some color bits that make points in incredibly
powerful yet un-showy fashion.
The historical recreation is just as amazingly strong and true. From the
start, as Schindler sets about casting his nets on German officers in a
nightclub, the atmosphere is genuine, from the chiaroscuro lighting of such
places (it also recalls films noirs and dramas of the 1930s and 1940s) to
the music : "Gloomy Sunday," a popular Hungarian song so downbeat that
(it's a fact) it encouraged many a suicide; other period tunes, jazz, the
tango "Jealousy"; martial music, including the German's favorite march
"Erika."   As the film proceeds, the score includes Hebrew songs and
melodies, background music, classical music (Itzhak Perlman plays), more
German items. For composer and music selector John Williams, it is his
finest hour.
Spielberg's experience pays off  every  minute, with outstanding
efficiency. Yes, Spielberg is the father of fantasies (some terrific, some
good, some irritating, and some lemons), but it is demeaning both to him
and to reviewers to harp on the notion that Peter Pan has finally made a
"real" movie. For the record, Spielberg is also the father of "Duel" (his
1972 debut), of "The Sugarland Express," and of "Empire of the Sun."
Here his camera techniques are astounding: no bravura shots, but unerring
photography that varies from handheld, newsreel or amateur footage,  to
subjective points of view,  to a rock-steady lens watching disaster from
afar, imperturbably, and all the more affectingly.  The editing is full of
masterful ellipses of sights, speeches and sounds, but again, never showy,
never arty.
Intelligent yet unfabricated scenes abound. Two examples among scores. The
evil, bestial Goeth's villa overlooks from high up the camp of Plaszow.
Goeth, stripped to the waist, leaves his mistress in bed and from the
balcony does target practice on the inmates. He then bends down, picks up
with his mouth his burning cigarette from the ledge, while clutching his
telescopic rifle with both hands, and shoots again.
During an infamous triage sequence,  loudspeakers are blaring a syrupy
German song "Gutte Nacht Mutter" (Good Night, Mother)-- a true situation,
grippingly staged.
When all is said and done, Schindler is still a cipher whom, mercifully,
the film does  attempt to explain, either by bargain basement psychology or
through high-flown analysis. The Irishman Neeson plays him with
unforgettable power, nuances, and a characterization that has no equivalent
in other films.
Nor is Goeth (whose name, with deadly irony, is like the humanist Goethe's)
spelled out or clarified. When British actor Ralph Fiennes  first appeared,
I wondered why Spielberg took such a chance on an unknown, instead of
picking a proven powerhouse like Klaus Maria Brandauer ("Mephisto," etc.)
or Jurgen Prochnow ("Das Boot"). Minutes later I knew why. Like those
performers, Fiennes is also a powerhouse who can act like the psychotic
fiend he is but can also, from  head to toe-tips, quietly convey complex
ominousness.
Then there's Ben Kingsley who, is able to portray any nationality, like the
late character actor J. Carrol Naish, (that Irish-American who played all
ethnicities saved the Irish) but as a star and on a much more elevated and
demanding level. Kingsley rounds up the trio of perfect male leads. And in
the rest of the cast, every single part is impeccable, from kids to
oldsters, from civilians to uniformed barbarians.
Violence is omnipresent, but shown in mater-of-fact, unsensational ways.
And it is intellectualized by low-key depictions as well as conversations.
Spielberg's film comes as close to flawlessness as any of the major
classics of cinema. My qualms are minor. One is that the concentration camp
people are not as skeletal as in reality, but there's no way to find
hundreds of emaciated extras.  Another is that the film does not state that
the Holocaust kept building up in direct proportion to Germany losing the
war -- something not known to the masses of viewers who know little or no
history.
At movie's (and war's) end, comes an invention :  Schindler breaks down
from accumulated stress and survivor's guilt, and  takes his leave from the
now free Jews, while doing a mea culpa. Unhistorical, yes, but so
gut-wrenching that I can't really cavil. And the epilogue of the movie is
an extraordinary emotional experience.
Credit Spielberg for creating this film in every detail. (There's an
excellent article on the making of the movie in the January 21 of
Entertainment Weekly ) .  Credit him too for bringing out the best in the
talents he gathered and orchestrating them. Like scriptwriter Zaillian
("Awakenings," "The Falcon and the Snowman," "Jack the Bear"), who recently
also turned director  ("Searching for Bobby Fisher"). Like cinematographer
Kaminski who came from Poland to the United Sates in 1980 to attend
Columbia College in Chicago, went on to American Film Institute and has
photographed mostly unknown movies.
Finally, what gets me in that movie is the reminder, the  knowledge that
there is no knowledge of the Nazi era, that our kids --even many of our
adults-- know all about MTV and Madonna, but no history.  In this age of
information, Hollywood shamefully neglects downbeat subjects of our age
while the several European features can find no public. But then there's
television. The public watches endless detritus on the small screen yet
there is an  abundance ( PBS, TDC, A & E, etc) of documentaries that can
teach us both analytical and in-your-face history.  The resulting ignorance
can be frightening, as in the reports that certain younger audiences
laughed during some of the most heart-breaking moments of "Schindler's
List."
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Liam Neeson, Ben Kingsley, Jonathan Sagalle, 
           Caroline Goodall, Ralph Fiennes, Embeth Davidtz
Director:  Steven Spielberg
Producers:  Steven Spielberg, Gerald R. Molen, Branko Lustig
Screenplay:  Steven Zaillian based on the novel by Thomas Keneally
Music:  John Williams
Released by Amblin Entertainment through Universal Pictures
     Steven Spielberg has directed two of 1993's releases.  One is the
top money maker, and the other has a legitimate shot at winning the
Best Picture Oscar.  JURASSIC PARK is, of course, the former, while
SCHINDLER'S LIST is the latter.  Even as fickle as the Academy is, I
find it hard to believe that Spielberg will be overlooked this time.
His Holocaust tale is simply too good.
     There have been numerous documentaries and dramatic productions
focusing on the Holocaust, including a television mini-series which
many consider to be the definitive work.  As a result, in deciding to
film SCHINDLER'S LIST, the director set for himself an imposing task.
His vision had to be different from that of the many film makers who
went before him, yet the finished product had to remain faithful to the
unforgettable images which are the legacy of six million massacred
Jews.  Those who see this motion picture will witness Spielberg's
success.
     The film opens in September of 1939 in Krakow, Poland, with the
Jewish community under increasing pressure from the Nazis.  Into this
tumult comes Oskar Schindler (Liam Neeson), a Nazi businessman
interested in obtaining Jewish backing for a factory he wishes to
build.  He makes contact with Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley), an
accountant, to arrange financial matters.  For a while, there is no
interest and nothing happens.
     March 1941.  The Krakow Jewish community has been forced to live
in the "Ghetto," where money no longer has any meaning.  Several elders
agree to invest in Schindler's factory and the DEF (Deutsche
Emailwarenfabrik) is born--a place where large quantities of pots are
manufactured.  To do the work, Schindler hires Jews (because they're
cheaper than Poles), and the German army becomes his biggest customer.
     March 1943.  Germany's intentions towards the Jews are no longer a
secret.  The Ghetto is "liquidated," with the survivors being herded
into the Plaszow Forced Labor Camp.  Many are executed, and still
others are shipped away by train, never to return.  During this time,
Schindler has managed to ingratiate himself with the local commander,
Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes), a Nazi who kills Jews for sport.  Using
his relationship with Goeth, Schindler begins to secretly campaign to
help the Jews, saving men, women, and children from certain death.
     Spielberg elected to film this motion picture in black-and-white,
and it's impossible to argue with his decision.  Having viewed the
movie thus, it's impossible to imagine it any other way.  Director of
Photography Janusz Kaminski has made beautiful use of shadow and
light.  In much the same way that it's cinematic blasphemy to suggest
colorizing CITIZEN KANE, so it's impossible to imagine SCHINDLER'S LIST
in anything but black-and-white.
     That's not to say that there's no color in this movie, but its use
is kept to a premium.  The opening scene is in color, as is the closing
sequence (which features the surviving "Schindler Jews," each
accompanied by the actor who played their character, placing a stone on
their savior's grave).  There are also two instances during the movie
when color is allowed to bleed into the blacks, whites, and grays.  One
little girl's jacket appears red so that she stands out from the
masses, and a pair of candles are allowed to burn with orange flames.
When color is used, it's noticeable, and Spielberg has definite reasons
for utilizing it.
     SCHINDLER'S LIST gives us three major stories and a host of minor
ones.  First and foremost, it tells the tale of the Holocaust,
presenting new images of old horrors.  These are as ghastly and
realistic as anything previously filmed, and Spielberg emphasizes the
brutality of the situation by not pulling punches when it comes to
gore.  Although in stark black-and-white, the blood fountains when men
and women are shot in the head or through the neck.
     The second story is that of Oskar Schindler, the Nazi businessman
who saved 1200 Jews from death.  Schindler starts out as a
self-centered manufacturer, concerned only about making money.  He
hires Jews because they're cheap, not because he likes them.  But his
perspective changes, and he risks losing everything to save as many
lives as he can.  His eventual lament that he couldn't save more is
heartbreaking.
     The third story is that of Amon Goeth, the Nazi commander of
Krakow, a man who teeters on the brink of madness.  He enjoys killing,
and despises Jews, yet he inexplicably falls in love with his Jewish
housekeeper, Helen Hirsch (Embeth Davidtz).  Rather than allowing
himself to touch her, however, he beats her ruthlessly.  Goeth is a man
to despise, but Spielberg works carefully to show enough character
depth to paint him with narrower brush strokes that show more than a
conscienceless monster.
     In many ways, the smaller stories are the best parts of
SCHINDLER'S LIST, and these often provide the most lasting images.
Helen's story is especially memorable, as is the plight of young Danka
Dresner and her mother as they strive to stay alive and together.
There's a Jewish couple that marries in the Plaszow camp, even though
their chances of survival are dim, and a Rabbi who survives a close
encounter with a Nazi gun.
     Of course the Holocaust images are grim, but scenes of mass graves
and exhumed bodies are not unique to SCHINDLER'S LIST.  While it's
impossible to deny their power, potentially more distubing are the
instances of callous, individual murder.  Spielberg doesn't spare his
audience when it comes to sudden violence or the dehumanizing factors
involved in such events.  After all, Jews were viewed as "vermin."
SCHINDLER'S LIST is replete with moments like this.
     Yet despite the grisly background, this movie is essentially a
story of triumph in the midst of a monstrous tragedy.  Not a happy
story, to be sure, but one that offers a glimmer of hope.  Schindler's
story, and all that he sacrifices for the Jews, is what sets this apart
from the other Holocaust dramas.  For, in SCHINDLER'S LIST, there is
cause for thankfulness amidst the mourning.
     The acting is uniformly excellent; there's not a bad performance
in evidence.  Liam Neeson's Schindler is shown in all his complexity,
and his transformation is played with beautiful control.  This is no
sudden reversal of philosophy, but a matter of conscience that slowly
dawns on the man.  With skill and a keen sense of Schindler's
character, Neeson depicts the metamorphosis from self-centered
businessman to crusader.
     Ben Kingsley, whose Gandhi transfixed audiences years ago, may
have the most understated role in the movie.  His is not a flashy part,
but it's as essential as Neeson's to the story, and he plays it with
simple sincerity.  Equally as impressive is Embeth Davidtz, who snares
the viewer's attention during her limited screen time as the helpless
Helen Hirsch, the object of Amon Goeth's twisted affections.
     Speaking of Goeth, Jonathan Sagalle is solid in his portrayal of
the Nazi commander, a man fascinated by power  and murder.  Caroline
Goodall has a small role as Schindler's wife Emilie.
     There's much more that could--and eventually will--be said about
SCHINDLER'S LIST.  This is the kind of movie that's ripe for
discussion.  Not only is the quality of the production high, but the
picture is pregnant with meaning and memories.  However, at least for
now, I've said enough.  This is a movie that speaks for itself anyway,
with its images being far more eloquent and gut-wrenching than anything
I could write.  One-hundred ninety five minutes (the running length of
SCHINDLER'S LIST) is a long time, but it's hard to imagine anyone being
aware of the time while watching this film.  And when the final credits
have rolled, this won't be an experience easily shunted aside or
forgotten.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Watching the news from Kosovo, we are again reminded that
human beings can sink to the lowest levels of depravity. We
are also reminded of the sad fact that people in general
tend not to learn anything from history, nor do they know
how to apply that knowledge properly. As a result, the last
decade of this sad century, with the tragic events in former
Yugoslavia, Caucasus or Central Africa, looks like nothing
has changed, that the mankind is again in danger to be
sucked into another vicious cycle of ethnic, religious and
racial hatred. The only comfort is in the fact that the
intolerance never managed to reach the levels of Holocaust.
Holocaust is the word most often associated with the World
War Two. It was also the word that became almost universal
synonym with the worst evil imaginable. Events like the
Holocaust happened before, and, sadly, it would probably
happen again, but the scope, magnitude and utter
irrationality of the event is something quite unique. It
shocked the contemporaries, who had been used to much lower
standards of human conducts than us, and it still baffles
many historians, philosophers, psychologists and other
scholars. Holocaust also inspired numerous works of art.
Among those works of art, Hollywood also gave its
contribution, which shouldn't surprise anyone due to the
strength and influence of Jewish lobby within American
motion picture industry. SCHINDLER'S LIST, "Oscar"-awarded
1993 film by Steven Spielberg, may not be the best among
them, but it is definitely the best known.
The film is based on the book by Thomas Keneally, which
described the fascinating true story about Oskar Schindler,
one of the more unusual and perhaps a little bit brighter
episodes in that darkest chapter of world history. The film
begins in 1939, after the conquest of Poland by German army.
That country becomes anything but happy place for local
Jews, who are forced to abandon their careers, property and
homes and live in overcrowded ghettos, experiencing hunger,
disease and utmost poverty. Their situation is an excellent
opportunity for Oskar Schindler (played by Liam Neeson),
small-time German businessman from Sudeten region of former
Czechoslovakia. He comes to Krakow and buys local factory
with the money he had borrowed by local Jews, who got raw
deal in the process. He employs local Jews as the cheapest
labour force available, and begins making large amounts of
money. He actually doesn't run the factory - his trusted
Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley) is doing all
the work - and instead spends all his free time drinking and
womanising. But, things are about to change when the Final
Solution starts showing its final and ugly face. When SS
units, led by sadistic Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes) begin with
pogroms, Schindler is at first worried about the loss of his
labour force. But gradually, he begins worrying less about
the money and more about people he is going to save.
Unlike most of the other stories that inspired filmmakers,
story of SCHINDLER'S LIST is an excellent opportunity for
all those who want to have a broader perspective of the
Holocaust, perspective that transcends simple formulas and
simple explanations. First of all, screenplay of book by
Thomas Keneally and screenplay by Steve Zaillian are evading
some popular myths. First of all, Holocaust, although
ignited by Nazism, wasn't some unexplainable aberration that
came to Europe out of blue; it was a nothing more than a
case of old anti-semitism driven to extreme; and it wasn't
uniquely Nazi nor German. Second, as some newer examples may
show, pure irrational hatred wasn't the sole motive -
Holocaust was fine opportunity for many shady characters to
fill their pocket. Protagonist of this film, who at
beginning, wants to bleed Jews dry of their money, is a fine
illustration of that, often overlooked, economic aspect of
the Holocaust. What happened to Jews in WW2 Europe was
heinous crime, but it was also good business for those who
knew to use opportunity.
Perhaps that was the greatest quality of SCHINDLER'S LIST.
It evades black-and-white characterisation and gives us a
protagonist who is hardly example of virtue. His motives, as
well as his moral alignment, gradually changes through time.
At first he is nothing more than war profiteer - probably
the slimiest category of all people we might see during the
armed conflict. But in the same time, Liam Neeson portrays
him with irresistible charm - the charm of the same
magnitude that saved thousands of innocent people and
brightened Schindler's reputation among critical historians.
As movie gradually progresses, and Schindler transforms into
good Samaritan, we are still left with the mystery - why did
that character change. But, in the end, it didn't matter
much to the people he had saved and who would always be
grateful to him.
The movie doesn't have just a complex protagonist, it has
similarly complex and, in a perverse way, seductive villain.
Amon Goeth, played by British actor Ralph Fiennes, is in a
way similar, but very different than Schindler. He is a
sadistic thug, who is seduced by the enormous power given to
him by the specific historical circumstances. This movie,
like many other, actually tries to explain his villainy by
indicating that sadistic and murderous behaviour was
motivated by his ulterior weakness. For some, this might
look oversimplification of Nazi psychology, but Fiennes, who
gained 13 kilograms just for the purpose of this role, plays
Goeth as twisted version of Schindler. Like him, Goeth is a
hedonist who likes women, alcohol and money, and even has
certain charisma of evil, but whenever we are ready to
forgive him, he shows again his ultimate dark side. Fiennes
was really incredible in this role, and even managed to
outshine Neeson.
Actors were, however, outshined by director. Steven
Spielberg made this film partially for personal reason,
trying to finally come to grips with his own Jewish
heritage. But it was also opportunity for him to improve his
reputation of film artist, much tarnished with commercially
successful, but artistically disappointing JURASSIC PARK.
And that opportunity was exploited in almost every regard.
Spielberg made film different from everything he had ever
made and very few people would recognise his style. First of
all, he used black and white photography by Janusz Kaminski,
which was good choice. Most people associate Holocaust with
black and white photographs, and by being monochromatic,
SCHINDLER'S LIST became more realistic and thus more
powerful. Another thing that distinguishes SCHINDLER'S LIST
from previous Spielberg's work is the use of steadycams and
constant movement of cameras that also provided more realism
and brought viewer right in the middle of the story.
Finally, unlike in all of his earlier films, Spielberg felt
unrestricted with his reputation of family entertainer -
SCHINDLER'S LIST contains scenes of unimaginable atrocities,
random violence and graphic bloodshed, as well as foul
language and nudity. Considering the subject matter, such
elements were necessary and many critics argued that
Spielberg, by refusing to compromise on them, actually
matured into real cinema artist.
Unfortunately, Spielberg might have been able to defeat
self-censorship, but he wasn't able to defeat himself. There
is a very small, but significant difference between very
good films and true masterpieces. For almost all of its 197
minutes SCHINDLER'S LIST looks like it belongs in the latter
category. But at the very end, Spielberg the Artist
surrenders to Spielberg the Entertainer and we are exposed
to the now infamous speech by Liam Neeson, speech that
revealed Spielberg as unable to resist the urge to fill this
film with cheap and unecessary sentimentality. Without that
speech, SCHINDLER'S LIST would have been one of the greatest
films of all times.
However, even with such flaw, SCHINDLER'S LIST is a very
good film, probably one of the best in 1990s. Perhaps it
didn't stand the test of time, perhaps it won't be as
immemorable as some had predicted. It also probably isn't
the ultimate film of the Holocaust (SHOAH was, in the humble
opinion of this author better; and Benigni's LIFE IS
BEAUTIFUL was at least equally good). It also probably did
very little to educate modern generations of the historical
evils (it was reported that skinheads in some German cinemas
actually cheered during the scenes involving massacres of
Jews), and the world probably isn't the better place because
of this film. But, nevertheless, it is very good piece of
cinema and those who are ready to spend three hours in front
of the screen would be rewarded with powerful,
thought-provoking piece of seventh art.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Liam Neeson, Ben Kingsley, Ralph Fiennes, Embeth Davidtz.
Screenplay:  Steven Zaillian.
Director:  Steven Spielberg.
     Back in August, I wrote the following:  "If SCHINDLER'S LIST is
even halfway decent, Steven Spielberg will be nominated for Best
Director, and probably win."  That statement was based on the
assumption that such an award would basically be a lifetime achievement
recognition, like Al Pacino's Best Actor win last year, as well as an
industry-wide "thank you" for the coattails business provided by
JURASSIC PARK.  I didn't expect that if he did win, he would actually
deserve it.  But with SCHINDLER'S LIST, Spielberg has crafted a nearly
perfect film, a gripping and brilliantly acted epic which is not only
the best film of 1993, but probably the best film of the decade thus
far.
     SCHINDLER'S LIST is the true story of Oskar Schindler (Liam
Neeson), a German businessman and Nazi sympathizer who decides to turn
the 1939 invasion of Poland into a personal windfall.  Cashing in on
carefully established Party contacts, Schindler sets up an enamelware
factory in Krakow to make pots and pans for the German army.  His
startup capital is provided by wealthy Jews with few other options,
among them accountant Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley).  Schindler makes a
fortune utilizing Jewish slave labor, until his business and the lives
of hundreds of thousands of Jews collide with the March 1943
liquidation of the Krakow ghetto, and the subsequent relocation of Jews
to Plaszow labor camp.  There Schindler establishes a friendship with
Commandant Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes), and attempts to use his money
and influence to save the lives of his workers.
     Longtime viewers of Spielberg films will scarcely recognize his
hand in SCHINDLER'S LIST.  Gone are the swooping crane shots; gone are
the zoom-ins on awestruck faces.  With the exception of a risky
epilogue, gone too is the cloying manipulation of emotion.  This is a
mature, restrained Spielberg, and his narrative decisions are right on
the money.  He casts a glossy sheen on early scenes showing Schindler
wining and dining highly placed SS officers, playing up the "panache"
which Schindler later describes as his strong suit.  Another sequence
juxtaposes a wealthy Jewish family leaving their home for the ghetto
with a smug Schindler moving into the very same house.  One scene after
another is expertly staged, too many individual moments to mention but
each and every one liable to leave an indelible mark on your memory.
     What allows SCHINDLER'S LIST to work both as fine drama and vivid
historical document is screenwriter Steven Zaillian's (SEARCHING FOR
BOBBY FISCHER) decision to make the characters as memorable as the
images.  Oskar Schindler is a marvelously intricate study, a slimy and
self-serving profiteer who finds himself becoming an unlikely savior
before he even realizes what he's doing.  Liam Neeson manages both
sides of Schindler skillfully, making the transition seamlessly.  Ben
Kingsley turns in a typically understated performance as Stern, the
"good angel" who must walk a delicate line while encouraging
Schindler's magnanimity.  The finest performance is also the most
disturbing, Ralph Fiennes' perfectly amoral Amon Goeth.  As a creature
of pure random destruction, it would have been easy for Goeth to become
another stereotypical Nazi, but Fiennes gives him surprising depth and
complexity, particularly in a tense scene with his Jewish housekeeper
(Embeth Davidtz).  All three performances are among the finest of the
year, and they give SCHINDLER'S LIST a personal quality that transcends
the subject matter.
     There will be some discussion about Spielberg's use of color in
the depiction of a young girl in a red coat who catches Schindler's
eye.  My feeling is that this is part of a larger attempt to make the
Holocaust a tragedy of individuals rather than of a faceless mass.
Spielberg includes several scenes of SS troops and the Jews themselves
announcing their names as they are registered, given work assignments,
or separated into "essential" and "non-essential."  In this way, he
assaults the viewer both with staggering numbers and with individual
lives.  There are many disturbing images of arbitrary murder, of death
without pattern or meaning, and in the midst of such arbitrariness one
act of mercy could mean everything.  "The list is life," Stern tells
Schindler when their work is complete, and SCHINDLER'S LIST is a
testimony to the individuals whose lives were changed forever by the
Holocaust.

Author
Richard Montanari
     To say that Schindler's List is the most powerful dramatic film
ever made about the Holocaust is not to say that it will, or should,
supplant Jan Kadar's 1964 Oscar-winning masterpiece THE SHOP ON MAIN
STREET, or documentaries such as SHOAH and THE SORROW AND THE PITY as
the ultimate indictment against Nazism and its crimes against European
Jewry.
     But rather it may serve to overlook the true significance of the
film: that being the huge step toward greatness it represents for
director Steven Spielberg.
     The three-hour film, based on the true story recounted in Thomas
Keneally's 1982 book of the same name, chronicles the war for Oskar
Schindler (Liam Neeson); hustler of powerful men, seducer of beautiful
women, an industrialist who needed only one thing to fully flesh out
his marginal business acumen: a nice long war.
     The story begins as seductively as the horror, with Schindler
hustling an entire cafe full of Nazi officers and their women,
eventually securing the connections he needs to open a factory in
occupied Poland.  At the beginning of the war Oskar Schindler was a
glad-handing Nazi war profiteer; charming and reasonable, a string
quartet outside a death camp.
     Soon, Schindler moves to Krakow with the intent of launching his
enamelware factory with Jewish money, hiring Jewish workers at slave
wages and retiring at the end of the war a millionaire.  But Schindler,
whose concepts of war and business had always been conveniently
similar, did not plan on standing witness to genocide.  Like Kadar's
Tono Britko, Oskar Schindler was a man in moral turmoil.
     The film was shot in Poland and other authentic locations in black
and white, except for a solitary sequence where a little Jewish girl
runs through the streets of the Krakow ghetto in a red coat.  At times,
during SCHINDLER'S LIST, it is easy to forget that you are not watching
a documentary; the realities are that heightened, the barbarity, that
graphic and wrenching.
     Liam Neeson gives an extraordinary, measured performance as the
enigmatic Schindler; as does Ben Kingsley as Itzhak Stern, the Jewish
accountant who becomes Schindler's business and, ultimately, his
conscience.
     Yet, in this telling, the very heart of Nazism--the notion that
real might is not just the power to kill, but the power to kill
arbitrarily--is embodied in one man, Amon Goeth, the monster of
Plaszow.  As Goeth, British actor Ralph Fiennes moves with frightening
ease from beleaguered administrator to wild animal.  The scenes of
Goeth casually shooting slow-moving Jews from his balcony, then turning
back to his lover are some of the most stunning glimpses of evil ever
put on film.  Fiennes will surely be nominated for Best Supporting
Actor for this performance.
     But there are so many other numbing moments on which Spielberg, in
conveying the enormity of the horror, thankfully does not linger; the
image of  Jewish women using their own blood to put color in their
cheeks and lips, hoping to convey a healthy appearance; the image of
the five-year-old-boy hiding in a latrine, waist-deep in feces; the
sound of Itzhak Perlman's anguished violin, a muted plea on an empty
street.
     By the end of the war, Schindler's list--the roster of more than
a thousand Jewish names that Schindler and Stern compiled as "essential
munitions workers," hence saving them from all but certain
annihilation--serves as a small flame of humanity amid such monstrous
inhumanity.  In the realm of the soul, Schindler's list was the
ultimate wartime requisition.
     While Spielberg's first two attempts at "mature themes," THE COLOR
PURPLE and EMPIRE OF THE SUN, fell short of expectations, this
astoundingly explicit and moving film should proclaim that America's
most successful director has become one of America's great directors
and, in one impassioned gesture, has crossed a line of innocence from
which he will never fully return.
     You will not soon forget the little girl in the red coat, nor the
naked, brutal majesty of Steven Spielberg's SCHINDLER'S LIST.

Author
Eric Walker

     At some point in a director's life, he may be seized with an urge
to make an Epic that will be remembered, he hopes, as his Magnum Opus.
He pours his heart and soul into his work, producing a movie that
expresses his inner feelings, baring his soul for the world to see.
     For instance, in 1980 Martin Scorsese had sunk into a depression,
and he felt that his life was nearing its end.  So he decided to make
one "last" movie, something that would bring all of his emotions and
feelings to the surface; it would serve as a cleansing, so to speak.
The result was one of the greatest "biopic" dramas ever made: RAGING
BULL, a brutal, shattering portrait of a man whose greatest enemy was
himself.
     Other directors have created their own "epic" films, though not
all have been successful: Bernardo Bertolucci's 1900; Francis Coppola's
APOCALYPSE NOW; Michael Cimino's disastrous HEAVEN'S GATE; even Sergei
Eisenstein's IVAN THE TERRIBLE, Walt Disney's FANTASIA and the
legendary GREED by von Stroheim.  It's as though the artist is seized
by the need to produce something memorable, something that will be
remembered even after it disappears from the theaters.
     Pauline Kael notes that these personal, shrive-my-soul projects
differ from so-called Hollywood "epic sagas," in that they're made with
something else in mind besides raking in bucks at the box office:
     "This form of gigantism is not to be confused with the producer-
initiated or studio-initiated big-budget pictures (CLEOPATRA, DOCTOR
DOLITTLE, THE TOWERING INFERNO [or TERMINATOR 2 or JURASSIC PARK, if I
might add], and so on).  The artist-initiated epic is an obsessive
testing of possibilities, and often it comes out of an overwhelming
desire to express what an artist thinks are the unconscious needs of
the public.  It comes, too, from a conviction, or a hope, that if you
give the popular audiences the greatest you have in you they will
respond.  The moviemaker has an idealistic belief that no matter how
corrupted mass taste is, people still retain the capacity to receive a
vision.  These epics try to vault over the film industry and go
directly to the public."  ("Hail, Folly!" from Kael's "When The Lights
Go Down.")
     Which brings me to SCHINDLER'S LIST, the story of one man and the
Holocaust, from the most "Hollywood" of Hollywood directors: Steven
Spielberg.
     Spielberg, of course, is the man who earned more money for one
Hollywood studio than perhaps any other director.  His name is
synonymous with God in the land of box-office receipts and account
books--so when he announced that he wanted to shoot a drama about the
Holocaust that was over three hours long, and in black-and-white, no
less, then who was in a position to say no?  No one else in Hollywood
has the power and influence to get a studio to spend so much money on a
film that is almost guaranteed to lose money.  In this day and age, how
many moviegoers are willing to watch a black-and-white movie?   Why
risk so much when you could turn in a quick profit filming something
like WAYNE'S WORLD 2 or MRS. DOUBTFIRE?
     But Spielberg has aspired to be something more than a director of
action movies and box-office hits.  He wants to be an auteur filmmaker,
to produce something that can stand up in the roster of cinema greats
like 8 1/2, THE THIRD MAN, THE AFRICAN QUEEN, NASHVILLE--and RAGING
BULL, among others.
     Spielberg has been trying to grow up, to escape the image of the
Disney wanna-be child at heart who can only make light-hearted "family
entertainment" movies.  His previous attempts at making "adult" drama
have met with mixed acceptance at best: THE COLOR PURPLE was a fine
movie, but he merely went through the motions with EMPIRE OF THE SUN
and ALWAYS, and thus he failed.
     The fatal flaw in his movies has been that of character: he has
trouble bringing truly "lifelike" characters to the screen in realistic
settings.  While he's given us larger-than-life heroes like Indiana
Jones, or everyday people in fantastic situations (as in CLOSE
ENCOUNTERS and JAWS), he's used fantasy as a crutch to escape from the
real world.  He says so himself when referring to SCHINDLER'S LIST as
his true awakening.
     But is SCHINDLER'S LIST a true rebirth for Spielberg?
     It's a well-crafted movie, and it has many scenes that will stand
out in your mind for a long time after it ends.  But it only scratches
the surface of its characters, including Oskar Schindler himself, and
it never lets us see them as real people.
     This movie is little more than a World War II melodrama
masquerading as great entertainment.
     Spielberg's attempt to produce a human-centered "epic" falls into
the classic "Hollywood" style of storytelling: it has clear-cut good
guys and bad guys, lots of suspense, a lily-white hero to root for, and
a happy ending--just like every other Spielberg movie.
     And yet, this is still a good movie.  The acting is superb, even
if the actors' roles are limited; the cinematography fresh and
energetic; the use of black-and-white superb; and the editing keeps the
story flowing so that we are never bored.  As entertainment, it's
certainly one of the better films to be released in a year where we've
had some very good movies.
     But as a character portrait of an enigmatic man, the movie fails.
It's based on the story of Oskar Schindler, a Nazi Party member who
bucked the system in the heart of Germany's occupation of Poland, and
who managed managed to save the lives of over a thousand Jewish
citizens of Poland by employing them as laborers in a war-supplies
factory.  Initially, Schindler supplied the army with basics such as
pots and pans, but near the end of the war, out of necessity, he moved
his base of operations to central Europe and ran a munitions factory.
     Over the course of the war, Schindler became very rich.  He didn't
have to pay his workers because they were Jews, and he exploited their
labors for his personal benefit.  But by the end of the war he was a
changed man, and he spent his entire fortune in bribes and "favors" to
Nazi officials to make sure that his operation, and his favored
treatment of the Jews, was never noticed.
     What made Schindler tick?  What caused him to undergo such a
drastic change in his character?  Was he really the heaven-sent angel
portrayed in the movie?
     Of course he wasn't.  Very few people in history turn out to be as
pure of heart as they're portrayed in the movies.  They're far more
complicated than this, and rare is the movie that dares to dig
underneath and let us understand just why a person does what he does.
     The story's basic flaw lies in the screenplay, where the
characters are not fully fleshed out.  Steven Zaillian, the
screenwriter, knows how to write characters as plot devices--but he
can't give them the "feel" of human beings.  He made a similar mistake
in this summer's SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER (which he directed), in
which every character had a part to play, but they never seemed like
anything more than living plot devices.  For example, Ben Kingsley's
role as the professional chess tutor was a character of pure logic and
no emotion; he existed solely on that level.
     Here he plays the role of Itzhak Stern, Schindler's accountant;
once again, his character seems to be single-mindedly devoted to one
purpose.  He is Schindler's conscience, there to serve as a gopher and
to occasionally remind Schindler that he could get in a lot of trouble
if his true motives are ever discovered.  But that's all we know of
him, and we never feel any emotion for him as a human being--because
here he's not one.
     Schindler himself begins the film as a war profiteer.  Profit is
everything to him, and he bases his cooking-utensil factory on the
cheap labor he gets from employing Jewish workers.  But he sees the
reality of Nazi persecution for himself--and he doesn't even see it up
close, the way we do; rather, he only gets a distant glimpse of the
slaughter in the Krakow ghetto, from horseback.  This, of course, is
irony: he's rich and powerful, and this power has come from the
exploitation of other people who have no rights of their own.
     The symbolic importance of the girl in the red coat is the
"marker" by which we can judge Schindler's transformation into a
selfless angel of mercy--a complete 180-degree turn, which cheapens
and simplifies the actual real-life awakening of Schindler to the
horrors of war.  Before seeing her, he is greedy and heartless;
afterwards, he's an altruistic humanitarian.
     The film takes pains to portray Schindler as a good guy: it
downplays his casual use and abuse of the women working for him, so
that we can easily forgive him of this "petty" fault.  Even after the
Krakow massacre, he continues to amass wealth and to befriend important
Nazi officials--but we know now that it's just a ruse, and that he's
doing it to ensure the survival of his "employees."  The movie would
have us believe that he didn't enjoy wealth and power, because we never
see him basking in the fruits of his labors.
     Therefore, Schindler is a Good Guy, and everything he does is for
the good of his fellow men.
     Still, Liam Neeson plays this role to the hilt.  After turning in
a stellar performance in Woody Allen's HUSBANDS AND WIVES, he has
managed to land some very choice roles in recent Hollywood movies.  His
star is on the rise, and he is being showered with praise for this
role.  He and the other actors turn in good, solid performances,
underplaying their roles and never acting preachy or bombastic.
     This is a plus for Ralph Fiennes, who portrays the evil Nazi
commander Amon Goeth as a true monster.  He casually sits on his seat
overlooking the Plaszow Forced Labor Camp, shooting Jews because he has
nothing better to do.  He's heartless and cruel, and while Fiennes
could have easily slipped into caricature here, he maintains the
character as believable.
     Goeth believes, like a true Nazi, that Jews are sub-creatures and
less than human.  But after he talks with and befriends Oskar
Schindler, he gains a soul and a conscience--temporarily.  Here the
film goes even further to portray Schindler as a pure angel: he
inspires pity in the worst demonic dregs of humankind.  But Geothe is
the Bad Guy, and his fate is inevitable--as we see at the end of the
film, when Schindler is rewarded and he is not.
     We're also given glimpses of of the Jews themselves, though once
again they're portrayed as plot devices, and not as human beings.  The
Jewish citizens of Poland exist in this film as a prize to be won,
either by the Nazis or by Schindler.  The movie takes pains to
emphasize the fact that no one under German occupation knew whether he
would live or die--but because of the conventions of the motion
picture, with Schindler as the Jews' guardian angel, we know that their
safety is assured.  Sadly, this lessens the impact of such scenes as a
card game played between Schindler and Goeth, with the life of the
Jewish servant girl Helen Hirsch hanging in the balance.  We know
exactly what's going to happen; likewise, when Itzhak Stern pleads with
Schindler for him to take an elderly couple (who obviously can't work
in a factory), we know what their eventual fate is.

Author
John Locke
     This film has gotten plenty of praise, some of it deserved.  Here's
another side.
     The fundamental problem is that the stories of thousands (or
millions) of people are very appropriate to documentary filmmaking, but
not to dramatic filmmaking.  It's the intimate knowledge of a few
characters that makes empathy personal and not intellectual.
SCHINDLER'S LIST gives us an intimate look at a few characters but
there are problems with all of these.
     First, Schindler himself.  He is not a Jew or a prisoner, so from
a historical perspective, he is not a central character in the
holocaust, merely an interesting sidelight.  The choice of putting him
at the center of the story reminds me of films like SALVADOR, where
El Salvador's history is reduced to the experiences in an American
journalist's life, or CRY FREEDOM! which is a biography of Stephen
Biko, but makes a white journalist the central character.  In all
cases, I think the technique is a cop-out to market forces--the largest
percentile of the audience is given a character they are more likely to
relate to culturally.  It is not simply a matter--with SCHINDLER'S
LIST--of choosing to tell the Schindler story.  A Jew could have been
central while Schindler was made subsidiary.  The holocaust could have
been the foreground and Schindler's factory the background, rather than
the other way around.
     (A television movie, PLAYING FOR TIME, makes better artistic
choices in how the holocaust is portrayed.  First, the characters are
prisoners and central to the event.  At the same time, their
recruitment into a camp orchestra gives them a plausible reason for
staying around longer than the average prisoner, and experiencing the
camp both as a prisoner and with the broader perspective of a long-term
inmate.)
     So who are the central Jewish characters?  Stern, the factory
accountant, is the main one.  But he has a disembodied life--no
background we know of, no family, no passions.  He gives up little of
himself and hence engenders too little sympathy.  Worse still, he is
spared from the horrors of the holocaust, other than witnessing them.
So he is not at the heart of the matter.  How about the camp
commandant's Jewish housekeeper.  She is closer but, yet, she rarely
speaks so we never get to know her except as She Who Suffers in
Silence.  After her, it's all cameos: the woman engineer who wants to
make a good barracks, the hinge-maker, the worker who wants to thank
Schindler, etc.  These characters come on to illustrate individual
points and then leave, but we never know them as individuals.  After
them, there are simply masses of people running around with rabbit-like
fear.
     The lack of strong developed Jewish characters, ironically, tends
to makes us think more like the guards of the prisoners than their
saviors.  A guard may be shocked at first by the violence he witnesses
but becomes used to it because he doesn't know the people and they are
never allowed to speak and become human.  It's knowing enough about the
characters to care about them as individuals that prevents us from
seeing them as unfortunate sheep.
     Sadly, the most vivid character is the psychopathic commandant.
He is so outrageous and unpredictable he steals all the scenes he is
in.  What crazy thing will this lunatic do next?  Is he central to the
holocaust?  Yes, in a perverse way, but I think we would all agree that
the major theme of the holocaust is suffering, not sadism.
     For anyone who has seen documentaries or photographs of the
holocaust, the visual impact of the film is greatly diminished.
SCHINDLER'S LIST is a grim tour through a holocaust museum, but without
the insights of empathetic characters, it doesn't go far enough beyond
the historical record.
     Putting all that aside, Schindler *is* an interesting character,
but in a subtle way.  His behavior doesn't really change over the
course of the film--he starts off running a factory and ends up
running a factory.  It's his motivations, his reasons for running a
factory that change, and the change takes place over a protracted
period.  That should be enough, but subtlety is apparently anathema to
Spielberg.  He can't resist tacking on an emotional wallop to the end
of the story, wherein Schindler breaks down pitifully in regrets that
he couldn't have saved one more Jew with the sale of some jewelry or
ten more with the sale of his car.  It's an outrageous sob sell-out on
Spielberg's part.  Schindler's breakdown lacks common sense--he's
already done so much obvious good.  The breakdown doesn't appear to be
in character at all.  Furthermore, it's not plausible that Schindler
even thinks that way--he's an entrepreneur, not an accountant; he
thinks on a grander scale rather than a smaller. (Note that the
breakdown is Spielberg's invention; it's not in the book.)
     Still, it's an interesting film, better than most.  It will garner
many awards, as much for its intentions as its artistry.  I give it a
$5.50 out of $7.00.
