Title
Review for Watcher, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joe Charbanic.
Cast: James Spader, Keanu Reeves, Marisa Tomei, Chris Ellis, Ernie Hudson.
2000 - 93 minutes
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 9, 2000.
There have been so many films made in the Serial Killer genre that, more 
often than not, they rely on a sole gimmick to set them apart from the crowd. 
When a movie of this sort attempts to create genuine characters and 
situations, and acquire innovative approaches to its story, as in 1986's 
stark "Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer" or 1991's Oscar-winning "The 
Silence of the Lambs," it comes as a startling change of pace. On the one 
hand, Joe Charbanic's "The Watcher" falls into the former category--that is, 
it's one hope for success falls on the idea of the villain holding up a 
peculiarly close relationship with the troubled investigator on the case. The 
picture is rarely ever original, and first-time feature film director Joe 
Charbanic uses too much flash and not enough substance to convey his ideas. 
However, the movie does hold a few unpredictably intriguing notions, and 
successfully creates a palpable level of suspense. With both positive 
qualities and negative downfalls consistently weighing from both sides, the 
fate of "The Watcher" falls on how satisfying the venture is once everything 
is said and done. Ultimately, the film begins to unravel during its climax, 
and the disappointing ending leaves you asking what exactly the point was. It 
also puts in place the final nail in its at-once-promising coffin.
Detective Campbell (James Spader), a troubled man suffering from migraine 
headaches and a barbituate dependency, has recently relocated to Chicago from 
Los Angeles to get away from his unfortunate past. At the same time, murders 
of young women begin to plague the area, and it soon becomes apparent that 
they are the work of Griffin (Keanu Reeves), a serial killer from Campbell's 
previous case in L.A. who has followed him to his new surroundings to haunt 
him once more. The hook is that Campbell begins to receive individual 
pictures of anonymous women in the mail, and is given exactly twenty-four 
hours to locate the potential victim before Griffin ends their life. It seems 
Griffin gains pleasure in forming relationships with the top investigators on 
his case, and although he doesn't know it yet, so does Campbell, whose 
obscure past is linked to the killer.
As far as movies in the recent Serial Killer genre go, "The Watcher" is a 
step above the tiresome likes of 1997's "Kiss the Girls" and 1999's "The Bone 
Collector," but inferior to 1995's "Se7en" and "Copycat." While getting off 
to a rocky start that doesn't seem to be going anywhere, when the 
cat-and-mouse games begin between Griffin and Campbell at the thirty-minute 
mark, the film is reinvigorated with a level of much-needed tension and fast 
pacing. Unfortunately, as with most thrillers of this sort, the outcome can 
be easily telegraphed in advance and its novel twist inevitably resorts by 
its conclusion into a cliched fight to the finish between the protagonist and 
antagonist.
The cast is talented all the way around, but nonetheless give a mixed bag of 
performances. James Spader (1997's "Crash") is in fine form as the afflicted 
hero, Campbell, and is effective in transmitting his character's confusion to 
why, exactly, he feels such a strong connection to his enemy. Meanwhile, 
Keanu Reeves (1999's "The Matrix") plays against-type as the cold-blooded 
murderer. Reeves isn't bad in the role, but Griffin's motivations are never 
clearly identified, and he occasionally has trouble acting menacing. The 
once-successful Marisa Tomei (1992's "My Cousin Vinny"), as Campbell's 
psychiatrist Polly, has recently fallen on hard times, and is handed here an 
underdeveloped character who has little purpose other than becoming one of 
Griffin's targets. Tomei simply looks bored in the part, and understandably 
so.
The one thought-provoking idea that screenwriters David Elliot and Clay Ayers 
do form is that, in your everyday life, you come into contact with a large 
amount of people, but most take interaction for granted and rarely ever 
notice those around them. Throughout, Campbell comes into very close 
proximity with Griffin (at one point, they share an elevator together), but 
as is common in human nature, Campbell never notices.
Complete with a memorable blend of current heavy metal and pop music, as well 
as annoyingly artsy photography that includes slow-motion and grainy video 
footage, "The Watcher" is a film that comes thisclose to overcoming its 
problems and succeeding as a thriller, but doesn't quite make it. The climax 
simply does not hold the amount of care required to end on a satisfying note. 
It leaves the viewer with a feeling of distaste and wasted time, rather than 
of pleasure and time well spent.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE WATCHER" (Universal)
Just what we need: another lurid, trashy serial killer saga. This time, Keanu
Reeves plays an elusive homicidal maniac who engages in a gruesome ticking-clock
cat-and-mouse game with James Spader, a burnt-out FBI agent who has suffered a
traumatic nervous breakdown after too many years on the job with the LAPD. To
taunt Spader, who has relocated to Chicago, Reeves packs up his trusty piano
wire and moves too. Before long, he starts mailing photographs of the lonely,
unsuspecting young women who are his intended Windy City victims, challenging
Spader, along with the Chicago Police Department, to stop him within 24 hours
before he strikes again. In the midst of this murderous frenzy, there's Spader's
psychologist, played by Marisa Tomei, who is even less convincing as a medical
professional than Jennifer Lopez in "The Cell." Writers David Elliot, Clay Ayers
and Darcy Meyers, along with first-time director Joe Charbanic (helmer of music
videos for Reeves' band Dogstar), dwell on the warped thrill of the methodology
and the chase, revealing, early on, exactly whodunit since the killer says he
and the cop "need each other to give meaning to our lives." Plus, as Reeves
explains, "We're all stacked right on top of each other, but we don't notice
each other any more." After that, it's all sound effects and tricky camera-work,
along with a muddled, discordant soundtrack. James Spader's acting technique can
be described as 'wooden deadpan' while Keanu Reeves maintains his perpetually
monotone 'dude' persona which sometimes works, sometimes doesn't. Chris Ellis,
as Spader's self-important colleague, is the only cast member who manages to be
convincing. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Watcher" is an
appallingly awful, amateurish 2. The real torture is watching it.

Author
Brandon Herring
Starring: Keanu Reeves, James Spader, Marisa Tomei.
When I first saw the previews for Joe Charbonic's new serial killer thriller, 
I thought "Hey maybe Keanu might come out with a somewhat decent movie". I 
was somewhat disappointed with "The Matrix" though I liked it never-the-less. 
I went into "The Watcher" expecting a somewhat good serial killer flick and 
walked out with a headache, some confusion and wondering why they wanted to 
make this movie in the first place. I may be the only one to give this movie 
this low of a rating, but when you have to sit through a movie, checking your 
watch every five minutes to see if it is over yet, then it is definately bad 
to me.
James Spader plays a detective who has been haunted from memories of his 
past. A killer has been following him trying to latch on to him, after he did 
something horrible to his girlfriend. He has a therapist (Marisa Tomei) who 
is trying to help him through all this trauma he is going through. Now the 
killer (Keanu Reeves) is sending him pictures of the girls he is going to 
kill, and Spader has one day to try to find them before its too late. Now all 
of New York City has to strap down and try to find these girls before the 
body count becomes bigger.
Jumbled plot? Bad writing? Sloppy Direction? Flat Acting? Thats pretty much 
what all this movie has in it. First of all the plot, if that is what you 
want me to call it, is so underdeveloped that is painfully confusing and so 
predictable that by the end of the movie I leaned over to my girlfriend and 
said "Let's go". I wasn't going to be insulted anymore, but she insisted on 
staying saying it has to be good somewhere somehow. Of course when I left the 
theatre she thought it was good, while I thought the opposite. I had to 
wonder why Keanu Reeves a somewhat talented actor chose such a terrible role 
as a serial killer, who isn't believable as a serial killer, nor does he fit 
the serial killer role.
James Spader has never been someone in Hollyweird I have liked, and in "The 
Watcher" he doesn't prove to me he can really be anyone I will like, after 
starring in the huge flop earlier this year "Supernova" he really hasn't had 
much in the way of a job. His character is completely and utterly 
underdeveloped and we know nothing about him to like or dislike. Marisa Tomei 
is one of the top-billed stars and has around fifteen minutes of total screen 
time. 
Joe Charbonic's direction is not good either, and some of the sloppily made 
scenes in the movie are so dumb that I started to get a pounding headache. A 
five year old could have made a better film than this mess. The script is 
somewhat good, but the dialogue that comes out the actors mouth is stiffly 
said, and doesn't make much sense sometimes.
Could "The Watcher" have been a good movie? Its highly doubtful and in the 
end product it clearly shows that Hollywood is starting to run out of steam 
in their movies. With "Almost Famous" coming out in a few weeks, I'm highly 
waiting for a really really good movie worth the watch, and worth the wait of 
a trip to the movie theatre, until then though I tell you to avoid "The 
Watcher" if anything possible, go see "The Way of the Gun" its not great but 
at least its better than this.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Serial killer movies are probably the easiest to get right.  Formula 
pictures, they can almost run on autopilot.  Making an outstanding one, 
like COPYCAT, of course, requires considerable skill and effort.  In THE 
WATCHER, by music video director Joe Charbanic, the pacing is so far off 
and the editing is so haphazard that it is easy to forget what genre the 
movie is supposed to belong to.  It's not easy to make a dull serial 
killer movie, but Charbanic has succeeded at least at that.
The lead detective in the case, Campbell (James Spader), mainlines drugs 
to help him deal with his job-caused mental problems.  He is 
derogatorily referred to by his coworkers as "Captain Barbiturates" for 
his drug habit, something that seems to affect the cast, whose lifeless 
acting make them all appear to be on downers.  Watching actors who look 
like they might fall asleep at any moment can be rather sleep-inducing 
for an audience.  Of course, the movie is frequently so ridiculous that 
your own laughter may keep you awake.
As the killer named Griffin, Keanu Reeves (THE MATRIX's poster boy) 
appears a lot saner than the detective who is trailing him.  Griffin is 
a loyal kind of guy who brings his killing spree to Chicago when 
Campbell moves there.  Campbell, in long and excruciatingly boring 
scenes, bares his soul to his psychiatrist, played with more wood than a 
Giant Sequoia by Marisa Tomei.
Griffith is a meticulous killer who watches his victims for weeks before 
strangling them, typically in their homes.  A student of forensics, he 
is tough to catch.  To give Campbell a better chance, Griffin starts 
FedExing the pictures of his intended victims to Campbell, who, 
unfortunately, has a bad habit of not opening his mail for days.
The movie's sparse dialog features such gems as: "Goodness gracious, 
nothing like a good serial killer to kick off the holiday season."  This 
leaves the visuals to carry the movie, which they can't.  Long lethargic 
sections of film are interrupted briefly by hyperactive video segments.  
These grainy, choppy, blurry video images look like they were shot on a 
cheap camcorder by a drunk at a New Year's Eve Party.
The ludicrous aspects of the script by David Elliot and Clay Ayers are 
almost endless, but let me mention just four:  1) They have a high 
quality color picture of one victim, but the poster that they cover the 
town with has such a low contrast black-and-white picture on it that you 
can't tell that it was the same woman.  2) Campbell and Co. usually 
spend all day looking for the victim and then find her just a few 
seconds too late.  3) Detective Hollis (Chris Ellis) has a cell phone 
discussion with Campbell while weaving in and out of traffic during a 
high-speed car chase.  Campbell offers to call him back, but, driving 
wildly with one-hand, Hollis says that isn't necessary.  4) With the 
entire front-end of his car in three-foot-high flames, Griffin drives it 
away rather than abandoning it or switching cars.  
It is no wonder then that our audience was laughing at the picture on 
the way out.  When Campbell utters the movie's last line, "Time's up," 
my immediate reaction was, "yes, but not nearly soon enough."
THE WATCHER runs 1:33.  It is rated R for violence and language.  Having 
remarkably little gore and reasonably tame language, it would be 
acceptable for most teenagers, but I would not recommend it to anyone.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Joe Charbanic
Written by: Darcy Meyers, David Elliot, Clay Ayers
Joel Campbell (James Spader) is an FBI agent whose life was destroyed by one 
case. The case involved a killer named David Griffin (Keanu Reeves), who 
would study young women for weeks before strangling them with piano wire. 
During the course of his exploits, and Campbell's search for him, the hunt 
turned into a game for Griffin. Now Campbell has moved from Los Angeles, 
where the murders took place, to Chicago to escape the case. He's also 
seeing a psychiatrist, named Polly (Marisa Tomei), who is helping him slowly 
put his life back together. However, David Griffin isn't done with him yet. 
The killer has followed Campbell to the windy city and is trying to make 
their game more interesting. He's sending Campbell photos of the young women 
he will kill, one day before he murders them. Campbell and the Chicago 
police have that much time to find the woman in the photos before Griffin 
kills them, and Griffin won't interfere in any way. Campbell has to fight 
his personal demons about the case and face the fact that he and Griffin are 
connected. Time is running out too, since the killer has gone through four 
of the sins, there are only three left, and - oh, sorry, wrong movie.
Newcomer Joe Charbanic's idiotic film, "The Watcher", couldn't have come at 
a better time. I just finished a review of "Se7en", in which I said for 
every good serial killer movie we get, we're hit with a dozen poor ones. 
Well, we got "The Cell", and "The Watcher", so only ten more to go. I don't 
know about you, but that brings a smile to my face (that was sarcasm by the 
way). I will give "The Watcher" one thing, it's bad enough that you'll get 
quite a few unintentional laughs (I actually laughed harder at this movie 
than at many so called comedies this year). "The Watcher" bills itself as a 
horror/mystery/thriller. Let's take a look at those, shall we? Horror? Well, 
it's kind of horrifying to think this was made, but other than that, notta. 
Mystery? Uhh, I'll give it away right now. Keanu Reeves is the killer, 
sorry. Thriller? Aside from being thrilled when the end credits rolled, 
didn't happen. So what kind of movie is this? I haven't the foggiest. I 
don't think dull qualifies as a genre yet (but thanks to this year, it's 
getting there), but once it does this movie will fall nicely under that 
category.
The acting, the acting, where do I begin? Well, as everyone knows by now, 
Keanu Reeves is indeed the black hole of acting. In other words, not only 
does he act horribly himself, but his very presence can make other actors 
look bad. You want to know what made "The Watcher" look even worse? I was so 
bored by the proceedings I was actually looking forward to Reeves' 
appearances on screen so I could be entertained in some way (you'd be amazed 
how entertaining bad acting can be). James Spader (Of all his films, I've 
only liked him in "Two Days in the Valley") gives his usual emotionless 
performance, no surprise there. I was, however, surprised that the one 
intentionally humorous (at least I think it was intentional) scene involved 
Spader displaying some good comic talent. In the scene, Spader is yanking 
people off the streets, forcing them to look at a girl's photo. I know, it 
doesn't sound funny, and it wasn't hysterical or anything, but it was 
somewhat amusing watching the peoples' faces when they get yanked off the 
street. Should I spend time on Marissa Tomei? Why bother, Charbanic sure 
didn't spend any on her. You'll see Ernie Hudson's ("Ghostbusters") name in 
the credits, but don't bother looking for him since I think he appears in 
two scenes.
Don't get me wrong, I have a multitude of problems with this movie, but my 
biggest one was the suspension of disbelief factor. Now, on a scale from one 
to ten, your average Schwarzenegger movie has a SD factor of seven or eight. 
"The Watcher" nearly broke the charts. You want an example, eh? Alright, try 
an entire city hunting for one girl, her picture all over the place, cops 
hunting every building, and not only does no one find her, but she doesn't 
notice any of this? To top that one off, she works in a bloody mall! She's 
surrounded by television screens, all showing her face and shouting her 
name. I'm as oblivious as the next fellow (okay, maybe a little more so), 
but you've got to be kidding me. I guess it's possible this was all supposed 
to be some comment about how people ignore each other in a big city, but if 
that's the case it sure didn't fit in with the rest of the movie (plus we 
already know that, this wasn't exactly groundbreaking). I also have to give 
the film this, I did learn a few things. For example, I didn't know you 
could hotwire a car in less than five seconds. Keanu does it though, just by 
snapping the steering console open and turning a wire. Neat, eh? I also 
learned that police helicopters serve one purpose only: to light the 
killer's way while he makes his escape. Hey, I didn't say it taught me 
anything useful.
Perhaps in the hands of a more competent director (or even a film school 
student) this picture would have worked (but probably not). Instead, we get 
Charbanic trying such "innovative" techniques as showing things through the 
killer's eyes by making the screen go blurry, black and white, and shaking 
the camera around. How does this guy even move, much less stalk young women 
when his eye sight is that bad? Charbanic also has an irritating affinity 
for flashbacks. He loves them so much in fact, that he shows the same ones 
repeatedly. If that wasn't bad enough, they're filmed in that same "killer 
vision" we see when viewing things through Keanu's eyes. I guess I should 
mention a few good points, so here goes. There's one supporting character, a 
cop named Hollis (Chris Ellis), who provides some entertaining moments (he 
has a phone conversation during a high speed chase for example). There is 
also a nice score playing during the film's very long opening credits, but 
unfortunately the soundtrack turns into your typical popular music 
compilation after that. The film only runs 93 minutes, but I sure thought 
I'd been in the theater for a week or so. I'd recommend it to those who love 
unbelievable, cliched serial killer movies (it's sad, but such people are 
out there. You know who you are) and give it a generous two out of five 
stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad? or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Hmmmm...seems like a couple of strange career moves on the part of Keanu
Reeves. One summer after starring in one of the freshest new films of the
past few years, THE MATRIX, Keanu returns with two very humdrum roles in two
very humdrum movies. I mention this only because even before THE MATRIX,
Keanu generally seemed to be choosing scripts that were a little "skewed",
if you know what I mean. But much like their titles, THE REPLACEMENTS and
THE WATCHER have both proven themselves to be two very generic films. Maybe
he's just saving himself up for those MATRIX sequels, eh?
PLOT:
Another nutty serial killer is on the loose. Another FBI agent is chasing
him down with no luck. That is until the serial killer decides to make a
game out of his killings and send pictures of his next victim to the agent
24 hours before he commits each murder. That way, the Feds have a whole day
to locate and save his next target.
CRITIQUE:
A serviceable serial killer thriller that actually improves as it moves
along but ultimately can't escape the pool of basic contrivances in which it
wades. The movie starts a little slow, establishing a sorted background on
both the killer and the agent bent on apprehending him early on, but does so
with a particularly annoying overemphasis on style, in my opinion. The
director takes slo-mo and strobe effects to a new level here and doesn't
really add much to the film with either effect. In fact, I found most of his
"stylish" endeavors to be quite distracting and would have rather seen a
more straightforward approach to the movie. The "Reeves" factor, with Keanu
taking a stab at the "bad guy" role, was actually much better than I
expected. We all have to admire Reeves for at least trying to stretch his
acting abilities with this part, but I suspect that his character would have
benefited greatly from a change of appearance from the typical "Keanu" look.
Don't get me wrong, overall I thought that he gave a pretty credible
performance, but at some point these super-star actors have to recognize
that their familiarity could well take away from their characters' full
potential. In this case, a goatee, a beard, bleached hair or anything
different might've added that little "something" to his overall performance.
But enough about Keanu.
The story of this film is pretty standard in the serial killer genre. The
murderer who insists on giving his burnt out tracker clues with the hopes of
making a "game" out of his killing spree. I never really understood why they
do that, but whatever! The action is also pretty standard, with one basic
car chase but a surprisingly few decent moments of suspense. I also enjoyed
the background development on the James Spader character, despite the
overuse of flashbacks to do so, but didn't get enough out of the bad guy's
motivations. All we know is that he's nuts and likes to kill? Pretty weak.
But the film certainly doesn't suffer from any major plot holes, and does
give us a nice deliberation between the two men sometime near the end of the
film, with another solid performance from underrated actor James Spader. Now
I'm not exactly sure where Marisa Tomei was for the past few years or why
she chose to take this very bittie part after all that time, but for what
she had to do...I guess she was alright in the movie. Overall, like many of
this year's other films, this movie doesn't really bring anything fresh or
innovative to the genre, but does present us with an "okay" time for an hour
and a half.

Author
Christopher Null
     Following one of the most pitiful title sequences I've ever seen,
The Watcher actually proceeds to become one of the most pitiful
thrillers I've ever seen.  And that takes some doing... but let me tell
you how.
     I give the movie half a point for its mildly eyebrow-raising
premise.  An L.A. serial killer (Reeves) has finally worn down the cop
who was chasing him (James Spader) to the point where he can no longer
function in society.  The cop gives up on the chase after a dozen-plus
murders go unsolved, moves to Chicago, and tries to drop out of life
with his migraine medication.  Only the killer tracks him down, 2,000
miles away, and tries to revive their old cat-and-mouse game, by mailing
our hero a photograph of an anonymous and lovely young lady, sentencing
her to die in 24 hours if the cops can't track her down.  Surprise:
Witness some of the worst police work in movie history as the cops can't
track her down.  Rinse and repeat.
     Like I said, it's a semi-interesting premise once you get past the
fact that Nancy Drew could put these cops to shame.  But of course, it's
all ruined by shoddy acting and some just-plain-God-awful filmmaking
that is shameful in its incompetence.  Reeves is utterly wooden, as if
he is reading his lines from a TelePrompTer that's running too slow, and
with nary a "Whoa" to utter.  Spader is fine yet unimpressive.  And
Marisa Tomei -- starring as Spader's shrink and a would-be victim of the
killer -- has turned positively ghoulish now that she's reached
maturity.  (Note: She's supposed to be one of those "lovely young
ladies" I mentioned above.)
     But let's get down to the worst offendor.  Director Joe Charbanic
(absolutely no credits on record aside from a few crappy music videos)
has no business being behind a camera at all and should retire now
before someone gets hurt.  This is Film School 101 stuff, what with the
ridiculous use of blurred-motion video footage (you see, we're looking
through the killer's eyes!), the positive-negative-positive effect to
make things oh-so-creepy, sudden flashes of white light, and, well, more
blurred-motion video footage.  My cat could puke up a better film after
a diet of canned tuna and fur.
     Which reminds me: As a funny footnote to The Watcher, Keanu Reeves
has actually hired Charbanic to direct a music video or two for his band
Dogstar (which is reportedly quite awful).  My poor kitty may be spared
some work after all.
Director: Joe Charbanic
Producer: Chris Eberts, Elliott Lewitt, Jeff Rice
Writer: David Elliot, Clay Ayers
Starring: Keanu Reeves, James Spader, Marisa Tomei, Ernie Hudson
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Bob Bloom
 The Watcher (2000) 1 star out of 4. Starring Keanu Reeves, James
Spader, Marisa Tomei, Ernie Hudson and Chris Ellis. Story by Darcy
Meyers and David Elliot. Screenplay by Elliot and Clay Ayers. Music by
Marco Beltrami. Directed by Joe Charbanic. Rated R.
 "The Watcher" is a cliche-ridden B-movie with the only discernible
distinction being the casting of Keanu Reeves as a serial killer.
 Of course, Reeves' psychopath performs just like every other Reeves
character - blank expression, monotone line delivery.
 "The Watcher" has that made-for-TV look with a lot of fancy camera
work, scenes jumping from negative to positive, many quick cuts and an
obnoxious, pulsating score.
 It's hard to imagine what lured Reeves to this underwhelming project -
unless it was the prospect of tarnishing his post-"Matrix" heroic image.
 The movie is totally preposterous in its premise of a serial killer
changing his locale just so he can hook up again with the FBI agent
(James Spader) who was chasing him in California.
 There is a homoerotic subtext to the relationship between Reeves' David
Allen Griffin and Spader's pill-popping, migraine-suffering Joel
Campbell.
 Think about it. If you were a serial killer, would you go from the
sunny climes of the West Coast to the cold Midwest of Chicago merely to
be near the law enforcement officer who knows more about you than anyone
else? That's the type of illogical premise that permeates "The Watcher."
 Spader looks terrible, hollow-eyed and sleep-deprived as Campbell. This
is how his character is supposed to appear, and it's a wonder how he can
be so perceptive  in such a state.
  "The Watcher" is only about 90 minutes long and even that is a
stretch. Director Joe Charbanic puffs it up with lots of padding -
overhead city shots, that time-compacting shot of speeding headlights
zooming by (you know the one) and one-frame jerky shots to turn a simple
cops-and-psycho movie into a pretentious work of art.
 "The Watcher" provides a subversive, guilty-pleasure thrill despite
being predictable and totally hokey. It's interesting watching Reeves.
At any minute you expect him to burst out laughing and say, `Hey, dude,
I'm not really a killer, I'm only screwin' with ya.' That may have made
"The Watcher" a bit more watchable, but I doubt it.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Reviews by Bloom can be found posted on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WATCHER, THE (director: Joe Charbanic; screenwriters: Clay Ayers/David
Elliot/based on a story by Darcy Meyers and David Elliot;
cinematographer: Michael Chapman; editor: Richard Nord; cast: James
Spader (Campbell), Marisa Tomei (Polly), Keanu Reeves (Griffin), Ernie
Hudson (FBI Director, Ibby), Chris Ellis (Hollis), Rebakah Louise Smith
(Ellie),Yvonne Niami (Lisa), Robert Cicchini (Mitch) Jennifer McShane
(Diana), Gina Alexander (Sharon); Runtime: 93; 2000)
A routine serial killer flick, set in Chicago. Everything seen is what
has become a cliché for this genre. There is the sensitive lawman who is
traumatized by the killings and his inability to get the killer, and the
cat and mouse games that ensue between FBI Agent Joel Campbell (Spader)
and the elusive killer, who has the obligatory three names all serial
killers seem to have, David Allen Griffin (Reeves). He follows the agent
from L.A. to Chicago, where he phones to tell him, it hasn't been the
same since you left. I missed you. There is the psychic connection
between the killer and the investigating agent, which is depicted here
like yin and yang, with each needing the other to exist, and there is
the ego maniacal taunting of the killer, coming in the form of sending
photos of the next intended victim to Campbell, as he gives the police a
day before killing them. The film ends smoothly like those mystery shows
on TV do: with a car chase that seems to be obligatory filler for such
cop films, a rescue coming just in the nick of time, and the action
scenes being well choreographed to fit the pyrotechnical finale. The
attempt to bring any psychology into this thriller, never materializes,
except in the most banal manner. An inexperienced therapist, played with
restraint by Marisa Tomei, doles out inane cheerleading analysis to the
burnt-out cop, who has become her patient, concerned that the killer is
using him as his excuse to kill. In fact, the killer is more interested
in playing mind games with Spader than he is in killing his victims,
which convinced me that this film wasn't looking to go into new
territory with this 'let's make a profit for the producers' genre film.
This debut feature by the music video director Joe Charbanic is a
limited venture, smacking of formula questions and answers to the serial
killer's mental state, resulting in a picture that is decidedly painted
by-the-numbers.
The film opens under the dark skies of Chicago, where the noise heard is
from police sirens and helicopters from above the skyline of Lake
Michigan, swooping down on the crime scene. The murder of a young woman
takes place in the building where Joel Campbell lives, and he is drawn
into the case when he makes contact with the hard-boiled investigating
detective who is at the crime scene, Hollis (Ellis). Currently, the
agent is on a disability leave, seeing a therapist about his inability
to function anymore, taking heavy doses of sleeping pills,
self-injecting himself in the stomach with drugs for his migraines, and
having nightmares in his unkept apartment about being unable to catch
sicko David Allen Griffin during an L.A. foot chase; and, from failing
to save the killer's last target in L.A. -- Campbell's married lover --
from a death by fire. The agent gets back on the case when the sicko,
seen always dressed in black, sends him by Federal Express a photo of
his next victim. The killer's modus operandi is to watch the victim
while undetected, get their routine down pat, and then sneak into their
apartment, gag them and tie them up, dance with them, touch them without
having sex and then strangle them with a piano wire. He makes for an
uninteresting sicko, reading his banal lines with an undue need for
perfect enunciation, as if he were trying out for an amateur Shakespeare
production in some small Midwestern town. Rumor has it, that Reeves
expected this role to only be a cameo and when the role was expanded and
his pay wasn't, he became unhappy with the studio, as a result refusing
to do any publicity work for them on the film.
James Spader as the lead, most of his career a fine actor, has
difficulty doing anything with his uninteresting and predictable role,
except go with the props he's been handed. He needs reassurance from his
shrink that he can catch the killer, but gets further frustrated that he
is unsuccessful in saving the lives of two nondescript women, who can't
be warned in time of the danger they are in, despite their pictures
plastered all over the windy city and on the TV news.
The film covers up its banal story by some pretty slick shooting
devices, which include fast-paced editing and jump-cuts, and at times,
when taking on the killer's point of view, making the beautiful color go
grainy with a hand-held video camera, which is meant to signify that
there is some kind of mystery going on. What the sleek looking film
accomplishes, is that it makes this hollow film very watchable, looking
much like an MTV video.
The film ultimately fails because the story is never drawn out enough to
make it spellbinding or tense, the main characters are both too
hackneyed to bring something to the table except an exercise in playing
a role that goes against their film career typecasting. After about 80
minutes into the film, it breaks completely down in silliness and
incredibility, as the killer and the cop - yin and yang - meet
face-to-face for the first time in the cemetery where Spader's
girlfriend is buried and continue their cat-and-mouse relationship, this
time over the pretty therapist, who is held hostage in the same way his
former girlfriend was, which makes for a dicey ending to a dicey pic.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Chad Polenz
When most critics describe a movie as being "by the books" or "follows all 
the rules" they usually mean it in a derogatory way. I was thinking of using 
one of those kinds of phrases to review "The Watcher." After all, it is a big 
budget Hollywood serial killer flick with marquee names, but that doesn't 
make it a bad movie. Sophomoric maybe, but definitely not bad. 
Serial killer movies are a big box office draw but they're not exactly the 
easiest films to make, or make well at least. You need a hero you can really 
stand behind but one with some kind of personal weakness or character flaw so 
that they're not invincible. You also need a nasty killer who has a sick 
style in the way he operates. The better criminal he is, the more we want him 
caught. 
A good screenplay and tight direction are also needed to bring it all 
together and make it work. You want a story that's complex but not so 
intricate that it's confusing, and you need good direction to keep the pace 
moving for consistent suspense. 
"The Watcher" does a fair job in balancing these components, walking a fine 
line between making just another formula movie and making a GOOD formula 
movie. 
Our hero and villain are played by James Spader and Keanu Reeves, 
respectively. The setting is Chicago and Spader's a pill-popping burned-out 
FBI agent with constant flashbacks to his days tracking a serial killer when 
he lived in Los Angeles. He visits a psychiatrist twice a week to help deal 
with his guilty conscience of his failure to catch the killer. He's the 
classic obsessed hero but he's also a hobbled one as we see the mess his life 
currently is. He can't seem to get his act together and is so strung out on 
medication it's like he's an escapee from the ICU. His introductory scenes 
are intercut with surreal flashbacks to that time he almost got the bad guy. 
It's a good way to keep the film energized but it's a little more than 
necessary. Spader's character is basically an exaggerated version of Fox 
Mulder from "The X-Files." 
Reeves plays the killer, a man who has a penchant for stalking women without 
them knowing it and learning their every move and daily routine. He waits for 
them in their homes and strangles them with piano wire but not after spending 
some "quality time" with them. We never get a motive or even a clue as to 
what turned him into the sickie he is. He's a really charming, handsome man 
who appears to have some money and isn't a drug-addled vagrant or anything. 
If he's lonely he should just go to a bar because the women would be all over 
him. Many critics say Reeves and Spader should have switched roles, I agree, 
it would have been much more effective. 
So the film does a fairly good job in establishing an insecure, weak good guy 
vs. a cocky, vain bad guy. But can it string them through a good story? 
For the most part yes, except for the fact that there is barely a story. It's 
mostly just thriller filler, but it works well. As you may have seen from the 
commercials and trailers Reeves tells Spader he'll send him a picture of his 
next victim and he can have 24 hours to find her. Whenever a serial killer 
gives the authorities an inkling of a clue, especially on purpose, it creates 
for great tension and "The Watcher" takes advantage of this situation. The 
second act of the film picks up the pace quickly and keeps the going and 
going. Kind of like a Jerry Bruckheimer movie but instead of explosions and 
chase scenes it's police work (hey wait a second, there ARE a few explosions 
and chase scenes!). 
If you're a cop in a city with several million people and you know one of 
them is going to be killed how to you prevent it from happening? Even with 
the photograph of the victim and the help of the media and officers handing 
out flyers all over the city would it still be possible in this day and age 
for a person to be essentially invisible among thousands of other people? The 
answer we get here is a clear "yes" and that's what gives "The Watcher" so 
much energy and intrigue through most of its running time. The teamwork the Ch
icago Police and the FBI do to avert this crime is pretty amazing and the 
film doesn't take shortcuts around the detective work either. How DO you find 
a needle in a haystack? The killer knows you don't but the hero has to 
believe you can with a lot of hard work and a little bit of luck. 
I shouldn't even analyze or discuss the ending. I mean this is a formula 
serial killer flick, how else can it end? 
Is it suspenseful? Sort of. Is justice served? Yes, but it's not as 
satisfying as you'd think. Is it cheesy? On paper it would be, seeing it on 
the big screen it's not. 
You can take "The Watcher" at face value and enjoy the ride or be more 
cynical and see it for what it really is. Either way you'll agree it's decent 
but neither terrible nor terrific. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-4B11-4923A6B-39D29B39-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Michael Dequina
        There is a germ of an interesting idea buried in _The_Watcher_,
but any chance of that idea developing into the basis of an intelligent
thriller was completely obliterated when the thought of stunt casting
entered the picture.  So instead of an engrossing psychological chiller,
we get a fairly pro forma serial killer pursuit pic where the madman is
played by... Keanu Reeves.  Any wonder why not a single scare nor
suspenseful moment is to be experienced in this amazingly anemic film?
        The potentially interesting idea lost in the muck is the
exploration of the strange symbiotic relationship between a killer and
his pursuer.  In _The_Watcher_, the killer is Reeves' David Allen
Griffin, who stalks his young female prey before strangling them with a
piano wire; the pursuer is Joel Campbell (James Spader), an FBI profiler
who worked on the Griffin case during his initial killing spree in Los
Angeles.  Burned out after working that case--without ever capturing
Griffin--Campbell has since left the bureau and the City of Angels,
living a layabout life in Chicago that is perked up only by non-stop
intake of prescription drugs and frequent visits to his shrink, Polly
(Marisa Tomei, struggling to get back on the studio A-list in a thankless
role).  But it isn't long before Griffin turns up in the Windy City,
prodding Campbell into a cat-and-mouse game that brings him back to the
Fed fold.
        I get the impression that the story as originally conceived by
Darcy Meyers and David Elliot was less about catching the killer--which
is what the finished _The_Watcher_ ostensibly is, a routine genre
exercise--than about something more interesting: that being how lawmen
become defined by the perps they track, and vice versa.  But any probing
psychological dimension to this story is drowned out by Joe Charbanic's
overdirection.  Heavy on the quick edits and stylized visuals, it comes
as no surprise that Charbanic is another music video vet making the big
leap to the feature film world.  While flashiness has its place on the
big screen, the seems strangely out of place in a film whose content
suggests something darker and grittier (further exemplified by Spader and
Tomei's sullenly earnest performances); the gloss makes the film that
much more difficult to believe.
        Ultimately nudging _The_Watcher_ from "difficult to believe" to
"impossible to believe" is the ruinous presence of Reeves.  Charbanic
directed videos for Reeves' band Dogstar, and I'd like to think it's that
connection--and studio execs' taste for stunt casting--is what led to
this stunning example of miscasting.  It is inconceivable that anyone
could sincerely believe that he of the affectless voice, erratic speech
rhythms, blank face, and bobbing head could convincingly convey any sense
of evil or menace, and Reeves' performance just confirms how limited his
range is.  His Griffin is serial killer as laid-back surfer dude, and
never once do we believe someone this incredibly goofy could have evaded
the authorities this long.  Whenever Reeves shows up, any level of
believability that the film has managed to generate (mostly courtesy of
Spader) goes rocketing out the window.
        And, unfortunately, Reeves shows up quite frequently in
_The_Watcher_, and Charbanic and the rest of the crew fail to compensate
with the pedestrian, suspenseless plot twists, which lumber toward a most
unsatisfying climax.  As such, the only fright likely to be experienced
by moviegoers is the fact that they spent hard-earned money on such a
turkey.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Ross Anthony
Spader's tough, but depressed, cop performance is mesmerizing. How could
anybody in their right mind be afraid of Keanu Reeves? That takes an expert
actor. Spader does such a great job that you might even come to fear Keanu
too ... a little bit? Maybe? Well, fear not (er, I mean, don't worry),
there's a good movie here -- even if the bad guy isn't all that frightening.
Basically, Spader, out on workman's comp because of the drugs for the
insomnia and migraines due in part to an LA serial strangler (Reeves), has
moved to Chicago in search of peace and a good psychologist. Unfortunately,
Reeves, missing the special way Spader used to pursue him, packs his piano
wire and sets up shop in the windy city.
Psychologist (Tomei), "Maybe you're just afraid."
Spader, "You're f-ing right I'm afraid."
This well paced film, backed by thumpin' tunes, moves with strength. All
involved act well, with Spader topping the list; though his later scenes
aren't too bad, Reeves is simply miscast. (Leave the pretty-boy crazed
killer gig to Brad Pitt.)
Another major distraction to the project is overuse of a passé digital
effect - strobe. Every time the image juts across the screen, my teeth
grind. But maybe I'm biased, thinking it pretty cool, I overused that effect
myself many years ago with my own shorts. Seeing it here nauseated me while
denigrating the overall quality of the production.
Also, midway into the story, Reeves steps into Spader's psychologist's
office posing as a potential patient. This new twist to the personal game of
chess between he and Spader waxes extremely promising. Terribly intrigued to
see it develop, audiences may very well be dismayed when it drops out of the
film like a dead body.
Lastly in a third act face to face, a gritty overworked Spader draws his gun
on a smilingly giddy unarmed Reeves; sorry, I don't believe Spader would
turn an ear before taking a shot at some limb or other.
Still, overall, a very strong B+. This film is stirring, has action, humor,
and great dialogue (the Spader character is artfully drawn and portrayed).
It's not all that scary, though a few victims do get a bit choked up - you
probably won't.
The Watcher. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring James Spader, Marisa Tomei, Ernie Hudson, Chris Ellis, Keanu
Reeves.
Directed by Joe Charbanic.
Screenplay by David Elliot and Clay Ayers.
Produced by Christopher Eberts, Elliot Lewitt, Jeff Rice, and Nile Niami at
Universal/Interlight(C)2000.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
