Title
Review for Mother (1996/II)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/96 (limited), 1/10/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:45
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, mild profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Albert Brooks, Debbie Reynolds, Rob Morrow
Director: Albert Brooks
Producer: Scott Rudin and Herb Nanas
Screenplay: Albert Brooks and Monica Johnson
Cinematography: Lajos Koltai
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
"There are two kinds of mothers on the planet. The first kind thinks 
that every single thing their children do is perfect and their children 
are God's gift to the world. And then there's the other kind. [MOTHER] 
is about the other kind."
          -- Albert Brooks
     In discussing the pantheon of living American motion picture funny 
men, names like Jack Lemmon, Billy Crystal, Steve Martin, Robin 
Williams, and Eddie Murphy are likely to surface.  A man who's rarely 
mentioned, however, is Albert Brooks, one of this country's most 
underrated comics.  Brooks, who started his public life as a standup 
comedian before moving into writing, directing, and acting in feature 
films, has done screen work every bit as hilarious as any of the 
aforementioned names, and his latest effort, MOTHER, proves that he's 
quite capable of bouncing back from a failure (1994's THE SCOUT, which 
he co-wrote and starred in, but did not direct).
     In the formula-laden playground of modern comedies, MOTHER comes as 
a breath of fresh air.  Unlike most of 1996's so-called "laugh fests", 
this one relies on smart humor rather than slapstick, puns, and dumb 
jokes with quick payoffs.  Brooks doesn't use the AIRPLANE approach to 
comedy.  His films aren't loaded with hit-and-miss gags.  The 
director/writer strives for quality over quantity, and when he wants the 
audience to laugh, they generally do so.  
     MOTHER doesn't have much of a plot.  In fact, what little story 
there is functions mostly as a framing device for two good performances 
and a stream of rich, intelligent dialogue.  Brooks has a keen eye for 
comedy in normal, natural situations.  Much of the humor in this film 
works because we can relate to it.  Regardless of your race, class, or 
creed, many of the situations represented in MOTHER will have a familiar 
feel.
     Brooks plays John Henderson, a forty year old B-grade science 
fiction writer (his published books include PLANET SEVEN and PLANET 
EIGHT) who is going through his second divorce.  For John, this is only 
the latest in a long line of failed relationships.  In the words of a 
friend he meets at a bar (John C. McGinley), "You've gotta know what 
you're looking for [in a woman], and you don't have a clue."  After a 
great deal of soul-searching, John decides that to better understand 
women, he needs to investigate his strained relationship with his 
mother, Beatrice (Debbie Reynolds).  So, much to the surprise of his 
friends and his younger brother, Jeff (Rob Morrow), he decides to move 
back into his childhood home in Sausalito and live with her.  Thus 
begins an odyssey of mother/son bonding that not even John is prepared 
for.
     It would have been easy for Brooks' script (co-written by Monica 
Johnson) to treat Mrs. Henderson as a caricature.  Most comedies would 
have opted for that route, I think.  The result might have been funny, 
but it wouldn't have been as meaningful.  As the film progresses, 
Beatrice is allowed to fill out into a full-fledged character, complete 
with her own desires, dashed hopes, and simmering dreams.  We, like 
John, gradually recognize why she reacts to him the way she does.
     Although MOTHER boasts a host of hilarious one-liners, the best 
moments are the extended episodes that delve into everyday life.  One 
features John's attempt to start an intelligent conversation with a 
vacuous date (FRIENDS' Lisa Kudrow).  There are also the scenes with 
Mom:  a trip to the grocery store, an excursion through the mall, and an 
afternoon at the zoo.  All of these sequences could have been short, but 
Brooks allows them to develop and play out naturally, letting the comedy 
bubble to the surface rather than escape in one sudden, contrived 
explosion.
     While Brooks is solid and likable as John, the scene-stealer is 
Debbie Reynolds, who is taking on her first starring role since the 
'70s.  Reynolds, who is probably best remembered as the leading lady in 
SINGING IN THE RAIN, sparkles as Beatrice, bringing a quality to this 
role that will make some motherly aspect instantly recognizable to 
nearly everyone in the audience.  Rob Morrow (LAST DANCE), an actor of 
limited range and passable talent who hasn't impressed me since his 
television to film transition, is well-cast as John's obnoxious, shallow 
brother.
     Admittedly, MOTHER has a weak beginning and ending, but the 
material in between is what makes it worth watching.  This probably 
isn't the funniest or most inventive comedy of the year, but it gets 
high marks in both categories.  From the parody of Simon and Garfunkel's 
"Mrs. Robinson" to the scenes of Beatrice attempting to work a video-
phone, MOTHER represents more than just another carbon-copy, unfunny 
comedy.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Christopher Null
     As Norman Bates said it:  "A boy's best friend is his mother."  And
just as Norman's family had its own brand of extreme dysfunctionality,
Albert Brooks dredges up more of his neuroses in MOTHER, a new comedy
about making peace with your past -- particularly with Mom.
     At least I think that's what it's about.  MOTHER starts off with a
definitive whimper, and it takes a long time to get to the real story. 
(Lisa Kudrow makes a short appearance at the film's opening -- which
bodes ill for the film, as it violates the "Never put a 'Friend' in a
movie" rule which was established early last year.)
     So, in the first 15 minutes, here's what we do get.  Brooks plays
John Henderson, a frustrated science fiction writer who is just
finishing all the paperwork on his second divorce.  His life is a
shambles, and John flails about for some kind of answer to the questions
of life.  His ingrate brother (Rob Morrow) is no help, so John turns to
the one person who understands him *least* -- his mother.
     John drives the 400 miles from L.A. to Sausalito and finds Mom
(played by the wonderful Debbie Reynolds) a reluctant host, plying him
with 3-year-old sherbet and frozen cheese.  John is moving back home
with one thing on his mind:  "The Experiment," a kind of soul searching
that isn't easy to explain in the context of a film review (the one time
John tries to explain it in the film, Mom turns and replies, "I'm sorry
John, I wasn't listening...").
     And while you may not really understand this Experiment thing, the
give and take between the two leads makes for some excellent comedic
moments:  Mom talks about John's divorce to the pet store clerk, John
takes Mom into Victoria's Secret to buy her some crotchless panties. 
You get the idea.
     The gist of the rest of the film revolves around John trying to
figure out why animosity exists between he and his mother, and when he
does, everything ties up a little too nice-and-neatly, and everyone's
happy again.  But cut him some slack; relationships are by definition a
tricky subject, and Brooks is to be praised for exploring one like
this.  I don't know if he's right about the whole thing, but I had a
good time watching him try to figure it all out.  If you have a mother,
you should too.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Brian Takeshita
I like movies with Albert Brooks, and I really like movies directed
and written by Albert Brooks.  LOST IN AMERICA and DEFENDING YOUR LIFE
are two of my favorite comedies.  His humor is of a kind that is not
very prevalent in movies today, inundated as we are with films which
revel in their aim toward the lowest common denominator.  You will
rarely see any slapstick in an Albert Brooks film, while the dialog
will not be as oppressive as in some of the independent "talk films"
which are finding their way into theaters.  The situations in which
his characters find themselves are ones we can often identify with,
but even if we can't, Brooks has the talent to make them comfortable,
and therefore we laugh.  Teenagers and Jim Carrey fans probably won't
find an Albert Brooks movie very funny, but people who look for more
than what we could find on television probably will.  Put simply,
Brooks' comedy is intelligent.
MOTHER is Albert Brooks' latest film, and it does not disappoint.
Brooks plays John Henderson, a middle-aged science fiction writer just
coming off his second divorce.  He makes an attempt at dating, but
fails miserably.  He then has dinner with his brother Jeff (Rob
Morrow), a successful sports agent who seems to live the ideal life.
Jeff has a good job, a loving family, and most of all, a warm
relationship with their mother Beatrice (Debbie Reynolds).  After
dinner, John witnesses a telephone conversation between Jeff and
Beatrice, and is at the same time amazed and sickened by how
hunky-dory the dialog is.  In comparison, Beatrice always hints at a
fault in John and his career every time she talks with him, and John
gives it right back to her.  At the end of one of their conversations
where Beatrice has just picked apart John's life, she says, "I love
you," and John replies with, "I know you think you do."  The thing is,
Beatrice is not overt with her criticisms, but instead gives them in
that mothering way which is tantamount to nit-picking and guilt
loading.  It's the kind that goes something like, "Yes, dear, I think
you do that wonderfully, BUT...."  It seems as though nothing he does
makes her happy.  There's always the big but.
John believes that his mother is somehow connected to his failed
relationships with women, either because of his flawed self-esteem
caused by his need for validation, or perhaps because he tends to
unconsciously seek out women who remind him of his mother in an
oedipal manner.  He comes to the conclusion that since his problems
are rooted in his boyhood home, he should move back in with his mother
for a while just to see what kinds of feelings come out, and by that
be able to sort out why his life is the way it is.  "A great
experiment", he calls it.
Brooks' own brand of humor really shines in this film, especially in
the interaction John has with his mother.  There's a scene where John
has just arrived at his mother's house, and after having driven from
Los Angeles to Sausalito, and having explained to his mother about the
"great experiment", Beatrice asks, "Now explain to me again why you
don't want to stay at a hotel."  She still doesn't get it, and it is
absolutely hilarious.  In the same scene, we get little glances at the
life his mother leads when she tries to feed him food that is no
longer fresh.  She apparently buys in great quantities and
refrigerates it until the lettuce is wilted and the sherbet is iced
over.  When John points out the ice on the sherbet, Beatrice tells him
not to worry about the protective glaze.  "You've named the ice?" asks
John.  He's also surprised at the variety of items Beatrice keeps in
the refrigerator, such as a twenty-pound block of cheese.  "The
freezer was a good invention," says John, "but it's not supposed to be
used for everything.  That's why it's smaller than the refrigerator."
It's something most of us find strangely familiar.
Brooks is also a master at employing the non sequitur.  For example,
in DEFENDING YOUR LIFE, his and Meryl Streep's characters are in a
comedy club having a discussion.  When they're finished and walk out,
Brooks cuts to the comic on stage who is just at the point of
delivering his punch line, "And so the moral is, if you have to fart,
go outside!"  You don't know what the joke was because you couldn't
hear him during the entire scene, but I must have laughed for the next
five minutes, it seemed so out of context.  In this film, Brooks uses
the same trick a couple of times to open or close a scene.  I don't
want to give them away, but suffice it to say they work just as well
as they have in the past.
John's purpose for staying with his mother is to learn, and we as the
audience learn right along with him.  His mother is not the
fascinating type to begin with, but as John spends more time with her,
we learn things about her personality and her lifestyle that give her
depth.  Watching the character of Beatrice unfold is every bit as
enjoyable as the humor that accompanies it each step of the way.
On screen, Brooks does an excellent job playing this kind of
character:   You get the feeling he often believes he is the only sane
person in an insane world.  In a way, he's very much like Yosarian of
CATCH-22, expect with something of an attitude.  Casting Debbie
Reynolds as Beatrice is perfect.  She assumes the part with ease, even
moving and speaking a little slowly, and is just so adorable it's hard
to get mad at her character.  This only helps the audience to share
the frustration John feels when dealing with her.  As his first
choice, Brooks originally wanted to lure Nancy Reagan out from her
acting retirement to play Beatrice, but the former actress and first
lady could not leave her husband, who was beginning to show symptoms
of Alzheimer's disease.  That may be just as well, since Reynolds
lends a softness to the character which enhances it immensely.  Rob
Morrow also does a good job at playing the younger brother who has
always been mother's favorite and, for all his success in his job and
family, is slowly exposed as a mama's boy.
The only things that hold this movie back from being better are a
couple of plot holes.  A solid connection is not really made between
John's troubles and his reasons for living with his mother.
Additionally, the end results of the experiment do not necessarily
jibe with the stated goals, and although this may have been sloppy
screenwriting, how can you be mad at the guy who also wrote this?:
Beatrice:  You must think I'm some kind of moron.
John:  No, I think your someone who thinks I'm a moron.
Beatrice:  Well, it takes one to know one.

Author
Nick Schaden
    Albert Brooks is a funny guy. Whether he's cracking jokes about food
products or relatives his timing and wit always make you at least chuckle,
and it's what makes "Mother" such a fun movie.
    "Mother" tells the story of John Henderson (Albert Brooks) a writer who
just got divorced. John feels he can't connect with women, and feels the
only way to make himself whole again is to move back in with his mother,
Beatrice (Debbie Reynolds) and try to regain his "feelings" during
childhood. It makes for a simple yet effective plot.
    The far majority of the movie is spent with John and his mother arguing
and fighting about different issues, many times with hilarious results. For
example, upon John's arrival to his mother's home, his mother starts by
offering him incredibly old and freezer-burned meats, cheeses, and dessert
for something to eat. Soon we see John and mother squaring off in an
argument about meat, use of the freezer, childhood, it's all quite funny.
    What makes "Mother" superior in some ways to other comedies is that the
movie doesn't try to push the limits of reality - while Brooks's character
is a mess he can be believable. In other comedies many times the plot calls
for incredulous situations (Clark Griswold flying through the air at Hoover
Dam in "Vegas Vacation" comes to mind) just so the audience can laugh a
little. This movie doesn't need fancy props or elaborate jokes - Brooks is a
master of comedy, and knows what makes the audience laugh.
    However, there are a few complaints I have with Mother. First and
foremost, the movie wraps itself up far too quickly and neatly. It's almost
as though actor/director Brooks said to himself: "Enough comedy...let's
finish with a good ending". Furthermore, for me as a viewer, to be laughing
and chuckling through most of the movie and then to switch gears to a happy
wrap up was a disappointment for me. Don't get me wrong, I expected the
happy ending - it's just that the movie needed a slower transition from
comedy to conclusion. Second, I wish that Jeff's (John's brother, played by
Rob Morrow) slight obsession with his mother could have been developed more
as a side plot.
    However, in conclusion, "Mother" is a fun movie. While you won't likely
want to sit and see this movie again and again, it made this reviewer laugh
the whole way through, and thus achieves its purpose as a comedy.

Author
Walter Frith
Albert Brooks is a successful and respected entertainer for two reasons.
One, he is a great example of the ordinary guy in just about every movie he
does which most of us can relate to and two, his writing has a biting
sensation of reality and often a radical perception of reality many refuse to
face.  'Lost in America' (1985), 'Broadcast News' (1987) and 'Defending Your
Life' (1991) are all examples of Brooks' talent both diverse and highly
entertaining.  'Defending Your Life' was a fantasy but I can picture many
people believing what the afterlife might be the same way Brooks portrayed it
in that movie.  Debbie Reynolds is 'Mother.'  Her two sons played by Albert
Brooks and Rob Morrow are respectable, hard working men but mother has
favoured her sports agent son, Morrow over Brooks who is a writer of glib
science fiction.  A wonderful wife and two kids is a great bonus for Morrow
while Brooks being twice divorced doesn't sit well with his family.  Brooks
drives from Los Angeles to San Francisco and moves back in with mother and
his reason is that it's an 'experiment' to see if he can somehow figure out
his relationship with his mother then maybe he can finally adjust to finding
the right mate and finally adjust to women in all aspects of his life.  This
movie is filled with situations that will almost certainly make a lot of men
say "Hey, I've had that experience with my mother!" or "Wow, I can't believe
how this movie details the little things that cause friction in a
relationship!"  It's a dark and humourous and pain stakingly detailed
screenplay co-written by Brooks and directed by the man himself.  Mother is
one of the most realistic slices of life I've ever seen and I related to it
better than most movies I saw in 1996 and Debbie Reynolds is terrific as the
mother who offers love, advice and compassion in an unorthodox and least
obvious way towards her sons.  Albert Brooks is a treat as always and this
gem of a movie is certain to become another buried treasure which will
probably find a huge following on home video as its theatre release has been
limited.  For everyone that's ever had a mother, don't miss this one!

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Albert Brooks, Debbie Reynolds, Rob Morrow Director: Albert Brooks
Producer: Scott Rudin and Herb Nanas Screenplay: Albert Brooks and
Monica Johnson
Forty, single and several failed relationships marks a mid life crisis.
The "male menopause" is no longer a myth. The years begin to show as
pockets of cellulite begin to emerge in the most unusual places; the
receding hair line and bald patch now crowns the once manly follicle
endowed head; the once energetic body slows metabolically until it is
comparably slower than the younger sex. What is there to look forward
to, when the trail left behind is littered with a long succession of
missed opportunities, and the path ahead looks like a much needed face
lift. Moody and slightly depressed, you begin to wander whether you have
achieved anything significant with your life, or will your tombstone
merely say "Here lies Jo Bloggs. He ate, He slept, then He died".
If feeling this way, there are several options. A friend of mine decided
he needed to discover his ancestral roots before he could reclaim his
identity. He travelled to Canada and met up with some distant relatives;
traced his heritage back to England; and discovered a war monument of an
ancestor somewhere in Australia - ironically it was a soldier who got
run down by a car before reaching battle. Anyway, somewhere along this
journey of self-discovery, he found himself again and is now happily
married with 2 children.
The other option, is to follow the context of this movie. Albert Brook's
thoughtful screenplay, suggests that one's problems with sex, life and
relationships are somehow related to your relationship with mother. So
his character, a divorced middle-aged man with writer's block, journeys
home in search of answers. This is an intriguing concept, but too simple
with it's solution. We are forgetting about the paternal part of the
picture, and the important role of sibling rivalry. Otherwise, Debby
Reynold's radiant portrayal as mother is a milestone in her "Golden
Years". She shows strength of character behind a fragile, docile
exterior. Rob Morrow gets to whine again post "Northern Exposure", but
this story belongs to Albert. This movie is a journey of self-discovery
for him in mid-life crisis. Here he finds reasons for why he is, and
after clearing the air with the first woman in his life, moves forward
into a brighter looking future.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There is a very selective appeal to Albert Brooks comedies.  They
are low-budget, intelligently written pieces in which the humor mostly
comes from dialogue.  Like Woody Allen, Brooks usually plays an
intelligent neurotic and the comedy ordinarily comes from the dialogue
as it does in a Woody Allen comedy.  Where Brooks differs is that his
characters speak in a much more natural manner than Allen's and his
humor is more subtle.  Also his comedies often take a little longer to
settle in.  It is hard to judge on a first viewing how funny an Albert
Brooks comedy will be the second time around.  Usually like a
Thanksgiving turkey they are a feast the first time around but are not
at their best until the second or third partaking.  Then some of his
gags take on classic proportions.  Bits like forbidding Julie Hagerty
to use the words "nest" or "egg" are hilarious and at the same time
ring very true.
     That said, MOTHER is just a bit substandard for a Brooks-directed
comedy.  Brooks usually uses as a format the experiment that fails--the
good idea gone awry.  Of five Brooks comedies, only DEFENDING YOUR LIFE
does not fall into this "it seemed like a good idea at the time"
pattern.  In MODERN ROMANCE the Brooks character decides to break up
with a woman and then finds the single life is not all he was
expecting.  LOST IN AMERICA involved a wealthy advertising executive
who drops out, buys a Winnebago, and tries to live on the road.  This
time around, in what could have almost been a sequel to MODERN ROMANCE,
John Henderson (Brooks) is a man who cannot deal with the women in his
life.  To understand why he returns to the home of his mother (Debbie
Reynolds) to live in his old bedroom, decorated just like the old days,
in an attempt to discover what he will learn.  What he finds is that
his mother is hard to live with.  Eventually he discovers why his
relationship with his mother has been strained. But while the reason
satisfies him, it turns out to be a not very satisfying or even
interesting contrivance. Most people I know have problems to some
degree in dealing with their parents not unlike those in this film, but
Brooks's rather pat explanation for his case just does not explain very
much of the problem.  If the mother-son problems are dispelled a little
too easily, at least the script does not place all the blame on the
mother.  Beatrice Henderson comes off as an intelligent and self-
reliant woman who can run her own life just fine, thank you, and who
once raised two bright kids, John and his brother (Rob Morrow of QUIZ
SHOW).
     While I have come to expect a fair amount of a Brooks comedy,
somehow here his timing seemed just a bit off.  A scene early in the
film has John rearranging the one chair that his divorce has left him
in a large empty living room.  He tries the chair in four places before
deciding that it worked best where it was.  The joke takes too much
screen time for way too little payoff.  This is not the sort of
perceptive humor we expect from Brooks.  Later, when he is in his
mother's home, the film tries to milk as much humor as possible from
his mother freezing a big chunk of cheese and a salad.  These gags are
more miss than hit in this film's hit-and-miss humor.  On the other
hand, there is some perceptive humor in Beatrice's repeated references
to writer John's lack of Stephen-King-like success in his writing
profession and the greater success of her other son, the sports agent.
There are a number of very clever gags including a very impressively
managed allusion to the film THE GRADUATE--telling any more would spoil
it.  Like Woody Allen, Brooks seems to play the same character from
film to film.  Reynolds is, of course, a veteran actress.  She holds
her own against Brooks.  One minor gripe: in MODERN ROMANCE the
character was editing a science fiction film, in this film John is a
science fiction writer, but in each film he seems to be very
condescending toward science fiction.  In his most recent novel they
talk about the character "with the big head" and the one "with the big
hand."  It is hard to imagine he could make a living writing science
fiction if he is writing at the level suggested in the film.
     Since Brooks directs a comedy only once in about five years, it is
a pity that this film is so frequently not up to his usual standard.
His comedy about a mother and son learning about each other could have
been a lot more memorable than this one was, but there are still more
laugh-out-loud gags than most comedies, and there is a bit of a
statement here also, so I give MOTHER a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
In albert Brooks' latest film, "Mother", science fiction writer John
Henderson (Brooks), suffering from two failed marriages and a severe
case of writer's block, decides to confront his demons - one of whom
may be his mother!
John sets out to find his true self and disprove the old adage, "You
can't go home, again," when he decides to move back home with his
mother, Beatrice, played by Debbie Reynolds. John feels his mother is
the key to what went wrong with his life and career.
What John discovers is unexpected by both him and Beatrice.
Aside from a wonderful performance by Debbie Reynolds in the title
role, I didn't find the premise of "Mother" to be particularly
compelling. Brooks' character John is very flat, with little
development over the course of the film. He starts as a schlemeil, he
ends as a schlemiel with a date.
Debbie Reynolds, on the other hand, is the saving grace of the film
and give a terrific performance and a decent character study of
Beatrice. She displays the kind of logic and sense that only a mother
can show. That's the strength of her performance - she reps all moms
to some degree. Reynolds als develops Beatrice all through the movie,
so, by the end, she is a complete different person, in your eye, than
at the start. This is mainly through the strength of the actor. I look
forward to her getting notice.
This is the least manic of Brooks' films, seeming that he has some
sort of internal ax to grind than audience entertainment as the goal
of the film.
I can't recommend seeing "Mother" at the theater, unless you take your
mother! Otherwise, leave it for video rental or cable.
I give "Mother" a C+, and loved Debbie.
Debbie Reynolds makes an amazingly impressive comeback after 27 years
as the title character of Albert Brooks' thoroughly amusing and
easily-identified-with "Mother".
Albert Brooks is John Henderson, the older of Beatrice's two sons.
His brother Jeff (Rob Morrow) is unusually close to his mother and
John feels he's much less liked.  After his second divorce, Sci-fi
writer John decides to go live with Mom for a while to discover if the
basis their relationship is why he can't connect with women.  The
mother he discovers is an eye-opener!
Brooks not only stars, but also wrote and directed.  His screenplay is
thoughtful, poignant and funny and his direction compliments the
production. Brooks' adventures with Mom include a visit to her 'food
museum' where ice crystals 'protect' the shebert and cheese comes in
frozen 3 lb. blocks, grocery shopping with strongly conflicting
economical philosophies and having Mom tell complete strangers his
life story everywhere they go.
Debbie Reynolds' performance is Oscar nomination calibre.  She
manages to appear rather clueless when she, in fact, is independent,
modern and artistic - the wonderful thing about the subtlety of her
acting is that you completely accept the her hidden capabilities and
talents as they're revealed.  Brooks is fine as the slightly pathetic
John.  Rob Morrow gives his best big screen performance as the whiny
mummy's boy who's initially presented as a successful sports agent and
eventually revealed as a selfish, needy child.
Go see "Mother" and I suspect you'll see something of yourself.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I like my cheese in ounces," middle-aged son John Henderson tells
his mother Beatrice.  "When they start weighing as much as a Fiat, I
stop being interested."  She has just taken an enormous and ancient
mound of cheese from her freezer so she can slice him a piece with her
electric carving knife.  After gagging on this and other petrified
pieces of food, he tells her in disgust, "You're running a food museum
here."
     The son, beautifully played for deadpan laughter and insight by
Albert Brooks, has gone back to live with his mother, done with
sweetness and determination by Debbie Reynolds.  She has the delightful
look of a geriatric pixie.  As the press kit information says, the
movie MOTHER is her first movie starring role in 27 years.
     After two divorces and other failed relationships, John has
decided he needs to conduct an "experiment."  He figures that his lack
of success with women must stem from the problems he has always had
with his mother.  If he can just go back and stay in his recreated
bedroom, perhaps he will discover the root cause of his distress.  That
is, if he and his mother don't kill each other first.
     The two seem as different as night and day.  He loves to indulge
himself whereas she will buy only the cheapest items to save money.
She does not consume them immediately, but instead squirrels them away
for some later date.  When he suggests that they splurge together on
some 91-cent extravagance from the grocery store, she is aghast.
     Albert Brooks is one of the best comedic actors, directors and
writers in America today.  His brilliance in this picture shines
through as he does all three roles with grace and perfect timing.  Just
as in his hilarious LOST IN AMERICA, his writing collaborator is Monica
Johnson.  Together they fashion an intelligent script so funny that a
few times I laughed so hard that I almost made myself sick.  I
understand now why Janet Maslin of the New York Times had MOTHER on her
best ten of the year list.  Although it did not make mine, it is a
comedic gem.
     What I like even better than the humor in the story is the
freshness of the character of the mother.  Usually, strong mothers like
Beatrice dissolve into Jewish mother cliches with lots of overbearing
lines delivered with heavy overacting.  This is not at all the
character that Reynolds gives us.  Reynolds's characterization of a
mother is a senior citizen with a love interest, among others.  "Dear,
we're not intimate," she tells John about her friend Charles (Peter
White).  "We just have sex occasionally."
     Beatrice is happily in control of her life so naturally she is
sure she knows what her son needs: food, albeit cheap food, and plenty
of it.  This causes him to exclaim, "Stop.  No more food.  It's like
FANTASIA."
     John is a science fiction writer, but not a particularly
successful one.  His brother Jeff (Rob Morrow), however, is a wealthy
sports agent.  Jeff is also a "mama's boy," who obsesses about talking
to his mother every day, and he hates the idea of sharing his mother
now with John.
     The movie is filled with great 60's style songs, but the best is
the "Mrs. Robinson" song that plays as John drives up the coast to go
to live with his mother.  They have changed the words to match MOTHER's
plot, but I will not reveal any of them.  They are precious.
     The biggest problem I had with the movie occurred 1:35 into the
picture.  I suddenly realized that the movie was about to end.  I was
upset.  I had grown to like these people and did not want them to leave
me.
     Since I pride myself in warning my readers about shows that can
prove troubling, let me do just the opposite with MOTHER.  I want to
allay your fears.  The ads clearly and accurately reassure us that, "NO
MOTHERS WERE HARMED DURING THE MAKING OF THIS MOTION PICTURE."
     Some movies work best for certain audiences.  I think this film
has a wide appeal, but for those of us with mothers of Beatrice's age,
it holds an extra fascination.  My mother is not at all like Beatrice,
but she has the same diminutive size and approximate age as Reynolds,
so in the scenes with Beatrice just barely seeing over the steering
wheel I got several extra chuckles.
     Although I invited my wife to the press screening and she loved
the movie too, I probably should have invited my mother instead.  On
the other hand, I still remember when I was twelve and invited my
mother to this new Hitchcock film called PSYCHO.  When the nude shower
scene suddenly came up, I was really worried about what she would think
of me for inviting her to see such as a show.  It worked out fine, but
I still remember my fear -- not of the scene, but of having lost face
with someone I respected.  Mothers are like that.  Good ones and bad,
they maintain an influence over your life forever.
     MOTHER runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for the mature themes and
some mild profanity.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  The show
would be fine for kids say ten and up.  I recommend this charming
comedy to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
Albert Brooks' new film is aimed at anyone who has ever had, ever been
or is thinking of ever becoming a mother. While admittedly this is a
fairly large segment of the movie-going public and the film is often
extremely charming, "Mother" is not for everyone.
There are no explosions, car chases or visible big guns. Broad slapstick
comedy is at a minimum. There aren't even very many outrageous rolling
on the floor laughing scenes. What there is, is an abundance of wit and
humanity that produce knowing smiles and chuckles. Looking around, you
can see the thought balloons floating above the audience members, "Yeah,
my mom does exactly the same thing."
Brooks plays John Henderson, a science fiction author ("Planet Seven"
and "Planet Eight" -- care to guess the title of his next book?) hitting
his mid-life crisis head on as he concludes his second divorce.
Realizing that all of his relationships with women are based on the
first woman in his life, he decides to move back in with mom to try and
figure out what's wrong.
Mother (Debbie Reynolds in her first leading role in over 25 years)
doesn't exactly understand what John calls his "Experiment", but goes
along with it good-naturedly albeit with something of a suspicious
attitude. Emptying out his old bedroom which has become a sewing room
(read "storage shed", because mother doesn't really sew), sonny boy digs
out his posters and trophies from high school. Shortly it looks like a
typical teenager's room in the sixties.
Except for a small part by John's younger, more successful and still
tied to mommy, brother (Rob Morrow), the film belongs to Brooks and
Reynolds. One or both are almost constantly on-screen and they do their
characters wonderfully. Reynolds shines as the over-bearing mother when
she offers her son antique generic orange sherbet with its "protective
ice coating" and slices a piece of frozen cheese off a block big enough
to clog the arteries of an entire town.
Morrow's whinny brother is adequately performed, but the actor hasn't
captured a character with much enthusiasm since his days as Dr. Joel on
"Northern Exposure".
Occasionally you can see the ghost of Woody Allen in the background as
Brooks, who also directed and co-wrote, mines the same relationship
territory. Although Brooks doesn't have the same timing genius, he does
seem tapped into life outside the big city more than Woody. Set in
Sausalito, the ultimate Yuppie west coast village, the film feels more
open and universally accessible that Allen's New York geocentrism.
There are some rough points in the film. Part of the appeal is that many
scenes are underplayed, almost like real life; but at times you will be
disappointed that the bigger pay-off is missing. The ending is tied up a
bit too neatly and could have used a little more time. 
The story explores the subtle and sometimes not-so subtle ways that the
mother and son treat each other as symbols and archetypes rather than as
people. John's revelation comes when he realizes that his mother is not
just someone who does things to him, but an individual with hopes,
dreams and disappointments. 
The theme of seeing beyond the masks is food for thought. The film's
message is that until adult children can do this, every day of their
life will be "mother's day".
[This appeared in the "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana 1/31/97.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MOTHER ** 4/5 . Directed by Albert Brooks. Written by Brooks and Monica
Johnson. Photography, Lajos Koltai. Editing, Harvey Rosenstock. Production
design, Charles Rosen. Music, Marc Shaiman.  Cast: Albert Brooks (John
Henderson), Debbie Reynolds (Beatrice Henderson), Rob Morrow (Jeff
Henderson), Lisa Kudrow (Linda),Isabel Glasser (Jeff's wife), Peter White
(Charles, Mother's boyfriend)A Paramount release. 106 min.  PG-13.
It starts with John (Brooks) and his ex at a wrap-up meeting with their
divorce lawyer.  The scene has the right degree of compactness and deft
humor. Next, when John walks into his living room that's now empty save for
an armchair and a table, comes a gag involving those two pieces. It's a
good gag symbolizing that the man is back where he started from, but it is
also too long and predictable. The tone is set for the virtues and the
weaknesse of the film .
John, a 40-something writer of sci-fi novels, has had two marriages and
three serious affairs --all ending in fiascoes, whereas his businessman
younger brother Jeff is a contented husband and father. Jeff's house,
cleverly (because it is done discreetly) exudes bourgeois values.
The brothers have an equally cleverly-written talk about their mother
Beatrice (Debbie Reynolds) and the fact that Jeff is her favorite son.
It's as though a hidden microphone is recording real people. The dialogue
is broken as Jeff, who calls Mother daily, speaks to her on a new
video-phone that (more gags) she handles ineptly.
In another early sequence, John has his first post-divorce date. Trying to
make conversation in a restaurant he asks the young woman who her favorite
authors are. Her reactions are topped by the name "Charlie Chaplin" to whom
she attributes the writing of "A Tale of Two Cities." What the dickens,
this may be broad humor but it is hilarious.
John, overly conscious of his failures with relationhips, concluding
somehow that all this started with his mother. He decides that the cure is
to go and stay with her for awhile. The visit is the film's substance.
Debbie Reynolds, not seen in a major movie role since 1971, is trim,
soignee and with a mind of her own. (She was 64 when the film was made;
Brooks was approaching 50.  Both seem younger).
The mother and son encounters are fraught with misunderstandings and
non-understandings as they revolve around such mundane matters as food,
John's old room, shopping, Mother's visiting beau, her matter-of-fact
mentions that she is having sex, her compulsive discussing of John with
acquaintances or strangers, her reactions to his books, and much else. For
a comedy, the welcome of John is pretty chilling. There's not much
affection in the air, on either side. For John the bottom line is that
Beatrice has been and remains a non-approving mother. And what amouns to an
intrusion on a woman who has lived alone for twenty years does not help
either.
There are also throwaway bits all over, like the dig at Stephen King
who"writes something over and over again," and several smart inventions,
actions and reactions. To reveal only one category, John does not eat meat,
yet Beatrice absent-mindedly keeps offering warmed-over meat dishes. She
also presents him with a gigantic slab of Gruyere cheese that has been in
her freezer for three years, with antique frozen salad and other items kept
by her un-needed frugality vis-a-vis money. It's not always clear, but
Mother must be stocking up on wholesale-priced specials. It reminds of
Woody Allen's saying "In my family there was just one sin -- to buy
retail."
Brooks was Los Angeles born and bred.  "Mother," set in California,
contains Californian Brookisms, sharp observations of psychology,
lifestyles and behavior,  as well as an underlayer of Jewish humor. It's
funny stuff but  it should have been funnier. "Mother" feels more like a
two-character play than a movie. Compared to most films, it far fewer
sequences. These go on too long and are often overdone.
Debbie Reynolds's very good performance is carried out with minimal facial
expressions and body language. But the script takes her idiosyncrasies too
far. Bothersome too is the fact that Mother just might be a sly cookie but
comes through  as a mix of flutterheadedness and vagueness.
There is a generation gap. The satirical treatment of older people (note
the ladies at the supermarket) makes me wonder if Brooks is not something
of an ageist. Still, the principal gap is one of mutual incomprehension
unrelated to age.
Like the many fans of Albert Brooks I appreciate his abstaining from
second-rate projects or from overexposing himself. Starting in 1979 he has
acted in a dozen movies, including all five that he wrote and directed:
"Real Life," "Modern Romance," "Lost in America," "Defending Your Life" and
"Mother." All are original, none is cookie-cutter formulaic.
The last time I saw him as a performer was in "I'll Do Anything," It was
generally underrated because in its first life it was a musical. After
audience tests, it had its music removed -- yet it was one of the best
pictures of 1994, with Brooks's manic performance contributing a great
deal. In "Mother," Brooks does the opposite, keeps a rein on histrionics,
at the cost of seeming a rather dull fellow--a wise decision.
Less wise is the arbitrary two-step happy ending. It  uses the artificial
trick of a revelation that brings mother and son close to each other; it
suddenly makes of her a woman with unexpected,hidden talents and
intelligence; it closes with a phony "new beginning" for John.
Although the film needs tightening as well as more development (what  made
and makes  John and his mother the way they are?), it still is definitely
recommended.
Note: Writers-directors-actors Mel Brooks, James L. Brooks and Albert
Brooks are not related by blood. But the last two might be called the
Brooks Brothers as they have worked so much together. James L. was in
Albert's "Real Life" and  "Modern Romance." Albert was in James L.'s
"Broadcast News" and " "I'll Do Anything."

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount)
Starring:  Albert Brooks, Debbie Reynolds, Rob Morrow, Lisa Kudrow.
Screenplay:  Albert Brooks and Monica Johnson.
Producers:  Scott Rudin and Herb Nanas.
Director:  Albert Brooks.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  104 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Albert Brooks is a rather odd case as a film-maker.  On the one hand,
he goes years between projects, has loyal and generally intelligent fans
and never has had a really big commercial success.  On the other hand, his
concepts have "pitch-meeting" written all over them.  REAL LIFE was a
parody of verite' documentaries like "An American Family;" LOST IN AMERICA
had yuppies going back to their free-wheeling roots; DEFENDING YOUR LIFE
turned heaven into "The People's Court."  Brooks is like a hybrid of Woody
Allen and Ivan Reitman, a writer/director too smart and eccentric to get
maximum mileage out of his marketing-friendly plots.  MOTHER is a perfect
example of Brooks' nose for high-concept, but for once he doesn't work any
particular magic with it.  Riding on the familiarity of his situations and
a wicked performance by Debbie Reynolds, Brooks turns out an amusing but
uneven domestic comedy.
     Brooks stars as John Henderson, a Los Angeles-based science-fiction
novelist going through his second divorce.  John determines that all of
his failed relationships have had certain elements in common, and that
those elements might be traceable to his upbringing.  In an attempt to
understand what goes wrong in his dealings with women, John heads up to
Northern California to move back in with the first woman in his life:  his
mother, Beatrice (Debbie Reynolds).  John's "experiment" perplexes both
Beatrice and John's successful brother Jeff (Rob Morrow), but John
perseveres anyway, and begins to examine his interactions with Beatrice in
the hope of learning some profound truths before she drives him crazy.
     Much of the appeal of MOTHER -- most of the appeal, to be frank --
comes from the character of Beatrice Henderson, less as created by Brooks
than as realized by Reynolds.  Mother is a sly creature given to subtle
disapproval and passive aggression, and there are moments of grand
humiliation which will inspire winces of recognition.  One running gag has
Mother constantly explaining John's marital woes to complete strangers;
another finds her making off-hand digs at John's vegetarianism.  There are
moments when Brooks verges on condescension towards his older female
characters -- an encounter with neighbors in a grocery store is both funny
and rather embarrassing -- but Debbie Reynolds salvages every one by
giving her line readings an intelligent twist.  Even when Beatrice is
fumbling with technology or circling a parking lot past the one available
space, she never comes off as dim or pathetic.  With a professionalism
showing no signs of rust after a long layoff from screen acting, Reynolds
wrestles a laundry list of motherly quirks into a wonderful character.
     This achievement comes almost in spite of Brooks' script, which has
plenty of funny lines but too little narrative direction.  The goodwill
generated by the main premise carries MOTHER a surprisingly long way, but
Brooks doesn't do all that much with it.  The film is full of situations
with great comic potential, most of which inspire a chuckle and little
more because Brooks prefers wry observation to outrageousness.  One such
opportunity involves John and Beatrice in a Victoria's Secret store after
Beatrice has succeeded yet again in embarrassing John.  It is a scene
which primes you for a huge laugh -- a man, his mother, lingerie...can you
feel the giddy tension rising? -- then dissolves after yet another
good-natured chuckle.  MOTHER is full of moments, like a scene where John
channel-surfs through a succession of info-mercials, where Brooks seems to
be waiting for a punch line to formulate itself instead of attacking the
set-up to provide a payoff.
     MOTHER is almost always an entertaining film, but it is not nearly as
subversive as it could have been, or as FLIRTING WITH DISASTER was
covering similar ground of warped familial relations.  Perhaps the problem
is that the script does not launch itself from full, rich
characterizations.  In fact, as the story unfolds, it seems that Brooks
has constructed his story around psychological case studies rather than
people.  Every time Mother does something exasperating, John deconstructs
it in search of its deeper significance.  The result is frustrating, as
though Brooks were telling jokes then stopping after each one to explain
why it was just as sad as it was funny.  It is one of the characteristics
which makes Brooks unique as a film-maker that he builds his climax around
a moment of insight rather than a wacky car chase, but there has to be a
middle ground.  Debbie Reynolds takes MOTHER's high-concept and gives it
high energy, making it a film anyone who has had a mother could like, but
perhaps only a mother could love.
