Title
Review for Cherry Falls (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
By now, the audience for slasher films is perfectly attuned to the
rhythms of Scream and its spawn of imitators, each more formulaic than
the next.  Attractive teenagers flirt with one another, meander around
campus chatting on their cell phones, then abruptly find themselves
isolated in an abandoned library or, God forbid, alone in the house. 
That's when the masked killer attacks.  Cue the shrieks.
Put Cherry Falls a notch above the competition for the audacity of its
wry comic twist.  Yes, there's a creepy, longhaired psychopath, either a
convincing drag queen or a ferociously strong woman, deliberately
seeking out virgins for slicing and dicing.  Virgins.  The resourceful
students of Cherry Falls High School soon realize that they have a
deliciously simple choice: fucking or death.  Which would you choose?
Not even their sensitive "Mr. Nice Guy" teacher (Jay Mohr, Jerry
Maguire) can prevent the hormones kicking into overdrive when an
elaborate bacchanal is planned for Friday night.  Considering the
alternative, randy boys and horny girls seek salvation in each other's
arms.  Yeah, baby, yeah!
The local sheriff (a well-cast Michael Biehn, Aliens) turns a blind eye
to those naughty kids while following the only lead he's got.  Could it
be that ever reliable plot device of a dark secret in the town's past
which can no longer remain hidden?  He's determined to find out.  No
sooner has he told his headstrong young daughter Jody (Brittany Murphy,
Clueless) to mind her curfew than she's sleuthing around herself. 
Daddy's little girl suddenly becomes the slasher's chief target.
You'll have no trouble deducing the killer from the handful of suspects,
though screenwriter Ken Selden's choice of leaving the gender a mystery
certainly helps.  Senden also creates a very well-written
father-daughter chat for Biehn and Murphy where the birds and the bees
are not so easy to categorize.  When he asks whether she could still go
a little further, it's unclear just what he's intending to protect.
For the most part, Cherry Falls sticks to the tried and true formula,
bringing to mind words like adequate or functional.  Geoffrey Wright
(Romper Stomper) deftly handles his directorial chores, maintaining
well-crafted suspense without adding any particularly original new
tricks to the proverbial cinematic bag.
In addition to the clever touch of kids breaking the fundamental rule of
slasher films (where only virginal heroines survive,) Cherry Falls has
one other vital ingredient.  Brittany Murphy has all the makings of a
movie star, a girl with beauty and brains.  On top of that, she's quite
a capable actress, much more believable as an eager high schooler than
scream queen bimbos Neve Campbell or Jennifer Love Hewitt.
If anyone deserves to inherit the mantle of Halloween's Jamie Lee
Curtis, it's Cherry Falls' leading lady.  Her most challenging roles
have been on stage (Arthur Miller's A View From the Bridge) but she
hasn't struck gold onscreen.  With a little luck, who knows?  If the
Jamie Lee comparison is accurate, she could go on to star in the 21st
century's answer to A Fish Called Wanda.  Memo to Hollywood: Give
Brittany Murphy more work!
http://www.cherryfallsmovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
"Cherry Falls," directed by Geoffrey Wright (1992's "Romper Stomper"), was 
filmed in 1999 in Richmond, Virginia, with a healthy budget, support from USA 
Films, and a top-notch cast that included Brittany Murphy (1995's 
"Clueless"), Jay Mohr (1999's "Go"), Jesse Bradford (2000's "Bring It On"), 
Michael Biehn (2000's "The Art of War"), and even a then-unknown D.J. Qualls 
(the skinny, nerdy boy in 2000's "Road Trip"). Originally scheduled for 
theatrical release in the summer of 2000, followed by a date change to 
September, the MPAA got in the way, threatening the picture with an NC-17. 
Recut five times before receiving an R rating, the movie ultimately premiered 
in the U.S. on the USA television network, even while it was doing healthy 
theatrical business overseas. The unfair, unjust censorship of America may 
have destroyed the chances of "Cherry Falls" being financially successful 
stateside, but now that it is out on DVD (in a double feature format that 
also includes the direct-to-video John Ritter thriller, "Terror Tract"), it 
would be foolish to pass up what is essentially the scariest, smartest 
slasher movie since 1996's "Scream."
In the small, idyllic Virginia town of Cherry Falls, teenage students of 
Thomas Jefferson High School have begun falling victim to a long-haired, 
fingernail-polish/high-heel-wearing killer who seems to be targeting virgins. 
When the town sheriff (Michael Biehn) suspects this pattern, he begins 
fearing for his own 16-year-old daughter, Jody (Brittany Murphy). With the 
school abuzz about innocence leading to death, a mass orgy party is planned 
where the slasher predictably makes a special appearance.
Stylish, suspenseful, and unusually intelligent for a genre movie, "Cherry 
Falls" is an excellent example of how to make a horror movie, in the vein of 
John Carpenter's 1978 classic, "Halloween," right. There is generous 
bloodshed to be had, and occasional violence, but the film is also equipped 
with emotional truths and realistic, believable characters. In the Jamie Lee 
Curtis role, the ever-talented Brittany Murphy places at least ten notches 
above the rest of the recent horror movie heroines. Murphy paints Jody with 
several different shades, and turns her into a three-dimensional individual. 
Jay Mohr also stands out as a much-liked teacher at school, as does Candy 
Clark (1985's "Cat's Eye") as Jody's loving, but confused, mother.
How Does It Look?
Presented in a 1:77:1 aspect ratio widescreen transfer, the picture on 
"Cherry Falls" sparkles with surprising detail for a relatively low-budget 
feature, and does absolute justice to the beautiful, atmospheric 
cinematography by Anthony B. Richmond. Black levels are very good, and the 
color of red, which is an ongoing theme, bursts off the screen. There is 
slight grain in several of the darker moments, but it is brief and remains 
undistractive. A highly impressive transfer.
How Does It Sound?
In the opening scene, the sound, in English 2.0, concerned me. The dialogue 
was difficult to understand with precision, and sounded muffled. Luckily, it 
was very likely the way the characters were speaking, because this problem 
cleared up immediately afterwards. While not overly dynamic (much of the 
movie is intentionally quiet, save for the action and suspense scenes), the 
music and dialogue play well off one another, neither ever overpowering the 
other.
Special Features?
Unfortunately, "Cherry Falls" offers no special features (unless you call 
"scene selections" bonus material). There isn't even a trailer, which is 
unfortunate, although there are production notes on the inside booklet that 
comes with the disc. An audio commentary would have been highly appreciated, 
but this movie's DVD treatment, much like its theatrical one, was obviously 
not taken as seriously as it should have been.
The Lowdown
While the special features are non-existent, "Cherry Falls" is such a good, 
overlooked movie that it is able to stand on its own. With it being offered 
as two movies for the price of one, with the full-length picture, "Terror 
Tract," and selling for only $24.99, the DVD is one that is recommended for 
all horror fans. In "Cherry Falls," you will find a slasher opus that does 
not disappoint.
