Title
Review for Tape (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Are you familiar with the song, "Friendship, friendship,/ Just a
perfect blendship,/ When other friendships have been forgot,/
Ours will still be hot"?  Presumably the composer meant the ditty
to be taken optimistically.  We're regularly inundated with self-
help gurus who tell us that having friends is the most important
thing in the world, and perhaps they're right.  But perhaps not.  If
familiarity breeds contempt, how about a familiarity that carries
with it some profound resentment that one fellow has toward the
other...even for an alleged event that occurred ten years
previously while the two guys were in senior year of high school?
   "Tape," a photographed play sometimes marred by dizzying
camera pans and directed by Richard Linklater--is a film
completely different in imaginative scope from Linklater's
"Waking Life" and far more confined than his "Dazed and
Confused" and "Slacker." Nonetheless the story is intermittently
involving because the performers, operating in 86 minutes of real
time, keep the heat up.  Considering that the particular bitterness
that fuels the rage of 28-year-old Vince (Ethan Hawke) appears
trivial to anyone who looks at the decade-old event in
perspective, Hawke provokes the theater audience to become
disgusted with his immature ways.  As his foil Robert Sean
Leonard performs in the role of Johnny, a young man who is in
Lansing to introduce his new film to an audience at the city's film
festival.  Vince has come from Oakland for the weekend
presumably to support John's film, and when they meet--after we
watch Vince bounce around the room like a kid who forgot his
Ritalin--he appears overjoyed to see his buddy.  After some
backslapping, the two show themselves to be opposites in
temperament.  While Vince, an unsuccessful, callow
adult who is a low-level drug dealer and volunteer firefighter is
full of off-the-wall physical activity, John is still pretty much the
shy goody-two-shoes he was in his high school days.  The
friendship between the two seems as unlikely as the bonding
between Joe and Terry in Barry Levinson's movie "Bandits."
   Both men are flawed characters.  The outwardly saintly Johnny
lectures Vince that the latter should get it together and change
his life, a discourse that only increases Vince's negative feelings
toward his less demonstrative friend.  Determined to have the
last word, Vince hammers at the goody-goody--who had stolen
the affections of Vince's girl friend Amy (Uma Thurman) in senior
year.  Vince sees his opportunity to shatter the lofty self-image of
his "friend" by making him confess to a criminal act committed
against the girl by Johnny.
   Ethan Hawke, fresh from a spellbinding role as the naive rookie
to Denzel Washington's experienced detective in "Training Day,"
stretches his talent in yet another film that takes place during a
single day.  Where Hawke is the nice kid whose corruptibility is
test in Antoine Fuqua's big-budget movie, in this claustrophobic
play he's a seedy guy with no ambition who is severely testing
his buddy's character, determined to keep the upper hand and
crush the spirit of the person who stole his girl.  Uma Thurman,
playing the role of Amy and showing up in the motel room after
the tension is immediately palpable, sizes up the situation and,
smart person that she is sets the two straight.
  "Tape" plays out the quintessential definition of theater: two or
more people figuratively (or literally) locked in a small location to
deal with their conflicts.  As a staged play it does not compare in
variety or interest with John Swanbeck's three-character "The Big
Kahuna"--from Roger Rueff's play "Hospitality Suite about two
world-weary salesmen and a naive young colleague at an out-of-
town convention.  Neither Hawke nor Leonard can compare with
Kevin Spacey or Danny DeVito.  Isn't it difficult to believe that
Johnny would masochistically stay in the room with the drug-and-
beer-intoxicated Vince rather than  walk out a half hour before he
does?  "Tape" holds us through its high-voltage in tension but is
weak in credibility, wit and style.
Rated R.  Running time: 86 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When Jon (Robert Sean Leonard, "Much Ado About Nothing") returns to his
hometown of Lansing, Michigan as a rookie director represented in the town's
film festival, he meets up with his old high school buddy Vince (Ethan Hawke,
"Snow Falling on Cedars") who's also flown in for the event.  Once Jon's
arrived at Vince's motel room, pleasantries quickly devolve into character
judgements.  Mounting tension is escalated when Vince accuses Jon of not
only stealing his old girlfriend Amy (Uma Thurman, "The Golden Bowl"), but
of raping her.  When Vince finally gets Jon to admit the truth, he 
announce's Amy's imminent arrival, then tells Jon he's captured their
entire conversation on "Tape."
Adapted from his one act play by Stephen Belber, director Richard Linklater
("Before Sunrise") uses digital video technology to capture an intense
character study in real time.  This is an actors' piece and the cast of
three thrive in its environment.
We first meet Vince, a small time drug dealer/volunteer fireman, burning off
his manic energy with inter-bed pushups.  Jon, a seemingly more well-adjusted
young man, is dismayed to learn that Vince has broken up with Lynn, his
long time girlfriend, but agrees with her assessment that Vince 'has issues
that manifest themselves in violence.'  This begins a debate that clearly
shows Jon believes Vince is beneath him, an unambitious, immature slacker,
even as Jon back-pedals his words.  Vince, denying said charges while shooting
beers and rolling joints, slowly turns the tables on Jon, making us
reevaluate the other character as perhaps having a weaker moral fiber.  
But "Tape," never letting us rest, soon has us questioning Vince's objectives.
When Amy, a local assistant district D.A., arrives on the scene, things become
awkward until she's assessed the situation and gains the upper hand.  Amy
has yet a third take on their high school days before she makes a telephone
call that will once again spur character defining actions.
Ethan Hawke, an actor who recently has delivered moribund performances, is
charged as Vince, at once an overactive adolescent and pothead philosopher.
Linklater should remain Hawke's director of choice as he hasn't been this
good since "Before Sunrise."  Robert Sean Leonard deftly digs a hole of
Jon's own making, constantly trying to spin himself as a nice guy while his
true nature seeps out between his words.  Uma Thurman has less time to 
flesh out her character, but makes her Amy's flip flop, from vulnerable to
victorious, believable although she never attains her costars level of
empathy.
Belber's clever writing shifts our perceptions constantly throughout the film,
while cinematographer Maryse Alberti ("Joe Gould's Secret"), limited to the 
space of one motel room, keeps the visuals interesting and diverse, only 
stumbling with the choice of some whiplash pans late in the action.  
Linklater's direction is tight and he gives us a laugh on our way out with the
witty selection of Brenda Lee's "I'm Sorry" playing over the end credits.
"Tape" may be an actors' exercise, but Linklater and his cast make it a
workout worth watching.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Norm Schrager
While the film world awaits what sounds like a daring experiment from
director Richard Linklater -- the animated Waking Life, coming in
October -- the filmmaker attempts to hold us over with Tape, a failure
of a low-budget project if ever there was one.  The movie is shot on
video and confined to a single motel room, for the entirety of its
real-time, 84-minute length.  With such restrictive parameters
self-imposed on a feature, success really must lie in creative
direction, acting power, and a solid screenplay.  All three are
non-existent here.
Tape is based on a play by Stephen Belber, and the playwright
contributes the clunky script, full of obvious dialogue and silly
posturing.  With one strike already against them, the experienced, name
cast (Hawke, Leonard, and Thurman) then take the problem a step further,
apparently not realizing that performances need to be taken down a notch
on video, as the medium tends to overexpose every movement and moment. 
(While Thurman's performance is good, the trio need to watch Brad
Anderson's Session 9 for a good example of subtle acting on video.)
Hawke, Linklater's Before Sunrise star, is Vince, a manipulative,
possibly violent drug dealer who's reuniting with Leonard's Johnny, ten
years after their questionable friendship in high school.  Johnny is in
town to premiere his first film in a local festival, and they convene in
Vince's seedy, low-key motel room.
Through some poorly delivered dialogue -- although much of it can't be
saved from the page anyway -- we learn of Vince's problematic tendencies
and Johnny's existence as a self-proclaimed goody-two-shoes, high on
moral fiber and good intentions.  When Vince pushes Johnny's buttons in
just the right way, a revelation surfaces, steeped in jealousy and
revenge.  Fellow classmate Thurman is then thrown into the mix, as is,
unfortunately for her, the motel room.
It must be quite a challenge adapting a stage play to the screen, as
many plays can be painfully static in comparison to the cinematic
rhythms of a film.  One would think that camera movement and placement
could truly turn a "stagy" setup into a visually intriguing film
(Lumet's Deathtrap comes to mind, as do the warehouse scenes in
Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs).  So it's quite a disappointment to see
Linklater's direction of Tape alternate between being stale and cliché.
When he's not spending too much time sitting on one shot -- trying to be
kind of video "underground", I guess -- he's pulling off annoying swish
pans between Hawke and Leonard while they argue, trying way too hard to
force some urgency.
Hawke's performance reeks of exaggeration, and Leonard would appear to
be a plain-old bad actor.  He barely gets into the role, looking as if
he were auditioning for the school play.  The plaintive, wimpy,
holier-than-thou stance that he applies to Johnny comes off as being not
only annoying, but wholly stilted.  I kept hoping for Vince to sock John
in the face, but alas, it never happens.
Things perk up when Uma Thurman's Amy joins the fray, not only because
it highlights the smartest points of the script, but because Thurman's
performance is the richest of the three.  She plays it naďve,
mysterious, and collected, and it helps push through the finale -- a
finale which Linklater and Belber surely think is cooler than it
actually is.
Reviewed as part of our 2001 Boston Film Festival coverage (feature
story coming soon).
Director: Richard Linklater
Producer: Alexis Alexanian, Anne Walker-McBay, Gary Winick
Writer: Stephen Belber
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Robert Sean Leonard, Uma Thurman
http://www.lionsgate-ent.com/dnm/profile.html?pid=IN-L-00053
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
