Title
Review for Aimée & Jaguar (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
As World War II enters its cataclysmic last act, the Allied bombers are
reducing Berlin to rubble.  The city's inhabitants, much like those in
the recent end of the world picture, LAST NIGHT, have a fatalistic view
of their future.  They try to keep up a semblance of normalcy, going to
the zoo and to the symphony, but they know that the next explosion may
be the end for them.  And for those of Jewish ancestry, a bullet by the
Gestapo may get them even sooner.
Against this backdrop, Max Färberböck's AIMEE & JAGUAR, based on Erika
Fischer's book, tells the true story of an unlikely lesbian love affair
between Lilly Wust (Juliane Köhler), a married mother of 4, and Felice
Schragenheim (Maria Schrader), a Jewish member of the underground.  (The
private names they used for each other were Aimee and Jaguar, hence the
story's title.)
Lilly's husband, Günther (Detlev Buck), a frontline soldier, has visits
home.  Both husband and wife are openly promiscuous with neither doing a
great deal to hide the fact.  When Lilly catches Günther making out with
Ilse (Johanna Wokalek), the children's nanny, he explains his action as
the inevitable effect of a man's libido.  The unflappable Günther does
lose his cool when he first realizes that his wife has a female lover,
which is the same reaction that Lilly has when Felice kisses her for the
first time.  Although Felice is an in-the-open lesbian, Lilly has always
assumed herself to be completely straight.
As the prim and slightly silly Lilly, Juliane Köhler gives a strong
performance with equal measures of fiery passion and frightened
vulnerability.  In contrast, Maria Schrader, as Felice, approaches her
character with a certain detachment.  The result is a love affair that's
never quite convincing.
More effective are the film's impressive atmospherics.  As bombers light
the sky a burning red, the cameras pan over the monuments of the
would-be invincible Nazi regime.  When Lilly goes to the zoo to fetch
her children, she walks past huge mounds of rubble in the streets.  And,
as the Berlin Philharmonic plays Beethoven's glorious 9th symphony, the
concert is interrupted by an air raid, much to the consternation of the
conductor, who demands, without success, that his players finish the
movement.
After telling Lilly of the men in his unit who have died, Günther
reveals his secret for his remarkable longevity at the front.  "You have
to duck first, that's the secret," he tells her.  Lilly, however,
doesn't duck, leaving luck to protect her.  Loving her girlfriend openly
and naively, she doesn't even realize that Felice and Felice's friends
are Jews.
Like SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, the movie is bracketed by appearances of Lilly
today.  As she lives the last few years of her life in a nursing home,
she still pines for Felice.  Felice, a woman who always made the most of
her situation, had a favorite word, "now."  "I want lots of 'nows'," she
said, and she lived her life accordingly, regardless of the bombs or the
Gestapo.
AIMEE & JAGUAR runs 2:05.  It is in German with English subtitles.  The
film is not rated but would be an R for sex, nudity and some violence.
It would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film, which was released last year in parts of Europe, does not yet
have a United States release date.  It opened the Berlin Film Festival
in 1999 and will open the Berlin and Beyond Film Festival in San
Francisco on Friday, January 14, 2000.  You can find the Berlin and
Beyond Film Festival information at its web site:
http://www.goethe.de/sanfrancisco.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Popick
Think it was tough being a Jew in Germany during World War II?  Try
being a lesbian Jew.  That's the basic theme in Max Färberböck's Aimée &
Jaguar, a Golden Globe nominee for Best Foreign Language Film earlier
this year.  As in The Tao of Steve, there isn't anybody named Aimée or
Jaguar in the film – they're pen names used by two women having an
illicit affair amidst the almost constant bombing of Berlin.
Felice Schragenheim (Maria Schrader) spends her days working for a
pro-Nazi newspaper in order to give important information to the Jewish
underground, while her evenings are spent with a close-knit group of
fellow lesbians.  Felice is a confrontational smart-ass who isn't afraid
to push the envelope when it comes to her sexuality or her religious
beliefs, causing a friend to say that she's `lost all sense of danger.'
In fact, the only time Felice seems uncomfortable is when her
grandmother prods her about an imaginary fiancé.
When Aimée opens, we see Felice at an orchestral concert with her pal,
Ilse (Johanna Wokalek).  Ilse works for Lilly Wust (Juliane Köhler), the
beautiful, bourgeois wife of a Nazi soldier.  Before the concert is
interrupted by the city's air raid sirens, Felice longingly gazes at the
seemingly unobtainable Lilly from afar.  She decides to write Lilly a
steamy love letter, anonymously signed `Jaguar,' which Lilly assumes is
from one of the men she sees while her husband fights in Eastern
Europe.  Through Ilse, the two women meet and begin to spend more and
more time together, ultimately beginning a torrid affair.
But Lilly still doesn't know that Felice and her friends are Jewish; she
just assumes they're banded together because of their alternate
lifestyle.  The first sexual encounter between Felice and Lilly is quite
breathtaking.  Färberböck does a great job at capturing Lilly's first
nervous foray into lesbianism, as well as Felice's cautiousness at
becoming involved in a potentially dangerous relationship.
Aimée also succeeds in its portrayal of 1943 Berlin.  People think
nothing of greeting each other with a friendly `Heil Hitler.'  There is
also an interesting scene where an affluent woman sells food stamps to
Felice and her gal pals in the bathroom of a posh club.  `Exciting
times, aren't they?' she snidely asks the women after charging too much
money.
In addition to the Golden Globe nomination, Aimée also won the top
acting prize (shared by the two leading ladies) at the Berlin
International Film Festival, which, ironically, is where the film is
set.  The film was written by Färberböck and Rona Munro (Ken Loach's
Ladybird Ladybird), who based their script on the Erica Fischer novel.
2:04 – R for nudity, sexual content and violence

Author
JONATHAN F RICHARDS
Screenplay by Farberbock and Rona Munro from the book by Erica Fischer
Aimee & Jaguar is also a true story of racial intolerance and people 
rising above it, but here the stakes are even higher and the ending less 
uplifting. We're in Berlin in the closing months of WWII, with sirens 
wailing and bombs blowing neighborhoods to rubble, and Jews being herded 
into trucks for concentration camps, while in the concert halls and the 
hotel bars life tries to struggle along with a semblance of normalcy.
Felice Schragenheim (Maria Schrader) is a beautiful, intelligent, 
free-spirited girl with two serious strikes against her under the 
circumstances: she's a lesbian, and she's a Jew. She conceals these 
Nazi-unfriendly traits, and works in the belly of the beast, as the 
trusted secretary of the editor of a Nazi newspaper. Lilly Wust (Juliane 
KF6hler) is the lonely, flibberty-gibbet wife of a German officer, a =
blonde blue-eyed mother of four blonde blue-eyed sons, who cheats on her 
husband to reassure herself while he's at the front.
Felice seduces Lily for fun. Frau Wust has boasted to her nanny Ilse 
(Johanna Wokalek), Felice's lover, that she can smell a Jew. When they 
meet, Felice proffers a perfumed wrist for her to sniff. "Lovely," says 
Lily. "It's French, isn't it?"
But what starts as sport becomes achingly serious. They fall in love. 
There's not much sex, but what there is is intense and beautiful.
Lily is a sweet woman who is not as shallow as circumstances have made 
her, but her naivete leads her to make a couple of terrible blunders. As 
the movie begins and ends, she is an old woman remembering. The real 
Lily Wust still lives in Berlin.
Both actresses are superb. The story is sometimes confusing, and at two 
hours plus it runs to fat, but it's well worth while.
