Title
Review for Wedding Singer, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
James Brundage
It's just your basic romantic comedy. It's also an eighties film (so if you
hated the eighties ) On the overall the film is all right, not too good,
not too bad. But, watching in dejected calm, staring as the screen threatens
epilepsy at 24 frames per second, I realize that this is so much the same
movie I had seen time and time again in my life. One out of a hundred within
the past sixteen years. Yet somehow I keep going back. Mindlessly, numbly
heading into the movie theater to see yet another movie, not entirely sure
of the title yet certain as to an inevitable memory of the details.
As far as this one goes, it tries to take off of the success of last years
very offbeat dark romantic action comedy, Grosse Point Blank, another 80's
movie about a hitman who has become dissatisfied with his professional life
and returns to his high school reunion to try to rekindle an old flame
(remember the tag line : Even a Hitman Deserves a Second Chance). Not that
it [Wedding Singer] is in any way a sick comedy or nearly as good, but it
still serves as a romantic comedy. You sympathize with the characters (like
you sympathize with the people on "Friends"), you like the sweet romances,
you know the ending as you go into the movie. Sure, it serves up well for
jokes but, as was once the focus of a Seinfeld episode 

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) The thing about Adam Sandler is, his heart is in the right
place. 
For example, in HAPPY GILMORE, Sandler plays a rookie golfer trying to beat
a self-confident jerk of a pro. If the star were any other comic, that would
be enough motivation to drive the movie, but with Sandler, the rookie also
wants to win the prize money to help his grandma keep her house. 
That extra motive doesn't make HAPPY GILMORE a funnier movie. It doesn't
really add any genuine emotional depth, either. In fact, the motive is
almost totally irrelevant to the movie. But Sandler's philosophy seems to
be, if it's a token gesture, why not make it a nice gesture? That is
endlessly refreshing. 
In THE WEDDING SINGER, Sandler is right on track. The fact that he's a
wedding singer is only superficially relevant to the story. What KIND of a
wedding singer he is is even less important. David Spade could have filled
the role with cynicism and sarcasm. He could make fun of the fat, ugly, or
embarrassing people he meets at weddings, and the story would be intact. 
But Sandler instead brings a mature goodness to the character. He seems to
really enjoy the people at weddings and treats them as though they were his
own family. Robbie Hart (Sandler) doesn't just SING at weddings; he also
gets the loners to join in and have fun, and he smooths it over when someone
does something embarrassing. He is exactly the man you would want at your
wedding. 
The day comes when Robbie has his own wedding, and he is stood up by his
heavy-metal bride (the movie is set in 1985). Robbie takes it hard. He
doesn't sleep, he doesn't eat, and he gets punched out at work when he sings
"Love Stinks" at a wedding. Julia (Drew Barrymore), who waitresses all the
weddings in town, gives him a shoulder to cry on and an ear to talk to. 
Eventually, Robbie starts rebounding toward Julia. He really likes her, but
she's engaged. Her fiancé is a self-confident jerk (do I see a trend - nope,
just a formula) who doesn't deserve her, but Robbie is too depressed to
fight for her hand. Julia seems to like Robbie too, but she can't leave her
seemingly safe and stable fiancé for the off-chance that Robbie might be
serious about her. 
You know the story. You've seen it a million times before. There's always a
new way to tell it, with new lovers, new chemistry, and new details, but
it's the same story. And sometimes, it works. 
First of all, the chemistry between Sandler and Barrymore is effective.
Actually, it's not so much the chemistry BETWEEN the two as it is each one's
own romantic tension. Sandler captures the forlorn sleepwalking look of a
jilted man, struck with an unattainable love. Barrymore is charming as the
girl next door looking for someone serious to settle down with. Sparks don't
fly when they kiss, but they both seem right for each other. 
Second, their love is mature. They are not driven by passionate sexual
attraction - they're a cute couple, but neither Sandler nor Barrymore is
centerfold material. Instead, they are both looking for someone meaningful,
someone to settle down with, someone to grow old with. At a wedding, Robbie
comforts a kid throwing up in a dumpster while Julia sits by. The repulsing
situation is taken in stride, as if the two were already parents, caring for
their sick child. 
The 80s soundtrack and references play a big part in this movie. Other
critics liked this movie in part because of the '80s soundtrack. 
Often, the music and references felt forced. For example, Robbie tells his
ex-fiancé to "get out of my Van Halen t-shirt before you jinx the band and
they break up." (Ha ha ha. Get it? David Lee Roth DID leave Van Halen!) Or
how about when Sammy (Allen Covert), Robbie's chauffeur friend, shows up at
a party wearing a Michael Jackson jacket and - get this - a single silver
glove. (That's EXACTLY what MJ used to wear ALL THE TIME!). 
Unfortunately, making fun of generalizations about a past era is too easy to
be rewarding. 
That's not to say the movie isn't funny. Screenwriter Tim Herlihy has
written for Sandler before (BILLY MADISON and HAPPY GILMORE), and the two
make a good combination. Herlihy knows what sort of jokes Sandler is good at
and has tailored the script to his straight-faced, smart-aleck style.  
Let's hope Herlihy and Sandler stick together for a few more projects
because this movie really won me over. With Barrymore's charm and Sandler's
heart, it was hard to go wrong.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I've gotta admit, I have a real hard time taking Adam Sandler
seriously as a romantic leading man.  And apparently I'm not alone in that
respect -- Sandler himself seems to be having a real hard time taking
himself seriously as a romantic leading man throughout THE WEDDING SINGER.
Sandler stars as Robby Hart, a one-time aspiring rock-and-roller now
making a meager living playing wedding receptions and bar mitzvahs circa
1985.  After being left at the altar by a fiancee (Angela Featherstone)
who can't deal with his low-rent "career," Robby begins losing the will to
sing "You Spin Me Round (Like a Record)," substituting "Love Stinks."
That's before he begins spending time with Julia Sullivan (Drew
Barrymore), a sweet waitress engaged to a pastel shirt-wearing, vaguely
unshaven Don Johnson wannabe named Glenn (Matthew Glave).
     It's surprising and refreshing to watch a performer like Sandler try
to stretch himself after a string of roles which required him either to
scream, destroy things or scream while destroying things.  It's also a bit
goofy.  When Sandler's big-haired fiancee explains why she doesn't love
him any more, the close-up of Sandler's twitchy face suggests someone
trying hard not to burst out laughing; when he explains to Julia how he
dreams of being a songwriter, his expression suggests someone trying hard
not to burst out laughing.  I was surprised not to find an out-take reel
over the closing credits of THE WEDDING SINGER, since it looked like
dozens of takes must have ended with Sandler in the middle of a massive
giggle fit.
    It's a good thing that the pleasant but improbable romance doesn't
have to carry THE WEDDING SINGER.  The real star of the show is the
mid-80s milieu -- a soundtrack full of the era's one-hit wonders pop
tunes, thread-perfect costuming by Mona May (CLUELESS), knowing references
to the eventual breakup of Van Halen and several famous couples.  In fact,
THE WEDDING SINGER is one of the more consistently chuckle-filled comedies
of the last several months.  Though never out-and-out hilarious or
inspired, Tim Herlihy's script (with uncredited assist from Carrie Fisher,
among others) gets solid mileage out of its kitschy atmosphere, lively
cameos by Steve Buscemi, Jon Lovitz and Billy Idol (as himself), and one
priceless moment involving a string quartet's solemn rendition of
Journey's "Don't Stop Believin'."  Even Drew Barrymore acquits herself
admirably in the uncommon role of the "nice girl."
     Still, there's something ever-so-slightly askew about Adam Sandler
trying to get away with the hushed tones and puppy-dog eyes of a
sensitive, relationship kinda guy.  He may be an actor some day, but he's
not there yet; he's still primarily a happy-go-lucky anarchist with a
talent for silly voices and even sillier songs.  Robby's performance
scenes are certainly where Sandler seems most comfortable, particularly as
he tears into a diatribe against his ex or a lyrically amusing ode to
growing old with Julia.  When he steps off the stage and into his best
faux John Cusack, it just looks like it's all he can do to keep a straight
face.  THE WEDDING SINGER turns out to be an entertaining way to spend 90
minutes laughing at the past.  In a different way, it may be just as funny
watching Sandler spend 90 minutes laughing at an alternative future.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Frank Coraci
Writer: Tim Herlihy
Starring: Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Christine Taylor, Allen Covert,
Angela Featherstone, Matthew Glave, Alexis Arquette, Frank Sivero,
Christina Pickles, Steve Buscemi, Billy Idol, Jon Lovitz
In the first scene of "The Wedding Singer," Adam Sandler did something I
never thought I'd see him do: after a drunken Best Man at a wedding gives a
scathing speech to his father and his brother the groom, the wedding
singer, played by Sandler, doesn't yell at him or beat him up, but instead
turns to the married couple and says something about how he thinks they'll
have a long happy marriage, easily smoothing over the previous speech.  I
did a double take.  Sure, he has a different cut and all, but aside from
that, I thought that would be the only difference his character has to,
say, Billy Madison or Happy Gilmore.  Is this the same guy?
Yes and no.  "The Wedding Singer" has the some of the same off-the-wall
humor usually attributed to Sandler outings, but this time the filmmakers,
and Sandler, have given the film a sweet overtone.  The Sandler who was
subject to fits of rage and various other vulgarities, the guy who would
scream obscenities at a freaking golf ball are gone.  "The Wedding Singer"
strips Sandler down, and exposes his soft candy shell.  Sure, we're still
laughing, but this time I actually cared for his character for reasons
other than that he was being played by Adam Sandler.
This fooled me immensely as the previews and commercials for this film made
it look like yet another gimmicky flick from Sandler that you see once,
laugh a couple times, and then forget completely (does anyone remember
anything about "Happy Gilmore," other than it featured golf?).  It could
have: a) been a typical Sandler flick, where he sings some tunes and yells
at people; or b) a tiresome, occasionally witty joke film making fun of the
80s (which would be a hair better).  What it is is a sweet, simple tale...a
slightly self-conscious 80s teen movie with a heart of gold and a couple
swear words.
Sandler is Robbie Hart, a musician in his early 20s working in town as a
wedding singer at receptions.  One night at work, he meets Julia (Drew
Barrymore - possibly looking the cutest she ever has), a waitress working
with him there, and the two slowly become better and better friends.  After
being stood up at his own wedding to a big-haried bitch (Angela
Featherstone), he starts to get more and more aquainted with her, and soon
realizes he may be in love with her.  Unfortunately, she's dating a Don
Johnson wannabe jerk, a guy who works at a big paying job in the city, and
drives a Deloreon (!!!) - Glenn (Matthew Glave).  The thing is Glenn cheats
on her, and is only marrying her for stability and because they've been
dating for years upon years now anyway.
That's the plot in a nutshell, but it's covered with lots of sugar coating
to make it nice and relaxing, as well as a billion 80s jokes, most of which
are hilarious.  Those of us who were forced to grow up when MTV was young,
when Reagan was in office, and when everything seemed kinda honky dorey for
the moment will bust a gut laughing at this film's numerous references,
such as a friend of Julia's (Christine Taylor - Marcia from the Brady Bunch
flicks) who has the old Madonna look, a run-down of couples who people
thought would be together forever...but are not anymore (Burt and Loni,
Donald and Ivana, Woody and Mia...), and a member of Robbie's band (Alexis
Arquette - the Arquette who tried to shoot Travolta and Jackson in "Pulp
Fiction") who bears an uncanny resemblance to Boy George...who alas gets
the worst case of "beating a dead horse" jokedom in the film.  Yeah, I
laughed my ass off when he started singing "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me"
over and over again in the begininng, but by the 45 minute point enough is
enough!
And we even get a couple dynamite cameos, one from Steve Buscemi (an old
pal of Sandler's - he's been in "Airheads" AND "Billy Madison"), and
another from Jon Lovitz, both which are tied for funniest part of the film.
 Buscemi gets to play the drunken best man in the beginning, and does it to
comic perfection, while Lovitz gets a chance to show why some of us
sometimes think he's really really funny, playing another Wedding Singer,
only more of a lounge lizard.  His exiting grin is priceless.  And oh...how
could I forget: Billy Idol, playing his own self-obsessed self...and not
doing too bad a job at it either.
The thing that I'll really remember, which really makes this film seem like
something, is the way the film just feels sweet.  Who'd of thunk that a
scene where Sandler sings a tune in that tiny voice he does to Drew would
actually make me smile?  Sure, he does some of his usual schtick, but most
of it is what you've seen in the commercials.  This time his temper is very
much on hold, and when he lets it go, you actually feel bad for the guy.  I
loved his reaction when he was told his fiancee was standing him up at his
wedding: he just stands there with a half-grin on his face, and quietly
walks away into the Groom's tent where he then throws a fit.  I laughed
much more than I would if he had torn the place down or something like
that.
I have to admit, I'm not a huge fan of Sandler, or ex-SNL members who try
to films either.  But "The Wedding Singer" gives a very funny comedian a
chance to open up a little bit more, to do his usualy schtick but also do
some stuff he's never been able to do before.  The film could have been
better (it could certainly have done some truly satirical takes on the 80s,
like materialism, which it touches but only briefly), but it's still an
enjoyable, nostalgic, and even a bit touching time at the movies.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Line Cinema
 Director: Frank Coraci
 Writer: Judd Apatow, Carrie Fisher, Tim Herlihy
 Cast: Drew Barrymore, Steve Buscemi, Allen Covert, Ellen
Albertini Dow, Angela Featherstone, Matthew Glave, Billy Idol,
Adam Sandler, Christine Taylor
   Since fifty percent of marriages end up in divorce, we can
no longer assume that the institution is a guaranteed lifetime
contract. Still, matrimony is taken with some seriousness,
enough to give people of both sexes the jitters as the big day
approaches.  A short time ago some guy left for Tahiti on his
wedding day, a detail which received vast publicity by the
media.  Apparently he checked into his little dot on he map
without his bride and without bothering to take his vows. 
When the crunch comes, feet can get awfully cold.
   In "The Wedding Singer" director Frank Coraci aims to mine
both the comedy and the pathos of such a situation in Judd
Apatow, Carrie Fisher and Tim Herlihy's screenplay.  He
succeeds to a degree, unfolding a story of a guy who is a
male variation of the adage "Always a bridesmaid, never a
bride."  Robby Hart (Adam Sandler) sings at other people's
weddings but cries at his own: his childhood sweetheart,
Linda (Angela Featherstone), simply did not show up, did not
tell any of the guests of her belated decision, but days later
volunteered the information that she was just not the same
person she was when she was a kid.  She no longer wanted
to hitch up with poor Robby.
   This movie is a vehicle for Adam Sandler, a veteran of
"Saturday Night Live, and the cheerful golfer in the
sporadically funny "Happy Gilmore."  Targeting his shtick to
an audience of twenty-somethings, Sandler knows how to turn
on the emotions, turning his plight into material that draws
laughter from his audience as he proceeds from sheer
exuberance while performing on stage to utter depression
when he is rebuffed so humiliatingly at his own wedding. 
Fortunately he runs into the lovely, sweet, and virtuous Julia
(Drew Barrymore), who is waiting tables for the caterer at one
of his gigs, and as the two meet informally from time to time,
their friendship grows and so does their mutual, physical
attraction.
   Director Coraci has done a fine job re-creating and spoofing
some of the cultural trends of the 1980s, a time in which
yuppie-worship replaced hippie-adulation. The decade's motifs
do not bode well for Robby since the gals tend to seek guys
who can offer them the security of the picket fence, the De
Lorean car, and the array of gold cards.  Scraping up money
whenever he can land a job at non-union rates for Bar
Mitzvahs and weddings, Robby is forced to live in the
basement of his grandmother's home and, after his rejection
by his long-term lover, is reduced to both poverty and
emotional misery.  What's more, he thinks he has little chance
to match up with Julia, who has for several years been the girl
friend of Glenn (Matthew Glave) the rich and handsome bond-
trader who has finally agreed to setting the date.
   In a predictable story laced with the shopworn spoofs of
eras inferior to our own (pastel wedding gowns, chintzy-
looking women with teased hair, octogenarians who still have
an eye for the provocative wiggle and who say things you'd
expect from the mouth of nineteen-year-olds), "The Wedding
Singer" depends on the chemistry between Robby and Julia. 
The growing excitement they feel for each other is there, all
right, but Adam Sandler is not exceptionally appealing as a
whining anti-hero, a role best left to Woody Allen.  Too often,
the dialogue calls for stereotyping the elderly.  In one quick
scene, grandma Rosie (Ellen Albertini Dow) delivers a rap
song in front of a microphone after previous confessing to her
grandson that she had "intercourse with eight men before her
marriage" and an old man in a bar (Carmen Filpi) announces
to Robbie apropos of nothing, "You need a prostitute." 
Christine Taylor fares better as Holly, a sexually liberated
woman who knows what she wants and uses no euphemisms
to proclaim it, and Matthew Glave excels as the wealthy
fiance who makes the mistake of describing his adulterous
intentions with Robbie.
   "The Wedding Singer" is a sentimental, romantic comedy
that affirms what we all know, deep down--that friendship
should precede love.  The motif is furthered by a Drew
Barrymore's charming performance as a sweet young thing
but marred by Sandler's lack of appeal and stereotyped
characters like George (Alexis Arquette), a musician who
comes across as a transvestite, and Rosie, whose adolescent
dialogue is more embarrassing than cute.  Rated R.  Running
time: 95 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Bob Bloom
The Wedding Singer (1998) 2 stars out of 4
 Sometimes when you go into a movie with low expectations - be it because
you are unimpressed with the talent or lack thereof of one or more of the
participants - you can be surprised.
 Such is the case with The Wedding Singer. Now, this isn't the funniest
movie since Buster Keaton's The General. Let us just say it's better than
Dumb and Dumber,  but not as good as Caddyshack.
 What catches you off guard is the performance of Saturday Night Live
alumnus Adam Sandler. It's restrained and, at times, touching. The comedy
of Sandler, like many of the recent SNL grads, is - like limburger cheese -
an acquired taste.
 In The Wedding Singer Sandler puts aside his usual loud, obnoxious schtick
to create a character with whom the audience can actually empathize and
root for.
 Sandler plays Robbie Hart, the title character, a failed rock musician who
makes his living singer at wedding, Bar Mitzvahs and other social
occasions.
 While he makes others happy, he himself is tossed into the dumpster after
his fiance jilts him on his wedding day, leaving him embittered and
forlorn.
 To try to lift his spirits his friend, Julie (a winsome Drew Barrymore)
asks him to help her with her wedding plans because her jerk of a fiance, a
snooty Wall Street bonds investor, claims he is too busy to help.
 Well, you can guess the rest as well as the outcome. If not, it's back to
basic film school for you.
  The Wedding Singer is a nice little movie, mostly thanks to the chemistry
between its two protagonists. Barrymore, with her baby moon face, looks
radiant, a good contrast to Sandler hound-dog appearance.
 Some of the laughs fall flat, and many of the characters are types rather
than real people, but overall, The Wedding Singer  entertains. It's a nice
diversion for undemanding and unsophisticated moviegoers who want to wile
away about 100 minutes.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christian Pyle
If the 70's nostalgia didn't make you feel old, the 80's nostalgia is bound to.
 One of the latter set, "The Wedding Singer," seems to be written by someone
who did not experience the 1980's directly but only read about them in an
article in Parade magazine.  The wacky fashions are here . . . and the music .
. . and references aplenty to celebrities and signs of the times, but it all
seems tediously-and too obviously-inserted for the
didn't-we-dress-funny-back-then chuckle.
The plot is standard romantic comedy with nothing original:  Robbie (Adam
Sandler) is a wedding singer; Julia (Drew Barrymore) waits tables at weddings. 
Both are engaged; however, Robbie's fiance (Angela Featherstone) dumps him at
the altar, and Julia's fiance (Matthew Glave) is a skirt-chasing speculator in
junk bonds.  Robbie and Julia go through the expected ups-and-downs as they
realize they were meant to be together.
I'll fess up-I've never found Adam Sandler funny.  Whatever his appeal is, I've
missed it.  (Other comedians I don't get include Pauly Shore and Pee Wee
Herman-make your own judgments).
The stupidity and artificiality of the whole project is summarized in a cameo
by Billy Idol as himself.  Idol looks like hell, and the ravages of his
lifestyle are barely concealed by thick makeup.  He's mocked by a photo of his
younger self on a Rolling Stone cover in the same scene.  We're not supposed to
notice that, and we're not supposed to notice how silly it is that Billy Idol
suddenly appears to play fairy godmother to Robbie.
Other cameos, by Steve Buscemi and Jon Lovitz, provide the only real laughs in
the movie.  Lovitz is especially good, playing a rival wedding singer plotting
with the mania of a Bond villain to take advantage of Robbie's post-break-up
depression.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Angela Featherstone, Christina
Pickles, Steve Buscemi, Jon Lovitz, Kevin
Nealon, Billy Idol, Robert Smigel, Alexis Arquette
Written by: Tim Herlihy
Directed by: Frank Coraci
Running Time: 90 minutes
The Wedding Singer surprised me in a way that I really didn't want to
be surprised. It has a level of sweetness to it that I really didn't
expect, and quite frankly going into it, really didn't want either. I
expected more of the angry-type humor that made Happy Gilmore so
funny. But The Wedding Singer does have it's humorous moments, and in
the end, the sweetness of the film did win me over.
Adam Sandler plays the title character, a young man who earns a living
singing at local weddings. The day before his own wedding, his fiancee
(Angela Featherstone) dumps him. He then starts to fall in love with a
waitress (Drew Barrymore) that he met at one of his shows. Trouble is
that she's engaged to be married as well. On top of that, the guy
she's engaged to is a real jerk, but only Sandler seems to know
that. Oh what to do?
The Wedding Singer takes place in 1985, for no real reason except for
some "gimmick" laughs and the chance to release yet another retro 80s
compilation soundtrack. The gimmicks I'm referring to involving
throwing 80s cultural icons at us and expecting us to laugh at them
just because they're from the 80s. See that? It's a Rubix Cube!
Remember those? It's funny! It's a Rubix Cube! That guy dressed like
Michael Jackson! He's funny! Jokes like that are a sign of weak
writing.
I say that The Wedding Singer won me over mainly because of Drew
Barrymore's character. She's just so cute in this movie.  Late in the
film it looks as though things aren't going to work out between
Sandler and Barrymore and I felt bad for them. It didn't matter that I
knew exactly how the story would end up even before the opening
credits started, and it didn't matter that I'd seen scenes like that
countless times before. For a few moments, I felt for these
characters. For a film this weak to be able to do that... well then
there must be something a little special about it. [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Christopher Null
Nine years out of the 80's and we already have our first nostalgic look back
in Adam Sandler's THE WEDDING SINGER, an entertaining romantic comedy which
recalls the days of big hair, Thriller, and Miami Vice with a sense of fondness.
Essentially, THE WEDDING SINGER follows Adam Sandler as Robbie Hart, the
titular character, who is fixated upon the idea of participating in his own
wedding.  Devastatingly, though, when the big day comes, his bride to be is a
no-show.  She has realized that she could not spend the rest of her life with
a lowly wedding singer.  Consequently, the break-up has traumatized Robbie so
much that he must avoid the painful experience of weddings altogether.  Thus,
his new line as a Bar mitzvah singer.  Shortly thereafter, Drew Barrymore as
Julia begins to open his eyes to love again, at which point Robbie must
contend with her creep fiancee Glen for her affections.
>From that point, the story develops into something oddly familiar, and we
become aware that THE WEDDING SINGER hearkens back to not only the fads and
fashions of the 1980's, but also to the romantic comedies from that era such
as CAN'T BUY ME LOVE and the John Hughes / Molly Ringwald movies.  Those
movies concerned the lovable loser that had to compete with the bigshot jock
or cheerleader for the affections of their true love.  In this remake, the
high school protagonists of those films have aged into Sandler's Robbie, ten
years out of high school but not far removed.  But the sentiment of those
films remains.  Instead of being a high school stud, Glen is a corporate stud,
and there is no doubt in our minds that he is the enemy.
With the modern trend in romance films like MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING and AS
GOOD AS IT GETS being to present some sort of true internal conflict to the
relationship (such as a likable significant other or a psychological illness),
THE WEDDING SINGER gleefully bucks this trend for the black and white, good
vs. evil approach of the romantic comedy of the 80's.  THE WEDDING SINGER is a
witty comedy that dwells on every aspect of pop culture from the decade past
(from Boy George to breakdance), and no laughable reference is left untouched.
 In the end though, it is a simple love story from a simpler time crafted as
skillfully as ever.
Director: Frank Coraci
Producer: Jack Giarraputo, Michelle Holdsworth, Robert Simond
Writer: Tom Herlihy
Starring: Drew Barrymore, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Christine Taylor
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 23 May 1998 for $3 at the Cineplex Odeon Worldwide
Do you remember the first time you heard Kajagoogoo's "Too Shy"? Did you
ever try to solve Rubik's cube?  Did you ever have to explain to your
mother that Boy George was not a girl, no matter how good his makeup and
no matter how womanly his features were? Do you remember when guys with
deliberate stubble and equally deliberate white blazers, thanks to Miami
Vice? Do you have more than one album by A Flock of Seagulls? Do you
remember when albums cost $4.99 on sale? Did anyone in your neighborhood
drive a Gremlin and see a movie with the same title?  "Deadhead sticker on
a Cadillac" mean anything to you? Do you remember your... President
Reagan? 
If you answered yes to any of these questions (I answered yes to *all* of
them), you will probably enjoy *The Wedding Singer*. Actually, all the
1980s nostalgia is a red herring, and underneath all the pastel and
two-tone tuxedos and feathered haircuts is a rather endearing little love
story. That Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore are endearing is also a nice
surprise. Plus, the movie is hilarious. Sandler is espcially surprising.
It's good to see that he's a bit more than the obligatory movie actor SNL
alumni are expected to become no matter how bad the movie scripts they're
offered are.
Robbie Hart, who sings at weddings every weekend for $60, seems to enjoy
his life despite his lack of income, and his basement apartment in his
sister's house. It bothers his fiancee, who leaves him standing at the
alter at his wedding. Robbie, who is tenderhearted and humorous and adds
to the occasions where he sings, turns sullen. Luckily, the results are
equally humorous, and either way, he gets the attention of Julia
(Barrymore)--a waitress at the catering hall. 
Unfortunately, Julia is engaged to a ratfink named Glenn Gulia (Mrs. Julia
Gulia..., yikes), and Robbie is an honorable man.  But this is a romantic
comedy and we all know how it ends. The difference is how they get there.
The nice thing about this movie is that the nostalgia is not completely
overpowering the storyline. The movie's basic dialogue is pretty funny on
its own, free of the 1980s trappings. That Carrie Fischer is one of the
uncredited writers might have a lot to do with this. But, all that
nostalgia is very amusing. References to Moonwalking, someone shooing
J.R., and "time to make the donuts," don't hurt the movie either. The only
thing that puzzles me is that it's a movie about the 1980s that sometimes
looks a lot like the 1970s, which were being made fun of quite heartily
by 1985.
The supporting characters are also amusing. Christine Taylor plays Julia's
cousin, the Madonna wannabe; Alexis Arquette is the Boy George wannabe; 
Ellen Albertini Dow is particularly hilarious as the octogenarian singing
student Robbie tutors for a fee of two meatballs a week. Jon Lovitz makes
a funny appearance as a rival wedding singer; Steve Buscemi has a nice
cameo bookending the movie. There's even a special guest star (Billy
Idol!). 
So, go and enjoy the Wedding Singer. You'll laugh, you'll almost cry,
you'll wonder what happened to Spandau Ballet, LPs, and men named Marilyn. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
George Wilcox
        I cringed when I first saw the trailer for "The Wedding
Singer." Uh-oh. Another Adam Sandler movie, I thought. I didn't
remember the statue of limitations running out after "Billy Madison"
and "Happy Gilmore."
        Enter Drew Barrymore and imagine my shock when Sandler capably
handles his first-time role as a romantic lead, Robbie, the ex-rocker
turned jilted guy in the title role. It took a while, but Sandler and
writer Tim Herlihy have discovered that Sandler doesn't have to scream
and be obnoxious all the time to elicit a few laughs.
        Barrymore saves the day proving she can play cheerleader cute
instead of bad girl hussy. Barrymore is just what Sandler's previous
films needed. An engaging co-star to keep us distracted from Sandler's
periodic, uncomfortable-to-watch rants.
        Set in 1985, "The Wedding Singer" is Sandler's best
film. That's not saying much, I know, but finally we have a period
comedy for Gen X even my Phillip Michael Thomas-loving friends can
enjoy. The film overdoes the 80s comedy a bit with jokes about
"Dynasty" and Rubik's Cube, but you've got to admire any movie that
includes scenes with such classics as Nina's "99 Luftballoons" and
Kajagoogoo's "Too Shy."
        Was I really listening to Frankie Goes to Hollywood my
freshman year in college? I must be dreaming.
        The constant retro 80s tunes is supposed to sell soundtracks,
but director Frank Coraci manages to keep his main aim in mind -- the
chemistry between Sandler and Barrymore. They are refreshing.
          Sandler's Robbie is a smooth-talking, hopeless romantic
looking forward to his wedding with punker Linda (Angela
Featherstone), his long-time girlfriend. He meets Julia (Barrymore) a
new waitress at the banquet hall, who is also engaged and looking
forward to her wedding to long-time boyfriend Glenn (Matthew Glave).
        Robbie's life turns to shambles when Linda is a no-show at
their wedding. Julia helps pick up the pieces.
        The film is sprinkled with cameos from Sandler's former
"Saturday Night Live" cohorts such as Jon Lovitz and Kevin
Nealon. Billy Idol steals one scene playing himself.
        "The Wedding Singer" is a wonderful reversal of fortune for
Barrymore, who has appeared in a string of bad movies as the dangerous
femme fatale, such as "Poison Ivy," "Guncrazy," "Bad Girls" and "Mad
Love." Barrymore's Julia is perky, smart and level-headed. For a
change, Barrymore plays the kind of girl you'd want to bring home to
mom as long as Barrymore manages to hide her six tattoos, none of
which are revealed in the film.
           Julia is the loveable babysitter type Barrymore would have
played in "Scream," had she lived longer than the film's first 10
minutes.
        Here's to more of Barrymore in the future, and I'm not talking
about flashing herself to David Letterman.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Christine Taylor, Allen Covert,
Matthew Glave, Angela Featherstone, Alexis Arquette
Director: Frank Coraci
Producers: Robert Simonds, Jack Giarraputo
Screenplay: Tim Herlihy
There is something wonderfully, pleasant about THE WEDDING SINGER,
rarely found in the overly sophisticated romantic comedies of today.
Surprisingly, the acting leads are also played by two stars who are not
well known for their romantic touch. Adam Sandler is probably best known
as the golf abusing, amateur in HAPPY GILMORE. By putting away his usual
hysterical antics and allowing normality to take over, he not only
surprises the audience, but probably himself by creating a character
(Robbie Hart) that the audience cares about. Drew Barrymore, also
surprises us with a glowing smile that lights up the screen. She
delivers the overly sweetened dialogue, with such heartfelt sincerity
one almost believes her when she claims to dislike alcohol.
Set in the mid-80's and surrounding weddings (a popular Hollywood
theme), two people fall in love in the most unusual of circumstance.
Both are getting married to the wrong person. Robbie Hart (Sandler) is
left standing alone at the altar, when his bride fails to show up for
the occasion. This leaves him intensely depressed and deluded about life
and love. How can he live down the humiliation and go on being a wedding
singer? Julia Sullivan (Barrymore) has been waiting for two years for a
proposal from a boyfriend. Now that she has been finally asked, is this
the right man for her?
There is nothing sophisticated about the script or plot. Basically when
Robbie and Julia meet, the audience is shown why they are right for each
other. In this instance, screen chemistry is vital and both Sandler and
Barrymore deliver. The ending is a tad cliché, but the journey to reach
there is pleasantly entertaining, with enough 80's love tunes along the
way, to make this an enjoyable nostalgic piece.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     What have we come to as a culture that we can look with nostalgia
at the events of a mere decade ago?  To most people nostalgia means
events that happened several decades ago.  Even films about the 70s
like THE ICE STORM and BOOGIE NIGHTS seem to be covering a time that
happened too recently to parody with bad clothes and ridiculous sets.
THE WEDDING SINGER attempts a nostalgic look at the classic period of
the mid-1980s, 1985 to be precise.
     Although most people will have trouble remembering how 1985 was
different from today, THE WEDDING SINGER clears it up.  In the previous
decade we wore incredibly bad clothes with heavy reliance on clashing
colors of lavender, pink, and lime green.  Our tastes in household
decorations looked like an updated version of the ticky-tacky 50s.  How
soon we forget how awful we were.
     THE WEDDING SINGER frustrates and delights with equal measures.
One minute it is an over-the-top comedy that is gratingly bad, and the
next it is a surprising sweet and touching little romance.  Director
Frank Coraci exerts little control over his picture, which drifts
aimlessly from bad to good and then back again.
     The story's male lead, Robby Hart, is a singer once on a track to
be a rock star but who has become a $60-a-gig singer at weddings
instead.  He loves his work and shows compassion for every member of
the wedding party, even the homely teenagers who can't get anyone to
dance with them.  Robby himself is engaged to be married, but his
fiancee (Angela Featherstone) leaves him standing at the altar when she
decides she loved the old would-be rock star and not the new wedding
singer.
     With long hair and a completely different look and approach, HAPPY
GILMORE's star, Adam Sandler, plays Robby.  His uneven performance can
be blamed partly on the script by Tim Herlihy, who also penned HAPPY
GILMORE, but it is mostly Sandler's own fault.  When he keeps himself
under control, he can be quite likable.
     The main reason, other than the energetic music, for the success
of the movie is the lovely performance by the female lead, Drew
Barrymore.  With a pixyish smile and an enchanting personality, she
plays a waitress name Julia.  Julia is engaged and her romance, like
Robby's, is equally ill-fated.  Her fiance (Matthew Glave) is a junk
bond king who drives a DeLorean and cheats on Julia day and night.
     In the predictable, but none the less charming, romance developing
between them, Robby and Julia don't realize that they are in love until
almost the end.  They introduce themselves as brother and sister to
explain why they look so much like a couple, but aren't.  It isn't
until Julia practices her wedding ceremony kiss with Robby -- she's not
sure the degree of tongue that is appropriate in a church setting --
that they realize that they have the hots for each other.
     When Robby isn't doing something stupid like the embarrassingly
bad scene in which he ruins someone else's wedding party just because
he is depressed, the chemistry between Julia and Robby is genuine and
captivating.  Drew Barrymore has innocence down pat.  When her fiance
mistreats her, you personally want to go into the screen and beat the
guy up.
     The supporting cast has lots of promise, partially realized.
Steve Buscemi plays a badly dressed drunk who humiliates his brother,
who is getting married.  Ellen Albertini Dow plays an octogenarian who
brags about the number of times she had sexual intercourse before
marrying her husband.  Allen Covert is Robby's limo driving buddy named
Sammy.  Sammy, whose role model in life is Fonzie, realizes the
limitations of his playboy lifestyle.  "No one wants to see a
50-year-old guy hitting on chicks," Sammy laments as he contemplates
his future.
     If -- and that's a big if -- you can ignore the stupefyingly bad
comedy, you will find that the movie has a big heart underneath.
Rewritten this could be a wonderful movie.  Even as it is, it still has
a lot to recommend it.
     THE WEDDING SINGER runs 1:38.  It is rated PG-13 for sex-related
material and language and would be fine for kids around ten and up.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        That's the question I asked myself when venturing nervously into
"The Wedding Singer," the latest film to star the Saturday Night Live
alumnus.
        Does he draw laughs from his sad, puppy dog expression and
don't-hate-me-for-being-a-simpleton observations?  Or do fans giggle when
he screams at the top of his lungs at people?  Or is it just the fact that
he sings songs with silly lyrics that bowl audiences over?
        Well, there's a little bit of all of that in "The Wedding Singer"
and while I exited the theater still not one hundred percent sure of Mr.
Sandler's thing, I did have a surprisingly good time.
        That's because, in a nutshell, "The Wedding Singer" is one of the
sweetest movies you're ever likely to come across.  That's right.  Sweet.
The humor in the film runs the gamut from dumb to mildly amusing to
laugh-out-loud hysterical but the tone?  Well, it's just lovely.  I have to
admit I was half-expecting farting armpit humor, gratuitous nudity,
superfluous, cloying subplots, and some nasty, unnecessary violence.
Instead?  Well, I've said it before.  Sweet.
        The year is 1985 and Sandler plays Robbie Hart, the eponymous
wedding singer, a job aspiring rock stars often settle for.  When Robbie's
fiancée dumps him at his own altar, Robbie gets depressed and turns to a
plucky waitress called Julia (Drew Barrymore) who has some problems of her
own (she's marrying a hunky junk bonds dealer who, unbeknownst to her,
isn't that big on monogamy).  It isn't giving anything away to say that
Robbie and Julia fall in love.  Aww...
        Sandler and Barrymore are a good match and they're assisted by some
terrific cameo appearances, including Steve Buscemi and Jon Lovitz, whose
individual scenes are perhaps the funniest in the film.
        Writer Tim Herlihy (with uncredited assistance from Carrie Fisher)
keeps the story bubbling along to its predictable conclusion.  It doesn't
all work but it's handled with such light-heartedness that Robbie and Julia
coming together generates more smiles than groans.  Herlihy and director
Frank Coraci have done a great job of recreating the sights, sounds, and
affectations of the 1980s.  The soundtrack--an ever-present force in the
film--is packed with wall-to-wall hits of the period, new wave upon new
wave of songs from Billy Idol's "White Wedding" to The Smiths' "How Soon Is
Now?" to Culture Club's "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me?"
        The mix of music and fashion would make "The Wedding Singer" a
great double feature with "Boogie Nights."
        If you grew up listening to The Cure and A Flock of Seagulls and
The Psychedelic Furs, then "The Wedding Singer" is bound to put a nostalgic
hop in your stride.  If you're a fan of the lovable, laughable Adam
Sandler, well...  Let's just say that "The Wedding Singer" might well be
the only film in recent memory to make *me* want to rent "Happy Gilmore."

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Wedding Singer (1998)
Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Allen Covert, Angela Featherstone, Matthew 
Glave, Christine Taylor, Steve Buscemi, Ellen Albertini Dow, Billy Idol. 
Directed by Frank Coraci.
PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
It would be easy to dismiss "The Wedding Singer." The film is admittedly 
fluff; just another throwaway comedy from a Saturday Night Live alumnus. 
The characters are mostly two-dimensional and the jokes are obvious and 
often corny. But the central romantic storyline is so sweet and good 
natured that it's fairly easy to overlook the film's many shortcomings. 
Ultimately, "The Wedding Singer" succeeds as light entertainment, a 
surprising triumph of charm over shtick.
Set in 1985, the story focuses on Robby Hart (Adam Sandler,) a former 
rock star wannabe who earns his living singing at weddings. Robby is very 
good at his job, as evidenced in the opening scene, when a drunken best 
man (Steve Buscemi) turns a toast into a hateful tirade and Robby's adept 
damage control defuses the volatile situation. An incurable romantic, 
Robby's world comes crashing down around him when his childhood 
sweetheart (Angela Featherstone) leaves him standing at the altar. He 
collapses into a bundle of pain and self-pity, only to be drawn out by 
Julia (Drew Barrymore,) an innocent young co-worker engaged to a 
philandering stud (Matthew Glave.) Will Robby and Julia escape their 
wretched fates and find true love together? You do the math.
>From a script by Judd Apatow, Carrie Fisher and Tim Herlihy, "The Wedding 
Singer" operates on two very elementary levels. There's the love story, 
of course, which is straightforward and sentimental without getting too 
sticky. The rest of the film is broad comedy, playing off the pop culture 
and manners of the mid-80s. Predictably, the film makes great sport of 
the entertainment and fashions of the period. Julia's fiancee wears the 
latest "Miami Vice" pastel outfits, complete with a perpetual three-day 
growth of beard. Other supporting characters ape the fashion stylings of 
Boy George, Madonna and Michael Jackson, while jokes about Rubik's Cubes, 
"Dallas,"  A Flock Of Seagulls and Van Halen are self-consciously 
inserted. The gags about the 80s are sometimes funny, despite being 
overly obvious and smug. In a few years, we'll probably be subjected to 
comedies looking back on those wacky days in the 90s, featuring tattooed, 
multi-pierced characters in droopy trousers prattling on about Laser Tag, 
"South Park," and the Spice Girls. The film's most tired joke involves an 
elderly person acting "hip," in this case an old lady "bustin' a move" to 
the Sugarhill Gang's "Rapper's Delight." Back in 1972, Ruth Gordon 
pioneered the "isn't it hilarious when octogenarians use trendy slang and 
swear" genre of comedy in "Harold and Maude." It was funny then, but only 
for about half of the film. 26 years later, the joke is annoying beyond 
belief. 
So why is "The Wedding Singer" getting a marginal recommendation? Because 
of Drew Barrymore and Adam Sandler. Barrymore has grown from "that cute 
little girl in 'E.T.'" into a beautiful, fresh-faced young woman. A few 
years ago, Barrymore appeared on David Letterman's show the night he was 
celebrating his birthday. As her gift, she danced on his desk, at one 
point turning her back on the audience and briefly flashing her breasts 
at Dave. On numerous occasions, Letterman has talked about his fond 
memories of the incident, always describing Barrymore as "charming" and 
"sweet." It's easy to understand why he'd feel that way. Barrymore 
possesses such an air of innocence that actions that might seem vulgar if 
done be others come off as playful and disarming. As Julia, she is a 
delight, radiating a fresh-scrubbed goodness and generating real 
chemistry with Sandler. 
For his part, Sandler does his best film work to date, playing an actual 
person for the first time. Sandler, who can somehow look handsome and 
gooney simultaneously, is an intriguing performer, with a career built on 
playing a variety of whining half-wits. He's the kind of comic who is 
often funny, but just as often so irritating that you'd like to take a 
swing at him. In "The Wedding Singer," Sandler reigns in his more 
annoying character traits for the most part, playing a veritable Boy 
Scout lost in the self-centered, hedonistic 80s. If he continues in this 
vein and avoids reverting to his idiot persona, he may actually be able 
to play a full-fledged adult someday.
In addition to Sandler and Barrymore, "The Wedding Singer" boasts a 
terrific soundtrack, packed with great songs from the 80s. Pretend-punk 
Billy Idol even makes a cameo appearance, playing himself in the film's 
cheesy, but satisfying climax.
Thanks to Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore, "The Wedding Singer" is a 
modest success, offering laughs and a tender romance to boot. The film is 
just a trifle, but in the mid-winter cinematic wasteland, you have to 
grade on a curve.

Author
Homer Yen
Meet Robbie Hart (Adam Sandler), a cloyingly good-natured man.  He is
the typical small-town boy with small dreams.  He wants to settle down
in his hometown and marry his high school sweetheart.  Once a lead
singer for his garage rock band, he now works as a wedding singer.  He
possesses charm and knows how to put a positive spin on any festive
occasion...that is until he is left standing alone at the altar.
He is now miserable and vents his frustration at wedding guests by
lamenting about life and singing songs like "Love Stinks".  But he
does find comfort with Julia (Drew Barrymore), a waitress that works
at the reception hall where he sings.  Julia's life, however, is
equally miserable.  Engaged to a wealthy but low-life jerk that seems
more interested in himself, she questions whether he's the 'one'.
Eventually, their misery brings them together and then...well, you
know.
But their path to happiness (and ours) is not without a few obstacles.
Robbie's financee wants another chance.  Julia's mother doesn't want
her to marry a wedding singer.  Julia's sister becomes attracted to
him.  Conversations are misconstrued.  And the scriptwriter goes to
great pains to keep them apart.  We know that they'll get together
long before they finally realize that they're even attracted to one
another.  In fact, it's my guess that the movie bigwigs knew that
there wasn't much meat in this movie.  So, to compensate, they added
another comical element, where the story is set in the '80s and ample
opportunities are created to poke fun at this era.  
For example, one of Robbie's band members dresses like Boy George; one
of Robbie's friends wears the trademark red, leather jacket and white
glove like Michael Jackson.  And there are allusions to the future
which elicited a few chuckles.  At one point, a women looks at Robbie
and Julia and says, "I can just tell when people will be together
forever...just like Donald and Ivana; Burt and Loni."  There's even a
cameo by Billy Idol.
But whether you like this movie or not will depend on two things.  The
first is whether you like Adam Sandler.  As a comedian and jokester,
he's fun to watch.  But he doesn't show the heft here to be a leading
man.  Drew Barrymore is levels above him.  She is a delight to watch,
but you begin to wonder what she's doing with a wedding singer...or what
she's even doing in this movie.  The second is whether you're a child of
the 80s.  If you are, then you can appreciate some of the cultural humor
and the all-80s soundtrack.  If you aren't, then this won't be a very
pleasant experience.  I, however, am a child of the 80s and thoroughly
enjoyed Barrymore's performance.  "The Wedding Singer" was flat some of
the times, but at other times, managed to hit the right notes.

Author
Chad Polenz
1998, PG-13, 96 minutes [1 hour, 36 minutes]
starring: Adam Sandler (Robbie Hart), Drew Barrymore (Julia), Christine Taylor
(Holly), Allen Covert (Sammy); written by Tim Herlihy; produced by Jack
Giarraputo, Robert Simonds; directed by Frank Coraci.
Seen March 7, 1998 at 10 p.m. at the Crossgates Mall Cinema 18 (Guilderland,
NY), theater #14, with my brother John using Hoyt's Movie Cash. [Theater
rating: ***1/2: excellent picture and sound, but seats could have been better]
        After a series of average mainstream comedies, the creative team of star Adam
Sandler, writer Tim Herlihy, and producer Robert Simonds may have gotten the
message that doing the same thing over and over again doesn't equal success.
With "The Wedding Singer" they seem to be taking a chance by slightly straying
from their usual schtick and venturing into the shaky waters of the romantic
comedy, and a "nostalgic" one at that.
        The year is 1985 and we meet our main character, Robbie Hart (Sandler), a
wedding singer with long curly hair who we later learn lives in the basement
of his sister's house and is engaged to his high school sweetheart. Other
characters are thrown into the mix such as: his co-worker and best friend
Sammy (Covert) who is a real ladies' man; Julia (Barrymore), a cute young
woman who has just started working with Robbie; and Holly (Taylor), Julia's
sister, co-worker, and shoulder to cry on. All of these characters have been
clearly set into the proper places in order to further the story and provide
for all the necessary comedic and thematic elements. But what's surprising is
how they all manage to work, probably due to the film's over-all sense of
grace under pressure.
        Setting up a story to a film such as this isn't too difficult of a task -
it's really just a matter of plugging in the characters and plot devices in
the proper places. It's not surprising that Robbie will be left at the altar
and that he will fall for Julia, who's engaged to a jerk she barely loves, and
this is where the conflict will occur. 
        If Sandler and company have truly learned from their mistakes, it shows right
away. Herlihy's dialogue is witty for such a mainstream film, and the story is
paced well to actually shape the characters, making them into real people and
not just pawns in a movie. We actually feel some kind of emotional connection
with Robbie, so that when he's crushed we can understand, and when he begins
to fall for Julia it's also sympathetic. This might also be due to the fact
that Sandler has matured a bit, as he's not playing a complete idiot who
constantly shouts and throws tantrums (a la "Bulletproof," "Happy Gilmore"). 
        Much of the story involves interaction between Robbie and Julia, and is
handled quite well. Where other films might have gone the sitcom route with
the characters madly falling for each other at first sight, or some other kind
of wacky plot, the script here is surprising in the way it handles the
unspoken attraction by actually having the characters restrain themselves.
Sandler and Barrymore may not have perfect chemistry, but they're placed in a
story good enough to give them some charm.
        The last act executes the story as one would expect, with a chase-after-the-
girl, showdown-with-the-boyfriend, and gratuitous celebrity cameo. But what's
surprising here is the chase evokes suspense, the showdown-with-the-boyfriend
is handled well, and the gratuitous celebrity cameo doesn't seem that
gratuitous.
        Criticizing mainstream films for being too cliche, repetitive, generic, etc.,
is starting to become a task just as repetitive as the films themselves. At
this point it's a given that most films will make the same mistake others
have, but if and when  filmmakers have learned from their mistakes, well,
that's something worth applauding and "The Wedding Singer" is a good example
of this. It's basically another commercial romantic comedy, but the motions it
goes through are unique enough to merit a recommendation. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Frank Coraci
Cast: Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Christine Taylor, Matthew Glave,
Allen Covert, Angela Featherstone, Steve Buscemi
Rated PG-13: Language, adult themes
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    I think that any competent member of the human race who's ever seen
a movie--any movie--could probably predict just about every turn in The
Wedding Singer. Even though I try very hard to not predict films as I'm
watching them (especially not romantic comedies), the plot of this
particular film just advanced before me seconds, and sometimes minutes,
before I actually saw it happen on screen. But I don't care. Not even a
little. My reasons for this are simple: 1) Adam Sandler is great. 2)
Drew Barrymore is great. 3) The movie is so funny. There are parts that
left me gasping for air because I was laughing so hard. I haven't
laughed this hard in a movie since Austin Powers.
    Sandler plays Robby Hart, a wedding singer who once had dreams of
being in a rock band and writing his own music. In the opening scenes,
he seems like a happy-go-lucky wedding singer, at least partially
enjoying his profession and doing a rather good job of talking down a
really drunk individual (Steve Buscemi) who decides that his brother's
wedding is a good place to tell the whole world that his life, up to
that point, was utter pointlessness.
    A week later, at his own wedding, he is left standing at the altar
by his ex-fiancée, Linda (Angela Featherstone). With his life in
complete disarray, he meets Julia (Barrymore), a waitress. She is
engaged to Glenn (Matthew Glave), and is to marry him in about three
months. Julia and Robby become good friends when she enlists him to help
with the wedding plans. Soon (and predictably) it becomes pretty clear
that Glenn is a jerk, and that Robby and Julia really love each other.
    Oh sure, it's trite. And if anyone making this film expected us to,
like, feel suspense or something while watching The Wedding Singer, then
they truly underestimated their audience. What makes the story bearable,
aside from the terrific costumes and 80s music, are the performances.
Barrymore is simply adorable here (I've never seen her look so close to
the way she did in ET). Not only is she pleasant to look at, but her
acting job here really is a good one--and it doesn't hurt that the
character is likable and adequately well-written. And the Jerk, played
in full-force by Graves, is just as despicable as any villain in any
romantic comedy I've ever     seen.
    Naturally, the true star here is Sandler. I think the guy is
flat-out hilarious. He can say something that just isn't funny, and his
delivery makes me laugh. His comedic performance here equals that of
Happy Gilmore, but in this film he goes much further and proves to me
that he can, indeed, hold his own as a leading man in a romantic comedy.
Whereas his roles in his previous films kind of had Sandler playing
Sandler, The Wedding Singer gives him a character that, for the first
time, he actually has to fit into. As far as I'm concerned he succeeded,
and this film is testimony that he does, in fact, have some range in his
talents.
    And the movie is just so funny. Perhaps the best moment is when he
sings a song for Julia that he claims is a little uneven because he
began writing it while in a good mood and finished it after his fiancée
abandoned him. This is the part that literally had me groping for a
breath of air. And while the film, like all romantic comedies, takes a
hiatus from laughs towards the end because the plot has to finish up,
there are more than enough truly hilarious moments in the first hour
that make up for any slumps in progress during the second half.
    My formal complaints for The Wedding Singer aren't very important.
The film is predicable, but who cares? The characters are extremely
likable, the movie is ridiculously funny, and the experience is simply
enjoyable. In addition to this, I can't imagine anyone seeing the
preview and not wanting to see the film. In that order, I conclude that
it is pointless for me to even have written this review. I just want
everyone to know that I laughed. A lot.

Author
Michael Redman
What were they thinking? Nostalgia for the seventies is bad enough, but do we
really need an eighties film?
Robbie Hart (Adam Sandler) used to want to be a rock and roll star, but in
1985 he's singing at weddings and having a good time. A romantic at heart, he
loves weddings and is just about to get married to his high-school sweetie.
When she leaves him waiting at the altar, his tune changes to "Love Stinks".
He meets waitress Julia (Drew Barrymore) who is engaged to a junk-bonds
salesman and you know that they are going to get together. In fact you know
everything that is going to happen during this movie.
Sandler is somewhat adequate in his leading man role, but there is no spark.
Barrymore doesn't seem to be able to convey anything other than a pretty face
with nothing behind it: beauty but no attitude. Both characters are just
there. Bit parts by Steve Buscemi and Jon Lovitz steal the show.
The eighties are shoved in our face. References to DeLoreans, Madonna,
"Dallas", Ivana and Donald, Burt and Loni and "Miami Vice" get old fast. The
filmmakers must have realized that there wasn't much entertainment to the
story and thought they could dazzle the audience with humorous period
allusions. They're not funny and it doesn't work.
With change on all fronts accelerating more and more, nostalgia appears to
have a great appeal, but don't you think we could have more than 14 years
before we yearn for the past. Maybe we can look forward to a film next year
waxing nostalgically about El Nino.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and he knows that
nostalgia is not what it used to be.)
[This appeared in the 3/5/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Jamie Peck
New Line / 1:35 / 1998 / PG-13 (sex humor, language, Adam Sandler)
Cast: Adam Sandler; Drew Barrymore; Christine Taylor; Allen Covert; Angela 
Featherstone; Matthew Glave; Alexis Arquette; Frank Sivero; Christina Pickles 
Director: Frank Coraci 
Screenplay: Tim Herlihy 
After the not-so-fashionable '70s were affectionately captured on screen with 
"Boogie Nights" and "The Ice Storm," it was inevitable that someone would 
splash theaters with a loving tribute to the Me Decade. It's finally here -- 
only a few months after "Boogie" and "Ice" -- in the form of the 1985-set "The 
Wedding Singer," part pop culture nostalgia flick and part starring-vehicle 
for Adam Sandler, one of the more successful "Saturday Night Live" cast 
members to hit movie pay-dirt. As an Aqua Net-heavy flashback, "The Wedding 
Singer" is quite amusing, especially its Culture Club-laced soundtrack. But as 
a romantic comedy, what it really wants to be, the movie is pretty inept. 
Sandler plays Robbie Hart, the wedding singer of the title. Robbie's got quite 
a charismatic knack for turning the worst occasions -- like the scathing toast 
of a liquored-up groom's brother (Steve Buscemi, in a great bit of novelty 
casting) in the film's opening segment -- into a good time for all. But his 
personal life crashes when he's left at the altar by his fiancee (Angela 
Featherstone), and the humiliation and melancholia turn him into every 
reception-goer's worst nightmare. The sole bright spot in his world appears to 
be pretty, perky waitress Julia (Drew Barrymore), but she's on her way to 
weding a cheating Don Johnson-wannabe named Glenn (Matthew Glave). Connect the 
dots to see what happens. 
Some of what's wrong with "The Wedding Singer" can be summed up in two words: 
Adam Sandler. Sandler, whose 1994 "comedy" "Billy Madison" is still one of the 
decade's worst, just doesn't feel at home as the male lead in this type of 
film. In the recent "Happy Gilmore" (what, they didn't want to call this movie 
Robbie Hart?), he scored by playing a character with a raucous edge. It's 
fitting, then, that "The Wedding Singer" comes alive when it lets Sandler be 
his bawdy self, but when he waxes sentimental with Barrymore (which is most of 
the time), he oozes false earnestness -- it's as though he's secretly smirking 
at the material. Barrymore, though, is impossible to resist. She and Sandler 
do exhibit chemistry, and it's just enough to make you wish that he didn't 
seem so out of his element. 
What's even worse is how calculated the movie is at getting Robbie and Julia 
together. Glenn is shown to be such an arrogant, pompous jerk that it's never 
clear what exactly drew Julia to him in the first place. In one scene, Glenn 
spills the beans to Robbie about his cavorting ways and how he'll continue 
them into his marriage. That's not the best idea, considering how Glenn later 
confesses that he was aware Robbie had his eye on Julia the whole time. What 
did he hope to accomplish there? Perhaps "The Wedding Singer" would have been 
more effective in its romantic storyline had it taken a cue from "My Best 
Friend's Wedding," a film where Julia Roberts wanted to break up her pal's 
impending nuptials, but found it increasingly hard because her competition was 
a really sweet person, deserving of his love in every way possible. No such 
luck here. 
Yet while "The Wedding Singer" is wobbly and manipulative, it is consistently 
watchable. A handful of worthwhile elements standout among the haze, most 
notably Jon Lovitz's cameo as a flailing, vulgar stage performer ("Thank you 
... and that ain't no sock in my crotch!") and the running plethora of '80s 
memorabilia (a Rubick's Cube, a DeLorean and some pretty big hair make 
appearances). There's also Alexis Arquette's underused but dazzling supporting 
work as a member of Robbie's entourage who fancies himself a Boy George clone 
-- "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me?" is the only song he knows, and lemme tell 
you, it doesn't go over very well at Bar Mitzvahs. For a truly good 
retro-comedy, rent "Romy and Michele's High School Reunion," because, while 
survivable and even funny in patches, this "Wedding" is something old and not 
much new. 
Š 1998 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Christine Taylor, Matthew Glave
Ingredients: 1980s setting, wedding musician, waitress, romance
Synopsis:
The story takes place in the 1980s but it could just as easily be any
typical Hollywood romantic comedy where boy meets girl, boy loses girl,
and they regain each other by the end. Robbie (Adam Sandler) is a down
and out musician who makes his living singing at weddings. After getting
left at the altar at his own wedding, Robbie's luck goes downhill until
he falls in love with his friend, a waitress named Julia (Drew
Barrymore). The two were made for each other. The trouble is, fair Julia
is engaged to unfaithful rich jerk Glen. At the same time, Robbie's
scummy old fiancee wants to get back together with him. Can Robbie and
Julia get past all the misunderstandings and find true love with each
other before Julia takes that plane to Vegas to marry Glen? 
Opinion: 
THE WEDDING SINGER is okay for a romantic comedy, with some dumb jokes
and some good ones, lots of chuckling at the 1980s decade, a good 'best
of the 80s' soundtrack, and a cameo by 80s rocker Billy Idol. Although
it is silly at times, and neither deep nor meaningful THE WEDDING SINGER
is big-hearted happy movie that any sucker for romance would love to
watch.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
I can already feel the hate letters pouring in on this one, folks. I loved THE
WEDDING SINGER. But it gets worse. If I so much as mention TITANIC in the same
sentence . . . hell, same paragraph as THE WEDDING SINGER, I'm bound to be
lynched. Well lynch me then, because I thought Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore
had the most convincing chemistry in recent memory, with TITANIC as the only
exception.
Right away, you're ready to discount my review, aren't you? You're thinking
that I can't possibly know what I'm talking about. After all, this is Adam
Sandler right??? Well, there's more . . . I actually got choked up, and more
than once. Yes, the man who brought us BILLY MADISON and HAPPY GILMORE was
able to bring sincere tears to my eyes. But before you shrug me off as an
imbecile, I urge you to see the movie and see for yourself.
THE WEDDING SINGER is the story of Robby Hart (Sandler), a 1985 rock star
wannabe whose soul achievement in life has been performing cover tunes at
wedding receptions for the past five years or so. But when his own wedding
results in a no-show for the bride (Angela Featherstone as Linda), Robby
begins to re-examine his life, and wonder why true love doesn't exist for
people like him.
In the process of performing at these receptions, Robby meets a waitress named
Julia, played with wholesome sweetness by Drew Barrymore, whose reputation is
anything but this character. Julia too is engaged, and when Robby finds
himself without a wife, his free time allows him to help her plan her own
wedding, seeing as how her fiance, the "Miami Vice" loving Glenn (Matthew
Glave), doesn't seem all that interested. As the time goes by, we learn the
reason Glenn is do dispassionate about the wedding - he's merely marrying
Julia to prevent a breakup, something he wants to avoid even if he does sleep
around with tons of other women.
It's obvious that Robby is going to fall for Julia and feel a strong need to
rescue her, but what is a lighthearted romantic comedy for? This isn't
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, but I'd actually compare it to that before I'd compare
it to HAPPY GILMORE. While THE WEDDING SINGER maintains some of that post-SNL
cornball humor, its sincerity and charm carry it a very, very long way.
Sandler is great in his role, and yes, if you allow it, you can take him
seriously. Barrymore seems perfect along side him, and although the two more
likely represent Gen-X moronism and party-girl ditzism (respectively), the two
go together like bread and butter as a mid-eighties couple. One scene in
particular, where Julia ponders the future in a mirror, is so well done, I was
on the verge of tears.
Unfortunately, Sandler is going to make a lot of people shrug this one off as
a no-brainer, but it's got so much surprise substance packed inside that I'm
encouraging everyone to go see it. In fact, the entire theater applauded when
the film ended, and laughs were so consistent, some jokes were probably missed
due to the uproar. The 1985 setting was milked for everything it was worth,
and for those of us that are old enough to remember it, it was a bodacious
trip back (and done very well).
Sandler shows a new side to himself while maintaining all his original charm
(or is it anti-charm?). While THE WEDDING SINGER only deserves three stars due
to artistic merit, grading it on pure enjoyability would give this one four
stars. It's hilarious, and it's touching. It's got that great cheezy humor,
but it also takes Sandler to a higher level than anyone expected. This is one
to see again and again. Is it possible THE WEDDING SINGER could be one of the
sweetest romantic comedies of 1998? My "Magic 8-ball" predicts it is certain.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Following the success of popular teen flicks Billy Maddison and Happy Gilmore,
Adam Sandler now combines his singing and comical talents alongside Drew
Barrymore in The Wedding Singer.
Whatever standards Sandler ever earned in the past are more than met: the loud
voice that shouts nothing in particular, the face that looks like a school kid
in mischief, and the overall manner that seems like a blend of Eddie Murphy and
Mike Myers.  But hes good  very good  with his new role as a hip wedding
singer in the 1980s.
Sandler plays Robbie Hart, the wedding singer, who loves his job and has a
natural gift for it.  Also a love of his, is seeing newly wedded couples
together, strengthening their relationships and celebrating in the festivities
that follow.  That is, until his own wedding arrives.  When Robbie is standing
at the altar reading to get married, he is stood up by his finance Linda (Angela
Featherstone).  Now disheartened and demoralized with the marriage scene, he
quits his much-loved job after a rendition of Love Stinks.  Meanwhile, he gets
to know a new waitress named Julia (Barrymore) and begins to fall in love all
over again.  The only problem is, she is set to be married to a womanizing
sleaze bag.
Anyone who is capable of reading this review will be able to figure out what
eventually happens to these two forbidden lovers.  Like most romantic comedies,
the ending is cheerful and predictable  but strangely satisfying.
By far the most enjoying parts of The Wedding Singer are its moments of song
and comedy  it is through these fabulously entertaining scenes that we truly
feel like we have been taken back a decade.  What fills the gaps in between
these moments, however, fail to give any creativity to a film that at first
seemed to be incredibly original.  Luckily, watching Adam Sandler and Drew
Barrymore on the screen together is just enough to keep the film attractive and
easygoing.  But, surprisingly, most of the films laughs come from its
supporting cast  namely Steve Buscemi as an idiotic best man and an old
alcoholic played by Carmen Filpi.
Mona Mays (Clueless, Romy and Micheles High School Reunion) costume design is
eerily eighties, and brings back awkward feelings of fashions we thought wed
seen the last of.  And not only that, but the movie has also brought back an
assortment of so-so 80s music in an attempt to make the mood feel ever more out
dated.  Its a pity that they had a whole decade to select music from but
somehow managed to stuff it upthe recent Jackie Brown proved to have much
greater taste not only in the choice of music but also the influence it had on
the film.
OK, the films sets and costumes do look superb  but if my mother taught be
correctly  its whats inside that counts. In the case if The Wedding Singer,
listening to Adam Sandler raise his voice whenever he desperately wants us to
laugh can only be funny for the first few hundred times.  You get the feeling
that Sandlers humor has been somewhat refined than what we have been exposed to
in some of his previous films; and although the comedy occasionally comes off as
a trifle lame, its generally clean cut and well executed.
The Wedding Singer is no Jerry Maguire or My Best Friends Wedding  but could
you imagine Tom Cruise in a bright blue suit, singing and entertaining in Hebrew
at a Bar Mitzvah?  I think not.


Author
Matt Williams
Adam Sandler turns up the charm in his latest romantic comedy, The
Wedding Singer.  Unfortunately, that also has the effect of softening
his edge.  He's nowhere near his peak of Happy Gilmore, not that it was
much of one.  He's certainly not helped here by a rather frail plot.
The year is 1985, letting the whole film obsess with 80s nostalgia. Adam
Sandler is nice guy Robbie, the titular wedding singer, who entertains
at the local reception hall by belting out his interpretations of
classic 80s hits.
Robbie's life is thrown into turmoil when his fiancee, Linda (Angela
Featherstone), leaves him at the altar.  However, things are looking up
when he meets Julia (Drew Barrymore), a waitress at the hall.  She's the
perfect woman, but for one small flaw:  she's engaged to be married to a
slick junk bond king, Glenn (Matthew Glave).
So, most of the film deals with the slow realization by Robbie that he
and Julia are in love, and his attempts to stop the wedding. As far as
plots go, it's a pretty thin and tired one.
To fill the gaps, The Wedding Singer delivers heaping spoonfuls of 1980s
nostalgia.  From Boy George to Michael Jackson, from Miami Vice to
Dallas, from the first CDs to the last Rubik's Cubes, this film revels
in all the minutiae.  And then there's the music... Learning a lesson
from the successful soundtracks to Grosse Pointe Blank, and Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion, this film packs more 80s songs in the
film than the running time will allow.  As a result, most songs get
maybe a lyric or a half, but you can almost see the bright gleam in the
record executives' eyes: The Wedding Singer Vols. 2, 3, and 4!
While the nonstop 80s riffs get incredibly tiring, at least they
distract you from the plot.  At least last year's My Best Friend's
Wedding stirred up the standard "keep your true love from marrying
someone else" plot by making the rival a nice person.  Here, Glenn is
such a lowly rat of a man that you never see what Julia saw in him.
Barrymore, on the other hand, is simply charming as Julia.  Which leaves
us with Adam Sandler.  He's at his best in the film when his nice guy
persona fades a little (such as when he has a breakdown on stage during
a wedding reception).  When he's in full nice-guy mode, he's more
pathetic than endearing.
The film boasts several cameos (most notably by Steve Buscemi and Jon
Lovitz). But none of them work well at all.  Buscemi's role as a drunken
best man simply fails to be humorous.  Lovitz, on the other hand, as a
rival wedding singer, makes you long for his good old days on Saturday
Night Live, where he was actually funny. The only cameo which has some
appeal is a guest appearance by a classic 80s rocker during the film's
finale (surprisingly, one of the only plot-related scenes which actually
works.)
Adam Sandler still has some work to do before he can become a dependable
leading man. While he attempts to change his image in The Wedding
Singer, the end result is no net gain.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Adam Sandler, Drew Barrymore, Christine Taylor, Allen Covert, 
      Matthew Glave, Angela Featherstone, Alexis Arquette
Director: Frank Coraci
Producers: Robert Simonds, Jack Giarraputo 
Screenplay: Tim Herlihy
Cinematography: Tim Suhrstedt
Music: Teddy Castellucci
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     Watching THE WEDDING SINGER is like being force-fed an overdose of 
'80s culture and memorabilia coated with syrup.  I realize that romantic 
comedies, by their nature, are supposed to be feel-good experiences, but 
THE WEDDING SINGER overdoes it in the schmaltz department.  This movie 
is sickeningly sweet, and only a die-hard romantic or an avowed Adam 
Sandler fan will be able to sit through the ninety-five minute feature 
without going into sugar shock.
     It wouldn't be so bad if the film was (a) funny, (b) well-written, 
(c) offbeat, or (d) heartfelt.  THE WEDDING SINGER is none of these 
things; what's more, there are precious few moments of originality to 
ease the progression from 1-to-2-to-3 in the scripted-by-numbers 
screenplay.  The only positive adjective I can come up with to describe 
the movie is "cute".  As in terminally cute.  This movie desperately 
wants to be liked. The problem is, there's not much here to like -- at 
least nothing that's new or interesting.  
     In general, I enjoy romantic comedies -- sometimes even those that 
feature recycled storylines.  But THE WEDDING SINGER suffers from two 
fatal flaws.  In the first place, it demands the kind of extreme 
suspension of disbelief that should never be required from this sort of 
movie.  The plot is so outlandish and difficult-to-swallow that it's 
tough to endure all of the contrived obstacles that stand in the way of 
true love.  Secondly, there's no palpable chemistry between the two 
leads.  Yes, Adam Sandler is surprisingly effective as a likable 
romantic lead (instead of the wisecracking personae we're used to), and, 
yes, Drew Barrymore does a good job as the pretty girl-next-door.  But 
there's no connection between their characters.  Romantic tension, the 
most critical aspect of any love story, is absent.
     Then there's the setting.  Instead of just establishing that THE 
WEDDING SINGER takes place in 1985, the film makers are determined to 
cram the movie full of every '80s reference they can think of.  It 
becomes oppressive.  We get MIAMI VICE, MAGNUM P.I., DYNASTY, DALLAS, 
junk bonds, Donald & Ivana, the Rubick's Cube, mid-'80s fashion, and 
enough pop music to cause a flashback.  It wouldn't be quite so 
irritating if there were fewer mistakes and anachronisms.  CD players, 
like VCRs, were mainstream by 1985, but one reasonably hip character 
doesn't know what a CD is.  There's a reference to J.R. being shot on 
DALLAS, but that happened back at the turn of the decade.  Also, by 
1985, the Rubick's cube was passé.  The bombardment of '80s songs in THE 
WEDDING SINGER had me thinking that maybe '70s tunes weren't that bad, 
after all.  
     THE WEDDING SINGER's main characters (and eventually fated-to-be-
together soul mates) are Robby (Sandler) and Julia (Barrymore).  He's a 
wedding singer who loves his job crooning to newly-married couples 
because of his romantic nature.  She's a waitress who meets him when 
they work a wedding together.  Since both are otherwise engaged 
(literally), they form a platonic friendship.  Then the complications 
start.  Robby's fiancee, Linda (Angela Featherstone), leaves him at the 
altar, sending him into a tailspin.  Meanwhile, Julia's beau, Glenn 
(Matthew Glave), finally sets the date.  Julia goes to Robby for help in 
planning her wedding, figuring that his experience will prove invaluable 
(this strikes me as an incredibly insensitive thing to do).  As the 
weeks pass, the attraction between them grows.  Everyone, including 
Julia's sister (Christine Taylor, Marcia of THE BRADY BUNCH movies) and 
Robby's best friend (Allen Covert), notices it -- everyone, that is, 
except Robby and Julia.  So, do they recognize the mutual attraction 
before Julia says "I do" to her cad of a fiancee?  Does Robby's 
girlfriend, who suddenly wants him back, spoil things?  It doesn't take 
a crystal ball to answer those questions.
     Perhaps the most surprising element of THE WEDDING SINGER is how 
tame Sandler is.  With the exception of a few momentary lapses, there's 
nothing to indicate that this is the same seemingly-hostile comic who 
made his mark in films like BILLY MADISON and HAPPY GILMORE.  Too bad he 
hasn't chosen a better vehicle for displaying his range.  Meanwhile, if 
you're in the mood for a movie with the word "wedding" in the title, 
stop by the video store and check out THE WEDDING BANQUET, MURIEL'S 
WEDDING, or MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING.  All three are much better than 
this limp Valentine's Day farce.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
