Title
Review for Village of the Damned (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 4/28/95 
Running Length: 1:37 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity) 
Starring: Christopher Reeve, Kirstie Alley, Linda Kozlowski, 
          Mark Hamill, Michael Pare, Lindsey Haun 
Director: John Carpenter 
Producers: Michael Preger and Sandy King 
Screenplay: David Himmelstein based on THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS by 
            John Wyndham and the 1960 screenplay by Stirling Silliphant, 
            Wolf Rilla, and George Barclay 
Cinematography: Gary B. Kibbe 
Music: John Carpenter and Dave Davies 
Released by Universal Pictures 
     Despite being an inferior remake, VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED is the most 
frightening motion picture that John Carpenter has brought to the screen 
in at least a decade.  Following this year's disappointing IN THE MOUTH 
OF MADNESS, Carpenter has turned to a creepy 1960 English film for 
inspiration.  Adding more than a dose of modernization, a new setting 
(the British village has become an American town), and a dash of his 
trademark shock tactics, the director has turned out an enjoyable, if 
obviously-flawed, amalgamation of horror and science fiction. 
     VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED opens in the rural community of Midwich, 
population 2000.  After giving perfunctory introductions to the central 
characters, Carpenter starts the action in a disconcerting fashion.  
With a noise that sets theater speakers throbbing, a "whispering cloud" 
moves across the sky, knocking everyone in Midwich unconscious.  During 
this event, at least two men are killed and ten women are mysteriously 
impregnated.  Government officials, led by Dr. Susan Verner (Kirstie 
Alley) arrive just in time for the town's revival.  Lending his aid to 
Verner's people is Midwich's resident M.D., Alan Chaffee (Christopher 
Reeve), who was away when the cloud moved in.   
     After the pregnancies have been diagnosed, Dr. Verner makes it 
clear that the government will pay stipends to every woman who carries 
her child to term.  Following the requisite nine months, the blessed 
events occur virtually simultaneously, giving Midwich a group of tiny 
new residents.  But as the children grow, it becomes clear that there's 
something inhuman about them.  With their platinum-blond hair and blank 
expressions, not only do they look unlike the men and women raising 
them, but they lack emotion and possess the ability to read and control 
minds. 
     For a movie that opens with so much promise, VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED 
is actually something of a disappointment.  The second half isn't as 
well-paced or intelligently scripted as what precedes it, although the 
taut climax will hold an interested viewer on seat's edge.  As the 
director has shown many times before (most notably in HALLOWEEN), he can 
take an overused scene or device and infuse it with unexpected energy.  
This skill--and little else--keeps VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED entertaining
throughout, but the movie is by no means an unqualified success.
     Society says that the young are innocent and vulnerable, and
therefore must be protected and supported.  VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED plays
on a parental nightmare:  the loss of control over an amoral--or even
evil--child.  How can any father or mother overcome the nurturing
instinct and act against an offspring, regardless of what crimes that
child has committed?  It's an unsettling consideration.  Alas,
Carpenter's exploration is somewhat perfunctory.  Ultimately, the film
is more interested in surface shocks than this sort of deeper
psychological horror, but vestiges of the theme still manage to lend a
chilling tone to what's on screen.
     The cast is interesting, if not top notch.  Christopher Reeve is
adequate in a role that doesn't require a stretch of his limited
dramatic range.  Kirstie Alley displays little presence or charisma as
the cold-hearted, secretive epidemiologist.  And, if Crocodile Dundee's
main squeeze (Kozlowski) is difficult to recognize as one of the
expectant mothers, what better camouflage could there be for Luke
Skywalker than as the local minister?
     What differentiates VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED from Carpenter's best
work is the lack of character definition.  There's no one in Midwich
worth caring about.  The high number of deaths--some of which are
unexpected--leads to a certain unpredictability, but none of the
murders has an impact beyond elevating the body count.  The result is a
movie that's as superficial as it is fun.  And, while the director
shows he's still very much on top of his craft, a tighter script, with
fewer subplots vying for screen time, might have made for a memorable
updating of the classic.  Instead, all we have is a passable remake.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Christopher Reeve, Kirstie Alley, Linda Kozlowski.
Screenplay:  David Himmelstein.
Director:  John Carpenter.
     It's difficult to say whether it's a devoted core following or
monumental chutzpah which accounts for John Carpenter continuing to
receive the possessory credit before his films.  It has been over a
decade since Carpenter made STARMAN, the last of his films to
receive any kind of critical or popular reception; the intervening
years have been characterized by cult favorites like BIG TROUBLE IN
LITTLE CHINA, ambitious failures like PRINCE OF DARKNESS and
ill-advised catastrophes like MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN.  So
seeing a film hyped as "John Carpenter's VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED"
doesn't exactly set my heart racing.  And it's too bad, because as
stylish as it is, VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED could have been a winner if
not for some truly atrocious acting.
     In the small town of Midwich, population 2000, it's a lovely,
ordinary day.  Dr. Alan Chaffee (Christopher Reeve) is out on his
rounds; school principal Jill McGowan (Linda Kozlowski) is busy
keeping the school fair running.  Then, at precisely 10:00 a.m.,
every living thing in Midwich falls unconscious.  When they all
awaken six hours later, no one is quite sure what has happened ...
or why ten women are pregnant, having conceived during the mass
blackout.  National Science Foundation epidemeologist Dr. Susan
Verner (Kirstie Alley) comes to study the phenomenon, and follows
the children as they grow.  But it doesn't take a scientist to
figure out that something is very strange about the children of the
Midwich blackout, and that every person in town lives in fear of
them.
     Even in his most uneven efforts, Carpenter has demonstrated a
great sense for how to use the screen.  VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED is a
typically impressive piece of visual direction, filled with subtly
creepy scenes.  The shots of the town during the blackout, with
streets and schoolyards littered with bodies, are serenely chilling.
There is one very nice split screen image after a key plot point,
and a simmering level of menace in the scenes of the 7-year-old
children in their paired marches.  Unlike Carpenter's previous
remake attempt, 1982's THE THING, VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED doesn't rely
on gruesome special effects in place of a well-constructed
atmosphere.  Most of the time VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED has just the
right feel.
     If only Carpenter were as astute a judge of material and actors
as he is of shot composition.  VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED, based on a
novel by John Wyndham and a 1960 film of the same name, is an
inherently disturbing story, but screenwriter David Himmelstein
feels obliged to spice it up with OUTBREAK-style mass hysteria,
paranoia and government conspiracies in moving the scene to
contemporary America.  He also struggles with the story's broad time
frame, which moves clumsily over an eight year span.  Narrative has
never been one of Carpenter's strengths, and the failure to include
something as simple as a "2 Years Later" caption makes for some
unnecessarily awkward transitions.
     Directing actors has also been a longtime problem for
Carpenter, Jeff Bridges' work in STARMAN asside, but in VILLAGE OF
THE DAMNED that problem is tripled by some mind-boggling casting
choices.  Christopher Reeve as the tragedy-stricken, intense hero?
Kirstie Alley as a flinty, secretive government scientist?  Mark
Hamill as the town priest ... or for that matter, as anything but a
cartoon or video game voice-over these days?  Why not Macaulay
Culkin as the chief of police?  The child actors are not much
better, neither emotionless enough to be truly other-worldly or
human enough to be the kind of "hidden threat among us" which can be
so frightening.  Only Linda Kozlowski (best known as CROCODILE
DUNDEE's sweetheart) is at all believable in her role.
     VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED almost pulls out a last second victory
with a tense, well-staged climax, but it just isn't enough.  It is a
film with tone to spare, but like many of John Carpenter's works, it
could stand to trade some tone for a little substance.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     There have been several movie versions of John Wyndham's stories,
none of which I have seen.  Director John Carpenter thought the film's
story would be improved if it were made more current. I don't much like
the genre of spooky films but I must say this one has a somewhat better
twist than most of that type.
     There's a little town of Midwich where nothing exciting ever
happens.  Every now and then a cloud, accompanied by ominous sounds,
passes over the town, and strange thing begin to happens.  Dr. Chaffee
(Christopher Reeve) finds he is being besieged by an inordinate number
of women who have become pregnant. He then becomes aware that the
conceptions took place on the same day, the day of a school outing ...
and that the cloud had passed over the town.
     Suspicious that something odd is going on, Dr. Chaffee calls on
the Federal Government to send someone to investigate this new
phenomenon.  The epidemiologist they send is Dr Susan Verner (Kristie
Alley) who, by the way, is a chain smoker.  Has no one told her about
the dangers of smoking?
     Of the ten children who are born, nine survive, apparently
healthy.  They all look very much alike with piercing eyes and whitish
blond hair which gives rise to the reasonable assumption that they were
all sired by the same "father."  As the boys and girls grow, they
begin to display weird, un-childlike behavior.  If they focus their
eyes on you (in a strange color), you will be involved in a fatal
accident very shortly.  Everyone soon realizes that these kids are not
to be antagonized or thwarted.
     That's pretty much the basis for the film.  What the children do,
what Dr. Chaffee and Dr. Vermeer do to try to stop what is happening is
what makes up the film.  Incidentally, there have, according to Dr.
Vermeer, been similar incidents recently in other parts of the world.
OoooooHHHHHooooo!.
     Others in the cast include Linda Koslowski, Michael Pare, Mark
Hamill and Karen Kahn, among others.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     [Spoiler warning: For those unfamiliar with the story, VILLAGE OF
THE DAMNED has many small mysteries for the viewer starting with the
very first scene.  It is impossible to say anything about the content
of the film without giving away some of the mysteries.  This review
will have only minor spoilers outside of one paragraph.  That paragraph
will have a separate spoiler warning.]
     One of the best British science fiction authors of the 50s and 60s
was John Wyndham Parkes Lucas Beynon Harris who wrote under several
names, but the best-known were John Beynon Harris and John Wyndham.
His most popular two novels, both written as John Wyndham, were THE DAY
OF THE TRIFFIDS and THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS.  The former has been filmed
twice under its own name; the latter has just been filmed for a second
time, both times under the title VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED, though the
second film version perhaps owes more to the first film than to the
novel.  Incidentally, the novel THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS itself appears to
owe a great deal to Richard Matheson's short story "Trespass"
(a.k.a. "Mother by Protest"), Theodore Sturgeon's "More than Human,"
and Jerome Bixby's "It's a Good Life."
     The director this time is John Carpenter.  When Carpenter remade
THE THING he threw a lot of special effects at the project and made a
film respectful neither of the spirit of the original film, nor of the
classic science fiction story on which it was based.  (Ironically, the
original story could be more satisfyingly adapted today with morphing
effects than with the model effects he used.)  His version of VILLAGE
OF THE DAMNED is much less sensationalist in style, probably lower in
budget, and at the same time a better representation of its story.  The
story is not one of screaming horror and dismembered bodies, but one
with more a subtle and a cerebral sort of chill.
     [Spoiler warning: do not read unless you already know the plot.]
The story takes place in the village of Midwich but no longer Midwich,
England.  Now it is Midwich, California, as unlikely as that name
sounds.  It is a nice, isolated coastal town.  In the middle of the day
a mysterious sleep falls upon everybody in town.  Simultaneously,
everybody in town simply collapses where he is.  Six hours later the
sleep ends as mysteriously as it began.  But things are not quite back
to normal.  Ten women come to realize they are pregnant.  With one
stillbirth, they give birth to what appears to be nine silver-haired
children, but it is actually one single organism with a single mind and
incredible mental powers.
     Carpenter has put in a few touches to please an action-film
audience.  There are a couple of particularly nasty deaths, there are
two fiery truck crashes, and toward the end there is a half-hearted
action scene with guns blazing.  But most of the violence is compulsion
by mental suggestion and mental suggestion is what Carpenter uses to
make it seem effective to the viewer.
     Carpenter clearly respects Wolf Rilla's 1960 version.  He credits
the screenplay and lifts whole scenes from the earlier film's script.
Visually he imitates the style of the earlier adaptation.  Realizing
how silly the superchildren would look in modern clothing styles, he
dresses them in the same sort of clothing as the earlier film and gives
them a similar silver-haired look and similar facial cast.  And
speaking of familiar casts, we have Christopher Reeve as the lead, an
amalgam of two characters in the original, but primarily the George
Sanders character.  Many may disagree but Sanders played the role too
smugly and confidently.  Reeve conveys a wider range of emotions.
Personifying the line "I'm from the Government, and I'm here to help
you" is Kirstie Alley.  There are interesting ironies in her character,
but she adds little to them.  As the town priest Mark Hamill
underpowers the role and carries too much baggage from previous roles.
The Children, like Reeve, may actually do a better job here than in the
original.
     For the most part, VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED looks like a science
fiction film that could have been made in the 60s or 70s that is not
half bad.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by John Carpenter
Starring: Christover Reeve, Kirstie Alley.
     Based on the 1960 screenplay of the original of this sci-fi
horror, which is based on John Wyndham's book THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS, this
is a disappointing film for Carpenter.  Although possessing a fleetish
B-movie feel, which works partly, Carpenter does not create the mood of
a town in havoc which we so expect from him.  Carpenter (HALLOWEEN, THE
THING) has been most successful when he sticks to the aura of horror as
opposed to the physicality of it. Unfortunately he failed for the most
part here.  Reeve (SUPERMAN) plays the village Doctor in a small town
which is suddenly hit by an unexplainable blackout.  Following this
blackout, all the women of child-bearing age become pregnant (including
a virgin) and give birth to strange children who possess the same
characteristics, one of which is the ability to make humans
self-destruct.
     As you would expect, the children go on a mad killing rampage, and
Reeve tries to stop them.  One of the most disjointed parts of the film
is government Doctor Alley (LOOK WHO'S TALKING XXXVII) who one can never
determine whether she is just an evil representative of Big Brother,
being controlled by the children, or just plain mischievous and dull!  Of
course, we are set up with an ending battle between good and evil, and
guess who wins!
     There is some nifty photography and the SFX in the children's eyes
is well done, but not enough to take this  film into the enjoyable
arena.
     Carpenter needs to get his act together and start looking at his
older films, especially HALLOWEEN and THE THING to re-learn how to
direct suspenseful horror.
