Title
Review for Jane Eyre (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jane Taylor
this review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/janeeyre.html
I'm sure that at some point in my educational career, I read Jane
Eyre.  But I was glad not to remember much about the plot.  Like
any good romance, especially one where the situation looks
hopeless, I enjoy it more if I'm able to be surprised.  And boy,
did I enjoy this.
Not that surprise is the only good thing about the movie.  It's
just consistent with the rest of what there is to enjoy.  The
acting was wonderful and the characters were very, very human. 
In particular, William Hurt as the tormented Mr. Rochester,
though he stayed true to the formality and precision of speech
of the 1830s, was the kind of man that I would take great
pleasure knowing and verbally jousting with in 1996.  I cared
about what he was going through, which made the climactic fire
scene and the resulting shift in his relationship with Jane an
agonizing  and suspenseful journey on which to travel.
Charlotte Gainsburg as the homely but ethereal Jane was also a
joy to watch unfold.  Her transformation from mistreated
schoolteacher to beloved governess was wary, gradual and
authentic.  With one brief smile from her somber face, she
conveys the transformative joy of a child taking her first
steps.  Her severe gray dresses, tight bun and pale, crooked
lips allowed Hollywood to redefine the term plain, but it
allowed her expressions to shine through that much more clearly
and be her crowning adornment.  I must admit, though, I couldn't
help but think "Hey, you're not poor anymore, babe - get a
makeover!"
Anna Pacquin, the luminous child from "The Piano" plays Jane as
a pre-teen.  Not a kid you'd want to try and match wits with. 
Pacquin carries herself with a grace and dignity that is
queenly, formidable and adult, and with very few words, rips the
pretensions of her elders to shreds.  I'll be looking for her,
in about 10 or 15 years, starring as Hester Prynne in a remake
of "The Scarlet Letter."
My only criticism of "Jane Eyre" is its mid-April release date. 
This is the movie for a rainy, dreary Saturday afternoon, not
for a glorious spring day.  Catch it soon and appreciate its
gentleness, before the sensuality of budding flowers and the
testosterone rush of the summer blockbusters takes hold.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Charlotte Gainsbourg, William Hurt, Joan Plowright, 
      Josephine Serre, Anna Paquin, Geraldine Chaplin, Elle Macpherson,
      Amanda Root
Director: Franco Zeffirelli
Producer: Dyson Lovell
Screenplay: Hugh Whitemore and Franco Zeffirelli based on the novel by 
      Charlotte Bronte
Cinematography: David Watkin
Music: Alessio Vlad
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     In an era when movies are again turning to classic literature for 
inspiration, it was only a matter of time before a new version of 
Charlotte Bronte's JANE EYRE reached the screen.  One of the best-loved 
of all the Victorian novels, JANE EYRE combines social commentary with 
gothic romance.  This new film, directed by Franco Zeffirelli (best 
known for his 1968 Oscar-nominated ROMEO AND JULIET), remains faithful 
to the original narrative in general, if not in all the particulars.
     Of necessity, the story has been condensed, since it isn't possible 
to reproduce a full-length book as a two-hour movie.  Screenwriters 
Zeffirelli and Hugh Whitemore have elected to retain JANE EYRE's full 
scope while elimiting many of the nuances.  The result is a reasonably 
fast-paced story (with a confused sense of time) that occasionally 
struggles to develop its characters to their maximum potential.  
Ultimately, this film is on par with the 1944 Orson Welles/Joan Fontaine 
version.
     We are introduced to ten-year old Jane (Anna Paquin) in the early 
1830s at Gateshead Hall, where she lives with her aunt and cousins.  
Orphaned at an early age, Jane has grown up unloved and unloving, and 
now her aunt has decided to send her to the Lowood Charity School, 
citing her as willful, obstinate, deceitful, and in need of a stern 
upbringing.  At Lowood, Jane finds life difficult under the tutelage of 
the cold-hearted Mr. Brocklehurst (John Wood) and Miss Scatcherd 
(Geraldine Chaplin), but she forms a pair of solid friendships that help 
her through the hardest times.
     After ten years at Lowood, an older, wiser, but still-spirited Jane 
(now played by Charlotte Gainsbourg) accepts a position as governess for 
the young French ward of Edward Rochester (William Hurt), master of 
Thornfield Hall.  Jane settles in quickly, forming solid relationships 
with her charge, Adele Varens (Josephine Serre), and Thornfield's 
housekeeper, Mrs. Fairfax (Joan Plowright).  However, the master of the 
house makes the strongest impression on the young woman.  From her first 
meeting with Edward, when she offers aid after he is thrown from a 
horse, she is infatuated, but his natural reticence keeps her from 
confessing her feelings.  But there is something other than Edward for 
Jane to consider as she beomes established in her new situation, because 
Thornfield Hall hides a secret.  Who, or what, lives in the attic, under 
the stern and watchful eye of the semi-vigilant Grace Poole (Billie 
Whitelaw)?
     JANE EYRE is a love story, but, instead of the lighter romance and 
humor of Jane Austen's novels, this tale is marked by stark realism and 
a pervasive sense of misery.  The meticulously accurate settings and 
beautiful-but-gloomy cinematography establish the atmosphere.  Even the 
daytime scenes are drab and colorless, and many of the interior shots 
are so dark that it's difficult to see the characters' expressions.  
There's no doubt that one of the reasons JANE EYRE is so cheerless is 
because the shadows are often more important than the light.  At least 
in the end, there is a moment of joyful catharsis.
     With one exception, the acting is excellent.  Charlotte Gainsbourg 
(THE CEMENT GARDEN) brings Jane to life, and, on those occasions when 
the script fumbles because it's painting the narrative in too-broad 
strokes, she holds our attention and captures our sympathy.  
Unfortunately, Gainsbourg's opposite, William Hurt, lacks presence.  His 
is a passionless portrayal of a tragic figure.  The venerable Joan 
Plowright plays Mrs. Fairfax with grandmotherly goodwill.  Josephine 
Serre, Amanda Root (who had the lead in PERSUASION), and Anna Paquin are 
all solid in smaller roles.
     JANE EYRE is about the contrast between a plain-but-spirited woman 
and a beautiful-but-venal one.  It's about obligations and taking 
responsibility for one's actions.  And, most of all, it's about the 
maturation of an unloved girl into a sensitive woman.  JANE EYRE 
features one of literature's most independent, strong-willed female 
protagonists in a narrative brimming with repressed emotion and dark 
secrets. 
     Zeffirelli's picture fits nicely into the recent spate of films 
based on classic novels.  It's a vast improvement over last year's hack 
job of THE SCARLET LETTER, but not as impressive as the "Jane Austen 
trio" (PERSUASION, SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, and the BBC/A&E PRIDE AND 
PREJUDICE).  Nevertheless, for Bronte aficionados, lovers of Victorian 
romance, or those who simply appreciate literate love stories, JANE EYRE 
offers two hours of quality entertainment.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Franco Zeffirelli adapts Charlotte Bronte and the result is a
starchy, slow-moving soap opera that, depending upon your sense and
sensibility about these things, will leave you either swooning or sick
to your stomach.  The plot revolves around a homely governess (Charlotte
Gainsbourg) and her adventures in a gothic mansion full of secrets and
other surprises.  (That mansion is great, BTW.  I half-expected to see
Uncle Fester scurrying by in the background.) Zeffirelli's film has an
EYRE of cheesiness about it; from the sweeping music-accompanied scene
changes, to the self-important dialogue delivery, done so slowly that
you can almost count to ten between each line.  (Unlike, say, those
Austen adaptations, which are far from trashy.) The international cast
is quite a treat.  Ms. Gainsbourg is all neck, William Hurt is very
good, and Joan Plowright, fresh the deadly duo of MR. WRONG and THE
SCARLET LETTER, is her usual smiling self.  Other familiar faces include
Anna Paquin, Amanda Root, Fiona Shaw, and, even, Elle MacPherson.  The
audience that I saw this with applauded at the end, but were they happy
at the outcome, or just happy that it was over?
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Charlotte Bronte, on whose book the film is based, was one of
three sisters.  One was Emily, also a famed author, and the other was
Anne, a poet.  As was the custom among the writers of the early and
mid-nineteenth century, the stories ended with no loose ends,
everything being pat and complete.  Charles Dickens, a bit later,
was not of that genre.  What helps make JANE EYRE so intriguing is
that much of the story came from Chartlotte's own life.  Charlotte,
like Jane (Anna Paquin, who won Best Supporting Actress in The Piano)
was brought up in her early years in a parsonage school  for orphaned
girls, later becoming a governess.  The adult Jane is played by
Charlotte Gainsbourg.
     Love, real love, was what she wanted in life.  While in most
situations, the governess would be an employee of the master of the
house,  Jane was made of stronger stuff so that she is more like one
of the family.  From there it follows that she and the "master,"
Rochester, (William Hurt) fall in love.
     While films made from classics are seldom as good as the book
itself, a good director such as we have here, is capable of  bringing
out all that the book tries to tell.  Aided by such brilliant
supporting  actors as Joan Plowright as Mrs. Fairfax, all smiles, and
Miss Scatcherd (a name Dickens would have loved) played by Geraldine
Chaplin, strict and mean, the film is one you will not want to miss.

Author
Christopher Null
     One of these days, Hollywood is going to run out of old Bronte
sisters/Jane Austen books to make into films.  Then, and only then, will
the world be safe once again.
     Don't get me wrong, I loved SENSE AND SENSIBILITY (it even made my
1995 top ten list), but I gave PERSUASION one of the worst reviews of the
year.  Here comes JANE EYRE to follow in the latter's footsteps.
     JANE EYRE is based on one of those books you were supposed to read in
high school (entitled, oddly, "Jane Eyre"), but which was so damn boring
you couldn't even get through the Cliff's Notes.  The film is *almost* as
exciting as one would expect a film about, say, the book, "Jane Eyre," to
be.  It's full of longing glances, Jane (Charlotte Gainsbourg) staring
into the hills of England, Jane prancing through the meadow, Jane in a
carriage, and important lines like, "He is a proud man."  And, sadly, not
much else.
     The hopelessly archaic story is one of love and idiocy in the early
1800's, when men could keep their insane first wives locked up in the
spare room of the castle (those were the days!).  It was also a time when,
for no apparent reason, you could expect a young governess to fall in love
with her invalid boss.  There are some other plot points of note, but
really, who cares?  There's much better things to laugh about!  Such as:
     Gainsbourg, best described as a British girl with a really long neck
and really fat cheeks, was recently seen in the film KUNG FU MASTER!  Who
better to play Ms. Eyre, really?  Anna Paquin plays Young Jane but is
completely devoid of the charm that endeared her to me in THE PIANO (and
won her an Oscar).  Elle Macpherson is Rochester's girly friend
(inexplicably jilted in the second film within a month)!  Maria Schneider
pulls off a totally toys-in-the-attic portrayal of Blanche, the crazy
first wife.  Amanda Root, who sucked in PERSUASION, doesn't suck as badly
here, but still causes me to break out in hives when she's on screen
(fortunately briefly).  And...the kicker...*William Hurt* as Rochester!? 
Ho ho ho!
     As if the casting and acting weren't enough to make this a bomb,
we've got an interminable story that just won't end, a really dumb ending
when it finally does, half of the audience laughing at the "high drama,"
the other half asleep, and, worst of all, a film that is so archaic and
out-of-date that it's almost insulting to watch.  How helpful and/or truly
relevant is this story of Victorian obsession and self-destruction today? 
Who would act in a manner remotely similar to these people, except my
psychopathic ex who fancied herself to be Blanche (but that's another
story)?  Putting it all together, JANE EYRE manages to be not just a very
bad movie, but to be irresponsible as well.  Keep away.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     You have all been to movies that were dogs, but which,
nevertheless, contain one or two outstanding performances.  Well,
tonight I got to see one of those rare examples of the reverse!  The
great director Franco Zeffirelli, who created the best movie production
of Shakespeare in my lifetime, ROMEO AND JULIET (1968), has turned his
tremendous creative genius and crafted a wonderful new JANE EYRE.
     The substantial flaw that prevents this film from greatness is
that Zeffirelli made one terrible casting choice in Charlotte
Gainsbourg to play Jane Eyre.  This is compounded further by William
Hurt approaching his role as the other lead, Edward Rochester, with a
cerebral and ethereal approach that lacks the passion and liveliness of
past actors (Orson Wells, George C.  Scott, and Timothy Dalton) who
successfully brought this role to the screen.  Even with problems with
the leads, the majesty of the film and wonderful story of the novel (by
Charlotte Bronte with screenplay by Hugh Whitemore and Franco
Zeffirelli) shine through.
     The sad tale starts with the lonely voice of 10 year old Jane
Eyre, played marvelously by past Academy Award winner for THE PIANO
Anna Paquin.  She tells us, "My parents died when I was very young ...
I went to stay with my Aunt who didn't love me."  Her aunt, Mrs. Reed
(Fiona Shaw), soon packs her off with the stern and self-righteous Mr.
Brocklehurst (John Wood from RICHARD III) who runs the Lowood Charity
School.  She gives strict instructions that she wants Jane to stay
there year round even during vacation.  Sound is important in this
show.  Listen in these scenes the way the sound effects editor has
removed almost all ambient noises to accentuate the dialogue and the
small sounds in the room.
     Mr. Brocklehurst promises to "tame her spirit" which he does by
introducing her to her new fellow students with ridicule and making her
stand her first day on a stool without food.  There are many other
scenes of abuse from him and from the head teacher Miss Scatcherd
(Geraldine Chaplin).  Jane makes instant friends with Helen Burns
(Leanne Rowe) whose hair the headmaster chops off because her natural
curls are a blasphemy to God.  A happy lot, that school.
     After an excellent beginning, Zeffirelli sends in the second team.
The beautiful and expressive Anna Paquin is replaced by the morose
Charlotte Gainsbourg who was able to play a quirky teenager in THE
CEMENT GARDEN, but was out of her league as Jane Eyre.  She has the
long neck of giraffe and enunciates her words without nuance or emotion
as if she is angry at the director for requiring her to speak.  She
creates Jane Eyre as an unlikable and unsympathetic character.  Joining
Gainsbourg is William Hurt who spends all of the movie brooding.
     Jane comes to live at Mr. Rochester's large castle called
Thornfield Hall, actually filmed in England at Haddon Hall.  She is
coming in response to a letter from a Mrs. Fairfax (Joan Plowright)
looking for a governess to a young Adele Varens (Josephine Serre) who
lives there.  Adele is a sweet little girl who asks her new teacher
about their relationship, "Mademoiselle, will we be very happy?"  Jane
sternly replies, "We will work hard, and we will be content."
     When Rochester meets Jane, he asks, "Are you fond of presents?"
With blank eyes she replies, "I hardly know.  I have little experience
of them."  Jane is painfully honest and tells her master that he is not
handsome, but that "tastes differ.  Beauty is of little consequence."
Later he tells her, "Jane, you're a strange and almost unearthly
thing." Jane learns that Thornfield Hall holds some deep dark secret.
The servant Grace Poole (Billie Whitelaw) warns her, "If I were you
Miss, I'd get in the habit of bolting my doors when I go to bed."
     Soon Rochester is engaged to the beautiful and rich Blanche Ingram
(Elle Macpherson from SIRENS).  She has radiant, curly, blond hair in
sharp contrast to Jane dull, straight, and black hair.
     So much about the peripheral aspects of the film are outstanding.
The sets by Roger Hall are rich and evocative of the early nineteenth
century.  They feel real and not like museum pieces.  The
cinematography (David Watkin) is a somber blend of dark shades of gray,
blue, brown, and green.  The movie has pervasive and rich music by
Claudio Cappani and Alessio Vlad.  The music moves seamlessly between
the sweeping grandeur and the delicate personal pieces.
     After a strong beginning and then a middle featuring too much
footage of Gainsbourg, the film really comes into its own in the last
part and begins to engage the viewer much more than the middle part.  I
really liked the show absent the issue of the two leads.  The conundrum
is why did Zeffirelli cast Charlotte Gainsbourg as Jane Eyre, and why
didn't he give better directorial guidance to William Hurt?  This is
the same director that made the risky decision to cast two young and
unknown actors (Olivia Hussey and Leonard Whiting) in the lead rules in
ROMEO AND JULIET.  This was a decision as brilliant as his logic was
flawed in choosing the lifeless Charlotte Gainsbourg as Jane Eyre.  I
frankly have no idea how he could have made a choice so bad.
     JANE EYRE runs a bit long at 1:52 and some parts would have better
been left on the cutting room table by editor Richard Marden.  The film
is correctly rated PG for a single scene of a bloody wound and a couple
of mild profanities.  There is no violence, nudity, or sex other than a
couple of almost platonic kisses.  The film would be fine for any kid
old enough to be interested in the material which I would guess to be
about 9.  I really liked the show, flaws and all, and recommend it to
you.  To be fair, I should point out that my wife thought the movie was
"appalling bad," and said she was almost ready walk out.  Usually when
we disagree, it is a movie that I hate, and she thinks is pretty good,
but here we reversed.  Finally, I give the film ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
