Title
Review for Tootsie (1982)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Tootsie" is a successful and entertaining comedy.
While not as good as its reputation, there are
many genuine laughs to compensate for its
weaknesses.
"Tootsie" stars Dustin Hoffman as a talented but
troublesome actor, unemployable due to his
reputation.  Out of desperation, he dresses up
as "Dorothy" to win a role as a woman on a daytime
soap.  He is somehow able to pull off this fraud
for a year, although it causes problems with his
old girlfriend Teri Garr, his new girlfriend
Jessica Lange, and his boyfriend (?) Charles
Durning.
"Tootsie" examines gender roles and differences,
and seems to conclude that women are better than
men.  In his final lines, Hoffman admits that he
was better as a woman than he is as a man, whatever
that means.  One of the male characters is a jerk
(soap director Dabney Coleman) and another is a
romantic buffoon (George Gaynes).  Admittedly,
the principal female characters have their faults
as well.  Lange drinks too much, while Garr can't
get her life together.
Other than two Steven Bishop songs, the most obvious
weakness of "Tootsie" is that no one except his roommate
(Bill Murray, in one of his best supporting roles)
and his agent (Sydney Pollack, who also directed)
knows that "Dorothy" is a man.  Even more unlikely
is the unwanted romantic attention he receives, from
Gaynes and Durning.
This was the first feature film for Geena Davis.
She makes an auspicious debut in a dressing room.
"Tootsie" was nominated for numerous Academy Awards,
including Best Picture, Best Actor (Hoffman),
Best Director, Best Original Screenplay,
Best Supporting Actress (Garr) and Best Cinematography
(Owen Roizman).   Somehow, the sappy "It Might Be
You" was nominated for Best Original Song.
The only Oscar the film won was by Jessica Lange
for Best Supporting Actress.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Rachel Gordon
Dustin Hoffman has been nominated for seven Oscars and has won two for
roles in Rain Man and Kramer vs. Kramer.  With an inescapable nose and
smallish stature, he's one of the few talents able to prove that the
business of entertaining isn't always dependent on looks.  He'll play
boring or annoying roles every now and then, such as Captain Hook, but
whatever he takes on, he does it with style.
Before Tootsie, Hoffman had been known more for his dramatic appearances
in such films as All the President's Men and The Graduate.  He hadn't
been involved with all-out comedy yet, whether for lack of industry
faith or blind luck.  So Tootsie was his first venture into this more
mainstream audience area, and he more than filled the part.  Which
brings us to one of the greatest role-reversal movies of the 1980's, for
which Hoffman was nominated by the Academy again (though he didn't win).
Michael Dorsey (Hoffman) is an unemployed actor.  He is passionate about
his career, if only he would be given a chance!  He becomes so
frustrated, in fact, that he decides it is probably easier for a woman
to get an acting job than a man, so dresses like one in an audition. 
His struggles begin with the famed casting couch as he must keep his
femininity intact while still using wiles to get the part.
Now Dorothy Michaels, he lands a supporting role in a soap opera and
fame arrives instantly.  As his star rises, so does his love for his
costar Julie Nichols (Jessica Lange, who did win an Oscar).  As
incestuous turmoil breeds on set, Dorothy becomes more popular.  And as
Michael takes turns being a mother to some, confessor to others, best
friend, and object of lust, his respect for what he thought would be
easy grows.  There is a specific individual part Michael he must play
for each person he works with, otherwise his paycheck will be gone,
along with the woman he loves.
It may be a predictable story by now, almost 20 years later, but much of
the humor still stands the test.  What keeps this movie so entertaining
is not the plot, which has been seen time and again, but the comedic
writing (penned by Larry Gelbart, also famous for MASH) and the fine
acting of Hoffman and Bill Murray.  Murray isn't a major character but
his meaty supporting role is flawless in terms of judging the change in
Hoffman as well as their comfortable banter.
Hoffman's growth is earned instead of just a slew of easy plot devices
thrown in to say, "Look, he's different now!"  The character that Dorsey
creates in Dorothy has three dimensions as well, instead of being a mere
alter ego.  Where Lange could simply have been the object of desire at
the end of his tunnel, she lends a pleasurable presence whenever she
walks onscreen before she even opens her mouth.
The scenes that take place behind the camera of the soap opera also
never get long or boring.  There is constant movement and attitude
swirling in the environment.  And where some of the secondary characters
become a bit like caricatures, they are each charismatic enough to be
able to affect great reactions from the protagonist.
A great movie for couples or those who like a good laugh at stereotypes
and sexual mores, Tootsie is as wonderful of a romantic comedy today as
it was 20 years ago.
Director: Sydney Pollack
Producer: Sydney Pollack, Dick Richards
Writer: Murray Schisgal
Starring: Dustin Hoffman, Jessica Lange, Teri Garr, Dabney Coleman,
Charles Durning, Bill Murray
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
