Title
Review for Waterdance, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Lon Ponschock
     Finally got to rent THE WATERDANCE starring Wesley Snipes and Eric
Stoltz.  I had read about this picture when it was in film release in
the magazines.  This information led me to believe that it would be the
definitive film of the adult handicapped, but read on.
     Written by Neal Jimenez, THE WATERDANCE is the story of a recently
paralyzed writer who has received his injury from a mountain-climbing
accident.  We also meet several other men with spinal injuries which
are as severe.  (It just occurred to me that there are no women
patients in this picture ... anywhere ... but read on.)
     We see how, in their recovery, they have to learn to live with
their disability on an emotional level.  You see, there is the ability
to appreciate a handicap on an intellectual level *when it is someone
else's* like AIDS, for instance,  but it is quite another matter to
appreciate it on an emotional level *like when it's your own.*
     Here's the news.  Always-been handicapped individuals think about
sex as often as you or I do (about every ten seconds).  I say you and
I, but *I* spent much of my youth as an invalid.  Trust me, I'm right
about this.  Through such films as COMING HOME and BORN ON THE FOURTH
OF JULY, there have been attempts to portray what the sexual experience
of an invalid would be like.  But here's the big BUT: not in my
recollection has there ever been an attempt to portray the
always-been handicapped as sexual beings whether they are male or
female.
     Recently I read a book called ENABLING ROMANCE by Ken Kroll
(Harmony Books, 1992, ill.)  It's a THE JOY OF SEX written with much
great humor and compassion for those who are disabled and those who
care about them.  It's available at your local library and I cannot
recommend it highly enough.  I also purchased it as a gift for a
friend.  The book not only talks about technique it also talks about
what a person who is *not* disabled may bring to a relationship in
which there is only one handicapped individual involved; *curiosity*
being the most spiteful and hurting of all.
     In THE WATERDANCE, the three principle characters have had full
lives: success, women, action, and adventure (one of these is a biker
dude, another is married, the third and principal man is a writer much
like Neal Jimenez himself who actually suffered an accident similar to
what happens in the film.)  They cope with their disabilities and with
their despair.  Our biker dude is the first to be shown openly
weeping.  They are conducted through classes about what they can expect
from sex in their new condition.  They bond.  They do *guy* stuff like
going to a striptease house.  The "you can look, but you can't touch"
cliche as regards the handicapped is played out once again here.  Our
writer has a girlfriend who tries to stay with him and they share some
intimacies.  But these are marred by impersonal intrusions and physical
incontinences, this last being particularly embarrassing.  Finally our
writer cuts her loose: she has a husband to go back to.
     As I said earlier, many opportunities to tell the truth were
missed in THE WATERDANCE.  There is another better film to be made on
the subject.  But I recommend THE WATERDANCE as another insight into
the lives of the handicapped .  It attempts to define these men as Men
in their diminished condition.
     But there are other men and women who have lived this way all
their lives.  They have been treated as adult children who could not
express passion or worse; have been *prevented* from expressing it.
     Your comments on this are welcome in rec.arts.movies or as mail.
