Title
Review for Jefferson in Paris (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 4/7/95
Running Length: 2:22
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes)
     THE BOSTONIANS.  A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE.  HOWARDS
END.  THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  These represent the best of Merchant-
Ivory--a category in which their latest, JEFFERSON IN PARIS, does not
belong.  Nevertheless, although this examination of several years in the
life of Thomas Jefferson (the U.S. minister to France between 1784 and
1789) is flawed, it nevertheless represents two-plus hours of diverting
melodrama.  The historical accuracy of certain plot points may be in
doubt, but this certainly isn't the first motion picture "based on a true
story" to play loose with the facts.
     Nick Nolte looks like Thomas Jefferson, and his deserved reputation
as a fine actor further argues in his favor as the perfect choice for the
title role.  Inexplicably, however, Nolte is actually rather flat.  As
was the case with Robert Duvall in HBO's STALIN, the part seems to
smother him.  He's adequate, but no emoting is involved, and there are
many sequences where Jefferson comes across as stiff and lifeless.  Nolte
never successfully forges a bond between his character and the audience.
     The whole film is rather superficial.  It tells its story reasonably
well, but doesn't do much more.  Considering that this picture comes from
Merchant-Ivory, the producer-director team that has given us a number of
multi-layered films, the lack of depth is disappointing.  JEFFERSON IN
PARIS is just another MASTERPIECE THEATER-style costume drama.
     There are four principle storylines developing in parallel
throughout the movie.  The first relates to Jefferson's burgeoning
friendship/romance with painter Maria Cosway (Greta Scacchi).  The second
follows the changes in his relationship with one of his slaves, fifteen-
year old Sally Hemings (Thandie Newton).  Another examines the jealous
reactions of his daughter Patsy (Gwyneth Paltrow) to his mistresses.  The
final, and potentially most interesting, is an observation of the
political events leading up to the French Revolution, and how Jefferson
reacts to these.
     In JEFFERSON IN PARIS, it's the secondary performers who impress.
Thandie Newton (FLIRTING) brings life and vibrancy to Sally (although
there is one horribly over-the-top scene where she dances for Jefferson
in the privacy of his bed chamber).  Gwyneth Paltrow, who was excellent
in her FLESH AND BONE debut, gives a multi-dimensionality to a character
conflicted by love, commitment, and jealousy.  Simon Callow (FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL) has a delightful turn as the gay husband of
Scacchi's Maria.
     When it comes to issues, JEFFERSON IN PARIS is feeble and fumbling.
After introducing the ironic hypocrisy of Jefferson's having written a
document claiming that "all men are created equal" while nevertheless
maintaining a significant contingent of slaves, little more of substance
is presented on the subject.  Equally given short shrift is the ideology
underlying the French Revolution.  Aside from a few brief discussions
filled with facile arguments, this particular element of the plot seems
designed more as an historical backdrop than anything else.
     Impressions of JEFFERSON IN PARIS are likely to be based largely
upon expectations.  Those anticipating something with the depth and
breadth of a HOWARDS END will be disappointed.  Regardless, though it may
be occasionally slow-moving and perhaps a half-hour too long, this film
is put together with care and a mindfulness of quality.  Little here is
exceptional, but, fortunately, less is below par.  In the end, like QUEEN
MARGOT or 1776, JEFFERSON IN PARIS serves as a snapshot of history and
the characters that made their mark upon it.
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Greta Scacchi, Thandie Newton, Gwyneth
Paltrow, Seth Gilliam.
Screenplay:  Ruth Prawer Jhabvala.
Director:  James Ivory.
     If Ismail Merchant and James Ivory are not careful, their names
might very well lose their proper noun status.  Like Q-Tip or Xerox,
"Merchant Ivory" is becoming something of a generic term, a
descriptor for intimate period pieces in the tradition of critical
successes like A ROOM WITH A VIEW, HOWARDS END and THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY.  For many moviegoers, though, the term is also used to
evoke images of technically proficient but turgid filmmaking.
Sadly, JEFFERSON IN PARIS is everything their most vocal detractors
have accused Merchant Ivory efforts of being.  There are plenty of
beautiful sets, meaningful glances and profound discussions, but
there isn't a shred of compelling drama to connect them, or a single
key character into whose life we are given any insight.
     JEFFERSON IN PARIS takes place primarily in the years 1784 to
1789, when Thomas Jefferson (Nick Nolte) lived in Paris as American
ambassador to France.  His beloved wife having died, Jefferson
brings the eldest of his three daughters, Patsy (Gwyneth Paltrow),
to stay with him, but otherwise is quite alone.  That changes when
he falls in love with Maria Cosway (Greta Scacchi), the English-
Italian wife of English painter Richard Cosway (Simon Callow), but
circumstances frequently conspire to keep them apart.  After the
death of Jefferson's youngest daughter, he summons the remaining
daughter to Paris, along with her slave nurse Sally Hemings (Thandie
Newton).  Although he maintains a correspondence and friendship with
Maria, Jefferson also begins a a secretive relationship with Sally,
while the stirrings of the French Revolution cause turmoil in the
Paris courts.
     There are any number of ways the Merchant Ivory team could have
approached these years in the life of a man of many contradictions.
They could have examined his reactions to the ostentations of the
French court which expedited its downfall in 1789; they could have
explored the reasons why the architect of democracy was also a slave
owner; they could have delved into his troubled personal life.  And
that is precisely what they did, and a dozen other things besides.
This is not a biographical sketch with a point of view.  It's a
series of anecdotes, many of them apocryphal.  Of what particular
relevance, for example, is Jefferson's mission to secure a loan from
the Dutch?  Or a lengthy scene at an opera in which the relationship
between Jefferson and Maria Cosway is not furthered one bit?  Writer
Ruth Prawer Jhabvala is a genius at adapting the narratives of other
writers for the screen, but she does a terrible job of constructing
a narrative from a collection of historical footnotes.  This is
simply EVERYTHING YOU ALWAYS WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT THOMAS JEFFERSON
BUT WERE AFRAID TO ASK.
     Jhabvala's ability to create characters also deserts her,
leaving JEFFERSON IN PARIS filled with incomplete sketches.  Gwyneth
Paltrow (FLESH AND BONE) has the most interesting part as Patsy
Jefferson, the troubled girl who feels abandoned by her father's
daliance with Sally, but there are significant gaps left in her
character as well (notably her reaction to Jefferson's refusal to
allow her conversion to Catholicism).  Greta Scacchi and Thandie
Newton are both under-developed as the women in Jefferson's life,
and his attraction to Maria in particular makes no sense based on
their interaction.  But that is part of the greatest disaster, Nick
Nolte's stiff Thomas Jefferson.  It is an awful performance of a
character with tremendous potential, and the script never even
bothers to try to get inside his head.  I felt I had a better
understanding of Jefferson from staring at Mount Rushmore.
     Ivory does deliver some finely crafted scenes, of course, such
as Louis XVI learning about the revolution while on a hunt, and
Richard Robbins' score and Tony Pierce-Roberts' cinematography are
characteristically superb.  Unfortunately, the way Ivory frames the
story (beginning with a flashback featuring James Earl Jones as the
son of Jefferson and Sally Hemings telling the story to a reporter)
makes the failings of JEFFERSON IN PARIS all the more evident.  It
isn't about the scandalous, if historically questionable, notion
that Jefferson fathered children by one of his slaves.  It isn't
really *about* anything.  Like the worst high school history
textbooks, it just starts in one place and ends in another, and all
you really want to do is look at the pictures.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: James Ivory
Producer: Ismail Merchant
Written by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala
Starring: Nick Nolte, Greta Scacchi, James Earl Jones
A Touchstone and Merchant Ivory Productions Presentation
     Merchant-Ivory Productions have carved out a niche for themselves
in costume dramas.  Usually they are adaptations of classic or toney
contemporary novels that explore class distinctions amid opulent
surroundings.  JEFFERSON IN PARIS is their first effort in a long time
not to be based on a well-known novel.  It is based loosely on a few
historical incidents that lack any real narrative force.  The poorly
focused dramatic structure, odd casting,  and slipshod approach to
history sink this lavishly produced period spectacle.
    The visual centerpiece of the film, featured prominently in the
ads, points out several of the problems in the film.  The scene is of
a hot air Montgolfier balloon demonstration staged for the king of
France.  The balloon wafts through the screen to the delight of all
those watching.  Jefferson (Nick Nolte); himself an inventor, scholar,
and architect; shows virtually no interest in the experiment.  Instead
he sneaks off with the married Mrs. Cosway (Greta Scacchi) to frolic in
the woods and talk of his broken heart.  This first flight with a live
cargo was the 18th century equivalent of the moon landing, and a noted
scholar shows no interest in it.  It is just a visual diversion used as
a backdrop for speculative romantic scenes.  Historically, the scene
plays even worse.  The experiment for King Louis XVI really took place
a year before Jefferson even arrived in Paris.
    The rest of the first half of the film is a series of constant
introductions to names dimly remembered from history class.  Lafayette
has a somewhat large role.  Others like royal consort Marie Antoinette,
King Louis XVI, charlatan Anton Mesmer and inventor Joseph Guillotine
turn up for heavy handed cameos.  With the parade of unneeded
characters in their elaborate silken outfits, much of the film plays
like an audio visual guided tour of a wax museum.  The stiff and
lifeless performances of many of the cast reinforce the waxworks
notion.
    Nick Nolte never manages to be convincing as Jefferson throughout
any of these diverse encounters.  When questioned about the particulars
of the Declaration of Independence he fumbles for answers like a C
student that forgot to cram for a test.  He does not appear to be the
man that actually wrote it.  A few times in the film he putters with
one of his various inventions, but seems more like a man that bought a
useless tool at a garage sale.  What exactly he is doing as minister to
France is never clear.  If he has official obligations he never attends
to them.  Mostly he just flirts with Mrs. Cosway at boring dinner
parties.  In real life Jefferson was noted for his witty dinner
conversation.  That is not evident in this production.
    The second half of the film manages to come to life slightly thanks
to the arrival of one of Jefferson's slaves from Virginia, Sally
Hemings (played by Thandie Newton).  She is the only one to create a
full fledged vibrant screen character.  She and her brother talk more
convincingly on subjects like freedom than do the rest of the "great
thinkers" in the film combined.  Her portrayal exhibits a little depth,
one persona for in front of her peers (both American slaves and French
servants) and one persona in front of Jefferson and his aristocratic
visitors.
    The story around her character is the most controversial element of
the film.  For years there have been unproven allegations that Thomas
Jefferson had children with his slaves.  The film makers try to tell
this story and distance themselves from it at the same time.  They
distance themselves by creating a framing story for the film.  They are
not saying that this story is true, they are merely relating a story
told by somebody else.  They introduce an African-American  character
named Madison Hemings (James Earl Jones), who late in the 1800s tells
the story that  Thomas Jefferson is his father, rendering the bulk of
the film in flashback.  It is this desire to tell the story and wish to
get away from it that hurt the second half.  The latter part of the
film devolves into a poorly developed love triangle between the widower
Thomas Jefferson, and two teenage girls competing for his affections:
his devoted daughter and his slave.  The film is rated PG-13.  This
rating does not really allow for in depth analysis of adult themes.
The relationship between Jefferson and Sally Hemings is really just
broadly hinted at.  To raise such a controversial story element and
then dance around it as Merchant-Ivory does here is reall a big cop
out.
    Throughout the first part of the film various plot threads are set
up.  The French Revolution is beginning, scientific advances are taking
place, famous artists are at work.  The film makers unfortunately
choose one of the least interesting and least well documented stories
to center on, and then show reluctance to deal with it realistically
anyway.  All of the main characters remain blank ciphers with no
personality and their actions are not clearly motivated by any events
in the story.  JEFFERSON IN PARIS is a lot of lovely sets and fancy
costumes looking desperately for something to be about.
