Title
Review for Dem deutschen Volke (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Wolfgang Pietsch
This article in English for better understanding with international audience.
Deutsche Newsgroups, bitte um Entschuldigung. Dieser Artikel in Englisch 
besseres Verst=E4ndnis mit internationaler Leserschaft.
Our Berlin century event of June/July 1995, the "Wrapped Reichstag" by
Christo and Jeanne-Claude had it=B4s resurrection ceremony yesterday
evening in the "Waldbuehne" open-air stage. Together with about 8.000
spectators, Christo and Jeanne-Claude watched the world premiere of
their film, "Dem Deutschen Volke" ("To The German People") produced by
the brothers Wolfram and Joerg Daniel Hissen from Germany. All the
people were lucky that no rain disturbed the performance, although it
got rather cold at night, but that didn=B4t prevent the visitors from
enthusiastic cheering to the artists, their project and the really well
done documentation about it.
Christo and Jeanne-Claude arrived at about 9.30 PM at the "Waldbuehne"
and because of Jeanne-Claude's red hair, the people recognized them
immediately and started an avalanche of cheering. Before that, the
percussion group "Les Tomtoms" were playing African music which is also
used in the soundtrack of the film, but, perhaps of the cold weather,
the "Reichstag-Feeling" didn't spread at that time. The critical weather
and the fact that the Track & Field event ISTAF with many stars from the
Atlanta Olympics happened at the same time probably was the reason for
only 8.000 visitors.
After the arrival of the artists there was also a short period of real
angryness, people giving loud whistles against then playing commercials
on the screen. Due to Christo and Jeanne-Claude's opinion about
No Sponsoring the people were more than a bit confused and sent the
Marlboro Man to hell ... ;-)
Everything was peaceful and happy again when the artists entered the
stage and spoke to the Berliners. Christo and Jeanne-Claude were very
happy to come back to the city of their big event and excused a little
delay. The reason was that Rita Suessmuth, President of the German
Bundestag Parliament, good friend of the artists and most important
driver of the project, was late. But Jeanne-Claude told the people:
"We will start now, Rita Suessmuth is an intelligent lady, she will
understand ...", the film started and Rita came just 5 minutes later.
The film is an excellent collage of pictures and scenes from the long
period of preparation, the decision phase, construction and presentation
of the "Wrapped Reichstag" project. The first pictures show "young"
Christo in the late 70's, walking over the snow on "Platz der Republik"
(the big square in front of Reichstag), collecting impressions and
imaginations about the realization of the project. Michael S. Cullen
talked about his (historic, W.P.) postcard to Christo and Jeanne-Claude
with the proposal of wrapping this building. B.t.w., I really missed
Mike Cullen at yesterday's film event, he was not introduced with all
the other important guests, so I guess he was absent, don't know why.
Back to the film, especially the preparation and decision period is
documented with a sensible focus on feelings during this hard time of
convincing the German Bundestag members. If you read the books before,
watched the fotos of that time and see those live pictures now, you can
really go inside what happened. A lot of funny situations change with
very serious aspects and the (preliminary) happy end is Christo's face
on the Bundestag gallery, just when the vote count was published by
Rita Suessmuth. I enjoyed this first part most and the people gave big
hands to important words told and whistled against the project opponents,
we had great atmosphere. B.t.w. the film didn't gloss anything, the
arguments of the opponents were widely covered, although, while repeated
in the final sequence of the film, those arguments got a slight ironic
touch.
After decision, the "Hardware Phase" began. Christo also named the
preparation period the "Software Phase". We saw and listened to many of
the working people, producing the fabric and ropes, constructing the
scaffolding, transporting the big rolls of fabric to the Reichstag and
finally rolling them down. The problems of big winds during first days
of final construction can be much better recognized in the close camera
shoots than in June 1995 as we were standing beside the building. There
were so many things not running well, Christo and Jeanne-Claude tried to
manage and the workers were not always happy about that. Christo and
Jeanne-Claude often had different opinions about details, sometimes
"fighting" them out, the spectators were very amused.
The presentation period was (of course) the most artistical part of the
film. People often gave big hands to the exciting views round and above
the wrapped building. A "Helicam" camera on a small, pilotless helicopter
was used for the aerial views. The visitors felt the happiness which
Christo and Jeanne-Claude felt about their dream came true.
This historic document is worth to be seen twice or more often.
The "Wrapped Reichstag" film "Dem Deutschen Volke" will be shown in
German cinemas, probably around the world, after the Frankfurt Book Fair
in autumn/fall. You can find details about festivals where the film will
be presented at and more about the "Wrapped Reichstag" project on the
website authorized by Christo and Jeanne-Claude at Kulturbox Berlin
http://www.kulturbox.de/berlin/reichstag/ .
Latest News (of Sa. Aug. 31st 1996): During their Berlin visit, Christo
and Jeanne-Claude made a contract with the Berlin Senator for Culture,
Peter Radunski, to hold an exhibition of published and actually
unpublished works, "Wrapped Reichstag", their coming works and more in
about 1 + 1/2 years at the "Martin-Gropius-Bau" in Berlin-Kreuzberg.
This rewiew can also be found at
http://www.snafu.de/~wpi/Reichstag_Review.html .
An image of the ticket for this event you will find at
http://www.snafu.de/~wpi/Reichstag_Ticket.html .
Wolfgang Pietsch, Berlin, 1996
http://www.snafu.de/~wpi/index_eng.html
