Title
Review for Himalaya - l'enfance d'un chef (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jonathan Curiel
Six good reasons to rush out and see Himalaya, a film that director Eric
Valli describes as a "Tibetan Western":
1) No Brad Pitt.  Valli worked on the Brad Pitt film Seven Years in
Tibet, which showcased Pitt and his pathetic German accent trekking the
Himalayas and befriending the Dalai Lama.  Instead of the overpaid,
perfect-toothed Pitt, we get real people from Nepal portraying
themselves, in roles that demand good acting and a credible screen
presence.
2) Unspoiled Tibetan culture.  While Tibet has been occupied by China
since 1950, Nepal has maintained the integrity of its borders,
especially in the remote northwest region of Dolpo, where Tibetan
Buddhism has thrived side-by-side with Indian Hinduism and other
non-Western influences.  Refugees from Tibet are prominent in Himalaya,
as are a bona fide monk and other Dolpo men, women and children with
tangible ties to an ancient homeland.
3) Biblical-looking peaks covered in snow.  Spending $8.50 to see
Himalaya is cheaper (and less exhausting) than flying to Katmandu and
bussing it to the base of the highest mountains in the world.  Climbing
those majestic peaks would take weeks.  With Himalaya, we are
transported there via celluloid for 104 minutes and treated to vistas
that have inspired generations of people around the world.
4) Yaks.  Lots and lots of yaks.  Himalaya is what you might call a yak
movie -- indeed, it's a Tibetan Western of sorts.  Dolpo's annual yak
caravan is the center of the film, showing off the herd of animals that
transport pounds and pounds of white salt to the lowlands.  The grueling
downward trek is vital to the Dolpopas' existence, letting them exchange
the salt for grain and other necessities.
5) Gripping storyline.  Though the film is closely based on reality
(Valli lived in Dolpo for years), Himalaya isn't a documentary -- it's a
fictionalized account of life among the Dolpopas, which means the movie
has death, romance, revenge, chaos, and emotional contours.  The
characters named Tinle and Karma dominate the film, giving it a friction
that sustains Himalaya for the full 104 minutes.  Tinle (Thinlen
Lhondup) is an old chief who blames Karma (Gurgyon Kyap) for his son's
death.  When Karma wants to embark on an early caravan, ignoring the
date set by ancient ritual, Tinle turns him down.  Karma takes his herd
anyway, followed four days later by Tinle and his entourage.  Dueling
caravans create powerful drama on Nepal's stormy mountaintops.
6) Viscerally moving soundtrack.  The songs that accompany Himalaya
(original work by Bruno Coulais) feature Tuva-like throat singing,
fragments of whispers, chants and shouts, orchestral chimes and strings,
and dreamy melodies that -- by themselves -- are worth the price of
admission.
The bottom line: Seeing Himalaya is to bear witness to a proud and rich
people.  Valli, who divides his time among Katmandu, Paris, and Los
Angeles, is a longtime National Geographic photographer who made several
documentaries before tackling this full-length feature film.  Here he
has made the type of movie that could -- and should -- be made more
often by the studios.  Applaud him.
Director: Eric Valli
Producers: Jacques Perrin, Christophe Barratier
Writers: Olivier Dazat, Jean-Claude Guillebaud, Louis Gardel, Nathalie
Azoulai, Jacques Perrin
Starring: Thinlen Lhondup, Karma Wangiel, Lhapka Tsamchoe, Karma Tenzing
Nyima Lama, Gurgon Kyap
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
When it becomes a case of survival, who do you trust? Man or God? The 
wise old village elder or the strong young leader? In Eric Valli's 
exquisite HIMALAYA, the first Nepalese film ever to be nominated for an 
Academy Award, the villagers are faced with these simple but difficult 
questions.
As the story opens, the leader of the village's annual caravan has been 
killed in an accident so his head-strong father, Tinle (Thilen Lhondup), 
vows to lead the caravan instead.  (The English title of the film was 
once CARAVAN, which is much more descriptive.)  The aged Tinle seems to 
be in no shape to lead anything more than a trip to the well, but he 
insists that he can lead the caravan like he used to decades ago.  
First, however, he must consult the gods who will pick the best date to 
depart.  As he labors over various religious tables, it begins to appear 
that he will never find an auspicious date to begin the long journey 
through the mountains.
As Tinle deliberates for what seems an eternity, Karma (Gurgon Kyap), a 
young upstart, desperately wants to lead the yak herd off before the 
winter storms come.  It is dangerous to wait too long, he warns.  The 
village needs the salt, which they mine, traded for grain so that they 
will not starve during the long, harsh winter.  And, if the caravan 
waits too long, they will die in the deadly storms that grip the 
mountain passes.
Since Tinle doesn't trust Karma, he refuses to follow his lead.  The 
rift causes the village to break into two caravans, one run by Karma and 
the younger men and the other led by Tinle and the elders.  Their 
harrowing journey is visually astonishing.  That the cinematography of 
rich browns and golds is breathtaking is obvious from the first scene.  
What isn't immediately obvious is that the film will become much more 
than just a gorgeous travelogue.  The yaks, magnificent beasts of 
burden, become stars in their own right, but it is the human drama that 
captures our imagination.  As they cope with their own conflicts, the 
caravanners have to fight a much bigger battle against the mountain.  
The senior citizen contingent, especially, appears to be headed for 
certain disaster.  Maybe with some big Hollywood stars the film would 
seem a bit trite, but, with these honest, straightforward actors, the 
story is completely engrossing.  You won't care about winners, you'll 
just be rooting for both sides to survive.
HIMALAYA runs 1:44.  The film is Tibetan with English subtitles.  It is 
not rated but could be a G since there is nothing to offend anyone of 
any age.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  HIMALAYA-l'enfance d'un chef (director/writer: Eric Valli; screenwriters:
Olivier Dazat with the collaboration of Jean-Claude Guillebaud/Louis
Gardel/Nathalie Azoulai/Jacques Perrin; cinematographers: Éric
Guichard/Jean-Paul Meurisse; cast: Thilen Lhondup (Tinle), Gurgon Kyap (Karma),
Lhakpa Tsamchoe (Pema), Karma Wangel (Passang), Karma Tensing (Norbou), Labrang
Tundup (Labrang), Tenzen Charka (Chopga), Tsering Dorjee (Rabkie); Runtime: 104;
Kino International; 1999) 
A truly magificent and authentic film set in the sparsely populated mountainous
region of Dolpo in northwest Nepal. Its appeal is both visually and in its
compelling story about the Tibetan villagers who live by their traditions. The
filmmaker is the Frenchman Eric Valli, someone who has been interested in
Buddhism since childhood and who was a former photographer for National
Geographic and has recently been a documentary filmmaker and author. He has
lived in Nepal for the last 18 years with his wife and three children. The cast
is made up of mostly non-professionals who have not only not acted before, but
some have never even seen a film. Their wonderful expressive faces are
reflective of the mountains and give the film its very appealing look. Himalaya
is noteworthy for its breathtaking shots of mountains that scale as high as
10,000 feet, as Valli daringly shot this almost impossible mountain trek for
nine months in all kinds of conditions--including a blinding winter snowstorm.
It was shot in Cinemascope using wide-angle panoramic framed shots and was
nominated for an Oscar as Best Foreign Film, but lost to Pedro Almodovar's All
About My Mother. 
The story in its simplicity can be viewed as a fable about a generational
conflict between a stubborn religious traditionalist set in his ways versus the
younger man who is influenced by the pragmatism of modern ways and is just as
pigheaded as his opponent. 
A yak caravan bringing back salt needed to trade for grain returns to the tiny
Dolpo mountain village and one of the men on the trek, Karma (Gurgon Kyap),
brings back the dead body of the young chief, the chief's elderly father, Tinle
(Thilen Lhondup), who retired so his son could be the caravan leader. He
suspects the ambitious Karma of foul play, even though, the two young men were
the best of friends. The irritable Tinle is desperate to get someone from his
family to lead the next salt-trek across the mountain, a trek that must be done
before winter sets in as it's a matter of survival for the villagers to get
food. The dead man's son, Tsering (Karma Wangiel), is too young to lead the yak
caravan and Tinle is too old. He tries to recruit his other son to be the
leader, a young man in his twenties, Norbou (Karma Tenzing Nyima Lama). But
Norbou has lived in a monastery as a monk since he was 8-years-old and has no
skills to lead a caravan, as he has devoted his life to painting and meditation
and has studied to be a lama. 
The heart of the film begins when Karma refuses to wait for the auspicious date
of his trek to be set by the villager's council of lamas and risks being
ostracized for disobeying their traditions. He acts in such haste because he's
worried about winter setting in and impulsively takes some of the younger men
with him. Tinle waits for the traditional word from the lamas as the auspicious
date is set several days later and he is joined by the superstitious elderly
villagers, his dead son's wife Pema (Lhakpa Tsamchoe) and Tsering, whose name
has now been changed to the more humble one of Passang. Norbou also decides to
help his father by joining him and when asked why-- gives the very Buddhist
response he learned from his master: "When two trails open in front of you,
Which one do you take?" The answer is "You always take the hardest one," the
implication being that there's more to learn on that path. 
The film becomes in its second half an amazing visual spectacle and a challenge
to the filmmaker to record the earnest story in the most difficult of locations,
as it follows the two parties through the barren highland valleys and unsafe
mountain passes. 
It's a testament to the spirit and courage of these followers of Tibetan
culture, who strive to carry on the traditions. It's ultimately a film about
finding out who you are and about living in harmony with nature. I enjoyed it
immensely and believe this rare film will be remembered for the simplicity of
its very human story and the deep respect it has for a way of life that is
endangered. If it wasn't a more penetrating look at the Nepal villagers and
their superstitions and if the drama wasn't more subtle--so be it! That might be
the task of another filmmaker. What this film did was show us a way of life that
few have ever witnessed, and it did it in a spirited pictorial manner. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Himalaya sounds a lot like something you'd find at your local IMAX theatre.
For starters, it's full of stunning panoramic shots that can't help but
overshadow an inferior plot.  The film tells the story of a young boy (kids
are an IMAX staple) on track to become Chief of his Nepalese village, which
means audiences will be treated to magnificent views of snow-covered
mountains that practically dare people to cross them.
Anyone familiar with Iranian cinema will notice similarities between
Himalaya (an awfully fun word to type) and that country's recent critical
hit A Time For Drunken Horses - this could have been called A Time For
Teetotaling Yaks.  Both films deal with impoverished villages whose survival
depends on caravans that wind through the dangerous mountains. While Horses'
characters smuggled contraband into Iraq, the people in Himalaya haul packs
of salt hundreds of miles away to exchange for grain that will keep their
tribes eating throughout the harsh winter months.
As Himalaya opens, the salt caravan has just returned to town.  One might
think this would be a time for celebration, like when the fishing boats came
home to Gloucester at the beginning of The Perfect Storm, but this time the
convoy has returned with the remains of their Chief in a burlap sack.
Lhakpa, we are told by his close friend and caravaneer Karma (Gurgon Kyap),
died trying to follow a risky path.  Lhakpa's elderly father Tinle (Thilen
Lhondup) doesn't believe Karma, suspecting he may have done something
devious to assume his place in the community.
A power struggle ensues, with most of the villagers in favor of Karma taking
over, but Tinle thinks the gig should remain in his lineage (he was the
Chief before Lhakpa).  The only problem is that the family's next male heir
is little boy named Tsering (Karma Wangel), who isn't nearly ready to man a
salt caravan through mountains big enough to make Lance Armstrong burst into
tears.
But that's not enough to stop crotchety old Tinle, who comes off as a
taller, Far East version of Cotton from King of the Hill (he even has a few
"I've been blah-blah-blah-ing since before you were born!" lines).  Tinle
hauls his other son, Norbou (Karma Tensing), out of the monastery he was
forced into as a boy and starts his own damn caravan (another fun word to
type) with a few of the village elders, his grandson and his widowed
daughter-in-law (Lhakpa Tsamchoe).
What follows is probably the closest thing we'll ever see to a Nepalese
road-trip flick, as the two separate caravans (Karma's and Tinle's) embark
on the salt-for-grain journey. There's one dicey scene where Tinle's crew
tries to cross a very narrow mountain path, but filming it was probably a
hundred times more precarious than it appeared on screen.  Not only are
there no stunt doubles in Himalaya, there aren't any professional actors,
either.  The faces weathered by the elements that you see on the screen
really have to lug salt through the mountains to exchange for grain.
Some folks might complain about the lack of character development, but since
Himalaya is populated by non-actors, beefing up their parts isn't going to
be a positive thing.  It'd be one thing if the picture starred Brad, Julia,
Haley Joel and Robert (as in Redford - his craggy puss would have been
perfect), but the story here is kept pleasantly simple.  It's almost a
fable - old customs (like using astronomy to tell you when to start the
caravan) butting heads with modern thinking (like using medicine over
hocus-pocus stuff).  But not too modern, mind you.  The only major problem
with Himalaya is that there isn't supposed to be a clear-cut protagonist,
yet it's hard not to root for Karma over the gratingly unpleasant Tinle.
Himalaya, which won César Awards for its score (Bruno Coulais) and
cinematography (Eric Guichard), was Nepal's first-ever submission to the
Academy Awards Best Foreign Language Film category in 1999 (it was actually
nominated, too, but lost to Spain's All About My Mother).  The picture was
directed by Eric Valli, a National Geographic photographer who, for the last
20 years, has lived in the same remote Dolpo region of Nepal in which
Himalaya is set (he was also a unit director for Seven Years in Tibet).  The
uncomplicated screenplay took four writers to tackle (one of whom,
ironically, was a scribe on fellow 1999 Foreign Film nominee East-West).
