Title
Review for Exotica (1994)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Bryant Frazer
     After the final reel of EXOTICA had unspooled, like a slender key
filling the last hole in a wooden puzzlebox, a woman at the New York
Film Festival screening last year had a question for director Atom
Egoyan.  She wanted to know what happened at the end of the movie.
Visibly perturbed at the question, Egoyan dodged it.  Heads craned as
the woman pressed for his answer.  She explained that she had seen each
of Egoyan's previous films, had enjoyed them tremendously; it was just
*this* film, she said, this was the one that she didn't "get." Finally,
Egoyan gave in and answered her question.  Here is what the last scene
in the film meant, he explained, his four- or five-word declamation a
stark and numbing negation of the gentle, almost languid spirit of the
film, which invites the audience to its own discovery.  The "what
happened" is simple enough to explain, but you can't really understand
it unless you're fully caught up in the cinema when it unfolds in front
of you.
     If you're like me, when you first hear that the director of
SPEAKING PARTS and THE ADJUSTER has made a film centered around the
patrons and employees of a strip club, you probably say "uh-oh" and
start flipping through the paper to find out what else is playing.  But
you shouldn't.  Previous films had established the Canadian Egoyan as
an austere, clinical filmmaker with a cold grip on his characters'
collective well being.  In EXOTICA, Egoyan's detachment is like a
melting icecap, or a striptease--shrinking away, peeling off layer
after layer of the soft-shelled characters he's investigating.
Moreover, it seems as though he's actually fond of these people.
     Obviously, the sleaze potential for such a story is tremendous,
but EXOTICA is an ambitiously sexual film that doesn't embarrass the
viewer.  Exotica itself is a lush and fantastic place--sort of a
sinister cross between The Playboy Channel and a Fellini film, with a
thundering Leonard Cohen soundtrack.  Christina (Mia Kirshner) is the
star dancer around whose history the film revolves.  The other at-first
inscrutable characters include tax auditor Francis (Bruce Greenwood),
rare bird smuggler Thomas (Don McKellar), Exotica's creepy master of
ceremonies Eric (Elias Koteas, with a great FM-radio voice), and Zoe
(Arsinee Khanjian, pregnant at the time with her and Egoyan's son), the
woman in charge of the proceedings at Exotica.  Much is made of the
erotic conundrum at the heart of a striptease (or, one supposes, an
erotic film): the dancer's actions are meant to arouse and excite the
patron, who is helpless to be anything but a passive viewer.  At
Exotica (as in, one supposes, an erotic film), voyeurism is a
frustrated alias for emotional intercourse, and mother figure Zoe
respects the power of those relationships, even as she zealously
protects her dancers from customers who commit the ultimate
transgression of touching a performer.
     On a theoretical level, Egoyan is well aware of the relationship
between Exotica (the club) and EXOTICA (the film), the ways in which
movies have always commingled voyeurism and cathartic emotional
experience.  In the post-modern era, erotic films have tended to either
indict or (mostly) shamelessly indulge the viewer.  Egoyan's
achievement in EXOTICA is singularly fitting, as he yokes the
experience of the movie audience to that of the audience in his film,
acknowledging erotic needs without condemning them, and stripping down
the obsessions that color a life.
     But on a more basic level, EXOTICA is simply a very wise film.
Even though its explorations are quite serious, there's something of a
sense of humor, and the spectacle of Exotica itself, quite unlike the
typical big-city strip club, is somehow reassuring.  After shooting was
complete and Egoyan's crew began dismantling the set, the building's
owner begged them to leave Exotica intact.  Egoyan refused, ensuring
the club's status as a fleeting construct of the cinematic imagination,
in existence for as long as it takes to sit in the dark, eyes on
Egoyan's deeply felt psychoerotic spectacle.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Atom Egoyan
Starring: Bruce Greenwood, Elias Kosteas, Mia Kirshner, Don McKellar,
Arsinée Khanjian, Sarrah Polley, David Hemblen, Peter Krantz, Victor
Garber, Maury Chaykin
Every other night, he comes in to the "Exotica" club and gets the same girl
to do an erotic dance for him, and, after a couple hours of this, leaves. 
And every time he does, the "DJ" of the club observes from above, and
sometimes from a tinted window, observing everything that goes on.  The man
doesn't really seem to get a lot of enjoyment from it, but instead seems to
feel cleansed by the act of the particular girl dancing for him.  For him,
it's not just some easy woman showing off her body, but instead it's
something deeper.
Canadian director Atom Egoyan's films always deal with a group of people
who have bizarre connections to one another, and the films usually examine
their relationships, giving us information as it goes on and allowing us to
put it all together.  The same goes for "Exotica," which dives right into
its narrative without so much as an exposition, and forces us to pay
complete attention, and remember everything we see.  He gives us characters
who seem unnecessary at first, but eventually come into the narrative more
clearly, and presents situations and scenes which appear to have no
relevance or meaning, but then blossom as other scenes make more sense out
of them.
Take for instance a scene between two of the characters in the film who are
talking while walking in a field with a bunch of other people.  They
mention that they "joined up" with the event, and that they're "looking for
something," but what they're doing there isn't even mentioned until the
second to the last scene in the film.  It's the kind of film you watch once
to see everything, then watch a second time so that it all makes sense.
Egoyan introduces several characters and slowly allows us to get to know
them better throughout the film by not only seeing what they're doing in
the present day, but also bits from their past which are often tossed in
looking like scenes from either the present or the near future. 
Character-wise, there's: Francis (Bruce Greenwood), an IRS man who is the
guy who goes to the club every other night; Eric (Elias Kosteas), the DJ at
the club; Christina (Mia Kirshner), the stripper at the club who dances for
Francis; Thomas (Don McKellar), a gay pet store owner who's been checked
out by Francis; and Zoe (Egoyan's wife, Arsinée Khanjian), the owner of the
club who is probably the most disjointed person in the film.
One would think that people like an IRS man, a DJ, a stripper, a pet store
owner, and a club owner would never fully amount to a film, but they all
have connections to one another in some way.  Although Thomas seems to be
just a mere subplot that has nothing to do with any other part of the film,
Egoyan eventually gets him into the narrative and also gives his character
some depth.
Watching the film is like watching layers and layers and layers being
peeled back; as the film goes on and we piece things together, the film's
emotional core is exposed, and instead of just a really fun and kinky film,
like some of Egoyan's films ("The Adjuster" is the least emotionally
attached film that I've seen of his; "The Sweet Hereafter," the most), it
shows that it's about people who become more and more realized as the film
goes on, and by the last scene, our heart is crushed because we know
everything.  We get to witness what happens to every character, and piece
by piece, we see what they're doing and why.  In the beginning, we have no
clue why Francis goes to the club every other night, and we think that his
behavior is just a tad off kilter.  But by the end, we know what has
happened to him to make him do this, and we feel all the more for him.
It doesn't hurt that Egoyan has created some extremely interesting
characters who you can care about, and the actors are extremely good in
developing their characters, most of whom are Egoyan regulars.  It seems
that he can only get the same group of actors for each film, save a couple
extras, probably because his characters do such weird things.  Egoyan
regulars in this film are: Bruce Greenwood, who expertly shows a man who is
at the end of his rope; Elias Kosteas, who plays yet another weird
character, and well; Don McKellar, who's performance is wonderfully subtle;
Arsinée Khanjian, who is slightly pathetic once again; a small role from
"The Sweet Hereafter"'s Sarrah Polley; and cameos from David Hemblen as an
inspector in the first scene, and Maury Chaykin as an "Exotica" patron. 
Egoyan newcomer Mia Kirshner is wonderfully sympathetic in what would
normally just be a seductive role, and look for Victor Garber, who recently
played the sympathetic desinger of the ship in "Titanic," as Polley's
wheelchair bound father.
The brilliance of "Exotica" is that it grows on your emotions as you watch
the story unfold.  What starts out as just another bizarro Egoyan film
blossoms into one of the most emotionally profound films of the 90s, as
well as one of the most fascinating.  Of course, this is no shock coming
from Egoyan, who, with this and "The Sweet Hereafter," is now not only one
of the most fascinating directors working, but also one of the best.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     EXOTICA (not to be confused with EROTIQUE which was released in
the US at about the same time) is a Canadian film.  It starts with a
smuggler of exotic birds and then switches to a totally different cast
of characters--this time in a night club full of exotic dancers.  The
only thing these people have in common is that are all major bizarre.
But don't tune out yet because the writer begins to weave a story of
extreme complexity.
     The smuggler, Thomas (Don McKellar), acts like his mind is in
another planet.  He manages to run into a series of characters each one
of which has the audience wondering if this character is important or
not and will he be the link to the exotic nightclub story.
     In the exotic nightclub part of the picture we have Eric (Elias
Koteas), the barker/DJ, who has some strange attraction to Christina
(Mia Kirshner), the main dancer.  Christina, on the other hand, has an
obsessive (mental?) relationship with Francis (Bruce Greenwood), a
middle aged customer who comes in every other night.  Moreover, Francis
is paying a teenage girl Tracey (Sarah Polley) for something.  He takes
her home to her Dad (Victor Garber--remember him in the Days and Nights
of Molly Dodd?) where they live above a liquor store in a bad area of
town.  And all of that is just the plot set up.  Whew!
     This labyrinth gets more convoluted from there.  Slowly and
eventually, most of it gets solved.  The last scene manages to tie up
most of the major loose ends, but much remains an enigma when the
screen goes to black.
     The director/writer (Atom Egoyan) manages to take a lot of risks
in his writing, but his directing was too cautious.  I loved the
mystery, but at the same time found that I did not care about the
characters because he had them play their parts too surreal and aloof.
Too often it seemed he was more interested in the texture of the images
than in the people.  The movie was basically sort of a Blue Velvet-lite
in feel but without its violence.
     The cinematography by Paul Sarossy was great.  The effect in the
nightclub was bright lights of intense blues and greens with the other
parts of the set in clear but less saturated colors.  The pet store had
an eerie feel due to the camerawork.
     The movie runs 1:41 which seemed about right.  It is rated R for
varying degrees of female nudity in about 1/3 of the scenes.  There was
no sex or violence.  It is not an erotic show no matter what the local
was and not matter how many women were in various states of undress.  I
agree with the rating that the show is for adults.  I give it mild
thumbs down as I wanted better acting and better directing, and I award
it **.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     EXOTICA is a new dramatic thriller from Canadian director Atom
Egoyan, who brings us this fascinating glimpse into the life of Francis
Brown (Bruce Greenwood), a Canadian tax auditor whose life intertwines
with a his brother and niece, an exotic animal smuggler, and, most
importantly, the denizens of a strip joint called Exotica.
     The action in EXOTICA jumps from one character to another, from
location to location, and back into Brown's past occasionally, teasing
the viewer with bits of information about how these people's lives are
eventually going to gel into a cohesive story.  As the story
progresses, there are plenty of blanks left for the viewer to fill in
as the action springs around.  The seamless editing makes this seem
natural, albeit a bit overdone at times, but eventually it all comes
together to make perfect sense in the end.
     Thematically, EXOTICA is a dense study of human nature, obsession,
and the difficulties of reconciling our perceptions with reality.
Egoyan's careful braiding of plotlines and characters makes this
reconciliation all the more difficult, but that's the point.  In the
end, the film gives us about five different viewpoints on a single
situation, an admirable effort that not many filmmakers could pull
off.
     EXOTICA is a beautiful sensory feast, studded with lush
cinematography and haunted by an outstanding score.  The sets are
excellent as well, particularly the seductive Exotica club itself.  The
performances are dead-on, especially Greenwood's slightly twisted
accountant and Mia Kirshner as Kristina, the stripper with whom Francis
is obsessed.  The convoluted plot line and rather mature subject matter
may make the film too esoteric for some, but you won't be able to get
EXOTICA out of your mind for days.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Atom Egoyan's EXOTICA is a thoroughly peculiar film that finds success in
its complete lack of regard for traditional narrative structure. To say
that it focuses on character development rather than plot is an
understatement. This is a film that literally *is* character development:
it starts with what seem to be disconnected episodes in various peoples'
lives, then gradually reveals why all of them are doing what they are doing
and how it all fits together. (What little plot there is, incidentally,
revolves around a bird egg smuggling ring--now how's that  for something
you've never seen in a movie before?)
The character who receives the most screen time is Francis Brown (Bruce
Greenwood), who goes to a strip club called Exotica every other night to
see a dancer named Christina (Mia Kirshner), who comes to his table to
perform a private dance. There is a strange connection between the two of
them, one that is deeply melancholy and personal rather than sexual, and
his visits to the club seem to be their unique way of expressing this.
(Incidentally, the promotion for EXOTICA, which touts it as "the first in a
series of high-profile strip club movies," could not be more misleading. To
be fair, I've never actually seen SHOWGIRLS or STRIPTEASE or any other
"high-profile strip club movie," but my impression is that they share
little in common with this film, which is devoid of any sleazy exploitation
and keeps the nudity to a minimum.) Also falling under Egoyan's microscope
are Eric (Elias Koteas), the club DJ and Christina's ex; Thomas (Don
McKellar), a nervous pet store clerk who buys scalped tickets to the ballet
only so that he can scalp them himself; and Zoe (Arsinee Khanjian), the
club owner who inherited it from her mother.
Part of Egoyan's success with EXOTICA is that he manages to engage the
viewer in such a certifiably strange web of personalities and
relationships. Francis, for example, is not the kind of guy I'd want to
hang around with and is severely prone to escapist fantasies, yet I found
myself understanding his situation and caring about what happened to him
even in his most self-centered or obsessive moments. Even Eric, who seems
to be by far the most manipulative of the bunch, comes across as a real
person rather than a two-dimensional villain. Through Egoyan's unorthodox,
piecemeal method of revealing the characters, events are presented strictly
within context, and moments that would have been played for slick
sensationalism in other films come across as matter of fact, since they are
merely a part of everyday life for these people.
Egoyan is a little less successful, however, with Thomas, whom he sets up
as a parallel to Francis at first (both of them are caught up in a
compulsive nighttime ritual--Francis at the club, and Thomas at the ballet)
but later becomes a device to further the developing Francis/Eric/Christina
conflict. If someone had asked me an hour into the film who the second most
important character was, Thomas would have been my obvious choice, but he
eventually recedes into the background to make room for Eric and Christina.
A half-developed character as expository device is better than a completely
flat one, of course, but EXOTICA might have been a little more complete if
Egoyan had found a way to make Thomas a more integral part of the conflicts
and personalities that drive the film.
The most impressive aspect of EXOTICA, in any case, is the extent to which
the characters' lives are revealed to be intertwined. They aren't
completely aware of it, but they share a connection that is at once
coincidental yet monumental. When Egoyan does finally make it clear, it
comes across with genuine empathy and completes the puzzle that he has so
carefully constructed. It may not be perfect, but there can be no doubt by
the time EXOTICA concludes that it is truly the work of a skilled filmmaker.
Send comments and suggestions to ktpattersn@aol.com.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Bruce Greenwood, Elais Koteas, Don McKellar, Mia Kirshner, Arsinee
Khanjian, Sarah Polley, Calvin Green, and Victor Garber
     To be quite honest, I expected crap.  I often do, being the pesimistic
person that I am, but I especially expected crap when I rented Exotica.  I
would have never done it if it weren't for the fact that Atom Egoyan,
director of The Sweet Hereafter and The Adjuster was behind the camera.
That and, let's admit it, I'm human.
     Of course, knowing that Egoyan was working on it should have told me
that Exotica wasn't going to be crap.  That it wasn't going to be a simple
striptease film, and that it would be close to as profoundly lyrical as The
Sweet Hereafter was.
     Exotica is a story of the intersection of lives.  On the one hand you
have a pregnant strip club owner, Zoe (Arsinee Khanjian), on the other, a
disturbed DJ, Eric (Elais Koteas).  Also in the cast is a seductive stripper
Christina (Mia Kirshner) and a father of a murdered child, Francis (Bruce
Greenwood).  A customs official (Calvin Green) and a man in charge of a
pet-smuggling ring (Thomas, Don McKellar) are also in the mix.  With the
magic that Egoyan has always had, however, he moves all of this into a
pattern of coherence.
     Their lives intersect, mainly, through the events leading up to and
followwing the breaking of the rules at a strip club: that a stripper is not
allowwed to be touched.  They also intersect with the fact Eric and
Christina were the two that found the murdered daughter.  You with me?
Francis is an accountant sent by the IRS (or the Canadian equivalant) to
confirm that Thomas is involved in smuggling, and Thomas becomes his helper
in answering a question.
     To clear up misconceptions, Exotica isn't a movie about sex.  Most
people will become so caught up in the sex that they won't notice the vivid
portrait of a man so depressed by his daughter's death that he is willing to
pay his niece Tracey (Sarah Polley) $20 an hour to babysit a dead child.  I
did.  And, good Christ, I liked it.
     The performances are nearly flawless.  Bruce Greenwood flexes his
acting muscles as he did in The Sweet Hereafter, portraying a character so
ripped apart by the events in his life that he goes to obsessive lengths to
keep some sembalance of hope.  Mia Kirshner does her job so perfectly that
we do not see a stripper when we look at her: we see a multifacted character
who has a very special relationship with Francis.  Eric, Elais Koteas'
finest role, is a man who has let his love for Christina turn into an
obsession that becomes an inflamed jealousy.  Thomas is a man trying to
salvage whatever is left of his morals while the world turns insane around
him.
     The conflicting obsessions are pitted against one another, forming an
intriguing mindgame that goes into the deapths of each character as we sit
back in awe, watching a truly mythical story unfold in front of us.
     Like with The Sweet Hereafter, Atom Egoyan crafts a tale capable of
academia, rife with symbolism and haunting images.  He drifts us back and
forth throughout time, shows us characters that are to be pitied and loved
at the same time.
     Although I dare not use this as an example in everyday conversation,
Exotica is a film that is a striking example of a lack of a villian.  The
antagonist, ironically, is each protagonist.  Each person's personal demons,
their problems, conflict with each other.  For those who have grown to hate
the archetypal battle between good and evil, this is a very refreshing movie
to watch.
     Let there be several warnings about this film, however.  First, those
who are very conservative or easily offended back off: Exotica is not for
you.  Second, those who are renting it for sex might as well not: Exotica
does not deliver in that department, and features less nudity that any other
strip film I have ever seen.  Third, for those who lack a literary mind you
should avoid this film: it takes a lot of intelligence to decipher.  Fourth,
don't watch it after midnight: you won't get it when it's that late.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 2/95-3/95  
Running Length: 1:43 
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, nudity, language, mature themes) 
     It's difficult to explain the full range of emotional impact caused 
by EXOTICA.  The latest offering from Canadian film maker Atom Egoyan 
(FAMILY VIEWING, THE ADJUSTER) is as beguiling as it is baffling.  Not 
until the final scene does everything finally snap into focus, and when 
it does, the revelations have all the sudden, stark clarity of a vast 
nightscape illuminated by a flash of lightning.  Past scenes come rushing 
back with new meaning.  Whole perspectives change.  Egoyan has taken a 
seemingly-simple story and woven it into a near-masterpiece, creating 
images and an atmosphere that establish the perfect backdrop for a tale 
of loss, grief, and eroticism. 
     The Exotica is a strip club in Toronto, where men go to watch, but 
not touch, a variety of unclothed women who strut their stuff to the 
pulsing sounds of a rich and varied soundtrack.  The most visible of the 
dancers is Christina (Mia Kirshner), a sultry brunette who comes on stage 
in a school girl costume and is introduced by the deejay Eric (Elias 
Kosteas) as a "sassy bit of jailbait."  Her gyrations as she unbuttons 
her white blouse give the illusion of corrupted innocence--a fantasy 
with its basis in reality. 
     One of the club's regulars is Francis (Bruce Greenwood), a lonely 
government auditor who spends hours paying out money for Christina to 
dance privately for him.  The bond between these two is more profound 
than that of a normal dancer and client.  When Francis utters his refrain 
of "How could anyone hurt you?" to Christina, we're not aware of all the 
layers inherent in his words.  Only in retrospect do we ultimately 
understand. 
     Paralleling Francis' story is that of Thomas (Don McKellar), a gay 
pet shop owner who runs a lucrative smuggling operation out of his place 
of more legitimate work.  Currently, his business is being investigated 
by Francis, and this forms the narrative link by which everything is 
eventually tied together.  Thomas is the shy, nerdy sort who doesn't know 
how to go about picking up men, until fate deals him a pair of opera 
tickets and a means by which to find a seemingly-limitless supply of 
partners.  But for Thomas, filling that aching void of the soul involves 
paying a hefty material price. 
     On the surface, EXOTICA might seem to be about sex and lust.  
Nothing could be further from the truth.  Those elements are a slick 
sheen of polish over the real core.  While it's true that strip joints 
normally reek of excess, Egoyan's story seeks a more fundamental 
emotional level.  This film is driven by the grief and isolation of the 
characters.  The interpersonal connections made in EXOTICA are often 
obscure, and the reasons underlying otherwise-inexplicable actions are 
complex.   
     Everyone deals differently with loss, but Francis' problem is that 
he can't accept the tragedy which has defined his life.  The effects are 
too devastating, so he huddles behind a curtain of illusion spun by 
Christina, trying to reduce his crushing despair to something more 
bearable.  It's easy to mistake Francis for a dirty-minded middle-aged 
voyeur until you begin to understand what EXOTICA is saying.  And it's 
not until the final credits roll that the last word of that litany is 
spoken.  Very little about this picture is either predictable or 
conventional. 
     As far as the major actors are concerned, there isn't a weak 
performance.  The quiet intensity of Bruce Greenwood; the flamboyant, 
almost-snarling sadism of Elias Kosteas; and the nervous timidity of Don 
McKellar breathe vitality into Egoyan's scripted personalities.  However, 
it is Mia Kirshner, with her combination of sensuality and thinly-veiled 
pain, who arrests the viewer's attention.   
     Comparisons to Mike Leigh's NAKED and the uncompromising work of
Ken Loach are entirely appropriate.  As movies go, this one is
painful--painful because it exposes so much truth.  It is a "response"
film that demands something more active than detached observation.
EXOTICA becomes a journey of self-discovery.  As the mysteries
underlying the actions of Francis, Christina, Eric, and Thomas are
slowly unwrapped, we learn as much about ourselves as we do about
Egoyan's characters.  When any motion picture succeeds at that, it
deserves recognition as nothing less than one of the year's most
profound cinematic experiences.

Author
Jason Wallis
"Exotica" * * * * (out of four)
Starring Bruce Greenwood, Mia Kirshner, Don McKellar, Arsinee Khanjian,
Elias Koteas, Sarah Polley, Victor Garber and David Hemblen
Directed by Atom Egoyan
     I first saw this independently made Canadian import a few months ago
after reading by several critics that it was one of the very finest films
to come out of it's year.  I had also read in Roger Ebert's review that it
featured a great surprise ending.  So I went to the video store, checked
out a copy and then went home to watch it, all ready to watch an
unpredicable mystery/thriller with a huge twist ending in the vein of "The
Usual Suspects" or "No Way Out".  An hour and forty-five minutes later, I
was sitting there watching the credits of "Exotica" roll across the screen,
thinking "What the hell was that?!".  I gave it about two stars.  I didn't
really care about any of the characters and was really let-down by the
ending.
     A few nights ago I was wandering the ailes of my local friendly
Hollywood Video and came across the movie box.  I picked it up, read it and
then decided to give it another chance.  Man, am I glad I did.
     I guess I was just so wrapped up in trying to find the clues to this
so-called "surprise ending" that I paid very little attention to the
narritive.  Viewing it again (this time actually paying attention to the
story), I found "Exotica" to be not only one of the most intriguing,
stimulating (no, not like that), provocative and just plain brilliant films
of it's year, but also one of the most fantastic flicks of all time.
     And as for the "surprise ending", I guess you could call it a twist,
but, as I said, it's not at all a "Usual Suspects" kind of thing; it's just
a revalation that is made about the past relationships of three key
characters.  Nothing more, so don't make the mistake that I made and ruin
the film trying to guess it.  It's no biggie.
     One of the great qualities of Atom Egoyan's masterpiece "Exotica"
(which, in case you were wandering, is not a porn flick) is the utter
simplicity of it's storyline.  You have five major characters.  Francis
(excellent performance by Bruce Greenwood of UPN's short-lived, underrated
"Nowhere Man") is a very troubled IRS agent with a tragic past.  He goes to
the strip club Exotica (hence the title) every other night to watch one of
the dancers put on a private show for him ("Five dollars is all it takes,
genlemen, for them to show you the mysteries of their world" barks the DJ).
 His particular choice every night is a "young piece of jailbait" (again,
the DJ) named Christina.  But Francis does not watch her for mere sexual
arousal.  They have a much deeper relationship; she is his angel.  He is
constantly asking her how anyone could hurt her, how anyone could take her
away from him.  It's very touching, actually, once Egoyan shows his full
hand and everything that has come before snaps into focus.
     However, "Exotica" is about much more than a relationship between a
stripper and an IRS agent.  On the contrary, it (along with a small handful
of other films like Bergman's "Cries and Whispers" or Scorsese's "Raging
Bull") manages to key into some very sensitive and profound human emotions
like our wants, out needs, our desires and, ultimently, our fears.
     I guess what I'm trying to say is that "Exotica" effected me like no
other film has in a long, long time.  It sweeps you up and takes you on a
dark, depressing, distrubing, but always rewarding ride and never lets up
until the last final scene when everything is finally explained and you
feel as though you know a little more the human soul than you did starting
the movie.
     Unlike many movies lately, Egoyan has made a film with a great deal to
say.  Important things.  And I'm glad I finally listened.

Author
Pedro Sena
SUPER FEATURES:  Well photographed film makes it attractive.
Atom Egoyan, is a bit of an oddity.  His earlier works, were generally
centered on thoughts, and characters' thinking.  The film basically stopped
so we could hear these characters think.  While this was interesting, it
usually made for a film that might drag on for a  bit too long, and of
course, would often end up in a rather  unsatisfying style.  One got the
feeling that the story couldn't possibly have an ending ( life DOES go on ),
and he always added one anyway, just so we would think that it all meant
something.
EXOTICA, may be Atom's departure from the student style of film as his
previous work pointed out, or to.  Unlike his previous films, there is a
sense that there is a budget here, and that he is finally dead set on making
something that makes sense to  anyone else, least of all himself.  And
unlike his other films, we can safely sit down and tell you that there is a
story here  that goes from a to z, where as the other films, it was a bit
difficult to do so.  They appeared to have a story, but did they really have
one.?
A man has been hurt since the death of his wife and daughter in an accident
some years before.  And he spends some of his off time in a nightclub where
the girls dance nude, and have moments where they can dance just for you for
a small price. What we don't know is why is a man who has a good job, and is
reasonably well paid, not gotten together with someone else, and "mellowed"
out.  The film avoids all reason, until the
very end, when it kinda puts all bits and pieces in one basket, and lets us
in on the rest of it.
But in between we face the tension and intrigue that one particular dancer
provides.  She looks very young, and in her act she  dresses as a school
girl.  And she has an enjoyable time dancing for this one man, when he shows
up.  But there is a slight problem.  The dancers are helped along their
performances by a disk jockey who plays music and occasionally adds dialogue
to get everyone interested in checking out the girls, for whatever reason.
He is a bit of a live psychologist, doing something, which at first appears
to be sexy and fun, but is turning rather sour after a little, or perhaps we
have heard enough of him.  But he does know how to use his voice very well,
and the attraction often brings about a catharsis for us as well.  The DJ is
also trapped in his own world, in many ways in the same way as the gentleman
of the story.  In its own way, this is also a rather nice touch, and it
never implies that everyone is the same way.  The DJ also happens to be in
love with this special girl, and though their relationship has come to an
end, he has had a hard time letting go of it.
When the film comes to the end portion we finally come to find out a little
more, but unfortunately, by that time, the story has lost its flavor, and
what might have happened, or was going to happen, does not, and the film
ends in a rather oddball note, which is a bit of another Egoyan'ism.  But,
unlike other films, this one is better tied together, and holds well better.
Still not totally satisfying, but quite a bit less frustrating than the
other films.
But the film has some very good acting, and some rather interesting moments,
which are actually very nice directing touches. In special is a moment when
the thoughts waver from one person to another, and all of a sudden we are in
the nightclub at the early morning hours where the disk jockey is
philosophizing about his feelings.  It is
a nice touch.  At least, none of the characters are totally dishonest which
helps the film along.
Atom Egoyan may not be the best director around, but he is proving that he
has a touch that may be developing into a style that is unusual, but is
touching, and deep at the same time.  At the pace he is displaying, chances
are that his future work will be even better than before.  His stories are
showing a maturity that we do not always get to see in many directors.  It
does help when the director is, an auteur, as is called in France, meaning
that he also has a hand in writing his own material.  This is the lost art
form of film, in America and in the world where entertainment and money rule
what the mass market must see.
It is this kind of work that gets many of us thinking and understanding
ourselves better. but does anyone really care.?
3 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
Edgar Sommer
     The Exotica is a nightclub on the outskirts of Toronto, where
Eric, DJ and sort of MC/animateur, watches nightly as his ex-girlfriend
Christina performs.  Watches jealously, especially as far as the extra
attentions regular customer Thomas (or Francis?) garners are
concerned.  Francis (or Thomas?), meanwhile and erstwhile, goes through
a series of, um, interesting situations involving his pet shop, a gruff
taxi-sharing stranger, unexpected tickets to the opera and smuggled
eggs of some rare bird.
     Multiple story lines unfold in a splendid tangle of cutbacks,
forward and backward references and recurring themes, all woven around
the Exotica, its customers and the people who work and live there.
     This is a calm roller-coaster ride of a movie, if that makes any
sense to you, visually and plot-wise (plot-wise indeed) and
intriguingly and emotionally and acoustically moving.
     Rating? What rating? See the most excellent Internet Movie
Database at http://www.cm.cf.ac.uk/Movies/moviequery.html for all that
technical stuff.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There is a party game called "A Stick Falls, a Man Dies."  The
person running the game gives players a very high-level description of
an invented incident and players try to figure out what really
happened, asking only yes-or-no questions.  By doing this players geta
fragment of the story here, one there, soon there are whole parts of
the story they understand.  Finally the right piece falls into place
and they understand  the whole story.  Films, of necessity, make the
viewer play a similar game.  In the first scene of a film the audience
see characters they don't yet know in a situation they don't yet
understand.  Most filmmakers try to bring viewers up to speed as
quickly as possible, giving all the necessary clues as quickly as
possible.  Generally it is the mark of a bad filmmaker to leave the
viewer confused.  But it is very possible to tell a story much like as
in the game where the pieces are revealed in no particular order.  A
bit at a time, the way the pieces fit together is uncovered to the
viewer until the viewer has a whole story.  PULP FICTION did that to
some extent, telling its interlocking stories out of chronological
order on purpose to make the audience work to piece together the
overall story.  MARATHON MAN intentionally shows the audience a very
diverse set of scenes with odd characters before it starts knitting
them together into a single story.  Canadian filmmaker Atom Egoyan goes
much further in that direction in his cinematic jigsaw puzzle EXOTICA.
The characters and situations are intentionally confusing to challenge
the viewer initially to put them together to make a story.  And with
Egoyan's mischievous wit, the story is not just told as a jigsaw
puzzle, it is told to mislead on purpose.  The gaps that the viewer
attempts to fill in for himself, he is probably wrong about.  And the
story that gets shown to the viewer a bit at a time is perfectly suited
to this style of telling.  It is about the secrets in people's lives
that they do not reveal to others, and perhaps not even to themselves.
     The one problem in all this is that when you hear the solution in
the party game, the story may make a nifty puzzle solution, but it is
just not that good a story all by itself.  EXOTICA has the same
problem.  When the last secrets are disclosed in the final scene, what
you have is a story that needs the convoluted telling because it just
is not compelling on its own.  The plot that connects the three major
characters--the smuggler, the tax auditor, and the strip club host--
seems overly contrived and frankly, just not all that interesting.  One
comes away saying, "Oh.  Is that all?"  The story is curiously
unmoving.
     Egoyan both wrote and directed this piece which is bound to appeal
to some audiences for the intellectual appeal of what is slowly
revealed in its central puzzle.  And it may appeal to quite a different
audience for what is more quickly and easily revealed in its explicit
sex club scenes.
     This is a film with more than its share of surprises that expertly
catches the viewer off-balance more often than not.  Unfortunately,
Egoyan is more interested in his game of secrets about his characters
than in actually giving us insights.  I give EXOTICA a +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Alex Lopez-Ortiz
NOTICE: This is a review and analysis of EXOTICA.  The first part
of this piece is the review, the second part contains some analysis of
the movie which might be construed as spoilers.  If you have not seen
the movie and after reading the first part you intend to do so, 
then save the second part for the discussion afterwards.
Starring: Bruce Greenwood, Mia Kirshner, Elias Kosteas, Don McKellar,   
          Arsinee Khanijian, Sarah Polley
Director: Atom Egoyan
Screenplay: Atom Egoyan
     EXOTICA keeps the viewer guessing about the relationship between
the various characters in the film.  All of the people know each other,
but apart from that, there seems to be no other reason why to select
such set and follow them in this fictional account.
     The director hints for possible solutions, using a multi-line plot,
so popular with critics in MYSTERY TRAIN, and used to good advantage by
Quentin Tarantino in PULP FICTION.  EXOTICA reaches a whole new
dimension using this technique.  At the end it is surprising to see how
well the pieces of the puzzle fit together, in spite their apparent
unconnectedness and even misleading features.
     The out-of-chronological-order technique has become ever so
popular, perhaps even de rigueur, for biographical films.  Similarly,
we can now expect to see more movies in the future which will use, to
varying extent, converging multiplots.
     On a first glance, once the multi-plot puzzle in EXOTICA is solved,
there seems to be little left to look at.  But perceptive minds which
take the time to dig further will be rewarded with interesting views on
life or rather, commentaries on views OF life.
     EXOTICA is very much worth seeing.  It opened to critic's praise
worldwide (I first saw it in Mexico City, last December).  In Canada,
it broke records for a movie of its kind, which prompted the American
distributor to go for a wide release.  Apart from a strong plot, acting
is very convincing, and the soundtrack seems as if made for the movie.
     The spoon-fed-entertainment crowd may not appreciate this movie,
and thus it might last little on screen.  But if you want to try a
movie a cut above the crowd, with an originality that is ever so rare,
by all means see EXOTICA.
     First, a common theme of the quest for gratification by monetary
means.  The lone tax-auditor, the repressed homosexual pet shop owner,
the pregnant woman which runs the nightclub, the rich man which has the
club remodeled, the audience at the movie theatre, all use personal
wealth to buy palliative relief for the penuries of the soul....  Then
we have the quest for gratification through visual means by most of the
same people, including those who sit watching EXOTICA....
     In that regard EXOTICA stands for onlookers at a nightclub, for
the rich man looking through silver mirrors, and poor-rich people
looking at other's people lives through a silver screen.  EXOTICA also
stands for unwanted society attention into the lives of other people,
such as the tax auditor and the pet shop owner.
     EXOTICA is the customer agent looking at the pet shop owner, which
in turn is looking at the core of the problems between the strip dancer
and the tax auditor through the detached eye of a gay person (no
attraction to the strip dancer), and only interested on avoiding jail
(no personal relationship with the tax auditor).
     Second, EXOTICA is about isolated people holding back their
feelings; about people which by voluntary or involuntary means transfer
their view of reality to other characters.  The strip dancer becomes
the proverbial daughter, the DJ becomes the proverbial killer by means
of breaking the relationship between the father and the proverbial
daughter.  The niece becomes the baby sitter, the baby sitter becomes
the dancer, and the dancer becomes the proverbial daughter.  The pet
shop owner becomes the proverbial DJ, by finding the proverbial
daughter.
     A chain made of real and imagined links coming around full circle,
just as everything comes around to a fitting whole at the end of the
movie.
