Title
Review for Baby-Sitters Club, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Schuyler Fisk, Rachael Leigh Cook, Larisa Oleynik, Bre Blair, 
      Tricia Joe, Ellen Burstyn, Brooke Adams, Peter Horton 
Director: Melanie Mayron 
Producers: Jane Startz and Peter O. Almond 
Screenplay: Dalene Young based on the books by Ann M. Martin 
Cinematography: Wally Kurant 
Music: David Michael Frank 
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures 
     The summer of 1995 has been a good season for so-called family films.
A number of features aimed primarily at children have held their own with a
more mature crowd.  THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB, Melanie Mayron's movie based on
the popular books by Ann M. Martin, is not a member of that category.
Unlike THE LITTLE PRINCESS, POCAHONTAS, THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD, and
BABE, this particular motion picture is unlikely to grab the attention of
anyone much past their pre-teen years.
     The baby-sitters of Stoneybrook have banded together to form a club.
Seven strong, they work like an agency, receiving calls from clients and
handing out assignments to their select members.  In the words of Kristy
(impressive newcomer Schuyler Fisk), the club's founder, "We're more than
just a club -- we're friends -- best friends.  And nothing will ever change
that."  Of course, the minute she utters those words, everyone in the
audience knows that something's going to happen this particular summer to
try.
     Character development is virtually non-existent, with the personalities
of seven girls, three boys, and a few adults being painted with the broad
strokes that define stereotypes.  They're all here: the tomboy, the put-upon
best friend, the dreamy California girl, and the worldly New York
transplant.  Each has at least one story all to herself.  One's having
problems with a boyfriend, another's forging a friendship with an older
woman (played by Ellen Burstyn), and a third is trying to cope with the
sudden return of her long-lost father (Timothy Horton).  All-in-all, the
months between June and August are very busy for the inhabitants of this
film.
     Ultimately, this looks and feels like a made-for-TV movie or an after
school special.  The direction by THIRTYSOMETHING cast member Mayron is
unimaginative, and the script recycles all kinds of cliched situations and
facile solutions.  For the most part, THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB wants to teach
its viewers the value of friendship, but the message comes across with
sledgehammer subtlety in the midst of a sickeningly- sweet shower of
goodwill.  This is too much like a '90s version of THE BRADY BUNCH.
     Some will argue that I'm being too hard on THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB.  It
is, after all, likely to work for the niche it's aimed at.  On a more
objective basis, though, the film doesn't succeed as a comedy, fantasy, or
drama.  Fans and would-be fans of Ann M. Martin's books may be enthralled,
but, for the rest of us, THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB is something of an endurance
contest.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB is actually quite a rare gem in today's world of
movies, particulary those movies aimed at pre-teens. It's nothing
spectacular, but it is a pleasant film that deserves the PG less than many
Disney films. It's a movie about friendship and honesty, and it's presented
with a lot more class than we're used to seeing, however cornballish it may
come off at first.
THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB is about a group of seven baby-sitters (imagine that!)
and the summer day camp they start with the hopes of bringing in a little
extra cash. This particular aspect of the plot is merely the glue to hold the
film together as we explore a more crucial element: Kristy (Schuyler Fisk),
the founder of the BSC, has seemed a little distant and nobody in the club,
save it be Kristy's best friend Mary Anne (Rachael Leigh Cook), knows why.
The audience knows that it's because her biological father has come back into
her life after a six-year dry spell, but to everybody else, she's just become
irresponsible and distant. You see, Kristy's father has asked her not to let
anyone know he's in town.
There are a few subplots, the most apparent involving 13-year old Stacey (Bre
Blair), whose involved with 17-year old Luca (Christian Oliver) . . . and
Luca has no idea she's not at least "almost sixteen". Then there's Claudia
(Tricia Joe) who will be forced to quit the club should she fail science
class. A lot of characters are kind of lost in the shuffle. The only
character we REALLY get to know is Kristy. As can be somewhat expected from a
film carried by young actors, it can be a little hokey, but it's sweetly so
and not to be discounted.
THE BABY-SITTERS club is no masterpiece, and the character development needed
just a little more to it, but I think the word that sums it up nicely would
be "delightful". It's the kind of movie that doesn't hit high marks, but when
it's thru, you just might find a nice little smile on your face. I did :-)

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Schuyler Fisk, Rachael Leigh Cook, Larisa Oleynik, Bre Blair,
Tricia Joe, Ellen Burstyn, Brooke Adams, Peter Horton Director: Melanie
Mayron Producers: Jane Startz and Peter O. Almond Screenplay: Dalene
Young based on the books by Ann M. Martin
This movie started out with the same magical feel of childhood, carrying
all of the wondrous hopes and dreams of the future. Then it suddenly
plummeted into the tedious depths of teenage melodrama, which carries
with it the same offensive smell of puked chocolate milkshakes.
So let's describe the gang of BSC's which is feministically female.
Kristy the perky leader, is smart and lies to her mother and friends
because of some forlorn promise she made to her weak father, SIGH. Mary
Anne is Kristy's best friend, she has made a solemn vow not to tell the
other's about the secret of Kristy's father, BOO HOO. So everybody
starts to hate these two for keeping secrets, TUT TUT. The others are
namely the shop-a-hollic, "I'm for NY" Stacey (13) pretending to be (16)
so she can impress the "I'm so cute" Lucas (17), THROW UP. Then there's
Claudia "the artiste", who can make ornaments from forks, but can't pass
science class. If she fails she has to drop out of the BSC, SOB. The
other three members, whose names I can't remember, are all pretty
inconsequential like most of this movie.
I'm truly saddened at what children read nowadays. What utter BALOO! I
guess it could have been worse, but this movie comes close. Where's the
BBC (Beat-the-girls Boys Club), they would have made the game of
baby-sitting much more interesting.
Comment: No sympathy points for this group of annoying adolescents.
