Title
Review for Princess Diaries, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of 'THE PRINCESS DIARIES" (Disney)
    The real significance of this formulaic, mildly amusing story about
an awkward teen who is horrified to discover that she's really royalty is its
success at the box-office. It opened as the second-biggest live-action G-rated
film, topped only by "101 Dalmatians" - meaning there's definitely an audience
that's hungry for family entertainment, given the right packaging. And there's
no better "packager" than Garry Marshall ("Pretty Woman") who skews the comedy
to appeal to young girls, adding a spoonful of Julie Andrews ("Mary Poppins")
for their mothers. 
    In this contemporary fairy-tale, nerdy, klutzy, frizzy-haired Mia
Thermopolis (Anne Hathaway) is about to celebrate her 16th birthday when her
free-spirited, single artist mother (Caroline Goodall) casually mentions that
her grandmother is coming to San Francisco to meet her for tea. That's odd
because Mia's never met her late father nor his mother, Queen Clarisse Renaldi
(Julie Andrews) of Genovia, a tiny, mythical principality between France and
Spain. And when shy, wide-eyed Mia's told she'll inherit the throne, she's torn
between curiosity and terror. Guided by Andrews and aide-de-camp (Hector
Elizondo), Mia's lessons in prim, proper Princess behavior generate smiles and a
few chuckles but her transformation from ugly duckling into swan comes as no
surprise. Heather Matazarro scores as Mia's social-activist pal, but it's
venerable Julie Andrews who commands attention, particularly in a sequence in
which she cleverly "knights" a policeman and the conductor of the trolley-car
into which Mia has accidentally crashed her Mustang. Despite Gina Wendkos's
lame, predictable script, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Princess
Diaries" is a refreshing if schmaltzy, silly 6 - and a sequel is already planned.

Author
Pete Croatto
Anne Hathaway is a gorgeous, young woman with a gentle screen charisma. 
It's hard to believe she will turn 19 this fall; she looks and presents
herself like a woman who knows all the answers.
This is someone who should not be the lead role in a movie about puberty
blues, but here she is.  In Garry Marshall's latest outing, The Princess
Diaries, Hathaway plays a smart, gawky 10th grader who learns she is the
heir to the throne of a small European country.
The news is broken to Hathaway by her long-lost grandmother (Julie
Andrews), queen of fictional Genovia, while she tends to business at the
country's embassy in San Francisco.  Genovia is in desperate need of a
ruler and needs Hathaway to take over after her father's death.  Despite
her doubts, California klutz Hathaway agrees to take "princess lessons"
from Andrews and trusted chauffer Hector Elizondo before deciding
whether to rule a country or take the SATs.
This is all very familiar territory for Marshall, who directed Pretty
Woman over a decade ago.  However, Pretty Woman worked because of a
brilliantly brash performance by a pre-superstar Julia Roberts and the
movie's take as an adult fairly tale.  With The Princess Diaries, there
isn't anything distinctive to make it particularly memorable.
Among the flaws in Gina Wendkos' script, based on Meg Cabot's novel, is
the constant reliance on Hathaway's clumsiness.  She breaks things, has
trouble putting on panty hose, falls down a lot.  I'd love to see the
day when a comedy doesn't have to feature a beautiful woman flailing
around like she has an inner ear problem.  Words can be just as funny
coming out of a woman's mouth as they can a man's.  Watch Madeline Kahn
in Young Frankenstein for proof.
The script also doesn't have the wink-wink humor (like Shrek) that makes
a family film appealing to adults.  While the goofiness and pretty cast
(teen siren Mandy Moore has a sizable role as Hathaway's nemesis) will
certainly satisfy kids, there's really not a lot for grown-ups to
enjoy.  Andrews and Elizondo (in Pretty Woman mode) give spirited
performances, but they don't get a lot to do.  However, a dance scene
between the two is the movie's sweetest moment and hints at what could
have been.
This is Hathaway's movie, which is both a good and a bad thing.  She's
positively stunning and shows talent despite the clunky plot.  However,
I have a major problem with her character.  Even in frizzy hair and
Elvis Costello glasses, she would be popular in just about any high
school in America.  You can only imagine what Hathaway looks like in
princess mode.
Still, the leggy, elegant Hathaway is the lead in a movie that takes a
somewhat serious look at the awkwardness of growing up and the value of
a person's character.  I saw the movie with an audience during a Friday
matinee, consisting mostly of kids who probably are or soon will be
going through the same problems.  Certainly, The Princess Diaries isn't
the only culprit of questionable adolescent casting:  Varsity Blues and
She's All That immediately come to mind as well.  In The Princess
Diaries, Hathaway's presence also deflates her character's regal
metamorphosis.  What exactly was there to transform in the first place?
Director: Garry Marshall
Producers: Whitney Houston, Debra Martin Chase, Mario Iscovich, Ellen H.
Schwartz
Writer: Gina Wendkos
Starring: Anne Hathaway, Julie Andrews, Hector Elizondo, Heather
Matarazzo, Mandy Moore, Caroline Goodall, Robert Schwartzman, Larry
Miller
http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/diaries
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Garry Marshall really, really wants to make his Pretty Woman again.  And why
wouldn't he?  The Cinderella update was the last hit he had, even though it
was pure drivel.  Marshall tried to recreate the smelly magic via the
re-teaming of Julia and Richard in the equally idiotic Runaway Bride a
couple of years back, and now he's made what amounts to a Woman sequel with
a gangly teenager replacing the hooker with a heart of gold (it is, after
all, a Disney film).
The Princess Diaries stars Anne Hathaway (TV's Get Real) as Mia Thermopolis,
a 10th grade nerd who has lived with her artist mother (Caroline Goodall) in
an old San Francisco firehouse for all of her 15 years.  Though she's a
likeable lass, Mia is ugly enough to make dogs bark (and curdle milk, to
boot), with thick locks of frizzy Greek hair and eyebrows bigger than Andy
Rooney's.
It takes about 30 seconds to establish Mia as an outsider at her school (she
pukes during a debate), as well as clarify which boy she likes now (Erik von
Detten), the boy she'll end up liking in about 90 minutes (Robert
Schwartzman), and the popular girl who will eventually get her comeuppance
(pop sensation Mandy Moore.)  As haplessly geeky and ostracized as she is,
it's pretty obvious Mia will end up looking like a hot cover girl.  How
unattractive do the filmmakers expect us to believe she is?  She wears a
Catholic school uniform, and, well, you know what they say about Greek
girls.
Mia's life is turned upside-down when her grandmother (Julie Andrews) hits
town and reveals a rather large family secret.  It turns out that Mia's
granny is the Queen of Genovia, making her deceased father a Prince.  Mia is
the last of the bloodline, and Genovia will, for some reason, cease to exist
unless she steps into the royal shoes by her sixteenth birthday.  Genovia,
in case you were wondering, is right between Canadia and Chlamydia and is
famous for its pears.
What follows is perhaps the most startling on-screen transformation since
that frumpy FBI agent turned into a beauty queen in Miss Congeniality.  Mia
attends "princess classes" with her grandmother and a friendly bodyguard
(Marshall regular Hector Elizondo) every day after school, submits to the
obligatory makeover scene (performed by an uncredited Larry Miller) and -
presto change-o - she emerges as the drop-dead gorgeous girl we all knew
lived in those clunky combat boots.  The new Mia starts to isolate her best
friend (Heather Matarazzo) on the way to the throne, but hey - she's just a
serf now, right?
As ridiculous as the whole thing sounds, Diaries is carried on the
surprisingly capable shoulders of Hathaway.  She's a real charmer, and even
though it seems like she's got the Julia dial cranked up to 11, the film
clicks because of her performance.  Andrews also does well in her biggest
role in years (I thought she was Glenn Close the first few time I saw the
trailer).  Even MTV poster-girl Moore does a pretty decent job, but
remember, she's been acting for years (acting like she hasn't been plowed by
every guy in sight is still acting).
The most surprising thing about Diaries is its incredible potential to make
the leap from G-rated Disney territory to a tawdry teen sex romp.  There's
one spankworthy scene in which Mia rolls around in the back of her limousine
while trying to put stockings on underneath her plaid Catholic school skirt.
Another has her smearing ice cream all over Moore's ample chest, and there's
even a potentially interesting subplot involving a female gym teacher who,
literally, almost shouts, "What am I; a dyke?" (she says "duck," but still.)
Andrews' real-life granddaughter is a porn star who uses the name "Mary
Poppins" (yes, there is a lawsuit), but the topper is the inclusion of DJs
Mark and Brian in one scene.  That's right - Howard Stern wannabes in a
Disney film.  Call me Henny Penny, but I think the sky might be falling.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        How could a G-rated Disney film based on Meg Cabot's novel "The Princess
Diaries" be anything but cute, harmless fun?  Easy.  Take all the cute,
harmless fun out of it.  And while you're at it make it borrr-ring.  That's
what director Garry Marshall, screenwriter Gina Wendkos and, not to be
outdone, producer Whitney Houston have done with the G-rated Disney film
"The Princess Diaries."
        You couldn't tell it from the audience though, a Braintree, Mass. of
growing, glowing pre-pubescent girls (and the odd parental, popcorn perched
about their persons), who positively cheered when the end credits rolled
(ah the film had struck a lovely nerve with them but not with fuddy-duddy
old me).  Well, I might have cheered that the utter tripe was now well and
truly over, but that would have been too obvious.
        Too obvious is the least of the problems with Marshall's film (Garry made
a couple of other "princess" movies--"Pretty Woman" and "Runaway
Bride"--but this one's way without Julia Roberts so maybe *that's* its
problem).  In addition to being predictable as molasses, "The Princess
Diaries" has hardly got a laugh in it (it's a comedy), could bore the pants
off an Abyssinian for long, long stretches, and is so sloppily edited the
principals refer to scenes we haven't even seen yet (and probably never
will except, perhaps, in the DVD edition).
        Marshall should take virtually all of the blame here, since he's been at
this for some time and should know when a scene or two isn't working ...
and hardly *any* of "The Princess Diaries" works ("works," alas, implies
cleverness and there's none of that here either).
        Newcomer Anne Hathaway stars as Mia Thermopolis, a bright but socially
invisible San Franciscan teen who learns that her single mom (a wacky
artist played by the likable Caroline Goodall) had a bit of a fling with
some royal member of some miniscule European country nobody ever heard of
(the filmmakers go out of their way *not* to call it Serbia, which is
pretty much what all miniscule European countries are called in the movies
mark my words) and now she, Mia, is next in line to rule "Genovia" (hence
the headphones/tiara combo in the print ads).
        Julie Andrews, with the luminous factor cranked to 11, plays Mia's
grandmother (aka Queen Clarisse Renaldi), who shows up out of the royal
blue and lends Mia much advice and direction in the eating, talking, and
looking like a princess department (although Mia's big makeover simply
transforms her from ugly duckling to ugly swan).
        Also on stereotypical hand are a brainless jock, an evil cheerleader, a
dorky-looking best friend ("Welcome to the Dollhouse"'s Heather Matarazzo),
a sensitive auto mechanic/musician, and Marshall mainstay Hector Elizondo
as Joe the driver, imparting wit and wisdom from the front seat of Mia's
chauffeur-driven limousine at every intersection.
        A non-animated G-rated movie is a rarity these days but the rating here
reflects the fact that all the guts, all the good stuff, has been exorcised
from the finished product.  Lame, labored, and lamentable, "The Princess
Diaries" is recommended for eight-and-a-half year olds of the feminine
persuasion *only*; all others would do well to avoid it (like potholes, the
plague, and "The Perfect Storm").
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Steve Rhodes
Disney's THE PRINCESS DIARIES, directed by Garry Marshall (RUNAWAY BRIDE and
PRETTY WOMAN), is a charming, G-rated throwback to a more innocent time at the
cinema, when movies were filled with humor that the whole family could laugh at
without a trace of embarrassment.  
A MY FAIR LADY type of story, it stars Anne Hathaway ("Get Real") as someone
with the girlish awkwardness of a Haley Mills and the childlike beauty of a
Sandra Dee.  As 15-year-old Mia Thermopolis, Hathaway plays a high school
student who is a card-carrying member of her school's out-crowd.  With her
save-the-whales buddy, Lilly Moscovitz, played blandly by Heather Matarazzo, Mia
feels disdain for the school's inner circle.  Except, that is, for Josh Bryan
(Erik von Detten), with whom Mia dreams of sharing her first romantic kiss.  But
with frizzy hair so thick that it literally breaks hairbrushes, she is unlikely
to ever be noticed by a popular jock like Josh.
Mia, who lives with her artist mother (Caroline Goodall) in San Francisco, gets
a visit one day from her paternal grandmother, whom she has never met.  The
grandmother, Queen Clarisse Renaldi (Julie Andrews), explains that Mia's dead
father was a prince and that, being the only one left of royal blood, Mia is the
only one who can rule their small European kingdom.  "Shut up!" a stunned Mia
replies.  The queen's limo driver and right-hand man, Joe (Hector Elizondo), has
to explain that girl meant the reply as an expression of surprise and not a
literal command.
Rather than looking upon this opportunity as every girl's dream, Mia resists the
chance to wear a crown.  "I'm not ready to be a princess," she tells the queen. 
"I'm still waiting for normal body parts to arrive."
Much of the humor, of course, comes from Mia's training and transformation from
nerdish teen to elegant young woman.  With a gift for physical comedy, Hathaway
manages to make even the most clichéd pratfalls fresh and delightful.  Beauty
expert Paolo (Larry Miller), who is called in to fix Mia's looks, tells her, "If
Brooke Shields had married Groucho Marx," their child would have had her
eyebrows.  Once he finishes his magic, of course, it is a "wow" moment for the
queen and the audience.
For some reason, cinematographer Karl Walter Lindenlaub chose to light the movie
harshly and brightly when a hazier glow would seem to have been a better choice
for this royal fairly tale.  His choice gives the images more of a
matter-of-fact look than a magical one. 
This sweet confection of a film goes down easily and is filled with many big
laughs.  It may not be the summer's most memorable movie, but it is a completely
entertaining one.  Most amazingly, it is a comedy for the whole family with a
refreshing absence of bathroom humor.  You can take your 5-year-old and her
great-grandmother, and they'll both enjoy the picture just as much as you do.
THE PRINCESS DIARIES runs about 1:40.  It is rated G and is fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film ** 1/2.  Although he thought it was funny,
he said that he didn't like it as much as many other summer movies.  His friend
Maxim, age 12, gave it *** 12, mentioning how funny and imaginative it was.  His
friend Sam, age 12, gave it ****, commenting that it was a very funny movie and
a real crowd pleaser.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 3.  In the
Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
15-year old Mia Thermopolis (Anne Hathaway, TV's "Get Real") is 'invisible.'
Her hair is a frizzy nightmare, she's lousy at sports, public speaking makes
her physically ill and her own Vice Principal (Sandra Oh, "Last Night")
greats her as 'Lilly's friend.'  When the mother of the father she never
met arrives in San Francisco and invites her to tea, Mia reluctantly attends
and learns she'll be invisible no longer - her father was the crown prince
of Genovia, her grandmother is its Queen and she's about to write "The
Princess Diaries."
Adapted from Meg Cabot's novel by Gina Wendkos ("Coyote Ugly"), "The Princess
Diaries" blends bits of  "My Fair Lady," "Anastasia," and "Pocketful of 
Miracles" for its tale of a commoner whose royal grandmother grooms her for
a global stage.  Remove the glasses, straighten the hair and voila! - we
have a beautiful princess.
Mia pines for the popular guy at school (Eric on Detten, "Leave It To Beaver")
who's dating cheerleader Lana (singer Mandy Moore), the girl who loves to
put down Mia.  Meanwhile, Mia's best friend Lilly's (Heather Matarazzo,
"Welcome to the Dollhouse") older brother Michael (Robert Schwartzman, brother
of Jason) likes her for who she is and is obviously the better choice.  Once
Mia's lineage is leaked, she forgets plans with Michael and a promise
to appear on Lilly's cable show in order to accompany the suddenly interested
Josh to a school beach party.  Compromising photos appear in the paper,
causing conflict with Queen Clarisse (Julie Andrews) as well.  Will Mia
ascend to the throne of Genovia?  The resolution of this cliched package is
never in doubt.
While "The Princess Diaries'" main story may only entertain preteen girls,
it does have a couple of things going for it.  Director Garry Marshall
("Runaway Bride") shows the oft-filmed city of San Francisco in refreshingly
new ways, using locations like the Musee Mecanique at Cliff House and
an abandoned SOMA firehouse.  The best thing in "The Princess Diaries" is
Hector Elizondo, star of every film Garry Marshall has made, as the chief
of Genovian security who has a "Mrs. Brown"-like relationship with his Queen.
The second best thing is Fat Louie, Mia's totally real pet cat.
Anne Hathaway gives a game try in her feature film debut as Mia, but she
tries so hard her performance verges on mugging for the camera.  If Marshall
had reined her in a bit, the film may have had more charm.  Heather
Matarazzo is a lot more successful as Lilly, Mia's equally outcast buddy
who's both pleased and horrified to discover her friend is a royal.
Robert Schwartzman displays some of the geeky sexiness that made his older
bro Jason such a natural in "Rushmore."  Mandy Moore and von Detten are
appropriately pretty and hissable as the popular kids, but the usually 
reliable Sandra Oh is embarrassingly bad as their school's Vice Principal.
Julie Andrews glides through the film like the grand dame she is and has
wonderful chemistry with Elizondo.
On the whole, though, "The Princess Diaries" just gives a high gloss sheen to
a perfectly average piece of Disney live action entertainment.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom
The Princess Diaries (2001) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Anne
Hathaway, Julie Andrews Carolind Goodall, Hector Elizondo, Heather
Matarazzo, Robert Schwartzman and Sandra Oh. Screenplay by Gina Wendkos.
Based on the novel by Meg Cabot. Directed by Garry Marshall. Rated G.
Approx. 114 minutes.
The Princess Diaries is an appealing live-action fairy tale from Disney
that is simplistically charming.
This G-rated family feature is an undemanding as it is preposterous,
but somehow it actually works and holds your attention, even at an
overlong 114 minutes.
The movie is basically the ugly duckling story transported to
contemporary San Francisco.
Mia Thermopolis is a 15-year-old at a private high school where she
passes unnoticed. She even considers herself invisible. With the
exception of her best friend, Lilly, she is basically ignored by the
other students.
But all that changes when Mia's grandmother, whom she has never met,
comes to the city for a visit. It seems - surprise - grandma is Queen
Clarisse Renaldi of Genovia and Mia is a princess. Not only a princess,
but the heir apparent to the throne of the small European principality.
Mia's mother and father divorced when Mia was an infant. Pop went back
to the old country to take care of royal business, while Mom remained in
San Francisco to follow her career as an abstract artist.
The Princess Diaries is a movie aimed at young girls, most of whom can
probably identify with Mia's predicament. `I don't want to run my own
country, I just want to pass 10th grade,' Mia says.
Mia is intelligent, but painfully shy; she can't make it through debate
class without having to hurl. It also doesn't help that she's a bit
nerdy looking as well as awkward. But once her regal grandmother begins
giving her `princess lessons' - and she gets a complete makeover - she
emerges as a graceful, self-assured young woman.
Anne Hathaway's portrays Mia with the right combination of brains,
gawkiness, reluctance and finally, confidence.
It is a bit difficult to imagine the reaction of an anonymous teen-ager
being told just before her 16th birthday that she is heir to the throne.
Hathaway, Caroline Goodall as her mother and Julie Andrews as Queen
Clarisse nearly succeed in making this unlikely scenario believable.
Truly, though, this is one of the film's weak points. It is difficult
in today's split-second, Internet, super-electronic age to fathom such a
secret being buried for almost 16 years without a leak.
Andrews is dazzling and slyly humorous as the royal grandmother playing
Henry Higgins to her granddaughter's Eliza Dolittle. Those who remember
Andrews from her classical stage performance in My Fair Lady can
appreciate the irony of the situation.
Director Garry Marshall, he of Pretty Woman and Runaway Bride fame,
tries to keep the proceedings moving, but a little more judicious
editing could have been used. At nearly two hours, the film drags in
spots.
The Princess Diaries, based on a young adult novel by Meg Cabot, plays
out as you'd expect, with everyone living happily ever after.
And even though the bumps and detours on this road to happiness are
very predictable, The Princess Diaries is a movie parents and children
can enjoy together. It's not grand cinema, but it is an enjoyable
confection that will give some families an excuse to spend some time
together.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Walt Disney Pictures 
 Director: Garry Marshal
 Writer:  Gina Wendkos, novel by Meg Cabot
 Cast: Julie Andrews, Anne Hathaway, Hector Elizondo, Heather
Matarazzo, MandyMoore, Caroline Goodall, Robert
Schwartzman, Terry Wayne
   As Roger Ebert so wisely tells us, it's not the what of a movie:
it's the how.  In other words, don't decide whether you want to
see a picture based on its subject: think of how well the team
may have executed the project.  Take, for example, the subject of the
ordinary person who is transformed into someone transcendent. 
The Broadway musical "My Fair Lady" not only did the job
splendidly but the cast featuring Julie Andrews and Rex Harrison,
using the music and lyrics of Frederick Loewe and Alan Jay
Lerner, turned in what is arguably the greatest staged musical of
all time.  It helped that the play was based on the writing of
George Bernard Shaw.  Now, it would be a mite unfair to expect
Garry Marshal, however remarkable his resume ("Pretty Woman,
"Frankie & Johnny," "The Flamingo Kid" and others) using a
screenplay by Gina Wendkos from Meg Cabot's novel to come
close to Shaw's "Pygmalion."   In fact "The Princess Diaries,"
about the transformation of a high-school geek into royalty, is so
loaded with sugar and fatuous dialogue that one can
scarcely believe that Mr. Marshal would risk holding the attention
of his targeted market, girls 8-13 years old, for an overlong 115 minutes. 
Though Julie Andrews at sixty-five years of age looks
magnificent, she is asked to display all the charm that her English
upbringing had given her to hold the story together.  All things
considered, she succeeds admirably.  Without her, "The Princess
Diaries" could barely last a weekend at the box office.
   Heather Matarazzo, who so dead-on showed us what life is like
in the Seventh-Grade-from Hell in Todd Solondz's "Welcome to
the Dollhouse" five years ago, is reduced to a supporting role as
Lilly, best friend of Mia (Anne Hathaway in her feature film
debut), both performing in the role of tenth graders at an preppy
San Francisco high school featuring the usual scenarios of
bullies, nerds and jocks.  Mia, who had recently lost her father in
an accident, lives with her mother Helen (Caroline Goodall) in a
modest home and rides her scooter to school each day.  Invited
to the stately home of her grandmother, Clarisse (Julie Andrews)-
-who happens as well to be the queen of a European nation-
state-- she is startled to be asked to fulfill the dream of every
adolescent girl: she is offered the job of princess of the fictional
little pear-producing country of Genovia situated between France
and Spain (Andorra?).  Burdened by her weaknesses as a public
speaker and her nerdy appearance (thick eyebrows, ghastly
hair), she is certain she could never fulfill the role.  But the
determined Clarisse puts her make-up guy (Larry Miller) to work
on her, shows her how to walk, talk and carry utensils, et voila--a
radiant beauty that subverts the essence of Andrew Adamson
and Victoria' Jenson's "Shrek."  Once again, as is typical of just
about every fairy tale, only the most beautiful can find her dream,
in this case a kingdom, should she so desire one, and a prince
charming to dance with.  (Two connivers, in fact, who would be
destined to take over the country should Clarisse refuse, are the
ugliest people in the film.)
   "The Princess Diaries" features the excellent Hector Elizondo
as the queen's chauffeur, who enjoys a Queen Victoria-Mr.
Brown relationship to her royal highness but Elizondo is a fish out
of water.  So wonderful in "Tortilla Flat," the actor has now
appeared in all of Garry Marshal's movies and has a difficult time
maintaining an upper-class accent and bearing.  
   "The Princess Diaries" is not a bad movie: mediocre would be
the best way to describe it, and for all we know it could go over
with the teen and sub-teen audience for whom it's directed.  Yet
given the changes that have been made in our society over the
past few decades, I'd be surprised if the young attending this G-
rated feature would consider it less than cornball, giving it
perhaps a lower rating than the more understanding and
indulgent adults who accompany them to the multiplexes.
Rated G.  Running time: 115 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Garry Marshall. 
Cast: Anne Hathaway, Julie Andrews, Heather Matarazzo, Hector Elizondo, 
Caroline Goodall, Robert Schwartzman, Mandy Moore, Erik Von Detten, Sandra 
Oh, Kathleen Marshall, Patrick Flueger, Terry Wayne, Larry Miller. 
2001 - 115 minutes 
Rated G (nothing objectionable). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, August 3, 2001. 
A rare G-rated, live-action Disney movie that could have almost been filmed 
in the 1960s as a starring vehicle for Hayley Mills ("Pollyanna," "The Parent 
Trap"), Garry Marshall's "The Princess Diaries" evokes a time when so-called 
"family films" were completely harmless for all ages, as well as absent of 
bodily function humor. It's almost refreshing, really, to see a movie with no 
coarse language or objectionable material that is able to retain every bit of 
the effectiveness it might have had with a little bit of both of these things. 
15-year-old Mia Thermopolis (bright newcomer Anne Hathaway) is a 
frizzy-haired wallflower who is terrible at public speaking and isn't a part 
of the cool crowd at her private San Francisco high school. Aside from her 
infatuation with a jock classmate (Erik Von Detten), Mia is perfectly 
comfortable with her no-name existence, and even has a best friend in the 
equally unconventional Lilly (Heather Matarazzo). When her distant 
grandmother (Julie Andrews), whom she has never seen before, pays a visit, 
she discovers that she is Queen Clarisse Rinaldi of the European country of 
Genovia. Even more, as the only living heir to her now-deceased father, Mia 
is set to become Princess of Genovia. Not exactly the royal type, Mia is 
forced to endure training on how to act and look the part, and must decide 
whether she wants to extend this honor as a lifetime title by the night of an 
impending ball. 
Yet another take on the classic story of "Pygmalion," "The Princess Diaries" 
treads in well-worn territory and, thus, is neither surprising nor original. 
It is a charmer, however, and coasts on this simple quality for the entirety 
of its overlong 115-minute running time. About as innocent as a beach movie 
starring Frankie Avalon and Annette Funicello, the film is good-natured and 
sprightly, with just enough energy to also work as a particularly funny 
comedy. 
Veteran actress and singer Julie Andrews, in her first starring role in over 
a decade, may add a touch of class to the proceedings as Mia's loving 
grandmother, but it is Anne Hathaway, in her film debut, who is the real star 
of the show. Hyped by director Garry Marshall as the next Julia Roberts (who 
shot to fame herself with Marshall's 1990 romance, "Pretty Woman"), Hathaway 
has a natural talent for both physical comedy and human drama, and the 
personal issues she struggles with are realistically brought to life. A 
genuinely likable presence, Hathaway definitely has what it takes to be a 
huge star. 
Surrounding Andrews and Hathaway with varying degrees of success are a large 
supporting cast of familiar faces. Hector Elizondo (1999's "Runaway Bride" 
and Marshall regular) has a nice, little role as the Queen's tender-hearted 
limo driver, while Heather Matarazzo (best known for 1996's "Welcome to the 
Dollhouse") makes an impression as Mia's friend, Lilly. Pop singer Mandy 
Moore, as Mia's stuck-up classmate, Lana, makes Selma Blair in the recent 
"Legally Blonde" look like an absolute angel in comparison. Moore does fine 
with what she's given, and even has a fun scene in which she gets to sing, 
but her character has zero redeeming qualities. 
Where "The Princess Diaries" falters is in the mixed messages it sends out to 
viewers. After Mia's obligatory makeover scene, her long, frizzy hair is 
trimmed down and straightened, and she replaces her glasses with contacts. 
After "becoming" beautiful, her popularity at school skyrockets and she is 
meant to look more like a Princess. Mia's makeover doesn't work, because (1) 
it doesn't stay true to her character's admirable, individualistic attitudes, 
and (2) it falsely tells impressionistic young audience members what the 
word, "beautiful," is supposed to mean. This entire plot point should have 
been extracted in the early screenplay stage, and the movie would have been 
stronger for it. 
Flaws aside, "The Princess Diaries" is an enjoyably featherweight piece of 
fluff that does a good job of creating a motion picture exemplary for all age 
groups. Glossy and picturesquely photographed by Karl Walter Lindenlaub, 
painting San Francisco as a beautiful place to visit, the movie is 
entertaining, light-hearted, and maybe even a little wise. For all of its 
missteps in trying to portray what is conventionally attractive, it does have 
a lot to say about staying true to one's beliefs and dreams. Not exactly an 
innovative notion, but a good one, all the same. 
