Title
Review for Exorcist III, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Louis Butler
     THE EXORCIST III is the real sequel to what might have been the
single most important horror movie since Boris Karloff portrayed
Dracula.  The original EXORCIST shattered the bounds of what was
acceptable gore and, unfortunately, spawned a generation of slasher
films that were nothing but gore.  Released in 1973 it depicted a level
of violence that I do not believe had ever been encountered before.
     The sequel, THE EXORCIST II: THE HERETIC (I think), was so bad that
it completely submarined the career of Linda Blair (who?).  When I saw
the preview for E III in the theater several months back I heard several
people say, "Three?  Was there a Two?  I don't remember II."  The lucky
few.  The lucky few.
     Now, 17 years later we have a sequel.  Fifteen years have passed
and some very disturbing murders are being committed.  There is none, or
very little of the shocking gore of the original or of the multitude of
"successful" horror movies of the last decade.  The gore is minimalistic
and the emphasis is on scaring the bejeezus out of the audience without
tricks.
     There is one scene where the camera is set up at the end of a
hallway.  A series of miniscares and an earie soundtrack warns you that
something is going to happen.  Something dreadful.  You know what will
happen.  You know to who.  You know to who.  The demon has told you who
is going to die.  You KNOW.  And yet, when the moment comes, I nearly
bolted out of my chair.  A figure in a white flowing gown walks quickly
across the hallway, perfectly erect.  The scene is surreal.  The flowing
robes and the fast soundtrack make the action seem like it is moving too
fast, but it is real time.  The figure has the murder weapon stretched
out in front like an object of rapture.  There is never the scene of the
murder.  No blood is spilled, and yet the audience is truly terrified.
     I highly recommend this movie for several reasons.  It is a return
to the good old fashion psychological thriller (a la ALIEN, or PSYCHO)
with a good dose of horror thrown in for good measure.  It might be a
good idea to see THE EXORCIST before you see this to refresh your mind
as to some of the details.  The plot of the first movie is rather
important.
     Blatty's depiction of Satan is rather disturbing.  There is a
quality there that is so human.  The demon has his points... if you
look just for an instant from his perspective.  Blatty allows the story
to unfold slowly and terrifyingly.  There are long pauses in dialog,
and long speeches from major players in the plot.  The acting is
wonderfull [sic].

Author
The Phantom
     The Phantom went into THE EXORCIST III with a bad taste in his
mouth, and although it may have had more to do with some strange Italian
mineral water he had just drunk, he thinks that part of the reason is
the general state of horror films today.  Through no fault of his own, a
few nights ago he was forced to watch most of last year's indescribably
bad THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA, and as the film plodded through scene
after predictable scene of tedious violence and more close-ups of Robert
Englund's latex-encased face than even his mother would appreciate, let
alone enjoy, the Phantom considered the current state of the horror
film.
     How things had come from the suspense classics and psychological
thrillers of years ago to this monstrosity, this badly plotted affront
to the name "Phantom," this latex nightmare, is a mystery.  Either
audiences have become stupider (for there is no other adequate
description of a film like Englund's PHANTOM OF THE OPERA), or
filmmakers believe that audiences have become stupider, or there is
simply no one left who can direct an intelligent horror film.
     Consider the Phantom's most recent reviews, which span just about a
year's worth of horror films:
     In a year's worth of horror films, how many were good enough that
anyone would want to see them once, let alone again on video in years to
come?  HENRY, and for those phans of the Twilight Zone, BRAIN DEAD.  The
rest range from downright awful, to predictable, to "well, I know it
sucked, but it had great special effects."
     Yet as he compiled this roll call of the mediocre, it struck the
Phantom that the best of the lot (HENRY and BRAIN DEAD) are both
primarily psychological thrillers first and horror films second.
Although some graphic violence is depicted in each, these two films
achieve their effect through good direction, good plotting, good
cinematography, and just plain good story telling.  In years gone by,
even the Roger Corman/Edgar Allen Poe quickies had some measure of
intelligence to them; whether because of the severe restrictions placed
on the display of graphic violence, or the infancy of film effects and
makeup techniques, or because latex hadn't yet been invented, horror
films had to be designed to scare their audiences through subtle
manipulations rather than through overt displays of blood and gore.
     Of course the Phantom realizes that there were exceptions to this
rule -- more than a few low budget gore-fests were produced during the
seventies -- but for the most part horror films made before the
Jasonized eighties had a different look and feel to them, and the
successful ones were successful because they gave us credit for having
imaginations and intelligence.  However good one thinks the HELLRAISER
and EVIL DEAD series are, one would be hard pressed to say that these
films were very thoughtful or even more than superficially clever.
Alas, it seems that even in the best of the most recent horror films,
phans have had to settle for style over substance and clever camera work
over original plots and intelligent dialogue.
     But what does any of this have to do with the subject of this
review, the latest EXORCIST sequel?  Just that while THE EXORCIST III
isn't a classic horror film, it is certainly a cut above the vast
majority of sad excuses for horror films we've seen recently.  Best of
all, it's a worthy successor to the original EXORCIST, and it all but
erases from one's mind its mind-numbing predecessor (though the Phantom
must admit that he makes a special stop for it at his local Blockbusters
whenever he really needs a good laugh).
     The Phantom thinks that this makes for a nice ironic contrast with
William Friedkin's 1973 classic, the original EXORCIST.  Though THE
EXORCIST may have been a lot of things, subtle it was not.  But phans
must keep in mind the time in which the film was released.  1973 was
very much different from 1990 as far as what an audience expected to see
in a horror film; in fact, THE EXORCIST is one of the films that so
changed our expectations that it spawned an entire sub-genre, the "bogus
Catholic theology" genre of horror film (of which this year's THE FIRST
POWER is one very unfortunate example).
     THE EXORCIST worked because it pulled out all the stops, but times
have changed, and the Phantom has seen dozens too many horror films that
make THE EXORCIST look like a Disney production.  Pea soup and gruesome
special effects just don't cut it anymore, and too many recent horror
films that were technically excellent still failed to satisfy because
they regularly sacrificed story, character, and dialogue to the
all-powerful god latex.
     And so the Phantom was astonished to see that THE EXORCIST III
forsakes almost entirely this false god and so succeeds in a way that
few other recent horror films have.
     The film is William Peter Blatty's "official" sequel to the
original EXORCIST (which was based on his novel of the same name), and
it too is based on one of Blatty's novels (in this case, "Legion"), but
this time Blatty himself directs from a script that he himself adapted.
That alone was enough to give the Phantom pause; after all, the last
time a writer had directorial ambitions Clive Barker managed to waste
David Cronenberg's startling performance and produce a very mediocre
NIGHTBREED.  Before that, Steven King imagined that MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE
would satisfy those of his phans who up until that point had not been
happy with the film adaptations of his novels.  (The Phantom thanks
heaven above that Rob Reiner, and not King, is directing the forthcoming
MISERY, since it was while watching MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE the Phantom
discovered what the protagonist of MISERY must have felt like; when
asked if would like to see MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE again, the Phantom always
responds "I'd rather be in hell with my back broken.")
     But Blatty seems to have decided that in EXORCIST II: THE HERETIC
he had a safety net: no matter how bad EXORCIST III turned out, it
couldn't even approach the sheer awfulness of its most recent
predecessor.  And so he set out to make a traditional horror film, one
that recalls THE OMEN or THE HAUNTING more than it does THE EXORCIST,
and one that at times feels more like a play than a film.
     It is a film in which people act -- actually act, not just stand
around and say things like "It's probably the storm, I'm sure it's just
the wind, let me take a look in the basement and make sure" -- and in
which the characters speak in complete sentences.  The dialogue
throughout the film is intelligent, witty and interesting -- one really
wants to listen to what the characters are saying, and the dialogue
itself contains countless clues to the mysteries of the film's plot.
And the film achieves its effects in precisely the way that made the
great horror films of the past great: through the use of psychological
horror rather than through acres of latex and liters of blood.
     In fact, at one point in the film, the Devil, speaking through his
latest instrument of death, says that he has always enjoyed
Shakespeare's works.  Given the structure and tone of much of the film,
it's easy to see why.  THE EXORCIST III is filled with what in different
circumstances might be termed soliloquies.  Strange for a film made in
the past few years, and stranger still for a horror film.  And strangest
of all, although this is one of the Phantom's most hated forms of
exposition (since he feels it is entirely inappropriate in a visual
medium that affords the artist so much freedom), the Phantom found that
he enjoyed Blatty's style -- and his script -- immensely.
     The story is a simple one, and so the Phantom will have to be
careful not to give too much of it away.  The action takes place in the
present day, 15 years after Linda Blair gave her head-turning
performance, and 15 years after the Devil killed Father Karras.  Phans
will remember that the Devil was exorcised that day, and Blatty reveals
that he's been itching for revenge ever since (the Devil, that is,
though one could argue that Blatty's been itching for another success;
the people who have purchased his last novel have not been, well,
legion).
     This is the starting point for THE EXORCIST III.  George C.  Scott
plays a detective who was a good friend of Father Karras', and who now
has the responsibility of solving a string of bizarre, ritualistic
murders that at least initially seem to proceed with no real pattern.
Each murder is more gruesome than the next (though phans of bogus
Catholic theology films will be glad to know that none tops the acme of
these deaths: the priest in THE FINAL CONFLICT (the third OMEN film) who
was strung up, wrapped in plastic, and then set on fire as he swung
suspended over a television studio), and in time Scott comes to realize
that he is dealing with something that is decidedly unnatural.  He is
plagued by dreams -- first of Father Karras' death as he tumbled down
those sinister looking stairs, then by visions of heaven in which the
dead and soon to be dead mingle with angels playing big band music and
with assorted NBA all-stars (no, the Phantom is not making this up, but
it *is* just a dream, you know), and finally he discovers the link
between what happened 15 years ago, a series of murders by someone known
as "the Gemini killer" that had been solved at about that time, and the
murders that are occurring all around him with astonishing regularity.
What that link is the Phantom will never divulge, but he warns phans not
to get their hopes up; Blatty may be able to make the Devil believable,
but John Le Carre he is not.
     If the Phantom has made this film sound like another FIRST POWER,
or perhaps another PRINCE OF DARKNESS, then he's done it a grave
injustice; perhaps it's because so much of what is enjoyable about THE
EXORCIST III has nothing to do with its rather shopworn plot.  Whereas
THE FIRST POWER and PRINCE OF DARKNESS were exceptionally stupid and
dim-witted films (respectively), films that did not even come close to
doing their subjects justice, THE EXORCIST III delivers.  Although
Blatty could have turned this into another special effects extravaganza,
he directs with a remarkably literate and restrained style.  The murders
all take place off camera, and yet because the characters describe them,
they turn out to be even more effective than the most heavy-handed slash
and trash scene.  Instead of seeing decapitations and disembowelments,
we hear about them -- something truly unique in these very illiterate,
yet overly literal, days.  It is psychological horror at its very best:
we are scared not because of what we see, but because of what we hear
and imagine.
     And still more remarkably, the film has a very low SLC Quotient
[from the Phantom's Dictionary of Horror Film Reviewing Terms:
"Spring-Loaded Cat Quotient," so named in honor of the technique Ridley
Scott used to scare his audience in ALIEN].  The film has a spare
feeling, and most scenes have just two or three people in them; in fact,
the film's most effective scenes are staged in a cell in which Scott
listens to the Gemini killer discuss his work.  Not since HENRY:
PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER has a director attempted to get his audience
inside the head of a psychopath, and while John McNaughton was far more
successful in his excellent HENRY, Blatty, utilizing some rather
eccentric and compelling monologues, comes close.
     There are no profound surprises to be found in Blatty's plot, and
for a film that starts out with a rather interesting premise, THE
EXORCIST III ends in a very conventional way.  In fact, the Phantom has
heard rumors that the original version of the film did not end with an
exorcism as the current version does, and that the ending was mandated
by nervous studio executives who didn't feel comfortable releasing a
film called THE EXORCIST III if it didn't contain at least one exorcism.
These same meddlers might then also be responsible for the film's only
scenes of blood and gore, scenes which seem remarkably out of place
given the tone of preceding 90 minutes.  The Phantom has not read
"Legion," so he doesn't know whether or not an exorcism was featured in
Blatty's original conception of the story.  But the film's ending is
both disappointing and jarring -- worse than being simply a bad ending,
it seems entirely inappropriate.
     But that is but a small quibble.  For the most part, Blatty
deserves nothing but praise for attempting to raise the genre from the
black depths into which Jason, Michael and Freddy have cast it.  Simply
put, THE EXORCIST III is a very enjoyable, very compelling, and very
successful horror film.  See it, phans; it's even worth $7.50.
