Title
Review for Atalante, L' (1934)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

L'ATALANTE (director: Jean Vigo; cast: Michel Simon (Jules), Jean Daste
(Jean), Dita Parlo (Juliette), Louis Lefebvre (cabin boy), Gilles
Margaritas (peddler), 1934-France)
Jean Vigo, whose father was an anarchist, as is he, sadly had a
promising artistic future cut short because of his sudden death from a
tubercular condition in 1934. He was just twenty-nine years- old and had
made two brilliant feature films, ZERO CONDUCT and this film.
L'Atalante is, perhaps, considered by some, a dated film as far as its
style goes. But with that being said, there is no denying that it is
still powerful viewing because of its magically developed poetical
gestures to the subject of love and the refreshingly lyrical way it
looks out at its surrounding seascape towns and at the human condition.
Its romantic story is much like Murnau's SUNRISE (1927), of innocents
from the country getting corrupted by the big lure of the city, and then
finding their true roots again. In this case, the peasant village girl
(Juliette), is amiably played by the notable German silent screen
starlet, Dita Parlo. She marries someone not from the area, the skipper
of a motorized barge, Jean (Daste). His route passes her hometown.
The newlyweds adjust to marriage on the barge, with the eccentric mate,
Jules (Simon), and the moronic cabin boy (Lefebvre) aboard. Jules'
presence gives the film a certain strength, whether in revitalizing
Juliette's spirits, which are encapsulated by her surprised reaction
that she has met someone as knowing as him. She comes to this conclusion
when she visits his room, where she sees that all the junk he has
collected over his years from travelling across the sea and the plethora
of cats he keeps, are extensions of his worldly personality. He becomes
for her someone she can lean on for common sense guidance. By the force
of his humanity and his paternalistic interest in the couple, he can
bring to Juliette a sense of relief from this seemingly forlorn journey
she is on. He is the heart and soul of this film; the richness of his
character gives her a confidence in living. His later role will be that
of savior, bringing her back to the captain after her disappearance.
The ordinary couple are playing out their vexing emotions without
letting on how much these emotions mean to them, until it is almost too
late. Because their emotions and passions are so dominating, the quality
of the film engulfs everyone aboard the barge in an unreal state. The
Seine looks so much like a dreamworld, where those on it are just
drifting. Where romantic visions fade in and out, and hopes arise and
perish on a whim.
The peasant girl, away from home for the first time, is bored by the
same monotonous grind aboard the barge. She anxiously tells her husband
that she wants to see the bright lights of Paris. On the night she has
her heart set on going to Paris, as the barge is docked there, the
roguish Jules decides to leave the boat and go to a palm reader to have
his future told, forcing them to stay home and watch the barge. When the
couple do go out in Paris, the husband is outraged at a peddler who
tries to win his wife away from him at a dance hall, and he abruptly
cuts that excursion short. Juliette still determined to see Paris,
sneaks off ship; but the jealous captain, in a rage, takes off for the
next town leaving her stranded. They both find that in their despair
over their separation, that they do miss each other. When they are
reunited, she will have seen enough of the world to know what it means
to be on her own in the hostile world. The city will symbolize
corruption and temptation for both of them, while life on the sea will
come to mean honest work and innocence.
Because the story is such a simple one and the couple in so ordinary, it
is not the story in itself that is exhilerating, as much as the way the
film moves us to look at our own lives, with all its possibilities and
disappointments. It makes us see things in a way that is disarmingly
enchanting. That despite the moroseness and daily grind of regular life,
there is also a poetical and romantic mood, waiting to be tapped.We are
encouraged to look into our hearts and see what matters to us, just as
Jean looked into the water for his missing bride and in a frazzled state
saw an emanation of her, and dove into the water to go after what he was
looking for. He realized that the love he has inside him is manifested
in his dreams.Vigo has created a dreamworld.Which makes his film an
out-of-this world cinematic experience that sublimely lingers in our
consciousness.
The film version to see, which is now on video, is the restored 1990
one, that Pierre Philippe and Jean-Louis Bompoint recovered missing
footage for.The film is now more decipherable from the botched up
initial showing of the film, that was not well received by the Paris
audience. It is good to see Vigo's almost original version of the film
resurrected, at last, and look so stunningly beautiful in
black-and-white.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Paris, the City of Light, center of the world's romance, is no
fun at all if you're alone.  Few places can be more downright
depressing if you are not in the company of your significant
other.  Utilizing this motif in making only one film of more
than 47 minutes in length, Jean Vigo established a reputation
as one of the world's great directors with "L'Atalante,"
a poignant story of love's labor's lost for several dire hours in
the streets of Paris, a work which is considered by top critics
to be among the top hundred films of the twentieth century, a
classic of the genre.
   Whether the average guy on the street or even the more
prescient critic would agree is not as obvious as it may seem. 
The film uses techniques that are dated, even hackneyed
when looked at through the eyes of moviegoers sixty-six
years after its conception--which was just seven years after
the silver screen began to talk.  Even allowing for that, one
may well wonder what all the hysteria is about.
   Sure, the story can touch the lives and pierce the
heartstrings of most film buffs beyond the age of thirty, who--
if they had not spent their lives in the Lascaux caves or an
ashram in Benares--have loved and lost, terribly hurt by
relationships gone sour.  Doubtless these adults have fretted
for months, even years, in grief over the ruins of what have
been: "I said something wrong/Now I long for yesterday." 
How, though, to explain the critic Hal Hinson of the
Washington Post who wrote in 1990, "Rapt, exuberant and as
fragile as mist, this passionate tone poem drifts in its own
bubble of oddly dissonant, almost fatalistic romanticism." 
Hinson, a fine writer, seems more in love with his own muse
than with the alleged transcendence of "L'Atalante."
   The admittedly simple story, one which like the Greek
tragedies follows the unity of plot, is of two fragile people in
love and the strapping, yet worldly orangutan of a man whose
common sense and deeply imbedded soft spot help to bring
them together when they go astray.  Vigo opens on a
wedding party in the streets of a small French village, Boris
Kaufman panning his camera across a group of typically
insular peasants who either grumble that the newlyweds are
too cheap to follow their nuptials with a grand bouffe or that
the girl should have married a local instead of the captain of
a small river barge, L'Atalante."  The bride, Juliette (Dita
Parlo), has too many stars in her eyes to settle for small-town
life and thrills in anticipation of docking in Paris, a city she
has never seen.  Her groom, Jean (Jean Daste), does not
share her passion for urban beauty but is content enough
doing the routine chores on the boat--and even then, he
seems to accumulate a year's worth of laundry before putting
the clothes through the ringer.  With Juliette bored out of her
skull, the honeymoon seems over, as in fact the marriage
would have been were it not for the common sense of the
ship's roguish mate, Pere Jules (the wonderful Michel
Simon), whose love for a plethora of cats exceeds his regard
for the simple-minded cabin boy (Louis Lefevre).  As we
watch the crew together with its new guest going through
their daily chores in cramped quarters, we in the audience
cannot help asking the predictable question, "Are we there
yet?"
   When the ship finally docks in Paris, life changes for the
couple--for the worse.  As Juliette connects with a
vaudevillian peddler, brightening as he performs magic in a
tavern and then sweeps the bride into a dance, Jean fumes
enough to leave his mate behind and set sail without her.  As
the abandoned Juliette despairs, Jean has second thoughts. 
In the film's most ardent scenes, one blending lyricism and
the surreal with a preponderant gruff realism, the despondent
couple each try to manage the depression that overtakes
them once they realize how lost they are, alone in a hostile
or, at best, indifferent world.
   The film was mutilated by its producers, who cut the 89
minutes down to barely more than 60, arguing that a box
office demanding entertainment would not accept the grim
realities portrayed on the screen.  If the bean counters 
sought simply to maximum their profits, they would not be
entirely wrong for the mangling. The mainstream public in the
United States today would scarcely be more drawn to this
dreamlike fare which moves along at its own pace, more
intent on portraying ambience than on thrilling with a dramatic
story, the cinematic equivalent of a dreamy Debussy tone
poem rather than a stormy Beethoven symphony.  
   If we were intent on oversimplifying we could compress the
motif of the film to the contemporary aphorism, "Don't ask too
hard for what you want.  You may get it."  Juliette is of the
spirits.  Ground down by the tedium of town life and the
monotony of gliding in a battered barge, she longs for the
excitement of Paris.  She finds it only to realize that without
the embrace of her man, the city offers nothing but
ephemeral temptations and adorned corruption.  Jean, who is
by contrast too bound to his daily routine, discovers that
without the transcendence that only his lover can provide, life
is meaningless at best, and downright painful--manifest in the
movie's most erotic scene that display both Jean and Juliette
tossing in their lonely beds during one aching night of
separation.
   Vigo has created a dreamworld which may well have been
innovative--but only for its time.  He has encouraged us in the
audience to look inside our hearts to determine what really
matters.  Surely "L'Atalante" does not perform these
praiseworthy designs in a unique manner, so that one
wonders exactly why this meritorious enough film is lauded by
so many critics above virtually all others of the genre.
Not Rated.  Running time: 89 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
