Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
Number of Reviews
39

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is 1593 and London has two competing theaters, each with a
favorite playwright.  The Curtain features the plays of Christopher
Marlowe, acknowledged to be the greatest playwright of the day.  The
Rose had a once promising young man who after about ten plays was
coming to the end of his creativity.  This is William Shakespeare
(Joseph Fiennes).  As we join the film Shakespeare's love life is in a
shambles as he is totally blocked from writing.  Not that it matters
because the theaters have been closed due to the plague. That may be
for the best as Shakespeare has promised his new play to both theaters.
That play, barely begun, being "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's
Daughter."
     Shakespeare cannot write, having had only the minimal experience
at love he got from a loveless marriage. But a woman is about to come
into his life.  Shakespeare sees Viola De Lesseps  (Gwyneth Paltrow)
and falls in love with her beauty.  Meanwhile it turns out that Viola
is a great fan of Shakespeare and the theater in general.  When the
theaters are reopened, due to only the most venal of reasons, Viola
gives in to temptation, defies the conventions of her time, disguises
herself as a man, and becomes an actor. Shakespeare finds the woman he
loves and begins an affair with her, ignoring the fact that she is
betrothed. When Viola auditions disguised as a man she is promptly cast
not as Juliet, but as Romeo in the play that seems to be written scene
by scene only one day, or often only hours, before it is rehearsed.
Shakespeare finds can write again now that he has something to write
about, his love of Viola, and his wild lovemaking during off moments of
the rehearsals.  The play Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter begins
to take shape and is transformed from the comedy everybody has been
expecting into the Romeo and Juliet we know.  Of course the creative
process is not without some help from Shakespeare's friends.  We see
Shakespeare's talent for pumping Christopher Marlowe and others for
ideas and character names.
     It should be noted that many of the fine details of this story are
carefully researched and there are references to real people and
events.  In fact, it is mainly the plot as a whole that is completely
absurd.  The story of Romeo and Juliet was popular long before
Shakespeare's time.  And it did not involve Ethel, the Pirate's
daughter.  Shakespeare's plays are almost exclusively adaptations of
pre-existing tales.  Scholars tell us that "The Tempest" was
Shakespeare's only original story.  (I am not sure how much
consideration they have given to "The Merry Wives of Windsor,"
essentially a sitcom written solely to reuse the popular character
Falstaff.)  This story of how Shakespeare's version of Romeo and Juliet
came to be written is obviously a complete fiction.  Unfortunately,
this means that any facts that one does glean about the period or about
Shakespeare from this film should be regarded as being highly suspect.
John Webster, seen here as a boy with rather gruesome tastes in drama,
is probably the playwright who went on to write plays like "The Duchess
of Malfi."  I do not know if there is any evidence that he knew
Shakespeare.  There clearly are Flintstone-esque anachronisms in the
play like the odd proto-psychiatrist that Shakespeare sees.
     The screenplay for SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is by Marc Norman and Tom
Stoppard.  Much of the screenplay shows Stoppard's sense of humor as
shown in other Stoppard plays like "Rosenkrantz and Guildenstern are
Dead."  The writers even have the audacity to write a little of its own
Shakespearean prose and wordplay.
     Fiennes and Paltrow are supported by a prestige cast including
Geoffrey Rush of SHINE, Ben Affleck of GOOD WILL HUNTING, Judi Dench of
MRS. BROWN (who is also the new M in the James Bond series), Colin
Firth of THE ENGLISH PATIENT, Simon Callow of FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL, Jim Carter of RICHARD III, and Tom Wilkinson of THE FULL
MONTY.  Director John Madden is the veteran of MRS. BROWN and episodes
of the BBC adaptations of SHERLOCK HOLMES (with Jeremy Brett as
Holmes).
     SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is a frothy and fun look at the bard and his
times, but is not to be taken too seriously.  One does not have to be a
fan of Shakespeare to enjoy it, but bardophiles will get more out of
it. It gets 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        A theater life has always been one full of doubt and
uncertainty, but never more so than in 16th century London.  In
addition to the formidible task of merely turning a profit,
one also had to contend with the Plague, unsanitary working
conditions, and rival theater owners engaged in a cut-throat
war to steal each other's customers-- hardly the easiest way to
make a living.
        But for a young playwrite named William Shakespeare,
the situation is even more dire: lacking romantic inspiration
in his life, he has developed a stubborn case of writer's block.
"I fear I've lost my muse," he explains to a local theater owner.
("Oh?  Who is she this week?" he queries.)
        Poor Will, it seems, has been living a rather lonely
existence.  Without a soulmate to spark his imagination, he is
finding it difficult to write anything other than cliched rubbish,
including his current project, a lackluster comedy entitled
"Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter."  He explains his
frustration to his therapist:
        But now his inspiration has dried up, leaving him to
simply go through the motions.  This doesn't bode well for
Mr. Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush), the theater manager who has
pre-paid Will for delivery of the (very) overdue manuscript.
Unless Will completes the play quickly, the financially-
strapped theater will have no new offering for the public,
and could be driven out of business.  Everyone's expecting a
new masterpiece to flow forth from Will's pen, and the
playwrite is frantic over his inability to provide it for them.
        Shakespeare isn't the only one having difficulties,
however.  Across town, the lovely Viola De Lesseps
(Gwyneth Paltrow) is lamenting twin hardships of her own:
a pending loveless marriage, arranged by her father for
purely financial means, and the realization that her dream
of being an actor cannot come to pass, as women are
banned from the London stage.  ("Stage love will never be
true love while the law of the land has our heroines being
played by pip-squeak boys in petticoats!" she frets to her
nurse.)  Reflecting upon the various suitors her father has
selected for her, Viola decries their cold, unartistic nature:
        Unwilling to accept her forced destiny, she hatches a
brilliant, desperate scheme to change her situation.
        Shortly thereafter, Shakespeare finds his spirits lifted
by the arrival of a talented new actor at the theater, a lad
named Thomas Kent.  The young man has a remarkable talent for
delivering Will's dialogue; much impressed, the writer casts
Thomas as Romeo in the still unfinished play.  Ah, but there's
a twist: Thomas is actually Viola in disguise, and it doesn't take
long for the clever Will to figure it out.
        Their relationship soon turns amorous, and Will,
astonished at the passion this remarkable woman inspires
within him, is soon filling sheets of parchment as quickly
as his pen can fly over them.  Channeling all his emotions and
desire into his writing, the manuscript comes alive with poetry
and metaphor; as the incomplete play goes into rehearsal (with
Will bringing in new pages daily), everyone praises the work's
boldness and originality.  The only thing that doesn't appear
to be working is the play's title; "Romeo and Ethel" somehow
lacks the passion that the material requires.  A brash young
actor named Ned Alleyn (Ben Affleck), however, comes to the
rescue: "Will, why not 'Romeo and Juliet?'  Just a suggestion."
        "Shakespeare in Love" may be the most original film I've
seen in the past year.  Poetic dialogue drips like honey from the
mouths of the actors, which simultaneously embraces and satirizes
the Bard's work.  The story can be appreciated on mulitple levels,
thanks to a brilliant screenplay (which was co-penned by Tom
Stoppard, the playwrite who gave us "Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern are Dead," another Shakespearean spoof).  Those who
are not overly familiar with Shakespeare's plays can still get caught
up in the story, while the rest of us will enjoy an extra layer of
subtle humor (Will stealing ideas from playwrite Christopher Marlowe
(Rupert Everett), or the wonderful scene in which Will overhears
someone saying "The rose smells thusly rank by any name.  I say,
a plague on both their houses!" and twists these words into two of
his most famous quotes).  Don't forget the delicious irony of the
female Viola pretending to be a young man in the role of Romeo...
while "Juliet" is played by a male, pretending to be female.  This
is the rare movie that actually gets better with multiple viewings,
giving the audience a chance to see what they missed earlier.
       There's not a bad performance in the entire film.  Joseph
Fiennes is a masterful Shakespeare, conveying both the dramatic and
humorous moments with a light touch, never going over the top;
likewise, Gwyneth Paltrow is a marvel in her dual role as
Viola/Thomas.  But the show is positively stolen by Ben Affleck's
brief performance as Ned, the spoiled young actor who attempts
to usurp the limelight away from Will with his arrogant
self-importance.  (Observe how Will tricks him into accepting
the much smaller role of Mercutio by appealing to Ned's ego, and
how Ned smirks before announcing, "I would play him."  It was one
of many laugh-out-loud moments for me.)
        "Shakespeare in Love" is a vibrant piece of satire,
capturing the tone and eloquence of Shakespeare's beloved
masterpiece while simultaneously turning it upside-down.  Full
of wit, humor, and passion, this film reminds us of the gift and
curse of true love.  I imagine that a sophisticated verbal comedy
about William Shakespeare's love-life won't appeal to everyone,
but if you like movies which deviate from the beaten path, you'll
have a marvelous time.  You might actually learn something,
though; consider yourself warned.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Michael Dequina
_Shakespeare_in_Love_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
This Brit-set period romantic comedy had been in the development stages
since 1990, with star pairings ranging from the promising (Kenneth Branagh
and Winona Ryder, currently displaying a nice rapport in Woody Allen's
_Celebrity_) to the potentially ghastly (Daniel Day-Lewis and...
accent-challenged Julia Roberts?!) attached.   _Shakespeare_ has now
finally arrived onscreen, and, I am glad to report, in the right
hands--those of director John Madden and stars Joseph Fiennes and Gwyneth
Paltrow.
If Fiennes and Paltrow's charming lead turns as, respectively, the Bard
and Lady Viola, the woman who melts away his writer's block and inspires
_Romeo_and_Juliet_, is the lifeblood of this film, then its vigorous body
is the deliciously witty script by Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard, full of
great lines (most delivered by Judi Dench's Queen Elizabeth) and peppered
with intelligent details (sly allusions to Shakespeare's _Twelfth_Night_).
Madden is the film's spirit, coaxing memorable work from his cast--or,
rather, _most_ of his cast (co-star Ben Affleck is too contemporary to
convince as a pompous Elizabethan stage actor)--and striking a nice blend
of light and heavy, achieving true emotion in its finale.  However, the
scale is definitely tipped toward the "light" side, for this fine film is
frothy fun.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Bob Bloom
  A young playwright is under pressure to finish his latest work. The
producer is breathing down his neck because the producer's creditors are
breathing down his.
  But, alas, the young playwright's Muse has deserted him. He is without
inspiration and is suffering from writer's block.
  What's a young playwright to do. Well, if his name is Will Shakespeare,
he crashes a party to meet a beautiful young woman who, lo and behold, is a
patron of the theater and a fan of the playwright's.
  Thus, with newfound confidence our playwright sets out to compose his
latest comedy "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter."
  But, soft, for as quickly as you can say iambic pentameter, our
love-struck Will is no longer writing a comedy. Ever so slowly, it is being
transformed into a classic love story of the ages. "Romeo and Ethel ... "
has been transformed by love into "Romeo and Juliet."
 Thus is the conceit of Shakespeare in Love, a boisterous, bawdy and most
appealing romantic comedy, written by Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard.
  Shakespeare in Love is a luminous, entertaining tale. And, yes, having
some rudimentary knowledge of the Bard's work will heighten your enjoyment
of the movie, but even if you've never read a line from any of his plays or
sonnets, you still can appreciate the humor and theatricality of this
wonderful outing.
  Taking center stage in this enjoyable conceit is Gwyneth Paltrow as Lady
Viola, the young woman who longs for a stage career and also worships the
words of Shakespeare. Unfortunately, in Elizabethan England, women are
forbidden from appearing on the stage. The female parts were played by
young boys.
  So, Viola hits upon the idea of disguising herself as a man named Thomas
Kent so she can join Shakespeare's company of players. Any comparison
between Viola's actions and the plot of any Shakespeare work is purely not
coincidental.
 Will and Viola become star-crossed lovers as she is bethrothed to another
- a poor nobleman who will use his dowry to build up his tobacco plantation
in Virginia.
  As Will and Viola's relationship deepens, so does the intensity of the
love story in Romeo and Juliet. And, when Will and Viola finally concede
that their love, while true, is doomed, it inspires Shakespeare to create
the tragic finale for his play.
  Paltrow is luscious, luminous, sensual as Viola. To use the Bard's own
words, "Oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! It seems she hangs
upon the cheek of night like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear. ...For I
ne'er saw true beauty till this night."
  She also displays a comic flair in her disguise as Thomas Kent, the
actor. Paltrow is the sun around which this comic tale revolves.
  As Shakespeare, Joseph Fiennes (younger brother of Ralph) is a bit
bumbling, but quick-witted and lustful. He is not a dashing figure, but
rather a tempermental young playwright trying to make a name for himself.
  A strong supporting cast including Oscar-winner Geoffrey Rush (Shine) as
the theater owner who believes comedy is box office, Ben Affleck as
matinee-idol dramatic actor Ned Alleyn, Tom Wilkinson (The Full Monty) as
Fennyman, the stage-struck money lender and, most notably, Dame Judi Dench
as Queen Elizabeth. With this performance, as well as her Oscar-nominated
impersonation of Queen Victoria in last year's Mrs. Brown, she displays the
skill that has made her a monarch among actors.
  Director John Madden (Mrs. Brown) keeps the film moving at a steady pace,
deftly switching from broad comedy to touching moments of romance and
drama.
  Shakespeare in Love in a wonderful experience. You need not be a fan of
the Bard to become enthralled, but I guarantee you will reach for a volume
of Shakespeare soon after leaving the theater.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christopher Null
     Easily the best comedy of the year - and the best film of the year
to star Joseph Fiennes and feature Queen Elizabeth as a major character
- SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE gets a hands-down recommendation for all
filmgoers.
     The clever premise follows one William Shakespeare (Fiennes), stuck
with writer's block while trying to pen "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's
Daughter" and unable to get his own love life going to boot.
     Enter Viola (Paltrow), an upper-class woman with aspirations of
acting in the men-only theatre who sneaks in (in drag) to audition for
the part of Romeo. But not only is Viola a woman, she's betrothed to the
Duke of Wessex and is set to sail for the New World in a matter of
weeks. It's only natural that young Will falls for the lady.
     Wacky hijinx ensue, but SHAKESPEARE never falls into the syrupy
love story trap, and the insight into what-might-have-been is a real
treat for fans of the bard. Fiennes does excellent work here, as does
Paltrow, who always seems to act better when affecting a British accent.
     The six Golden Globe nominations are right on target - definitely
check SHAKESPEARE out at an art house near you.
Director: John Madden
Producer: Donna Gigliotti, Marc Norman, David Parfitt, Harvey Weinstein,
Edward Zwick
Writer: Tom Stoppard, Marc Norman
Starring: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Ben Affleck, Geoffrey Rush,
Judi Dench
http://www.miramax.com:8888/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=0&midStr=742
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
David Wilcock
This story about the Bard and his love for a woman named Viola is witty,
dramatic and very very enjoyable. The plot centres around William
Shakespeare (Fiennes) who is stuck for ideas for his next play. He soon
hashes one together, and gets a cast together, featuring the likes of Ned
Alleyn (Ben Affleck), but the one cast member who strikes him is a young
'boy' played by Paltrow. They soon start a relationship, but she is already
set to be married to the slimy Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) who wants nothing
but her money. Will Will (pun kinda intended) both keep Viola and get his
play finished in time?
Despite a simple story conceived by Tom Stoppard and Marc Norman,
Shakespeare in Love is undeniably charming. Wit and drama is dished out in
equal amounts, and there's a fair bit of sentimentally in there aswell. The
cast give all their worth to the well realised script. Fiennes is a standout
as the young William, giving an energetic and well rounded performance. Ben
Affleck is fun as the 'Bruce Willis' of the Elizabethan age, offering a
change of pace for him since the hectic Armageddon. Colin Firth doesn't have
much to work with what is a very two dimensional character, but he gives a
suitably slimy performance even if he is nothing but a plot device. Also
popping up are British comedians  Martin Clunes and Mark Williams giving two
likeable performances, Geoffrey Rush as a flustered theatre manager, and
Dame Judi Dench makes an appearance as Queen Elizabeth, who gets a very
funny scene at the end of the film. The cast list goes on, and each
individual performance is a delight.
But it's Paltrow who has to carry the film, and while she's a competent
actress, she's never experienced a role as challenging as this one.
Thankfully, she's really rather good, delivering Shakespeare lines with ease
and brings a lot of charm and warmth to her character. I find it hard to
believe, however, that Shakespeare mistook her for a boy, and even with a
moustache she still looks as beautiful as ever (make of that what you will.)
And, the chemistry between Fiennes and Paltrow is intense, although with
boyfriend Affleck on set it may have been a bit embarrassing for her acting
slushy with another man right in front of her own man!
While the story is wafer thin, it's well handled by Mrs. Brown director John
Madden, who grabs the audience attention and keeps a strong hold on them. I
found it very hard not to be entranced by the film, with it's rich, vibrant
colours and costumes and entertaining interpretation of the screenplay.
There's also lots of contemporary references to look out for, the long
'credit's list on Will's new play being one of them. The soundtrack is nice,
and the entire production is very enchanting.
Knowledge of Shakespeare and his plays aren't really needed, although it may
help to get some of the jokes. The film is based around one of the Bards
better known plays, 'Romeo & Juliet,' which thanks to Leonardo DiCaprio has
been opened up to a whole new generation of teenage girls. In summary, it's
very hard not to like Shakespeare in Love. It truly is a lovely film, and
would be an excellent use of two hours.

Author
Walter Frith
One of the most flawless films of 1998 has arrived and it is called
'Shakespeare in Love'.  This is high spirited entertainment that is
rousing and the best thing about it is that it treats the time that it's
set in (the 16th century) with all the understanding of the 20th century
in terms of its use of dialogue.  It isn't a high brow period piece
where you need an interpreter of Shakespearean literature to translate
everything for you.  The majority of the words spoken are comprehensible
for the layman and enough to hopefully satisfy even the most radical fan
of the most influential writer of all time.  Having said that, it should
also be noted that there are no real stars in the picture, giving it a
great look of authenticity and believing that the people you are seeing
are indeed the characters they're playing and not themselves.  I man
wiser than I once said, "Give me no stars, just talent."  This is where
you'll find it.
The film is a fictional romp of how the influences in Shakespeare's own
life were the inspiration to finalize his play of 'Romeo and Juliet'.
Given another title originally in the film, it doesn't sound right to
most and the final title rolls off the tongue with anticipation for
those wishing to see it.
Gwyneth Paltrow is Viola, the daughter of a wealthy man and her marriage
is arranged and she is to marry Lord Wessex (Colin Firth), a man of
little warm emotion and who has plenty of cold domineering sides to his
personality and a man whom Viola can't stand.  Her heart belongs to Will
Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes).  The two meet and fall in love and are
inseparable just as Romeo and Juliet were.  What's amusing in all of
this is the fact that at the time, Shakespeare was not regarded, as the
film states, as a great literary giant of his time but as a struggling
writer whose plays were always approached with crossing fingers for
success.  My, how things have changed based on the film's message here.
There is an assorted cast of characters in this film that give it the
free spirit it needs so as not to be bogged down with the assuming slow
pace of a romance.  This film has the cocky one (Ben Affleck).  He's an
actor who demands perfection and decides who is fit to work with him.
Ohhh, the stiff upper lip of him.  Really!  There is the clownish one
(Geoffery Rush).  As an Oscar winning actor who shined in 'Shine', this
is a role that Rush can have a ball with.  He plays the buffoonish owner
of the Rose theatre.  A man who weasels out of paying off the
extortionists and always snivels with good intentions.  There is the
deadly serious Queen Elizabeth (Judi Dench), whom we can't take our eyes
of of not because of the way she looks but by the way she speaks.  If
modern day school teachers were like her, the education system would get
a gold star.  Other actors who could have had larger and more memorable
roles are Tom Wilkinson ('The Full Monty'), Rupert Everett ('My Best
Friend's Wedding'), and Simon Callow ('Four Weddings and a Funeral'.  He
was the funeral.)
Their under written parts don't take away from the rest of the film
because they aren't major players but they are interesting nevertheless.
One of the producers of this film is Edward Zwick, director of 'The
Siege', 'Courage Under Fire', 'Legends of the Fall', and 'Glory'.  His
influence over this film's production brings a smooth mix to it which
gives it the fluid filming it needs to win over the majority of film
audiences which I believe it will.
The film is directed by John Madden and written by Marc Norman and Tom
Stoppard and for this movie to make its mark so well in putting aside
the rigid elements of a Shakespearean play for which mainstream lovers
of the arts have been known to mock and not understand it fully, this is
a film for which all can enjoy and re-inventing Shakespeare by taking
poetic license in a fictional account of his life is better and more
acceptable than re-writing any of his work.  That task would not be
acceptable anywhere.  One of 1998's best films and a worthy candidate
for a Best Picture Oscar nomination.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: John Madden
Cast: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, Ben Affleck,
Colin Firth, Judi Dench, Simon Callow
Screenplay: Marc Norman, Tom Stoppard
Producers: Donna Gigliotti, Marc Norman, David Parfitt, Harvey
Weinstein, Edward Zwick
Runtime: 122 min.
US Distribution: Universal
Rated R: sex, nudity, brief profanity
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Playwright Tom Stoppard and screenwriter Marc Norman took on an
astonishingly difficult task:  they wanted to write a script about
William Shakespeare that parallels Shakespeare's works.  They also
wanted to poke fun at the way all of us envision Shakespeare:  I mean,
really, who doesn't think of Shakespeare as a guy seething with so much
passion that he can barely write a play without exploding into a
passionate, introspective verbal couplet of iambic pentameter?  Stoppard
and Norman are men who love Shakespeare, and they wanted to make a movie
for everyone else who loves Shakespeare.
And, despite the difficulty of their task, they have succeeded. 
Shakespeare in Love is one of the smartest, funniest, most touching
films of the year.   It's so rare that a picture with such high
aspirations succeeds in all of its endeavors, but here we have a movie
that defines success:  it is at once charmingly acted and flawlessly
written.  It could have been a smug, self-important movie that panders
to die-hard Shakespeare fans, but the appeal of this film is almost
universal:  if you've ever read a play by Shakespeare, or know anything
about his life, it's likely that you'll find grand entertainment in
Shakespeare in Love.
Joseph Fiennes, brother of Ralph, stars as Shakespeare himself; he's a
delightful, irresistible lad, concerned mostly with women and detached
from life's more serious problems (debt, plague, etc.).  He's
commissioned to write plays for various people:  Queen Elizabeth (Judi
Dench) wants comedies, while local slimeball Philip Henslowe (Geoffrey
Rush) needs him to write a play so that he can pay off his debts to Hugh
Fennymann (Tom Wilkinson).  Shakespeare, however, has trouble focusing
on his work.  He begins work on a comedy about a boy named Romeo and a
girl named Ethel.
This all changes, however, when he meets Viola De Lesseps (a radiant
Gwyneth Paltrow), a young heiress set to marry the financially-oriented
Lord Wessex (Colin Firth).  Shakespeare instantly falls in love with
her; he first meets her when she pretends to be a man to try out for the
part of Romeo.  He discovers her identity and confronts her later; she,
of course, falls in love with him, although their love is doomed because
she absolutely must marry the tyrannical Lord Wessex.  But she continues
to act because she loves Shakespeare's writing so much, and soon the
production (which later becomes Romeo and Juliet) is set to be
performed.
Shakespeare in Love is an amazingly good film, not because it works as
great entertainment, but because it pays attention to detail and knows
its subject matter.  I was instantly won over by Joseph Fiennes in the
lead role:  he has such searing optimism and energy; he's clearly a man
who admires Shakespeare, and even in the shortcomings that he gives his
character (inability to turn away from women, attention deficit
disorder), we sense a great deal of affection and care.  He practically
overflows with passion in every scene.  Fiennes is matched by Paltrow
(whose English accent is so good that wonder where she actually comes
from); she is an actress who exudes strength and conviction in every
performance I've seen her in.  The two performers work perfectly
together, taking the passionate scenes as far as possible without making
them melodramatic, and wringing the comedic scenes for every conceivable
laugh.
Of course, it doesn't hurt that they have a masterful script to work
with.  Stoppard, whose play Rozencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead
inspired an interesting film, is full of dry wit and boundless
understated humor (all of his plays have similarly dry humor).  The
first intelligent step Stoppard and Norman took was harmonizing the
events of the film with Romeo and Juliet.  One of the funniest scenes in
the film is an imitation of the famous terrace scene from the play; in
the movie, Shakespeare is bumbling about while Viola is trying to fend
off her nurse maid.  Director John Madden does a fantastic job dabbling
in slapstick humor -- scenes like these would have seemed obtuse in the
hands of a lesser director.
I'm going to have to see the movie again; I'm certain there are
numerous references that I missed.  In fact, I doubt it's possible to
gather everything with just one viewing.  Stoppard is a master of
detail:  you'll notice familiar lines placed throughout the film, not as
lines of a play, but as dialogue, suggesting that Shakespeare simply
spoke like that all the time.  There's also a brilliant running joke in
which Shakespeare is in constant competition with Christopher Marlowe
(and the fact that Marlowe is played by the openly-homosexual Rupert
Everett is a joke in of itself), proposing a slightly twisted
explanation to Marlowe's mysterious death in a pub.  There's also a
scene featuring a wide-eyed dog that is so funny that I hurt myself
laughing.  "There's no dog in this play?"  "No!  No dog!"
The ensemble cast is perhaps the strongest this year.  Geoffrey Rush is
nearly unrecognizable as the detestable Henslowe; Wilkinson is also hard
to recognize, but has a great role as a thug who takes his part as the
apothecary so seriously.  Ben Affleck, playing one of the actors in the
company, shows great range, both in his accent (his is almost as good as
Paltrow's) and in humor (he has some of the best one-liners in the
movie).  Colin Firth, always stuck playing the sap, does a good job
being hateful.  Judi Dench, however, has the best supporting performance
as Queen Elizabeth:  rarely has so much depth been conveyed in so few
words.  
My single, minor complaint about Shakespeare in Love is that I feel
like I could have been more moved by the end.  The story is moving, but
there are a few missed opportunities in the final scenes.  But my
quibbling is not important.  What is important is that I acknowledge the
quality of this picture, the sheer skill with which it has been written,
acted, and produced.  Shakespeare in Love tries so many things, and
nails every one of them:  it's a film that both loves Shakespeare and
makes fun of him, a film in which the actors, writers, and director are
all perfectly in sync.  It's also a movie that has the potential to
introduce a lot of people to Shakespeare's work in a positive way,
without seeming condescending or superior.  I admire this film not only
because it passes so pleasantly, but because it has lofty aspirations
and succeeds in them.  Not just any film can poke fun at Shakespeare and
get away with it.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben
Affleck, Tom Wilkinson, Imelda Stuanton, Judi Dench, Simon Callow, Rupert
Everett
Director: John Madden
Screenplay: Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard
Australian theatrical release: February 11, 1999
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 
4 and half stars
Shakespeare in Love's recipe for success is a simple one.  Due to the film's
superb screenplay and sound acting, director John Madden is able to pick and
match the best parts of three different genres.  Clever comedy, charming
romance and absorbing drama fit neatly into this period piece, which has a
distinctly contemporary feel.  Ordinarily it would be fair enough to point out
that a director probably shouldn't attempt to have the best of both worlds (so
to speak); but here, Madden has the best of three.  
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) has writers block.  He's just begun working
on a proposed play titled "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter," but
struggles to find inspiration to express himself.  But, like the play's title,
Shakespeare's life soon changes for the better.  He finds motivation in the
form of Lady Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), who is destined to marry the snobby Lord
Wessex (Colin Firth) at the command of Queen Elizabeth herself (Judi Dench, in
a cleverly arrogant performance).  Shakespeare and Viola live out their doomed
romantic fantasy, whilst the formalities (and informalities) of producing a
theatrical production blare in the background.  
Those interested in Shakespearean times will appreciate the film's suggestions
and insights into what happened during this era.  Shakespeare in Love suggests
how the mysterious death of famous playwright Christopher Marlowe (played by
the always dependable Rupert Everett) occurred, and hints at how the
prohibition of women on the stage was eventually revoked (during the era, men
had to play women in drag).  On the other hand, those who desire two hours
worth of solid entertainment will get more than they paid for. Comic
performances from Geoffrey Rush as a struggling theatre owner and The Full
Monty's Tom Wilkinson as the play's producer aid the film in keeping it
accessible for everyone.  
Joseph Fiennes and Gwyneth Paltrow shine in the two meatiest parts.  Scenes in
which Shakespeare puts pen to paper work better than you may expect; each
bringing a magical touch and an involving atmosphere.  As he writes, we can
almost feel the love that inspires him.  Paltrow delivers one of - if not the
- best performances so far in her career. She has always had enough talent to
make a difficult part work, and should have made a performance like this a
long time ago (her roles in A Perfect Murder, Hush, Sliding Doors and others
restricted her charisma).
With so many films nowadays that try to tell too much in too little time (or,
alternatively, films that tell too little in too much time), here is one that
never oversteps the mark.  There are so many paths the film could have taken,
but Madden focuses almost entirely on the central relationship and the first
ever production of "Romeo and Juliet." Shakespeare in Love's recipe for
success is a simple one, but not an easy one to pull off.  Its carefully
crafted screenplay interlaces drama, romance and comedy smartly and
efficiently in this charming and passionate tale.  Shakespeare in Love has a
big heart, but never loses its grasp on reality or the tragedy of forbidden
love.  Not only does it work as an upbeat period piece, but also as just about
anything you want it to be.


Author
Jerry Saravia
William Shakespeare has always been a tortured soul to me - not a helpless
romantic. Still, the vibrantly acted "Shakespeare in Love" makes the case that
the Bard must have been a romantic - how else can one account for his quirky
romantic comedies ("As You Like It") or his morose, romantic tragedies ("Romeo
and Juliet")? He must have been in love with a special, beautiful lady to
inspire such matters of love and death. In truth, he was involved with another
man, but that's another story.
As the film starts, the actor and playwright William Shakespeare (Joseph
Fiennes) is suffering from writer's block - he is unable to devise a story out
of his new play, "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter." Philip Henslowe
(Geoffrey Rush), the owner of the prestigious theatre, the Rose, is threatened
by slimy creditors into bringing in profits, and pleads for William to quickly
deliver his play. William's loss for words miraculously fades once he sets his
eyes on Viola de Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), an heiress who is deeply touched by
his work. His eyes light up once he starts to fall in love with Viola, and the
play Romeo and Ethel slowly becomes the tragic Romeo and Juliet. 
"Shakespeare in Love" is a fine film for what it is, but it is too safe and
sanitized - the film constantly threatens to explode with passion and
fireworks, or at least comically bawdy innuendoes, and it always seems afraid
to cut loose. It holds back too often, and the delightful, on-target screenplay
by Tom Stoppard requires more rhythm cinematically than it offers. 
The actors certainly are up to the task. Joseph Fiennes is like an energetic
puppy dog, leaping around town emitting phrases and remarks with frenetic ease
- he's like a younger Woody Allen without the neurosis. Fiennes also has
workable chemistry with Gwyneth Paltrow, and the movie shines whenever you see
them exchanging glances at each other. Paltrow speaks like a British heiress,
but her smiles and frowns get repetitious after a while - the constant
close-ups indicate that there are only two expressions in her acting
vocabulary. Of course, if you have seen "Hard Eight," you might have seen a
more quixotic version of what is on display here. Ben Affleck brings comic
arrogance to a new level as a boastful actor who slowly forces the Bard to
develop the character of Mercutio. Kudos must also go to Geoffrey Rush
("Shine") as the caricaturized theatre owner who answers nearly every question
with the dainty line, "It is a mystery." The show-stopper in all this is Judi
Dench's remarkably authoritative, ghost-like Queen Elizabeth - it is a cameo,
but when she appears on screen, the movie stops cold with her titanic presence.
"Shakespeare in Love" works because of the acting, and its profound theme
about the love of theatre, summed up brilliantly during the Queen's speech at
the end. Still, the film is static, though never lifeless, and with such an
ambitious premise, it could have been so much more. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 

Author
John Smythe
Impresario Phillip Henslow (Geoffrey Rush) is very concerned. He has 
outstanding debts and his theatre, the Rose, lies idle while his young 
playwright, William Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) dithers about finishing 
his latest work, a comedy called Romeo and Ethel, A Pirate's Adventure'. 
To make matters worse, his chief creditor, Fennyman (Tom Wilkinson) 
expresses his dissatisfaction by dangling Henslow over an open fire, and 
threatens worse if his debts are not swiftly repaid.
So begins Shakespeare in Love, a gloriously witty, piquant and 
unashamedly theatrical yarn of the creation of the play Romeo and 
Juliet, one of the most famous and touching stories in literature (in 
English, anyway). Shakespeare is suffering from writer's block - he 
needs a muse, and (with his wife safely stashed in the country), he 
casts his eye around but is not impressed by the women he sees. His mood 
is not helped by the fact that everyone wants a comedy (whereas he would 
like to create something more worthy) and his fierce rival, Marlowe 
(Rupert Everett) is enjoying critical and popular acclaim.
Everything changes when Shakespeare sees Viola De Lessops (Gwyneth 
Paltrow), the beautiful daughter of a wealthy aristocrat. Viola is also 
a fan of theatre and particularly of the sonnets of a promising young 
playwright called Shakespeare. They eventually meet and fall deeply in 
love. Unfortunately, Viola has been promised in marriage to the 
insufferably arrogant Lord Wessex (Colin Firth), a union approved by 
Queen Elizabeth (Judi Dench), and therefore insoluble. As Shakespeare 
begins shaping his play, its character changes from comedy to drama to 
outright tragedy, as it mirrors the impossible but all-consuming love 
affair between a poor commoner and a rich aristocrat.
The movie skilfully weaves two rather different stories into a dramatic 
and beautiful tale. The first one is a hilarious account of the struggle 
to put on a show and I wish Kenneth Branagh had seen this film before he 
inflicted The Bleak Midwinter on the rest of us. There are lots of sly 
jokes as applicable to the film industry today as theatre then or now. 
Such as the decision to give the actors a share of the profits rather 
than paying them.(Henslow explains, "But it will never make money" and 
Fennyman replies, "Exactly"). Spoken like a true producer. Indeed, a 
wager is made that art cannot move people in the same way as real life - 
that art is lightweight and artificial. Viola disagrees - true art will 
always touch people. A dig at the entertainment industry today, perhaps 
?
There is always a danger that attempting humour in a medieval setting 
will invoke memories of Monty Python or Blackadder, but the writers 
(Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard) avoid such pitfalls. They do have fun 
speculating on the sources of Shakespeare's inspiration. He hears a 
preacher shouting at the unheeding, passing crowd, "A plague on both 
your houses". He decides on some of the plot while out drinking with 
Marlowe. What really illuminates the story, (and provides most of the 
inspiration) and raises it above the ordinary, is the on-screen 
relationship of Voila and Shakespeare. Joseph Fiennes brings a 
passionate intensity to the young Shakespeare, and his character, 
mischievous, committed, determined, impatient and erudite, is convincing 
as the man who could only conjure such emotions in his works by having 
tasted such extremes of desire.
The object of his desire has never looked better. Women world-wide must 
be a bit disgruntled. Having spent years reading women's magazines 
assuring them that "You too are special in your own way" along come 
women like Cameron Diaz and Gwyneth Paltrow, who are beautiful, 
talented, critically acclaimed, hugely popular and filthy rich. It's not 
good for morale. It's easy to see why Shakespeare would risk his life to 
see her - she looks sublime. With her long golden curls and delicate 
features, she calls to mind Botticelli's Birth of Venus. Paltrow's Viola 
is also strong-willed, intelligent and romantic. She also has (yet 
again) a faultless English accent (at this stage, she's just showing off 
). The prurient amongst you may also appreciate the fact that she strips 
off - rest assured it's in the best possible taste.
The supporting cast are uniformly solid - Ben Affleck as the egotistical 
actor playing Mercutio (who can't believe he gets killed off early), 
Dench as the Queen (wryly amused by the prospect of Wessex being 
cuckolded by a penniless artist), and Wilkinson and Rush as the 
producers. 
The movie, though sumptuous in terms of costume and scenery, makes no 
real claim at veracity whatsoever, and one suspects that Shakespeare's 
antics, as portrayed, would have shortened his life considerably in 
reality. There are some minor quibbles - some of the humour is a little 
farfetched - but these are very minor distractions. What is refreshing 
is that a movie such as this can get made in the first place. As we 
approach the 1999 Oscars, Gwyneth Paltrow must surely get at least a 
nomination for her performance. Funnily enough, one of her rivals may 
well be Cate Blanchett for her portrayal of...Queen Elizabeth. 
 
 
 
Directed by John Madden.


Author
Charles Ellis
Shakespeare In Love - review by David Ellis 
        http://www.magicstore.net/my_take.htm
    Tom Stoppard goes to the "Shakespeare What-If" well once again, and why 
not? Didn't Huntz Hall use the same gags every film? Is not Huntz Hall 
remembered fondly by all? 
    There were Victorian writers who made up childhoods for Shakespeare's characters (little Falstaff...egads!), why not make up something about the 
Bard hisownself? His life story has many gaps. 
    It's peopled with theatrical contemporaries like Burbage, Marlowe and a 
boy John Webster (a slightly later tragedian). Jonson and Bacon fans (all 
eight of them) will be disappointed, they don't appear at all. Full of in 
jokes, this romantic comedy delivers on both the romance and the comedy. 
Ignore the history part, this is Hollywood! 
    While Will's sources for his plots are well-known, this film premises 
that his new girlfriend helps him write Romeo And Juliet. She's the model   
for Juliet in Will's "real" life. Shakespeare himself was been first to 
really explore the lines between drama, play acting, and reality. His own 
material is full of winks to the audience. This film follows beautifully and 
entertainingly in that tradition.
    Will is played by intense Joseph Fiennes, who also gets the girl in 
"Elizabeth". I'm jealous...does it show? Intense, intense, intense. If he was 
your shoe salesman, you WOULD buy shoes, OK? But you would fear to buy a car 
or computer from this man. I hope I'm clear about this, he's no half-ass, 
he's intense.
    Gwyneth Paltrow as Viola steals the film in every scene she's in, even 
the scenes with the intense guy.  The rest of the cast does a good job of 
pretending to be theatrical hacks and bad actors..> so 
she can come in and show them what a good actor does. An added treat, she 
plays Romeo for most of the rehearsals. It's two or three roles in one and 
she pulls them all off. If she wins the Oscar she should quit and start a 
legend.
    The film has comedy, romance, a play-within-a-play (a Shakespearian 
invention? If only Romeo And Juliet staged a play for their parents and 
friends, we could have had... oh, never mind!). There are pratfalls galore, 
steamy sex, and culture...what more could you want?
    Despite glaring chrono-illogics the film does a terrific job of 
recreating details of Elizabethan life, from the bad teeth everyone but the 
leads have to the poop in the unpaved streets. Will is as superstitious as 
the rest of the lot. Nobody in the film except Queen Elizabeth really has a 
clue, everyone else in the picture has their own crazed agenda. Nobody has 
any money, not even Viola's noble suitor. All very accurate. The only over-
riding concern of the age left out is the Catholic-Protestant schism, see 
"Elizabeth" for that. 
    We get wonderful supporting characters almost as colorful as Will's own. 
The camera work is as ornate as the rest of the picture, but you hardly 
notice it, it just seems so right. We swoop to balconies and behind-the-
scenes at the theatre with ease and no jarring "oh, it's a movie" to break 
the spell. 
    Much is made in reviews of the fact that the Virginia colony referred to 
in the film did not exist for twenty years after the film events take place. 
I can't believe the filmmakers did not know this, or chose to ignore it. My 
interpretation of the ending is that the sailed for it and shipwrecked thus 
delaying the colony's start. Sole survivor Viola gets to walk off in the 
sunset to an uncertain future on a vast empty continent...bet that wasn't in 
her horoscope!  I like to think she  hiked to the Pacific and somehow ended 
up in Japan, causing trouble the whole way.

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        As 1998 coasted along for approximately ten or eleven months
with an abominable slew of pathetic releases, it seemed that we
were going to hit a new year-long low in American cinema.
However, movie executives seem to think that the Oscar voters
have short memories, so they cram a theatre-full of good movies
into November and December.
        A film like "Shakespeare In Love" was worth waiting for.
Almost all by itself, it can dispel the notion that 1998 was a
bad year. With a sizzling total of 13 Oscar nominations, this
fine piece of work has been getting heaps of critical acclaim and
deserves every bit of it. The complete antithesis of "Saving
Private Ryan"--its chief rival for many of the major awards in
March--"Shakespeare In Love" is funny, rousing, romantic,
lyrical, and intelligent. (I'll save any further gushing for
later--no sense in using up all my good adjectives so soon into
the review).
        The plot is simply within the name of the film--the
legendary William Shakespeare falls in love. Shakespeare (Joseph
Fiennes) is penning his latest play, a comedy called "Romeo and
Ethel The Pirate's Daughter". His eventual love-interest, Viola
(Gwyenth Paltrow in an Oscar-nominated performance), is about to
get stuck in one of those prearranged marriages that we all love
to hate in the movies. Shakespeare mopes around writing his
sub-par play and casting a bunch of hilariously lousy actors to
fill the roles, while Viola knows his work, loves it, and wants
to play Romeo.
        Now, don't forget that back in the days of The Bard, women
were not allowed on the stage. To get a fair opportunity, the
gifted young woman masquerades as a boy in order to land the lead
role. Naturally, she is such a good actress that she deceives
everyone for a little while. That is, until Shakespeare confesses
his devout love for the real version (the female version) of
Viola (whom he had seen earlier at an upper-class function) to
her moustachioed male alter ego.
        Despite a marriage he doesn't confess to and that
prearranged marriage she's stuck in, the two kids fall completely
in love. She inspires him to write the play that we all know as
the tragic masterpiece, "Romeo And Juliet", and she captivates
everyone with her acting ability. Of course, she is eventually
exposed as a woman and all proverbial heck breaks loose.
        To say much more about the plot would ruin it for someone
who hasn't had the good fortune to see the film. The plot DOES
deserve plenty of kudos though, just as every other feature in
the picture does. Director John Madden (a great name, but not the
football dude) combines so many elements of technical, musical,
and acting brilliance that it's too bad that it all must come to
an end. This is a rare movie about English people who didn't make
me want to retch and throw things at the screen. When it was
over, I wanted to go out and rent a copy, any copy, of Romeo and
Juliet! It's THAT inspiring.
        Paltrow and Fiennes are absolutely spectacular together.
They burn up the screen. We see their forbidden love grow in the
same way that the love between Romeo and Juliet grows. Paltrow is
even more impressive when you consider that she is 100% American,
yet speaks with a fine English accent.
        Some terrific editing sequences parallel the film's story
with the story-within-the-story and the triumphant score is
infectious. But this picture never takes itself too seriously. It
pokes fun at its characters and makes inside jokes about how
Shakespeare took inspiration from other people when writing his
plays. Also, this movie is laugh-out-loud funny at times,
snickeringly silly at others. When we get to the appropriate
ending, the only complaint is, "I truly enjoyed that. Why isn't
there more?"
        The wonderful performances of Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, and
Judi Dench are all nominated for Oscars (Rush and Dench in
supporting performances), but Fiennes (Ralph's little brother)
was snubbed. It's too bad too because this could have been the
first film to win 4 acting awards in the history of the Academy
Awards. "Shakespeare In Love" has 10 other nominations to brag
about, from music score to cinematography to costume design.
Simply put, it's worthy of each any every one of them.
        "Saving Private Ryan" is still probably the best film of
'98, but it has some fierce competition. "Shakespeare In Love" is
glorious and fun. It's going to be "flip a coin" time on Oscar
Night for Best Picture between these two lead horses. Whichever
side the coin lands will be fine with me. It's war versus love
and maybe love CAN conquer all--even Steven Spielberg!
USELESS TRIVIA--If this film wins in each of the 3 acting
categories for which it's nominated, it would be the first to win
3 Oscars for acting in 22 years (Network, 1976).


Author
Kevin Patterson
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is a story built out of one of those "what-if"
scenarios. In this case, it's "What if William Shakespeare had a romantic
relationship that came to an unfortunate ending around the time he was
writing 'Romeo and Juliet'?" Joseph Fiennes and Gwyneth Paltrow star
respectively as The Bard and Viola De Lesseps, an upper-class woman doomed
to a marriage she despises. Screenwriters Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard
deftly weave elements of Shakespeare's style, such as disguises, mistaken
identities, and mistakenly attributed guilt, into this story, creating what
was probably the favorite film of all English professors across the
country. "Cute," "clever," "funny," and "charming" are all words I would
use to describe this entertaining trip through 16th-century England as
Shakespeare probably knew it. Words I would not  use to describe it,
however, are "best film of the year" or "worthy of thirteen Oscar
nominations." Yes, it's a lot of fun, and yes, it's intelligently written,
but I'm afraid I don't see much more to it than that: the story is
essentially a prolonged gimmick, and some of the most poignant dialogue is
not the screenwriters' but Shakespeare's, when Fiennes and Paltrow end up
playing the parts of Romeo and Juliet on the afternoon of the play's
premiere. Still, I was never bored for a second, and SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is
refreshingly devoid of the clichs and melodrama that plague many a
romantic comedy.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben
Affleck, Tom Wilkinson, Judi Dench.
Screenplay: Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard.
Producers: Donna Gigliotti, David Parfitt & Harvey Weinstein and Edward
Zwick & Marc Norman.
Director: John Madden
Don't let this movie fool you into believing the romantic noirs of
William Shakespeare. No one will truly understand the heart and soul of
this man except through his work, and this movie makes a vain attempt at
that. Any moves to glamorise' his life, which Hollywood has an annoying
tendency to do, will only subtract from his achievement rather than
expound on his greatness. This movie about his life, although well
written, puts too much make-up on a man whose life was probably more
pork and potatoes, rather than lobster and champagne.
Oh well, let's fantasise onwards an assume that he was a bit of a
flirtatious play-write, who falls in love with a beautiful woman
(Gwyneth Paltrow) and from her inspiration, several plays develop -
Romeo and Juliet', and The Twelfth Night'. It is easier for me to
believe that he had a wet dream and that's how all his plays develop,
but please spare me all of this unnecessary melodrama. But I guess my
version probably wouldn't draw a crowd or make a dollar on screen. So is
there any justification in romanticising the man Shakespeare, when all
we need to do is read his work in order to find his soul. I think not.
As for the Oscars were they deserved by this movie? I think not. In many
aspects Private Ryan' and Life is Beautiful' were far superior movies,
but one should never assume that this should be a criteria for winning
an Oscar, as time and again, for reasons unexplained, an undeserving
movie will win the accolade. Another sore point is the fact that Gwyneth
won the best female lead, over a more polished Cate, but I guess if you
go on enough about your grandfather dying and your nephew being
hospitalised - people will start feeling sorry for you.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE (director: John Madden; cast: Gwyneth Paltrow (Viola
de Lesseps), Joseph Fiennes (Will Shakespeare), Geoffrey Rush (Philip
Henslowe), Colin Firth (Lord Wessex), Ben Affleck (Ned Alleyn), Judi
Dench (Queen Elizabeth), Rupert Everett (Christopher Marlowe), Simon
Callow (Tilney, Master of the Revels), Jim Carter (Ralph Bashford),
Martin Clunes (Richard Burbage), Antony Sher (Dr. Moth), Imelda Staunton
(Nurse), Tom Wilkinson (Hugh Fennyman) and Mark Williams (Wabash), 1998)
This film doesn't claim to capture the accuracy of its Shakespeare
production (it even relishes in the inaccuracies it presents; ex., there
were no Virginia tobacco plantations during that time frame, there was
no Virginia), but the film exuberates in the fun filled spirit and the
frolicking nature of the performers and the backbiting that goes on
backstage, as it might have been in a 1593 production of a Shakespearian
play. The theme of the film is picked up from the literati speculations
that a mysterious woman became the living muse who inspired
Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet." Here she is admirably played by
Paltrow, whose impeccable English and regal stature, makes her a most
endearing Viola for Shakespeare (Fiennes) to fall madly in love with.
I had no problem adopting myself to the cleverness of Tom Stoppard's
screenplay, though I am usually turned off by films that think they can
get by on that one note. But this film was witty and except for a
penchant to become at times a cliched formula plot type of film,
borrowed from thousands of other films, you know, the old underdog
against the world story, with the underdog winning  the big event in the
film, in this case, poor Will Shakespeare against the establishment:
that part of the film took away the fresh and innovative dash the film
seemed to have on its own terms.
But, I was, nevertheless, impressed by the carefree spirit of this
romantic comedy, it seemed to encapsulate a feeling for those times when
a great poet had to be popular in order to be recognized as great. In
school we are usually forced into believing Shakespeare is only for the
high brows, not realizing that Shakespeare's plays were popular and
written and spoken so that the common man could understand them. That
Shakespeare was a great bard, there is no argument. But that he was at
times too worldly, is fair criticism. This film is very clear about
that, as a fictionionalized version of Shakespeare or not.
His rivalry with Christopher Marlowe (Rupert) as to who is the better
playwright of the time, was amusingly done, showing the vanity and grace
of both rivals. I was not taken as much with Fiennes' fiery performance,
as acceptable as it is, as much as I was with the rest of the cast, and
especially, Paltrow's very appealing performance. Fiennes' Shakespeare
seemed a little too flighty for my taste, I just don't think Will was
like that and despite this fictonalized account of Will, it still
bothered me to see him look so lost, at times. The only performer who
seemed to be in the wrong film, was Ben Affleck's (Ned Alleyn). You
should talk Shakesperian English, if you are in a Shakesperian
production.
Henslowe (Rush) seemed to have some of the best lines in the film,
playing the shifty producer, willing to try anything to stay in show
business. When asked who is that addressing the actors, by the play's
financier, Hugh Fennyman(Wilkinson), who will soon comically become
stage struck, he says, "That's no one important, that's the author."
Judi Dench (Queen Elizabeth) played the queen with authority, mopping up
the screen when she was on, with her commanding presence and sharp
tongue going at full steam.
I found it to be an enjoyable film, full of life and tongue-in-cheek
humor to sustain its colorful story within a story, of the needy Will,
on the advice of a therapist, told to seek some romance to regain his
writing ability.Will, thusly, goes about with the staging of his play
and is faced with
the political and financial problems that always seem to plague theater
people; and with his own hapless love for Viola, which is complicated by
her high birth and his low birth, and that she is promised by her father
to the cold-hearted Lord Wessex (Firth), who is a nasty character,
adding additional spice to the story.This all added to the splendid feel
the director gave to this period piece that rises a little above a
typical work of this nature, as the parts of the film that were
fictionalized were intriguingly and cleverly done, for the most part.
What was a lull in the film, was when its story got too clever for
itself and resorted to too much ado over nothing...
But, after all, there is something mysterious about show business that
draws us into its bosom and allows miracles to happen for this
not-so-serious look at Shakespeare to be dazzling and refreshing,
something Shakespeare might have looked at with wonder, speculating at
who this Shakespeare is he is seeing on film.
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 8, 1999
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes, Geoffrey Rush, Ben Affleck,
Colin Firth, Judi Dench, Tom Wilkinson, Rupert Everett
Directed by: John Madden
Distributed by: Miramax Films
MPAA Rating: R (sexuality, nudity, brief profanity) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/shakespeare.htm
The only historical figure that has been written about more than William
Shakespeare is Jesus Christ, which explains why the Bard's materials are
such a popular source for remakes, revisions, rewrites, inspiration,
subtlety, credit, and dispute. Indeed, in recent years, American
contemporary cinema has been swamped with a wash of Shakespearean
products. Including this year's upcoming A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM,
Shakespeare's material has been the cause for twenty-six big screen
productions since 1990. But for a change of pace, MRS. BROWN director
John Madden gives us a story of the Bard himself in the wonderfully
vibrant SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE. 
Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard's story is largely fantasy, although as the
viewer soon learns, SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is not a movie that takes itself
seriously. (Will Shakespeare of the 1590's would've been married to Anne
Hathaway, and he would've had a teenage daughter and two young sons;
here he is a bachelor played by Joseph Fiennes.) Will is a writer
struggling to come up with a great play, and his current comedy in the
works -- "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter" -- just doesn't quite
seem right. With the help of the great writer Christopher Marlowe
(Rupert Everett), and the inspiration of true love with noblewoman Viola
De Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), he changes things around and writes one of
his greatest tragedies, "Romeo and Juliet."
The love story between Will and Viola loosely parallels the story of
Romeo and Juliet, to great effect. Fiennes and Paltrow develop a sexy
chemistry as the two lovers which gives the movie much momentum; this
momentum smoothes out the bumps in the unfinished and largely
unsuccessful comedy. The supporting roles are well filled out, from
Geoffrey Rush as Will's worrisome agent, Philip, to Tom Wilkinson as the
producer Hugh Fennyman. Even Ben Affleck, leading the troupe of actors,
manages to make a favorable impression; and Judi Dench lends some brief
moments of screen time as Queen Elizabeth I. Gwyneth Paltrow is by far,
however, the standout of the lot, creating a large percentage of the
forementioned vibrance. 
The story is well-crafted if nothing else, although it has dangerous
moments where it flirts with the "let's make a movie"-genre. The
dialogue is breezy and lighthearted, and certainly accessible by the
audience's lowest common denominator. There's something for everyone in
this romantic comedy, making it prime date flick material. Although
certainly not inspiring in any regard, it revels in a wholesome,
well-rounded atmosphere that has been absent in many of 1998's pictures;
the true-love story is one of the best around. Certainly recommendable
when the traditional slew of indifferent year's-open releases is just
around the corner.

Author
Ryan Davis
        There are hardly any historical-romantic comedies produced, so
`Shakespeare in Love' is quite a rarity, a gem you could
say. It's funny, romantic, highly entertaining and even brilliant
at times. At first I thought all the hype was too much to live up to,
but it manages to live up to all my expectations.
        The film begins with Philip Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush), a bad
businessman who owns a theatre, agreeing to let some people he owes
money to in on his new play, which is supposed to be a comedy from
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes), entitled `Romeo and Ethel, the
Pirate's Daughter.' Unfortunately, Will doesn't have any
inspiration to write; he thinks he has lost his gift.
        That is until he meets Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), at an audition
for the play. She is dressed up as a man, and is the only one who
auditioned to use one of Shakespeare's sonnets for the
audition. Soon he finds out she is really a woman and they fall madly
in love. Sadly their love can never be, because she is promised to
Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) and they are marrying in a few weeks.
        Will and Viola's relationship inspires him to change the
entire play to seemingly reflect their lives and it gradually becomes
`Romeo And Juliet' As things happen in his life, he adds
something to the story that is similar to their lives. As the movie
progresses, the parallelism continues to grow; it's remarkably
written.
        It's not just the parallelism of the script that's
great, the dialog is superb and the characters are extremely well
developed.  It's also beautifully filmed; the costumes and sets are
gorgeous. The acting couldn't be any better.  Joseph and Gwyneth
are phenomenal in their roles, and even Ben Afflect is terrific in his
cameo appearance.
        `Shakespeare in Love' is a perfect romantic film; it
never tries too be too sappy or manipulate the audience. Also
nominated for thirteen Academy Awards, this wonderful film should be
on the top of your must see list.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Murali Krishnan
We know William Shakespeare as the giant of English literature, but who was
he before he was established? This is the question addressed by this film.
As the story opens, Will Shakespeare is starting work on his latest play,
the adventure/comedy, "Romeo and Ethel the Sea Pirate's Daughter". During
this time period, the theater is of questionable repute and is always under
threat of being shut down if the common mores are offended. The owner of the
Rose Theater, Philip Henslowe, is pressuring Shakespeare to quickly finish
and put on the play so he can ease his heavy debt burden. Viola De Lesseps
is a young woman from a rich family who is in love with the theater, and
fancies the works of Shakespeare in particular. She would love to be an
actor, but in those days women are barred from the stage. She furtively
dresses as a man, and lands the role of Romeo. Shakespeare falls in love
with Viola shortly before discovering that she is in his play. They pursue a
secret romance, even though her marriage to Lord Wessex has been arranged by
her family and approved by the queen.
It is not necessary to be deeply familiar with the works of Shakespeare to
enjoy this film, but it helps to have a good knowledge of "Romeo and
Juliet". Since it is a work in progress as the story unfolds, we see how
many of Shakespeare's experiences influence the actions and dialogue of the
play, often in comic ways. Cleverly, we see that the experiences of Will and
Viola parallel those of Romeo and Juliet. This technique was previously done
in the 1989 French-Canadian film Jesus of Montreal. (I would recommend for
anyone who enjoyed this film to also see that one.) Great effort was made
with the cinematography, set, and costume to accurately reflect the time
period, and at no point does it feel that what is presented is anything
other than the end of the 16th century.
The film is not without flaws. The Lord Wessex character is too convenient a
villain, and there is a partly deus ex machina resolution. However, to the
film's credit, it avoids crowd-pleasing sentiment and stays with its
intended direction. The dialog is consistently clever and witty. The acting
is superb, particularly Joseph Fiennes and Gwyneth Paltrow as the two leads.
Recommended. Admirers of Shakespeare will love it, but non-afficionados will
also find it an enjoyable comedy.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Matt Prigge
Writers: Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard
Starring: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, 
Ben Affleck, Judi Dench, Tom Wilkinson, Simon Callow, Imelda Staunton, 
Rupert Everett
It's been awhile since we've had a truly great rethinking of the works 
of an artist known primarily for uniting and then splitting up a woman 
named Juliet and a man named Romeo...about three years, if I'm correct 
(that would point out that I am referring to none other than "Richard 
III," Richard Loncraine and Ian McKellen's wonderfully naughty 
adaptation-cum-daring-melodrama). But it's been, oh, three decades at 
least since we've had the last real retooling of the master's work 
("Richard III" more or less played the narrative straight through), and 
that's not counting the mediocre film version - of course, I'm referring 
to "Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead," the legendary piece of wit 
from Tom Stoppard that is almost as cheerfully absurdist as, oh, 
"Waiting for Godot." Apparently he didn't get enough from that play, and 
needed to show us once again exactly how much he knows about the man and 
his subsequent work.
That being, "Shakespeare in Love," the egg that has since hatched from 
his mammoth-sized cranium, as well as that of Marc Norman (who came up 
with the actual plot), is no "RAGAD," but hey how the hell could it be. 
It's lighter. More cheerful. More accessible. Only slightly less 
engaging. Entertaining as all hell. In fact, in a year when even the 
biggest blockbusters can't lift you off your seat and put a big fat 
grimace across your face, it's refreshing to see a movie so witty and 
wonderfully passionate as this, and surprising to find that even if you 
can't name more than two of his plays ("Romeo and Juliet" and "Hamlet" 
notwithstanding), you can still find that this 
love-story-cum-backstage-pass-cum-witty-rethinking-of-the-life-of-a-certa
in-playwright-cum-costume-drama-cum-flat-out-comedy to be almost as 
pleasing as I or anyone else who actually enjoys the Bard does (not that 
I'm being priggish about it). Because Stoppard, even in "RAGAD," doesn't 
merely show off his knowledge of the Bard's work, but demonstrates it as 
well, and forms his plays/scripts so that even if you're not sure of the 
source material, you can still follow along fine (although it doesn't 
hurt to know what he's talking about, just to get some more of the 
jokes).
And he makes sure that the characters it's about are not just 
recreations from a previous much better play, but actual fresh 
realizations so the story is not stale and so it's easy to be drawn in. 
After all, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, presented so briefly in the 
play, were reintroduced by Stoppard as a variation on the Laurel and 
Hardy mold, a feuding pair of friends who aren't only likable and 
sympathetic because their fate is so obvious, but also because they're 
such great characters. Stoppard does a similar thing with the way he 
recreates Shakespeare. Thought of mostly as a prissy, maybe even 
pretentious artist, the way Shakespeare is presented here is a wonderful 
example of wit: thin, even (as I've been told) devastatingly attractive, 
and, best of all, a hack, he speaks in a whirlwind of aphorisms and 
metaphors, just trying to get his emotions out (a friend, after a short 
speech he's given, says "Enough of that; talk prose."). When we first 
meet him, he's a local London playwright, estranged from his wife, 
selling mere ideas to theatre-owners in hopes of advances and money per 
page he writes, constantly living under the glow of a certain other 
playwright, the then-more notable Christopher Marlow (Rupert Everett, a 
wonderful in-joke here, eh?). Under the employment of Philip Henslowe 
(Geoffrey Rush, in full over-the-top mode here, with a funny mustache 
and a medium-pitched, hilarious speaking voice that screams "rat"), he 
is currently laboring over this new play, aptly-titled "Romeo and Ethel, 
the Pirate's Daughter").
Everything explodes when, during a rehearsal, an actor reads from a play 
of his (the film finds him after early successes, like "Titus 
Andronicus," and before his later masterpieces, like, oh, "Hamlet"), and 
does it with such passion and gusto that he must get his name. But lo 
and behold, it's actually a woman, one Viola de Lessups (Gwyneth 
Paltrow), an attractive aristocrat's daughter, bethrothed to a pompous 
ass of a nobleman (Colin Firth, always on hand to be the asswhole who 
wrecks a lovely romance, like he was in "The English Patient"). The two 
meet again, her no longer in disguise, at a dance, and hit it off 
immeadiately. Once Viola has been cast as Romeo and has revealed her 
true identity to Shakespeare, the two launch into a series of passionate 
love scenes, and she quickly becomes his darling muse. As they make 
love, with the aid of her fellow nurse (Imelda Staunton), his banal play 
(written to make sure that it has pirates and a dog, as Henslowe points 
out) turns into the greatest love story of all time, and just as those 
two were lovers without any hope of a good finale, these two take 
delight in the fact that their relationship as well is doomed from the 
get-go, that she will eventually have to reclaim her social position, 
and he his, but in the meantime, they carry on such a passionate affair 
that it sparkles all the energy in him to write one of his first great 
plays, at least the one that will get him better jobs in the future.
But there's more to the film than just making light of Shakespeare's 
early career and his background for writing such passionate plays: the 
film is basically your traditional Shakespearean play, or at least a 
great carbon copy of such. It has true love, villainy, unexpected 
deaths, vicious twists, character manipulation, bawdy humor, social 
commentary, inside jokes about the times and even itself, and, the most 
classic Shakespearean entity: crossdressing, and not just great 
crossdressing, convincing crossdressing, where people actually buy that 
the gender is what it seems to be. It even has hilarious connections to 
the final form of "Romeo and Juliet" (imagine, if you will, a balcony 
scene culminating in a great fall and a chase by dogs). And it's all 
done in a witty, hilarious way that may have passed as mid-level 
Shakespeare, because Stoppard and Norman know exactly what they're doing 
(and so, I guess, does the other writer, Marc Norman). He knows what's 
funny, and what is also appealing. He crafts not only great lead 
characters, but also memorable supporting characters, like that of Hugh 
Fennyman (Tom Wilkinson), the local moneylender, first seen buring the 
feet of Henslowe, who owes him money, and later seen cherishing the fact 
that he has a role in the final production of the play (even if it is as 
the apothecry). His delight in playing the role is such a sweetly funny 
thing to behold that it gives the film another layer of joy.
But there's much more. I just basically loved almost everything in this 
movie. I loved how it knew its subject backwards and forwards and knew 
how to present it in a witty and entertaining way (it even drolly gives 
a brief nod to Will Kemp, one of the more famous Elizabethan actors). I 
loved how the play was constructed and made so that Shakespeare could 
easily move from a forgettable work to an unforgettable one. I loved all 
the performances, especially Joseph Fiennes, so forgettable in 
"Elizabeth," and here so hilariously witty and charming; and even 
especially Judi Dench, playing an older, more knowledgable Queen 
Elizabeth, who steals all the three scenes she's in (an aside to Viola's 
fiance is just fantastic). For the first time, Gwyneth Paltrow measures 
up to her claim to fame (read: I finally respect her). And I even liked 
Ben Affleck (playing haughty actor Ned Alleyen, who is told that the 
play is titled "Mercutio" so that he doesn't fuck up the play).
But most of all, I loved how the center relationship is so full of life 
and vitality that we don't for one second doubt it's sincerity (a friend 
of mine did point out that when one is in love, one doesn't feel like 
doing work - not so: famous composer Leos Janacek was noted as doing the 
best work of his entire life when conducting a passionate affair, with a 
woman who happened to be half his age...and if it works for him, it 
could've worked for Shakespeare). And we feel for them so that even 
though we know that it's a cursed one from the beginning (like the way 
we know that Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are going to die at the end of 
either of the plays they're in), we can't help but feel a huge loss when 
it actually comes around. It's magnificent direction (by John Madden) 
and beautiful look (which looks genuinely Elizabethan) only help to add 
to the overall impact of the film, but by the end, this is just another 
story of a man who appears to be great but is actually as hopeless lost 
and hopelessly romantic as the rest of us. Like us all, we see the great 
Shakespeare as a local hack, trying to find the muse that will pull him 
out of his prison, and when this happens, it's like a beautiful 
awakening. So is the film. Who else could have possibly made even the 
lowest artist feel better about themselves by downgrading Shakespeare 
and not succumb to the wrath of purists everywhere than Tom Stoppard? 
Just a great man, even if his one attempt at directing was a little 
weak. Norman too.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Kong
Shakespeare in Love is a film that I love to love. There are films which I
like so much that my reviews are shorter than usually because a film review
is half criticism and half pointing out the what to look for. If the film
is as good as Shakespeare in Love, there's not a lot to criticize, just
good things to point out. Shakespeare in Love is a perfect mix of different
genres: a romance, a comedy, and a drama. It all works out to make
Shakespeare in Love one of 1998s best films.
There are two battling theatres in Shakespeare in Love; the Rose Theatre
which has the fairly green screenwriter Shakespeare and the Curtain Theatre
that has the ever-popular Marlowe (Rupert Everett).
Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) is working on Romeo and Juliet (which has the
working title of "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter"). The owner of
the Rose Theatre, Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush), is badly in need of a play to
bring his theatre out of the rubbles, to pay his debts, and to save his
feet (you'll learn early on in the film what I mean by the last part).
Henslowe's secret weapon is Shakespeare. Though at the time Shakespeare is
nothing but a playwright with writer's block. The owner of the Curtain
Theatre thinks that Shakespeare is an up-and-coming playwright and wants to
have Shakespeare writing plays for the Curtain Theatre. Shakespeare forgoes
working for the Curtain Theatre after a startling discovery. He falls into
a bit of depression after making the discovery and his writer's block gets
even worse  that is until he meets the daughter of a rich man, Viola De
Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow). But, as stories go, it turns out that Viola is
going to be married in two weeks. What is Shakespeare to do?
Is Shakespeare in Love based on a true story? It really doesn't matter. The
film is so entertaining that it could stand by itself. The humour in
Shakespeare in Love is off-the-wall and screwball. There are many
Shakespeare references, so many that I couldn't catch them all. If you've
read any Shakespeare, there will  be some Shakespeare references in this
film that will make you chuckle.
John Madden directs Shakespeare in Love. Kudos to Madden for putting
together such a wonderful film based on the script by Marc Norman and Tom
Stoppard. The script is a magnificent piece of work that shows just how
well a movie can be written. Kudos to Norman and Stoppard.
As for performances in the film: They are all top-notch. Paltrow is
effervescent onscreen. Fiennes is the perfect cast for Shakespeare. And
Geoffrey Rush, whom I did not recognize until I saw the credits, is
hilarious. The supporting players are all wonderful. Kudos to everyone in
the film for their all around brilliant performances. Look for Ben Afflect
in the film, his presence is amusing.
If I write anymore about Shakespeare in Love I risk drooling all over the
review, this is a film that you can't miss on the big screen. Don't Miss
Shakespeare in Love. And take a significant other with you to see this
romantic and sweet film.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
James Brundage
Written by Tom Stoppard (Rozencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead) and Mark
Norman (Cutthroat Island)
Starring Joseph Finnes (Elizabeth), Gwenyth Paltrow (A Perfect Murder),
Geoffrey Rush (Shine), Ben Affleck (Good Will Hunting), Judi Dench (Mrs.
Brown), and Colin Firth (The English Patient)
 To be clear about things, this is what Shakespeare in Love is.  Shakespeare
in Love is a comedy of mistakes about one gentleman in Verona (or, in this
case, Elizabethan England) desperately trying to concoct Romeo and Ethel,
the Pirate's Daughter by the Twenty First Night.
 Shakespearean puns aside, Shakespeare in Love actually does center about a
young William Shakespeare (Joseph Finnes), righting a play on assignment
known as Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter, in a period of no less than
three weeks.  However, he is making much bother about something: the fact
that William Shakespeare, one of history's most prolific playwrights, has
writer's block.
 In former times, he was able to enjoy himself in adulterous fashion with
everyone from the tired wives of Halifax to Othellina, the Mooress of
Venice.  Not one of the eight wives of Henry VII can do a bloody thing to
complain about this lover.
 Now, however, he is Hamlet, serf of Sweden with his beloved Ophellia.  He
has no inspiration, only angst.  He does not like it as it is. This is,
however, until he finds himself smitten with Viola De Lesseps (Gwyneth
Paltrow).  This temptress causes an emotional tempest.
 But, keeping with the pilgrim's passion, he lusts after a woman engaged (do
I hear Prince Paris in the wings?), this time to Lord Wessex (played by
Colinn Firth, who lost another girlfriend to a Fiennes boy in The English
Patient).  Lord Wessex comes across with all of the charm of Yiago,
Othellina's trusted friend, but he does it in such a funny way that you have
to love him.
 In fact, you have to love the entire movie.  The way that you see the
evolution of Romeo and Ethel evolve into Romeo and Juliet while a similar
play is being shown in their lives is a perfect postmodern device: used
before and equally well with Rozencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead, the
highly satiric and intelligent play that launched Tom Stoppard onto the
literary scene by telling the story of Hamlet from the view of the friends
sent to spy upon him.
 Hey!  I went a paragraph without using a pun!  I'm going to my myself
something from the merchant of Paris!
 The performances are worth writing sonnets about and put Caesar Augustus to
shame, one of them already having earned a Golden Globe for Best Actress
(Paltrow) and the movie is magical to watch.
 What is most interesting to watch, however, is the shrew taming that
Stoppard demonstrates over his script.  Equally included are postmodern
devices and plain old storytelling.   Grounding humor mixed in with things
King Richard the First and Fourth could have been proud of, not to mention
any of the Henrys.   Almost every line is tainted with Shakespearean
reference.  So, when you see someone laughing their head off for almost no
reason, let them: there probably isn't an un-funny line in the script.
 In fact, there are equally many lines there for just anyone.  The way it
opens has Geoffrey Rush bartering a deal with a loan shark to save his feet
from coals.  It has funny quips like, when Shakespeare begins talking in
iambic pentameter, Rush saying "prose, please".
 The fact is that Shakespeare in love is incredibly funny, incredibly
brilliant, incredibly beautiful.  It's exactly as I like it.  Next to Saving
Private Ryan I would have to call it the best film of the year, and boy is
it a close second.  Shakespeare buffs like myself will get all of the inside
jokes, non-Shakespeare fans will be swept off their feet by the love story
and by the humor that they'll get.  Everyone will enjoy, from Timon of the
New York City Homeless Shelter to the King of Lears, Bill Gates.
 It doesn't even have an unhappy ending!  But I can't tell you much more
except this: all that ends well  is well and that's the last pun you'll hear
in this summer's tale of a late winter's daydream.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard
Ingredients: Shakespeare, Lady dressing like man,
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes, Judi Dench
Synopsis:
The setting is Old England, in days when only men are allowed to be
actors. Even women's roles are acted by men. A girl named Viola (Gwyneth
Paltrow) wants to become a thespian so badly that she dresses up like a
man and calls herself Mr. Kent in order to audition for Will
Shakespeare's acting troupe.
Meanwhile, separated from his wife and two children, Will Shakespeare
(Joseph Fiennes) can't seem to find inspiration for writing his play
Romeo and Juliet without being in love. He falls in love with Viola not
knowing she is Kent. Viola loves Will in return, but then Viola's father
commands her to become the fiancee of Lord Wessex.
Will love prevail? Will Romeo and Juliet ever be completed and
performed?
Opinion:
A movie where everyone speaks Old English, SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is a
farcical, high energy situation comedy with as many pratfalls and quirky
characters as any SEINFELD or SPIN CITY episode. Gwyneth Paltrow excels
as the scheming heroine who must always stay one step ahead of others in
order to maintain her well-meaning deceptions. Viola's schemes, along
with the joyous sword fighting and swinging around, make SHAKESPEARE IN
LOVE a lighthearted and fun romp.
Copyright  1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
With hundreds of sonnets, comedies, tragedies, and patriotic histories 
to his name, William Shakespeare seems an unlikely candidate for 
writer's block.  But that's the conundrum facing the illustrious Bard at 
the outset of "Shakespeare in Love," a deliciously witty and inventive 
comedy drama that reminds us once again of the true genius of England's 
greatest writer.
London, 1593, and Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes, no doubt sick of 
being referred to as "Ralph's little brother") is struggling with his 
latest play.  He needs inspiration in the form of a muse and finds it in 
Viola De Lesseps (a radiant Gwyneth Paltrow), who auditions for the male 
lead (since women weren't allowed on stage in Elizabethan England).  It 
isn't long before Viola, still in drag, starts canoodling in the wings 
with the smitten playwright.
Unfortunately Viola is to be wed this fortnight to the odious Lord 
Wessex (Colin Firth), which puts a bit of a crimp in our heroes' 
romantic future.
It goes without saying that this is a purely invented account of what 
inspired Will to write "Romeo and Juliet" (working title: "Romeo and 
Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter"), but it's absolutely credible and great 
fun in what it supposes.  Like any good Shakespearean work, "Shakespeare 
in Love" is filled with love, sex, villainy, despair, tears, sword 
fights, men dressed as women, women dressed as men, buffoonery, ribald 
humor, intimidating penmanship...and a dog!
Writers Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard (who's been down a similar road 
before with "Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead") take great delight 
in mirroring the diction, the meter, and the sentiment of Shakespeare's 
English.  Their screenplay is punctuated with earnest soliloquies, 
anachronistic asides and, most effectively, the kind of adult humor 
missing from so many mainstream scripts.  Where else but in "Shakespeare 
in Love" might you find "But, soft! what light through yonder window 
breaks?" within spitting distance of "for sixpence a line I'd cause a 
riot in a nunnery."
As sophisticated as the writing is, it's not the be all and end all of 
the piece.  "Shakespeare in Love" is a real team effort, from the fine 
direction of John Madden ("Mrs. Brown") to a superlative cast.  
"Shine"'s Geoffrey Rush plays the fool, Judi Dench plays the Queen, and 
Tom ("The Full Monty") Wilkinson, Ben ("Armageddon") Affleck, and Rupert 
("My Best Friend's Wedding") Everett all give fine accountings, with 
Everett brief but fun as Will's rival playwright, the ill-fated 
Christopher Marlowe.
Fiennes and Paltrow, of course, are terrific and make a handsomely 
engaging couple, even if the latter's nude scenes do seem cheap and 
somewhat distracting in this otherwise high-class production.
That said, "Shakespeare in Love" remains a wicked and wonderfully 
mature period romance, one with which the Bard himself, no doubt, would 
have been proud to be associated.


Author
Mac VerStandig
Shakespeare in Love is quite possibly the most enjoyable period piece 
ever made for the silver screen. It is both humorous and romantic in a 
very unique blend that can successfully entertain any audience for the 
nearly 2 and and a half hours that it occupies. That is, however, not to say it 
is a good film, a quality production or anything of the sort. 
Shakespeare in Love is an incredibly cheap illusion that truly pans out 
to be very little quality or original work.
The finest sign of this may be the plot, in looking back, there seems to 
be little more than a thin, predictable plot that is only carried by the 
portrayal of people that we revere in our history books. Philip Henslowe 
(Geoffrey Rush) owns 1 of the 2 theatres in London. It is at the peak of 
the royal theatre era, and Queen Elizabeth (The recently Damed Judi 
Dench, by, appropriately enough, Queen Elizabeth II) is very much a fan. 
However, to directly quote the film, he has "cash flow problems." 
Through a long set of events, it becomes apparent that his entire life 
is dependent on his next show doing well enough to pay off his debts.
So, Mr. Henslowe employs the young playwright, William Shakespeare 
(Joseph Fiennes) to pen a comedic production. However, the young writer 
has a severe case of writer's block, and blames it on the fact that his 
love life is struggling as well. He has the title in mind, Romeo and 
Ethel, The Pirate's Daughter (Even that joke loses steam after a while) 
but can't seem to put words to paper. Then, as only Hollywood could have 
it, through a long set of twisted events, he meets Viola De Lesseps 
(Gwyneth Paltrow) and falls madly in love, thus curing his writer's 
block. There are many other little issues that Mr. Henslowe encounters, 
but they all pan out to be much ado about nothing.
The first realization that I reached in watching this film is that one 
of the messages given is that a show should not always be credited to 
it's author. Ironically, that couldn't be truer here. The great scenes 
that will sweep audiences away are not the scenes that fit in the plot, 
but rather the recitals of Shakespearean lines by actors playing actors. 
One of the most breathtaking moments in this film does not involve the 
character of Shakespeare or Queen Elizabeth or even the theatre owner, 
but rather 2 young children named Romeo and Juliet who chose to end 
their own lives in the name of love. So it is that I am offended by the 
fact that Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard are credited with writing this 
production, and the name William Shakespeare is no were to be seen 
beyond a character's name in the credits.
The acting in this entertaining yet poor film is often thin to the point 
that it would not have survived even in Queen Elizabeth's theatres. 
Joseph Fiennes may just be the worst of fall though. He is tragically 
unbelievable and comically bad. Gwyneth Paltrow is little more than 
satisfactory in her lead position as well. However, the supporting cast 
does almost save the day. Geoffrey Rush is nothing short of incredible 
and Judi Dench is breathtaking. They both seem to have shown that as 
proven actors they could survive in this film of weak links. You will 
also find a very good performance by Ben Affleck in his first real role 
since Good Will Hunting (No, Armageddon doesn't qualify as real 
acting.). And Rupert Everett was cute in his small part as well. But not 
even they could save this sad excuse for a film, so it remains plagued 
by poor performances.
When all is said and done, Shakespeare in Love is only worth the trip if 
you want to be entertained. However, as the film so kindly pointed out, 
entertainment may be fun, but it isn't necessarily quality. And this 
certainly isn't quality. Perhaps this may be best compared to a John 
Grisham novel, as a dear friend of mine often does compare things to his 
work. Simply put, it is far-fetched, poorly crafted, but very 
entertaining.
See this review and many others at Http://www.moviereviews.org

Author
Luke Buckmaster
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben
Affleck, Tom Wilkinson, Imelda Stuanton, Judi Dench, Simon Callow,
Rupert Everett
Director: John Madden
Screenplay: Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 and half stars
Shakespeare in Love's recipe for success is a simple one.  Due to the
film's superb screenplay and sound acting, director John Madden is able
to pick and match the best parts of three different genres.  Clever
comedy, charming romance and absorbing drama fit neatly into this period
piece, which has a distinctly contemporary feel.  Ordinarily it would be
fair enough to point out that a director probably shouldn't attempt to
have the best of both worlds (so to speak); but here, Madden has the
best of three.
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) has writers block.  He's just begun
working on a proposed play titled "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's
Daughter," but struggles to find inspiration to express himself.  But,
like the play's title, Shakespeare's life soon changes for the better.
He finds motivation in the form of Lady Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), who is
destined to marry the snobby Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) at the command of
Queen Elizabeth herself (Judi Dench, in a cleverly arrogant
performance).  Shakespeare and Viola live out their doomed romantic
fantasy, whilst the formalities (and informalities) of producing a
theatrical production blare in the background.
Those interested in Shakespearean times will appreciate the film's
suggestions and insights into what happened during this era.
Shakespeare in Love suggests how the mysterious death of famous
playwright Christopher Marlowe (played by the always dependable Rupert
Everett) occurred, and hints at how the prohibition of women on the
stage was eventually revoked (during the era, men had to play women in
drag).  On the other hand, those who desire two hours worth of solid
entertainment will get more than they paid for. Comic performances from
Geoffrey Rush as a struggling theatre owner and The Full Monty's Tom
Wilkinson as the play's producer aid the film in keeping it accessible
for everyone.
Joseph Fiennes and Gwyneth Paltrow shine in the two meatiest parts.
Scenes in which Shakespeare puts pen to paper work better than you may
expect; each bringing a magical touch and an involving atmosphere.  As
he writes, we can almost feel the love that inspires him.  Paltrow
delivers one of - if not the - best performances so far in her career.
She has always had enough talent to make a difficult part work, and
should have made a performance like this a long time ago (her roles in A
Perfect Murder, Hush, Sliding Doors and others restricted her charisma).
With so many films nowadays that try to tell too much in too little time
(or, alternatively, films that tell too little in too much time), here
is one that never oversteps the mark.  There are so many paths the film
could have taken, but Madden focuses almost entirely on the central
relationship and the first ever production of "Romeo and Juliet."
Shakespeare in Love's recipe for success is a simple one, but not an
easy one to pull off.  Its carefully crafted screenplay interlaces
drama, romance and comedy smartly and efficiently in this charming and
passionate tale.  Shakespeare in Love has a big heart, but never loses
its grasp on reality or the tragedy of forbidden love.  Not only does it
work as an upbeat period piece, but also as just about anything you want
it to be.


Author
DeWyNGaLe
In the new comedy/drama Shakespeare In Love, you can already tell that it is
going to be excellent.  Judi Dench has been nominated for an Academy Award, Ben
Affleck and Geoffrey Rush have won Academy Awards, and Gwyneth Paltrow is
certainly on her way to at least an Oscar nomination with this film. 
Shakespeare In Love tells the story of William Shakespeare and what inspired
him to write one of the most popular pieces of writing of all time, "Romeo and
Juliet."  It is nice to see a film with a plot revolving around Shakespeare
himself, rather than another one of his pieces of work.  For the first time in
awhile, I have seen a period film that wasn't long and drug out.  Shakespeare
In Love kept my interest and not for one second was my attention directed
somewhere else.
Joseph Finnes plays William Shakespeare, poet and writer in the times of the
1500s.  When Phillip Henslowe, played by Geoffrey Rush, asks Will to write a
play for him so it can be performed, he has a lot of trouble thinking of ideas.
 He believes he has something that many authors get, called writers' block.  He
starts to write a story called "Romeo and Ethel The Pirate's Daughter."  He
only has the title so far, but starts to get ideas when he spots a woman whom
he finds extremely attractive, and he thinks something is very special about
her.  He just stares when he first sees her, and does not make eye contact.  He
writes Act One of his play and it is about the way Romeo felt about a woman he
saw that day.  He meets this lady after a period of time, and discovers that
she is Viola De Lesseps, played by Gwyneth Paltrow.  They get along wonderfully
and start to fall in love.  Viola becomes a fan of Will's work, and desperately
wants to be a part of "Romeo and Ethel The Pirate's Daughter."  Knowing that
girls cannot act in the theater, she dresses up as a boy and rehearses for the
part of Romeo.  She wins the part, but little does she know that Will knows
that she is Viola, not "Thomas Kent", the name she has been going by.
He proceeds anyway, not telling anyone that Viola is actually playing the part
of Romeo in his play.  As Will and Viola fall in love, a problem arises.  Viola
is informed that her duty is to marry Lord Wessex, played by Colin Firth.  She
is devastated that she cannot be with Will any longer.  Queen Elizabeth, played
by Judi Dench, wishes to meet and approve of Viola before she and Lord Wessex
wed.  She doesn't seem to like Viola, and makes a fool of her in front of all
of the people.   Will adds up all the events he goes through with Viola, and
continues writing "Romeo and Ethel The Pirate's Daughter."  Many people,
especially Henslowe are becoming excited about Will's latest script.
Unfortunately, Viola still has to marry Lord Wessex.  Queen Elizabeth informs
Viola that she must move to Virginia with Wessex, and leave Will behind. 
Although she is extremely reluctant to do so, she has to.
Ben Affleck plays Ned, an actor in "Romeo And Ethel The Pirate's Daughter."  He
gives Will the idea of simply calling his story "Romeo and Juliet."  This is
where the classic title comes from.  Will and Viola write more of the story
together, helping each other with ideas.  They come up with the classic ending,
where Romeo and Juliet die together.  The actors continue to work harder and
harder and when show time comes, Will becomes Romeo.  They are ready to perform
this wonderful story, but there is one major problem.  There is no one to play
Juliet.  Viola hears the news and rushes to the stage to play Juliet.  The
performance goes great, and the crowd absolutely loves the show.  A standing
ovation is given, and Will and Viola are extremely happy.  Though many problems
occurred through the writing of "Romeo and Juliet", Viola and Will stayed
together, and really became the characters of Romeo and Juliet.  Everyone in
the town loved the performance, even Queen Elizabeth. 
The cast and characters in Shakespeare In Love had some of the best costumes I
have ever seen in a movie.  The outfits were so real looking, and they didn't
look ridiculous or inaccurate.  The town, the theater, the castle, and all the
other places in the film were extremely real to life and you really felt like
you were there.  Most period movies have a hard time showing what the place
actually looked like.  The theater in particular was impressive.  It didn't
look the least bit new.  You could tell that a lot of time and effort was put
into making Shakespeare In Love look good, sound good, and be good.
The acting in Shakespeare In Love is superb.  Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes,
Judi Dench, Ben Affleck, and Geoffrey Rush should all be nominated for an
Oscar.  Gwyneth Paltrow adds another great  performance to her great year in
the movies.  Joseph Fiennes proves he isn't the only brother capable of being a
great actor.  Judi Dench just proves to us some more that she is a great
actress who can play any roll with great talent.  Ben Affleck shows he can play
more than a hero, or a joker, and that he can do a good job of acting in a
serious roll.  Geoffrey Rush shows us that he is becoming one of the best
actors around.  Shine and Shakespeare In Love are two of my favorite movies
ever, and he was a part of them both.  Shakespeare In Love didn't have many
problems, except for some poorly acted places here and there.  The acting was
the best thing about the movie, and it brought out the best of it.  The plot
was also a great thing.  It is very interesting to see the man behind all these
great pieces of work, instead of his actual work for the hundredth time. 
Overall, Shakespeare In Love is a pure winner.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE
(Miramax/Universal)
Starring:  Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth,
Ben Affleck, Tom Wilkinson, Judi Dench.
Screenplay:  Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard.
Producers:  Donna Gigliotti, David Parfitt & Harvey Weinstein and Edward
Zwick & Marc Norman.
Director:  John Madden.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity, profanity, adult themes).
Running Time:  122 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE offers an answer to 400 years' worth of high
school English students who wondered why the heck he wrote that way --
turns out he spoke that way, too.  As portrayed by Joseph Fiennes in this 
smart, sly and enchanting historical confection, Will Shakespeare is a
the quintessential artist as hopeless romantic.  Afflicted with writer's
block and surviving only by scamming advances on his next play, Will needs
a muse to inspire him.  When he finds one -- the beautiful gentlewoman
Vila de Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow) -- the words flow faster than he can
contain them, both onto the page and from his lips.  A poet awash in the
language he gives to his own grand emotions, he even annoys his
contemporaries into requests that he "talk prose."
     One of the many brilliant twists in SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is how it
treats its protagonists' love with both utter sincerity and an ironic 
wink.  The affair between Will and Viola is, of course, doomed -- he's an
impoverished artist with an estranged wife and family, she's well-born and
promised to the haughty Earl of Wessex (Colin Firth) -- yet that's part of
what makes it so appealing for both of them.  Prohibited from pursing an
acting career by the era's prohibition of women on the stage (Elizabethan
drama cast men in drag in women's roles), Viola sees her alliance with
Will as a double rebellion against society; for Will, an ultimately
unattainable woman inspires the heights of romantic idealism his art
requires.  As the two fairly glow in each other's presence, it's always
clear that they're building a sense memory, not a relationship.
     Before it begins to seem that SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is merely a
meta-commentary on romantic love, it should be clear that it's a sharp
comedy which uses that theme for wonderful satire.  The central romance
becomes a parallel to the play Will is writing during the film -- one
which begins as the comedy "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter" but
morphs into something a bit more tragic.  While debt-ridden theater owner
Philip Henslowe (a great bit of comic acting by Geoffrey Rush) pleads for
Will to create a crowd-pleasing comedy -- "something with a shipwreck,
and a dog" -- the author secretly crafts what he believes is a more honest 
story.  We see that the story's timeless appeal comes from the fact that
it's as unreal as his romantic comedies -- it's a melodrama about two
teenagers treating love the way teenagers do.  Will Shakespeare is styled
as the first Hollywood screenwriter, creating a love story not as it is,
but the all-consuming way we all want to belive it is.
     The Hollywood motif actually runs throughout SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE, and
provides its best laughs.  A money-lender (Tom Wilkinson) becomes a
production partner with debtor Henslowe, suggesting net profit
participation ("monkey points") as payment for the actors; later, a
riverboat driver drops Christopher Marlowe's name as a previous passenger,
and asks Will to read a script he has written; there's even a great piece
of business where Will coaxes a prima donna actor (Ben Affleck) into
taking a smaller role in "Romeo and Juliet" by telling him the play is
titled "Mercutio."  Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard (a writer who knows a
think or two about deconstructing the Bard from "Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern are Dead") create a whip-smart script which drops
unapologetic anachronisms and fanciful historical revisionism into an
already buoyant romantic comedy.
     Considering how many things SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE tries, the
astonishing thing about it as that it nails every one of them.  As a
period piece, it captures the glorious squalor of chamberpots raining down
on pedestrians in 16th century London.  As an allegory, it captures the
appeal of the theatrical life for all its vanity and shady business
dealings.  As an actors' showcase, it gives splendid parts to splendid
performers, notably Paltrow, Rush and Judi Dench (as a breathtakingly
regal and insightful Queen Elizabeth).  And as a pure romance, it has all
the swoon appeal you could hope for in a tale of star-cross'd lovers.
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE is the kind of story that first delights as an
exhilarating simple trifle, then only becomes better when you think about
its layers and its language.  It's almost -- dare one say it --
Shakespearean.
     On the Renshaw scale of 0 to 10 tragical-historical comedies:  10.

Author
Matt Williams
Shakespeare in Love is a delightful romantic comedy with a literary
twist. A fictionalized account of a few months of Shakespeare's life,
the film manages to humanize the greatest English writer of all time,
and delivers a splendid time while doing it.
The film is set in 1593, when William Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) was
just a struggling playwright with a bad case of writer's block. The
debt-ridden owner of The Rose theater (Geoffrey Rush) has commissioned
his latest play, a romantic comedy entitled Romeo and Ethel, the
Pirate's Daughter...but Shakespeare is at a loss where to start.
Enter the dazzlingly beautiful and rich Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), a young
lady who would much prefer the life of a player to her life as the
future wife of a pompous aristocrat, Lord Wessex (Colin Firth).  To
these ends, she disguises herself as a man (since women are forbidden to
take to the stage), and auditions for the part of Romeo in her favorite
poet Shakespeare's latest play.
Meanwhile, a chance encounter with the undisguised Viola sets
Shakespeare's heart all aflutter.  His infatuation gives him renewed
inspiration for writing his play, but it also may turn deadly, as Lord
Wessex wants no rivals for his wife-to-be...particularly not a low-born
playwright.
The screenplay of Shakespeare in Love, written by Marc Norman and Tom
Stoppard, is both literate and accessible.  The wordplay is absolutely
frantic, and even something the Shakespeare-illiterate will enjoy. From
Shakespearean allusions, to pure physical comedy, the film  incorporates
the same mixture of high-and-low humor as many of Shakespeare's plays.
There's something for everyone in this ingenious script.
Sure, there are a few anachronistic twists thrown in here and there, but
they only enhance the playful mood of the film.  The film is obviously
not striving to be mistaken for bland history.  But there are enough
historical details here and there to satisfy the amateur historian.
Joseph Fiennes is simply mesmerizing as Shakepeare, particularly when
delivering the tongue-twisting dialogue at a frenetic pace.  However,
the true marvel of the film is Gwyneth Paltrow, who radiantly shines as
Viola.  Here, she has a role which allows her a fiery mixture of
strength and passion. She makes it perfectly believable that a character
like hers could inspire one of the most inspired poets.
Not merely a period piece, Shakespeare in Love is the rival of many a
modern-day romantic comedy.  The solid acting and delightful screenplay
raise this one above the crowd to be the best romantic comedy of the
season.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Homer Yen
Romeo, oh Romeo...wherefore art thou, Romeo?  Oddly, he might have
been shipwrecked on some deserted island and the butt of a hundred
jokes unless the struggling but well-respected literary mind of
William Shakespeare (Joeseph Fiennes) can somehow overcome a bout of
writer's block.  But as it stands, nothing is igniting his creative
flame for prose and his newest play is a half-baked comedy currently
entitled `Romeo and Ethel - A Pirate's Daughter.'  Alas, what's a
playwright to do?
`Shakespeare in Love' is an immensely satisfying story that follows
the distraught Bard through his period of uncertainty, discovery and
glory.  His spark is provided by the lovely Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), a
charming and radiant woman who has a passion for plays and a fondness
for works previously written by Shakespeare.  There love for one
another is intense, passionate, and romantic in every sense of the
word.  Her presence and strength allows him to begin retooling his
comedy into what will eventually become `Romeo and Juliet.'  But his
goal of creating his greatest work to date is fraught with setbacks. 
Competition wants to derail his troupe of actors; Viola has already
been pre-arranged to marry a jealous suitor; and other factors develop
that threatens Shakespeare's work.  But through it all, he tries to
remain focused on his task at hand.  But creating timeless work
requires some help.   Rich supporting performances come from the likes
of Judi Dench as the sardonic Queen Elizabeth; Geoffrey Rush as the
investor who prays that the play will make money; and Ben Affleck as a
glory-seeking actor that is relegated to only a small role.  Each
added tremendously to the wit and dimension of this film.
I remember when I learned about Shakespeare in middle school, and it
was like learning a second language.  To this date the meaning of his
words still alludes me.   You can expect to find much of that
Elizabethan tongue present here in this movie, but the dialogue is so
rich and vivid that you can not help but awe at how romantic that
period must have been.  Paltrow and Fiennes are absolutely radiant and
have terrific chemistry together in their Oscar-calibrer performances.
 The story is marvelously contructed and strikes a rewarding balance
of pathos and romance as it presents a terrific story of love that
crosses the barriers of wealth, class and titles.  Doses of great
comedy trickle through the story, but the romance aspect and the
intrigue that accompanies it is satisfyingly unexpected and undeniably
sweet.  After I walked out of the theatre, I really wished that I had
payed closer attention to my Shakespearean lessons.  You won't find
many films that are better than this one this year.


Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on New Years Day 1999 by myself at the Cinema 1 for $8.75
Young Will Shakespeare is having writer's block. His pre-Viagra therapist
suggests that he find his muse so he can get his quill up and running to
complete his latest play, "Romeo and Ethel the Pirate's Daughter." And he
must write in a hurry. The producer at The Rose theatre is pressuring him,
as he owes money to some local thugs. He also has dealings with the
competition across the Thames--the Curtain.
So sets the stage for the comedy *Shakespeare in Love*, with the
personable and sexy Joseph Fiennes (as the young playwright) leading a
cast of Oscar winners and nominees. Anthony Hopkins he ain't, but he is
entertaining.
Meanwhile, noblewoman Viola de Lessups (Gwennyth Paltrow) wants a life
"full of poetry, and adventure," and to take to the stage in an age that
forbids women actors. So she auditions at the Rose disguised as "Thomas
Kent" for a role in "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter." If there is
any element that makes no sense in the movie is that anyone would not
notice she is a woman in male drag, but that is my sole complaint.
Like many a Shakespeare play, there are twists and turns, cross-dressing,
and mistaken identities. Director John Madden and writers Marc Norman and
Tom Stoppard bring to life a lively bunch, a Who's Who of British Film
Actors: Geoffrey Rush as one of the rival producers; Colin Firth as the
venemous Lord Wessex, Viola's fiance; Simon Callow as a petty bureaucrat;
Judi Dench as the older, sharp-as-a-tack Queen Elizabeth I; Rupert Everett
as the Bard's rival, Christopher Marlowe; and Tom Wilkinson as Hugh
Fennyman.
The movie's comedy also succeeds as it shows the "origins" of elements of
Romeo and Juliet. For example, climbing up to Viola's terrace; the kind
confidence of the helpful nurse (played hilariously by Imelda Staunton);
suggested plot devices come from his rival. Anyone with even a minimal
amount of exposure to Shakespeare will find enough to appreciate the
in-jokes.
The best sequence is the one in which the lovers run their lines; while
the soundtrack maintains a continuous dialogue, the scenes intercut the
lovers both on stage and half-clad in bed. This is what editing is all
about.
What makes *Shakespeare in Love* a winning film is an enthusiastic cast,
quickwitted dialogues, comic timing, and an obvious love of The Bard's
work. Also adding to the movie's charm are some anachronistic elements:
Shakespeare goes to a therapist; oarsmen on the Thames are more like New
York cabbies ("Follow that boat!"); and statements like, "I hear there's a
future in tobacco." England has never looked sunnier; indeed, there
doesn't seem to be any significant rainfall in this romp.
Also worthy of acclaim is Deborah Lynn Scott's costume design. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Philip Henslowe is a small businessman with a cash flow problem in
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE.  Philip, played by Geoffrey Rush in his best role
since SHINE, is the owner of a playhouse called "The Rose," where young
playwright William Shakespeare is supposed to put on his next play.
Philip's creditor, Fennyman (Tom Wilkinson), is pressuring him to repay
his debts forthwith.  This is no problem since Will's next play, "Romeo
and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter," is in development.  Actually, it
hasn't even begun since Will, played charmingly by Joseph Fiennes, has a
severe case of writer's block.
The movie delightfully mixes the romance and fighting of the play with
some equally high-spirited antics off stage.  The dialog from the play
works its way into the scenes outside of the theater.  When Philip
confronts Will about the need to finish the play in short order, Will
starts speaking poetically.  "No, we haven't the time, talk prose,"
Philip says, interrupting him.
As directed by John Madden (HER MAJESTY, MRS. BROWN) and written by Tom
Stoppard (ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD) and Marc Norman, the
movie bursts with comedic and romantic joy.  It is the small details
that separate great films from lesser ones, and it is here that
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE proves its mettle.
When Will writes, the ink gets all over his fingernails.  He develops
writer's cramps from composing such a large volume of words so quickly.
We even watch him sharpening his quill pens.
The hilarious auditions and rehearsals are both insightful and humorous.
The acting talent from which Will has to choose is not all top drawer.
Philip, for example, insists that his stuttering tailor receive the key
part of the narrator since Philip is so heavily in debt to him.
In a perfect bit of casting, Gwyneth Paltrow, in clearly the best
performance of her career, plays Viola, a rich but untitled young woman.
Her father has arranged for her in three weeks time to marry the noble
but less wealthy Lord Wessex (Colin Firth).  Her father will obtain
royal connections, and Lord Wessex will be rewarded financially.  The
newlyweds are to live across the vast ocean in far-away Virginia.
Viola, a stunning beauty, seeks true love and poetry for her life.
After she falls for Will, she dresses as a boy and wins the part of
Romeo in the play.  (Women at the time were strictly forbidden to be
actors, and men in drag played the women's parts.)
Will falls head over heels in love with Viola and doesn't realize at
first that the young boy with the small goatee is his love.  This causes
one of the sweetest scenes of all when Viola, as a boy, is overcome with
sexual desire and plants a huge kiss one night on a stunned Will.
In the film's long romantic middle section, which nicely mirrors the
middle of the play they are rehearsing, Viola and Will are so much in
love that they have trouble keeping their hands and lips off of each
other.  These sensuous sequences make the picture one of the best date
movies of the year.
The film has as many subplots as a Shakespearean play but manages to
develop them well and still stay within the time limitations of a
traditional length motion picture.  Rupert Everett plays Will's
competition, Christopher Marlowe, whom Will sometimes claims to be in
order to trick people.  Judi Dench (Oscar nominee for HER MAJESTY, MRS.
BROWN) plays a different queen this time, Elizabeth I.
The best small part is that played by CHASING AMY's Ben Affleck, as a
cocky actor named Ned Alleyn.  Will cons Ned into thinking that his part
of Mercutio is the lead and the title of the play.  Eventually, Ned
finds out the truth, and it is he who suggests the better name of "Romeo
and Juliet" for it.
The movie ends with the production of the play and some last minute role
changes.  The movie uses the words of the play to suggest meanings for
the actors on and off stage.
"O, I am fortune's fool!" Will says aptly.  And Viola asks the question
that must be utmost on her mind, "O think'st thou we shall ever meet
again?"
The script will sweep you away.  One minute you are falling in love, the
next you are doubled over in laughter and the next finds you fascinated
by the minutia of the stagecraft.  The movie is for lovers, for
students, for budding actors, for connoisseurs of fine comedy, and for
just about everyone.
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE runs 1:53.  It is rated R for sex and nudity and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Victory A. Marasigan
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
There's an old teaching that says that everything a writer writes, no
matter what his outward intentions, is ultmately the story of that
writer's own personal struggles. That reasoning seems to have been the
foundation of Shakespeare in Love, an infectious romantic comedy whose
charm sneaks up on you, and which easily ranks as my favorite film of
1998.
All is not well for Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes), whom we see here
as a young, struggling London playwright. Though he still owes one
theater-owner a play, he promises his services to another (Geoffrey
Rush), a man whose creditors aren't above using torture as payment.
Adding a kink to Will's situation is the fact that he's been unable to
write a satisfactory line of prose in who-knows-how-long (His
pseudo-psychiatric apothecary's explanation? Lack of a love life).
With moneymen breathing down his neck, Shakespeare begins writing and
casting his new production, Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter,
without any idea of what the play will really be about. A troupe of
actors -- all men, since women were not considered fit for the stage --
is hastily assembled to fill roles as Shakespeare comes up with them.
The exhilarating trials and tribulations of putting together the play
(eventually to become Romeo and Juliet) are the focus of director John
Madden's cinematic treat.
To reveal the details of the plot here would be to ruin the film,
because part of the fun of Shakespeare in Love is in discovering
familiar story points and picking up on Bard-related inside jokes. I
won't even say how young Will falls in love with the beautiful Lady
Viola (played with a perfect British accent by Gwyneth Paltrow), or how
their forbidden union leads to Shakespeare's triumph with Romeo and
Juliet. Nor will I divulge how the fate of Will's rival Christopher
Marlowe (Rupert Everett) predicts moments from not one but several of
the Bard's later plays, including Hamlet, Julius Caesar, and MacBeth.
There is an inexplicable joy to be had in watching Will toiling away at
his desk with a feather pen, while the ink blackens his fingertips.
Though your typical teenager would quickly say otherwise, Shakespeare
did not write his plays so he could torture countless generations of
high schoolers. His initial reasons for becoming a writer were probably
no different than those of your average modern-day wordsmith. Shakepeare
in Love boldly suggests that something more than an itch to tell stories
and a basic need for survival began his creative streak, something much
simpler and more human.
At the same time that the film asserts that Shakespeare's writings were
inspired by events from his own life, it presents his story as the Bard
himself may have written it. Writer Tom Stoppard and Marc Norman have
meticulously combined moments of high comedy, deep tragedy, and action
for action's sake into a layered spectacle not unlike many a
Shakepearean play.
All-around great performances will have you clapping for an encore.
Fiennes and Paltrow have put just the right amount of oopmh into their
portrayals, something which I hope the Oscar nominations do not
overlook. Judi Dench's deliciously ascerbic portrayal of the Queen
Elizabeth I is good for some of the film's big laughs. And as out-
of-place in this
production as he initially seems, Ben Affleck leaves a surprisingly
positive impression in his minor role as the famous thespian Ned Alleyn.
Historians and scholars be advised: Shakespeare in Love is as much the
true story of the Bard as IQ is the story of Albert Einstein. But for
the film's two hours, the illusion which has been so carefully crafted
is so appealing you wish that it really had happened. To the average
high school grad, the film is a breath of fresh air, like a past due
reward for paying
attention during English class.
Reviewed December 17, 1998 at Loews White Marsh Theater, White Marsh,
MD.

Author
Christian Pyle
On first hearing, it sounds like an unlikely hit.  "Shakespeare in Love?" 
Wouldn't most people rather see "Schwartzenegger in Love?"  A script loaded
with allusions to the plays and Elizabethan in-jokes?  Will that put bums on
seats?
"Shakespeare" only recently made it to the hinterlands of Lexington, Ky., and I
had to try twice before I could get a ticket and squeeze in
shoulder-to-shoulder with a sold-out crowd.  I've seen similar crowds lounging
on blankets for an outdoor Shakespeare festival.  Despite the differences in
language and culture and the centuries that have passed, Shakespeare retains a
popular appeal because he speaks to the whole human experience-our noblest
aspirations and lowest urges.
John Madden's "Shakespeare in Love" celebrates the spirit of the Bard in
language anyone can understand.  We find William Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes)
suffering from writer's block and unable to make any progress on his new play,
a comedy called "Romeo and Ethyl, the Pirate's Daughter."  Theater owner Philip
Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush) is anxious to produce "Romeo" to keep a loanshark (Tom
Wilkinson) off his back.
Meanwhile, Viola De Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), a young woman from a rich
family, is so entranced by the stage that she disguises herself as a man to
audition for "Romeo."  (In Elizabethan England, women were forbidden to be
actors;  the parts of women were played by boys.)  Will is blown away by
performance of the disguised Viola, and soon discovers her secret.  A
passionate romance erupts.
The structure of "Shakespeare in Love" is modeled on "Romeo and Juliet," with
the premise that Will's love for Viola inspired the famous play.  So, as the
romance develops, Will incorporates events into his new play, and Viola
performs them on stage as Romeo.  Like Juliet, Viola has a nurse (Imelda
Staunton) who is her confidant and a rich fiance (Colin Firth) she doesn't
love.  Like Romeo, Will crashes a party and woos his love from beneath her
balcony.  There are references to and motifs from other Shakespeare plays, too,
especially "Twelfth Night," which has a cross-dressing heroine named Viola.
"Shakespeare in Love" features cameos by other luminaries of the period. 
Shakespeare's rival Christopher Marlowe (Rupert Everett) is on hand, as is
Jacobean playwright John Webster (Joe Roberts), here a bloodthirsty boy.  Ben
Affleck is hilarious as conceited actor Ned Alleyn; his performance serves as a
sharp satire on star status.  (I get the sense that Affleck may have modeled
Alleyn on John Barrymore; it may be coincidence but Alleyn plays the same role
that Barrymore played in the 1930s version of "Romeo and Juliet.")  Another
standout is Judi Dench, who plays Queen Elizabeth.  Dench, who recently played
Queen Victoria in "Mrs. Brown" (also directed by Madden), gives us an Elizabeth
who is perceptive, witty, and commanding.
"Shakespeare" is the smartest script in recent memory.  Tom Stoppard, one of
its authors, is a respected playwright best known for the inside-out version of
"Hamlet"-"Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead."  The other author, Marc
Norman, has a less-impressive record, but his most recent work, "Cutthroat
Island" (1995), was also a period piece about a woman who crossed gender lines.
"Shakespeare" is a guaranteed crowd pleaser which combines plenty of comedy
with a passionate romance.
 1999 Christian L. Pyle
">http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Christian+Pyle>

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

Because of our current heat wave and my not wanting to really run the
AC in my apartment -- it only affects the bedroom, so having a climate
controlled living room TV session would require heroic efforts on the
part of my two little fans and severe damage to my Con Ed bill -- I
went to the local 2nd run movie house this Saturday.  Choices: "Twin
Dragons" or "Shakespeare in Love".  Not wanting to see a bad Jackie
Chan, I saw "Shakespeare".  About 30 minutes into the showing, I was
kicking myself for not seeing it when it first came out
The fanciful conceit is that Shakespeare is going through a severe case
of writer's block.  Called on to produce a comedy with at least some
pirates and a dog, he starts "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter"
but doesn't get very far.  Things start clicking when he meets Viola De
Lesseps.  The comedy is transformed into the tragedy "Romeo and
Juliet".  This new play reflects and is reflected by Will and Viola's
brief affair: scenes are borrowed from Shakespeare's courtship of the
lady; she disguises herself as a man and acts as Romeo in the
production; passages from the draft inspire their lovemaking.  The film
is very good at visually entwining the play and the affair,
intercutting between rehearsals scenes and bedroom scenes.
There's, of course, trouble, or else "Romeo and Juliet" may well have
ended up as a comedy with a dog in it.  Fundamentally, Viola is the
prize in a marriage alliance.  Her wealthy merchant family intends to
marry her off to destitute nobility to secure a title for themselves.
The nobleman in question, of course, is a bastard (figuratively) more
interested in cash and dowry than in the anachronistically feminist
Viola, who goes to great lengths to break the taboo of women as actors;
young boys had played the women's roles.  It's for the love of poetry
and prose and the stage that she dons the wig and mustache and binds
her breasts.
The film's writers, Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard (Stoppard having that
high-brow cachet going for him), laced their script with scholarly
Elizabethan references.  I know a couple of them mainly because I've
read reviews on the film a while ago -- the boy fascinated with
stabbings is apparently a playwright from the period who specializes in
gore, the George Romero of his day.  The disguise of Viola as a boy is
in the long tradition of Shakespearean women dressing up as young men,
with "As You Like It" and "Twelfth Night" as prime examples.  There's
also the Superman/Clark Kent eyeglasses-as-disguise thing going:
Shakespeare doesn't recognize Viola, even though her boy disguise is
ridiculously thin.  This happens often in his plays.  I'm sure other
reviews can fill in on these touches.
Shakespeare's phrases are woven so thoroughly into the fabric of our
language that we're surprised when we look through Bartlett's and find
that many of the common sayings and clever quotes that we toss off come
from Shakespeare.  One wonders how Shakespeare must have looked brand
new.  One wonders how the first audience to see "Romeo and Juliet" may
have reacted.  This film should get bonus credits for evoking these
bits of wonderings.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films/Universal Pictures
 Director:  John Madden
 Writer:  Marc Norman, Tom Stoppard
 Cast: Simon Callow, Martin Clunes, Rupert Everett, Ben
Affleck, Judi Dench, Joseph Fiennes, Colin Firth, Gwyneth
Paltrow, Sandra Reinton, Geoffrey Rush, Tom Wilkinson
   If you have a way with words and you want to create a
book, a theater piece or a screenplay, you know the usual
advice.  Write what you know.  A great deal of the literature
and films we see are born from the real-life experiences of
their creators.  Even a sci-fi film like Michael
Anderson's"Logan's Run"--which deals with how each
citizen's life of unending pleasure in the twenty-third century
must end at age 30 with extinction--could have been inspired
by the scripter's difficulties finding a job once he had become
"overqualified" because of age.
   Most moviegoers are probably uninterested in how the 
lives of the screenwriters and directors influence their plots. 
That's for critics to debate.  But in the visually elegant
romantic comedy, "Shakespeare in Love," director John
Madden uses Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard's screenplay
to involve us in the life of William Shakespeare, posing the
question, "How much of the Bard's own life is reflected in his
works?"  If you're a reasonably serious student of the great
Renaissance writer, you know that he depended less on his
own nature than on sources well-known to all from years and
centuries past.  In the greatest love story of them all,
Shakespeare lifted the theme from Arthur Brooke's poetic
"The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet," written thirty-
three years before the first production of "Romeo and Juliet." 
Does this mean that there's nothing in the play that came out
of the writer's own life?  Not at all.  According to the director
Madden's fanciful film, Shakepeare may have been quite
familiar with the Brooke text.  After all, he was trying
desperately to get some pages out of a new work called
"Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter."  But he was
blocked.  He needed inspiration, and that encouragement
would come from a brief affair he would soon fall into.
   Now "Romeo and Juliet," first presented to an Elizabethan
audience in 1595, is a gender-bender which includes some
comedy (such as the scene in the fourth act dominated by
ribald musicians), a considerable allotment of tragedy, and a
very great deal of romance.  "Shakespeare in Love" similarly
reflects these genres but is dominated by comedy.  The title
character, played by Joseph Fiennes, proves that writer's
block is not a scourge of our own century alone.  He is
working on "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter," but
nothing in his own life can inspire him to dash off even a
single page of poetry.  His purely physical needs are met by
the promiscuous Rosaline (Sandra Reinton) but he needs
something transcendent if he is to draft the greatest love
story ever told.  Neither the pressure of theater owner Philip
Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush) nor the insistence of financier
Hugh Fennyman (Tom Wilkinson) can stir his creative juices. 
When he sets eyes on the lovely and cultivated Viola De
Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), he is hooked and, fortunately,
the feelings are mutual.  Viola, however, has been
commanded by Queen Elizabeth (Judi Dench) to marry the
insistent gold-digger Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) and to follow
him to his plantation in Virginia.
   When Lady Viola--who aspires to be an actor at a time that
women were not allowed on the stage--auditions for the role
of Romeo disguised as a man, there follows a series of
mistaken identities, free-for-all brawls, swordfights, and best
of all some passionate embraces between Bard and bedmate
that mirror the very themes of the play.  The words now flow
liberally from Shakespeare's quill.  For dialogue, the author
makes canny use of the everyday expressions he picks up
while walking through London streets, such as one orator's
political diatribe "A plague on both your houses" and another
citizen's comment on a theater building, "A rose by any other
name..."  If you believe the particulars of this movie, you'll
even see how Will was able to follow up his great play about
love with a lighter-than-air fable,"Twelfth Night," finding a lead
role for the object of his own great passion, Viola.
   The idea behind the film is a clever one indeed, showing
how art follows life, and is in addition a paeon to the power of
the theater (and by extension the cinema) to teach us the
real meaning of love.  Clever that the movie may be, it does
not come up to the usual standards of its co-writer, Tom
Stoppard, who has imparted to us far wittier take-offs on
Shakespeare such as "Dogg's hamlet," on James Joyce in
"Travesties," and has inundated us with verbal wit and
intellectual games in such plays as "Hapgood" (on double
agents and nuclear physics) and "After Magritte" (about the
elements of a Magritte painting such as umbrellas and
bowlers).  Much of the comedy is obvious and flat, as in the
slapstick scene involving the comical torture of Philip
Henslowe by Hugh Fennyman and Restoration comedy-like
scenes involving the licentious Rosaline with Tiley (Simon
Callow), who tries to close the theater upon learning that a
woman is on the stage.  Nor is Joseph Fiennes a match for
the radiant and highly talented Gwyneth Paltrow.  Fiennes
has distinguished himself in the role of Dudley in the
generally convoluted film "Elizabeth" but in a part that
demands the corporeal countenance and impassioned
demeanor of a great lover, he comes across as both
physically and temperamentally thin.  Not so Dame Judi
Dench, who follows up her distinguished portrayal of Queen
Victoria in John Madden's "Mrs. Brown" with a vibrant
portrayal of the Virgin Queen in her current role.
   "Shakespeare in Love" boasts an abundant gallery of
British thesps, including Antony Sher, Rupert Everett and
Simon Callow and also popular American stars such as Ben
Affleck and, of course, the L.A.-born Gwyneth Paltrow.  It 
has a 1990's sensibility, encompassing a session which
Shakespeare has on the couch with verbal intimacies timed
by an hourglass. The picture is stunningly photographed on 
location in Britain to reflect a late 16th Century motif.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE" (Miramax Films)
At last, a juicy, funny, romantic comedy - aimed at adults!
Cleverly written by Marc Norman & Tom Stoppard and brilliantly
directed by John Madden, this charming story, set in 1594, introduces
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) as a young English playwright
struggling with plots, characters, deadlines - and writer's bloc. And
he's in competition with Christopher Marlowe, who writes for a rival
theater. And his producer (Geoffrey Rush) is deeply in debt to the
local moneylender (Tom Wilkinson) whose methods of collection are
insidious. Just as the future of their Rose Theater looks dire, a
wealthy merchant's daughter, Viola De Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), who
swoons over Will's sonnets, decides to masquerade as a boy (since
girls were not allowed to perform on the stage at that time) and
audition for "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate King's Daughter," one of
Will's works-in-progress. She's hired immediately, as Will is
enchanted with the recitations of his new "Romeo" until, of course, he
discovers he is a she - at which point the bawdy Bard slips between
the radiant maiden's sheets - but, by then, Queen Elizabeth I (Judi
Dench) has promised her in marriage to Lord Wessex, a cold, arrogant
Virginia tobacco farmer (Colin Firth).  All's well that ends well and,
if their escapades resemble "Twelfth Night," that's no coincidence. In
true Shakespearean form, there are mistaken identities, sight gags,
ghosts, sword-fights, betrayal, lies - and a dog. You don't have to
know Shakespeare to enjoy this incandescent film but the more you
know, the more you will appreciate its hilarious wit.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Shakespeare in Love" is an enchanting, richly
comic 10. Not only one of my 10 Best Pictures of the Year but one of
the major Oscar contenders.

Author
greg king
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE (M).  
(Universal/Miramax/UIP)
Director: John Madden
Stars: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Platrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, 
Imelda Staunton, Tom Wilkinson, 
Ben Affleck, Martin Clunes, Judi Dench, Simon Callow, Jim Carter, Joe 
Roberts, Rupert Everett, Antony 
Sher, Mark Williams
Running time: 123 minutes.
This bawdy, slightly irreverent but delightfully entertaining
romantic comedy offers us a fictional interpretation of the creation
of Romeo And Juliet, one of literature's greatest tragic love stories.
The film is set in the Elizabethan London of 1593.  Up and
coming young playwright Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes, recently
seen in Elizabeth) has been commissioned to write a play by
sycophantic but debt ridden theatre owner Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush, in
a wonderful comic turn).  It is hoped that this new play will put him
on a par with arch rival, the famous playwright Christopher Marlowe
(an uncredited Rupert Everett).  But, even before he has put pen to
paper for his farce Romeo And Ethel, The Pirate's Daughter, he is
unfortunately struck by writer's block.
Enter Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow, in a role originally intended
for Julia Roberts), the headstrong daughter of a noble family, who
desperately wants to become an actress at a time when women were
forbidden to pursue a career in the theatre.  Although she is
betrothed to the slimy Wessex (Colin Firth) in an arranged marriage,
Shakespeare falls heavily in love with Viola.  She becomes his muse,
and soon the words are flowing from his quill.  Their illicit romance
provides the inspiration for the struggling playwright, and the drama
of their affair is reflected in the developing play.
Some of the characters and incidental details may already be
familiar to audiences who saw the lavish BBC tv mini-series starring
Tim Curry as Shakespeare.  Playwright Tom Stoppard (Rosencrantz And
Guildenstern Are Dead, etc) and co-writer Marc Norman suffuse their
script with an air of irreverence, playfully mixing fact with fiction.
The result is a briskly paced and enjoyable comedy about love,
mistaken identities, duels, passion and death - the very stuff that
became the essence of Shakespeare's famous plays.
This wonderfully written film offers plenty of insights into
the world of Elizabethan theatre without becoming didactic.  British
director John Madden (Mrs Brown) also gives it a slightly contemporary
flavour with his treatment of the off stage dramas, the bruised egos,
the rivalry between writers, and the scrambling for patronage and
favour.  His direction is crisp, and he makes the most of the sharp
script and the poetic beauty of the dialogue.
The ensemble cast are all uniformly good, and their solid
performances lift this delicious comedy.  Golden Globe winner Paltrow
is luminescent as Viola, and she delivers a wonderful performance in a
quite challenging dual role.  Fiennes only stepped into the role of
Shakespeare after Daniel Day Lewis passed, but it's hard to imagine
anyone else bringing such passion, wit and smouldering intensity to
the part.  He is superb, and if he keeps getting good roles in quality
films like this, the younger Fiennes will possibly eclipse his more
famous but over rated brother Ralph.
Tom Wilkinson brings his usual touch of class to his role as
Fennyman, the money lender who eventually sponsors the creation of
Romeo And Juliet.  Judi Dench lends her commanding presence to the
role of Queen Elizabeth.  Imelda Staunton is marvellous as Viola's
sympathetic and understanding nurse.
This handsomely mounted production beautifully brings to life
the Elizabethan setting.  The costumes and the set design evoke the
marked contrasts between Viola's world of pomp and privilege and the
destitute, grimy world of London's growing theatre community.  Stephen
Warbeck's gorgeous music score and Richard Greatrex's luscious
cinematography further enhance the classy production.  **** greg king
http://www.netat.com.au/gregking

Author
Nicole Lesley
Starring: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben
Affleck, Judy Dench.
Going to see Shakespeare In Love I learnt a lesson that I've learnt
many times before and I'm sure I'll learn many times again. It kind of
undermines this web-site but the lesson is: Never listen to critics!
I had seen the preview for Shakespeare In Love and it looked exactly
like the kind of movie I would hate. Three things, however, worked
against me. First, the critics were raving about it. It was getting
ten out of tens, and fours stars and two thumbs way up. Second, a
friend of mine believes that whatever impression a preview gives, the
only thing you can be sure of is that the movie isn't like
that. Third, Colin Firth was in it.
Perhaps the lesson should be always trust your first
instincts. Shakespeare In Love was a trial to sit through. There are
so many reasons why this is a painful movie: let me count the ways.
    1.Gwyneth Paltrow and her nasal British accent. Are there no
British female actors of the right age to play this part? (Perhaps
they all read the script and had too much sense.) Or if we must have
an American actor to drag in the US audience, could we please have
someone different? After Emma and Sliding Doors I've had enough of the
British Ms. Paltrow.
    2.Romeo and Juliet. I will confess that I think this is one of
Shakespeare's weakest plays. Perhaps it was revolutionary for the
times, perhaps it tells an amazing story, but really, it's now such an
overdone plot in Hollywood: star crossed lovers, insurmountable
barriers, passion beyond compare. In Shakespeare In Love, we don't
only have to sit through the story of Romeo and Juliet, we have to sit
through the rehearsals and the performance of it, just in case we
don't get the allegory.*
    3.More British accents. I will admit that Ben Affleck played quite
a good role but there were moments when his accent wandered. At one
point this event caused me to laugh at the most inappropriate
moment. I prefer Kenneth Branaugh's approach of letting people speak
in their own accent. It's not like historical authenticity was a point
here: the British people were speaking with twentieth century accents.
    4.Did Gwyneth Paltrow really need to have her breast bound to pass
as a boy?
    5.The soap opera production values. By this I mean the climactic
moment, serious close-up of our male hero as he reacts to the
situation, amazing close-up of our female hero as she reacts to the
situation, quick shot of a couple of the by-standers for their
reaction, back to the heros, lingering on their faces, cut to a
commercial. Ok, so we didn't get the commercial but we got everything
else.
Are there any good points to this movie? Well, it looks
beautiful. They may all behave like they're in General Hospital but
they've got a budget that would make television people weep. Apart
from the wandering accents, all the performances are quite good and
finally, Colin Firth is in it.  He seems to be specialising in playing
the baddies opposite people of the Fiennes family (see The English
Patient).
Speaking of which, if you liked that movie, you'll probably like this.
They're very similar: star-crossed lovers, insurmountable barriers,
passion beyond compare. Are there no original ideas in movies any
more?
*For those of you who find this stance contradictory to the HD that I gave
Romeo + Juliet, I think Baz Luhrmann's treatment of this play is
perfect for the subject matter, suggesting perhaps that it's not totally
the play that's the thing but what you do with it that matters.
