Title
Review for Meet the Feebles (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jason Wallis
Starring Robert the Hedgehog, Heide the Hippo, Bletch the Walrus, Trevor
the Rat, Sebastian the Fox, Harry the Hare, Lucille the Poodle, Wynard the
Frog, Samantha the Siamese Cat and Sid the Elephant 
Rated X for sex, nudity, profanity, violence, gore and general tasteless
humor 
I've never seen a film quite like "Meet the Feebles", and I doubt that I
ever will again. It is a film so crude, so tasteless and so lurid that one
can only wonder how it was even released in the first place. However, it is
also what is probably one of the most hilarious films I've ever seen,
taking a backseat only to some of the Monty Python flicks. Yep, it's...an X
rated puppet flick!!! And if you can just get past that concept without
being completely turned-off and horrified, you're in for a real treat. 
The Feebles are, essentially, the Muppets gone off the deep end. Instead of
being cute and funny gripping about paychecks, the Feebles are too busy
doing horrible, unspeakable things to each other to worry about their
wages. But as bad as these characters are, director Peter Jackson puts a
lovable spin on each and every one of his creations, making even such
otherwise despicable characters as Trevor the rat (who films S&M porn
movies in the basement) into genuinely likeable people. 
The story revolves around one day and night during rehearsals for a live
telecast of the "Feeble Variety Hour" (yet another spin on the Muppets) and
the many problems that come up during this time. The star of the show is
Heide, a very large hippo with some even bigger emotional problems,
constantly stuffing herself with any kind of cake available and weeping
over scrapbooks with pictures of her and Bletch, the walrus producer of the
show. Walrus, unbeknownst to Heide, is having an affair with his secretary,
a slutty Siamese cat named Samantha. On top of this, Robert (a hedgehog who
pronounces his name "Wobert") has just landed a new job in the chorus, and
Trevor (the aforementioned rat) is trying to recruit the poor hedgehog's
poodle girlfriend Lucille as new talent for his smut pictures. 
If this isn't enough, Wynard (the knife-throwing frog) is in the last
stages of drug addiction and has problems not making Swiss cheese out of
his assistants because of his extreme depression and shellshock regarding
the Vietnam war (illustrated in a brilliant parody of "The Deer Hunter"),
not to mention his drug withdrawal. And how could we forget the unfortunate
hare named Harry, who has recently (due to his habit of all-night orgies)
contracted a nasty little VD and has been diagnosed to have just twelve
hours to live (kind of like a soap opera, eh?)? In the end, this all
amounts to a brilliantly apocalyptic finale that is kind of like "Carrie"
meets "Rambo". 
And there's more...but I won't get into it, as one of the movie's chief
pleasures is having the delightfully witty narrative unfold before you.
What Jackson has done here is taken what would otherwise be a juvenile,
disgusting and ultimately pathetic story and elevated it to become some
sort of twisted masterpiece. I wasn't sure what to make of it when it was
finally over, and I'm sure that other people might hate it, but that does
not alter the fact that anyone who meets the Feebles will have a hard time
forgetting them.
Visit Jason Wallis' "Filmaholics Anonymous" web site at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475 

Author
James Berardinelli
Australia, 1989
U.S. Availability: Summer-Fall 1995 (extremely limited)
Running Length: 1:37
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Puppet sex, puppet profanity,
     puppet drug use, puppet violence, puppet nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Featuring the voices of Donna Akersten, Stuart Devenie, Mark Hadlow,
     Ross Jolly, Brian Sergent, Peter Vere Jones, and Mark Wright
Director: Peter Jackson
Producers: Jim Booth and Peter Jackson
Screenplay: Danny Mulheron, Frances Walsh, Stephen Sinclair, and
     Peter Jackson
Cinematography: Murray Milne
Puppets designed by Cameron Chittock
Music: Peter Dasent
U.S. Distributor: Greycat Films
     And now for something completely different....
     Originally released in Australia during 1989, Peter Jackson's cult
hit MEET THE FEEBLES is only now receiving its official United States
"tour", opening for short runs in select art houses across the country
over a six month period.  Those not specifically on the lookout for this
film will probably miss meeting the Feebles, which may be a good thing,
considering the potentially-horrified reaction of someone who
unwittingly walks into a theater showing this feature.
     The Feebles--the creatures which populate this movie--are a
cross between the Muppets and the monsters from RETURN OF THE JEDI.  But
the denizens of Peter Jackson's dark, puppet demesne are not cute and
cuddly.  To the outside world, the stars of "The Fabulous Feebles
Variety Hour" television special are celebrities worthy of adoration,
but those who spend time behind-the-scenes know the real story.  The
Feebles are engaged in every kind of depravity imaginable, from
pornography to homicidal shooting sprees.  In brief, there's Harry the
hare, who thinks he's infected with a terminal sexually-transmitted
disease; Bletch the walrus, who runs a XXX video business on the side;
Sebastian the fox, who writes and sings a song called "Sodomy"; Trevor
the rat, who deals drugs and sounds like Peter Lorre; Heidi the hippo,
the aging, overweight star attraction; and Wynyard the frog, a Vietnam
Vet with a heroin habit.
     The stories of these and a few other characters are told in a
disgustingly graphic, obscenely offbeat, and caustically funny manner.
MEET THE FEEBLES is for those with a strong stomach and a seriously
warped sense of humor.  The film is so off the beaten track that it
makes MONTY PYTHON seem mainstream.  Anyone attracted by the promise of
an earlier effort from the director of HEAVENLY CREATURES should avoid
precipitously rushing out to see this; the only link between the two
films is the undeniable creative genius of Peter Jackson.
     The mood of the viewer goes a long way to determining how much
enjoyment is culled from MEET THE FEEBLES.  It probably helps to watch
this film with a group of like-minded individuals, perhaps after
imbibing a little too much alcohol.  Calling this film "bizarre" is far
too tame--it's sick, ribald, and willing to try just about anything.
That makes for a nearly-unprecedented monument to bad taste.  Sounds a
little like something by John Waters, doesn't it?
     It should be noted that grossing people out isn't the only
objective of MEET THE FEEBLES.  Despite being buried beneath copious
quantities of body fluids and other revolting material, Jackson's film
contains a satirical message about not objectifying media stars.  This
movie was created some seven years ago, yet it doesn't take much stretch
of the imagination to relate it to certain current high-profile news
stories.  How different is the Feebles' three ring circus from that of
the O.J. Simpson trial?
     MEET THE FEEBLES is the sort of movie you either love or hate.
Personally, while I found parts of it diabolically clever and funny, I
thought the setup was overlong and certain aspects of the production
either didn't work or were needlessly overdone.  But that's the kind of
style that turns something like this into a cult favorite, so take the
numerical rating with a significant grain of salt.  Regardless of your
opinion of MEET THE FEEBLES, however, it's unlikely that, after seeing
this film, you'll ever look at Kermit or Miss Piggy in quite the same
way.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Peter Jackson
Writers: Peter Jackson, Danny Mulheron, Stephen Sinclair, and Frances Walsh
Starring: Mark Hadlow, Ross Jolly, Brian Sergent, Peter Vere-Jones, Mark
Wright, Donna Akersten, Stuart Devenie
A friend of mine said to me about three minutes into watching Peter
Jackson's "Meet the Feebles" that (I'm paraphrasing) "This is nothing but
an obnoxious, nasty version of the Muppets; everything that's going on is
just being aimed at the lowest common denominator."  To which I relpied
"Yeah...so?"
"Meet the Feebles" is one of the creepiest, most disgusting films I've ever
seen, and also one of the more interesting, to say the least.  As my friend
said in the quote, it's a nasty version of the Muppets, kind of like the
vile behavior.  The film's about a group of living puppets all working on a
one-hour variety show a la the Muppets, but all on their very first show. 
And the film takes place in a short period time before this show, as we are
introduced to every single character on the show, some of which get more
attention than others, and are shown as bluntly as possible.
The film exposes all the melodrama of the backstage of the show, including
several stores going on at the same time, such as one featuring Heide the
Hippo, an overweight actress hired only because she's a star, which is also
the reason she's married to Bletch the Walrus, the show's double-crossing,
asswhole producer, who's carrying on an affair with Samantha the Siamese
Cat, his voluptuous secretary.  Meanwhile, we meet the quiet, lovable
Robert the Hedgehog, the least depraved of the sort, who has fallen in love
with Lucille the Poodle, who has the eyes of Bletch's Peter Lorre-accented
assistant, Trevor the Rat, who shoots S&M films on the side.
You think these characters are bizarre?  Here's a couple more: there's the
show's bitchy director, Sebastian the Fox, who has a musical suprise near
the end; the dim-witted Sid the Elephant, who has accidentally gotten a,
um, chicken pregnant (don't ask me how); Harry the Hare, another star who
has found out that he may have AIDs; Wynard the Frog, the shaky knife
thrower who does morphine every thirty seconds to calm the pain of a past
war where he was held captive and forced to do Russian Roulette (yes,
there's a "Deer Hunter" parody); and a Papparazzi fly who shows up now and
then.
This should basically give you an idea of what the film is like: it IS the
Muppets made afoul.  This is exactly why the film is fun, though.  And I
was wrong about my first impression that it was merely just this. 
Underneat we have a hilariously scatching satire of the line between how we
view celebrities and how they really are.  On stage, Harry the Hare may
seem like a lovable Bugs Bunny rip-off, but what you don't know is that the
minute he leaves the stage, he's off to take on two chick bunnies in his
dimly-lit room.
No, it's not accurate; it's a puppet movie, and it takes everything it can
to the extreme at any moment.  But this is exactly what the film is about
and why the film is fun.  Although barely released in the States, this film
has a cult status, and it's easy to see why.  I can understand why this
film would seem very fun after a couple friends come over and following a
brief downer of some heavy liquor.  It does pander to the lowest
denominator, that's why it's fun.  And because it has some general depth,
it can also hold up when sober.
If there's anything wrong with the film, it's that it's too long.  97
minutes is nothing normally, but when you have puppets talking and doing
shit for that long, it seems like an eternity.  Although several things are
a riot, this film just needs some good editing, especially in the middle
where it drags horrifically, making for a generally uncomfortable
experience.  Although I have to admit I don't know what could be cut.
But that's all made fine by an ending which is so over-the-top, so much a
parody of "Carrie" and "The Wild Bunch" that I suddenly lept to my seat
when it began.  Yes, it's another typical Peter Jackson gorefest, but he
does them so well that I can't see how anyone could complain with a
straight face.
I kept thinking back to what my friend said (who left after five minutes or
so to do something "better"), and how I wished he had stayed until the end.
 Although it's often a big task to watch, the reward for making through it
is a fiercely funny and satirical film which may be foul, disgusting, and
horrific to watch, but at the same time, entertaining, mesmerizing, and
unforgettable, which isn't always a good thing, but here's an exception.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
