Title
Review for Guarding Tess (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Nicolas Cage, Shirley MacLaine, Austin Pendleton, 
           Richard Griffiths, James Rebhorn, Edward Albert 
Director:  Hugh Wilson 
Producers:  Ned Tanen and Nancy Graham Tanen  
Screenplay:  Hugh Wilson and Peter Torokvei 
Music:  Michael Convertino 
Released by TriStar Pictures 
     How many different spins have their been on the "buddy film"?
>From THE ODD COUPLE to LETHAL WEAPON, it seems that just about
every angle on this subject has been covered.  Then along comes a movie
like GUARDING TESS that thinks it has a unique twist to this
tried-and-true theme.  However, an unusual pairing doesn't equate to a
noteworthy picture.
     Since the death her late husband the President, former First Lady
Tess Carlisle (Shirley MacLaine) has been living in a house in
Sommersville, Ohio, under the watchful eye of Secret Service agent Doug
Chesnick (Nicolas Cage) and his team of six men.  Just when Doug thinks
his term of duty is over, Tess requests that he return for another
three years, and what Tess wants, Tess gets.  So, against his will (his
alternative is the unemployment line), Doug remains in Sommersville,
where his already- brittle relationship with the aging widow turns into
an open contest of wills.
     DRIVING MISS DAISY did it much better, but there are some shared
themes between the 1989 Academy Award winning film and Hugh Wilson's
GUARDING TESS.  Both are about two mismatched people coming to know and
appreciate each other, and eventually realizing how important their
relationship is.  This, the central theme of every "buddy film," lies
at the core of GUARDING TESS.  Only the details surrounding it have
changed to fit the situation.
     The story is not especially original.  Mostly predictable,
GUARDING TESS is light on surprises, but that's a given for any film
that falls even loosely into a formula category.  Slow to start with,
the movie eventually slips into a flow, but the ending is burdened by a
poorly-reasoned and rather silly kidnapping subplot.  Don't think too
hard during this part, because a lot of what goes on doesn't make much
sense.
     The comedy is mostly low-key, and much of it works.  Coming from
writer/director Hugh Wilson, the man behind the original POLICE
ACADEMY, it's nice to find a motion picture whose laugh-to-joke ratio
is relatively high.  GUARDING TESS relies far more on verbal jousting
and body language than on slapstick and other ridiculous gags.
     Nicolas Cage carries the movie.  The energy and audience
involvement all come as a result of his engaging performance.  Normally
know for his manic on-screen antics, it's interesting to see Mr. Cage
play a restrained role.  The harnessed emotion is always there, just
beneath the surface, waiting to break free.
     Shirley MacLaine does a reasonable job as Tess, and holds her own
in scenes with her co-star, although her magnetism isn't as palpable as
his.  The rest of the cast, including such familiar names as Austin
Pendleton and James Rebhorn, provide fine supporting work.
     Ultimately, while GUARDING TESS is a genial comedy that provides a
reasonable ninety-five minutes' entertainment, it's sadly lacking in
originality.  There are a few good jokes, some nice chemistry between
the two leads, a little character development, and a little pathos, but
it all doesn't add up to very much.  The ingredients are there, but the
final product wasn't prepared to its best advantage.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nicolas Cage, Shirley MacLaine.
Screenplay:  Hugh Wilson and Peter Torokvei.
Director:  Hugh Wilson.
     I mean no condescension when I say that GUARDING TESS is the kind
of movie that my grandparents would love.  They see about a movie per
year, if that, and when they do choose to plunk down their $7.00 a
piece they tend to opt for something light and frothy, usually one of
those comedies featuring two decent but strong-willed characters who
spar but obviously care about each other.  These films are always good
for a few smiles, and are generally inoffensive.  Intellectually, I
understand the appeal of such once- in-a-blue-moon-night-on-the-town
entertainments, and some of them do give the character interaction
zing.  GUARDING TESS isn't one of them.  It's just two pleasant,
well-acted characters with nothing to do.
     GUARDING TESS has been the assignment for the past three years for
Secret Service agent Doug Chesnic (Nicolas Cage).  Tess is Tess
Carlisle (Shirley MacLaine), an irrascible widowed former First Lady,
beloved by the public but held in a slightly different regard by those
close to her.  Doug has just completed his three years, much to his
delight, when he is informed that Tess has personally asked the
President to keep Doug on the detail.  It is with reluctance that Doug
returns to guard Tess, and the two find themselves perpetually at odds
as Doug insists on doing everything by the book.  When tensions boil
over, both become aware of an underlying respect that grows into an
unlikely friendship.
     GUARDING TESS owes every ounce of charm it displays to the very
engaging lead performances of Nicolas Cage and Shirley MacLaine.  Cage
often seems to have only two gears on screen--frantic and manic--but
here he des a surprisingly restrained turn as the frustrated agent.  He
is appropriately humorless about a job Doug takes very seriously, yet
he doesn't go for wooden.  MacLaine, who seems to get every role in
Hollywood written for a woman over 50, has mastered the flinty dame bit
by now, while always managing to leave a bit of softness around the
edges.  Tess is not a particular stretch for MacLaine, but she never
mails in a performance.  The interaction between Doug and Tess in the
film's first half hour is amusing in a low-key way, never degenerating
into over-the-top theatrics.  At almost every stage the relationship
seems completely natural, and that relationship makes for some
entertaining scenes.
     What torpedoes GUARDING TESS is the sense that director and
co-writer Hugh Wilson didn't really know what to do with these two
characters.  Wilson's most notable previous contribution to film has
been the POLICE ACADEMY series, but he did create the popular TV sitcom
"WKRP in Cincinnati" and the critically acclaimed but short-lived
"Frank's Place."  Since Wilson's greatest success has come on the small
screen, it should come as no surprise that GUARDING TESS feels a lot
like a pilot for a series.  The characters are established, but the
plot is nearly non-existent.  Very quickly, GUARDING TESS begins to
repeat itself, with too many redundant scenes of Doug and Tess butting
heads, Tess winning and Doug fuming.  It's a film that just floats
around like a hovercraft on a layer of niceness.
     Then, when Wilson finally seems to realize the need for a second
plot point, he creates an utterly ridiculous subplot involving a
kidnapping.  I have this feeling the conclusion we see was not his
first choice.  There is a silly red herring involving Tess's son which
I suspect was not a red herring in some earlier incarnation, because
the revelation of who the kidnappers are inspires a big "what?"  I also
believe Wilson might have considered a slightly darker resolution, but
was concerned about ruining all the good will he had worked so hard to
generate.  The result is just grossly out of touch with the rest of the
movie anyway.
     Fluffy and inconsequential doesn't have to mean tedious.  GUARDING
TESS might make a fine bargain matinee for someone seeking a chuckle or
two.  At least that's what I'd tell my grandparents.

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Secret Service agent Douglas (Nicolas Cage) is called back for a
second three-year term at the Secret Service's worst assignment,
guarding former First Lady Tess Carlisle (Shirley MacLaine).  Fur flies
as Douglas tries to enforce Service protocol, while Tess just wants
respect and privacy.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     As a fan Nicolas Cage fan, I try and see him whenever I can.  I've
also been impressed by Shirley MacLaine's acting.  So I looked forward
to their pairing.  In GUARDING TESS, MacLaine's strong-willed character
is constantly bucking at Cage's strongly enforced security rules and
restrictions.  GUARDING TESS's funniest moments come from this
interaction as they constantly jockey and battle for the dominance.
     There's also an undercurrent going on.  They're fond of each
other, but not to the casual observer.  As GUARDING TESS opens,
Douglas's term of duty is over, but Tess likes him enough to pulls
strings and have him reassigned.  When Douglas asks why she did this
despite their conflicts, she replies, "Because I like you, Douglas."
     Douglas is often frustrated by Tess's stunts, and the lack of more
active assignments.  The only action he has to deal with are
ridiculously humorous excursions to the supermarket.  "We have lost
interest in peas, repeat, lost interest in peas..."  When something
finally happens, as it inevitably must, he is caught flat-footed.
Which leads to a scene where a superior berates him, saying "Are you
telling me that *seven* trained and heavily armed Secret Service agents
can't guard one senior citizen?!?".
     I laughed a lot during the first half of GUARDING TESS.  But about
two-thirds of the way through, it suddenly turned into a half-hearted
suspense drama.  The laughs went away and were replaced with
serious-faced goon squads to try and solve the crime.  Fortunately, the
deviation into bad suspense-drama doesn't last long and GUARDING TESS
redeems itself at the last moment by returning to comedy.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     GUARDING TESS is a decent comedy that turns into a bad suspense
drama near the end.  If you're a fan of either Shirley MacLaine or
Nicolas Cage (like I am), you might want to check it out as a matinee.
Otherwise, GUARDING TESS can probably wait.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     If Tom Clancy tried to write a sitcom, he'd probably end up with
something like GUARDING TESS--a horribly misfired comedy about a
by-the-book Secret Service agent assigned to protect a
do-anything-she-wants-to former First Lady.
     The set-up seems foolproof: team Shirley MacLaine with Nicolas
Cage.  She's cranky presidential widow Tess Carlisle; he's
straight-laced Service man Doug Chesnic.  She likes to play golf in
thirty-degree weather; he won't let her ride in her car unless properly
seated.
     She likes having him around; he wants off the assignment.
     With only their age differences precluding any obvious romantic
interest, this story should've scripted itself.  After all, the actors
don't need much prodding.  MacLaine has already settled into her
post-MADAME SOUSATZKA crotchety character.  And nobody, I mean
*nobody*, does a slow-burn better than Nicolas Cage.
     GUARDING TESS gets off to a bad start.  The writers start the
story too late by opening the film at Doug's debriefing.  He's finished
his three-year tour-of-duty and he wants a more adventurous
assignment.  The First Lady has other ideas, though, and, with a phone
call to the President, demands Doug's return.
     That bit is fine in terms of plot device--but it presumes a
conflict that the audience hasn't seen.  We don't know what's been
going on with Tess and Doug.  We don't know what he's done or what she
hasn't.  And without TESS AND DOUG: THE EARLY YEARS to fill us in, the
bickering seems blase.
     Of course, the film ignores this technicality and spends about an
hour letting MacLaine and Cage circle each other like toothless
sharks.  But the nibbles are few and far between.  In fact, the film's
scene-stealer is isn't even in a scene!  That's director Hugh Wilson as
the voice of the president, who's salty tongue chastises Cage in a
couple hilarious phone-calls.
     Right at the hour mark, the story gets serious and it's downhill
from there.  Plot points start swarming like agents on Reagan and,
suddenly, nothing's funny anymore.
     In the right context, the drama would've worked wonders.  But who
can believe such somber sincerity after an hour of failed frivolity?
Or, for that matter, Nicolas Cage shooting off people's toes?  The
shifting tone renders GUARDING TESS almost unwatchable.

Author
Jim Straus
GUARDING TESS
DIRECTED BY: Hugh Wilson MPAA RATING: PG-13 RUNNING TIME: 96 Minutes
     Two clever, entertaining movies featuring Secret Service
characters have dominated screens recently.  Last year, it was the
dramatic IN THE LINE OF FIRE.  Now, it's the comic turn GUARDING TESS
in which we're given a different look at the everyday hassles of
protecting important public figures.  This surprisingly off-beat,
character-driven comedy features the great duet of Shirley MacLaine and
Nicolas Cage.  They have so much comic chemistry that one wonders why
it took Hollywood so long to bring them together.
     When Secret Service agent Doug Chesnic (Cage) has had enough of
the fussy, bossy, widowed ex-First Lady he's been assigned to protect,
he tries for a new post.  He's sent right back in to guard Tess
(MacLaine) at the behest of the President of the United States, (played
over the phone to comic perfection by the director himself, Hugh
Wilson).
     Doug is trapped in the detail from hell and our laughter doesn't
stop as we're treated to memorable scenes: on a golf course, in an
opera house, and in her motorcade.  Although the agent is in a
compromising position, the two leads prove worthy adversaries.  Cage's
tough Chesnic is every bit an equal to MacLaine's crusty Tess.  By the
time the two come to terms, the by-the-book agent has learned to loosen
up and embrace life, and the cantankerous First Lady has emerged from
her hard shell.
     The plot excellently maneuvers through a believable storyline
laced with hilarious jokes and poignant, touching insights into the
private lives of the powerful.  This comic drama has a Capra-esque
populist charm.  It manages to be that most rewarding type of film that
makes you laugh and cry.
     Anyone who has had a nightmare boss, a domineering mother or
nagging spouse will relate to the funny battle of wills. We come to
admire Tess so much that we hope she's a mirror to future First Ladies
of a special-spirit and integrity.
     "Tess", is one of those rare movies that comes to an end sooner
than you want it to.
