Title
Review for Zard-e Ghanari (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In Iran in 1972, a thrifty civil servant and his wife buy a house in the
Tehran suburb of Hertabad.  The very first night, they catch a thief
brazenly stealing their goods.  The house owner then tries to have the
thief arrested; he takes the thief to several different police
agencies, encountering major bureaucratic obstacles the entire way.  A
nice satire on bureaucracy and human nature.
Iran (English subtitles), color, 1988, 100 minutes.
Director:  Rakshan Bani-etemad
     Mr. Halimi is a thrifty and proud civil servant.  He saved for 8
years to have the money to purchase his own house; he even deferred
having children to save money to buy a house, a tactic his wife strongly
objected to.  Finally he achieves his goal, and buys a house in the
Tehran suburb of Hertabad, known as "Chaos City."
     The first night in his new home, he awakens to find a thief openly
stealing his possessions.  He shouts an alarm, the neighbors come and
the thief surrenders without incident.  The next morning Mr. Halimi and
his neighbor take the thief to the police station, on an odyssey to find
justice.
     However, justice is not to be found.  They go to the regular
police, only to be sent to another police agency (the "gendarmerie" --
federal or military police?) because "Chaos City" is not within the
boundaries of their jurisdiction.  After being turned down at yet
another police district, Mr. Halimi finally ends up at the Ministry of
Justice.  The story continues with Mr. Halimi stubbornly trying to get
justice from the intransigent bureaucracy of the Ministry of Justice!
     This movie provides some interesting insights into human nature,
and our attitudes towards laws and those who break the laws.  Mr. Halimi
is extremely stubborn and has the soul of a bureaucrat.  His reaction to
the unresponsive, inept police bureaucracy is quite humorous, but in a
subtle way.  As the film progresses, his temper slowly approaches the
boiling point.
     On the other hand, the thief is blase about the whole matter.  He
behaves as if he has been through it all before.  He is also an
opportunist, stealing from people they encounter in their journey
through the bureaucracy.  This latter point upsets Mr. Halimi a great
deal; he is even more upset when the thief offers him a new job, as his
partner in crime!
     Although the film is a nice satire of bureaucracy and also makes
one think about the foibles of human nature, it might not appeal to a
wide audience.  The film has an extremely slow pace; some viewers may
find the first half of the film to be boring.  There are rewards for
patience though, for the second half is interesting (perhaps the word
"cute" would be appropriate).  The humor is generally low-key and 
subtle.  If you appreciate sophisticated satire, the film is certainly 
worth considering.
Distribution.  Part of a film series, "Iranian Film Now," coordinated by
The Film Center, Chicago on behalf of the Farabi Cinema Foundation.
Screened at the Pacific Film Archive,  University of California,
Berkeley.  This film may be available on video, if you can find a source
for Iranian videos.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
