Title
Review for One True Thing (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Susan Granger
       With all that has been written about the feminist movement, it
took Pulitzer Prize-winning Anna Quindlen to write an engrossing story
that dramatizes the complex difference between our mother's generation
and us, a confrontation between a woman whose expectations never
extended beyond her home and her children and her husband's career,
who viewed her life as an adjunct to those things, and her daughter,
whom she raised not only to work but to expect the world. Renee
Zellweger ("Jerry Maguire") plays an ambitious Manhattan journalist
who is forced to move back home to help her middle-aged parents -
Meryl Streep and William Hurt - through a cancer crisis. Not only does
she discover who her parents really are - their strengths, their
weaknesses - but the gutsy, gritty emotional journey she undertakes as
a care-giver is a complicated rite-of-passage to her own
maturity. Superbly adapted for the screen by Karen Croner and directed
by Carl Franklin ("Devil in a Blue Dress"), the performances are
dazzling, except for Tom E. Scott's bland younger brother character
which is grossly underwritten. Renee Zellweger, in particular, is
captivating; she is irresistible as an actress, while Meryl Streep is
luminous, perceptive, and courageous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "One True Thing" is a wise, resolute 8.  It's a remarkable,
intimate film that reverberates with love for an unbroken generation
of stay-at-home mothers who knew how to have fun within a limited
arena and to love the life they made for the mselves.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
ONE TRUE THING
Cast: Meryl Streep, Renée Zellweger, William Hurt, Tom Everett Scott
Director: Carl Franklin
Screenplay: Karen Croner based on the novel by Anna Quindlen
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and a half stars
It's hard to know whether One True Thing should be classified as a
mainstream or art house production.  There are definite Hollywood
touches in the film, evident in its opening and closing images that
tinker on the verge of portraying glossy sentimentality.  But the
majority of the film is habituated with emotional resonance, both
profound and unsophisticated, that philosophizes about the togetherness
of a family that is, by social definition, far from faultless.
Scriptwriter Karen Croner - who adapted the screenplay from Anna
Quindlen's novel - succeeds so well in crafting her very domestic
characters by realizing that there is nothing incredibly unique about
them.  Even in Meryl Streep's dying character - a woman who is suffering
from terminal cancer - the 'one true thing' in her life is the simple
fact that she is related by blood and love to the rest of her family.
She is neither a self-pronounced nor a publicly proclaimed hero; she
doesn't arrive at a conclusion that puts the rest of her life in
perspective.  She is simply a mother, a wife, a decent person, and
somebody who finds joy from establishing happy relationships.  This
passionate view on motherhood and families is at times given a cynical
edge by director Carl Franklin, who generally achieves what he intends
to.  At its best, One True Thing explores the isolation and unity of a
family, and the things that bring them together as well as the things
that tear them apart.
Kate Gulden (Meryl Streep) is cheerful mother who lives a peaceful life
in a small American town with husband George (William Hurt).  After Kate
is admitted into hospital for an operation that will hopefully remove a
terminal cancer from her body, George asks daughter Ellen (Renée
Zellweger) to take leave from her busy New York life as a journalist so
she can take care of her mother.  Ellen reluctantly obliges, and soon
learns the demanding requirements for being the maintainer of a
household.  She experiences first-hand the life in which Kate lives, and
as her cancer worsens, Kate relies on Ellen for physical and emotional
support.  But Ellen also has matters of her own to take of, including
her desperate attempts to keep her job and her growing suspicion and
frustration of her father, who is seldom at home.
The story is more of a mediation than a narrative, and that suits the
film's direction, which relies heavily on the strength of its
performers.  Thankfully Franklin draws exceptional performances from his
talented cast, ranging from Renée Zellwege's subtle portray of emotional
pain to Meryl Streep's display of physical suffering.  William Hurt is
also very fine, and displays a knack for questioning the audience as to
whether they should love or hate his character.  One True Thing's
ensemble cast lifts the film to heights that would have been otherwise
impossible to reach.
One True Thing does have its drawbacks, though, as not everything in the
film is as bittersweet as perhaps I have made it out to be.  Franklin's
direction sometimes feels like he is trotting over the same ground again
and again, not really going anywhere, but rather building a more
reclusive and isolated atmosphere for his characters to revolve in.
Strangely, it does pay off well, with an ending that is quite satisfying
considering that we know roughly what is going to happen from the very
first scene.
"Less is more," says William Hurt in the film, and that quote is
appropriate to Franklin's use of Karen Croner's script.  Some of the
power he exemplifies comes from the things that he doesn't explain or
elaborate on, which perhaps motivated him to refuse to round off One
True Thing in the happy and resolved way that made Stepmom - this year's
other film about a woman dying of cancer - pretentious and irritating.
This is one piece that intelligently illustrates the faults and merits
of reasonable people.  None are squeaky clean, and there are no heroes
or enemies.  But the very humane message that powers this film is,
although a touch too simplistic, enough to instigate an emotional
reaction from viewers.  It wants to conclude with a happy ending, but,
like life, happiness is in the eye of the beholder.


Author
Matt Williams
Director Carl Franklin tackles this small-scale tearjerker, based on
Anna Quindlen's novel One True Thing.  Although good, and appropriately
sad, it never reaches its full potential.
Ellen Gulden (Renee Zellweger) never had a good relationship with her
mother, Kate (Meryl Streep).  Instead, she has always idolized her
father, George (William Hurt), a writer of moderate reknown.  Following
in his footsteps, she is well on her way toward a career as a feature
writer at a New York magazine.
But, everything changes when she learns her mom has cancer.  Someone
needs to stay home and take care of Kate until she feels better, and
Ellen has been drafted for the job. Reluctant at first, she soon learns
how everything her mother does is much more difficult and
underappreciated than she originally thought.
Those duties aren't made any easier by the approach of the holiday
season.  Kate is thoroughly involved in the community, and her women's
group, the Minnies,  administer various holiday activities and functions
as well as decorating the entire town.  And all this falls in Ellen's
lap, who doesn't have a decorative bone in her entire body.
If all this sounds like the ingredients for a sentimental tearjerker,
well, it is. However, although blatantly sentimental, the movie never
gets as downright weepy as similar tales.  This is both a good and a bad
thing.  It's good in that the film doesn't overplay its emotional
hand...but bad in that a movie of this caliber should be able to tap
those depths of emotion without overplaying its hand.
The problem with One True Thing can't be traced to one specific element
of the film. Most everything here is done well and good.  The problem is
that there's little that is great in the film.
Case in point, take the performances.  Streep is good as the ailing mom,
but it's a performance which won't rank high along with her illustrious
career.  Zellweger holds her own in a rather large role in the company
of rather prominent actors. William Hurt seems to drift through his
part, still recovering from his Lost in Space misadventure. (As a side
note, he actually gets to mutter "Danger Will Robinson" at one point in
the film.)
Although a nice little sentimental film, One True Thing never taps its
potential. It is alternately entertaining and sad, but not the
three-hankie tearjerker it strives to be. One True Thing tops out at one
hankie, if that.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Walter Frith
Set in the mid to late 80's, a film like 'One True Thing' attempts to
tell the story of Kate Gulden (Meryl Streep) who has dedicated her life
to being a homemaker and in the process of taking care of her family,
finds that she becomes an unintentional burden to them when for once,
she needs taking care of after she develops a slow and torturing form of
cancer.  Did I mention that this story line is only a sub plot?  What
the film is really about is a re-examination of priorities from the
stand point of the woman's daughter Ellen (Renee Zellweger) and how her
career driven life as a Harvard educated writer comes to a sudden halt
when she seems to be the only one in a position to give her mother the
care she needs while she dies slowly at home after being bed ridden and
confined to a wheel chair for too long.  
Meryl Streep receives first billing in this movie and received an Oscar
nomination for it as Best Actress but her role is clearly a supporting
one.  Zellweger is the film's protagonist --- a hard and judgmental
woman who can't cook, clean or do anything in that capacity as well as
her mother.  She carries a secret resentment from not having anything in
common with mom and somehow feels that she is totally blameless.  Her
father (William Hurt) is a fellow writer who runs a department at a post
secondary educational institute and while she has plenty in common with
him from a writer's stand point, she can't quite embrace her father's
generation and grows further and furthr away from him when she finds he
has been having affairs while his wife is dying.
What makes this film work is that although the story is told in
flashback from the the daughter's point of view, we don't really know
until the end of the film, who it is she's talking to about the film's
situations.  Combining that with top notch performances and an easy
flowing sense of style, 'One True Thing' does pay off and is especially
important to film audiences that can identify with its subject matter. 
It does have a distant and rather cold feeling about it that keeps it
from being a true motion picture classic but you have to admire it for
wanting to escape the trappings of a weepy and pretentious tear jerker,
and become just another inflatable film full of false emotion.
The film transcends any thought of making either the career woman or the
homemaker the heroine and treats them both as equals.  Quite a
remarkable thing in the age where most woman are in the work place and
rightfully so because in many cases it's out of necessity, and where the
homemaker is often viewed by many as wasting her life.  But 'One True
Thing' shows us that as long as one feels their existence is important
and they perform a valuable service that nothing ever goes to waste.
The balancing act this movie performs once again fails in the category
of under written characters.  William Hurt's portrayal of the father and
Tom Everett Scott, who plays the family son and Zellweger's brother, are
both not used to their full potential and are rather forgettable
characters.  The film is also too lengthy for many attention spans but
if you can stick it out for two plus hours, it is a film that not only
tells the story of a family but in many ways it looks around for exactly
what the definition of a family really is.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
One True Thing (1998)
Meryl Streep, Renee Zellweger, William Hurt, Tom Everett Scott, Lauren 
Graham, Nicky Katt, James Eckhouse, Patrick Breen, Gerrit Graham, Davud 
Byron, Stephen Peabody, Lizabeth MacKay. Screenplay by Karen Croner, 
based on the novel by Anna Quindlen. Directed by Carl Franklin. 117 
minutes.
Rated PG-13, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Based on advertisements alone, it would be easy to mistake "One True 
Thing" for just another tearjerker, but the film is actually much more 
than that. Written and acted with a remarkable sense of detail, this rich 
drama investigates one of life's most baffling mysteries: how our 
parent's marriages work.   
I'm not being glib here. At one time or another, we've all studied our 
parents and thought, "Who ARE these people? How can they live like this? 
How can they stand each other?" Early in life, we pass judgment on them 
as individuals and as a couple. Days turn to years, years turn to decades,
 but we rarely bother to review those evaluations to determine if they 
were actually valid. 
In the 1995 Pulitzer Prize-winning novel on which the film is based, 
author Anna Quindlen states, "Our parents are never real people to us. 
They are... Achilles' heels, dim nightmares, vocal tics, bad noses, hot 
tears, all handed down and us stuck with them." "One True Thing" shows 
what happens when circumstances force an adult child to deal with her 
mother and father on a level different from that with which she is 
accustomed.
Ellen Gulden (Renee Zellweger) is an ambitious investigative reporter 
whose career defines her life. When a family emergency strikes, she cedes 
to her father's demands and returns home from New York to care for her 
ailing mother. Struggling in vain to balance journalism by long distance 
with her newfound household duties, she finds her carefully crafted life 
dissolving, and all of her childhood resentments returning to the surface.
The Gulden family dynamics will seem familiar to many. Patriarch George 
(William Hurt) is a respected literary professor and celebrated author. 
Always ready with a studied quip or well-worn anecdote, George takes his 
role as leader and perpetual center of attention as a given. Even as 
adults, Ellen and her brother Brian (Tom Everett Scott) find themselves 
concealing their failings from Dad, still striving to gain approval from 
the lord of the manor.
The consummate homemaker, wife and mother Kate (Meryl Streep) appears to 
live only to serve. In Ellen's eyes, she seems almost trivial, an 
appendage to her husband rather than a self-realized individual. When 
Kate falls ill and George badgers his daughter into taking a sabbatical 
to help her mother, Ellen lands in a personal hell as she haplessly 
attempts to play the role of housewife. 
This is the stuff of countless sappy TV movies, but "One True Thing" has 
the substance and integrity most dramas about family lack. The handsome 
production is reminiscent of "Ordinary People" in its rich, stirring 
depiction of the realities beneath the surface of an upper-class family. 
Karen Croner's screenplay, based on Quindlen's bestseller, is precise and 
extremely insightful, taking stereotypical characters and turning them 
into real people. Having an all-star cast doesn't hurt, either. 
Tom Everett Scott is effective in a supporting role as the easygoing son 
who takes after his mother while deferring to his dad. William Hurt gives 
one of his best performances in years, with his prickly, cerebral persona 
perfectly suited to this role. George is much like Mary Tyler Moore's 
character in "Ordinary People"; he loves his family, but is self-absorbed 
and lacks crucial nurturing skills. "One True Thing" refuses to write off 
George as a villain, though, instead exploring the self-doubt and fear 
beneath this damaged man's exterior.
As Kate, Meryl Streep is simply extraordinary, investing the character 
with remarkable depth and humanity, without ever seeming pious or 
mannered. Kate's essence is best explained when she refers to her 
husband's literary mantra, "Less is more," and tells her daughter, "I 
disagree with your father. More is more." Streep is especially good in 
scenes depicting the latter stages of Kate's illness, effectively 
conveying the difficulties in trying to retain her composure while pain 
and fatigue batter her soul.
Renee Zellweger has perhaps the most difficult role in the film, 
representing all adults in the audience who have ever rolled their eyes 
in frustration over the conduct of their parents. As our surrogate, 
Zellweger nails our generation's behavior with often uncomfortable 
accuracy. She does her duty for the family, but makes sure those around 
her understand exactly how much of a sacrifice she is making. Her 
periodic whining and petulant manner are difficult to watch because she 
reflects us so very well.
Honest, perceptive and moving, "One True Thing" builds to a revelatory 
climax, forcing you to rethink everything you've seen up to that moment. 
You'll likely do considerable thinking after you've left the theater as 
well. "One True Thing" makes a simple, but powerful suggestion: maybe our 
long-held assessments of our parents are wrong. We grew up asking, and 
generally receiving, second chances from Mom and Dad. Perhaps it's time 
to return the favor. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
The "F-word" is never spoken in the Gulden household in ONE TRUE THING.
A family tradition is to gather around at New Year's and discuss their
lofty plans for the coming year.  "Failure" is considered the worst
obscenity and is not to be uttered from the lips of a Gulden.
As Professor George Gulden, "Mr. American Literature," William Hurt
delivers his first outstanding performance in years.  The carefully
constructed script by Karen Croner, based on an Anna Quindlen novel,
makes the professor into a conceited academic, who is much more complex
that he seems on the surface.  Although his teaching skills are
legendary, his passion is his great novel, which remains unfinished.
"I'm 55," he confesses at his surprise birthday party.  "I'm developing
hardening of the sentence structure and inflammation of the paragraph."
(This quote will later provide one of the story's many small, but
important turning points.)
His grown daughter, Ellen, played by Renee Zellweger in the best
performance of her career, is just like her father, or at least she
tries hard to be.  The ambitious Ellen works night and day as an
investigative report for a New York magazine with the hope that her
writing will please her father.  When she asks him about her famous,
recent article, he launches into a "writer-to-writer" critique that
devastates her with his unnecessary and brutal honesty.  Zellweger, with
her forced smile, shows how hard Ellen takes his criticism.  With her
slightly sad, little girl demeanor in an adult body, Zellweger is
perfectly cast for the part.  With small sighs and little rolls of her
eyes, she conveys all the pain of a grown daughter who can never seem to
measure up to her father's unrealistic expectations.
Ellen's mother, Kate, is just as driven as her husband, but she throws
her energies into charitable acts and domestic chores.  When we first
see Kate, she is dressed in a silly Dorothy outfit, complete with
little-girl pigtails and ruby slippers.  Kate has a long list of
mandatory traditions, dressing up for Halloween being one.  Meryl Streep
plays Kate, and Streep would have been wasted if the story had stayed at
this comedic level.  Kate is diagnosed with cancer early in the film,
and Streep uses all of her skills to make Ellen's pain palpable without
resorting to any over-the-top emotions.  Be warned that those who have
recently lost a parent or a loved one will undoubtedly find many of the
scenes of her illness, no matter how delicately staged, to be quite hard
to watch.
The movie, told in flashback by Ellen, is her story.  Zellweger, even
though she gets second billing to Streep, manages to rise above the
superlative performances given by Streep and Hurt.  Watching Ellen, you
can see her father in her, and, when she's around her mother, she is so
ill at ease.  Ellen wants to make her place in the world like her dad,
but she is embarrassed by her mom.
"There's no place like home," one of Ellen's friends remarks when both
of them are visiting the house of Ellen's parents.  "Thank God," murmurs
Ellen under her breath.  She yearns to get back to New York.
As in the best family stories, the family in this one is quite complex.
As hardworking as the parents are, they are still head over heels in
love.  With a Bette Midler song playing, they embrace in a dance full of
genuine chemistry between them.  But, after all of the years, there are
signs -- important ones -- that there is a hidden problem.  When Kate
discusses this with her daughter late in the movie, the scene becomes
shocking with its candor.
The main tension in the film comes from the demands that George puts on
Ellen.  With her mother diagnosed with cancer, George tells her she must
put her nascent career on hold to care for her mom, even though it does
cost her her job.  He rejects out of hand her requests for him to take a
sabbatical from his established career.  Once Ellen arrives, he treats
her as part pupil and part servant -- expecting her to wash his laundry
and mend his shirt.  He lives his life in denial that his wife may be
terminal.  Ellen's self-absorbed father is busy with midterms, etc.
Ellen resents the demands placed on her, especially since she doesn't
have the training or the desire to be a housewife.  "Being my mother is
very tiring," she complains.
Even if it is basically a character study, the film has several small
mysteries whose slightly ambiguous resolutions help piece together the
family puzzle.  A film of quiet emotions and subtle power, ONE TRUE
THING, directed by ONE FALSE MOVE's Carl Franklin, has three marvelous
performances and a touching story.  In a time when most movie families
are hopelessly dysfunctional, it is refreshing to see one that doesn't
quite fit the mold.
ONE TRUE THING runs 2:07.  It is rated R for adult themes and a little
profanity and would be fine for kids around twelve and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Wallace Baine

`I want to talk before I die,' blurts Kate Gulden (Meryl Streep) towards
the end of `One True Thing.' Kate is in the final throes of terminal
illness and with her ghoulish red eyes and oatmeal-colored complexion, she
looks the part. Then, as her horrified daughter looks on, she does
something unexpected: with mock petulance, she admits she doesn't know what
to say.
That comic hiccup in the middle of what should have been the inevitable
death-bed speechifying is only one of the moments when `One True Thing'
distinguishes itself from the ritualistic hanky movies that you might see
on Lifetime.
Based on Anna Quindlen's novel of the same name, `One True Thing' is a
convincing but restrained melodrama, at times attaining true emotional
power. Director Carl Franklin (`Devil in a Blue Dress') and screenwriter
Karen Croner (`Gas, Food, Lodging') don't always hit the buttons they set
out to hit. But they also keep the film from flying off into hysterics. The
most effective images are the most simple ones: A scene in which Kate,
ravaged by cancer, stands unsteadily in the town square among dozens of
Christmas-time revelers singing `Silent Night,' is certainly nothing
original. But its grace is undeniable.
Ultimately, `One True Thing' is about a young adult confronting the mystery
of her parents' relationships with her and each other. Ellen (Renee
Zellweger) is a driven New York magazine writer who, like most people her
age, thinks she knows her parents all too well. 
When she visits her leafy, upstate hometown for her dad's surprise birthday
party, her parents are playing true to form. Her mom Kate is a kind of
pre-feminist uber-housewife, chirpy, annoyingly sunny, super-attentive to
the trivial elements of her family's happiness while, at least in Ellen's
eyes, blind to the larger undercurrents of unhappiness. When we first see
Kate, she's ridiculously dressed as Dorothy from `The Wizard of Oz (the
party is one of those come-dressed-as-your-favorite-literary-character
deals) and her costume seems a fitting metaphor for her personality. To say
the least, Ellen who prefers basic black has certain compatability issues
with her mother. When the two exchange hugs at the party, Ellen cannot hide
her distaste.
Her father is a different matter. George Gulden (William Hurt) is a
National Book Award winner and head of the English department at the local
college. He's brilliant, headstrong and impatient with mediocrity and Ellen
has adored him since she was a child.
These perceptions begin to change, however, when George asks Ellen to move
back home to take care of her mother who has just been diagnosed with
cancer. Ellen is horrified at the idea but she does it anyway. When Ellen
is drafted into her mother's stultifying social club, a collection of
preening upper-middle-class hens consumed with make-busy projects, Ellen
feels lost: `The one thing I never wanted to do,' she confides to a friend,
`is to live my mother's life.'
Surprisingly, Ellen's relationship with her mother eventually becomes
secondary to her relationship with her father. In Ellen's eyes, George
moves from literary god to arrogant alpha male to philandering,
ego-besotted monster. Taking care of her mom eventually costs Ellen
everything she holds dear: her job, her boyfriend, her golden image of her
brilliant father. In the end, Kate rushes in to fill the vacuum in her
daughter's life.
As for the acting? Expectations are high when Meryl Streep plays a dying
mother and, of course, she's incredibly great. What's notable, however, is
that Streep doesn't outshine her co-stars. Hurt and Zellweger adopt similar
acting styles: a turbulent, but barely perceptible anguish that rarely
spills out into over emotionalism. We're talking about a white,
middle-class family with two Harvard diplomas in the household. The absence
of screaming jags and trailer-trash revelations that explain away all the
family's pathology gives `One True Thing' a refreshing dignity.
At one point, Kate trying to drink in the feel of the air and the small
sensations of life contradicts her husband's writing-coach philosophy `Less
is more.' No, she tells a daughter in the glow of a newfound respect, `More
is more.'
As a life philosophy, fine. But as a way to make a film about humanizing an
idealized family, George was right after all. Less is more.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
One True Thing, based on the novel by Anna Quindlen, tells the story of
an average small-town family afflicted with a crisis.  The film stars
Meryl Streep and William Hurt as Kate and George Gulden; Kate is your
typical housewife, calmly cooking dinner each night and participating
cheerily in her clubs, while George is a stoic literature professor at
the local university.  The story is actually told through the eyes of
their daughter, Ellen (Rene Zellweger), who comes home for Thanksgiving
in the beginning of the film.
It is at this point that Ellen learns that her mother has cancer. 
George insists that Ellen come home and stay with Kate, despite Ellen's
intense journalism job in New York City.  Ellen obligingly obeys her
father's orders; initially, she hates what she has to do, and resents
her mother for it.  We learn that the two women weren't terribly close
as Ellen was growing up, and that neither of them feels that they can
get along with the other.  Subplots arise when it becomes clear that
George is more concerned with his work than his family life, and soon
Ellen suspects that he's having an affair.  
There are two types of goo:  there's bad goo, in which the characters
are weakly defined, weakly acted, and take part in a story that only
wants to make you cry (and usually fails).  Then there's good goo, in
which the characterizations and acting are strong, and the story is at
least marginally interesting and not completely contrived.  One True
Thing, for the most part, fits securely in the second form of goo.  It
is sentimental, and made many people in my screening cry profusely.  But
it's admirable in its triumph of characterization over manipulation, and
ultimately it's a worthwhile bit of goo.
What really sets apart the film are the three terrific lead
performances.  Streep is a pro, and while it's clear that she can play a
role like this without a lot of stretch-work, she's immensely appealing
and always endearing.  Hurt is also a well-seasoned performer, and is a
rare screen presence who manages to rise above his familiar face and
create a character worth watching.  Oddly enough, One True Thing gets
its real burst of life and emotion from Rene Zellweger (Jerry Maguire). 
It certainly helps that she's luminous and smart, but this alone isn't
enough:  her performance here is deep; it resonates and holds the film
together on an emotional level.  We endure all of Ellen's experiences
through Zellweger, and this makes most of the difference between One
True Thing and its bad-goo siblings.  
The film isn't perfect, of course.  Director Carl Franklin keeps the
story at a good pace, but there are a few too many scenes that want to
make us cry.  I counted about six, spread out at even intervals through
the second half of the film.  That's not to say that these scenes aren't
moving, for they are -- none of the sentimental moments in One True
Thing reach that unbearable level of cloying insincerity.  By the end,
though, I felt like Franklin had tried to manipulated me too much.  A
little is okay, but I was exhausted from fending off an emotional
response.  
A film like this doesn't need a compelling story to be successful, but
there are a lot of interesting themes explored in One True Thing.  The
bonds between mother and daughter, and also between father and daughter,
are well-described (even if they aren't universal truths), and the
family unity is very well executed by Franklin and the actors.  It's so
much easier to wimp out and make a film of bad goo that might
superficially please audience members; I was glad to sit through One
True Thing and find that my heartstrings hadn't been yanked by big heavy
chains.  

Author
Greg King
Adapted from Anna Quindlen's acclaimed novel, One True Thing
is the latest film in the terminal disease cum moving women's
melodrama genre (Stepmom, Beaches, etc).  It's sure to have sensitive
audiences reaching for their tissues, while others will easily resist
its more cynically manipulative designs.
The film explores familiar territory, but first time screen
writer Karen Croner brings some rich emotional depths to the material.
The film is also an insightful exploration of the complex and
uncomfortable relationship between parents and their children.
Ellen Gulden (Renee Zellweger, from Jerry Maguire, etc) is
establishing her own career as a journalist in New York, when she
comes home for a family visit.  Ambitious, hard and unforgiving, Ellen
has always viewed these visits home as intolerable.  She has always
idolised her father George (William Hurt), a brilliant academic and
writer, while she looks down upon her mother Kate (Meryl Streep), who
has devoted her life to domestic duties and community work.
The family is stricken when Kate is diagnosed with terminal
cancer.  Ellen is reluctantly persuaded to put her career on hold and
remain home to care for her.  She eventually comes to view both her
family and the wider community from her mother's perspective, which
unexpectedly changes her own outlook.  She comes to appreciate her
mother's hidden strengths, while finally recognising her father's
flaws and failures.
One True Thing is a fairly downbeat experience, and there is
precious little relief from its litany of pain, suffering and misery.
It has all the elements of being a first class tearjerker, but this
potentially moving drama is let down by some lapses in judgement from
director Carl Franklin.  Better known for his superb crime thrillers
One False Move, Devil In A Blue Dress, Franklin seems a little
uncomfortable with the demands of this domestic drama.
Part of the problem lies in the clumsy structure, clearly a
hangover from the novel.  The film unfolds in a series of extended
flashbacks as Ellen relates the tragic story behind her mother's death
to the local district attorney.  This cumbersome device only serves to
slow down the film and interrupt the smooth flow of the devastating
emotional journey.
Franklin however seems more comfortable working with his
actors, and he draws marvellous performances from his three stars.
Streep is typically superb, and her beautifully understated
performance is both painfully realistic and moving.  Although Streep
was nominated for an Oscar, it is Zellweger who delivers the more
demanding performance.  Her character undergoes the greatest change
during the course of the movie, moving from vulnerability and awkward
lack of confidence to discover hidden reserves of strength.  Hurt is
effective in a more restrained, low key but intelligent performance.
Unfortunately, as Streep dies a slow and lingering death, the
film slowly dies along with her.  One True Thing ultimately seems far
too long to have the desired emotional impact, and many within the
audience will tire of the film well before its climactic revelation.

Author
Jamie Peck
ONE TRUE THING
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Ellen's very much the child of her father, an esteemed English professor 
named George (William Hurt), and has followed in his footsteps since she 
was a young child. Now, she's a career-driven reporter for "New York" 
magazine, and when she travels to her Pennsylvania hometown to celebrate 
George's birthday, she hangs on every word of his somewhat too-harsh 
criticism of her writing. But Ellen appears to be at a loss when it 
comes to handling the double-whammy that Kate has developed cancer, and 
her dad, too busy with his job, wants her to leave the city life to help 
out. She reluctantly complies, and begins to see her mother in a whole 
different light as a result. 
The story might sound like fodder for a TV-movie-of-the-week, but "One 
True Thing" really couldn't be further removed from mawkish sentiment. 
Director Carl Franklin, taking a break from gritty crime-dramas like 
"One False Move" and "Devil in a Blue Dress," shows admirable restraint 
in his handling of the Guldens' crisis. It would be far too easy to turn 
the film into a scene after scene of button-pushing manipulation, but 
Franklin and screenwriter Karen Croner, adapting Anna Quindlen's novel, 
don't linger over the devastating details of the disease. Instead, their 
concentration is on the bond between parent and child, more specifically 
how little the latter truly knows about the former. 
Of course, the one-two acting punch of Streep and Zellweger only 
enhances Thing's thoughtful, universal focus. Streep could play this 
type of role in her sleep, but that doesn't make her performance any 
less special - you really see her as this strong, admirable maternal 
whirlwind and not some 10-time Oscar nominee who deserves another award 
for her work here. Zellweger plays off Streep's sing-songy tones 
perfectly; her ultimate transformation is a heart-breaking one because 
she makes the loss of this woman she's just beginning to deeply 
understand painfully palpable. A sequence where Ellen grapples with a 
monumental decision while preparing Kate's dinner is an emotional doozy. 
Happy stuff it's not, but neither does "One True Thing" wallow in somber 
unpleasantness. Even with Bette Midler tunes and maudlin piano chords 
dotting the soundtrack, this is one classy tearjerker, gentle and ever 
so undemanding the way it finally reduces you to a state of disquieted 
calm. And though the film might send audiences away questioning the 
manner in which they live their lives and inhabit their relationships, 
it ends on a hopeful, uplifting note, imploring all within earshot to 
cherish those who love you before they're gone forever. As soon as the 
credits hit the screen, there's no doubt that "One True Thing" is the 
run-home-from-the-theatre-and-hug-your-mom movie of the year.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The "F-word" is never spoken in the Gulden household in ONE TRUE THING.
A family tradition is to gather around at New Year's and discuss their
lofty plans for the coming year.  "Failure" is considered the worst
obscenity and is not to be uttered from the lips of a Gulden.
As Professor George Gulden, "Mr. American Literature," William Hurt
delivers his first outstanding performance in years.  The carefully
constructed script by Karen Croner, based on an Anna Quindlen novel,
makes the professor into a conceited academic, who is much more complex
that he seems on the surface.  Although his teaching skills are
legendary, his passion is his great novel, which remains unfinished.
"I'm 55," he confesses at his surprise birthday party.  "I'm developing
hardening of the sentence structure and inflammation of the paragraph."
(This quote will later provide one of the story's many small, but
important turning points.)
His grown daughter, Ellen, played by Renee Zellweger in the best
performance of her career, is just like her father, or at least she
tries hard to be.  The ambitious Ellen works night and day as an
investigative report for a New York magazine with the hope that her
writing will please her father.  When she asks him about her famous,
recent article, he launches into a "writer-to-writer" critique that
devastates her with his unnecessary and brutal honesty.  Zellweger, with
her forced smile, shows how hard Ellen takes his criticism.  With her
slightly sad, little girl demeanor in an adult body, Zellweger is
perfectly cast for the part.  With small sighs and little rolls of her
eyes, she conveys all the pain of a grown daughter who can never seem to
measure up to her father's unrealistic expectations.
Ellen's mother, Kate, is just as driven as her husband, but she throws
her energies into charitable acts and domestic chores.  When we first
see Kate, she is dressed in a silly Dorothy outfit, complete with
little-girl pigtails and ruby slippers.  Kate has a long list of
mandatory traditions, dressing up for Halloween being one.  Meryl Streep
plays Kate, and Streep would have been wasted if the story had stayed at
this comedic level.  Kate is diagnosed with cancer early in the film,
and Streep uses all of her skills to make Ellen's pain palpable without
resorting to any over-the-top emotions.  Be warned that those who have
recently lost a parent or a loved one will undoubtedly find many of the
scenes of her illness, no matter how delicately staged, to be quite hard
to watch.
The movie, told in flashback by Ellen, is her story.  Zellweger, even
though she gets second billing to Streep, manages to rise above the
superlative performances given by Streep and Hurt.  Watching Ellen, you
can see her father in her, and, when she's around her mother, she is so
ill at ease.  Ellen wants to make her place in the world like her dad,
but she is embarrassed by her mom.
"There's no place like home," one of Ellen's friends remarks when both
of them are visiting the house of Ellen's parents.  "Thank God," murmurs
Ellen under her breath.  She yearns to get back to New York.
As in the best family stories, the family in this one is quite complex.
As hardworking as the parents are, they are still head over heels in
love.  With a Bette Midler song playing, they embrace in a dance full of
genuine chemistry between them.  But, after all of the years, there are
signs -- important ones -- that there is a hidden problem.  When Kate
discusses this with her daughter late in the movie, the scene becomes
shocking with its candor.
The main tension in the film comes from the demands that George puts on
Ellen.  With her mother diagnosed with cancer, George tells her she must
put her nascent career on hold to care for her mom, even though it does
cost her her job.  He rejects out of hand her requests for him to take a
sabbatical from his established career.  Once Ellen arrives, he treats
her as part pupil and part servant -- expecting her to wash his laundry
and mend his shirt.  He lives his life in denial that his wife may be
terminal.  Ellen's self-absorbed father is busy with midterms, etc.
Ellen resents the demands placed on her, especially since she doesn't
have the training or the desire to be a housewife.  "Being my mother is
very tiring," she complains.
Even if it is basically a character study, the film has several small
mysteries whose slightly ambiguous resolutions help piece together the
family puzzle.  A film of quiet emotions and subtle power, ONE TRUE
THING, directed by ONE FALSE MOVE's Carl Franklin, has three marvelous
performances and a touching story.  In a time when most movie families
are hopelessly dysfunctional, it is refreshing to see one that doesn't
quite fit the mold.
ONE TRUE THING runs 2:07.  It is rated R for adult themes and a little
profanity and would be fine for kids around twelve and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal
 Director: Carl Franklin 
 Writer:  Karen Croner, novel by Anna Quindlen
 Cast: Meryl Streep, Renee Zellweger, William Hurt, Tom
Everett Scott, Nicky Katt, Lauren Graham
   There was this song deservedly popular some time ago,
"You've gotta have heart/ Miles and miles of heart/ Oh, it's
fine to be a genius of course,/ But keep that old horse before
the cart,/ First you've gotta have heart."  Good lyrics. Catchy
tune.  When you try to develop the theme of these lines into a
two-hour+ movie, though, watch out.  As the professor
says in "One True Thing," "Less is more."  What's solid for
three minutes can be slender when extended.  A schmltz
throwback to Arthur Hiller's "Love Story," "One True Thing,"
based on the best-selling 1995 novel by Anna Quindlen, feels
out of place in a decade devoted to edgier, wittier family
dramas.  We could put up with yet another soap if it worked:
"Firelight" functioned because its principal performers, Sophie
Marceau, left us with a solid conviction of her passion for her
child and the man for whom she at first felt an unexpressed
attraction.  "One True Thing" lacks clarity about a singificant
discovery a daughter makes about her parents, is at times
difficult to believe, and trots out the usual gags about
klutziness that Diane Keaton underscored eleven years ago in
"Baby Boom."  What is most damaging is that the picture's
stated theme is not realized.  "One True Thing," about a
sharp, urban, 25-year-old journalist who returns to her mom
and dad's New England home for a few months, promises to
reveal to her a new consciousness about her parents.  While
she learns that her mom is a bit more noble than she thought
and her dad is not the benevolent hero of her childhood
fantasies, she doesn't come away with a whole lot of new
perceptions about the sorts of people her folks really are.
   Ellen Gulden (Renee Zellweger), a chip off her dad's block
but not at all like her mom, is an ambitious investigative
journalist for the hip, upscale "New York" magazine.  She
leaves her Manhattan digs for what she thinks is a quick
birthday celebration for her New-England based father,
George (William Hurt). She is commanded by this prickly 55-
year-old to take a sabbatical from her job because her
mother, Kate (Meryl Streep), has cancer and will need Ellen's
help and presence.  Whimpering at first that her career will be
jettisoned by such a visit, she must accept her father's lame
excuse that he simply cannot take a sabbatical at this time
from his job as Am Lit professor in a top college.  "You have
a Harvard education," he reminds her in a guilt-tripping
rebuke, "But where is your heart?"  
   While trying without much success to keep up with her
writing via phone conversations with her young, Yuppie-ish
editor, she becomes increasingly engulfed in the day-to-day
tasks of caring for her mother's spiraling illness, but not
before she sees the 48-year-old Kate as a woman who may
be tradition-bound but devotes much of her time to
fundraising and contributing her energy to good, community
causes.  Gaining new admiration for Kate, she is
disillusioned by what she perceives as her dad's womanizing
with his students, his hidden alcoholism, his shirking of
responsibilities toward the deteriorating woman.  In the
movie's climactic scene, Kate delivers a monologue of
Shakespearean proportions to her daughter, criticizing the
young woman's judgmental temperament, instructing her in no
uncertain terms that her standards are impossibly high and
that "when you're married a long time, you make
concessions."
   For all its histrionics, the manifesto is lifted above the banal
only by Meryl Streep's remarkable abilities as a performer. 
Instead of walking out on her less-than-ideal husband as she
did in nineteen years ago in Robert Benton's "Kramer vs.
Kramer," she has made her peace with a man whose
position of authority has fashioned him into a pompous ass
who breezily gives the same fatuous advice not only to
students in the tutorials but to his own daughter, who is eager
for genuine criticism of her writing.  Karen Croner's script is
virtually bereft of humor and wit, the only amusement aside
from burned roasts coming from crossed wires near its
conclusion when Ellen, devastated at her mother's funeral,
tearfully tells her cheating boy friend "I never knew I could
miss someone so much," to which the guy replies, "I missed
you too."  The film's frame, a conference between Ellen and
an assistant D.A. (James Eckhouse) to which we return from
time to time, is not believable.  Since the immediate cause of
Kate's death was an overdose of morphine, the D.A. is going
through the motions of hearing Ellen's side of the story.  The
informal testimony becomes the vehicle for Ellen to narrate
the entire tale, which takes her back to her father-
worshipping childhood.  The conference seems more like an
extended psychoanalytic session: what public official would
take the time to hear the story in a well-appointed office,
shades discretely drawn, without the presence of an attorney
or a tape recorder?
   Let's admit it.  We go to "One True Thing" not for the story. 
We've heard it all before and we're not expecting to break
open the box of Kleenex this time.  We're here for the acting,
and we get it.  Meryl Streep can do no wrong, transforming
herself from a pliant, Ibsen-esque doll to an image of death
itself, and Bill Hurt plays out his underwritten role as
pretentious professor (is he or isn't he having an
affair?).  The movie belongs to the remarkable Renne
Zellweger, who turns in a performance as astonishing as she
did in her role in one of this year's best-acted films, Boaz
Yakim's "A Price Above Rubies."  She emerges as the film's
one true thing.

Author
Michael Redman
Two great mysteries: death and parents
Removing masks may be the most difficult thing we can do. We all wear them and
many of our relationships are mask to mask rather than human being to human
being. They make life easier. It's much simpler to deal with most of the
people you encounter during the day as personas and not people.
The danger is when we treat our lovers, close friends and other intimate
relationships as their roles, ignoring the reality of the individual. Perhaps
the most difficult barrier to break through is that between parents and
children. These stereotypes are formed so early in life that it's tough for
parents to see their grown children as entities separate from themselves. For
an offspring to view their parents as something other than "Mommy" and "Daddy"
takes a lot of work.
When Ellen Gulden (Renee Zellweger) returns to her small town home, the masks
start to slip a bit. Although she easily falls into old childhood patterns
desperate for her father's approval and disdaining her mother's homemaking,
real people slowly appear. 
Father George (William Hurt), a professor of American Literature, is a cold
perfectionist. Mother Kate (Meryl Streep), a Martha Stewart clone, devotes her
life to her women's group, the "Minnies", decorating the town for every
available holiday. Daughter Ellen is an investigative reporter for "New York"
magazine without a moment to spare.
That's who they are and that's who they remain until Kate discovers that she
is dying of cancer. Then the old model falls apart. Everyone's armor develops
chinks and begins to dissolve as they deal with real life. Ellen starts to
come to grips with her anger at her father and her embarrassment for her
mother when they emerge from their archetypes.
The film is slow at first, but director Carl Franklin ("Devil In A Blue Dress"
seems to have crafted it that way so we can appreciate the characters'
evolution. His choice of presenting the story as a flashback from a scene of
Ellen being questioned about her mother's death is less successful. The
framing scenes are supposed to present a mystery but it is a minor one and not
worth the plot details that are given away.
Streep couldn't be better and that should come as no surprise. As Kate slowly
succumbs to her disease, her transformation is astounding. An Oscar nomination
would be in order. This is Hurt's best performance in a long time, more than
making up for his unfortunate Professor Robinson in "Lost In Space". Although
Zellweger's teary-eyed hurt and angry little girl is tedious occasionally, she
hits the role right on target more often than not.
A few characters appear to have little purpose. Ellen's brother and her
on-again, off-again boyfriend do little for the story. Her New York friend who
visits a few times has an intriguing screen presence but is only seen for a
few minutes. We are left to wonder why these people exist.
The same is true of the subplot concerning Ellen's attempts to track down a
political story. These scenes could have been eliminated without affecting the
film at all.
Meryl Streep films are often not fun. This is no exception. It's real, it's
poignant, it's instructive, but it's certainly not pleasant. And it's not
supposed to be. Great art isn't always a frolic in the sunshine, but it is
always worthwhile. If this motivates us to lose those masks for a little
while, it will have done its job. Maybe it's time to give Mom and Dad a call.
(Michael Redman as written this column for over 23 years and would like to
state for the record that he also didn't have sexual relations with "that
woman" as defined by the legal description. He would like to volunteer himself
as a witness to the fact that he did not observe Bill Clinton engaging in sex
with Monica Lewinsky during the deposition in the present tense while they
were or were not alone. Email a more exciting tale to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 9/24/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Tim Voon
Cast:  Meryl Streep, Renee Zellweger, William Hurt.
Screenplay:  Karen Croner, based on the novel by Anna Quindlen.
Producers:  Harry Ufland and Jesse Burton.
Director:  Carl Franklin.
This movie should have a profound effect on people's understanding of
life and death, but somehow ends up being less effective than it could
have been, because it diverts its attention away from a mother's need
and focuses instead on a daughter's plight.
In this pandemonium of personal and family problems, we learn more than
we need to know about poor family dynamics. We have a mother (Meryl
Streep) who has given her life over to serving her family and helping
her husband achieve his dreams. A father (William Hurt) who is on the
surface an accomplished professor, but beneath the smooth exterior lacks
any character strength. A daughter (Renee Zellweger) and a son who are
constantly living in the shadow of their 組reat' father, and who are
unable live up to his high expectations for them.
It becomes apparent how important the role of the mother is to this
family, when she starts dying. The fabric that holds them all together
slowly begins to tear. Her husband is unable to cope with the situation
and unfairly unloads his responsibilities on a daughter, who is only
beginning to realise how great her mother is. Unfortunately, too much
time is spent exploring the daughter's dilemma of caring for her sick
mother, and not enough time is spent exploring the fears of the one who
is dying of cancer.
The other issue that is brought out in this movie is the need for cancer
sufferers to die with dignity. It is rather unfortunate that this movie
paints the picture of someone asking for euthanasia because of
inadequate pain control. I believe this is a biased, incorrect view of
cancer sufferers. With current medical treatments, suicide because of
inadequate pain control is not a valid option. However, the
deterioration of quality of life is a more difficult issue to address
and in this case, may have tipped the scales of life and death.

Author
jasanfor
Who wouldn't want a mom like radiant Kate Gulden?
 She's the queen of arts and crafts, with domestic skills that could put
Martha Stewart to shame -- just see how she embroiders pillows and decorates
cribs like nobody's business.
Besides, she's genuinely nice, a veritable fountain of love and
understanding; this is the kind of mother who must have packed cheerful
little notes in every nutritionally balanced lunch she sent to school. When
someone breaks a plate in her kitchen, Kate doesn't rant or weep. She kindly
asks the offender to save the pieces for use in her mosiac table.
 When Kate's daughter Ellen looks at her, though, it's not with affection.
In fact, she's quietly disgusted. This is a woman who's squandered her
potential, thinks Ellen, a New York Magazine reporter who'd rather eat her
word processor than cook up a batch of Mom's zucchini soup.
 Ellen is instead awed by her father George, an English professor who won a
National Book Award years ago and tells her inspirational things like "When
I was working at The New Yorker, I would spend all day working on one
sentence."  George has a pithy line for every situation -- too bad most of
them are unattributed steals from James Thurber.
 "The one thing that I never wanted to do was live my mother's life," Ellen
(Renee Zellweger) confesses early on in "One True Thing," adapted from Anna
Quindlen's keenly observed best-seller. But circumstances force her to do
exactly that, as Kate (Meryl Streep) becomes ill and Ellen is coerced by
workaholic George (William Hurt) into putting her career on hold to return
home to play nursemaid and fill-in housekeeper.
 Quindlen's book was told from Ellen's point of view, with the parents
serving mostly as a backdrop for her story. Karen Croner's screenplay gives
George and Kate greater depth and color while jettisoning the small-town
scandal set-up that framed the novel's action. Ellen is also a bit easier to
empathize with onscreen than she is on the page, where she often comes
across as shallow and uncomfortably self-absorbed.
 Zellweger, fresh from her outstanding work in the little-seen "A Price
Above Rubies," dazzles again as she follows Ellen's arc from condescending
careerist to enlightened daughter. Playing the same league with seasoned
pros such as Streep and Hurt must be a formidable challenge, but Zellweger
admirably rises to the ocassion.
 George's aloofness and inner despair are easily communicated by the
brilliant Hurt, whose talent has been shamefully wasted throughout most of
this decade in second-rate movies like "Trial By Jury" and "Mr. Wonderful."
Obviously some of the production team had a sense of humor about Hurt's
career since "One True Thing" manages to include a timely "Lost In Space"
joke and a copy of Anne Tyler's "The Accidental Tourist" is prominently
featured on George's bookshelf.
 But the movie ultimately belongs to Streep, who illuminates the
extraordinary soul inside an everyday woman. Streep understands Kate feels
just as removed from Ellen as Ellen does from Kate, and the actress hints at
a well of suppressed jealousy and slight antagonistic tendencies behind
Kate's pleasant persona. When Kate hosts a costume party dressed as Dorothy
from "The Wizard of Oz," we're unsure whether it's because she truly
believes "there's no place like home" or if it's just a clever way to jab at
her daughter's ego.
 Likewise George, who comes off as the stereotypical philandering academic
in the book, gets a more sympathetic reading in the film. So much of
Croner's writing is smart and straightforward, it's a shame she couldn't
have freshened up the character of Ellen's faithless boyfriend Jordan (Nicky
Katt) or given brother Brian (Tom Everett Scott) more personality. They're
the film's only glaring weaknesses.
 There's a fine line between the touching and the saccharine, and it's one
many filmmakers find extraordinarily difficult to navigate. Just look at
movies like "Simon Birch" and "Deep Impact," which do everything short of
stomping on your toes in an effort to jerk tears.
 Under Carl Franklin's low-key direction "One True Thing" succeeds where
these pictures fail by maintaining its dignity and, just as importantly, its
honesty. You won't cry out of a sense of obligation, but because Franklin
and his incredible cast drive the material straight to the heart. By the
way, don't bother with tissues: For the last half-hour of this picture,
you'd be better off bringing a sponge instead.
James Sanford

Author
Mark O'Hara
There is enough dysfunction among the Gulden family members to fill the 
plotlines of two or three television dramas for an entire season.  What 
makes the film refreshing and watchable is that the director does not 
over-reach in portraying emotional moments.  Never does the film fall 
into unforgivable sentimentality;  never does it sketch a character in 
purely black or white.
Director Carl Franklin's toughest task must have been getting right the 
terrible and delicate shadowing in the backgrounds of the characters' 
lives.  The Gulden family has so much going for it - a Victorian mansion 
an hour or so outside of  New York City, a house made perfect and 
picturesque by Kate (Meryl Streep).  There is Kate's husband George 
(William Hurt), owner of a National Book Award, respected essayist and 
chair of the English Department at Langhorne College, no Harvard but a 
respectable small pond.  The Guldens' two children are Brian (Tom 
Everett Scott), a college student, and Ellen (Renee Zellweger), a 
Harvard grad and rising writer at a New York magazine.  When Ellen's 
cancer intrudes suddenly on their lives, and George asks Ellen to resign 
her responsibilities in the City and care for her mother, the story 
unfolds and the emotions unload.
It's a safe guess that Meryl Streep did not require much coaching.  She 
is brilliant, her angular features shining in her Dorothy costume (she 
even clicks her ruby-slippered heels!) that she sports for her husband's 
birthday party.  So much of Streep's acting is subtle, telegraphing her 
character's thoughts and making so many words unnecessary.  Streep 
should be a shoo-in for another Oscar nomination.  Although Ellen seems 
very put off by her mother's domestic prowess, she is forced by 
necessity to assume her mother's household duties.  This mother-daughter 
relationship is the key one in the story.  Two of the film's most 
wrenching scenes feature these women:  one at a  town gathering - 
perfectly accented by a lingering camera shot;  the other in Kate's 
bedroom, a cathartic scene that is at once a confession and an 
absolution.  Here Carl Franklin demonstrates his timing, intuition and 
experience.
In the novel on which the film is based, Anna Quindlen crafts Ellen as a 
remote intellectual, looking down her nose at her housebroken mother, 
while looking up at her writer-god father.  Zellweger fills in this role 
well.  She is wonderful in scenes involving a disastrous meal;  
notwithstanding, Ellen is inducted into her mother's women's group, the 
"Minnies."  Ellen's reluctance slowly gives way not only to an 
acceptance of the hard housework, but to an appreciation of Kate's 
diligence in keeping the Gulden family running so smoothly.  For much of 
the film Zellweger, stone-faced, watches her parents' lives altered for 
good.  When it counts, though, she delivers "the right thing to do."
The screenplay, by Karen Croner, preserves much of Quindlen's clever 
dialogue.  It also adds new pieces that portray the characters in bleak 
lighting.  For instance, Professor George Gulden comes off as pompous, a 
phony who relies on a couple of quotes, one stolen, to impress his 
listeners.  Also added are memory strobes in which Ellen remembers her 
younger father, full-bearded, buying her ice cream and carrying her atop 
his shoulders.  It's not difficult to admire a film that takes even 
minor risks, like these flashbacks.  William Hurt's George is just as 
complex as Ellen.  His actions are often detestable, unthinkable for a 
man whose wife is terminally ill.  But we also see qualities that go a 
long way toward redeeming him, and in the end we witness George and 
Ellen sharing a remarkable epiphany.
Symbolism in the picture is noticeable but not heavy-handed.  We follow 
the seasons from fall through a dreary winter.  In an uncharacteristic, 
medication-induced rage, Kate shatters plates whose pieces Ellen later 
uses in a mosaic project started by her mother.  Finally, mother and 
daughter switch roles.  Together with other moving scenes, the product 
is a fine adaptation of Quindlen's compassionate work.
If not for the uttering of a forbidden word three times, this R-rated 
film may have been a more accessible PG.  (Even if the word were 
included one time, wouldn't there be a PG-13 rating?)  There is no 
nudity, only brief references to sex, certainly no violence.  Many 
children will miss a well-drawn drama about a family, because someone 
decided not to sacrifice verbal realism.  Oh, well.


Author
Scott Renshaw
[Note:  Some of the content in this review may be considered spoilers]
     Director Carl Franklin (DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS) and screenwriter Karen
Croner take a calculated risk in setting up the story for ONE TRUE THING.
The framing sequence, introduced in the first few minutes, finds Ellen
Gulden (Renee Zellweger) in a district attorney's office, answering
questions about the death of her mother Kate (Meryl Streep).  The
narrative then proceeds through flashback, introducing Ellen as a
career-minded journalist summoned home by her stern academic father George
(William Hurt) to care for Kate after she is diagnosed with cancer.  The
risk, of course, is that knowing the outcome way ahead of time might
somehow reduce its emotional impact.  How effective can a tear-jerker be
if you're waiting for them to be jerked?
     ONE TRUE THING deftly sidesteps that problem -- at least for half its
running time -- by being nothing at all like a conventional tear-jerker.
At its core, it tells a story of one of adulthood's most daunting tasks:
coming to terms with the humanity of one's parents.  It is clear from the
start that Ellen is George's daughter -- she has followed in his footsteps
as a writer, craves his approval, and emulates his disciplined,
intellectual approach to life.  Kate, on the other hand, is a slightly
embarrassing enigma to her.  Ellen sees Kate's delight at being a
life-long mother and home-maker as simple-mindedness; she sees Kate's
sunny optimism as obliviousness.  Spending time with both parents forces
Ellen to recognize George's hidden weaknesses, Kate's hidden strength, and
the value understanding both parents can have for her growth.
     As long as the focus remains on those three characters and their
relationships, ONE TRUE THING is solid film-making.  Meryl Streep delivers
yet another winning performance, finding the warmth and compassion in Kate
without ever turning her into a cartoon.  The small mannerisms in her
attempts to connect with Ellen -- an almost imperceptible rejected touch,
hidden disappointment at her daughter's dismissals of her -- are the stuff
great screen acting is made of.  Zellweger is nearly as good both in awe
of her father and in contempt of her mother, while Hurt makes good use of
the remoteness which has hindered his performances inother films.  The
Guldens are a thoroughly recognizable modern family, their interactions
real enough to evoke emotion and sympathy without resorting to sobs or
recriminations.  There's something particularly wrenching about watching
people who love each other trying to like each other.
     Alas, the plot device which brought Ellen back home soon rears its
head and pulls ONE TRUE THING in the wrong direction.  It's not that the
cancer storyline is mawkish or overly manipulative.  Indeed, Franklin's
direction and Streep's performance avoid most of the traps which can turn
such stories into melodrama.  Kate's battle with cancer simply occupies
too much screen time, time which had been so well-spent on Kate, George
and Ellen battling with each other.  Once the Big C starts taking over the
proceedings, the nuances of character which had made ONE TRUE THING such
compelling viewing begin to lose their force.  Conversations become
confrontations; the words sound progressively more scripted and less
genuine.
     A tighter, leaner screenplay might have been able to keep Ellen's
journey of discover squarely at the center of ONE TRUE THING.
Unfortunately, screenwriter Karen Croner handles sub-plots like Ellen's
unstable relationship with her boyfriend (Nicky Katt) and her pursuit of
an interview with a scandal-ridden Senator (David Byron) with 
find-the-metaphor urgency.  There's only one true thing which makes ONE
TRUE THING glow with realism, and that's the struggle of parents and their
adult children to deal with each other as adults, as equals, as fellow
human beings.  That's the reason it was so wise to remove the live-or-die
suspense from a story that's not about who will live or die.  That's also
the reason it was so disappointing to watch the film linger on a foregone
conclusion.

Author
Michael Dequina
_One_True_Thing_ (R) *** (out of ****)
Although mine were a couple of the relatively few dry eyes left at the end
of this adaptation of Anna Quindlen's tearjerking novel, I was not left
untouched by this radical departure for director Carl Franklin
(_One_False_Move_, _Devil_in_a_Blue_Dress_).  After his homemaker wife
Kate's (Meryl Streep) cancer takes a turn for the worse, English professor
George Gulden (William Hurt) forces his daughter Ellen (Renee Zellweger) to
leave her job as a big city magazine writer and become, in effect,
nursemaid to her dying mother.  The arc of the story is predictable, but
only to a point; while familiar bases are covered (the never-close Kate and
Ellen learn to bond; Ellen learns the importance of family over work),
Karen Croner's script also has a surprising, and rather involving, mystery
element to it, largely embodied by a framing device where Ellen
interrogated by an investigator (James Eckhouse) for reasons that only
gradually become clear.
But the true thing of _One_True_Thing_ is the acting, which is uniformly
superb.  The usually spacey (as of late) Hurt's uncharacteristically
focused performance is a noteworthy achievement, but his effort is upstaged
by the excellent mother-daughter duo.  Zellweger and especially Streep both
bring their roles to vivid life with a multi-dimensional blend of warmth,
vulnerability, and underlying strength.  While the whole of
_One_True_Thing_ may not be deserving of such kudos, the actresses'
exquisite performances are what Oscars are made for.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Brian Koller
"One True Thing" has a very high quality to entertainment
ratio.  While it is certainly a very good film, with
an excellent cast and script, it is a difficult film
to watch.  While the advertising campaign would have
you believe that the film is heartwarming, the emotional
impact is closer to wrenching.
George (William Hurt) is a successful college professor
and author.  His upper class family consists of kindly
socialite wife Kate (Meryl Streep), and their two
grown children: outspoken reporter Ellen (Renee Zellweger)
and gentle screw-up Brian (Tom Everett Scott).
Ellen has grown up worshipping her father and rejecting
her mother.  By becoming a reporter, she is emulating
her father's writing profession, and by remaining single,
she has avoided the charitable and housewife roles of
her mother.
Unhappily, Kate develops cancer and undergoes chemotherapy.
George asks his daughter to leave her job in New York
and help her mother.  Ellen reluctantly agrees, and
the decision changes her life.  Her career and her
boyfriend become secondary to her family, and she realizes
that her childhood opinion of her parents was wrong.
Ellen discovers that her mother is strong and selfless,
while her father is weak and selfish.  In general,
men do not come off well in "One True Thing".  Her
brother Brian is flunking out of school and is like
a lost puppy, while her boyfriend Jordan (Nicky Katt)
has all the weaknesses of her father with none of his
strengths.
"One True Thing" is certain to receive some Academy
Award nominations.  Streep will likely be nominated for
Best Actress, and Karen Croner will likely be nominated
for Best Adapted Screenplay, based on a novel by
Anna Quindlen.
The usual opening night audience of teens and young
adults was replaced by middle-aged adults, compelled by
the Streep and Hurt names.  The audience was generally
silent, but occasionally shuddered during the more
revealing moments.
"One True Thing" is not an entertaining film, but
it is an important film.  The audience is challenged
to confront terminal illness and devastating
disappointment in family members.  While "One True
Thing" may be an emotionally draining film, it is
well worth the effort.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
