Title
Review for Carrington (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Christopher Null
     I hate to stereotype ... but I will anyway.  I simply find it
inconceivable that a real woman could go for seventeen years without
once changing her hair.  The woman in question is Emma Thompson,
portraying English painter Dora Carrington in post-WWI England.  The
hairdo in question is a peculiar blonde bob that has the daunting task
of making Thompson look "boyish."
     If you're like me, you're saying to yourself, "Who is this Dora
Carrington, and why would someone make a movie about her?"  Well, I
still don't have the answer to that one.  Carrington was something of a
homebody who thrived on shocking Victorian sensibilities with her
outrageous behavior, the bulk of which involved sexual promiscuity in
some fashion or another.  Most notable among her odd and largely
meaningless "flings" was a doomed-from-the-start relationship with
troublesome writer Lytton Strachey (Jonathan Pryce), a bearded,
neo-Oscar Wilde who couldn't function normally without substantial
babysitting from Carrington and/or any number of her lovers.
     Together, Carrington and Lytton meander through 17 years of love
and hate, happiness and anger, life and death.  With its promising
start, CARRINGTON begins by introducing the real star of the film,
Lytton, but shortly thereafter, the movie bogs down in irrelevant,
plodding details about Carrington's life and love interests.  Soon, I
was wondering what the point was to all of this, and I never did find
out, as the only remotely empathetic character was Lytton.
     Jonathan Pryce, who won Best Actor at Cannes, is deserving of all
the praise he's received.  He manages to bring Lytton alive so well
that when he's not on the screen, the film completely stalls out.  In
fact, the movie is based on a book entitled "Lytton Strachey."  Why
screenwriter/director Christopher Hampton (who recently bombed with
TOTAL ECLIPSE) felt Dora Carrington was a more interesting person is
beyond me.
     Other than Pryce, the raucous comedy at the film's opening, and a
great score by Michael Nyman (THE PIANO), there's not much to redeem
this picture.  Incidentally, this script was written in 1976, and only
now has it been produced.  It isn't hard to see why it took so long.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CARRINGTON is a biographical movie about the painter Dora
Carrington and her life long love, the writer and critic Lytton
Strachey.  If you are like me and have never heard of this painter,
you will not only learn about her life, you will also get to see some
of her marvelous paintings at the end of the movie during the credits.
To me her paintings are like a cross between a Renoir and an Edward
Hopper, and I would love to see an exhibition of her work some day.
     Similarly, if you have never read any of the writings of Lytton
Strachey, this is no problem either since the artistic talents of the
two protagonists of CARRINGTON are of minor importance.  The film is
about undying love while at the same time attempting to lay waste to
the notion of monogamy.  A fascinating contrast.
     The movie starts in 1915 with a statement that Dora Carrington
(Emma Thompson) then was known as "a painter of exceptional promise."
At the start of the show she meets Lytton Strachey (Jonathan Pryce).
Their initial meeting is inauspicious.  Lytton asks her friend, "Who
is that ravishing boy?"  and she tells him, "Carrington", and he says,
"oh" very disappointedly since he is unabashed gay.  Lytton's clothes
(by Penny Rose) are old and Bohemian looking, and he always has a
scraggly beard.  Nevertheless, from the moment Carrington lays her eyes
on him, she is smitten and wants to spend her life with him.  Since he
finds women unappealing this does present a major dilemma for her.
     She spends the rest of the movie going to bed with a long series
of men including Lytton, but he keeps his eyes out mainly for young
men.  Unlike the typical love triangle, the relationships in this film
form a pointed star of uncountable number of points.  Among others, the
lovers include Steven Waddington as Ralph Partridge, Samuel West as
Gerald Brenan, and Rufus Sewell as Mark Gertler.  I was keeping a
mental list for a while, but eventually lost track.  Through affairs
and marriages she always lives with Lytton.  Although the movie goes on
for over twenty years, the make-up by Chrissie Beveridge was poorly
done and the actors and actresses never age.
     I liked this movie for the dreamy atmosphere it provided.  They
play a Schubert String Quintet at one point, and its slow and smooth
intonations are an apt metaphor to the happiness that Carrington
radiates.  She keeps remarking how being with Lytton makes her so
incredibly happy.  At the same time, she makes love with almost every
man in the movie with the exception of some of Lytton's boyfriends.
     The sparse dialog by Christopher Hampton is quite witty.  Lytton
relates to Carrington that, "I tend to be impulsive in these matters
like the time I asked Virginia Woolf to marry me."  Carrington asks,
"She turned you down?"  "No, she accepted.  It was ghastly," he
replies.  When Lytton finally becomes famous and gets compliments from
the conservative press that he loathes, he says, "It isn't easy
remaining calm in the face of excessive praise from The Daily
Telegraph."  Lytton is played as a man ancient before his time.  In the
first of the show he complaints about how old he is, when he is but 36.
     First time director Christopher Hampton gives the audience a show
that drifts along with the easy of a slow stream in summer.  Even as
the love relationships get more complex, the show stays with its simple
veneer.  Unsuccessful attempts at shattering the calm are statements by
Lytton proclaiming that "There are times when I feel like a character
in a farce."  The cinematography by Denis Lenoir has many scenes of
inner peace crafted by filming the English countryside in sunset hues
and the inside in the warmth of small rooms with equally small
fireplaces casting golden shadows.  The characters spend significant
amounts of time staring happily at each other.  The music by Michael
Nyman fits the mood created by the director perfectly.
     Although the show appears devoid of any morals other than live
for the moment, it provides a peaceful diversion.  Lytton summons it
up when he declares of his young male boyfriends, "I find these young
people refreshing.  They have no morals and never speak."
     The scene that best illustrates the movie has Carrington alone at
night outside a great house owned by Lytton.  Wrapped in a blanket she
watches couples in every window - all about to make love.  Ultimately
the movie is a paean to living life to the fullest without being
troubled with values.  When her new husband, Ralph's best friend Gerald
shows up and falls in love with Carrington, she can not understand why
Gerald is troubled when they start making out with her husband only
fifty yards away.  And yet, the story is anchored in her complete love
for Lytton.
     The acting is excellent.  Emma Thompson is always great, and this
movie was not exception.  She takes a simple and direct approach to the
character, and it works.  Jonathan Pryce has a more complex character
to deal with, and he is up to it.  Lytton is a bit of conundrum, and
Pryce exploits this to the fullest.  You never quite understand what
Lytton is thinking, and yet he is such an intriguing and quirky
character that you can see why Carrington is attracted to him even if
he claims to detest the sight of women's bodies.
     CARRINGTON runs too long at 2:02.  The editor (George Akers) has
left in numerous scenes that he should have deleted in their entirety.
The movie is rated R for bad language, some sex, brief nudity, and a
total lack of morals.  Only mature teenagers should go and then I would
advise discussing it with them thoroughly afterwards.  For me, the
dreamy mood of the picture and the excellent acting won me over, and I
was able to ignore the morals issue.  I do recommend CARRINGTON to the
adventuresome moviegoer, and I give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Availability: 11/10/95 (limited); 11/17/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:02
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sex, violence, discreet nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Emma Thompson, Jonathan Pryce, Steven Waddington, Samuel West,
      Rufus Sewell
Director: Christopher Hampton
Producers: Ronald Shedlo and John McGrath
Screenplay: Christopher Hampton based on the book LYTTON STRACHEY by
            Michael Holroyd
Cinematography: Denis Lenoir
Music: Michael Nyman
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     Love comes in many forms--platonic, romantic, and sexual--and
this is the issue at the heart of CARRINGTON, a cinematic biography of
artist Dora Carrington and her near-lover, writer Lytton Strachey.
Though Dora, a heterosexual woman who didn't lose her virginity until
she was in her twenties, and Strachey, an avowed homosexual, each had an
assortment of male bed partners, they were intensely devoted to each
other with a passion that was "all absorbing" and "self-abasing".  Even
without a sexual element, their love was transcendent, majestic, and
ultimately tragic, for one could not live without the other.
     Screenwriter Christopher Hampton (TOTAL ECLIPSE) makes a successful
directorial debut with this picture, an artistic and emotional
examination of the seventeen year liaison between Dora (Emma Thompson)
and Strachey (Jonathan Pryce).  The movie is historically accurate, but
its focus is less on the events of the time than on the relationship
between the principals.  CARRINGTON is a special love story that
challenges the intellect with as much vigor as it touches the heart.
Hollywood inevitably equates love with lust; Hampton shows that it's
possible to have souls in synch even when their sexuality is
incompatible.
     Lytton Strachey was born in 1880, fifteen years before Dora
Carrington.  The two met shortly after the onset of World War One.  At
that point, he was a confirmed pacifist; she wanted nothing more than to
be a man so that she could fight.  Strachey would go on to write several
unique biographies, using a style characterized by "a brevity which
excludes everything that is redundant and nothing that is significant."
The 1918 publication of EMINENT VICTORIANS cemented Strachey's literary
reputation.  Dora, on the other hand, remained a little-known talent
during her lifetime, since she painted just for herself and Strachey,
not to exhibit or sell.
     CARRINGTON is divided into six chapters, most of are named after
the men who float in and out of the title character's life.  Of course,
Strachey is there all the time, a constant supportive and loving
presence.  In one segment, Dora loses her virginity to ardent suitor
Mark Gertler (Rufus Sewell).  In another, she marries Ralph Partridge
(Steven Waddington), primarily because Strachey is attracted to him.
This leads to a bizarre triangle where only one relationship is
consummated.  Then there's an tryst with Partridge's best friend, Gerald
Brenan (Samuel West), and a later affair which results in an unwanted
pregnancy.
     The film is beautifully photographed, with each scene carefully
composed.  One of CARRINGTON's most poignant--and lasting--images is
of Dora sitting outside of Ham Spray House at night.  As she gazes in
through lighted windows at the various couplings taking place, it's
possible to feel her loneliness.  The stunning sequence is made all the
more impressive by the slow, deliberate manner in which it was filmed.
     Thompson, as always, is a joy to behold.  Here, with a Buster Brown
haircut, the actress gives a carefully restrained, subtly nuanced
performance that can stand toe-to-toe with her Oscar-winning turn in
HOWARDS END.  The versatile Jonathan Pryce, better known to American
audiences for his Infiniti TV spots than for film roles like BRAZIL, is
every bit Thompson's equal.  It's a rare pleasure to watch two top-notch
equals play off one another.  There is tangible chemistry between them,
although not of the conventional sort.
     Unlike Thompson's most recent Merchant-Ivory entry, THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY, CARRINGTON's tone is not one of restraint.  Strachey and Dora
don't have sex, but their love is definitely neither unrequited nor
unacknowledged.  This is a passionate, although never gratuitous, motion
picture, with a clear view of how it wants to portray its characters and
their complex relationship.  The result is a memorable portrait of two
of history's most unique lovers.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Around the time of WW1 and until 1932, Carrington, as she liked to
be called (Emma Thompson) was in love with Lytton Strachey (Jonathan
Pryce).  Theirs was not the usual relationship.  For one thing he was
gay; for another, he was fifteen years her senior.  Despite that, she
lived with him and loved him for his intelligence and his world famous
writings.  Living with him did not keep her from having affairs,
one-nighters and longer when she so chose.  Thus she opted to ignore
the Victorian mores of the period and be the Bohemian.
     Carrington had shown great promise as an artist when she went to
college and she continued her painting while living with Strachey. Each
admired the other so much they could not live without being together.
     While the book on which the film is based is Michael Holroyd's
LYTTON STRACHEY, the writer/director, Christopher Hampton, chose to
make Carrington the leading figure in the film.  He wanted the film to
be about an artist to whom life was more important than art.  Thompson
is vivacious and looks delightful in her short cropped hair; Pryce, in
a beard, is more sedate.  In any case, hers is the bigger role and
gives her a chance to show her stuff.
     This turns into one of those films that sound better on paper than
when made into a movie.  The period after the war was not a
particularly interesting one (to me) nor were the characters. I kept
thinking PBS would be a more suitable milieu for the film.
     Also in the cast are Steve Waddington as Carrington's husband, and
Samuel West.  Penelope Wilton has the role of Lady Ottoline Morrell.

Author
Pedro Sena
Films about artists and writers are not fun... they can really take it to
your heart. But they sure create some amazing performances from the actors.
And when a script as this one comes around, it is difficult not to
appreciate the beauty of the work that Jonathan Pryce out into it, and the
very nice job that Emma Thompson did as the writer's long time friend.
This film is about the living arrangement that the writer Lytton Strachen
and artist Dora Carrington had during their time, right after the glory days
of Victorian England.  Lytton is a homosexual, and Emma is not. But this
does not deter from their agreement to withstand each other as personal
friends and housemates for a very long period of time.
Lytton's health interfered with his ability to write, many times, as well as
his ability to stay with his writing. And Dora provides much of the
stability that the otherwise un-emotional Lytton seems to avoid. But as he
grows, and his homosexual side comes out, his life takes different turns. He
is a bit more emotional, and apparently his health is all the better for it.
It's when he has the emotional letdowns, that he appears to suffer the most.
And Dora, appears to be much in love all the time, even going so far as to
get married to the man with whom, they are both having an affair. The
triangle is not an orgy, as each couple maintains their space, but it is a
severe strain all the way around.
When Lytton's health takes his life, the lonely Dora decides that her life
is miserable, and does something about it.
In between, it is easy to see what it is that turns on a writer, and a
painter. Dora, though not a major artist,
became, in time, considered quite an accomplished artist, with a sizeable
collection of works, mostly portraits of
the people she liked. Lytton's work is available in the many libraries the
world over.
Jonathan Pryce ( Brazil, Miss Saigon ) is the thing that keeps this film
going, and it really shows up when he is
not around. Lytton has a large ego, built out of being well educated, but he
also has the knack for making
things appear more interesting, and important. The others do not have his
sense of occasion.  And Jonathan
Pryce just shines all the way through, even if the line is a quick cut, or
take, in the film.
With sharp acting like that, it is up to Emma Thompson to bring out the
originally shy Carrington, but later
the woman that pretty much knows what she wants from those people around
her.  She can't have children, so it seems, and she then turns into a life
of enjoyment, to compensate for it. She can not break through Lytton's
barriers against a physical relationship with women, but his attitude
towards them softens with her around,
much later in life.  But the film makes it clear that it is the likes of the
early rejections that Lytton
receives, even from Dora ( two other times it shows up in the film ),
eventually is what makes him say
such things as women's bodies are "hideous and ugly". But his inner
relationship with Dora makes up for
whatever lack of physical satisfaction may be present.
An outstanding film, with superb acting all the way around, this is really
more of a study of a gone by era,  and its attitudes, than it is the story
of Lytton and Dora. In the capable hands of a respectful director and sharp
actors, that era comes alive even more, even if it can not be found today.
Excellent film, well directed, and sharply made, in that it is tightly
thought out, and accomplished. It also
has some magnificent music by Michael Nyman, which is highly noticeable.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is the true story of a woman who made all her own choices.
She chose to love a man who (in addition to being much older and a bit
repulsive) was gay and could not give her a sexual relationship.  She
chose her lovers, ruining their lives.  Yet she still ended unhappy
because a gay man could not love her back the way she wanted.  It seems
to be the point of view of the film that we should feel very sorry for
Dora Carrington.  But you know, life is tough.  In spite of the best
efforts of the filmmaker to make Carrington a sympathetic character
there is roughly 98% of humanity more deserving of sympathy.  And the
tears that some audience members shed for her could have been much
better spent.
     Dora Carrington (played by Emma Thompson) is a young but very
promising art student when she first meets Lytton Strachey (Jonathan
Pryce).  Strachey is a most disagreeable and self-centered man.  For
reasons never really shown in the film Carrington falls in love with
him.  Their relationship is mostly platonic since Strachey is gay and
not interested in sex with her.  However at this point in life
Carrington is not interested in sex at all, so his orientation is nota
problem.  That will change.  It is to be presumed that their
relationship is on a higher and more intellectual plane, though
writer/director Christopher Hampton does painfully little to us show
this.  Later when Carrington decides that she does like sex after all,
she takes a husband to whom both she and Strachey are attracted and
apparently tries to make up for lost time.  Even more fascinated by sex
as she gets older, Carrington takes multiple lovers including her
husband's best friend.  She apparently has the looks to attract men and
is little fettered by contemporary (1930s) morality or even decency.
     In all this time we see little of Carrington's supposed intellect.
Hampton shows us far more of her body than we see of her mind.  Her
talent for painting seems to be channeled mostly into home decoration.
Her attraction to Strachey is never explained since he seems to have
the sex appeal of an old book consumed by mildew.  His conversations
are more cutting than clever.  Through the middle of the film nearly
every scene seems to concern in some way the sex lives of the
characters.
     Much of CARRINGTON seem well photographed, though at times there
are disturbing and obvious shifts in filters giving some scenes a
disagreeable yellow tint.  The directing and acting are quite up to
what you would expect for the prestige production this was intended to
be.  Jonathan Pryce gives an appealing portrait of a most unappealing
character.  Emma Thompson never gives a bad performance, but did not
noticeably show us anything new in her acting besides a willingness to
take her clothes off.  She shows us too much of the flesh of Dora
Carrington and not enough of the person.
     I saw this film at the Edinburgh Film Festival.  It had already
won a Special Jury Prize and a Best Actor Award to Pryce at Cannes.  I
had high expectations and I certainly expected better than what was
basically a Harold Robbins sort of sex story, only set in the first
third of the century and made with high production values.  I cannot
rate this higher than a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
