Title
Review for Fandango (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Freddie Mercury spoke to me a couple days ago on the radio, 
saying, "Scaramouch, Scaramouch will you do the Fandango?" I hate 
it when he calls me Scaramouch, but I decided to oblige him and 
watch FANDANGO anyway because hey, where else are you going to 
find a movie that gives Judd Nelson top billing over Kevin Costner? 
FANDANGO is a road comedy set in the 60's, with four college 
buddies out to reclaim some lost youth before they're forced to 
grow up and/or go to Vietnam.
        It's one of those comedies that's only ninety minutes long but 
is still padded with unnecessary scenes to lengthen the thin plot. That's 
because, in it's original form, it was a short student film. They had to 
add in enough plot digressions to make it hit the hour-and-a-half 
mark, but at least most of them are entertaining, as when the car runs 
out of gas and one of them decides to connect a cable between the car 
and a passing train for a free tow, or the sequence where the four 
college buddies and a couple of "jailbait" girls are shooting fireworks 
at each other in a cemetary. Most of the scenes have a dramatic 
context as well, the tombstones and flying fireworks in the cemetary 
reminding them of the threat of death under fire in Vietnam.
        The longest piece of the plot involves Judd Nelson, who 
plays the nerd of the group. (So now we know Nelson can play both 
extremes of the spectrum -- the too-cool rebel in THE BREAKFAST 
CLUB and the wimpy dork here.) The other guys pressure him into 
skydiving with a whacked-out, pot-smoking pilot and later scramble 
on the ground to warn him his parachute is faulty. It's definitely the 
most entertaining part of FANDANGO and serves to point out that 
beneath all their differences they still like Judd Nelson, even if all of 
Hollywood has since betrayed him. Interestingly enough, the entire 
"Breakfast Club" is now serving breakfast at the Pasadena Denny's.
        Although it's mostly entertaining, FANDANGO isn't the best 
road movie and it isn't the best comedy set in the past about a bunch 
of guys trying to reclaim their lost youth (a.k.a. DINER). It isn't the 
first in each genre and it isn't the last. Nostalgia for the teenage years 
will continue to be a popular film theme for decades to come because, 
as Judd Nelson said, "Give me work, any work! Voice-over work, 
guest appearaces on sitcoms! I'll take anything! I'll be the San Diego 
chicken, for God's sake!" He also said in FANDANGO, "You're only 
eighteen once, just like you're only a virgin once." Well, listen here 
people, I am eighteen and I am a virgin and I can't imagine ever 
looking back on this point on my life with any degree of longing. 
And Judd, if you're reading this, I'll give you twenty bucks to 
mow my lawn, but that's it.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
