Title
Review for Mulholland Drive (2001)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Naomi Watts Chases Hollywood Dreams Along Mulholland Drive  
A feature story by Jeremiah Kipp - Copyright Š 2001 filmcritic.com
Australian actress Naomi Watts (Tank Girl) portrays a wholesome young
starlet eager to fulfill her Hollywood dreams in David Lynch's latest
noir fantasia, Mulholland Drive.  Betty Elms, fresh off the plane from
Canada, finds herself temporarily diverted from her earnest, sparkling
hopes for movie stardom by the unexpected appearance of Rita (Laura
Elena Harring), the amnesia-stricken survivor of a traumatic car
accident.  Out of the plum goodness of her heart, surely made of solid
gold, Betty guides Rita on her quest for self-discovery.  This path
gradually leads them to dark revelations that shake the foundations of
their unexpectedly fragile reality.
Those who have not seen Mulholland Drive should be advised that our
interview with Ms. Watts (daughter of a Pink Floyd sound engineer)
divulges certain details of the plot that first-time viewers may not
wish to uncover.  Though Lynch's tapestry suggests multiple
interpretations and demands repeated viewings, this interview considers
one possibility suggested by Ms. Watts and implied by several critics in
their reviews.  Our discussion is by no means the only reading, but
provides a unique response to the material from an actor translating
Lynch's abstractions into grounded, character-driven motivation.  Read
no further if you don't want to know the key narrative shift of
Mulholland Drive.
The world of "Betty" (largely pulled, one assumes, from the two-hour
television pilot that ABC dropped from its fall season lineup) is
revealed midway through Mulholland Drive as perhaps being an elaborate
romantic fantasy created by Diane (also played by the chameleonic
Watts).  She's an embittered actress living in a dingy hole-in-the-wall
whose movie career never took flight.  What's more, her entire world has
been corrupted by a self-destructive, obsessive love for Rita, now seen
as a cavalier Hollywood diva named Carmela (Harring) that drifts from
one relationship to the next, breaking hearts along the way.  Finding
solace from an unforgiving reality, Diane can only find meaning within
her fabricated romance with Carmela/Rita in the "Betty" dreamscape (and
their passionate love scene is already notorious in some circles).  Even
in the dream, dark impulses start to emerge that may ultimately destroy
Diane/Betty.
After touching on her experience working with David Lynch, one of the
most innovative American filmmakers working today, Ms. Watts shared her
thoughts on Mulholland Drive.
filmcritic.com: Did you have any preconceived ideas about working with
David Lynch?
Naomi Watts: I thought he would be inaccessible; a really dark, intense,
brooding kind of guy.  And I couldn't have been more wrong.  He's just
an incredibly charming, highly spirited human being who is great to be
around, and everybody shared that opinion.  He's got one of the funniest
senses of humor I've ever experienced in a man.  A real dry wit, but
incredibly mischievous at the same time.  We teased each other the whole
time.
On top of that, working with David was an extremely different
experience, because the way he works with his actors is quite different
from the normal director-actor relationship.  He really doesn't tell you
much about what he's thinking.  I know he's not divulging anything to
the press [about the film], but he's the same with actors.  He wants you
to interpret it yourself, so he doesn't give directions.  As actors, for
the most part we're trained to know where we've come from, where we're
going, what the truth and meaning is behind every scene, but he
basically asks us to undo all that.  He's saying that all those
questions don't matter, that you simply treat each scene with the right
mood and ideas that it needs.  David guides you along, but he doesn't
tell you exactly what it is or what it means, so it's up to you to make
[those things] up.
Obviously this is a non-linear story and there are a few ways to
interpret it.  At first I asked a lot of questions, but he would just
smile quite smugly and pretend that he was trying to torture me, so I
pretty much learned early on to stop asking.  Now, he is very expressive
and communicative, but again, with not too much instruction.  While he
does have these ideas about how things should play, he's not attached to
them or fixated on them because that would leave him no opportunity for
new things to occur.  Mostly, I remember him using a lot of physical or
facial expressions, gesturing with his hands.  David's not someone who
needs to talk about stuff for a long time at all.
Could Mulholland Drive be read as an allegory for the revolving door or
glass ceiling of young actresses in Hollywood?
Maybe but I feel that it's more about how complex we are as human
beings; that there is a full spectrum of black and white, pure and evil,
or darkness and light.  There's innocence and sexuality in all of us. 
It's not just about the gray somewhere in between, but we can experience
those two extreme emotions in one person.
Do you think Betty is Diane's alter ego?
For me, Diane is the reality-based character.  That is the truth of the
situation.  Things are so awful in her life, in this rock bottom place,
this horrid state of dementia, that she creates Betty as how she would
have liked it to have been.  Betty was optimistic and hopeful and pretty
and peppy and sweet and everyone loves her and she's in control of
Rita.  Rita doesn't know who she is and Betty loves this power and this
control she has over Rita.  So that's the wish, the dream, the fantasy,
the projection, whatever you want to call it.  It's the reverse when
we're talking about Diane and Carmela.
What spurs Diane to create this elaborate fantasy about Rita?
Because it's an unrequited love story.  Carmela is a movie star, she's
beautiful, a femme fatale, the directors are in love with her,
everyone's in love with her.  She's a powerful, strong woman.  Carmela
pulls her friend Diane into her life for a minute but then cuts her off
and stops reciprocating any friendship.  [That plunges] Diane into this
massive psychosis that she can't get out of, and then the worst happens.
It seemed as if Lynch was setting up a relationship in the "Betty" world
between you and Adam (the intense Hollywood movie director played by
Justin Theroux), but then that shifts into a relationship between you
and Rita.  Conversely, in the "Diane" world, Adam and Carmela wind up
together.  How do you think Adam figures into your relationships in
Mulholland Drive?
Adam is basically someone who pulls Carmela away from me.  Diane is a
narcissist, so she sees Adam in the "Betty" world [as being] in love
with her.  They have a moment.  And I think again because she's so in
awe of Carmela's life, she just represents everything that Diane wants
and doesn't have.  So she basically tries to change it all around. 
That's when she creates Justin's character, Adam, as being someone that
wants her, instead of Carmela.  I think it's just an obstacle in the way
of her love affair with Carmela.
During the "Betty" reality, can you describe what goes through Betty
when she's having her sexually charged (and quite disturbing) audition
scene with a much older actor?
This whole other character emerges.  It comes out of left field, but
we've had hints that Betty is not all that good and pretty and perky and
sweet and innocent.  There is going to be some kind of transformation,
and that's where we learn more about her.  We see her come alive and
undergo a change.  The way Betty is set up [in the beginning] seems
almost like a cardboard cutout.  I thought when I first read the script,
"Oh my God, it's so one-dimensional -- she should be on the side of a
cereal box in 1952!"  But there were moments of release, like when she
pulls the [substantial amount of] money out of Rita's purse you think,
"Is this person gonna call the police right now?  No."  You see the fear
register on her face but then there's an excitement, too.  Then we see
her in the audition scene, and it's the same thing.  We get a hint that
there's a whole other layer about to reveal itself.  Again, that's
Diane's projection of her complexities, and who she is and who she
wishes to be.  But then there's this whole other truth coming through.
Did your interpretation of the project change significantly when it was
decided that Mulholland Drive would not be a TV pilot or series but a
theatrical release?  The new scenes are quite unique and different.
I read the TV pilot after I saw the movie.
I know!  There are a few of you out there who managed to get hold of
it.  It's very crafty of you!  (laughs)  Well, David doesn't like to
delineate what was for TV and what was [new footage for] the film.  He
feels it takes away from the mystery.
Though obviously you know the answer to that, so I can't lie to you! 
Betty was set up in a different way for the TV series. but we knew that
she would change extraordinarily because she's a David Lynch character. 
We know he creates people that are incredibly complex and go through
some weird changes and an extreme spectrum of emotions.  Also, it would
have been a long road because a TV-series can last one, two, three,
four, possibly five years or longer.  I knew that it had to go in
different places, but when we got the new additional scenes there was
definitely new ways to interpret the whole thing as a finished feature
length.
Have you been going to any of the film festivals with the movie?
Are you curious about the audience's response?
Yeah, I am.  I'm really curious and there seems to be, knock-on-wood, a
lot of interest in this film and not just from the die-hard Lynch fans. 
It's probably because this was supposed to be a TV series and the
network said no to it.  There was a lot of press about it a long time
ago that sort of perpetuated itself.  Then there's that TV versus film
thing that [a few critics] are really capitalizing on.  Also, it's David
Lynch's next movie, and he did The Straight Story last, so there are
some who are really keen to know that he's back to his old stuff. 
Although I think The Straight Story is a great film and still very much
has the Lynchian stamp on it, some of his older fans preferred that
non-linear structure that he's used to doing.  So I'm really buzzed
about the things I've been hearing.  I just hope the public sees it.
I'd say the party line on this movie is to try and see it twice, if not
more because it's really an internal film, and intimate.  I know that
after having read it, shot it, and now to be speaking about it and
having seen it three times that the second or third time is best because
there are so many things going on.  Everyone I've spoken to, and a lot
of the journalists included, have said that the second viewing is where
it really comes together for them.  It's a movie where you need to use
your mind.  But having said that it shouldn't be too cerebral.  People
can have an incredibly visceral reaction where they don't quite know
what made them connect with the film, but it just happens.
I found Mulholland Drive tremendously emotional.  It hits on a more
primal level than a cerebral one, although you can certainly deconstruct
it afterwards.  I'm looking forward to seeing it a second time at the
New York Film Festival.  If you're curious to read the review, it's on
filmcritic.com.  There are two reviews.  My editor wrote the one on top
and I wrote the one on the bottom.  It might be interesting for you,
because we disagree somewhat.
We both liked the movie, but he had a more mixed reaction than I did. 
Close but no cigar.  I'm of the school that really loved The Straight
Story but was enormously happy to see David Lynch return to this
particular vein.  It was an interesting companion piece or extension of
a lot of his ideas over the years.
That's exactly it, actually.  There are a lot of comments that are made
or repeated from his other movies, and I don't think that repetition is
a bad thing.  It runs true for him, and he finds new meaning in the same
thing and I love that about him.
I think that's really true.  There are the same themes, but they keep
broadening every time.  It's a much fuller presentation.  I think it was
Jean Renoir who said the best filmmakers make the same movies over and
over again.
Oh really?  I'm gonna steal that line from you.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "MULHOLLAND DRIVE" (Universal Focus)
    Whatever David Lynch is selling, I'm not buying.  From the
writer/director of "Blue Velvet" and "Twin Peaks" comes another dark, mysterious
thriller that opens with an automobile accident on Mulholland Drive, the
serpentine street that twists high in the Hollywood hills. Dazed, a beautiful
brunette (Laura Elena Harring) emerges and stumbles down a hill, slipping
unobserved into a '30s-style apartment as the tenant leaves for a trip. The next
morning, a dewy blonde (Naomi Watts) from Deep River, Ontario, arrives in LA
with dreams of stardom in her suitcase. Her aunt owns the apartment and the two
women meet. The brunette has amnesia so the blonde tries to help her discover
her identity along with her latent lesbian lust. Meanwhile, a hotshot director
(Justin Theroux), whose wife is in bed with the poolman, is forced to cast a
certain actress in his new film and there's an assassin (Mark Pellegrino)
roaming the city. The tortuous paths of these various characters - and others
named Cookie, Coco and Cowboy -  intersect at various points but the plot
remains elusive because, midway through the story, Lynch has the brunette and
blonde play two different women in an alternate reality, leaving a huge wad of
cash, a blue metallic key, a paralyzed mogul and a lot of questions that go
unanswered. Elena Harring and particularly Naomi Watts are gifted actresses,
effectively making the subtle switch. The same cannot be said for former M.G.M.
dancer Ann Miller who's stiff and self-conscious, speaking - like most Lynch
players - in staccato tones. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mulholland
Drive" is a frenzied, frustrating 4. Originally designed as an episodic TV
pilot, this surreal triumph of suspenseful style over substance is packaged as a
puzzle with several of the key pieces left out.

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
The dream resembles a TV-movie, and reality itself is fragmented and
torn.  David Lynch's Mulholland Drive is more than just a curiosity
piece expanded from a scrapped TV-pilot, though it uses the forms and
conventions of television to explore the increasingly addled fantasies
of a would-be starlet.  Those who found Lost Highway an audacious stunt,
transforming its protagonist into someone else at the midway point, will
be flummoxed by Lynch's askew storytelling methods here.  Not only do
the characters morph into deeper representations of their secret selves,
the entire schematic approach to the mini-series dissipates into an
altered state.  
To the tune of composer Angelo Badalamenti's wine-dark funereal
melodies, Lynch forages his way into the nocturnal avenues and
expressways of Los Angeles.  On Mulholland Drive, a beautiful,
raven-haired amnesiac (Laura Harring) staggers from the twisted wreckage
of a black limosine and makes her way through the night-shadowed
Hollywood Hills toward the beckoning city lights.  The sound of her high
heels is preternaturally loud as she evades impending pursuers, hiding
away in the tangled bushes surrounding a residential apartment complex.
The clear light of day brings no comfort.  Two men (Patrick Fischler and
Michael Cooke) in a coffee shop recount a nightmare about some strange,
shadowy figure that peers through walls and lurks behind the diner, a
controlling force that brings death.  To prove there's no such thing as
phantoms, the men investigate the neighboring alleyway and make a
startling discovery.
Arriving in L.A. for the first time is a bright-eyed innocent named
Betty (Naomi Watts), filled with naďve dreams of becoming a movie star. 
Temporarily staying at her aunt's opulent home at 1612 Havenhurst (a
Lynch preoccupation: showing us Where We Are), her first brush with
Hollywood may shatter those illusions.  Before this fledgling has a
chance to spread her wings, she finds a newfound friend and roommate in
the helpless amnesiac.  Drawn into the mystery of "Rita's" identity, the
two women attempt to uncover the truth.  Along the way, a savage
attraction blooms between them that could be the start of something
exquisite and hazardous.
To delve further into this labyrinth would be a disservice to any
audience open to forming their own subjective connections and analysis. 
Suffice to say, these subplots merge together, involving gangsters and
studio moguls, magicians and chanteuses, detectives and assassins, red
curtains and pinheaded villains, spare hotel rooms with hissing
radiators.  There are spontaneous bursts of violence (like when a film
director, played by intense, bespectacled Jason Theroux, smashes the
windows and headlights of a posh limo with his trusty golf club) and
sexual forays that might be described as subterranean.  Lynch's
preoccupations with noir's form and graphic design prove an ideal match
for the impassive, sparse cityscapes of the west coast.  "Welcome To Los
Angeles" is one of the first signs glimpsed in transit; it has rarely
felt so foreboding.  
Presuming that Mulholland Drive takes us deeper into fantasy is more
than shortsighted; it's a misnomer.  Inner feelings of sentiment and
dread directly affect the external images, remaining truthful to Lynch's
heartfelt observation of the world.  Setting aside logic, it's better to
consider the Lynchian mold as an emotional, musical tapestry, one that
filters into collective anxieties.  There's nothing obscure about the
question of self, an obstacle Betty and Rita both must confront. 
Romance and betrayal morph them into new roles.  Lingering underneath
the starlet might be a calculating rube, under the seemingly timid
amnesiac stirs an ever-ripening sensuality.
Sketched in muted colors and pervasive darkness by superb
cinematographer Peter Deming (who also lensed Lost Highway), the
standards of television rely on conventional medium-shots and close-ups
to fit the small screen.  Lynch makes advantageous use of those
unwritten rules, though he contorts them through his unusual camera
placements and penchant for lingering on obscure beats (who else would
linger on a cup of espresso during a confrontation scene, thereby making
the cup of espresso into a menacing artifact?)  As the characters merge
into something Other (or, alternately, become fully realized versions of
themselves), Deming's photography becomes more ragged and hyperreal,
accompanied by Mary Sweeney's serrated knife-edge editing technique of
shock cuts.  
Holding this bundle of nerve ends together are remarkable ensemble
performances from startling newcomers and established veterans:
legendary Amy Miller as a freakishly maternal hotel caretaker; Dan
Hedaya as a volcanic movie financier; Lafayette Montgomery as a
soft-spoken cowboy with murder in his eyes ("You'll see me one more time
if you're good.  You'll see me two more times if you're bad.").  The
real finds are Naomi Watts and Laura Harring, whose balancing act
recalls Shelley Duvall and Sissy Spacek in Robert Altman's Two Women. 
They're the lifeblood of Mulholland Drive, offering richly calibrated
incarnations of womanhood.  Watts and Haring are poised for triumphant
careers, two more reasons why Lynch and his collaborators have created a
masterpiece.  As they say in show business, this is where the magic
happens.
Director: David Lynch
Producer: Neal Edelstein, Joyce Eliason, Tony Krantz, Michael Polaire,
Alain Sarde, Mary Sweeney
Writer: David Lynch
Starring: Justin Theroux, Naomi Watts, Laura Harring, Ann Miller, Dan
Hedaya, Mark Pellegrino, Brian Beacock, Robert Forster
http://www.bacfilms.com/mulholland/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
David Lynch's MULHOLLAND DRIVE is a cross between a slow-motion episode of "The
X Files" and a super long version of "Twin Peaks."  A baffling but always
intriguing failure, the movie gets more confusing, not less, as the story
unfolds.  Lynch won the director's prize at this year's Cannes Film Festival for
the film.  It would have been more appropriate if he had a gotten a dual award
-- a first for directing and a booby prize for writing.  Lynch can make the
simple act of walking down a small staircase ominous, but his script is full of
bewildering and unrealistic characters for whom we care nothing.
Betty Elms (Naomi Watts) is a "golly-gee" kind of would-be starlet who has just
arrived in Los Angeles in order to make her fortune in the movies.  Upon
arrival, this innocent blonde goes to her new apartment, where she finds a
mysterious, dark-haired beauty who may or may not be named Rita (Laura Harring).
 Rita, who was recently in a car accident, isn't sure of much about herself,
including her own name.
A typically bizarre event at the apartment has a mysterious woman dressed in a
heavy black robe knocking on Betty's door.  Looking like someone from a gothic
novel, this stranger in the shadows warns Betty, "Someone is in trouble. 
Something bad is happening."  When she closes the door, Betty's only response
is, "Wow!"  Yours will probably be an equally simplistic, "Huh?"  You'll be
thinking that a lot during this movie, which needs a pictorial scorecard to keep
track of all of the quirky characters who make brief appearances.  One known
only as "The Cowboy," who acts like he's attempting Jedi mind tricks, is perhaps
the most bizarre character.
Meanwhile, across town director Adam Kesher (Justin Theroux) is casting his new
movie.  A couple of strange Mafia types insist that, for the leading role, Adam
must choose their actress, Cammie Rhodes (Melissa George) -- no relation.  One
of these perplexing bad guys asks for an espresso and a napkin, which he uses to
slowly spit out the drink when it is not up to his demanding standards.
Almost every scene is full of foreboding, although the source of the danger is
never quite clear.  Frequently Lynch appears to have his camera dolly floating
on a gently undulating sea in order to enhance the audience's queasiness.  
Before the ending credits roll, there is a murder, some mistaken identities, a
puzzling small box, a couple of Lesbian love scenes and one confusing incident
after another.  "I'm going to trust you to sort this thing out," Coco (Ann
Miller) tells Betty at one point.  Good luck.  
MULHOLLAND DRIVE runs way too long at 2:26.  It is rated R for "violence,
language and some strong sexuality" and would be acceptable for older
teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 12, 2001.   In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
MULHOLLAND DRIVE did very well at the Cannes Film Festival.  As 
you can see from the rating it did not do very well from me at the 
Toronto International Film Festival.  It may not be clear to the 
viewer why I am so negative on this film for most of the running 
time.  In fact it is an interesting mystery story told on the 
backdrop of the Hollywood film industry.  Toward the end of the 
film I think everything that has been built falls apart.  The film 
was to be a pilot for a TV series but writer and director David 
Lynch did not sell his TV pilot and I think he decided that he 
wanted to do something else with it.  Something else is what he 
did. 
The film opens with a woman (played by Laura Harring) about to be 
killed in a car when a car crash saves her life.  She crawls away 
from the accident with a concussion and finds herself a bungalow 
with an unlocked door to sleep.  Meanwhile young vivacious Betty 
(Naomi Watts) arrives in Hollywood from Canada.  She wants to 
build a career as an actress.  Betty is a little surprised to find 
a woman sleeping in the borrowed bungalow.  She does not know who 
the woman is.  She is even more surprised when the woman awakes 
and does not herself know who she is.  They fix on a name Rita for 
her, but are not sure if this right or not. 
Meanwhile local director Adam Kesher (Justin Theroux) has problems 
of his own.  He is trying to cast one actress for his new film and 
is getting pressure from the producers and from crime figures to 
cast someone else, Cammie Rhodes (Melissa George).  These two 
threads are joined by a third one in which there is a strange and 
comic murder that goes terribly wrong.  There is also a strange 
character called The Cowboy (Monty Montgomery) adding to the 
confusion. 
In what was probably intended for the television pilot the film 
opens with a great vibrancy showing dancing 60s style under the 
credits.  A lot of MULHOLLAND DRIVE starts out fun.  Lynch wants 
you to know he could make an enjoyable stylish film.  He just 
chooses not to.  As with any David Lynch film there is strange 
material added for little reason.  There are no earthworms, but 
there are some decidedly strange David Lynch touches.  The film is 
a little long for the subject matter.  Toward the end it gets into 
some heavier violence and sex scenes, clearly not intended for the 
TV pilot. 
Unfortunately some of the most important comments to make about 
this film would be spoilers.  I will not mention them in the main 
body of the review but I give MULHOLLAND DRIVE a 4 on the 0 to 10 
scale and a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale. 
MULHOLLAND DRIVE Spoiler Warning.  I have rated this film fairly 
low.  You should read this only after seeing the film or deciding 
that you will not see the film. 
David Lynch is in large part a dark satirist.  Most of his work is 
done in familiar genres but in some way shows their underside.  In 
MULHOLLAND DRIVE I think he is having a laugh at the expense of 
the crime film genre.  What he does with this film is (Are you 
sure you want to read this?) playing off the audience expectations 
that there will be a simple explanation for what is going on.  The 
first 80% of the film he tells a simple multi-thread crime story 
with clues sprinkled throughout.  Then suddenly at the end he 
turns the story on its ear with a large number of clues that 
appear that they should add up to something.  The audience 
expectation is that they will add up.  But he has given clues that 
are self-contradictory.  Lynch wants the audience to argue about 
what they have seen afterward and come up with theories.  In fact, 
the pointers are noticeably contradictory and until I hear a 
better explanation, I think Lynch is merely playing a joke. 
There is a visual curiosity that was popular in the sixties.  Mad 
Magazine called it a Poiuyt.  Other sources called it a Tri-
pronged U-bar.  Look at small portions of it and makes sense.  
Look at the whole figure and it does not.  This film is, in my 
estimation, the cinematic equivalent of a Tri-pronged U-bar. 

Author
Laura Clifford
A dark haired woman (Laura Elena Harring, "Little Nicky") is ordered out of 
a car at gunpoint just before it's hit head on by a bunch of joyriding teens. 
Dazed, she climbs from the wreck and makes her way to a Hollywood apartment 
being vacated by an older woman.  
A perky blond (Naomi Watts, "Dangerous Beauty") arrives to stay at her Aunt 
Ruth's vacant place with dreams of movie stardom dancing in her head.  Betty 
finds the dark haired woman in Aunt Ruth's shower, but 'Rita' doesn't remember
who she is or why her purse is stuffed with hundred dollar bills and a blue 
key.  The two set out to discover what led to her accident on "Mulholland 
Drive."
After the linear "The Straight Story," writer/director David Lynch is back
in the weird world of nightmares with this cautionary tale of dashed
dreams and lost love.  Lynch fans should rejoice as "Mulholland Drive" is
his best film since "Blue Velvet."
That film is immediately recalled with the light/dark parallels of Betty
and Rita to Laura Dern and Isabella Rossellini's characters.  The twist here
is that we're in 'Betty's' dream, getting events filtered through her own 
idea of her good, talented self.  'I just came from Deep River, Ontario 
and now I'm in this dream place,' Betty chirps at LAX.  The real woman we 
finally meet has a far darker soul, besmirched by her experiences in
tinseltown.
One person having a torturous day in her REM state is Adam (Justin
Theroux, "American Psycho"), a director with a penchant for Fellini-esque 
eyewear.  He's being pressured by the mysterious Castigliane brothers (Dan 
Hedaya and composer Angelo Badalementi) to cast an unknown woman, Camille 
Rhodes, in his movie.  After bashing their limo with a golf club, he heads 
home to discover his wife in bed with the pool man.  He takes residence in a 
fleabag hotel and gets word that his bank has notified the manager that his 
credit's no good.  Then his assistant tells him he's to meet 'The Cowboy' 
later that night.  This Robert-Blake like character's message?  When Camille 
auditions, he's to say 'That's the girl.'
Meanwhile, Betty's audition is so successful a visiting casting agent 
tries to steel her away and steer her towards Adam, but Betty, having promised
to meet Rita, with whom she's fallen in love, nervously flees.  Rita thinks 
she might be Diane Selwyn and the two trace Diane's apartment only to find 
that Rita is not Diane and the dead body inside the apartment very well 
could be.
Trademark Lynch touches abound, from the opening car driving along a median
strip on a dark road and subsequent car accident, to kitschy diners (Winkie's 
here, complete with ghoul in its back alley) and red draped rooms inhabited 
by Mr. Roque (Michael J. Anderson, "Twin Peaks'" Man From Another Place).  The
Club Silencio, where all is illusion and everything's on tape (shades of "Lost
Highway"), features a singer belting out a Spanish rendition of Roy Orbison's 
"Crying" acappella.  The industrial soundscapes and Badalementi score provide
the signature Lynch sound while cinematographer Peter Deming's ("Lost Highway)
camera creeps around corners towards sinister doorways and swoops into the
black hole of a blue box.  
Naomi Watts ably plays both the light and dark sides of a woman in love
trying to survive in L.A. (her audition scene's a doozy).
Harring does well playing the sympathetic mystery woman of the dream and
the harder beauty of reality.  Theroux adds sardonic humor.  The legendary
Ann Miller is Coco in both worlds.  Watch for an uncreditted cameo by Lee 
Grant as Lorraine.
In June of 1999, Jack Nicholson was in a car accident with an initially
unidentified 29 year old woman on Mulholland Drive.  She turned out to
be Lara Flynn Boyle, the 'good' friend of "Twin Peaks'" doomed Laura
Palmer.  (Jack also had a road rage incident with a golf club.)  Is this
what David Lynch's dreams are made of?  Whatever the inspiration, 
"Mulholland Drive" is Lynch at the top of his game.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Dreams, strange characters, sexy and troubled women, a mystical black box
and its blue key and a sinister air drive the bizarre drama as
director/writer David Lynch takes us into his own unique view of the world
with "Mulholland Drive." Naomi Watts stars as a squeaky-clean, fresh-faced
actress named Betty Elms, straight out of the boondocks of Canada, who
comes to Hollywood to find fame and fortune but, instead meets, in her
aunt's shower, a mysterious, beautiful woman, Rita (Laura Harring). Rita
has a pocketbook stuffed with hundred-dollar bills and no memory after
being in a car accident on the titular road.
Betty offers to help Rita learn about herself and regain her memory.
Meanwhile, Fellini-looking film director Adam (Justin Theroux) is being
coerced by his backers, the Castigliane brothers (Dan Hedaya and
"Mulholland Drive" composer Angelo Badalementi), to put their chose of
actress as the star of the helmer's pic. Adam refuses, trashes the
brothers' car then hides out in a Hollywood fleabag hotel, only to find out
that his assets are frozen.
Betty is awakened from sleep by a strange and mysterious guy called The
Cowboy only to learn that the her meteoric success is only a dream and she
must cope with the reality of her situation - out of work and without
prospect, except to use what God gave her to try and get ahead. Rita, it
turns out, is the star and she has the attention of director Adam, now back
in control.
David Lynch, as a filmmaker, is most definitely an acquired taste. Which
explains why, for the first time I can recall in quite a while, years
maybe, people walked out of the screening I attended. If  not forewarned,
the average movie bear would be hard-pressed to see just what it is about
Lynch that causes him to have such a dedicated following. The director's
style, since he broke ground with "Eraserhead," is to use sparse dialog,
slow almost languid camera work and long bouts of quietude throughout his
films, coupled with his offbeat storylines and characters. "Mulholland
Drive" is no exception.
Be prepared, when you sit down to watch "Mulholland Drive" for the
director's unique perspective on telling a story. He treats things that are
good and nice as superficial and destined to be replaced by those things
that rise up from the sordid underbelly of the human psyche. His main
characters represent a duality of good/bad, but almost invariably, the bad
comes to prominence - see the director's nightmarish "Blue Velvet" and the
near-incomprehensible but enthralling "Lost Highway." While "Mulholland
Drive" doesn't have the exquisitely evil character of the other films,
Dennis Hopper and Robert Blake, respectively, there is the patented
Lynchian undertone of the sinister side of man within and throughout the
film.
Acting, like the dialogue, is sparse as the thesps deliver their lines in
the slow, deliberate manner what couples with the director's laconic method
of telling a story. This tale is almost linear in nature, somewhat of a
departure from the episodic sequencing he normally exhibits. Lynch
collaborator, cinematographer Peter Demming, provides the requisite moody
camera work to carry forth the story and make the film look interesting.
His close-up camerawork of the attractive female leads has a texture and
feel that brings out their beauty. Production designer Jack Fisk is
thoroughly in sync with the director and gives a life to the set design
that complements the film. A keynote of the flick is a fabulous musical
rendition of a foreign language version of the great Roy Orbison song,
"Crying," that blew me away. The oft-eerie score, by Badalementi, helps
maintain the sinister undertone that Lynch is striving for.
If you're headed out to the theater and are looking for a bit of mindless
Hollywood entertainment, do NOT buy tickets for "Mulholland Drive." But, if
you are a fan of David Lynch or are up to do a little experimentation at
the movies (which I encourage), then this will, at the very least, have you
thinking. This one is for the brave at heart (it is 21/2 hours long) and I
give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Mulholland_Dr._ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
        David Lynch's _Mulholland_Dr._ began life as a television series pilot
commissioned by ABC for the 1999-2000 season.  Like Lynch's legendary 1990-1991
foray into network television, _Twin_Peaks_ (which later spawned the criminally
underrated 1992 prequel feature, _Twin_Peaks--Fire_Walk_with_Me_), the engine
driving the "Mulholland" pilot is a mystery centering on a young woman.
        The pilot begins on a dark stretch of the titular, windy road in the
Hollywood Hills, where said woman (Laura Elena Harring, a long way from doing
the lambada in the 1990 camp classic _The_Forbidden_Dance_) narrowly escapes an
attempted hit, thanks to a freak traffic accident.  While she stumbles away from
the scene with her life, she doesn't come away with her memory, and she
ultimately holes up in a nearby apartment that happens to be empty--at least
when she first gets there; she is soon  greeted by perky aspiring actress Betty
(Naomi Watts), the fresh-from-Deep Water, Ontario niece of the apartment's
regular tenant.  Betty and the amnesiac woman, who takes on the name "Rita"
after looking at a poster for the Hayworth-starrer _Gilda_, become quick
friends, and Betty vows to help Rita recover her lost past.
        Also like _Peaks_, _Mulholland_ is an ensemble piece, and while the
Betty/Rita storyline is the main concern, there are other subplots that play out
in the background.  One that directly relates to the main story is that of a
clumsy hitman (Mark Pellegrino) out to finish the job on Rita.  Another major
thread has less direct relation: one involving Adam Kesher (Justin Theroux), a
hot Hollywood director who's being forced to surrender casting control--and
perhaps more--to some mob types.
        While the characters, setting, and situations, not to mention the more
noir-based flavor, are quite distinct from _Peaks_, the pilot-based portion of
_Mulholland_Dr._ (which is rather easy to recognize as roughly the first 100
minutes of the film's total 146-minute run time) more than recalls that earlier
series.  Some characters are even direct analogues to those in _Peaks_: Betty's
golly-gee enthusiasm at cracking a case is a more extreme take on FBI Agent Dale
Cooper's similar work attitude; the creepy mob figure who sits in a curtained
room is played by none other than _Peaks_' diminutive curtained room resident
Michael J. Anderson, wearing an oversize body; and the information-imparting
ways of the _Peaks_ character of the Giant continue in the form of the Cowboy
(Monty Montgomery).  That character--and, in one standout sequence, the
hitman--offers some scene-stealing doses of typically absurdist Lynchian humor. 
Most _Peaks_-ish of all is the unsettling, unpredictable atmosphere.  Once again
Lynch regular Angelo Badalamenti (who has a memorable cameo) composes a
haunting, dread-filled score that highlights the underlying danger and evil that
threatens to surface at any given moment.
        ABC passed on _Mulholland_Dr._ as a series, reportedly because
higher-ups found it--shock of shocks--too weird.  (The network instead went with
_Wasteland_, the Kevin Williamson-created twentysomething drama that ended up
flaming out after a scant two months on the air.)  But based on the intoxicating
narrative groundwork he establishes, there's little doubt that Lynch could have
had another watercooler sensation along the lines of first-season _Peaks_.  If
that series, with its focal families living in a small town filled with dirty
secrets, can be seen as Lynch's take on the old school TV soap, then all
indications suggest that a regular _Mulholland_Dr._ series would have been his
uniquely off-kilter spin on the slick '90s breed of sudser, with its young,
Aaron Spelling-ready cast members (interestingly enough, Harring toiled for a
year on that producer's short-lived daytime drama _Sunset_Beach_) intertwining
in an apartment complex that--perhaps not so coincidentally--bears eerie
resemblance to the _Melrose_Place_ compound.
        A year after _Mulholland_Dr._ was officially pronounced dead as a
television project (talks with other networks went nowhere), Lynch secured
financing to morph his open-ended pilot into a self-contained feature.  That the
final 40 minutes or so do not offer a clean and conventional resolution to the
many dangling threads that had been carefully introduced will certainly be a
source of endless irritation to many a moviegoer.  However, this should be a
reason for relief; it's not in Lynch's blood to come up with tidy solutions, as
so clearly illustrated by the half-hearted quickie wrap-up to the "Who Killed
Laura Palmer?" mystery in the European version of the _Peaks_ pilot.
        Call it either brilliant or boggling (or maybe even both?), there's no
denying that the course that Lynch decided to take is nothing short of
astonishing.  Instead of serving up a capper to a previously unfinished work, he
redefines the whole--or, rather, _refines_ it.  Most attention will be paid to
the many surreal occurrences in this final stretch, but far more important than
the surface trickery is what it accomplishes: redirect the focus from events and
characters to the film's raw emotional core.  In scattering events and
identities with seeming randomness, Lynch apparently says that such particulars
are moot; what matters are the emotions boiling within the people--in
particular, the person played by Watts, whose virtuoso performance is a wonder
on par with the film's daring transformation.
        Perhaps nothing illustrates this better than _Mulholland_Dr._'s most
startling scene, where Betty and Rita go to a creepy nightclub/theatre and sit
transfixed as a woman onstage warbles a heart-crushing, a cappella, Spanish
version of Roy Orbison's "Cryin'."  Just about everything about the scene has
the air of the unreal--the strange woman with the blue hair in the box seating;
the blurred lines between singing/speaking and lipsynching in the show, not to
mention those between the languages--except the intimately devastating emotional
impact of the singer's lament of lost love (which proves to hold even more
resonance as the film goes on).
        At first glance, the simple, single-sentence--or, rather, "single-line,"
since it's technically just a phrase--synopsis offered in the _Mulholland_Dr._
press kit appears to be a classic case of Lynch playing coy.  But once one sees
the maddening, masterful _Mulholland_Dr._, one would be hard-pressed to come up
with a more accurate and appropriate description of the experience than "a love
story in the city of dreams." 
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Christopher Null
Twin Peaks stands as one of my favorite television series ever made. 
But if you slapped the first three episodes together and called it a
movie, I doubt I'd feel the same way.  Mulholland Drive was originally
intended as David Lynch's return to TV.  Rumored to be a creepy and
atmospheric drama, I had anticipated another Peaks -- and prayed for
something better than Lynch's disastrous "sitcom" On The Air.
Trouble began when ABC abruptly pulled the plug on Mulholland, but
Lynch, ever the trooper, decided to take the footage he'd shot so far
and turn it into a movie.  Of course, a few things would have to be
added -- namely a lot of nudity and oozing sexuality and, well, an
ending -- so it was back to the set for extra shooting.  The result is
archetypical Lynch -- creepy, uncomfortable, erotic, and devoid of all
logic whatsoever.
The story, as much as there is one to describe, is told much like any TV
pilot would do.  Characters are fed to us slowly -- remember, this was
supposed to carry us over 13 hours or so -- and plot details are drawn
with a large brush.  We witness a Hollywood car crash and meet its
amnesiac victim (Laura Harring), we see a farm girl/aspiring starlet
(Naomi Watts) take her in and befriend her, and we sit in on a series of
strange meetings surrounding the making of an artsy, difficult
director's (Justin Theroux) Big Movie.  And somewhere among the
apartment buildings, the dingy diner, the studio lot, and Mulholland
Drive itself, these stories will intersect.
Whether those stories will be comprehensible (and whether that's an
important quality for a film to have) are something else entirely, and
as with any Lynch movie, it's pretty much up to the viewer to decide all
that on his own.  Personally, I think that story does matter, and I'd
also so that Mulholland Drive simply doesn't make sense when looked at
with a critical eye.  You can make up your own mind, but between the
mystical matter-transference box and its triangular key, a pair of
giggling seniors, a yeti that lives in a parking lot, and a good dozen
character identity changes a la the boneheaded Lost Highway, even the
most patient moviegoer will be utterly lost starting right at the fade
in.
I realize that faulting Lynch for not making sense is a bit like being
mad at the dog for digging in the garbage.  It's in his nature to be
random.  But Twin Peaks and movies like Blue Velvet are masterworks
because they managed to be cryptic think-pieces and still satisfy you in
the end, backwards-talking dwarfs or no.  To be certain, Mulholland
Drive is gutsy and has moments of greatness: Watts' virtuoso audition
with a far-too-tanned leading man shows how truly magnificent the movie
could have been.  Other vignettes are just as memorable -- like when a
perfectly ordinary event like coming home from work suddenly turns into
a nightmare -- but they end up being islands in an ocean of overly
pregnant pauses and wild tangents.
But again, I have to harp on this: Far, far too much of the film
(clocking in at almost 2 1/2 hours long) is nonsense.  Most notably,
near the hurried finale, Harring drags Watts to a way-after-hours
performance wherein musicians don't play their instruments.  Watts ends
up shaking violently until a magic box appears in her lap.  Um,
okaaaaayyyyy....  It all sounds like some silly dream Lynch once had and
scribbled down during the middle of the night.  Who knows, maybe that
was the point.
Technically, the film is assured and reasonably memorable.  The actors'
performances (virtually all unknowns) are good but hardly career-making
-- with the dual exceptions of Watts and Lafayette Montgomery's
miniscule yet thunderous role as a cowboy somehow pulling all the
strings.  The camerawork is typical of Lynch but his use of out-of-focus
shots -- presumably meant to make us question our perspective -- ends up
being distracting more than anything else.  The music, by longtime Lynch
collaborator Angelo Badalamenti and Lynch himself, is appropriately
creepy when it needs to be and fun when levity is needed.
To his credit, Lynch at least tried to wrap everything up in the last 20
minutes.  It all involves that damn magic box, but still, he does pay
lip service to the notion of plot structure.  It's no "Who killed Laura
Palmer?", but it's something to chew on.  It's just too bad that trying
to make heads or tails of the dozen last-minute plot twists is a bit
like trying to analyze jazz -- the more you think about it, the less
sensical it becomes.  Let the movie go, and you'll find it far more
enjoyable.
Director: David Lynch
Producer: Neal Edelstein, Joyce Eliason, Tony Krantz, Michael Polaire,
Alain Sarde, Mary Sweeney
Writer: David Lynch
Starring: Justin Theroux, Naomi Watts, Laura Harring, Ann Miller, Dan
Hedaya, Mark Pellegrino, Brian Beacock, Robert Forster
http://www.bacfilms.com/mulholland/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   As Burt Bacharach and Hal David advise in the song "Do You
Know the Way to San Jose," "L.A. is a great big freeway/ Put a
hundred down and buy a car/ In a week maybe two they'll make
you a star/ Weeks turn into years and quickly pass/ And all the
stars there never were are parking cars and pumping gas..."
   "Mulholland Drive" puts those now overly-familiar lyrics into
pictures.  The movie, by one of the most inventive or American
directors, is about a naive, perky, Doris-Day type of woman with
short blond hair who travels to Hollywood from her native Ontario
in search of stardom.  What she finds is pretty much the fate of
most women who seek fame and fortune in a industry that chews
up women and spits them out.  If that were all there is to Lynch's
latest film--which blends the surreal with the actual--"Mulholland
Drive" would be a pretty simple tale, but this movie, which is
bound to be one of the most talked-about puzzlers of the year, is
a complex one, one which despite its languid pace and 2-1/2
hour length does not overstay its welcome, and one which lends
itself to perhaps four distinct interpretations.
   Lynch, whose flamboyant "Blue Velvet," about a kinky nightclub
singer and a sadistic drug dealer presents a look behind a
Norman Rockwell American town; and whose "Lost Highway,"
about a jazz musician, suspecting that his wife is having an affair
and becomes a suspect in her murder--are also tales that could
be spun in simplistic ways but subject themselves to what is now
known as Lynchisms.  Lynchisms are stylistic touches fabricated
by the 55-year-old creator of "Eraserhead," "Dune," and "The
Elephant Man" among other unconventional works that make the
man's films incomprehensible to some, repulsive to others, and
brilliant to still a third group.  This split pretty much sums up the
reactions of critics who discussed the film after seeing an
advance screening, comments  running the gamut form
"pretentious" to "a master stroke."  My own view if that
"Mulholland Drive" is a film to respect, one about which perhaps
a small segment of the audience can become wowed while
others (like me) can admire the originality and stylistic fetishes
albeit without great enthusiasm.
    "Mulholland Drive," which was chosen as the centerpiece to be
presented at the 2001 New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center,
focuses on the astonishing Naomi Watts in the role of Betty, a
sprightly blonde who arrives in Hollywood with stars in her eyes
and a wish of luck from an elderly couple who have befriended
her on the flight south but who laugh behind her back when she
leaves.  Taking a room lent to her by her aunt, she runs into a
brunette woman perhaps a little older than she who calls herself
Rita (Laura Elena Harring) but is suffering from amnesia which
results from the shock of witnessing a fatal car accident which
kills the man who is about to execute her.  The picture opens with
the perhaps most athletic dance contests ever shown on the
screen followed by a loud crash of a head-on collision, but from
there this character-driven piece becomes increasingly intricate,
eerie, suspenseful and sexy as Rita and Betty, who at first share
the latter's spacious digs under the watchful eye of manager
Coco Lenoix (Ann Miller), become lovers.
   To illustrate the way a multi-layered Hollywood power
apparatus masticates all in its path, Lynch hones in on a film
director, Adam Kosher (Justin Theroux), who at first refuses to
cast an actress in his new film and is then persuaded by a man
behind the scenes of the studio head (played by Dan Hedaya) to
choose that gangster's favorite for the role.  When Rita, realizing
that she is still in danger and dons a blond wig over her brunette
hair and makes love to her roommate Betty, we in the audience
see the mutual dependence of the two personalities after which
the film sinks arrestingly into a reality-meets-dream world of
illusion and actuality.  The big kick comes when the director does
an about face, changing the identities of the women as the perky
Betty's face mirrors her conversion to that of a woman
possessed by envy, hatred, and downright evil inclinations.  So
good is Naomi Watts in the lead role, so convincing is her
descent from Canadian small-time naivete into a thoroughly
corrupted, even vicious demon, that her very conversion will
inevitably cause the film world to debate and ponder what Lynch
has in mind. My fondest hope is that Mr. Lynch does not mean
for us to take any large part of his story as a character's dream--
in a dream, anything is possible: role reversals, fluid identities--so
that we in the audience can accept any and all interpretations
given our freedom to discard all logic.  My own view is that the
picture means primarily to illustrate the nature of power plays:
Betty, helping Rita, makes herself beholden to the helpless
brunette.  The financiers, telling the director, "this is the girl,"
show their strength in determining how a picture gets made. 
Adam Kosher's discovery of his wife in bed with another man
gives him an edge, but the reaction of the wife's muscular partner
changes the picture.  Add to this the notion that Betty is no more
than name of the blonde than Rita is the name of her new friend. 
We are led to believe that "Betty" is merely the dream-like
fantasy of one Diane Selwyn, who imagines herself an innocent
femme seeking her way in Hollywood.
   Peter Deming films the action with an emphasis on close-ups,
focusing on the eyes of the two principal women as audience
clues to their emotions, all backed up by Angelo Badalamenti's
non-intrusive and effective score.  
Rated R.  Running time: 146 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
First things first: David Lynch's latest film has absolutely nothing to do
with that stupid 1996 Chinatown rip-off called Mulholland Falls (you should
always be wary of a film that's selling point is how realistic its hats
are). Mulholland Drive was something Lynch made years ago as a two-hour
pilot for ABC, but it was ultimately never picked up by the network...and
with good reason.  This shit would have terrified a television audience.
The notion of Fred and Mary Lou Cornpone from Peoria watching Who Wants to
be a Millionaire lead in to this must have been too much for the network
brass to handle.
Luckily, a French company gave Lynch (The Straight Story) $7 million to turn
the unresolved pilot into a movie.  The writer/director re-shot some
existing scenes and added new material to Drive, which ultimately netted him
the Best Director Award at this year's Cannes Film Festival.  As you would
expect from a movie that made the unusual transformation from television
drama to feature-length picture, Drive becomes garbled and unintelligible
over its last 30 minutes, which, presumably, is what Lynch added to the
film's original format.  If you can understand the last half-hour, you
should either be heading up your own brain trust or immediately locked up.
While Lynch might be best known for his surreal takes on small-town America,
Drive seems like his spooky tribute to Hollywood.  The film's opening
credits play over what could be a Gap khakis commercial, but it only takes
about three minutes to get seriously creepy.  The action begins with a vampy
looker (Laura Harring) riding in the back of a limousine.  The car stops on
Mulholland Drive and the driver orders the woman out at gunpoint, but before
she can react, the parked limo is creamed by an oncoming car.  The woman,
who appears to be the only survivor of the crash, stumbles away and passes
out, Margot Kidder-style, on somebody's lawn.
The lawn in question belongs to an elderly couple who are on their way out
of L.A. and have left their gorgeous apartment (which looks a lot like
Melrose Place) to their equally gorgeous niece Betty (Naomi Watts), who is
naive, chipper and eager enough to have been teleported from the '50s.  She
wants to be an actress and has just arrived in town from Deep River, Ontario
(which drew a huge laugh from the audience at the Toronto International Film
Festival), presumably making the journey on a turnip truck.  The crash
survivor, now suffering from amnesia, is discovered by Betty, and like any
native of Deep River, she bends over backward to help the stranger, who says
her name is Rita (as in Hayworth) after seeing a movie poster hanging in the
apartment.  The mystery deepens when Rita's purse is opened to reveal stack
upon stack of large bills.
The third leg of Drive's story is about a young, hotshot movie director
named Adam Kesher (Justin Theroux, American Psycho), who is appalled to
learn the producers of his latest film want to replace his lead actress.  In
a very surreal business meeting, his producers show him a picture of the
woman they'd like him to cast, repeating the phrase "This is the girl" over
and over again.  If that wasn't odd enough, Adam heads home and finds his
wife getting reamed by Billy Ray Cyrus, who then proceeds to beat the
stuffing out of him.  Former tap dance legend Ann Miller even makes an
appearance as Betty's nosy landlord.
The tales of Betty, Rita (couldn't Lynch have just named her Veronica?) and
Adam intertwine and are added to other set pieces (some involving curtained
rooms with a certain midget Lynch fans have grown to love) that barely make
sense but are so damn entertaining and visually pleasing that it hardly
matters.  Angelo Badalamenti's score is typically strong and simultaneously
eerie, while cinematographer Peter Deming, who also does a great job on the
upcoming From Hell, makes everything shadowy and claustrophobic.
In Story, you kept waiting for something dark and weird to happen, but it
never did (which was part of the film's genius).  That dark, weird stuff
happens here, and often.  Drive is likely to divide critics and fans as
decisively as last year's Cannes champ Dancer in the Dark did.  Of the three
relatively unknown stars, Watts steals the show and could be the new Meg
Ryan (because I think we're all a little tired of the old one, aren't we?).
And she's involved in some of the hottest non-porn girl-on-girl action you'
re likely ever to see in a mainstream film.
2:26 - R for violence, language and some strong sexuality
