Title
Review for Big Parade, The (1925)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Big Parade" is a silent film about an
American soldier's involvement in World War I.
There are some chilling depictions of trench
warfare, but for the most part, the film
is part romance and part comedy, and lacks the
focus and intensity that is necessary for a
great film.
John Gilbert stars as the lazy son of a
wealthy businessman (Hobart Bosworth).  Under
pressure from Bosworth and sweetheart Claire Adams,
Gilbert volunteers for the Army.  Gilbert is sent
to France to fight World War I.  There, he
becomes friends with two comic-relief soldiers
(Tom O'Brien and Karl Dane), and romances
Rene Adore.  The soldiers are sent to the front,
where they performs heroic deeds while under
fire from fortified German positions.
"The Big Parade" has several problems.  The
most obvious is a lack of focus: at first the
film appears to a comedy, as Gilbert has
various misadventures in France with Dane
and O'Brien.  After Gilbert wooes Adore,
the film has become a love story.  Gilbert
gets to prove his manhood in the trenches, and
"The Big Parade" becomes a war movie.  Finally,
it becomes a love story again.
"The Big Parade" works best as a war movie.
Trench warfare is credibly depicted as grisly
and monotonous.  Still, the battle scenes lack
the scale and impact found in later films such
as "All Quiet on The Western Front", and are
handicapped by a desire to portray the American
soldiers as valiant heroes.
The film partly succeeds as a comedy.  The scenes
with Gilbert trying to move a barrel work, and
Dane in particular is a good comic actor.
Other scenes aren't as effective, such as the
three soldiers making moves on a protesting, but
stationary Adore.
"The Big Parade" is weakest as a soap opera.
The characters lack definition, and appear to
change personalities to suit the story.  Bosworth
is the very stereotype of a successful but
overly stern family patriarch.  Gilbert makes
an immediate and easy transition from smug idler
to innocent soldier.  Adore does not appear to be
deeply in love with Gilbert, until her laughably
dramatic parting from him as he leaves for the front.
"The Big Parade" was a commercial and critical
success, and made John Gilbert a star. His career
faded with the arrival of talkies.  Gilbert and
co-star Adore both died in their thirties.
The Director, King Vidor, had a lengthy and
successful career, picking up five Oscar nominations
along the way.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
