Title
Review for Latcho Drom (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LATCHO  DROM  (Safe journey) (France, 1993) *** 1/2  Written and directed
by Tony Gatlif. Produced by Michele Ray.  Photography, Eric Guichard.
Editing, Nicole D.V.Berckmans. Music consultant, Alain Weber. Final song by
Tony Gatlif. Design and art work, Denis Mercier.Cast: Gypsy musicians from
8 countries. A Shadow Distribution (Waterville, Maine). 103 min. No rating.
At the Art Theater.
Many North Americans are familiar with CD-ROMs, but not with seedy Roms. In
Europe it's the other way around. Rom is what Gypsies call themselves in
their language (Romany). They slowly migrated westward from northern India
about one thousand years ago. Now they live all over the world but mainly
in Europe, which they reached in the early 14th century.
The Rom refer to all non-gypsies as "gadje," a pejorative word, the way
"barbarian" was used by the Ancient Greeks for all non-Greeks. The "gadje"
have repaid the Rom by despising them as undesirables, thieves and other
nasty things. Of course, a few films have gone to the extreme of
romanticizing the Gypsies. Get a video of a darkened Marlene Dietrich and
Ray Milland falling for her in "Golden Earrings" (it is fun kitsch).
"Latcho" sounds to me like the word for "Good" in Serbo-Croatian and other
languages; "Drom" comes from the Greek "dromos" meaning "road" and was
incorporated into the Romany language."Latcho Drom" is a wish that
literally says "Good Road," i.e. 'have a good trip." In French it was
correctly translated  as  "Bonne Route."  In any case, all versions  are
applicable to the ever-ambulant Gypsies.
Director-writer Tony Gatlif, a citizen of France born in Algeria, is a Rom.
Most of his films are on Gypsy subjects. "Latcho Drom" was followed by
"Mondo" (1996) and "Gadgo Dilo" ("Crazy Stranger) (1997). "Latcho Drom" was
produced by Michele Ray, a famous reporter and the wife of the equally
famous film director Costa-Gavras. (There is an Alexander Gavras listed as
Assistant Director too).
The movie is more theme than subject. Its non-plot couldn't be simpler.
Gatlif's cameras and microphones focus on Gypsy musicians, in Rajastan
(India), Egypt, Turkey, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, France and Spain, main
stations in the wanderings of the Gypsies. It is beautifully photographed
by Eric Guichard ("Seven Years in Tibet") in 35mm. widescreen, with
superior sound.
Songs range from exuberantly joyous to plaintive. Vocal, instrumental , and
generally with dances, the pieces are quite different from one another. To
a specialized musicologist, there may be common threads running below the
different "numbers," but not to most listeners. The common ground is that
all of the items sound like the ethnic music of the countries they are
performed in. In simple terms, thanks to the Gypsies there's a two-way
traffic: the Rom music has been influenced by that country's music, and the
country's music, by its Gypsies. Much that would have died out of a given
land's musical heritage has been preserved in one form or another by the
Rom tradition.
The opening salvo, in India, features lavishly and ornately dressed women,
a man reciting energetic love poetry, and much else. Unlike documentaries,
there is no commentary, printed on the screen or as voice-over. Nor is
there any dialogue or viewer orientation. Nothing is identified, who the
performers are, what country they are in. What the words mean is only
occasionally subtitled.
Yet the film has impact, grows on you and involves you in odd ways. If
you're expecting what most of us think of as typically gypsy music,
initially you're in for surprises  The Rajastan part sounds Indian but not
quite. It may be somewhat familiar to the few Westerners who have seen
those Indian movies that are so popular in the subcontinent but almost
never reach western theaters. Yet even then, the gypsy sounds feel like
cousins to Indian sounds, not like siblings.
We are then transported, with no transition (as in the rest of the film) to
Egypt, where an ensemble performs an Arabic-sounding, vivacious melody on
love, in Arabic (I could not tell if this was pure or a mixture of Arabic
and Romany), with a ghaziya dancer moving rather sexily.
By the rear wall of a large cafe in Turkey, a teen-ager sings, nicely, a
Turkish-like song.The all-male clientele, with their backs to her, face
raptly the instrumentalists at the opposite end. In the streets Gypsies are
selling things. A man with a telescope sells looks at the sky. I thought of
conjunctivitis.
In Romania comes the shock of recognition as finally the music corresponds
to our notions of gypsy melodies. A solo violinist/singer celebrates - in
Romanian - the new freedom, showering the late dictator Ceaucescu with
insults. He uses a normal bow but alternates with a single horsehair that
draws eerie, fascinating sounds. Then you even meet happy Gypsies, smiling,
swaying, dancing, as  skillful  players (strings, cymbalom, clarinet,
accordion, flute) play for their own people.
A montage of a galloping horse leads to the Iron Horse, the railroad. The
rails speak of deportation (as for the Jews) by the Germans to
extermination camps. In a train car, a duet by, probably, a mother and a
daughter, has as its leitmotif "The whole world hates us -- we're always
being hunted and thrown out "  Discrimination, exclusion, disdain,
persecution are the ovewhelming themes and connecting thread of the various
"serious" pieces.
In  Hungary, the Gypsies use spoons, knives and a metal pot for infectious
rhythm. There, and in Slovakia, the musical territory becomes increasingly
familiar to our ears. In a Central European snowy landscape, barbed wire
and tattooed arms speak of Auschwitz. There's the surreal sight of the
Gypsies "camping out" atop trees. Men sing of wandering and persecution.
>From destitution to near-luxury. In France, the "gitans" have caravans. But
then two locals, one with a hunting gun, make the Gypsies leave their
encampment. In the Camargue (Southern France) where there is an annual
Gypsy Festival, there is terrific guitar and violin jazz a la  Django
Reinhardt and Stephane Grappelli. And in Spain, the Gypsies squat in empty
buildings, are evicted by the authorities who brick up doors and windows.
Yet the Gitanos sing, clap and dance for themselves (there's an amazing
boy-singer) with the joys and sorrows of Flamenco.The film concludes with a
threnody about the unwanted. It is sung by a woman on a hill top
overlooking a city's public housing -- "for whites only," I kept thinking.

Author
James Berardinelli
     LATCHO DROM, which means "safe journey", has no cast and no
dialogue.  This film, which tells of the migration of the Gypsies
across Europe and Asia, presents its story through song and dance.  It
is an unusual--and ultimately effective--way to tell the tale of an
often-neglected people.
     Through the centuries, few groups of people have been as
persecuted as the Gypsies.  Hitler went after them as assiduously as he
did the Jews.  Nicolae Ceausescu terrorized them in Romania.
Christians castigated them as pagans.  Wherever they have traveled,
bigotry and hatred have awaited.  Yet it is rare to find documentation
of their travails.  They have become a forgotten footnote in history
books.
     LATCHO DROM uses Gypsy musicians from seven countries (India,
Egypt, Turkey, Romania, Hungary, France, and Spain) to get across its
many-faceted message.  With song and dance, they tell of their long
journeys, the anger directed at their people, and their own indomitable
will.  The carefully-constructed picture of the Gypsies could not be
clearer, and the brushwork is accomplished without spoken words.
     Director Tony Gatlif uses images to reinforce the power of his
aural message.  The most memorable of these occurs when a concentration
camp survivor is singing a mournful dirge about Auschwitz.  We see
lonely footsteps in the snow, and the impression is as chilling as the
weather.
     Much of LATCHO DROM is upbeat, however, concentrating on the Gypsy
zest for life.  Many of the songs are designed to be accompanied by
clapping, and the dancers move their hips in a manner that is
suggestive and sensual.  One scene illustrates the healing power of
song as an impromptu performance by a band of roving Gypsies teases a
smile from a young woman on the verge of tears.
     The most impressive quality of LATCHO DROM is how much history it
manages to convey using such an unorthodox manner of story-telling.
The film is a sensory banquet of colorful costumes, lively dancers, and
emotional songs.  There are limits to what can be accomplished
exclusively with music and camerawork, however.  Coupled with a slow
(and, at times, almost-somnolent) pace, this occasionally makes the
movie's greatest asset its most noticeable weakness.
     On balance, though, those in the picture's small target audience
are likely to find LATCHO DROM both appealing and engaging.  It is
undeniably different.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
