Title
Review for Ringu (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
R.L. Strong
FINE LINE PICTURES PRESENTS
A KODAKAWA SHOTEN PUBLISHING COMPANY. LTD.PRODUCTION
Staring  NANAKO MATSUSHIMA   HIROYUKI SANADA   MIKI NAKATANI
Original Score by KENJI KAWAI
Executive Producer  MASATO HARA
Edited by  NOBUYUKI TAKAHASHI
Director of Photography JUNICHIRO HAYASHI
Based on the Novel by KOJI SUZUKI
Produced by TAKASHIGE ICHISE   SHINYA KAWAI   TAKANORI SENTO
Screenplay HIROSHI TAKAHASHI
Directed by HIDEO NAKATA
The state of the Horror genre in American films has been in dire
straits for the past 20 years. Several films have been heralded as the
savior of the genre. Films such as Wes Craven's "Scream" and "I Know
What  You Did Last Summer" really did nothing to revive the format. It
wasn't until last year with the release of "The Blair Witch Project"
and "The Sixth Sense" that horror films came back to the land of
box-office  success and audience acceptance. But the trend was
actually started back a year earlier with a small little film from the
Island of Japan.
Yes, you heard right the same country that gave us rubber monsters,
samurais masquerading as Italian cowboys, and Laser Discs. But there
has always been a tradition of lyrical and hypnotic horror from the
Island nation. Such regarded films as "Kaiden" and "Onibaba" both
revel in their story telling and ominous portrayal of dread. But for
the past 30 years, audiences have been fed so much carnage that it's
refreshing to find a film that deals in the subliminal and the
sublime.
"The Ring" (Japanese title: "Ringu") is such a film. Telling its tale
of supernatural revenge and atonement  with a leisurely pace and
atmosphere that almost cries out terror. This is not the school of
revulsion. Far from it, this is the realm of bad dreams and bad deaths
that come at you with inexorable finality. This is sublime terror that
cannot be withstood.
The film opens with Tomiko and her friend, two teenage girls spending
the evening together while Tomiko's  parents are at a baseball game.
Tomiko's friend relates the story of a young boy, who had watched a
strange videotape, wherein a old woman, pointing her finger at him
said he would die within a week. Tomiko remains silent as he friend
details the aftermath in which the boy received a phone call
immediately after viewing the tape. The voice on the phone said the
same thing. Tomiko asks her friend what happened to the boy. She
replies, "His parents found him dead. His mouth wide open, like he was
screaming". Tomiko lays down on the floor, her discomfort palpable.
Suddenly, her friend starts to laugh claiming the story is a joke.
Tomiko turns the tables on her friend claiming to have had the exact
same experience while on a camping trip. As her friend starts to
succumb to the fear inherent in the situation, Tomiko breaks down
laughing, replaying the joke.
Suddenly the phone rings! The two girls stop laughing and run down
stairs to answer it. Tomiko's friend  picks up the receiver. The call
turns out to be from Tomiko's Mother. The baseball game is going into
extra innings and they won't be home until late. Tomiko's friend runs
off to use the bathroom. Tomiko hangs up the phone, when the
television in the living room suddenly turns itself on. Tomiko slowly
walks into the room to turn the set off. Returning to the kitchen to
pour herself a drink, Tomiko feels something oppressive in the room.
She turns towards the television; her eyes grow wide in terror. She
screams.
Reiko Asakawa (Nanako Matsushima) is a journalist working on a story
for her television station concerning the urban legend of the cursed
videotape. Interviewing a group of schoolgirls, Reiko becomes immersed
in the tale. Returning home to her son, Koichi (Katsumi Muramatsu),
Reiko gets ready to visit her parents for  the funeral of her niece
Tomiko!
The tale of the curse videotape, formerly only an urban legend has now
become a personal issue for Reiko. Talking with some of Tomiko's
friends outside the home, it is learned that the girl visiting her
that night that she dies is now hospitalized in shock. Hearing that
two of Tomiko's friends died in a car the same evening, Reiko
investigates further. She searches Tomiko's room, finding a roll of
film from her camping trip. Taking the film for developing, Reiko
finds the resort the teenagers had stayed at. But another anomaly is
found on one of the photos. A group shot of all four teens, innocent
enough, except that faces are all distorted and warped.
Investigating the resort, Reiko finds the unlabeled videotape behind
the front desk. She asks the desk clerk about the four teens, but
without any real recollection other than they did not stay the night
they had paid for, there was nothing else strange about them. Reiko
goes to the cabin that her niece had stayed with her boyfriend and
watches the video. The television is first rife with static. But then,
smeared images of a woman brushing her hair in a mirror, someone with
a cloth covering their head, their finger pointing down towards the
bottom of the screen. Numerous other bizarre unconnected images
concluding with a view of a well in a small garden. Reiko turns off
the video. As she does the phone rings!!
Reiko returns home to her son. She is disturbed and uncomfortable. She
calls her ex-husband, Ryuji Takayama (Hiroyuki Sanada) a reporter for
a tabloid and a practicing psychic. Ryuji arrives at Reiko's home. He
stops outside as his son in going off to school. The two stand in
front of each other for a moment,  without exchanging a word. Koichi
goes on his way. Inside the home, Ryuji feels an ominous presence.
Skeptical about the urban legend, he asks to view the video. Reiko
produces the tape (having stolen it from the hotel). As Ryuji watches,
Reiko steps outside unable or unwilling to experience it again. Ryuji
steps outside and tells her, "It's over.. It's been five minutes. No
phone call."
Taking the tape to the Reiko's office, they examine it frame by frame
on a digital editor. Researching the image of the woman on the video,
they find that it is Mai Takano (Miki Nakatani). The only problem is
that Takano, a noted psychic died in the early 60's. The investigation
continues, leading to the Doctor who  brought Takano to Tokyo to
validate her claims of being a true psychic. With only days left
before Reiko may fall prey to the curse, the search for a way to
dispel the curse becomes even more serious when Koichi is urged to
view the video by the ghost of his cousin, Tomiko.
"The Ring" is a luxurious horror film. Director Hideo Nakata is to be
commended for constructing such a chilling and thought provoking film.
The imagery and use of space in the film continually closes in on the
viewer, giving one a continual feeling of claustrophobia. Almost
subliminally, reflections, shadows, and  spectral visions abound in
the periphery of the film. There is so much depth that one is
immediately pulled into the terror.
Nanako Matsushima as Reiko is just marvelous. This is one of the
finest performances I have seen this year. Her decent into terror is
too palpable to be ignored. As she is in almost every scene, she must
carry not only the plot of the film but its emotional depth. Hiroyuki
Sanada as Ryuji is also remarkably good, having to play the bitter
ex-husband part. His dissatisfaction with his marriage and his family
is frightening in and of itself. A loner blames everyone for it. In
essence, he is a psychic that cannot see into his own heart.
The script by Hiroshi Takahashi is such dark poetry that from the
first frame of the film to the final  denouncement, the feelings of
dread never let up. The characters are written with such detail to
their lives and relationships that they seem to be real people. The
film becomes almost a document, a diary if you would of these bizarre
and unfathomable circumstances. The structure of the film plays almost
like a dark detective story or supernatural noir, with clues being
found and dug out of the most desperate of places. The central idea of
an urban legend being true is nothing new, but in the hands of
Takahashi the material is raised to level of suspense and unease that
one cannot really appreciate until after the film has ended.
"The Ring" is without a doubt one of the most unique and frightening
films since "Night of the Living Dead". Unlike that film and other
horror films for the past 30 years, it does so without any gratuitous
scenes of violence of gore. There are a few brief moments of the
grotesque, but they are not handled in a manner that could be
considered exploitative. The subtlety of technique and story telling
make this film closer to Val Lewton territory than anything else in
memory. However, Lewton's films were never this disturbingly real or
close to home. By all cost see this film, this is the true beginning
of a renaissance, and a harbinger of horror films that we can honestly
enjoy and respect. With Fine Line films releasing "The Ring" sometime
this year, it has my vote for one of this years best films.
Copyright Š  2000 R. L. Strong
Nothing in this article may be reproduced or altered in any way
without the expressed written permission of the author.
Visit The Cornucopia of Film web site
email at Areles@geocities.com

Author
David Dalgleish
"She killed a man just by willing him dead."
Starring Matsushima Nanako, Hiroyuki Sanada, Nakatani Miki;
Directed by Hideo Nakata;
Written by Hiroshi Takahashi, from a novel by Koji Suzuki;
Cinematography by Junichiro Hayashi
        Back in the 1790s, Ann Radcliffe, the most popular author of Gothic
fiction during its heyday, proposed a distinction between horror and
terror.  "Terror and horror," she wrote, "are so far opposite, that the
first expands the soul, and awakens the faculties to a high degree of life;
the other contracts, freezes, and nearly annihilates them."  In other
words, horror offends the senses, and terror exalts them; horror is cheap
thrills, terror is sublime.
        On the basis of RING, a Japanese movie which could be a working
model for Radcliffe's definition of terror, I'm inclined to agree.  For
ninety-plus minutes, it builds suspense and (of course) terror through
insinuation and understatement and measured pacing.  It is not graphic or
violent, but it nonetheless manages to be intensely scarifying.
        The premise: a mysterious video has been linked to a number of
deaths in Tokyo.  Rumour has it that those who see the video receive a
phone call moments later informing them that they have exactly a week to
live.  Asakawa, a journalist and single mother, investigates, finds the
video, and (because we need a plot) watches it.  She receives a phone call.
And the screw begins to turn ...
        Despite the modern trappings, RING is very much inspired by classic
ghost stories, and uses the same simple storytelling methods.  It gains our
interest by presenting us with sympathetic, everyday characters,
principally Asakawa (Matsushima Nanako) and her ex-husband (Hiroyuki
Sanada), whom she enlists to help her after receiving the fateful phone
call.  It involves a ghost who haunts our mortal realm because she has been
sinned against and cannot rest in peace.  It develops thematic links
between the past and present by having both strands include neglected
children.  It uses needless details--like a ride on a fishing boat across a
tempest-tossed sea--to intensify the mood of foreboding.  If Wilkie Collins
or M.R. James (or their Japanese counterparts) were alive now, they might
write such a tale.
        While the narrative is, for the most part, quiet and unhurried,
composed in the serene static Japanese style familiar from Ozu and
Mizoguchi onward, it is occasionally punctuated by brief disruptive
moments: flashes of images from the video or from the past, accompanied by
a harsh ominous score.  As is the case in the films of Takeshi Kitano,
whose contemplative storylines are interrupted by short bursts of extreme
violence, the contrast is potent and compelling.  There are other nice
touches, too, like the captions telling us which day it is, counting down
the time Asakawa has left--and matter-of-factly cranking up the tension.
        The video itself, shown early in the movie, proves to be perhaps
the freakiest paranormal moment seen on screen since the climax of THE
KINGDOM I.  It is a brief montage of enigmatic, blurry video footage, with
weird sounds in the background.  It reveals nothing at all, but conveys a
powerful sense of wrongness.  Although director Hideo Nakata's methods are
elsewhere straightforward--albeit effective--the composition of the video
is inspired.  Sections of it are shown repeatedly, but it becomes no less
eerie or estranging.
        The entire film could be construed as the set-up for one "money"
scene, in which a much-anticipated confrontation finally takes place,
although not in the expected manner.  Because the film is so well crafted,
this "money" scene delivers exactly what it is supposed to: chilling
terror.  Yes, that's a cliché, but it was literally true in my case--I had
shivers going up and down my spine like a parade was passing over my grave.
And in a tense moment earlier in the film, an unexpected development
elicited plenty of curt breathless screams from the audience.  RING was a
smash hit throughout South-East Asia, and based on the reaction at its
North American premiere, it's not hard to see why: it plays its audience
masterfully, regardless of their language.  In the grand scheme of things,
it may not be a great or important movie, but it is a near-perfect example
of its kind.  It understands the simplest rule of terror: the longer you
make them wait, the bigger and better the pay-off will be.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
David Dalgleish
        The producers of the RING movies have evidently done their
economics homework.  They know that if a movie surpasses box office records
throughout South-East Asia, as THE RING did, then a sequel should reap
immense financial rewards.  And so they put out a sequel, which wasn't hard
to do, because the ending of the first movie is plenty ambiguous.  And if
the sequel is open-ended, then there is always the possibility of a third
movie, and more profits.  And so THE RING 2, sequel to the splendid
original, is open-ended, and THE RING 3 is already in pre-production, even
though the first two movies have only just premiered in North America, and
it would all seem like a blatant cash-grab, if the movies weren't so good.
        THE RING 2, remarkably, is almost as effective as its
predecessor--indeed, if you are not already familiar with the basic
material, it may be just as fine, although I would guess that proper
appreciation of THE RING 2 depends on knowledge of the original.  That film
introduced us to the memorable figure of Sadako, a white-garbed ghost with
a twisted posture and long black hair which obscures her face in an
indefinably sinister manner, and to the deranging video tape which heralds
her presence and signals to those who watch it that they have only a week
left to live.
        In THE RING, a journalist and her ex-husband went looking for
Sadako after seeing the tape.  The focus here is on the journalist's young
son, one of her co-workers, and the ex-husband's teaching assistant, as
they too come under Sadako's curse and seek to extricate themselves before
she claims them.  The sequel does its best to take the material in new
directions, following up on loose ends from the original to provide us with
new twists such as a mute possessed child, some pseudo-scientific
mumbo-jumbo about "energy transference," and a woman who can see into the
next world.
        Nevertheless, the strengths of THE RING 2 are, by and large, the
strengths of the original.  There is the seriously creepy presence of
Sadako.  There are images from the disquieting video tape, judiciously
recycled to great effect.  And there is Hideo Nakata's direction, which is
crisp, methodical, and inobtrusively superb, although there are moments in
THE RING 2 which verge on cliché and diminish its understated power.  The
least successful scene, to my mind, is a close-up of unconvincing blood
seeping from the body of a woman run over by a car, complete with the dead
woman's voice whispering spectrally on the soundtrack.  But such moments of
stock-in-trade triteness are rare: mostly, the movie is unaffected and
convincing.
        Its success depends on maintaining that tone of conviction.  Nakata
approaches his material with unblinking solemnity, depicting it as if he
believes in it.  He does not undercut the suspense with overplayed humour
or self-referential winks.  The sense of menace is never diminished.  Early
on, there is an unnerving set-piece in the neurological ward of a hospital:
a patient affected by Sadako's spirit causes other women in the ward to
have violent hysterical fits, while the TV in the corner crackles with
static and scenes from the video interrupt the broadcast.  The sense of
disruption this scene causes does not abate afterward.  Nakata proceeds
smoothly from one scene to the next, always with the same meticulous
mise-en-scene, and the unwavering consistency of tone allows earlier events
to inform and amplify those that follow.
        The end result is that the movie is chilling even when we can guess
what's coming--the horror depends not on surprise but on intensity.  Nakata
has, unfortunately, refused to direct the third installment, although it is
probably a wise decision.  He has given us two remarkable films, but now
it's time to turn out the lights.  The producers, so concerned with
economics of sequels, would do well to consider the law of diminishing
returns, which applies to art as it does to commerce.  The first time, it
was very scary.  The second time, it is kinda scary.  The third time, it
will be redundant.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
THE RING is probably one of the creepiest movies I've seen in years. But
then again, I've always had this phobia of Asian born horror films. I
remember when I was a kid I was scared as hell with those green faced,
long-haired floating ghosts donning their white gownseuuugh. THE RING
really brings back those memories and its grips me long after the movie has
ended. Unlike the horror films coming from the west, I'm pretty much used to
the gore and visual effects, so much so, they become rather bland nowadays.
There's really no scary movie from the west for a long time. If you have
something in mind, please tell me.
This Japanese flick is supposed to be based upon stories written by `The
Stephen King of Japan', which is also (I heard) televised over the air in
Japan. The film revolves around a mysterious videotape which will bring
death for sure to the person who watches it, one week prior to viewing. A
journalist and her husband, stupid enough, tests the so call `urban legend'
and ends up having a week before she meets her doom. She and her husband
then goes on a search for the origin of the videocassette, to get to the
root of the whole curse with the hopes of freeing themselves.
THE RING plays on the senses like no other horror film today. Visual
subtlety, minimal music and an intriguing plot puts the audience within an
aura of suspense throughout the entire film. Very well done indeed,
especially for a film that does not have a single trace of violence and
gore. Now, thats something budding horror film-maker wannabes should
consider looking into. Just an idea of how visually powerful the film is, it
is in Japanese and subtitled in Chinese; both of which, I can't understand
at all (OK, I had a friend who gave me a gist prior to watching, but he
revealed very little!).
The twists in the plot, leading to an unforgettable climax (will definitely
leave an impression on the audience) will have you at the edge of your seat.
Visit my film reviews site ! http://members.tripod.com/jackchoo
