Title
Review for Blind Date (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Blake Edwards has been making comedies for a long time.  He may be best
known for the Inspector Clouseau films that starred Peter Sellers.  Edwards
has turned out a comedy every year or so since the mid Fifties, and since
the early Seventies he has made little but comedies.  Many of his comedies
have been uproariously funny like THE PARTY, but in my opinion he is having
some trouble keeping up the level of his humor and his comedies work nowhere
nearly as well as they once did.  Edwards seems to be running out of ideas
and his films seem to have less and less care lavished on each.
     BLIND DATE has the feel of an hour-long script padded, mostly at the
end, to be a full-length film.  Like INTO THE NIGHT and AFTER HOURS, BLIND
DATE is the story of how much can go wrong with someone's life in the course
of a single night.  After the story of that night, BLIND DATE finds itself
with no story to tell and no place to go.  The rest is just sort of tacked
on.
     Walter Davis (played by Bruce Willis) is a financial executive who
needs to find a date to take to a business dinner.  Against his better
judgement, he allows his brother to fix him up with a woman he has never
met.  To his surprise she doesn't look like the underside of a rock.  In
fact, Nadia (played by Kim Basinger) is a knock-out.  Then he makes his big
mistake.  Against the advice of his brother and Nadia's own reluctance, he
gives her a drink of champagne.  From that point on, Pandora's Box has been
opened and Walter's life would never be the same again.
     There are perhaps two scenes that actually work in this film; the rest
of the film just frames those scenes, and not particularly imaginatively.
Through much of the film people act in totally unexplainable ways on the
weak script excuse that they are drunk, so not themselves.  Often the script
doesn't even make that much sense.  One character spends a good part of the
film driving though store fronts.  The police never stop him and his car
sustains only minor damages.
     These days some very good comedies are coming out, with the current TIN
MEN, RAISING ARIZONA, and perhaps OUTRAGEOUS FORTUNE as prime examples.  If
Edwards is going to trade off of his name and do as slipshod a job as this,
he will soon have to hang it up.  For the sake of a couple of scenes that do
work, rate this one a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Fritzinger
     Walter has a problem.  He needs a date for a dinner party being thrown for
one of his firms biggest clients.  His regular girlfriend has stood him up at
the last minute, and now he's desperate.
     Walter finally accepts a blind date with Nadia, a friend of his
sister-in-law, and, ignoring the warnings of his sister-in-law, allows her to
drink.  After all, Nadia is a charming and beautiful woman.  What harm could
come from sharing one bottle of champagne?
     Unfortunately, no one told Walter that Nadia is a hopeless dipsomaniac
who, after just one drink, gains the destructive force of a tornado.  Walter,
of course, has a miserable night.  Over the next 6 hours, he is the butt of
every slapstick gag known.  In addition to being mugged, jailed, and fired he
ends up in love, and responsible for saving Nadia from the plotting of her
unscrupulous ex-fiance.
     BLIND DATE has everything you would expect from a Blake Edwards movie,
except Julie Andrews.  The dialogue is funny, the slapstick is funny, and the
pacing is good.  For high-concept comedy, it's pretty good, but there are
several problems.  At first Bruce Willis struggles against his David Adison
image, playing Walter as a disorganized portfolio analyst with no style or
social skills, but then falls into his "Moonlighting" persona.  Kim Bassinger
gives a good performance as Nadia, but the role requires that she only behave
drunkenly and then helpless, so there isn't much room for depth.  It also has
the one hundredth movie dog named Rambo this year, and several running jokes
that quickly become stale and predictable.
