Title
Review for Nikita (1990)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark Kosten
Director: Luc Besson
Producer: Jerome Chalou
Music by: Eric Serra
Starring: Anne Parillaud, Jean-Hugues Anglade, Tcheky Karyo, Jeanne Moreau
A French-Italian co-production. 1990.
French with English subtitles.
     France's Luc Besson is well known for his films LE DERNIER COMBAT
(THE LAST BATTLE), SUBWAY, and THE BIG BLUE, which are stylish and
somewhat surreal.  However, along with some other directors of similar
stylish films, such as Ridley Scott, Kathryn Bigelow, David Lynch and
Michael Mann, he sometimes has a problem with scripts that let down the
images.  There tends to be a lack of substance, which is illuminated by
the contrast with the production values and attention to detail and
imagery.  Does this film close the gap?
     Besson's wife, Anne Parillaud, plays a teenage street punk called
Nikita, who is spaced out on drugs and in with a group that are equally
spaced out and very violent.  They break into a chemist [drugstore for
Americans] and are surprised in the act of stealing drugs by the owner
and the police.   Basically everyone dies in a hail of bullets except
Nikita, who is dragged off to jail.  She is shown to be extremely
violent and irrational, which gets her life imprisonment.  The French
secret service (who knows which group it is supposed to be, perhaps La
Securite?) recruit her by staging her death then offering her either
life as an assassin for France or a real death to fill the empty grave
her family grieved over.  You can guess which she takes.
     The rest of the story revolves around her training, acceptance of
her situation, and finally, after three years, release into the world as
a government-sanctioned killer.  She "comes out" as a smart, beautiful,
deadly woman, who knows little of living in the real world.
Nevertheless, with the aid of what has become her surrogate father (her
boss in the secret service) and a man she eventually becomes engaged to,
she slowly fills in the gaps of compassion, feeling and love.  However,
as she carries out her "hits," each mission gets more and more
difficult, messy and violent.
     Without wanting to spoil the story or ending, I must say the whole
thing is a bit far-fetched in detail and the ending even more so.  
There is no real resolution, and the denouement, such as it is, is
particularly weak.  Indeed, the story is light on the Pygmalion-like
personal changes Nikita goes through and her relationship with her
boyfriend is rather unbelievable, although it is touching.  The idea of
her being an assassin has a curious veracity, and France has been shown
to use women in hazardous missions -- witness the Rainbow Warrior
bombing in New Zealand, so fortunately we are left only with a taste of
silliness.
     Besson uses some of his "mafia," such as electronic composer Eric
Serra and actor Jean Reno as a "cleaner", a very black comedic role.  
They and the other cast and production people perform well, with not a
step wrong.  Technically Hollywood couldn't do better.
     France has made some excellent thrillers over the years.  DIVA
comes to mind, made by Besson's compatriot Beineix, but let's not forget
Clouzot's WAGES OF FEAR or LA BALANCE by America's expatriot Bob Swaim
and many others.  This film compares favourably, but is not quite
intricate or involving enough to quite make it to the top few.  
Nevertheless, it stands out from much of the dross today, and I
recommend a look, as you will at least enjoy the ride, if not the
mulling over afterwards.
Mark Kosten,           phone: +61 3 479-1500
Computer Centre,       AARNet (internet): ccmk@lure.latrobe.edu.au
La Trobe University,   X.25 (PSI): 05052347300000::ccmk
Bundoora, 3083
Australia

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Nikita, a violent young woman with a drug problem, is sent to prison.
There she is recruited by an unnamed French intelligence agency, and
given a new life, and a new job -- as an assassin for the (French)
government!  A violent drama that varies from unbelievable to gripping.
Overall, a very good movie.
France (English subtitles), color, 1990, approx. 118 minutes.
Director/Writer:  Luc Besson
     Nikita is a 19-year old woman with serious problems.  She is a
junkie and a thief.  One day she and her friends are robbing a drugstore
to get drugs.  Things go wrong; the police arrive and a bloody shootout
follows.  The ultimate result of this is that Nikita ends up in prison,
serving a life sentence.
     Nikita is deliberately given a drug "overdose" by prison officials
and she officially "dies."  Nikita awakens from her "death" to find she
is being held by French Intelligence officials.  She has a choice: work
for the government as an assassin, or go back to her grave -- this time
for good.  This begins Nikita's new life, working for the government.
After a lengthy training period, the story continues as Nikita is
returned to the outside world to begin her work as a killer; but is she
actually ready for life on the outside again?  Can she have a personal
life, while working as an assassin?
     Given the storyline of the film, I was concerned that it might turn
into a "woman exploited by big, bad guys" story.  Although you do have
some sympathy for Nikita by the end of the picture, you won't forget her
depiction from the first part of the picture: a hateful, drug-addicted,
young woman who is prone to acts of uncontrollable, extreme violence,
and who kills without hesitation.  The film does not glamorize, or 
victimize Nikita.  Instead, Nikita is the "victim" of her own violent
actions, and her own wrong choices in life.
     The production values of the film are high, and some of the acting
is very good.  The actress who portrays Nikita (Anne Parillaud) is
excellent.  However, some of the things that happen in the film seem
rather unbelievable.  For example, the way some of the covert activities
are accomplished is dubious; one would think that an assassination for
political purposes would be thoroughly planned (to avoid risk of
discovery) and would not have any last-minute uncertainties.  These
complaints are minor, however, and do not distract from the action or
enjoyment of the film.
     Overall, I thought the film was very good (certainly worth
considering), because of its interesting story line and the fact that 
it does not glamorize Nikita.  One caution: the film is very violent.
Distribution.  Scheduled to open Friday, 4/5, in San Francisco (AMC
Kabuki 8 Cinema); in its first U.S. release.  U.S. distributor: The
Samuel Goldwyn Company.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This sort of plot has been done many times before in American films.
Most notably, it was done in the film REMO WILLIAMS: THE ADVENTURE BEGINS
based on the "Destroyer" books of Murphy and Sapir.  Some super-secret
government agency wants to create an assassin without a background so they
start with someone whom the world thinks is dead, but who is not really.
Maybe they even arrange the purported death, and then they train this
"zombie" to be their agent.  Nobody misses the person; nobody can trace the
person either.  That story told competently, but without too much in the way
of new twists, is the currently playing French film LA FEMME NIKITA.
     The film opens with four French punks breaking into a pharmacy to steal
drugs for one of them, a nineteen-year-old woman who is clearly in a bad
way.  The robbery goes wrong for just about everyone involved: the owner of
the pharmacy, the police that he calls, and the would-be robbers.  Three of
the punks are killed and only the young addict survives.  She identifies
herself to the arresting police as Nikita.  This Nikita is not just bad
news--she is deadly to anyone around her.  The record later said that this
woman committed suicide by an overdose of tranquilizers, but she is in fact
administered them by injection and they are not lethal.  Then begins the
process of turning her from a sociopathic killer into a controlled weapon.
     While LA FEMME NIKITA is playing mostly in art theaters, it is not an
art film any more than DIE HARD was.  This is a slick, light-weight, high-
violence adventure film.  Much like REMO WILLIAMS, the story of the training
of the human weapon takes about half of the film and it is by far the best
half.  In both films the actual missions that the character is assigned are
rather shallow and silly exercises.  One mission seems to be only a make-
work project where the organization has done everything but actually pull
the trigger and sends Nikita (at great expense) to pull the trigger herself.
It is not that Nikita is so great a marksperson since the shot seems an easy
one.  Nor is it professionally done, since she leaves the gun barrel out a
window for about five minutes while she waits for her orders.  Nor is it
that she is still untraceable, since by this point she has a reasonably
permanent new identity.  The whole sequence is there only to add some comedy
and a little more action to the film.
     LA FEMME NIKITA stands as testimony that English-language film makers
do not have the patent on silly action-adventure.  This one is a likable
see-once-and-forget sort of film.  My rating: +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LA FEMME NIKITA (director: Luc Bresson; cast: Anne Parillaud,
Jean-Hughes Anglade, Tcheky Karyo, Jean Reno, Jeanne Moreau, 1990-Fr.)
An exciting and entertaining actioner that tests the plausibility of its
story with an unreality check, yet is real on its emotional levels,
testing the heroine's reactions to love, guilt, loss of identity, and a
deprived upbringing, which is rare for this genre to be so concerned
with actual human values. Anne, the wife of Luc, plays Nikita with a
flair, exhibiting the tremendous energy and orneriness needed to make
the part exceptional. The film plays like an MTV special, using a splash
of coloring to light up the screen and very fast paced action sequences
to keep you mindlessly glued to the screen. But that is disarming, since
this film has more than that to offer, even if it does not seem so
during certain stretches of the film. It is worth sticking with this
film, it gets better and less predictable the more you get into it.
Though its ending, does leave a lot to be desired.
Nikita is a violent junkie, who gets caught in a bloody robbery, gets a
life sentence, and is turned over to the government so she could train
to be an agent for them, doing the dirty work they have to do for them,
such as assassinations. This part of the story lags, as we watch how
this violent misfit channels her anti-social aggressiveness into
acceptibility for her new role in life, one that society, supposedly,
can appreciate. Her teacher is Bob (Tcheky), who falls for her, but
plays it on the up-and-up, remaining dedicated to the government he
works for, never questioning their ruthless and unethical tactics. As we
can easily surmise, she proves herself fit for her assignment, and the
big event will climax on how she will fare on her first job.
Jeanne Moreau has a nice little cameo in Nikita's schooling scenes,
teaching the 23-year-old, how to be a woman. There is one great scene
where we see the young Nikita putting on makeup
next to Moreau, and we are dazzled by looking at the faces of the two
stars fill-up the screen, with Moreau, wrinkles and all, still looking
quite sexy and alluring, and in my way of looking at things, the one who
is the more alluring.
With Nikita's graduation from school, she is now a secret agent, who
will answer to the code name Josephine, as she is given money to set up
an apartment and life of her own, since the government has done a mock
funeral for her, and she has no relations who will ask questions about
her, she is now completely reborn as a new person. She quickly meets a
checker in a supermarket, Mario (Anglade), and they fall in love and
move in together. She remains mute to him about her biography, demanding
that he asks her no questions, as she continues to go on hit man
assignments for the government, in a seemingly never-ending redemption
for her past crimes.
Her final assignment goes awry, as a cleaner, Victor (Reno), is called
in to mop up after the important mission, of going into an ambassador's
safe to steal documents that will link some private companies to some
shady dealings, is about to be aborted. Victor is menacing , brutal, and
maniacal, and this outcome of mayhem, convinces Nikita that it is time
for her to move on.
So, we have come full cycle, and Nikita has developed an appreciation
for life that she never had before, leaving us with much moral fodder to
chew on, more than most actioners leave us with, and we come to the
understanding that this incredible story, that is hardly plausible, that
is seemingly cartoonish, is much better than it appears on surface
because somehow or other it satisfies our need to know something about
covert operations and the people who go into it on a non-voluntary
basis, plus the movie is very entertaining and was able to hold our
attention, even through the rough spots in it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
I had high expectations when I saw this movie.  And it started
well enough, only increasing the anticipation.  But it quickly
became unbelievable, full of the implausible events that only
occur in action-adventure movies.  All in all, it was something 
of a letdown.  An okay film, but not the great film that I had
been hoping for.
Our anti-heroine is first seen as part of a team of addicted 
punks breaking into a pharmacy to steal drugs.  This robbery
is a failure when the owner and, later, cops arrive.  In a flood
of bullets, nearly every dies except Nikita (aka Marie,
Josephine, cutie).
In the aftermath of the raid, Nikita kills a cop for the 
pleasure of it.  This, plus several violent fits of temper,
gets her a death sentence which is commuted so that she can
become a government-paid assassin.  This is the premise of the
film, but is not credible.  Perhaps the French government does
have assassins on the payroll, but they wouldn't recruit feral
killers for the job.
Nikita has three years of training.  This includes makeup
and femininity lessons that supposedly transform her from
bitch to beauty.  She also has martial arts classes.  At one
point she bites her instructor and then jubiliantly dances
afterwards.  Her mentor is delighted with this.  Only in a
film would this happen. In real life he would be furious.
Released in the world to wait for an assignment, Nikita
immediately obtains a boyfriend.  Gender roles are reversed
in this relationship.  She is the aggressor and sets the plans,
while he constantly wants to talk and probe for info about
her past.
Nikita's first assignment is to kill several people who
just happen to be together in the same restaurant with her
when she gets the assignment.  Lots of people die in the
ensuing shootout, but not Nikita.  She is told of an
escape route that is shown to be sealed up.  This is supposed
to be another test for her.  Instead of being angry at her
mentor for this treachery, she kisses him.  Huh?
A later assignment has Nikita busting a hotel window, pointing
a rifle into the streets for several minutes, eventually shooting
someone in front of several others, and making no effort to leave
the scene.  Huh?
A third assignment again has bodies falling all around
Nikita, but her charmed existence continues unharmed.
An elaborate scheme is set up over six months to obtain the
papers in a diplomat's safe.  Would this really be worth the
body count to the French government?  Well...
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
