Title
Review for Rain Man (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jeff Meyer
     After seeing RAIN MAN a few weeks ago, I regret not having seen it last
year, as it would have certainly been on my top 10 list for 1988.  Barry
Levinson continues his run of making what I would term "small" pictures with
big-name actors, with a pretty successful eye for casting.  Here he takes a
road trip across America with two brothers, played by Tom Cruise and Dustin
Hoffman.  Cruise is Charlie, a wheeler-dealer who's slick, self-centered
personality keeps everyone at bay.  When his father, who Charlie has not seen
since he left home as a teenager, dies, Charlie discovers that the majority of
the estate has been left to a brother, Raymond, he never knew existed: an
autistic man who is something of an idiot savant, who can juggle fantastic
figures in his head but is panicked by the slightest deviation from the routine
he is used to.  Hoping to get some of the estate to rescue his own flagging
business, Charlie kidnaps Ray to Los Angeles, but must travel by road due to
Ray's nervousness about flying.
     This gives Levinson the chance to use the odd Americana vistas he knows so
well as a backdrop to contrast two men who have severe inabilities to
communicate, one due to a rare physical disability, and the other due to a far
more common emotional one.  A friend of my family's has a son who is autistic,
and many of Ray's handicaps and abilities (particularly the number-crunching)
were familiar.  Charlie's particular handicap is also familiar, and from a
source much closer to home; I suspect many will recognize it, in those close to
them and in themselves.  The story of how these two men bridge their particular
handicaps is moving while rarely being cloying.  After years of sluggish,
bloated pictures by "actors' directors" winning Oscars, it's nice to finally
see a director who deserves the title appear on the scene.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Barry Levinson's occasionally humorous
     drama of a razzle-dazzle car salesman and an autistic savant.
     This is perhaps Hoffman's most demanding role since his
     performance as Ratso Rizzo in MIDNIGHT COWBOY.  RAIN MAN is
     one of the few films really worth seeing this holiday season.
     Rating: +2.
     These days we see a lot of films about outsiders and how they see and
fit into our society.  SPLASH! showed us the theme with a mermaid; STARMAN,
E.T., BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET, and any number of others have used
aliens; MOSCOW ON THE HUDSON and even RED HEAT did it with Soviets.  Of
course you do not have to go to another planet or the Soviet Union to find
outsiders.  We have institutions full of people whose view of the world is
radically different from yours or mine. But where is the pleasure of seeing
a film about people with so-called mental disorders?  That is the stuff of
television movies perhaps, but they rarely make it into theatrical films as
anything but killers.  But if anyone is going to make an original theatrical
film about mental disability, few filmmakers can do it as well as Levinson.
     Barry Levinson is one of these days' all-too-few filmmakers who is
willing to take a chance on the type of film they make and then make it work
for them.  Besides making THE NATURAL--perhaps the best sports film ever--he
made an enjoyable film about salesmen of aluminum siding, and, of course,
his two best-known films, DINER and GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM.  With the
possible exception of GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM, his films are fresh and
different from anything else being made.
     In Levinson's latest film, RAIN MAN, Tom Cruise plays Charlie Babbitt.
Babbitt is the kind of car dealer that the man who sold you your last car
would really like to be, the kind of salesman you hope never to run into,
and the kind of salesman which on your salary you probably never WILL run
into.  Charlie is a wheeler-dealer who may have his hand in many pots but
when we see him he is dealing in ultra-expensive cars, razzle-dazzling them
past the EPA, and making enormous profits.  He uses people like toys and
loves only money.  At the death of his father his only emotion is greed.  He
is all ready to happily inherit millions, but instead gets a shock.  At the
reading of the will he finds out that his father has chosen to leave the
bulk of the estate to someone else.  (Why?  Well, I may be the only reviewer
in the world who doesn't give away that plot twist.)  The actual beneficiary
is Raymond, an autistic savant.  What is an "autistic savant?"  It is a
person who generally lives in a world of his own, but in just a few skills
he is good enough to boggle the mind.
     Now Raymond (played by Dustin Hoffman) has a rather remarkable mind.
Like most autistic minds, his usually is off in a twilight zone of unrelated
thoughts.  He talks a sort of verbal fruit cocktail.  Yet at the same time
he is capable of incredible mental gymnastics.  Given two three-digit
numbers he can visualize their product and simply read it off.  Overturn a
box of toothpicks and he can almost instantly count them just by looking.
Given a date, he knows its day of the week.  (Actually, I can do this one
myself, but it takes me twenty seconds or so; Raymond knows instantly.)
Charlie formulates a scheme to steal the inheritance, but as it progresses
Charlie finds he must spend more time with Raymond than he ever expected..
Initially Charlie has no sense of wonder about Raymond's mind, Charlie is
just one more person to use.  But eventually Raymond's lightning flashes of
numerical brilliance and his innocence begin to win over even Charlie.
     As with MIDNIGHT COWBOY, Dustin Hoffman does not play the main
character--at least the character was not written that way.  But let us
face it, the day that Hoffman cannot out-act Cruise, he might as well hang
it up.  This is Hoffman's movie as much as or more so than MIDNIGHT COWBOY
was.  Tom Cruise does an adequate acting job and no more is really
necessary.  Even if Cruise were a much better actor than he is, when Hoffman
is on the screen all eyes would still be on Hoffman.  If Hoffman fails at
all in this film, it is in not  really giving us enough insight into
Raymond's mind.  We see enough of Raymond's world-view to whet our appetite
to see more, but we never get sufficient insight into who his mind works.
Perhaps nobody but an autistic savant knows how an autistic savant thinks.
But in a very disappointing holiday season's crop of films RAIN MAN stands
out like Raymond himself does.  Rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1988, R, 128 minutes [2 hours, 8 minutes]
[drama]
Starring: Tom Cruise (Charlie Babbit), Dustin Hoffman (Ray Babbit), written
by Ronald Bass, Barry Morrow, produced by Mark Johnson, directed by Barry
Levinson.
For most of us, it's difficult to imagine having any major handicaps or
mental problems. We really don't think about the people that do have those
problems because they only seem like images on TV and in movies. "Rain Man"
is a good, touching story that proves those people do exist and we learn a
lot about life from those who live simple ones.
Tom Cruise stars as Charlie Babbit, a cocky, greedy import car salesman. He
makes huge amounts of cash from importing the most expensive cars from around
the globe (i.e. Ferrari, Lamborghini, etc.). He also has a girlfriend and
everything is OK, even though business is looking shaky. When he hears of his
father's death we learn a more about him as he talks about the terrible
relationship he had with his father. But since he is the only surviving
relative he believes he will inherit his father's entire estate.
Apparently, Charlie's father left three million dollars to another
beneficiary. But Charlie is so upset and confused, he does some research and
eventually finds himself at a mental hospital in Ohio arguing with his
father's friend over the inheritance and in the process realizes he has an
older brother named Raymond (Hoffman) he never knew existed. 
Ray is an autistic savant, he can memorize anything upon hearing or reading
it once, but is incapable of making decisions for himself and does not
understand emotions either. When Charlie demands half of the money and is
rejected, he essentially kidnaps Ray and starts a cross-country trip home.
There really isn't a plot after this point, it's just chemistry between
these two very different people. Cruise and Hoffman are so excellent you
totally believe everything that happens. Hoffman delivers an astonishing
performance, not only is his character touching because of his innocence, but
he is also quite funny and gives the film a lighthearted tone.
Charlie cannot understand Ray, and Ray certainly cannot understand Charlie.
There are many  funny scenes that deal with these problems. For example, Ray
says he can't wear Charlie's underwear because he only wears boxer shorts
bought at K-Mart at 400 Oak Street in Cincinnati. He is also obsessed with
watching television shows at the same time everyday, and if he can't see
these programs he will break routine and it will be too much for him to
comprehend. 
Perhaps this is a theme of our lives too. We are pretty much slaves to
routine, but imagine if every minute of every day was dependant upon an exact
schedule. This seems difficult to understand, and for a "Scrooge" like
Charlie, it is totally impossible.
The film does have an important sub-plot to it concerning Charlie's business
dealings, although it really is not that necessary to keep the story going.
There is a long but interesting detour as Charlie exploits Ray's ability to
memorize everything as they pass through Las Vegas and "cheat" at Blackjack
and win almost $100,000. By this point the two have really gotten to know
each other  and realize their limitations. The Vegas setting also provides
for many great scenes, one involving a prostitute flirting with Ray, and
another with a slow dance between the two brothers.
Of course by the end of "Rain Man" Charlie is completely transformed and
wants custody of his brother. Maybe this seems a little too sweet in the big
picture, but the way the movie's nuances work so well, it doesn't make a
difference. We're just happy with what happened. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
David Alba, Jr
     Over his illustrious career, Dustin Hoffman has turned in stellar
performances: Ratso Rizzo in MIDNIGHT COWBOY, Lenny Bruce in LENNY, a single
parent in KRAMER VS. KRAMER, an actor turned actress in TOOTSIE, a senile man
in DEATH OF A SALESMAN and what may be his finest role, Raymond Babbit in RAIN
MAN.
     Dustin Hoffman portrays Raymond Babbit, an autistic savant, and Tom Cruise
stars as Raymond's brother Charlie Babbit.  Charlie makes his living by dealing
very high-priced cars (Porsche, Lamborghini, etc).  Charlie soon learns about
his father's death, and at the reading of the will he learns that his father
has given the bulk of the estate to a brother that he never new existed.  After
Charlie learns about the whereabouts of his brother, and after he learns that
his brother is autistic, Charlie plans to kidnap Raymond in order to get half
of his inheritance, which he feels is due him.  Raymond and Charlie embark on a
cross-country trip.  It is while they are traveling through the country that
Charlie learns about Raymond's extraordinary skills.
     This is an excellent movie, which has perhaps one flaw.  I think it is the
fact that director Barry Levinson did not focus more on what being an autistic
sevant is really like.  The director shows us a little bit about autistic
people, but he did not go into more depth on the subject.  Look for Dustin
Hoffman's name come Oscar time.  He is one of this generation's finest actors.
     Barry Levinson, has directed some great films in the past: THE NATURAL,
DINER, TIN MEN, and GOOD MORNING VIETNAM.  With RAIN MAN he has continued in
that tradition of great filmmaking.
