Title
Review for Dr. Benderfax (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Dr. Benderfax (1997)
Steve Gouveia, Merodie Patterson, Nicholas Berry, Caroline Hazeldine, 
Nigel Hazeldine, Sylvia Novider, James A. Howard, Joe Ivers, Jeffrey 
Blumberg, Diane M. Jaffari, George A. Ryan, Chuck Young, Robert T. 
Nanninga. Music by Hans Jorgen Fjellestad. Produced by Tom Hosler and 
Kata Jacobson. Written and directed by Tom Hosler. 85 minutes.
NR, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
The pacing is uneven, the story has enough holes to fill the Albert Hall 
and the ending is a let down, but "Dr. Benderfax" is simply too damned 
likable to resist. The ultra low-budget independent feature is one of the 
oddest black comedies to come down the pike in quite some time. During 
its best moments, the movie plays like a freaky hybrid of "Andy Warhol's 
Frankenstein" and an episode of "The Kids In The Hall."
Dr. Benderfax (Nigel Hazeldine) is an unusually chipper mad scientist 
determined to prove his theories about a neuro-psychic phenomena called 
the telefaximial field (don't ask). With the assistance of ruthless Nurse 
Clench (Caroline Hazeldine), he heads a psychiatric hospital, harvesting 
mental patients for his experiments, which generally prove fatal. 
Unfortunately for Benderfax, his newest employee, idealistic Dr. Andrew 
March (Steve Gouveia), stumbles onto the truth, enlisting the help of 
Nurse Carmen (Merodie Patterson) and schizophrenic stalker Farance 
(Nicholas Berry) to thwart Benderfax's scheme.
The mad scientist story, of course, is straight from "Overworked 
Plotlines 101." The fun in "Dr. Benderfax" comes from the details. 
Writer/director Tom Hosler packs his debut feature with loads of odd 
performances and engaging quirks that kept me occupied even when the 
story sagged. For example, the film opens with an elderly chain smoker 
watching a faux production of "Robot Monster" on TV, while brow-beating 
his wife into going on a cigarette run for some Delta 100's. I've no idea 
whether the brand is obscure or invented (I suspect the latter), but the 
incessant product references were funny either way. Later, characters 
drink beer out of generic white cans labeled "Beer."
Hosler gives his actors a lot of leeway, with varying results. As a 
detective with a personal grudge against Benderfax, Jeffrey Blumberg 
adopts an extremely grating New York accent. If he was shooting for 
credibility, he should have toned it down, and if he was trying for comic 
stylization, he should have turned it up a notch or two. As is, he just 
comes off like an amateur. Likewise, Caroline Hazeldine's work as Nurse 
Clench uncomfortably veers between humorous caricature and community 
theater. 
As Farance, the schizophrenic sidekick, Nicholas Berry is effective, 
especially when his character tries to keep cool even as he hallucinates 
disembodied creeping arms in his backpack and refrigerator. One 
particularly inspired scene has him displaying exceptionally good manners 
when introduced to a headless body. At times, Berry reminded me of a 
young Eric Idle. Merodie Patterson is also good as Nurse Carmen, the most 
well-adjusted member of the cast.
Steve Gouveia does a wonderful job playing young Dr. March, exhibiting a 
gloriously manic peppiness. Bruce McCulloch of "The Kids In The Hall" 
used a similar approach for many of his characterizations of overly 
wholesome types with an undercurrent of obsession, and Gouveia excels at 
capturing that rare spirit. When he delivers a line like, "Ah, Froom's 
room, I presume," he manages to be funny and earnest simultaneously, 
quite a mean feat.
Best of all is Nigel Hazeldine, hilarious as the jaunty, very British and 
quite insane Dr. Benderfax. Hazeldine's finest moments come during his 
experiments, as he directs a constant stream of peppy chatter at his mute,
 terrified subjects. When poor Mr. Froom's body begins to twitch wildly, 
Benderfax casually says "What was that all about?" with a cheerful smile 
on his face. Later, he glances at the man's crotch and enthusiastically 
chirps "Looks like you're getting a stiffie there, Mr. Froom!" Great 
stuff.
While Dr. Benderfax the man is consistently delightful, "Dr. Benderfax" 
the movie often falters. The extras portraying various mental patients 
look painfully like extras playing mental patients. As for the script, 
even Hans Jorgen Fjellestad's exceptionally buoyant score can't prop up 
the numerous droopy spots. And the film's "shocking" climax is anything 
but climactic.
Still, the positives in "Dr. Benderfax" outweigh the negatives. This is 
one fun little movie, and an impressive debut for Tom Hosler. It will be 
interesting to see what the promising filmmaker does next. In the 
meantime, I look forward to spending another evening with "Dr. Benderfax" 
in the near future. 
