Title
Review for Crumb (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Christopher Null
     When the HOOP DREAMS scandal was going on earlier this year, there
was a second documentary commonly mentioned as having been likewise
robbed alongside the basketball film.  That movie was CRUMB, the
equally ambitious and deserving portrait of the infamous
artist/cartoonist Robert Crumb.
     Crumb was the creator of such works as the drawing, "Keep on
Truckin'," which became an icon adorning every truck mud flap in the
1960's, the cover art for Big Brother and the Holding Company's album
"Cheap Thrills," and the character Fritz the Cat, which had the dubious
distinction of starring in the first X-rated feature animated film.
     One of the first things we find out about the artist:  he
basically hates all of these works, for one reason or another.  In
fact, there's not a lot that Crumb likes at all about his career to
date.  He basically shuns the underground comic movement that he
started.  He refuses almost all commercial propositions.  He despises
modern society and, seemingly, humanity as well.
     This new film by Terry Zwigoff is an eye-popping shocker, delving
unflinchingly into questions of Crumb's hatred of females, questions of
racism, his traumatic childhood, and his extremely twisted family.
Crumb makes no apologies.  Like most documentaries, there's no cohesive
plotline here, only slow and inexorable revelations about the artist's
life, filmed over a six-year period.  Despite the meandering story
line, the film is quite engrossing, not so much due to the extensive
parade of Crumb's work that is displayed, but more to the cast of
characters inhabiting this strange, strange world.
     Crumb's family are the most enthralling of these characters,
especially his two brothers.  Their stories of growing up as outcasts,
their abusive father, their amphetamine-abusing mother, and the birth
of their respective "careers" in art are nothing short of fantastic.
The film starts to drag during some of the comic book readings and
during interviews with other characters who aren't quite as
enthralling, but overall the film is extremely worthwhile.
     The ultimate impression that stays with me is not just that Robert
Crumb is an extremely odd fellow, but more that he's a real person that
I doubt anyone will ever truly understand.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Human beings, as evolved animals, have a dual nature.  We have an
intellectual side and an animal side.  The latter we have since we are,
after all, we are animals.  We are forced to spend time eliminating
wastes, we have drives to reproduce ourselves, and we have physical
animal bodies.  But we wall off that part of our lives by doing it in
as much privacy as we can arrange.  Much of what we consider to be
indignity, much of what we find embarrassing, is to be reminded that we
really are biological.  There is sex humor and bathroom humor.  We find
it funny that a President of the United States would vomit on a high
dignitary of Japan because it reminds us that even a President has a
lot in common with all other animals.  CRUMB is a film that says little
more that Robert Crumb is very hung up on the fact that everyone has an
animal side and that his bizarre humor comes out of these obsessions.
     Robert Crumb's nihilistic and misanthropic underground comics
precisely reflect his personality.  The man himself is as misanthropic,
misogynistic, and kinky as the underground comic books he draws and
writes.  Or at least that is the face he is trying to present in the
documentary CRUMB, made by his long-time friend, Terry Zwigoff.  On one
hand the documentary has the air of authenticity because the style of
Crumb's work seems so naturally to arise from the person the film
describes.  But Crumb is obviously someone quite capable of playing
jokes on the documentary maker and his audience.  It might even be to
be expected.  When Crumb describes some of the odder aspects of his
childhood, like his sexual attraction to Bugs Bunny, it could be true.
But it also sounds suspiciously like a put-on in the style of comedian
Emo Philips.  Crumb could be as weird as he wants us to think he is, or
it could be in part a joke or even a publicity stunt.
     As weird as he presents himself, Crumb is a functioning human
being and in the Crumb family that makes him not just not just unusual,
it makes him a real wonder.  Each of the Crumb children we see leads a
psychologically knotted and screwed up dysfunctional life.  The family
peculiarities are due in large part to an abusive father who tried too
hard to force the family to fit his concept of a norm.  We meet three
brothers: Robert, the younger Max, and the older Charles.  (Two sisters
understandably did not want any part of the documentary and perhaps the
family.)  The oldest of the brothers is the suicidal Charles who has
retreated from the world, making himself a recluse in part due to the
drug treatments for his self-destructive impulses.  Robert's brother
Max supports himself by begging on the street and in his spare time
performing feats of yoga.  The boys continue to rebel against their
father and society in general in many different ways.  At one time the
standard Crumb family mode of rebellion was to draw amateur comic books
and this has made one of the boys moderately rich and sort of famous.
     In the course of the documentary Crumb tells the camera about his
background and particularly his sexual hangups.  Bugs Bunny gave way to
a marginally more normal fixation on Sheena, Queen of the Jungle, the
heroine of a 1955 syndicated television series.  The Crumb brothers
were social outcasts in school and continued to be so in the drug
culture.  In spite of rumors that he was at one time "in" with well-
known rock groups, he was an outcast with just about everyone but his
family.
     His discussions in the film include his sexual fetishes,
particularly sitting on women's shoes and riding women piggy-back.  We
are told that he is not much interested in sex in usual way, though he
does have a daughter who is apparently his own.  What we do discover is
that he has a seriously negative attitude about nearly everything that
strikes him as being normal and he seems bitter about just about all
that is around him.  One temporary exception is France; he seems to
think that he will like France and in the course of the making of the
film he moves there.  Though we do not find out in the film, it seems
very likely that he will be disappointed as much by that as by just
about everything else in his life.
     The film's view of Crumb is at times ironic.  While on one hand he
claims to be very disinterested in being successful and is unwilling to
make some effort that would make his art more saleable, he complains
bitterly how his most famous pieces of art did not pay him very well
and all the profits are going to others.  He claims he was "ripped off"
though, in fact, from his account given at a lecture, it sounds more
likely that he just made a bad bargain and sold off the rights for
considerably less than they would eventually be worth.  The three most
successful works were the "Keep on Truckin'" cartoon, the "Cheap
Thrills" album cover, and the film rights to his character "Fritz the
Cat."  Zwigoff's documentary style is very often just to let the camera
roll as Robert talks with his brother frankly about sex or describing
their masturbation or toilet habits.
     There are some nice ironies captured on film.  Another artist,
comments she was never bothered by Crumb's material--some of which it
appears was quite racist, at least on the surface.  But she did object
when his cartoons started taking a misogynist tone, including
mutilation fantasies.  The film does make some interesting points when
it suggests that the image of the wholesome family--the "Leave it to
Beaver" family--that was considered the ideal in the Fifties--may have
been a reaction to WWII in that people found the stable family
reassuring.  It is unclear, however, why there was no similar reaction
to the Korean and Vietnam wars.
     While I am not sure CRUMB lives up to the expectations raised by
some of the critical comment, it is an engrossing documentary with the
same sort of unaccountable fascination that a dead horse by the side of
the road has.  Rate it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Remember, way back in the 60s, when everywhere you looked you saw
the cartoon, "Keep On Truckin'. . .?"  That was the work of the
"underground cartoonist" Robert Crumb; this documentary is not only
about Crumb but his mother, his artist brothers, his wives; they make
for an odd lot despite their obvious talent.  In addition, there are
interviews with current top underground artists.
     The second most famous of his work was something he did for Janet
Joplin's Cheap Thrills.   Robert Crumb was also famous for Fritz the
Cat which Ralph Bakshi made into the first x-rated animated feature.
Time Magazine's art critic, Robert Hughes, compares Crumb with the 16th
Century Brueghels.  While I have seen many Brueghels, I don't know
enough about art to see the resemblance that Hughes finds.
     Over a period of about six years, Director Terry Zwigoff, did
interviews with Crumb, his wives, his family and other cartoonists.
What emerges is a film of a very talented and entirely uninhibited
artist.  In all the film, he wears his hat and his smile while all the
time he is sketching in pen and ink.  The ease with which the pictures
take shape is a marvel to behold as the pen seems to be scratching away
with a will of its own..
     An appreciation of underground art is helpful in enjoying and
understanding Crumb and all those with whom he associated.  ZAP Comix,
for instance, is one of his.  While here in the U.S. he has cult fame,
in Europe and Japan his artistic work is more readily seen as "real"
art.   If you do not mind admiring the work of an artist who, at age
five,  was sexually attracted to Bugs Bunny, you will get a bang out of
the film ... even when Crumb goes way beyond tilting with what today
is considered PC.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CRUMB is a documentary about the famous underground cartoonist
named Robert Crumb.  He is the one who did the Keep On Truck'n
illustration, the X-rated Fritz the Cat cartoon character, and the Mr.
Natural cartoon series among others.
     CRUMB tells Robert's story as well as that of his highly
dysfunctional family.  He and his two brothers, Charles and Max, cling
to the edge of the sane world.  Robert has his success as a cartoonist
to vent his pent up anger and rage.  His brothers are fellow
cartoonists, but without Robert's success, so they are unable to cope
with society.  You may have heard about CRUMB from Gene Siskel who
pronounced in late winter that "I do not expect to see a better movie
this year than CRUMB".  When a major critic commits himself to his top
pick that early in the year, you know the movie has to be something
special.
     Director and producer Terry Zwigoff uses a very traditional
documentary style narrative.  He follows Robert around and lets him
talk about his childhood, his cartoons, and his sexual proclivities.
Zwigoff introduces most of the other characters (brothers, wives, and
girlfriends) by having them talk to Robert.  Only other cartoonists,
gallery owners, and critics talk directly to the camera without Robert
there.  This straightforward documentary technique works quite well
although it means the credit for the show belongs much more to Robert,
I think, than Zwigoff whose main contribution was simply letting the
cameras roll and getting Robert to agree to talk.  Robert is a recluse
who constantly turns down large sums of money and who refuses to sign
autographs so getting him to agree to be filmed was no mean feat.
     The three brothers, as well as the two sisters who declined to be
interviewed, suffered a repressive childhood.  Their mother disciplined
them by forcing enemas on them if they were bad.  All the boys were all
obsessed with sex from a very early age.  Robert talks about being
attracted to boots from the age of five.  His girlfriend relates that
his interest in sex focuses on shoes, boots, and piggyback rides.  His
underground cartoons were famous in the 60s and were full of images
deemed by some of his fellow cartoonists, especially some of the female
ones, to be pornographic and racist.  He lived in Haight Ashbury, but
never fit in that scene.  Robert was always in another world.  As a
grad student in Berkeley in the late 60s, I remember seeing and not
caring for his bizarre images.  Too grotesque for me.
     Charles was a talented cartoonist but was so ostracized in high
school that he did decided to spent the rest of his life at home with
his mother.  He never goes out of the house.  He is a self-conscious
individual who takes pride in only taking baths every six weeks.  He
suffers deep depression and has homicidal tendencies.
     Even stranger is Max.  He gave up on his excellent cartoonist
skills and became a painter in the style of a Picasso but with highly
repulsive images.  He always sits yoga style and sometimes on a bed of
real nails.  He is a convicted molester, but prides himself in not
being a rapist.  Among his more eccentric habits is that of swallowing
a six foot long thin, wet cloth so that passing through his intestines
it cleanses his body.  Right.  You even get to find out how long this
process takes.  You will have to see the movie to find out the answer.
     The points above have barely scratch the surface in the intimate
details that this documentary reveals about the whole Crumb family.  If
there is a theme to the show, it must be salvation through cartooning.
     CRUMB runs 1:59 which was somewhat too long for my taste.  I got
tired of hearing about Robert's sexual habits after a while, and I saw
more distasteful cartoons that I wanted.  Nevertheless, for taking me
into a world, repugnant and sad as it was at times, that I have never
traveled before and for showing me some tragic characters, I recommend
this enlightening movie to you.  It is incorrectly rated R.  We are
shown one X rated cartoon after another so I can not see how in good
conscious they gave it anything less than a NC-17.  It is not for
teenagers.  It is *** movie in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1994 
U.S. Release Date: limited release beginning June 1995 
Running Length: 1:59 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual candor, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Featuring Robert Crumb, Charles Crumb, Maxxon Crumb, Aline Kominsky-
          Crumb, Robert Hughes, and others 
Director: Terry Zwigoff 
Producers: Lynn O'Donnell and Terry Zwigoff 
Cinematography: Maryse Alberti 
Music: David Boeddinghaus 
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics 
     Upon viewing the completed version of this film, cartoonist Robert 
Crumb, whose story it tells, informed director Terry Zwigoff, "After I 
saw it I had to go for a walk in the woods, just to clear my head.  I 
took my favorite hat off, this hat that I've had for 25 years, and I 
threw it off a cliff.  I don't want to be R. Crumb anymore."  
Considering the material, the reaction is understandable.  This is the 
sort of movie capable of prompting a viewer to question and evaluate a 
great deal more than the inner workings of a single man.  In addition to 
presenting one of the most compelling filmed documentary character 
studies of all time, CRUMB asks a lot of pointed questions about life 
and art that no one can possibly answer, least of all the misanthropic 
genius at the center of the portrait. 
     "My work is full of sweating, nervous uneasiness, which is a big 
part of me and everybody else," says Crumb.  "Most people don't want to 
see that though, because it reminds them of inadequate parts of 
themselves."  Indeed, one of the most fascinating aspects for any viewer 
of CRUMB is to identify elements of their own personality reflected in 
what Zwigoff uncovers.  Crumb doesn't tone down his often-bizarre 
opinions just because the camera is on.  
     Crumb's claim to fame is founding the underground comics movement 
in 1967, when issue #1 of his "Zap Comix" was released.  Crumb is also 
the creator of the "Keep on Truckin'" logo, the artist for the LP cover 
of Big Brother and the Holding Company's CHEAP THRILLS, and the 
originator of Fritz the Cat, which Ralph Bakshi turned into the first X-
rated animated feature (a film that Crumb hates).  CRUMB, made with 
even-handed passion by Zwigoff, does not attempt to be a complete 
chronicle of the cartoonist's life.  Instead, the movie chooses to 
examine certain facets of his personality, his and others' impressions 
of his work, and the forces which contributed to the genesis of a 
product that has been called everything from satirical genius to 
pornographic filth. 
     Through interviews with Robert Crumb, his brothers Charles and Max, 
his current wife and ex-wife, his son Jesse, and various art critics, 
Zwigoff constructs a Picasso-like image of the man and the influences 
underlying his creativity.  One of the most important of these is surely 
the dysfunctional family environment of his childhood.  With a father 
labeled by Charles as an "overbearing tyrant" and "sadistic bully", and 
a mother who became an amphetamine addict, it's no wonder that Crumb is 
filled with anger, disgust, and hate.  But, as deep as his bitterness 
runs, the artist possesses a streak of sardonic, self-deprecating humor 
that shines through.  At one point, Crumb states, "At least I hate 
myself as much as I hate anybody else."  In fact, in comparison to his 
two brothers, Crumb appears almost normal.  Charles is a manic 
depressive who takes medication to keep suicidal bouts at bay (one year 
following Zwigoff's Philadelphia interview, Charles killed himself).  
Max, a confessed sex offender, spends several hours a day meditating on 
a bed of nails.   
     Is Crumb a misogynist?  Probably, since, in his own words, he 
harbors inner hostility towards women.  But there's more than that to 
his work.  TIME magazine art critic Robert Hughes defends Crumb, saying 
that his work expresses fantasies that are common, but which most of us 
repress out of fear.  Mother Jones editor Deidre English has a different 
view, indicating that Crumb's fetish for depicting overendowed, headless 
female bodies is a manifestation of his "arrested juvenile vision."  
It's even suggested that putting such fantasies on paper is "dangerous."  
Zwigoff gives both sides of the argument equal time, and never 
editorializes.  It's up to the viewer to decided which position, if 
either, he or she accepts. 
     Is Crumb obsessed with sex?  No doubt.  Apparently, there was a 
time when he masturbated four to five times each day, and everyone seems 
to agree that he finds his own work sexually stimulating.  The 
cartoonist's views of sex may not be of the "normal" variety (just ask 
one of his ex-lovers), but he definitely enjoys certain activities.   
     Is Crumb disgusted with popular culture and fame?  In his own 
words, "As a teenager...I realized I was an outcast, I became a critic, 
and I've been disgusted with American culture from the time I was a kid.  
I started out by rejecting all the things that the people who rejected 
me liked, then over the years I developed a deeper analysis of these 
things."  Crumb has turned down opportunities to make hundreds of 
thousands of dollars by going mainstream.  He will not sign autographs.  
And he rejects the romantic notion of love, saying the only woman he has 
ever loved is his daughter. 
     Whatever opinion a viewer has of Crumb at the end of this film, an 
apathetic reaction is unthinkable.  Empathy, fascination, disgust, or 
anger are all likely, but not disinterest.  R. Crumb is the sort of 
person it's impossible to ignore, and Zwigoff's film creates such an 
honest portrayal of him that some sort of response is demanded.  CRUMB 
is a rare and powerful documentary that completely absorbs the viewer 
and leaves an impression so blindingly clear that the afterimage cannot 
be blinked away even when the theater is far behind.  Crumb and his 
words will tug at the mind with all the tenacity of a pit bull tearing 
at its prey. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Benjamin Edward Swire
     Terry Zwigoff's film CRUMB was the hit of this year's Sundance
festival (the Cannes of the independent film world), winning the
festival's cinematography award and Grand Jury prize for its category.
After seeing the film, Siskel & Ebert begged their audiences to flock to
the local theater and demand that the movie be booked....  Not bad for a
documentary whose subject masturbates to his own cartoons.
     CRUMB focuses on underground comic artist R. Crumb, most
recognized for his X-rated characters (Frits the Cat, Mr. Natural,
etc.) and the infamous "Keep on Truckin'" drawing which has made its
way onto mud flaps, coffee mugs and the like.  The film is essentially
made up of interviews with Crumb's family, colleagues, critics and
Robert Crumb himself.  What emerges is a dark picture of a dark man
whose art and life both border on the psychotic.
     Crumb's work took on its warped, explicit tone in the late 60's.
After experimenting with LSD, he began filling pages with the taboo,
forbidden urges and desires he found floating around his unconscious.  He
puts his darkest impulses out in the public for all to see, proudly
acknowledging rather than nervously concealing his deviant side.  For
better or worse, Crumb's artwork offers up his Id in a pure,
unadulterated form.
     For example, there is a story about a family of characters who
look and talk like the archetypal '50's nuclear family: Dad in his suit,
just home from work; Mother in the kitchen with her apron; Brother and
Sister in front of the TV, etc.  By the end however, Father has ordered
the willing daughter to give him a blow job while muttering things about
lollipops and candy canes.  Meanwhile, Mother has taken Jr. into the back
room and suited herself up in an S&M outfit complete with leather and
chains.  The punch line spoken from one parent to the other is "you know,
we really ought to spend more time with the kids."
     In the film, Robert Hughes, a Time magazine art critic, says he
feels that Crumb uses graphic art as social criticism, "exposing the
seamy underside of American consciousness," turning comics into a
"pertinent social portrait of politics, drugs and religion." Critics
such as Hughes defend Crumb's work as a necessary acknowledgement of
desires which exist and need to be recognized and dealt with rather
than suppressed, ignored, and allowed to continue existing in silence.
     Counterpoised to this viewpoint are perspectives such as the one
held by Trina Robbins, a fellow cartoonist. Robbins is adamant that
Crumb has gone over the line from satire to pornography.  She insists,
that "it is irresponsible" to put the types of desires Crumb deals with
onto paper.  It is between these two camps of necessity vs. obscenity
that much of the film's discussion of Crumb's work takes place.
     The brilliance of Zwigoff's CRUMB is that, like Crumb's work
itself, the issue is presented to the audience unadulterated.  Neither
side of the critical argument is particularly skewed or emphasized, and
both are allowed to articulate their opinions clearly.  The audience is
handed the responsibility of judging for itself.
     Rational judgement however, is pushed to its limits by the
emotional points which Crumb's artwork strikes.  For example, in
discussing Crumb's mock advertisement for canned "Nigger Hearts,"  (in
which clean-cut white kids yell enthusiastically for the product as
lunch) cartoonist Spain Rodriguez comments, "a knee-jerk reaction is
going to be 'yeah, he's a racist.'"  But, he continues, the comic also
turns the reader back on him/herself, leading to a consideration of the
origin of the racism, and eventually a confrontation of one's own
racist tendencies.  The issue of whether Crumb's work satirizes or
supports its racist, sexist content is debated throughout the film.  It
is not, however, the extent of the film's concerns.
     Normally the psyche is hidden beneath the personality, hidden from
the public sphere.  However, when dealing with a man who publicly
paints his psyche for a living,  Zwigoff's challenge was to find the
person lurking behind the psyche--the motivating force behind this
bundle of neurosis.  As a result of this search, much of CRUMB is
dialogue between the smiling Robert and his two brothers, Charles and
Maxxon.
     Robert, though a successful, fifty-year-old artist, still seeks
the approval of his older brother Charles--his original inspiration for
becoming a cartoonist.  "He made me feel worthless if I wasn't drawing"
says Robert of his older brother's influence on him as a child.  In
fact, comics were originally Charles' passion, and to be included,
little brother Robert got involved.  Thus began the rise of one brother
and the descent of the others.
     In adulthood, while Robert had drawn his way across the country,
ultimately settling in San Francisco, Charles had remained at home with
his mother since graduating high school.  At the time of the filming he
had not been outside in fifteen years.  In fact, Charles says he spends
most of his days sedated, rereading through his cluttered stacks of old
paperback novels.
     While reminiscing about their childhood ("Mom used to threaten us
with enemas if we didn't behave") Charles confides to Robert that as a
child he had to stifle the urge to "bash your head in with an axe" and
"put a butcher knife in your heart."  "Geez," says Robert without
blinking, that eerie smile still plastered to his face.
     The brothers' discussion topics range from masturbation to
suicide.  While sitting on a bed of nails, Maxxon, who dwells in some
sort of mental facility, smilingly speaks about his past need to molest
Asian girls.  Meanwhile back at home, Charles speculates about the effects
of his "lack of exterior stimulation."
     All three brothers speak of a lonely, friendless childhood made
all the more miserable by a bullying father and drugged out mother.          
Robert's adolescent feelings of alienation remain intact to date, but he
uses them as fuel for his work--allowing him a sense of revenge.  Still
bitter about the "football types" that laughed at him and beat up
Charles, Robert vehemently criticizes the society that holds them up as
an ideal.  He uses his work to reject the culture which he feels rejected
him.
     "I like the feeling of being removed from humanity," says Robert,
who takes every opportunity to make it clear that there is no love lost
between himself and the rest of the world: "Whatever's the biggest latest
thing, that's all they care about.  I get disgusted with humanity for
not being more intellectually curious about what's behind all that jive."
     Initially Crumb comes off as a spooky, withdrawn, misanthrope.
But then you realize that this man is screwing around with the very
boundaries of what society allows us to think--i.e., how far do you let
your fantasies roam before stopping them and labeling them as perverse
and unacceptable?
     CRUMB is a chronicle of a deranged man spending his life
confronting people with the deranged natures they spend their own lives
hiding.  For some this confrontation is an incredibly liberating
force--one which recognizes the darker, yet inherent, corners of the
mind and airs them out rather than repressing them.  Other people
however, consider these boundaries which Crumb so blithely disregards
to be the very foundation of our society and aren't as amused by his
disrupting sense of humor.
     In rejecting the boundaries of the public, Crumb places himself in
an odd position.  For he is attempting to live outside of the society
he lives within.  That is, he makes art depicting thoughts which
society forbids its members to have, hence he is on the outside. Yet at
the same time he places himself and his thoughts on display within that
very society which he has just placed himself outside of.  By
disregarding society's rules (via acknowledging those thoughts which it
demands remain invisible), Crumb forfeits the securities afforded by
those same rules--he opens himself to its condemnation.
     For instance, him saying "the only one I'd say I've ever been
in love with is my daughter Sophie," sends shivers through the audience
to whom he has just admitted masturbating to his own comics--such as the
50's domestic, father/daughter scene described above.
     The audience, while perhaps enthralled by his rejection of
cultural norms, still dwells and judges from within those norms.  Crumb
becomes a kind of outlaw hero--both condemned and admired for exposing
himself to his audience, flashing them his smile, and dangling his Id in
full view.

Author
Chad Polenz
1995, R, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
Produced by Lynn O'Donnell, Terry Zwigoff, directed by Terry Zwigoff.
Most people are familiar with Andy Warhol, Salvador Dali, and other modern
artists whose art seemed to reflect their bizarre lifestyles. Robert Crumb is
one of those artists, but more blue collar and down-to-Earth and this is
reflected in his artwork. His art defines the division between the sexes, but
portrays them in such a distorted manner , it's no wonder the documentary
"Crumb" was made.
The film does not have much of a linear order, which causes it to be just as
strange as Crumb's artwork. We drop in on him in the present day and learn as
much about him by following him around, meeting others who know and/or are
related to him, and also learn about his past at the same time. 
Crumb was a "geek" as a child, who wasn't accepted by his peers and vented
his emotions through his drawings and comics. They say the best revenge is liv
ing well, and Crumb gets his revenge in that manner, as he has become a rich
and famous comic book artist.
We also meet and spend (maybe a little too much) time with Crumb's brothers,
Max and Charles. Charles is over 40, clinically depressed, and still lives at
home. Max is much like Charles, ugly and weird, but seems to have more of a
life than Charles. All of this is just so bizarre it's interesting.
There is some attention paid to the effects of Crumb's artwork, but not
nearly enough. The art is also some of the craziest you will ever see, as
most of it somehow revolves around bizarre sexual situations, where women are
seen as only as bodies to have sex (in Crumb's mind). Is this degrading to
women? Perhaps, but that is not the point of the film. The point is to show
this man's outlook on the world, and in some ways this reflects how all men
feel. At least he does not blame society for his problems. In fact, Crumb is
not really depressed at all, he is quite happy with his situation.
"Crumb" was touching, but often confusing and bizarre. Art is a great medium
to comment about society and provide for quality entertainment and a source
of income. But sometimes the artist is even more fascinating than the art. 

