Title
Review for Free Enterprise (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian Takeshita
There are guys out there who grew up on Star Trek, and perhaps even
lived it out in various ways.  In their younger days, they fantasized
about being Captain Kirk, maybe role played the part on the school
playground or had a costume with the familiar yellow shirt and black
pants.  These folks have gotten older, and although they no longer
dress the part on Halloween, the attraction to the 30+ year old
phenomenon is still very much there, and still an influence.  FREE
ENTERPRISE is about two such young men in their late twenties, Robert
(Rafer Weigel) and Mark (Eric McCormack), childhood friends who find
themselves at a crossroads of sorts as they approach the big three-oh.
Taking stock of their lives so far, they together attempt to sort out
their lives in work, love, and Star Trek.
To me, Star Trek is a great source of entertainment.  I don't revere
it as the end-all of morality, like some people do, but rather view it
as a nice outlook for our own future.  I also believe that in order to
truly enjoy Star Trek, one must be able to laugh at it, and there are
so many reasons and ways to do so.  A film like FREE ENTERPRISE is
something for which a lot of people (including myself) have been
waiting a long time.  There is no doubt that this film was made for
Star Trek fans because of the many references to the episodes and
movies (oh, and that's Classic Trek, folks - sorry Next Generation
fans).  Many of the best laughs will probably be lost on
non-aficionados.  It's revealed, for example, that one of Mark's
fantasies is to get in bed with a green woman.  One might not really
catch the meaning of this unless you knew that the Talosians attempted
to seduce the previous captain of the Starship Enterprise, Capt.
Christopher Pike, with a sexy green Orion woman in the only two-part
Star Trek Episode entitled "The Menagerie", in a scene which was
really from the original pilot episode entitled "The Cage", before
series creator Gene Roddenberry revamped the show and replaced all of
the actors except for Leonard Nimoy.  Or, um, at least that's what
I've been told.
However, in a possible attempt to make the film more accessible to the
rest of the world, screenwriters Mark Altman and Robert Meyer Burnett
(it's no coincidence that the main characters have the same names)
have chosen to dilute this main comedic drive with a number of more
mainstream jokes, leaving the Star Trek punch not as potent as it
should be.  Unfortunate, especially since the mainstream humor doesn't
really click.  The result is fewer belly laughs for the fans, and
lukewarm jokes for everyone else.  If I had my druthers, there'd be a
Star Trek joke every few minutes.  After all, why take on such a
monolithic source of potential humor as the main drive for your film
if you're not going to exploit it?
Speaking of exploitation, William Shatner, who plays himself, gets the
Good Sport of the Year Award just for being in this film.  One of the
first scenes includes Robert and Mark browsing in a book store when
they see the man who portrayed Captain James T. Kirk himself - and
he's flipping through a porno mag.  After he gets to know them, he
attempts to enlist their help in producing a new version of
Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, in which he'll play all the roles.
Forget about what everyone else has said about Shatner's ego.  You've
got to love a man who can allow himself to be made fun of like that.
One of the interesting things about this film is that the characters
do things which my friends and I - er, I mean, which I've seen other
people do....from time to time.  For example, Robert, Mark and their
friends are going out to a special screening of STAR TREK II:  THE
WRATH OF KAHN.  How do they show their enthusiasm?  By all shouting,
"Khaaaaan!", ala Kirk when marooned in the tunnels of the Regula Moon,
second stage experiment for the Genesis Project - or, um, so I'm told.
The thing is, the characters are too much like regular people, who, in
addition to showing their enthusiasm for Star Trek now and then, also
have other interests, and showcasing these other interests strays our
attention even further from the main feature.  There's a big deal
about going to the comics store, having a collection of Star Wars
action figures, and possessing the Criterion Collection laserdisc
versions of Hitchcock films.  Realistic?  Yes.  Good for the film?
No.
There are a couple of half-hearted attempts at throwing in a romance
angle.  Robert falls in love with a woman, but really doesn't know how
to handle the emotions.  Meanwhile, Shatner falls in love with the
proprietor of a trendy night club/bar, and spends some of his time
trying to get her attention.  There's great potential here to explore
how Star Trek affects the way each of these men deal with love, or how
love affects their association with Star Trek.  Unfortunately, the
romance angle has no clear association with the topic, and is
furthermore less than compelling.
Am I going too far in criticizing the film for detracting from the
Star Trek jokes?  Am I missing the point that the film is really about
how average people relate to themselves and to each other?  I don't
think so.  I mean, the film is called FREE ENTERPRISE, after all, and
it does have William Shatner.  Star Trek not only has to be the main
theme, but the overriding theme, and this film simply does not deliver
in this respect.  It's too bad because this FREE ENTERPRISE could have
filled a niche empty up until now, a true Star Trek fan parody.  It
really could have gone where no one had gone before.  Come on, now.
You know I had to say it.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Free Enterprise
Starring Rafer Weigel, Eric McCormack, William Shatner; Audie England,
Patrick Van Horn, Phil LaMarr
Screenplay by Mark A. Altman & Robert Meyer Burnett
Directed by Robert Meyer Burnett
website: http://www.freent.com
IN SHORT: Geek masterpiece, with many in-jokes
Cranky was picking up his set-asides at the LCS when Stan, the man
behind the counter said to "have a good weekend." I said "I'll try" Stan
said "There is no try." and I knew exactly what came next. It was then
confirmed that I, Cranky, was a geek. Which was a week before I saw Free
Enterprise with a room full of real geeks (and felt redeemed because I
only got a third of the plentitude of in-jokes).
Let me try to explain. Free Enterprise is the story of a couple of LA
based, died-in-the-wool, more-than-major-comics-and-sci-fi fanboys and
how they overcome Geekdom to find real relationships as their thirtieth
birthdays loom larger than LastDay in Logan's Run. Along the way, they
befriend William Shatner who has woman troubles of his own and sees
these young movie biz insiders as a way to get his long cherished movie
project, a musical version of Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, made. Yes,
it's Captain James Tiberius Kirk himself, and the site of Shatner poking
fun at the fanboy idolization of Trek and Shatner himself, is very
funny. Shatner took some pokes at himself on Saturday Night Live a lot
of years ago, but in Free Enterprise he takes down TJ Hooker, too. Let's
look at the geeks:
Mark (Eric McCormack), a writer for Geek Magazine. He's ever had a
relationship that went farther than sex. He's lent thousands of dollars
to best friend Robert (Rafer Weigel) who is intelligent enough to
maintain a relationship, but can't find a woman who understands his
desire to collect Hallmark Star Trek Christmas ornaments and other
tchotchkes. That is, until he meets Claire (Audie England) in a comics
shop. Claire is the perfect woman (pros: cute, reads Sandman, Astro
City, Preacher. Cons: reads Spawn but not Strangers in Paradise. A more
than acceptable tradeoff) PLUS she's got just as much attitude as Mark
does. How struck is Robert? He borrows $60 to buy Uncanny X-Men #266
(first Gambit) on which Claire has scribbled her phone number. That's a
$40 premium over Overstreet. That's love.
As Robert falls out of his small circle of friends (which include
MadTV's Phil LaMarr, a known Trekker) they wonder how to win him back
from the Dark Side; he loses job and most of his life because he's
fallen deeply in love and he can't get up. The Question for Robert is:
When you've destroyed your old life, and then cast away the new, what's
left?
Here's where Cranky's opinion diverges, 'cuz he's seen Free Enterprise
twice. First time out, I was sitting amidst a bunch of critics even
geekier than I. They got most of the in-jokes and lines of dialog copped
from classic SF movies. I wondered what I was missing, got totally
distracted when an obvious steal came at me and I couldn't identify it,
and totally failed to lock in on the story behind the lines. That the
gimmick detracts from the story is not a good thing. We take away points
for that.
Second time out, Cranky was the solo geek. This way, despite the
preponderance of impenetrable in-jokes in the first act of the flick,
the story blasted through. It's a good one. It's about how obsession can
get in the way of developing a complete life. It's about what you'll
give up to make the complexities of a male-female partnership work. It's
about what you will do to help a friend whose lost his way. Through it
all are the recurring appearances of Bill Shatner, proving once and for
all that childhoods heroes are as flawed as Green Lantern's ring.
 Cranky should've gotten married when he had the chance . . .
As of this writing, Free Enterprise is opening only in New York and
Chicago. It may be that the only way you'll get to see it is on video,
which is so totally appropriate for geekdom the irony may be lost on us
all. 
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Free Enterprise, he would have
paid...
which is dateflick level. This is the kind of flick a former gal friend
would have "endured" because it's subject was more appealing to me. I
think the romantic subplot would have surprised her. As always, your
reactions are welcomed on the message boards.
[and composer Scott Spock does a neat trick of lifting enough musical
notes from Trek themes to cue you in, but not enough that original
composers Alexander Courage or Fred Steiner have to be paid. Producers
like that kind of effort. Cranky's cousin Fred doesn't . . .]
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š by, Chuck
Schwartz. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Christina Hsu
This romantic comedy set in the world of hard-core Sci-Fi fans raises
the bar significantly for independent films.  The script (winner of
best screenplay at the AFI festival in LA where they also took best
picture) is tight as a drum and will definitely be considered the
"mother of all" pop-culture reference movies.  The rapid fire dialogue
laced with Sci-Fi and movie references comes across not only as natural
but "real". I saw the film at the Peachtree International Film festival
with some true Sci-Fi fans who definitely could have doubled for some
of the characters in the film.  
The story revolves around two main characters who grew up on Science
Fiction movies and television, specifically Star Trek, who now struggle
with all things "Grown up" such as maintaining healthy relationships
(or finding one to start with) and the non-fiction horror of turning
30.  Along the way they meet their childhood idol, William Shatner, who
turns out to not be the captain of their fantasies.  Shatner turns in a
wonderful performance as the actor/man that created a legendary
character but who could never fill his own characters shoes.  I don't
want to give away anything more about the film, but I do want to stress
that one need not be a Sci-Fi fan to "Get" or enjoy this movie, it's a
real crowd-pleaser.  Hopefully, the film will get its distribution soon
as I can't wait to see it again and everyone else shouldn't miss out.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
Regent Entertainment
starring Eric McCormack, Rafer Weigel, William Shatner, Audie England,
Patrick Van Horn, Jennifer Sommerfield
written by Mark A. Altman and Robert Meyer Burnett
directed by Robert Meyer Burnett
Picture a Kevin Smith ("Clerks") movie with "Star Trek" enthusiasts
instead of "Star Wars" fans, and you'll have a pretty good idea of
what Robert Meyer Burnett's slightly amusing "Free Enterprise" is
like. "Free Enterprise" stars Eric McCormack and Rafer Weigel as Mark
and Robert, two L.A.  "trekkies" who are down on their luck as they
approach age 30. All that changes (for an instant) when they run into
their lifetime idol, "Star Trek's" William Shatner (mocking himself in
a brilliant performance), and their luck gradually changes (hey, the
plot is pretty thin). This even lower-budget version of "Swingers" has
its characters spouting out movie references in basically every line
of dialogue. While this is actually a lot of fun for a while, the
talkiness gradually wears thin by the end of the film (which is at
least 20 minutes too long). All in all, "Free Enterprise" is a nice
but overlong little indie flick that should make a decent rental. If
you're a trekkie in a rush to see William Shatner rapping, then check
"Free Enterprise" out in theatres, and don't expect too much.
Note: I know absolutely nothing about "Star Trek", so I have no idea
what this film's title means, and I have no idea of how this film is
from a trekkie perspective.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com (!!!!!!!new site address!!!!!!) 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Regent Entertainment
 Director: Robert Meyer Burnett
 Writer:   Mark A. Altman & Robert Meyer Burnett
 Cast: Rafer Weigel, Eric McCormack, Audie England, Patric
Van Horn, William Shatner
   In one of the great, adult, sci-fi movies of our time, Michael
Anderson's 1976 hit "Logan's Run" starring Michael York,
Peter Ustinov and Farah Fawcett Majors, the people active
during the year 2174 lead lives of unending pleasure.  One
catch: at age 30 they are extinguished, kaput.  The fable is
an obvious one: our own world treats people past 30 as over
the hill, and so it's no wonder that the character in Robert
Meyer Burnett's surprisingly effective "Free Enterprise" point
out that they expect their bodies to start falling apart as they
approach their fourth decade of life.  "Free Enterprise" is a
series of Saturday-Night-Live type skits, though the episodes
are bound together in a fairly tight manner, all revolving
around two 29-year-olds who are confirmed fans of the 30-
year-old TV series "Star Trek."  
   Why did I find the picture a pleasurable surprise?  I had
been led to believe that one had to be hard-core sci-fi fan to
appreciate it and that at best, the non-devotee would smile at
some of the jokes while being embarrassed by the belly
laughs of the true disciples seated around the theater.  If
you're a movie fan in general, though, that's quite enough.  In
fact even if you go to only film a month, you'll find diversion
in focusing on the sharp, edgy conversations between two
Trekkies, Robert (Rafer Weigel) and Mark (Eric McCormack),
whose first names parallel those of the director and writer of
the movie for good reason.  An semi-autobiographical tale
recounting the delayed coming of age of one successful
journalist and one not-so-thriving guy working for a production
company, "Free Enterprise" is an ode to L.A., to the cinema,
and most of all to the enduring power of friendship.
   Both Robert and Mark are Peter Pan types who at age 29
are still talking about the bimbos and others they've been
dating and who wonder why they cannot connect with
women.  Mark is the more down-to-earth fellow, a
bespectacled, hard-working dude who is called upon to lend
large sums of money to his less flourishing friend, Robert.
Both enjoy the pleasures of the flesh with some of
California's more liberated women, meeting little resistance to
their sexual overtures--though in a hilarious scene, Mark,
running into a brief lack of compliance from his German-
American date, wins her over with the line, "Considering what
your people did to my people during World War II, I'd
consider a little breast fondling a minor reparation."  The
financially challenged Robert seems to spend all his money
on laser discs, carrying a home library of every sci-fi movie
ever made, and meets the woman of his dreams, Claire
(Audie England), in a comic-book emporium. They discover
that they like exactly the same literature and films, with
Robert as surprised as any that Claire does not consider
such fiction to be a guy thing.
   Their lives come to a crossroads when they meet their idol,
William Shatner (played by William Shatner), the hero of the
Star Trek series, who performed in the role of starship
Captain James T. Kirk.  By discovering that Shatner--whom
they first spot browsing at the centerfold of a porno
magazine--has as many problems and insecurities as they,
the young men feel that they are not at all unique in their
difficulties, both ultimately coming to terms with the angst of
their age.  The awkwardness of their initial meeting is to be
repeated in the unpolished manner with which they meet
women.  "You're the greatest American actor," purrs Robert
looking for a way to break the ice, to which the Star Trek
hero responds while backing off, "I'm Canadian."  "Then
you're the greatest Canadian actor," counters Robert, to
which the great man answers, "There aren't that many."  The
three become good friends, the younger men even advising
their icon how to pick up girls.
   Since "Free Enterprise" does not display retreads of any
sci-fi episode save for a quick installment involving a "Logan's
Run" dream, the emphasis is not on the world of movies but
on the young men themselves.  In the roles of this
dysfunctional but exceptionally sharp duo, Rafer Weigel and
Eric McCormack keep the audience on their toes, the sci-fi
enthusiasts gloating over their recognition of the name-drops,
the others enjoying the sexual and other escapades of the
principals.  Shatner is a good sport in his self-deprecatory role: 
he announces his plan to make a six-hour musical out of Julius 
Caesar with him in all roles except that
of Calpurnia--for whom he wants to cast either Sharon Stone
or Julia Roberts.  The movie's final scene showing Shatner
pitching in with rapper Rated R in a rap monologue of Marc
Antony's speech is an embarrassment, but there will be
viewers who'd consider this the movie's highlight.  All in all
"Free Enterprise" is a worthwhile entry in the large pool of
coming-of-age comedies, bound to be a hoot for Trekkies, an
amusing ride for others.
