Title
Review for Andromeda Strain, The (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Paul McElligott
Starring: Arthur Hill (Dr. Jeremy Stone), David Wayne (Dr. Charles
Dutton), James Olson (Dr. Mark Hall), Kate Reid (Dr. Ruth Leavitt).  
Produced and Directed by Robert Wise.
The Andromeda Strain is the greatest science fiction film ever made.  I
know that is very sweeping statement, so I'll qualify it by adding that
The Andromeda Strain is one of the few films made that genuinely deserve
the label of "science fiction," stories in which speculative science is
at the core of the plot.
2001: A Space Odyssey is probably a better film, but it really only
qualifies as science fiction if you consider metaphysics to be a
science.  Most all other films we normally classify as science fiction,
or SF, are really just fantasy, action or horror stories set in a
futuristic setting.
The Andromeda Strain starts out with two soldiers in a high-tech (for
1970) van looking for a crashed satellite in a tiny New Mexico town. 
Something bad happens to them.  Pictures from a reconnaissance plane
show a shocking sight.   Apparently everyone in the town is dead.  The
authorities call a "Wildfire Alert," summoning four scientists, all but
one of them somewhat reluctant, to a super-secret underground germ
warfare laboratory in Nevada.  Two of scientists, Stone and Hall, fly
directly to the town in space suits and find a town where almost every
single resident literally dropped in their tracks, their blood turned to
powder in their veins.  Some went insane before they died and two of
them, a baby and an old wino, are miraculously still alive.  They take
the survivors and the satellite back to the lab, where Stone pressures
the White House to call up a "Directive 712," an executive order to
cauterize the area around the town with a nuclear bomb.
What they find on the satellite when they get back to the lab is
Andromeda, an organism that defies all the normal rules of Earth-like
life and mutates as it grows.  Their only hope to cure it is to find out
what a perfectly healthy baby boy has in common with an old derelict. 
What they find out is that organism feeds directly on energy and that
detonating the A-bomb over the town would only spread it across the
entire planet.  They barely call off the bombing in time.
But then the organism mutates into something that threatens to eat
through the labs defenses and break out.  This triggers the lab's
last-ditch defense mechanism, an atomic bomb.
To those raised on the brainless action fare that pollutes movie
theaters these days, The Andromeda Strain will probably seem
interminably slow.  Much of the film is a lot of people standing around
looking at video screens and computer readouts.  But what the characters
see on those screens ratchets up the tension with every turn of the
screw.  The performances are universally fine, with the actors keeping
things low-key and restrained, just like scientists.
To me, the real appeal of this film is the fact that it shows scientists
acting like scientists and makes it seem exciting.  We follow the logic
of their deduction step by methodical step, puzzling like they do every
time Andromeda behaves in a way we don't expect.
This film is only available on wide screen on DVD and that is the way to
see it.  It was originally rated G when first released but it now
carries the PG rating, mostly for very mild nudity and one scene in
which a body's wrist is slashed, spilling its powdered blood.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The great director Robert Wise will probably be forever remembered
for such popular musicals as WEST SIDE STORY and SOUND OF MUSIC even
though he does have some significant science fiction films to his
credit, including STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE and THE DAY THE EARTH
STOOD STILL.
     In 1971 Wise directed the first film adaptation of a Michael
Crichton novel, THE ANDROMEDA STRAIN.  The film's screenwriter, Nelson
Gidding, has had a particularly mediocre career, including such
unmemorable films as BEYOND THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE and THE MUMMY LIVES.
Nevertheless, THE ANDROMEDA STRAIN's staging and scripting give it an
eerie documentary feel that works perfectly.
     The setup for the movie is that a United States satellite crashes
into an isolated desert town.  On-board the satellite is a tiny organism
from outer space that instantly kills everyone in town except an old
drunk and a crying baby.  The show's conundrum is what is the common
thread that saved these two disparate individuals.
     Men in protective gear are sent to survey the scene and determine
what has happened.  The only thing they are sure of is that the organism
from space is responsible and that death occurs by turning their
victim's blood into powder.
     This first and most frightening part gives way to the second where
deep underground in the world's cleanest environment, four scientists
rush to find the cause and the cure for the greatest disaster to have
ever struck earth.
     Arthur Hill in one of his finest performances ever plays the team's
lead scientist, Dr. Jeremy Stone.  Dr. Stone wants all procedures
followed carefully and no short-cuts taken just because they are under
pressure.  When the strain has them all about to crack, he relents and
becomes more willing to cut corners in their experiments.
     David Wayne plays the team's wise old man, Dr. Charles Dutton.
James Olson is the team's handsome, young Dr. Mark Hall.  Since Dr. Hall
is the only single member of the crew, he gets to carry the key that can
disarm the underground station's self-destruct system.  They discuss in
detail the scientific experiments that proved that a single person will
be the most rational user of the key.  Presumably a married person might
stop the self-destruct for some selfish reason having to do with his
family.
     As the odd woman out, Kate Reid plays the only female member of the
group, Dr. Ruth Leavitt.  Carefully casting an exceedingly homely and
pudgy woman, the focus stays firmly on her technical abilities and
leaves aside the usual love interest that most scripts seem obliged to
include.  Dr. Leavitt, as it turns out, has some yet-to-be-discovered
limitations, but scientifically she is a valuable member of the team.
     The beauty of the script and the direction is the contrast of the
fast paced demands placed on the researchers with the meticulousness of
their experiments.  They talk and argue like scientists whereas
audiences are used to expensive actors showing off their emotions at
every turn.  One might criticize Wise's presentation as dull, but to me
it was brilliantly realistic and totally captivating.  Every twist and
turn in the show draws you more and more into the story.  The ending is
arguably a bit too neat, but works nevertheless.
     THE ANDROMEDA STRAIN runs 2:11.  It is rated PG for mature themes
and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
