Title
Review for Whistle Blower, The (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There's a dark world and a light world.  They co-exist side by side.
Most of us live in the light world and think we have some idea of what is
going on.  Sometimes we do and sometimes we don't.  Sometimes what we think
we know has been a play put on for our benefit by the people who live in the
dark world.  It's the dark world that's real.  That is the theme of a new
film, a murder mystery with espionage overtones, THE WHISTLE BLOWER,
directed by Simon Langton, and based on a novel written by John Hale.
That's an old idea, but it gets a few new wrinkles in this mystery that is
not so much a who-done-it as a what-are-they-doing-and-why.
     Bob Jones (played by Nigel Havers) is a Russian-language translator for
British intelligence.  That is still living in the light world, but he gets
occasional glimpses of what is going on in the dark world.  He is disturbed
by what the Soviets are doing, what the Americans are doing, and what his
own government is doing, all under the cover of state security.  At the very
least, he wants to quit his job.  His father (played by Michael Caine)
thinks he would be foolish to give up a good job in a world that doesn't
seem to be crying for linguists.  But Bob wants to do more.  He wants to
tell the world what sort of thing happens in the intelligence game, to lift
the veil on one small corner of the dark world.  And that could get people
killed.
     THE WHISTLE BLOWER isn't a great mystery, nor does it seem much of a
spy thriller, nor does it really have a strong social comment.  But it does
do a nice job of integrating all three with a sense of irony at times.  It
meshes MISSING with MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  If you think about it, these
shouldn't go so well together; perhaps there is more to this film than meets
the eye.  This is one of those films where what each person tries to do
makes sense, but the sum total is a knot of complexity.
     Other familiar faces include John Gielgud, James Fox, and Gordon
Jackson.  (There is also a minor, and perhaps unintentional, in-joke in the
casting of Jackson's superior, a face that will be familiar to people at all
familiar with Jackson's career.)
     THE WHISTLE BLOWER is not a great film, it's not a spell-binding
thriller, and there is little in it you haven't seen before someplace, but
it does skillfully play off of Cold War paranoia.  Give it a +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Wayne Citrin
     Britain seems to be a hotbed of spy scandal these days and the interest
seems to have made its way into art.  There's the uproar over SPYCATHCHER, new
biographies of Anthony Blount, and several books on the British Secret Service.
In the movies, we have last spring's DEFENSE OF THE REALM, and this summer's
THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, and THE WHISTLE BLOWER.  I haven't seen THE FOURTH
PROTOCOL, but THE WHISTLE BLOWER is far inferior to DEFENSE OF THE REALM,
although they both cover similar ground.  In DEFENSE OF THE REALM, a 
newspaperman who breaks a sex/spy scandal involving an MP discovers that this
is merely a smokescreen for something far more disturbing (even to a jaded
moviegoer like me).  In THE WHISTLE BLOWER a Russian mole in a British
electronic intelligence organization, and the death of a number of people in
suspicious circumstances, draws the interest of one of the organization's
Russian linguists, and then of his father, played by Michael Caine (who also
appears in THE FOURTH PROTOCOL).  Unfortunately, unlike DEFENSE OF THE REALM,
which offers us something new in the way of political thriller, THE WHISTLE
BLOWER offers us little beyond conventional spy stuff that is done much more
inventively by John LeCarre.  Caine seems to do little in the film except
listen to people of the right and the left make speeches defending their
actions.  The ending is both a letdown and not entirely comprehensible.
     I think that the premise of THE WHISTLE BLOWER would have been more
effective if the story had been told differently.  Film is a visual medium and
story- telling in film is most effective then this visual aspect is exploited,
and verbal exposition is kept to a minimum.  DEFENSE OF THE REALM used the
visual possibilities of film admirably, although it was far from polished.  THE
WHISTLE BLOWER resorts to tired cliches and boring speeches we've heard before.
For comparison, in an earlier review I gave DEFENSE OF THE REALM 3 stars out 
of 4, although I might give it 3-1/2 stars now.  I would only give THE WHISTLE
BLOWER 2 stars.  It's not awful, only disappointing.
