Title
Review for Angel's Ladies (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Laura Clifford
Mack and Angel Moore, senior Christian cemetary/funeral parlor owners from
Eugene, Oregon, had a unique retirement idea.  They sold their death related
businesses in the dreary Northwest and moved to sunny Nevada, where they
purchased Fran's Star Ranch, a legal brothel which they renamed.  Director
Doug Lindeman's documents their new business in "Angel's Ladies."
"Angel's Ladies" sounds like a great idea for a documentary, especially
given the background of the business' new owners (Mack is seventy, Angel
fifty-five).  Lindeman even captures the prurient interest of the public
when he invites a tourist couple to go inside with him (funnily enough,
its the wife who thinks it 'sounds like fun,' while the husband is concerned
about their timetable).  However, "Angel's Ladies" quickly outwears its
welcome.
We're introduced to Mack and Angel as decent people who believe they're 
providing a needed service.  Angel, in particular, is showcased grieving
the loss of her two sons (one to illness, another to an accident) and first
husband while likening their three 'girls' to her new family.  Yet Lindeman
is holding many things about this couple back, information that is shockingly
abhorrent when revealed midway into the film.  This holding back of information
for dramatic effect later on seems dishonest.
The three prostitutes who we meet at "Angel's Ladies" are very different.
Kevin is an outdoorsy horsewoman who seems pretty down to earth.  Linda
is friendly with Kevin and seems like the ex-suburban wife she was, but
is given far less screen time than Kevin or Melody.  Melody is the harshest
of the three, seemingly more suited to the trade.  Her recollections of 
things she's done to satisfy men's fetishistic fantasies become more and
more offputting (as does the relish with which she relays them) as the
documentary trudges on.
And trudge on this does, with increasingly repetitious shots of the girls
cavorting in the desert in work costumes while addressing the camera
crosscut with Angel becoming more and more defensive about the way she
does business.  The only person who seems to be making out at "Angel's
Ladies" is the housekeeper, who professes to mostly sitting around drinking
coffee.
Technically "Angel's Ladies" resembles a pretty good cable access production.
Some editting choices are juvenile (repeat jump cuts to make someone
'dance' for example) while the music is cheesy and distracting.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Mack Moore, a cemetery kingpin in Eugene, Oregon, and his second wife,
Angel, a widowed funeral director, sold it all and moved to the frontier
hamlet of Beatty, Nevada, located halfway between Death Valley and the
Nuclear Weapons Testing Range. The couple purchased the local brothel,
Fran's Star Ranch, and shifted careers from caring for the dead to
servicing the living in the documentary film, "Angel's Ladies."
The idea of "Angel's Ladies" is an interesting one. A middle aged couple,
he 70 and she 55, pick up their long-established roots in the damp
northwest and plunk themselves down right next to the hottest place on
earth to run a cat house. There is ready made interest in why they did it,
what their plans are, who are the women working for the Moores and why are
they there.
Things start off in a pretty straightforward manner with a succession of
talking heads and panoramic view of the scrub brush of the desert and the
ticky-tacky brothel building. But, it becomes obvious very fast that the
video makers have not learned their craft too well. In this day of
inexpensive, high quality video and audio equipment, there is no reason for
poor camera work and bad sound from a so-called professional filmmaker.
Both of these quality problems are rampant through the entire film. I have
seen local cable access programs that have better production values. The
cheesy production also extends to the lousy use of music to bridge many
moments in the documentary.
The subject matter is intriguing, but the execution of it is not. What
starts out as a document of the Moores and their unusual business in the
middle of nowhere, Nevada, turns into a rather strange tale of
misperceptions, labor problems and Angel taking an active part in servicing
the brothel's clients. Moore, at one point, claims that he never "dates"
his girls. The ladies counter his claim saying, sure, he always hits on
them. Mack and Angel say that the women are totally loyal to the couple.
Then, we hear about the labor problems from the hookers. As the docu
progresses, we become increasingly confused as to the point of the film and
why we are here.
The docu glosses over any in-depth investigation, like the impact of
brothels on the local community. This is glossed over with a few interview
shots of town officials telling us that the brothel tax pays for the town's
emergency services and it's all a good thing. We don't get into the heads
of Mack and Angel (nor would I want to be) or really learn much about the
why and wherefore of the women working at Angel's Ladies Brothel. When the
film ended, I wondered about the point of the film and the time I wasted
watching it.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
