Title
Review for Lumumba (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Robin Clifford
On June 30, 1960, a self-taught, idealistic, yet pragmatic, young man
became, at age 36, the first head of government of a newly independent
African state, formerly the Belgian Congo. Two months later, he was ousted
from his powerful position and hunted by government troops until he was
captured and brutally murdered along with two aides. This little-known
story of this meteoric rise and fall is told my international filmmaker
Raoul Peck in "Lumumba."
Patrice Lumumba's (Eriq Ebouaney) story has been told previously by helmer
Peck in his 1991 award winning documentary, "Lumumba -   Death of a
Prophet," virtually guaranteeing that his new, fictional account of a
patriot remains true to its subject. Peck, with co-writer Pascal Bonitzer,
begins at the end of the story of the young political leader. We watch as
two white men perform the gruesome task of dismembering the bodies of three
black men. Images of hatchets, saws and fast-emptying whiskey bottles
accompany the grisly image.
Jump back a few years to a meeting among the black leaders in the
Belgian-owned Congo. A third class postal worker, Lumumba, speaks his mind
to heads of the most powerful tribes, proclaiming himself not tribal, not
regional, but a national leader. His small, mobile party, the Congolese
National Movement (MNC) is gaining prominence and Patrice leaves his
clerical job to sell beer, and get his face known, in the bustling capital,
Stanleyville. At a time when the colonial empires are falling down around
the world, Lumumba is in the right place at the right time and, through
political savvy and chess-like manipulation, achieves a position of
leadership of the MNC. As the date for independence approaches, he
tactically positions himself to be the new nation's first prime minister
and defense minister, supporting the presidency of Joseph Kasa Vubu (Maka
Kotto).
The coalition he created soon starts to fall apart as the former Belgian
masters continue to exert influence on the struggling nation as they strive
to maintain economic hold on the country's vast natural resources of
copper, diamonds, gold and more. Lumumba won't seek the help of the US,
knowing that they would try to create de facto American control of the
fledgling government. His initial investigation into Soviet assistance
immediately tags Patrice as a communist and his integrity is overshadowed
by the Cold War threat of Russian domination. The situation goes from bad
to worse as the army mutinies, the remaining whites begin to evacuate or
arm themselves, Belgian troops violently intervene, the lucrative Katanga
province succeeds under the leadership of rival Moise Tschombe (Pascal
Nzonzi) and Lumumba is refused access to his own country when he returns
from a conference abroad.
This tumultuous and little known period of modern African history saw a
score of nations struggling for independence from the sometimes-odious
colonialists who have ruled much of the world from their European seats of
power for centuries. Peck focuses his story on familiar material that
strives to give an honest portrayal of Patrice Lumumba, his friend and foes
and the independence movements that gripped Africa in the 50's and 60's.
(During the time the story takes place, many new nations, including Nigeria
and Somalia, were born, with varying degrees of success and failure,
usually dependent upon which country colonized them. Some colonial masters
were better than others.)
The effort involved in "Lumumba" is quite ambitious as Peck and his crew
before and behind the camera strive to bring to life this slice of world
history that might have gone unexplored for decades, if at all. Production
values are first rate on what must be a small, by US standards, budget. The
period feel and realistic African settings are nicely maintained in a
production that traveled from Zimbabwe to Mozambique.
The screenplay covers a lot of ground and does yeoman's work in providing a
great deal of detailed history while trying to do justice to the story of
Lumumba's life. The political side of things is evenly told in a linear,
straightforward manner that teaches, not preaches. It concentrates on the
good deeds of the man, if a bit as a stalwart saint, but doesn't embellish
on a larger than life persona. The family side of Patrice's life is handled
in several, perfunctory and brief interludes that show him talking to one
of his children, embracing his wife or lamenting the death of his child. I
know the intent is to flesh the man out, but too short a shrift is given to
the family man side of Lumumba. The story, as such, has a lopsided feel
about it.
High marks go to Eriq Ebouaney as the title character. The actor gives a
convincing, charismatic performance as the multifaceted, politically deft
Patrice Lumumba who has the good of his people and his country as the force
driving his own ambitions. In true docudrama tradition, the supporting cast
does not outshine the star, complementing his good efforts, instead.
"Lumumba" is a solid, interesting, educational and honest docudrama that
should appeal to film buffs and politicos, both. It has more intelligence
in its telling than anything I've seen out of Hollywood for months and I
give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Every time a U.S. president is shot or a major government
figure is assassinated in a foreign country whether by a
crazed gunman or a group that has carefully planned a coup,
I think of how much more pleasant it is to be an ordinary guy. 
Oh, there are dangers facing all of us in these parlous times,
but it seems that the less you need a bodyguard, the less you
seem to attract people out to do you in.  Take the most
recent case of a national leader gunned down in a coup.  
Some months ago President Laurent Kabila of the Congo
was assassinated.  Even if you keep up with the New York
Times, you're likely to say, "Huh...what's this all about"? and
then you remember the time you ignored your high school
history who insisted that if you don't know her subject
thoroughly, you not only miss out on some fascinating
reading but you have no real idea how things got to be the
way they are--how a particular figure came to be the target of
an assassin's bullet.
   In this case Laurent Kabila was a supporter of the Congo's
George Washington, Patrice Lumumba, who--contrary to our
own country's dad--was no landowner but simply a self-taught
postal worker who began delivering fiery diatribes in his huge
country in the central part of Africa while selling beer.  He
became the former Belgian colony's first prime minister only
to be shot by a firing squad just months after assuming office. 
Does this tell you why his follower, Laurent Kabila, was
similarly taken out forty years later?  In a way it does.  If you
want a history lesson that's not only painless but fascinating
as well, take in Haitian director Raoul Peck's riveting, docu-
drama style political thriller (which he co-wrote with Pascal
Bonitzer), "Lumumba."  
   As the title character, Eriq Ebouaney looks and acts like
Denzel Washington in his portrayal of "Malcolm X" in Spike
Lee's considerably longer historical drama. The picture opens
on a grisly scene, that of a couple of Belgian soldiers (one
drinking heavily from a bottle, a man who was later to go
insane) are hacking up and disgracefully burning three
corpses.  As they chop and saw away at Lumumba's body in
the darkness, far from witnesses, cinematographer Bernard
Lutic (who shot the work mostly in Mozambique and
Zimbabwe) cuts to the young Lumumba haranguing a crowd
in Stanleyville, a pep rally urging complete independence of
the then Belgian Congo from its minuscule European colonial
power.  (As I recall from World Geography 2, sixty Belgiums
can fit inside the African country it dominated.)  Rising to the
leadership of his political party and receiving the most votes
in a democratic election, he cuts a deal with Joseph
Kasavubu to share power, with Kasavubu as president and
Lumumba and Prime Minister.  
   In a power struggle that began even before the decisive
appointment, the more moderate Kasavubu--who gives a
conciliatory speech on independence day, playing up to the
Belgians in the audience--would break completely from the
radical Lumumba--who courageously indicts the Europeans
for their snobbery, their readiness to imprison dissidents, and
their continued role as white officers leading an all-black
Congolese army.  Still later in the story, as riots break out in
the barracks leading to the rapes of Belgian women by
undisciplined Congolese soldiers, Belgian paratroopers move
in to restore order and protect their nationals who remain,
while the American CIA, eager to protect American business
and geopolitical interests, back Moise Tshombe (Pascal
N'Zonzi) and his Katanga region secessionist movement.
   If the direction comes off on the stiff side and the
performers occasionally fall into agitprop caricatures of their
ideologies, the picture as a whole has the look of authenticity,
sincerity, and an obvious pro-Lumumba partisanship. Raoul
Peck subtly evokes the selfish, even evil motives of the
whites from the condescending Belgian general to the Belgian
ambassador and even a representative of U.S. President
Kennedy's government.  Framed by the shameless burning of
Congo's national hero with only a smidgen of kootchi-coo
family sentimentality, "Lumumba" richly deserves its Best
Picture award at the 2001 Pan African Film Festival.
Not Rated.  Running time: 115 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
