Title
Review for Hanging Up (2000)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/hanging_up.htm ---
Georgia, Diane Keaton's character in the new film Hanging Up, says it 
best: "it's possible our father will never die." Audiences can 
sympathize as they groan through this 92-minute story of three sisters 
and their elderly, senile father. It shouldn't come as a surprise that, 
just before credits role, Lou (Walter Matthau) will pass away- it is 
what is expected. Unfortunately, what passes the time is no more 
entertaining than those telephone salesmen that always ring during 
dinner.
Eve (Meg Ryan), Geogia and Maddy (Lisa Kudrow) are three sisters 
separated by profession but connected by AT&T. Georgia is the wealthy 
founder of a self-titled magazine, Maddy is a quasi-celebrity soap 
actress and Eve is a frazzled house-wife/mother trying to succeed in the 
business world via "No Surprises", her party planning company.
As Lou's health worsens with more and more incoherent references to 
"John Wayne's pecker" and death becomes imminent, Eve finds herself as 
the sole caretaker since only she is willing to set aside the time for 
her father. As phones ring all night, she exclaims "he's dead," always 
to be proven wrong. Where are the other two offspring of this divorced 
father? On the set and in the conference room.
Despite being directed by Keaton, Hanging Up is Meg Ryan's movie. Kudrow 
and Keaton, save their star-status, would only be considered extras 
during the first 80 minutes of the film. They are prominent at the end, 
but the production remains a vehicle for Meg Ryan as an actress and 
Walter Matthau as a supporting actor (who does very well in a role much 
akin to that of Jason Robards in Magnolia). Additionally, I'm not sure 
that Kudrow and Keaton's performances qualify as acting- they seem a tad 
too comfy playing pampered and strictly selfish blonde women.    
Traditionally, when making films where the ending will be marked by an 
obvious death, a secondary plot is added to keep the audience engaged. 
In the 1993 masterpiece Philadelphia, a fascinating and oftentimes 
gripping legal battle dominates the screen. Delia Ephron, whose freshman 
novel is the premise for the movie, obviously is not a Jonathan Demme or 
Tom Hanks fan as the death of Lou is the only saga here.
This script would probably never have been produced except for the fact 
that Delia's sister is Nora Ephron. Call her the Tori Spelling of 
writing, because this once respected journalist/non-fiction author will 
achieve nothing in the world of Hollywood's fictional films without her 
sibling's help.
Many people can sympathize with this tale of cell phones, car phones, 
portable phones, stationary phones and the family at the other end of 
them. That may well be the singular gleaming point of the film. 
Unfortunately though, at the end, the movie proves to be no more 
enjoyable than the resultant enormous phone bill.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
I'm not sure if other people do this, but when I read a book, I can't
help but think about who I would choose to play each character should
the novel ever be made into a film.  I also visualize how certain shots
should be set up and decide which parts of the book I would leave out
altogether.  Then if the movie is ever made, I complain about the
casting, the script adaptation and the direction.  It always seems
better in my head.
The casting for Hanging Up is probably the closest to what I envisioned
while reading it.  Need a craggy curmudgeon on his last leg?  Get Walter
Matthau.  Need his thirty-something daughter with a cute up-turned
nose?  Get Meg Ryan.  Need her hippie younger sister?  Get Lisa Kudrow.
Need her older, sophisticated sister?  Getokay, I would have picked
Sigourney Weaver over Diane Keaton just because she looked good as a
blonde in Galaxy Quest.  But since Keaton directed the film, she thought
casting herself was a better idea.  Whatever.
The whole dying-father-and-three-daughters set-up might sound a bit like
`King Lear,' but don't be silly.  Ryan (You've Got Mail) plays Eve, a
stressed-out, married mother of one who owns a party planning company
and is the middle daughter of a family that does the majority of their
communicating on the phone.  Her father (Matthau, The Odd Couple II), a
former Hollywood screenwriter, bombards her with phone calls from his
nursing home, while she relays his condition to fashion magazine founder
Georgia (Keaton, The Other Sister) and soap opera actress Maddy (Kudrow,
Friends).  Over the years, the sisters have taken turns caring for their
dad, who has become increasingly crazy as the years pass.
Hanging Up opens with a lovely montage of old photographs of the
characters, over which we hear Eve receiving numerous phone calls from
her father, bragging about Georgia's magazine exploits no less.  This
helps to establish Eve's growing irritation with her dad.  So far, so
good.  But there are big problems up ahead.
What made the book so interesting is that the characters rarely shared
scenes together, emphasizing the importance of the telephone as a major
part of the story.  Also, they hung up on each other a lot more, hence
the title.  I guess somebody must have thought that nobody would pay to
see Meg Ryan talk to people on the phone, so the script was altered to
accommodate a minimum of two stars in every scene.
Another reason why the book worked was because it was unconventional.
There aren't too many comedies about your father dying.  While the novel
was full of dry, subtle humor, someone must have decided that the idea
of a `comedy' about `death' would be too dark for the public to handle.
So they chose `death' and ran with it.  There are few laughs in the
film.
Perhaps the best part of the book was that Eve was slowly beginning to
fall in love with an Iranian doctor that was involved in a traffic
accident with her son Jesse (Jesse James, A Dog of Flanders).  The
doctor and Eve speak on the phone several times, but don't meet until
the end of the novel.  In the film, however, Eve is the one that gets
into the accident, so she meets the doctor right away.  There are no
phone conversations between them and no romance, implied or otherwise.
Perhaps someone figured that nobody would want to see a Middle Eastern
guy and America's favorite pixie get together.
Want more evidence on why this adaptation doesn't work?  Eve is supposed
to be a protagonist, but her and her sisters are so whiny and
self-centered that the dad becomes the most likeable character in the
film.  It's not supposed to be that way.  The freedom with time worked
really well in the novel, but it's done all wrong here.  There is an
important flashback that works much better toward the end, but the film
shoves it into its middle.
The acting in Hanging Up is pretty solid, so what went wrong?  The book
was written by Delia Ephron, who adapted the screenplay with her sister
Nora, who also happened to direct Ryan in Mail and Sleepless in
Seattle.  It must be difficult to screw your own book up so badly.  The
direction is fairly well done, but one has to wonder what issues Keaton
has with her parents.  Her last directorial effort, Unstrung Heroes, was
about a mom that died.  Toss in a really lame closing scene, and you've
got one hell of a mess.

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/c66292008a87ebac88256916001bf079?OpenDocument
There's just something really screwy about a family like the Ephrons.
A pair of sisters (Nora and Delia) collectively control the purse
strings of many a woman and hold they keys to the heart of the modern
romantic through two movies: Sleepless in Seattle and You've Got Mail. 
Nora Ephron (along with Meg Ryan), redefined delis and male-female
interaction with 1989's When Harry Met Sally.  Both are the daughters of
a screenwriting duo, children of The Industry, and have become
higher-level powerbrokers than their parents ever were with a string of
well publicized hits and soon forgotten misses that formed a winning
streak that lasted up until now.
And why did their house of cards come toppling down?  Because someone
decided (that someone being Nora Ephron) that it might be a good idea to
make a movie out of Delia Ephron's novel a novel about (*gasp*) the
daughters of a Hollywood screenwriting duo!
Yes, Hanging Up is a movie that smells of quasi-autobiographical kitsch
hanging in the wings.  And burdened down by this fact, Hanging Up never
achieves that all-important low level of pretense that made You've Got
Mail and Sleepless in Seattle pass as entertainment.
Eve (Meg Ryan) is a caterer running a banquet while her father (Matthau)
is dying.  Georgia (Diane Keaton) is a Tina Brown-esque women's magazine
editor who steals Eve's stuffing recipes for articles for The New York
Times.  Maddy (Lisa Kudrow) is a soap opera actress.  All three are
sisters who have to deal with their father's death and an impeding
banquet.
Although I would really love to go on a rant about why it's not a good
idea to write a book about your life and then make a movie out of it
with your sister, I won't.  I'll stick to the raw weaknesses of Hanging
Up, which are as prolific as cellular phones in Sydney.
For a film written by two of Hollywood's top-gun screenwriters of this
generation (and the children of some top-gun writers of last
generation), Hanging Up is incredibly weak as far as character
development goes.  Walter Matthau's character raises more questions than
answers, Eve is typecasted as the busy working mom, and the other two
sisters are merely caricatures who never really have a conflict to
them.  Maddy is so forgettable that one might have done better to fill
in her role by using stock footage from "Friends."  Georgia pins her
Tina Brown pin-up but we never get any insight as to why she's the
famous one (other than that she's the oldest).  Flashbacks happen with
little purpose, and the film staggers around like the drunken leach that
Matthau plays.  Since Hanging Up is so damn busy being the creme de la
creme of character dramas, it neglects almost any comedy.
The result: Hanging Up is the picturesque butchered novel, lying
bleeding on the editing room floor.
Of course, to give credit where credit is due, all of the acting is
fine.  Although the film wobbles left and right, it can still see
straight enough to give us some entertainment along the path just
enough to get us through the film.  Yet we never connect we never make
contact with anything dear to the characters, and, as Eve goes on her
rampage around the house and takes all of the phones off the hook, we do
not feel her triumph we feel the urge to just hang up.
Director: Diane Keaton
Producer: Nora Ephron, Lawrence Mark
Writer: Nora Ephron, Delia Ephron
Starring: Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton, Lisa Kudrow, and Walter Matthau
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and free screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Are you like me? Do you get annoyed seeing people talk on their cellulars in
public places, shouting out loud, not giving a ratt's ass about anyone
around them, and basically just wallowing in their own self-importance? Well
if you are, than you will most likely agree with my rating of this film
since it basically features a trio of annoying ladies bickering away on the
phone for an hour and a half...only to make up and hug in the end.
Aaaaaaaahhhh...
PLOT:
Three grown-up sisters living their own separate lives, begin to
re-establish their communication lines when their dear old dad falls ill.
CRITIQUE:
This would be a good movie if it wasn't for the fact that it's got very
little to say, features uncaring people sharing annoying phone
conversations, is chockfull of bad acting moments and provides less
emotional satisfaction than any third-rate after-school special. And I'm
being nice! How junk like this gets made is beyond me, but happy am I that
the Ephron sisters will finally be dealt a professional blow, considering
the regurgitation level of their material had just about reached its limit.
The only true emotional moment demonstrated between Meg Ryan's character and
her dad in this film is when he hugs her and swings her around at a
Christmas tree lot. Wow...how deep. Of course, the same Christmas tune
that's played in every Ephron flick chimes out in the background, while
characters continue to build "bonds" among one another by making reference
to old, quaint movies or movie stars. Stop me...I'm gonna cry again! This
film is a mess. The characters are boring and irritating to watch, the plot
has something to do with three selfish sisters talking on the phone a whole
lot, kind of liking their father (but not really) and then finally realizing
the error of their ways, while sharing an "emotional" moment about movie
stars from the 50s.
Admittedly, I was not expecting much from a film whose television trailer
features Meg Ryan screaming every two seconds and a big dog rolling its
eyes, but even I was surprised at the level of ineptitude when it came to
some of the acting efforts put forth in this film. Meg did fine as the
sister who cries a lot, looking as adorable as ever, but someone please put
Lisa Kudrow inside a permanent home of limited range, cause this woman
basically IS that very same character that she plays in every single
movie/TV show that she's in. Enough already! And Diane Keaton must've spent
more time thinking about her role behind the camera in this one, cause her
acting was amateurish at best. Neither one convinced in "emotional" scenes.
Granted, they gave Walter Matthau the best lines in the film and that's
probably where my rating of three points comes from. All in all, this movie
is not funny (unless you're one to chuckle at train wrecks), provides zero
drama (unless you consider loud phone conversations moving), generates
absolutely no emotion (although I did tear up when Meg hugged a coffee
machine) and ends on a perfectly pretentious note ("Oh no, please don't get
any flour on my Donna Karan dress!). Ugh.
I suggest that all ladies take their husbands/boyfriends to see this movie
if they are pissed off at them about something! That'll teach 'em to mess
with you! Oh and incidentally, Mrs. JoBlo also likened this movie to a piece
of cow dung flailing in the wind, so there! Then again...maybe you'll like
it. : )

Author
Dustin Putnam
 Directed by Diane Keaton.
 Cast: Meg Ryan, Walter Matthau, Lisa Kudrow, Diane Keaton, Adam Arkin, Jesse 
James, Cloris Leachman, Edie McClurg.
 2000 - 92 minutes
 Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
 Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 19, 2000.
 "Meg Ryan is irresistible in the comedy that celebrates sisterhood!," 
screams the television ads for "Hanging Up," disastrously written by 
real-life sisters Delia and Nora Ephron and sloppily directed by Diane 
Keaton. Make me laugh again! Not only is "Hanging Up" misadvertised, since 
the film wholeheartedly focuses on middle sister Meg Ryan and gives her two 
co-stars, Lisa Kudrow and Diane Keaton, little more than extended cameos, but 
they don't actually come together until the final ten to fifteen minutes. And 
we are supposed to believe their strong bond, and smile in the last scene 
when they rekindle their rocky relationship, despite them being apart for the 
majority of the running time? Excuse me, again, while I almost bust a gut at 
that truly delusional notion.
 Eve Marks (Meg Ryan) is the middle Mozzell sister, still living in the 
California town where she grew up, and with a husband (Adam Arkin) and 
pre-teen son (Jesse James). Her elderly, wisecracking father, Lou (Walter 
Matthau, in his brightest performance in years) has just recently been put 
into the hospital, in the final stages of what I assume is Alzheimer's (even 
though the film never enlightens us on exactly what is wrong with him). While 
Eve's relationship with her mother (Cloris Leachman) is nearly nonexistent, 
since she ran out on Lou and her children years ago, she has had her fair 
share of up's and down's with Lou, who used to be an alcoholic. Her older 
sister is Georgia (Diane Keaton), an editor for the self-titled magazine, 
"Georgia," while Maddy (Lisa Kudrow) is the youngest, a soap opera actress. 
Interestingly, their professions are given, but we not once ever see them 
working at their jobs, or, for that matter, learn much of anything about 
them. Maddy, Georgia, and Eve do not see each other much anymore, their adult 
lives gradually causing them to drift apart, but they do manage to 
consistently talk on the phone to one another. And they talk. And talk. And 
talk...
 In fact, the telephone is the major star of the film, even more so than 
Ryan, as it appears in virtually every scene of this interminable 92-minute 
catastrophe that feels like its three hours long. If you are able to get 
through the opening half-hour, in which phones ring so much you feel like 
jumping through the screen and taking a sledgehammer to them, you will surely 
survive the rest. The question is, who would want to subject themselves to 
this resolutely irritating, self-involved pat-on-the-back?
 How could a comedy-drama that has the star-power of Meg Ryan, Lisa Kudrow, 
and Diane Keaton be so very bad in so many different ways? Issues from the 
past involving the possible jealousy each has had for one of the others is 
fleetingly brought up, but the film isn't mature enough to deal with such a 
thing in a thoughtful manner, and since we learn next to nothing about their 
childhood, it is a lost cause that comes off as nothing more than an 
afterthought. Also, it is expected that the viewer quickly catch on to the 
tricky dynamic that the three sisters have with one another, but no dynamic 
metamorphosizes. And when they do reunite in the finale, their whole 
consanguinity is reduced to a repulsively annoying three-minute scene in 
which they argue like little children. You can see the impending death coming 
a mile away, and it conveniently occurs in the next scene, so that the three 
can quickly come to terms with themselves, and with each other. You think to 
yourself: "The only thing left for them to do is have a playful food-fight," 
and like clockwork, it also occurs by the end credits.
 Meg Ryan is a versatile actress (look no further than 1998's "Hurlyburly" or 
1994's "When a Man Loves a Woman"), despite her various detractors who 
stubbornly believe all she can do is romantic comedies. With "Hanging Up," 
the only thing she needs to do is completely sever her filmmaking ties with 
Nora Ephron, a writer/director/hack who shouldn't be allowed to work in 
Hollywood again after this big-budget, high-profile debacle. Even if she knew 
what she was making was not exactly up to par in the quality department, she 
nonetheless is very good, and the two scenes that work, flashbacks to 
Christmas 1988, when she had a heartbreaking run-in with her mother, and to 
Halloween 1993, when Lou crashed her son's birthday party in a drunken 
stupor, are effective because of the realism Ryan brings to the situations.
Diane Keaton, as Georgia, is better as an actress than a director here, but 
that is a wildly feeble compliment. What is more than a little far-fetched is 
that Keaton is distinctly older than Ryan and Kudrow, although in the very 
brief glimpses we get at them as children, she is no more than five years 
Ryan's senior. Yeah, right.
 Lastly, poor Lisa Kudrow has been wasted once again in a big-screen venture, 
after her even more thin role in 1999's "Analyze This." Kudrow isn't given 
enough time to create a full personality with Maddy, so it isn't her fault 
she doesn't register until a few quiet moments sprinkled throughout where she 
is actually blessed with being given dialogue. If anything, though, Kudrow is 
a real talent, and I anxiously await the next time she is given a role more 
deserving of her time, as in her brilliantly nuanced, Oscar-caliber work in 
1998's "The Opposite of Sex." If you are a fan of Kudrow's (and who isn't?), 
do yourself a favor and rent this gem that puts more good use to Kudrow in 
sixty seconds than "Hanging Up" does in its entirety.
 As Eve's hardworking husband, Adam Arkin is, predictably, squandered with a 
role that gives him next to nothing to do, until a subplot reveals itself 
midway through, only to never be mentioned again. Cloris Leachman, as with 
Ryan and Matthau, makes a small, but noticeable impression with her, albeit, 
very brief appearance, while Edie McClurg, as a rosy-cheeked woman Lou had an 
affair with in the Christmas 1988 flashback, manages one of the few laughs in 
this otherwise joyless production.
 Nearly all the emotions displayed within "Hanging Up" are patently 
manufactured, and despite the movie wanting the viewer to care about the 
characters, aside from Eve, why would you want to when they are all spoiled 
brats? If, for some bizarre, "Twilight Zone"-type of reason, you find 
yourself in a movie theater showing this film, my suggestion would be to hang 
up on it before the opening credits are over. Saying it is a waste of time is 
an understatement of epic proportions.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Hanging Up (2000) 
Rated PG-13; running time 92 minutes
Genre: Comedy/Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0162983 
Official site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/hangingup/index.html
Written by: Nora Ephron (based on the story by Delia Ephron)
Directed by: Diane Keaton
Starring: Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton, Lisa Kudrow, Walter Matthau, 
Adam Arkin, Cloris Leachman, Jesse James 
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamshangingup.html
As the middle of seven sisters, I've been anticipating seeing "Hanging 
Up" for weeks now.  Surely, I thought, they'd be addressing Issues like 
the ones I've had with my younger and older siblings for thirtysomething 
years now.  Surely, I thought, the Female Factor would be in full 
effect.  Surely, I thought, I'd leave the theater with a better 
Understanding of the mystique that is sisterhood--or at least pleased at 
having been able to identify with the chicks on screen ("yeah girl, my 
sister tried to play that sh...tuff too!") 
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
In what probably sounded better On Paper than what was actually 
realized, Eve (Meg Ryan), Georgia (Diane Keaton) and Maddy (Lisa Kudrow) 
are sisters who really strain to have Issues with each other, with their 
dying father (Walter Matthau), with their estranged mother (Cloris 
Leachman), and with the phones that seem to rule their lives. 
The Upshot
Take note: this will be the shortest review I've written to 
date--because there's really not much to tell.  This movie can be summed 
up in a single phrase: the Ephron sisters (Nora and Delia, co-writers of 
this dud) need to keep their boring Issues to themselves. 
I tried, lord knows I did, to find something to write about.  The 
storyline just bored me to tears, being linear and obvious as it was; 
the acting was tedious; the dog was as unnecessary as the unfortunate 
inclusion of Adam Arkin as Eve's husband Joe and Jesse James as their 
son Jesse (not that they did anything wrong, per se, only that they were 
just so much dead wood in a forest full of logs); Diane Keaton's 
directing debut was uninspiring; and the whole phone gimmick was too 
through after the first or second time it was crammed down the viewers' 
throats.  Except for Leachman's somewhat interesting role as the mother 
who didn't want to be a mother, nothing else about this movie justified 
it taking up 92 minutes of my life. 
I won't take up more minutes of your life trying to make more out of 
this by-the-numbers movie than needed.  You won't laugh, you won't cry, 
you won't feel moved to tell your sisters you love them.  You'll only 
wonder why Mom and Dad Ephron didn't send their girls to writer's camp. 
Bammer's Bottom Line: 
If you've seen the trailers/commercials for this flick, you've seen the 
movie.  No, not just the best parts, I mean that you've seen the 
*movie*; the other 90 or so minutes are just filler.  Boring, trite 
filler at that.  Guess I'll have to wait for The Black "Hanging Up" to 
see my sisters and I on the big screen, after all. 

Author
Christian Pyle
The ads make "Hanging Up" seem like an upbeat comedy about a rascally father
and his three daughters.  Anyone who went to the movie expecting that left
disappointed.  All of the movie's funny scenes were included in the ad.  
So what do we get?  Eve Marks (Meg Ryan) just put her father Lou Mozell (Walter
Matthau) into a hospital.  Once upon a time, Lou was a Hollywood screenwriter
who collaborated with his now-estranged wife.  His one great moment in life was
writing a film for John Wayne, who gave him a giant bullet-shaped trophy.  Now
Lou is senile and deteriorating rapidly.  Eve tries to convince her sisters
Georgia (Diane Keaton) and Maddy (Lisa Kudrow) that their father is dying and
needs them.  Both are slow to show concern.  So devoted Eve stands vigil over
her father, who constantly asks for his favorite daughter Georgia, while
running her own business (planning special events) and caring for her son
(Jesse James).  (Some comic relief comes when Maddy also drops off her ailing
St. Bernard for Eve to care for.)  The tension builds until all three sisters
are finally in one room at one of Eve's events where Georgia is the keynote
speaker.
There's a superficial resemblance to Shakespeare's "King Lear" (senile king
with three daughters:  one devoted saint and two selfish bitches), but the
material is apparently drawn from life.  Sister screenwriters Delia and Nora
Ephron had parents who were a successful Hollywood writing team.  Henry and
Phoebe Ephron collaborated on 17 screenplays, including "Desk Set" and "There's
No Business Like Show Business."  (Delia's novel, the basis for the film, is
dedicated to Henry).
Surprisingly, the script is as thin as an anorexic's wet dream.  The virtue of
a semi-autobiographical project would seem to be the wealth of material
available.  Yet, the Ephrons provide only the barest minimum of information
about their characters.  Also, the spaces they inhabit seem artificial.  Eve
lives in a house that looks like a magazine layout; no matter how put-upon she
is, we can't feel sorry for anyone whose house is so pristine on any given day.
 Georgia is a famous magazine editor, and in her brief scenes while she chats
on a cell phone with Eve seem like the photo spread for a profile.  When we
first meet Maddy, she's fishing at a picturesque mountain stream.  I expected
to see the credit "Cinematography by 'Vanity Fair.'"
And, yes, Diane Keaton is literally old enough to be Lisa Kudrow's mother.  To
her credit, though, she looks young enough to pull it off.
The one redeeming aspect of "Hanging Up" is that, at its core, is a truth about
siblings.  There's always one on which everyone else in the family relies,
freeing the others to be selfish and emotionally distant.  My wife is the
reliable child in her family; for better or worse, my brother has the role in
mine.  (Being selfish and emotionally distant may not be fulfilling, but it is
a lot less work).
If you have nothing better to do than watch this movie, look for a powerful
cameo by Cloris Leachman as the sisters' mother Pat.  In a devastating scene,
Eve discovers that her mother doesn't love her.  Although Leachman is best
known for comedies like "Young Frankenstein" and "The Mary Tyler Moore Show,"
her performance here reminded me of the considerable dramatic talent she
displayed in "The Last Picture Show."
Bottom Line:  Everyone involved has lived in Hollywood so long they don't
recognize real life anymore.

Author
Ross Anthony
An over-burdened Meg Ryan runs around town tending to everyone else's needs,
but her own. She remains mostly in good humor while doused with an
inharmonious silly physical comedy. Example: The phone rings and Meg answers
the TV remote.
Meg's Father (Matthau) is hilariously incoherent too deeply touching too
terminally ill. "How is it that a man can't recognize his own pants, but he
remembers his daughter's phone number." Matthau is wonderful, without him
"Hanging up" would have been completely "Disconnected." Kudrow, Keaton and
Ryan all give strong performances.
Aside from some early exposition, the dialogue is very good, very
re-written, and sharply detailed; however, the story line feels like a first
draft. What happens to Meg's kids as she tends to everyone else? After the
first 15 minutes, they're gone. We're teased into anticipating a plane crash
that never happens. And an interesting character (Dr. Amond) is left
undeveloped and un-used.
The intent was to portray a slice of the life of a good person with a
bleeding heart personality who is totally exhausting herself, but the
byproduct of that is ... we get exhausted along with her.
You might lose some sympathy when Meg tears a page from a public phone book
while driving to her estranged mother's house. Besides being a bit out of
character, that is so rude! What about the next person whose mother's maiden
name starts with the same letter?
In the end we have a film that touches on Meg's relationships with her
sisters and with her father and with herself in a on-again-off-again
humorous way, but without a great story to hold onto.
Hanging Up. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton, Lisa Kudrow, Walter Matthau
Directed by Diane Keaton
Screenplay by Delia Ephron and Nora Ephron
Produced by Laurence Mark and Nora Ephron at Columbia Pictures.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
Disconnect the phone line. Don't accept the charges. Do anything you can
to avoid the wretched, melodramatic sisterhood dramedy `Hanging Up'.
I figured I needed to get in touch with my feminine side, and `Hanging
Up' seemed like an ideal opportunity to do so. The film features an
incredible palate of female talent, and the capability behind the camera
brought to mind such sparkling gems as `Sleepless in Seattle' and
`Unsung Heroes'. Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton and Lisa Kudrow play a trio of
sisters who, once separated by career judgments over family ties, must
reunite when their father (Walter Matthau) is admitted into the hospital
with Alzheimer's disease. While this may read like an optimum
opportunity to rekindle their relationship and reflect with poignancy on
the past, the script by sisters Delia and Nora Ephron is exasperating,
shapeless dreck teeming with emotional fakery. `Hanging Up' has the
overall effect of a tele-marketer pestering you for two hours, while you
don't have the option of doing as the title suggests.
For the first half-hour, the Ephron sisters use telephone conversations
for a basis of character development. This is an annoying and
ineffective device. Cell-phones ring every five minutes, and everyone
hurriedly rushes along, leaving marginal time for the frustrated viewer
to relate to the sisters' issues and problems. If `Hanging Up' was an
apple pie, then I felt as if we were getting the mere crust of the
story. Granted, there are a few genuine and sincere moments in the film.
But they only help to establish that the remainder of the strained
emotions are nothing but inferior dramatic muck.
The most outrageous strategy in `Hanging Up' is that, after a series of
largely unrealized attempts at character development, we are expected to
exhibit compassion and courtesy toward the sisters as they join for a
melodramatic finale. We are able to identify with Eve (Ryan), the most
open and caring daughter, because she is the one who stayed by her
father's side as everyone else moved forward to pursue a impending
career. Georgia (Keaton), the eldest daughter, is celebrating the fifth
year anniversary of her magazine called.... `Georgia'. Maddy (Kudrow),
the soap opera actress, spends time either contemplating her possible
path to stardom or nursing her dog. Ryan's convincing performance and
diverting cuteness are two of the more agreeable aspects of `Hanging
Up'. Kudrow, so delightfully eccentric as the off-kilter airhead Phoebe
in `Friends', is totally wasted. Ditto for Keaton, who is serving a
double shift as co-star and director - a time slot that can be a
difficult priority juggle. Her frenzy is apparent.
For a chick flick, there is a distressing lack of chuckles. The reliable
Matthau is reduced to chaotic shtick that, given his character's
situation, seems more depressing than amusing. Even so, the peak form of
humor in `Hanging Up' is represented by some of Matthau's nasty quips
and Ryan's eternal battle to have the aforementioned pooch swallow a
pill. That about accounts for the three or four chuckles you will expel
during the film. My curiosity has suddenly been tweaked to discover how
such a promising and star-studded approach could turn so viciously sour.
But really, it's no mystery. The predictable, melodramatic filth that is
`Hanging Up' is certainly not the fault of these actresses. Pin it on
the screenplay, which attempts to clear up vital issues in three or four
minutes, while spending the rest of the running time in an annoying
flurry of phone conversations. It's certainly a far cry from what one
would label as a rewarding experience, but `Hanging Up' should have at
least been enjoyable. Uh-uh. It's a wrong number from the beginning.
Your Comments Appreciated! movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures
 Director:  Diane Keaton
 Writer:  Delia Ephron & Nora Ephron, novel by Nora Ephron
 Cast: Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton, Lisa Kudrow, Walter
Matthau, Adam Arkin, Cloris Leachman
   The three sisters in Nora Ephron's novel are nothing like
their counterparts in Chekhov's story.  Unlike Olga, Masha
and Irina, they are not bored, provincial women longing to go
to the big city where they can find the excitement so sadly
lacking in their lives. These L.A. gals have already arrived:
one of the in particular is up to her turned-up nose in activity,
another perpetually distracted by attention as the head of a
terminally hip, successful magazine, and the third  is a TV
soap-opera performer in one of those hospital serials.  If
"Hanging Up" is inspired by any classic, it would take a page
from Shakespeare's "King Lear," about the relationship
between an over-the-hill monarch and his three
daughters--only one of whom exhausts herself to do right by
her dad and is largely unappreciated.  But if this picture,
directed by Diane Keaton, takes a page or two from "Lear," it
takes just a title from another of the Bard's plays: "Much Ado
About Nothing."  Almost torture to sit through its one hundred
minutes of banal chatter and counterfeit crises, "Hanging Up"
makes us long for the pleasant-enough fluff of Nora Ephron's
"You've Got Mail" to supplant the repetitious scenes of
cranky-old-dad-shows-ingratitude-to-loving-daughter.  
   The production notes reveal that when novelist Delia
Ephron's father got sick, she was the only one of her family
in L.A. and was on the phone constantly with her sisters
about him--and on the phone as well with her father.  "I live
half my life in the real world and half on the telephone"
became the statement around which the novel, and now the
movie, revolve.  
   If you've ever been baffled to see the intensity with which
people use their cell phones--while walking on the street, in
restaurants, shopping at the supermarket, and even to the
extreme annoyance of their neighbors in the Broadway
theater--you can sense the addiction that the three women
and one elderly man in this story possess.  Since the three
women are what we would today call smart, they are highly
verbal, spending a good deal of their energy both at work and
at leisure vocalizing in person or especially on the
phone.  The trouble is that while the daily conversations of
these people must be awfully absorbing to them, they have
little interest for the audience, who must sit through the
endless banter and decide that eavesdropping on these
people is about as interesting as listening in to a woman at
the greengrocer interrogating her husband via her cellphone
about what he would like her to pick up for their dinner.  
   Meg Ryan takes center stage in the comedy-drama which
is light on laughs and oddly dry-eyed in its pathos.  As the
owner of a business that coordinates conventions--such as
the one depicted in the Nixon library--she has a difficult time
balancing home, work, and extended family.  With a bratty
12-year-old kid, Jesse (Jesse James), who laughs at his
mother with a donkey's bray, a handsome husband who has
little to do in this story but throw his father-in-law out of their
home, and a curmudgeonly father who is hospitalized and
supposedly dying (though we haven't the foggiest idea of
what), this middle sister is a modern representative of the
liberated woman who tries to have it all.  Her dad, Lou
(Walter Matthau), rewards her constant attention by telling
her that her mother wanted to "throw her back" after she was
born.  Eve must put up with her dad's adolescent attempts at
humor while he is being wheeled about, jokes about John
Wayne's allegedly small pecker ("that's why he carried those
guns"), about the location of the mini-bar in his hospital room,
about how he might go to bed "but not with you" (to a middle-
aged nurse).  Supposedly Lou went nuts when his wife, Pat
(Cloris Leachman), walked out on him ten years earlier, but
given the story's lack of development, we don't know whether
she left because he was looney or whether he became
unbalanced because she left.  Matthau wears yet another of
his outrageous rugs for the role, while cameraman Howard
Atherton hones in on his face to highlight the man's wrinkles.
   The frequent flashbacks to happier, more carefree times in
this family are generic and unenlightening.  When Georgia
(Diane Keaton), the oldest and most successful and much
envied sister, gives a talk before a roomful of adoring women,
we don't know whether Ephron means to satirize the currently
fashionable Cosmopolitan-type periodicals or to praise them. 
Nor do attempts work at parodying Nixon about tapes in his
library available for the visitor to click into to find what the ex-
president considered his favorite food and other important
issues.  We're left with a troupe of experienced, fine actors
bereft of anything of significance to say, but they're the last to
know this as they jabber and banter and jest and rail at one
another.  Too bad the Ephrons do not display half the talent
of Arthur Miller who knew how to write a story about siblings
who were not so concerned with hanging up as they were
with their own hangups.  In Miller's "The Price"--currently in a
Broadway revival--two brothers who get together after
disposing of their late father's belongings, deal with their
jealousy, their hatred, their corrosive and unacknowledged
anger, and their resentment against a selfish, child-devouring
father.  The first is a policeman who sacrificed his education
and probably career as a scientist to care for his invalid
father.  The other is an eminent surgeon who walked out on
the demands of family to concentrate on his personal
ambition.  This work, unlike "Hanging Up," examines the
dilemma with compassion, humor and insight--all of which are
missing from this movie.
   Look inside any high-school classroom during homeroom
period and observe which kids are doing the most jabbering. 
It's the dull ones.  They say that empty vessels make the
most noise.  The vessels in "Hanging Up" are particularly
sharp women: ironically, they make quite a bit of noise both
on the phone and in person and yet they say nothing--as
empty as the underwritten script in this meandering movie. 
Pick up the video some months from now and tune into it
next time you're sleepless in Seattle.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on May 12, 2000; certificate 15; 95 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Diane Keaton; produced by Nora Ephron, Laurence Mark.
Written by Delia Ephron, Nora Ephron; based on the book by Delia Ephron.
Photographed by Howard Atherton; edited by Julie Monroe.
"Hanging Up" is not the worst movie I have ever seen, but it is the only one 
I can think of that made me want to pull out a gun and start shooting at the 
images onscreen. It's a horrible experience, as if somebody had discovered my 
pet peeves and decided to devote a whole film to winding me up. Although I 
own a cellphone and am acquainted with whiny women, they are both things I 
detest, and for emergencies only. Watching them for 95 minutes is not my idea 
of a good time.
The film is supposed to be the story of a man's family reacting to his 
descent into death. It's actually just an irritating bunch of phone 
conversations between three witless sisters, who might actually develop 
personalities if they cancelled their AT&T subscriptions and lived in the 
real world. Meg Ryan plays Eve, the one who stays by her father's hospital 
bed, deals with his eruptions of dementia, and calls up everyone else, trying 
to get them to visit him. Maddy (Lisa Kudrow), the youngest sibling, is an 
insecure little tramp who complains that nobody will take her seriously; she 
doesn't think it odd that at age 29 she was still dreaming of becoming a rock 
star, and in her mid-30s she expects she's going to be an actress. Georgia 
(Diane Keaton), the eldest, is smarmy, dishonest and lies about her personal 
life when it will bring her gain.
So much of "Hanging Up" takes place on the phone, with the annoying trio 
barking insipid platitudes down receivers, that when I left the cinema my 
ears were still ringing from clicks, beeps and dial tones. Perhaps this movie 
was inevitable, such is contemporary society's obsession with 
telecommunication. Delia and Nora Ephron, who wrote the screenplay, and Diane 
Keaton, the director, seem to think this presentation of people is normal, 
and that's rather sad.
Worse is the grating nature of the performances. Keaton plays her detestable 
character with the kind of glee that shoves right into our faces and makes us 
want to scream. Ryan is unconvincing, because she uses the same disorganised 
comic presence as in "When Harry Met Sally" and "Joe Versus the Volcano", and 
expects it to work when her character is supposed to be a cornerstone of 
emotional stability. As for Lisa Kudrow, well, she's a joke, who exudes 
stupidity from all of her phoney body, dead eyes, and flat, sarcastic whimper 
of a voice.
You know when you're on a crowded train, and you're wedged into the window 
seat when three other people need to sit in the same booth as you? "Hanging 
Up" is a lot like that, as long as the three people are vapid yuppie bitches 
whining and crying about their boyfriends and families into mobile telephones 
that play a little tune when they ring. This is a film that could get 
Gandhi's blood boiling. If it becomes your wife's favourite video, no sane 
jury will convict you of domestic abuse.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Steve Rhodes
Fingers scraping across a blackboard.
HANGING UP, one of the most irritating movies of the year, features
non-stop phoning.  Like fingers grating across a blackboard, these cell
and cordless phones ring incessantly.  And, when the phones go on strike
briefly during flashbacks, the story manages to be no less obnoxious.
Populated by clichéd, unbearable characters, with whom you wouldn't want
to spend 5 minutes, much less 90+, the film is about as much fun as
answering calls from telemarketers while you're trying, unsuccessfully,
to have dinner.  Essentially a very long infomercial for the joys and
trendiness of cell phoning, the movie gets in your face like a drunk at
a cocktail party.
Walter Matthau plays a senile, dirty old man named Lou Mozell, whose
favorite joke is about the small size of John Wayne's private parts.
Lou spends the movie dying and making the audience feel guilty for
wanting his end to come as soon as possible.
His three grown daughters cell phone their way through the plot.  The
film's director, Diane Keaton, proves again than she's a much better
actress than a director.  She also plays Georgia, the oldest of Lou's
daughters.  Georgia is a mile-a-minute executive, who says things to
callers such as, "I love you. Call me every 5 minutes."  The bad news is
that she means it.
Meg Ryan plays Eve, a scatterbrained party planner, who wrecks cars
while talking on the phone.  She has already had 3 smash-ups this year.
Eve's son, Jessie (Jesse James), has just discovered an especially
insufferable laugh that almost rivals the movie's ubiquitous ringing
sounds in detestability.
Lisa Kudrow is the youngest sister, Maddy.  Maddy brags that she plays
"a fully three-dimensional character" in a television series, which, of
course, means that her character is anything but.
To round out this strong but misused cast, Cloris Leachman plays Pat,
Lou's ex-wife.  Using a variety of outlandish explanations, Lou tells
people that she has died.  Pat is the sort of "loving" mother who
confesses with brutal honesty to Eve that she wished she'd never been a
mother in the first place.
The story by Delia Ephron does have a few nice moments -- perhaps the
best being when Eve, wearing one of her signature see-through blouses,
wakes to the sound of a doorbell.  Thinking, of course, that it's the
phone, she answers it by picking up a remote control, which turns her
place into a cacophony of jarring sounds.
So what did Jessie get for a birthday present when he was little?  A toy
cell phone, of course.
HANGING UP runs 1:34.  It is rated PG-13 for language and some
sex-related material and would be acceptable for kids 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Sanford
 During a vacation in London a few years ago, I had a free evening and
decided I'd go down to the local cinema and see director Mike Leigh's
"Secrets and Lies." But when I told the friends I was visiting what I
had in mind, I was informed that since it was Monday night, that was not
possible. It was, they informed me, Ladies Night, and no men would be
admitted.
 I was absolutely indignant. What kind of country was this anyway? Why
in the United States, I declared, anyone with the price of admission
could attend a movie any time they wanted to, regardless of their sex.
Ladies Night, indeed -- ha!
 After having seen "Hanging Up," however, I think maybe instituting
Ladies Night Stateside might not be a bad idea. But don't just limit it
to Mondays: Make it every evening this film is playing. Trust me,
considering the movie's plot involves lots of crying over wrecked
birthday parties and stolen stuffing recipes, most guys -- and more than
a few women as well -- probably wouldn't want to know what they're
missing.
 Adapted by Nora and Delia Ephron from Delia's semi-autobiographical
book of the same name, "Hanging Up" brings together a trio of dynamite
actresses to play three two-dimensional roles. Diane Keaton (who also
directed) is Georgia, a wildly successful magazine publisher who seems
to be Martha Stewart and Diana Vreeland rolled into one. Lisa Kudrow
plays Georgia's much younger sister Maddy, a petulant soap star who
savors her role as the baby of the family.
 Squashed in between is Meg Ryan as Eve, the Jan Brady of the bunch, the
middle child who has to clean up everybody else's messes because Georgia
is too busy and Maddy too bratty. Chief among Eve's concerns is her
salty-tongued father Lou (Walter Matthau), a former screenwriter who's
senile and seemingly headed directly for death's door. He's not too
busy, however, to spend his few lucid moments obsessing over the size of
John Wayne's genitalia, something Eve finds both charming and puzzling.
"He has a bad case of uproar," one observer notes of Lou.
 Meanwhile, Eve seems afflicted with the kind of adorable klutziness
Ryan tends to turn to whenever one of her characters can't come up with
anything else to do. See Eve get knocked down and dragged around by a
huge dog. See Eve trip over her son's toys. See Eve tumble over her
husband (Adam Arkin) while frantically trying to grab the phone.
 In its first hour, "Hanging Up" is almost as irritating as a
theatergoer who feels compelled to answer his cell phone during the
performance. Paired with a strong co-star, Ryan can sparkle but when
she's left on her own -- as she is for much of the movie's first half --
her mannerisms can become grating in no time at all. Throw in a
pointless and mildly offensive subplot about an Iranian doctor (Duke
Moosekian) and his mother and you've got a real yawner of a first act.
 Once Keaton and the cracklingly good Kudrow enter the picture, "Hanging
Up" gets a much-needed jolt of energy. It's impossible to really believe
the three are sisters -- there's an obvious 20-year gap between Georgia
and Maddy -- but the chemistry between the women makes up for the lack
of credibility. Director Keaton also seems to have enjoyed shooting the
scenes of sibling rivalry and revelry since they have a spryness not
found in the Ryan-Matthau and Ryan-Arkin sequences.
 Those with a low tolerance for "chick flicks" should be warned this
film does include -- in addition to those spoiled birthdays and stuffing
theft recriminations -- a food fight in which Georgia gets flour on her
sleek black dress and screams, "This is Donna Karan!" If you can
identify with her predicament, "Hanging Up" is probably an experience
you shouldn't miss. James Sanford

Author
Scott Renshaw
     That irritating sound you'll be hearing for the first 20 minutes of
HANGING UP -- more or less non-stop-- is the ringing of phones. They ring
on walls, in cars, in purses and on fax lines. They ring for calls from
business associates and family members. Then they ring again on call
waiting. In the context of the film, you could say the ringing phones
represent the distractions that keep us from focusing on what really
matters. Or maybe they stand for the way we can talk and talk and talk
without ever really communicating. And in the context of the film, either
message would be painfully ironic. HANGING UP is an extruciatingly awkward
piece of film storytelling -- a movie full of distractions from what
really matters, a movie that talks and talks and talks without ever really
communicating.
     From the film's marketing campaign, you'd probably expect HANGING UP
to be the story of the semi-dysfunctional Mozell family: aging and ailing
former Hollywood screenwriter Lou (Walter Matthau) and his daughters
Georgia (Diane Keaton), Evie (Meg Ryan) and Maddy (Lisa Kudrow). In fact,
it's essentially the story of Evie, a woman juggling responsibility for
her business, her own family and the ever-more-dependent Lou. While
Georgia publishes a glossy women's magazine in New York and Maddy works
as a soap opera actress, Evie is left with the growing burden of an
alcoholic father she has cared for since her mother left.
     The bulk of the film finds Evie becoming ever more flustered as she
prepares a women's business conference for her event planning company,
worries that Lou is going to die at any moment, frets over whether her
latest fender-bender can be settled without going through her insurance
and tries to get some support from Maddy and Georgia. It's all about Evie,
and Ryan does her perky, weepy best trying to make Evie's plight matter. 
Too bad HANGING UP is such a muddle of shifting tones and undeveloped
relationships that Ryan's manic performance reeks less of frustration over
her life than desperation over the script. Every scene feels aborted in
mid-thought, leaving little but the spectre of Matthau trying to give some
hammy charm to a character that's alternately eccentric-annoying and
creepy-annoying.
     Eventually, perhaps out of sheer boredom with Evie's story, HANGING
UP turns to the interaction between the three sisters once they're finally
brought together by Lou's most recent turn for the worse. By that time
it's far too late to make that interaction convincing or endearing, since
both Keaton and Kudrow are playing gross caricatures of self-absorption.
Georgia and Maddy exist basically as props for Evie's self-realization,
appearing only when Evie needs to become aware that she's the only one
working at preserving family relationships. It's inevitable, then, that
every moment between the sisters feels false, every grating attempt at
bickering, bittersweet reconciliation or playful kitchen food-fighting
serving as a reminder that you were expecting a movie about the ties that 
bind. What you get instead is a movie about people who all signed up to
be in the same movie.
     There are so many things wrong with HANGING UP -- the stilted script
by Delia and Nora Ephron, the wretched editing, Matthau's depressing
shtick -- that it seems absurd to pick out one moment of epic
miscalculation. Nevertheless, that dubious distinction goes to a flashback
scene between Evie and her estranged mother (Cloris Leachman). Evie tracks
her mother down several years after she has left the family, and finds a
less than enthusiastic welcome. It's a pivotal moment, one that will
explain any number of issues in Evie's life ... and it's dispatched in a
matter of seconds, with Leachman delivering about a half-dozen lines of
dialogue. That sort of incomplete, abrupt storytelling defines HANGING UP,
a film that becomes such a fragmented collection of life moments that it's
virtually impossible for the whole thing not to give you a headache. That
irritating sound you'll be hearing after the phones finally stop ringing
in HANGING UP is the dissonant buzz of movie that never has a point. 

Author
Michael Redman
If you'd like to make a call, please hang up and try again
What is the poet said about humans and rodents and how their plans usually
gets screwed up?
The distance between how a project looks in our head and how it acts in real
life is often so vast that even the best ideas can't make the leap. We spend
hours and hours working out the scheme, detailing the minutia and then it just
doesn't work.
Not surprisingly our expectations and hopes are so high that we can't even see
that it's not workingfor a while at least. We want the thing to be good so it
looks good to us. Until the slow realization of reality sinks in.
That's exactly what happens with "Hanging Up". It sounds great and has all the
elements to be a wonderful movie. I expected and wanted to enjoy it. But then
chaos theory set in. A butterfly flaps its wings in Japan and the film falls.
Eve (Meg Ryan) has a full life running her own business and taking care of her
family, but her obsession is caring for her dying alcoholic father (Walter
Matthau). Her self-absorbed sisters Georgia (Diane Keaton) and Maddy (Lisa
Kudrow) aren't much help. Georgia carries on a love affair with her cell phone
while publishing her women's magazine (entitled, what else, "Georgia").
Maddy's life revolves around her soap opera role.
This all must have looked so good on paper. What an ultimate "chick flick"!
Screenwriter Nora Ephron has a string of hits. Keaton, who also directs, has
good instincts and her directoral efforts have earned prestigious awards.
The casting of the women was genius. All three have at least partially built
their careers on playing the same scattered but appealing hot babe. It's not a
stretch to imagine a younger Keaton in "When Harry Met Sally". Or a younger
Ryan fitting in with the cast of "Friends". Keaton and Ryan both captivate the
screen in most of their roles and Kudrow isn't too annoying in small doses.
Matthau has spent half of his life playing crotchety old men and he does it
better than anyone. No one else can so convincingly lie in a hospital bed yet
still have the energy to grab asses.
There are a few touching moments. Dad comes home drunk during young Eve's
birthday party and everyone in the audience feels her pain and embarrassment.
When absent mother (Cloris Leachman) explains she left the family because
motherhood just didn't take and Eve returns home, your heart sinks. You know
she's going to take her mother's place in the family and the emotional deadend
that leads to. Her relationship with her father is the one convincing aspect
of the film, although you would think that sometime during the past 10 years
she would have run into one of those thousands of books on codependency.
What goes wrong? Just about everything. The actors are all more than adequate
but with the exception of Ryan and Matthau, no one really connects with each
other. Rarely do the women come across as sisters. Maddy and Georgia aren't
fully fleshed-out characters. None of the men are anything other than
place-holders. Matthau is great, but he's merely a cartoon.
The script contributes little towards creating real people. Most of the time
the conversations fall flat even when supposedly passionate. The story ("I've
devoted my life to my father and now he's dying") has the potential for a deep
look into the human psyche and connecting with a large number of the audience
but seldom gets beyond superficial.
The film isn't horrendous. The dangers of being electronically and/or
emotionally overly connected and at everyone's beck and call 24 hours a day
says something to the modern American. The actors are fun to watch and some of
the scenes work well. Occasionally the humor hits home.
Unfortunately none of it clicks together as a whole. Bits and pieces, but not
a satisfying film. Oddly enough, for a movie that supposedly deals with how we
relate to each other, what we have here is a failure to communicate.
(Michael Redman has written this column since before the dawn of time and has
to confess that, for possibly the first time, his favorite film of last year
was nominated for an Oscar. Comments about "American Beauty" can be sent to redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the Feb. 24, 2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at mailto:redman@indepen.com ]

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
No doubt, Columbia Pictures and the producers wanted this to
be a baby-boomers' version of The First Wives Club; i.e.: a wise,
witty chick's flick about three blonde, beautiful sisters coping with
their sibling rivalry while dealing with their philandering old father
who's suffered a minor stroke. But something went wrong from the
script to the screen. What's left is an overdose of cheery cute. Meg
Ryan's perky as ever as the sensible middle sister, a party planner
whose motto is "No surprises."  Which puts her in direct conflict with
Walter Matthau, her charming, curmudgeonly dad who not only drinks too
much but loves to surprise women by pinching their posteriors.  Diane
Keaton's the hip, super-successful, self-involved older sister, while
Lisa Kudrow's the youngest, a ditsy, semi-successful TV actress on one
of those daytime hospital dramas. Adapted by Delia Ephron from her
1995 novel, co-scripted by sister Nora Ephron, and directed by Diane
Keaton, its title comes from the family's addiction to cell phones
which are annoying enough in real life but become unbearable on the
screen. Delia Ephron reveals, "I live half my life in the real world
and half on the telephone" - and that cliche-filled, whiny jabbering
is the premise of the story. There's also some metaphysical connection
between hanging up the phone and disconnecting yourself from your
problems. But the movie is uneven in pace and tone. Sometimes it's
goofy, concentrating on quirky, if banal, verbal sibling encounters;
at other times, it goes for pathos - what with dad's
dying. Predictably, ultimately, there's reconciliation and
redemption. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Hanging Up is a
flimsy, floundering 4. Be thankful you don't share the phone gene in
this family's DNA - nor their frenzied phoniness.

Author
Michael Redman
If you'd like to make a call, please hang up and try again
What is the poet said about humans and rodents and how their plans usually
gets screwed up?
The distance between how a project looks in our head and how it acts in real
life is often so vast that even the best ideas can't make the leap. We spend
hours and hours working out the scheme, detailing the minutia and then it
just doesn't work.
Not surprisingly our expectations and hopes are so high that we can't even
see that it's not working...for a while at least. We want the thing to be
good so it looks good to us. Until the slow realization of reality sinks in.
That's exactly what happens with "Hanging Up". It sounds great and has all
the elements to be a wonderful movie. I expected and wanted to enjoy it. But
then chaos theory set in. A butterfly flaps its wings in Japan and the film sinks.
Eve (Meg Ryan) has a full life running her own business and taking care of
her family, but her obsession is caring for her dying alcoholic father
(Walter Matthau). Her self-absorbed sisters Georgia (Diane Keaton) and Maddy
(Lisa Kudrow) aren't much help. Georgia carries on a love affair with her
cell phone while publishing her women's magazine (entitled, what else,
"Georgia"). Maddy's life revolves around her soap opera role.
This all must have looked so good on paper. What an ultimate "chick flick"!
Screenwriter Nora Ephron has a string of hits. Keaton, who also directs, has
good instincts and her directoral efforts have earned prestigious awards.
The casting of the women was genius. All three have at least partially built
their careers on playing the same scattered but appealing hot babe. It's not
a stretch to imagine a younger Keaton in "When Harry Met Sally". Or a
younger Ryan fitting in with the cast of "Friends". Keaton and Ryan both
captivate the screen in most of their roles and Kudrow isn't too annoying in
small doses.
Matthau has spent half of his life playing crotchety old men and he does it
better than anyone. No one else can so convincingly lie in a hospital bed
yet still have the energy to grab asses.
There are a few touching moments. Dad comes home drunk during a birthday
party and everyone in the audience feels Eve's pain and embarrassment.
When absent mother (Cloris Leachman) explains she left the family because
motherhood just didn't take and Eve returns home, your heart sinks. You know
she's going to take her mother's place in the family and the emotional
deadend that leads to. Her relationship with her father is the one
convincing aspect of the film, although you would think that sometime during
the past 10 years she would have run into one of those thousands of books on codependency.
What goes wrong? Just about everything. The actors are all more than
adequate but with the exception of Ryan and Matthau, no one really connects
with each other. Rarely do the women come across as sisters. Maddy and
Georgia aren't fully fleshed-out characters. None of the men are anything
other than place-holders. Matthau is great, but he's merely a cartoon.
The script contributes little towards creating real people. Most of the time
the conversations fall flat even when supposedly passionate. The story
("I've devoted my life to my father and now he's dying") has the potential
for a deep look into the human psyche and connecting with a large number of
the audience but seldom gets beyond superficial.
The film isn't horrendous. The dangers of being electronically and/or
emotionally overly connected and at everyone's beck and call 24 hours a day
says something to the modern American. The actors are fun to watch and some
of the scenes work well. Occasionally the humor hits home.
Unfortunately none of it clicks together as a whole. Bits and pieces, but
not a satisfying film. Oddly enough, for a movie that supposedly deals with
how we relate to each other, what we have here is a failure to communicate.
(Michael Redman has written this column since before the dawn of time and
has to confess that, for possibly the first time, his favorite film of last
year was nominated for an Oscar. Comments about American Beauty can be
sent to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 2/24/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
