Title
Review for Back to the Beach (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Lyndall Hobbs.
Cast: Frankie Avalon, Annette Funicello, Lori Loughlin, Demian Slade, 
Tommy Hinckley, Connie Stevens, David Bowie, Don Adams, Bob Denver, Pee 
Wee Herman, Barbara Billingsley, Tony Dow, Jerry Mathers, Alan Hale, Edd 
Byrnes, Dick Dale and the Del-Tones.
1987 - 92 minutes.
Rated PG (for mild profanity).
Reviewed October 14, 1998.
If you've heard of Frankie Avalon, Annette Funicello, and their old 
"beach party" movies from the 1960's, such as 65's "Beach Blanket 
Bingo," then you know the definition of the word corny. Those beach 
films may have been kinda fun and harmless, but they were also 
undeniably dumb. Then in 1987, Frankie Avalon and Annette Funicello 
returned to their "beach party" movies, and made the best film they 
could have possibly done.
"Back to the Beach" stars Avalon and Funicello, playing their screen 
images, as a married couple living in Ohio. Avalon seems to have lost 
his spontaneity and is now an uptight car dealer, while Funicello is a 
spunky housewife who has an obsession with peanut butter. Together, they 
have two kids, a daughter, Cindi (Lori Loughlin) in her early twenties 
living in Malibu, and a teenage son named Bobby (Demian Slade) who 
dresses like a punk. At the start of the film, they realize that they 
desperately need a vacation, so while on their way to Hawaii, they stop 
over in Malibu to see Cindi, not knowing that her fiance (Tommy 
Hinckley) is living with her on a pier at the beach. After they get 
there, Annette and Frankie get in a fight when he meets up with an old 
pal from the beach, Connie Stevens, and appears to be having more fun 
with her. Figuring into the story are various musical numbers, a surfing 
contest, and, yes, beach parties.
By hearing the premise, "Back to the Beach" may sound exactly like 
Funicello's and Avalon's old movies, but it is not at all. "Back to the 
Beach," in fact, is one of the most entertaining comedy musicals I have 
ever seen, and is one of those movies that can be watched over and over 
(and I've seen it many times, to be sure).
One of the biggest surprises of the film is that the movie is a little 
bit more edgy than expected. Funicello and Avalon are good sports, and 
actually satirize their images to humorous effect. Funicello, especially, is 
so purely good and sweet that she is absolutely entertaining to watch. 
Stealing the opening scenes of the film is Demian Slade, who is hilarious 
as their punk son. Remarking about his parent's dim-witted conversations, he
observes, "It's like a conversation at the Kissinger's."
The music in "Back to the Beach" is perhaps the main star of the 
picture, and every song is memorable and fun to listen to. The musical 
numbers are also well choreographed and they give off a lot of spark and 
joy. 
"Back to the Beach" is, by no means, a deep and thought-provoking motion 
picture. It knows that it is only a "beach" movie, and it makes the most 
of it by adding a winning, lightweight screenplay, charming performances 
by the whole cast, a delightful array of cameos (ranging from Barbara 
Billingsley to David Bowie to Pee Wee Herman), and some great music. And 
when you're dealing with Frankie and Annette, what more could you ask 
for?
       - Copyright 1998 by Dustin Putman
         Dustin
Putman's Film Reviews >

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Twenty-five to twenty years ago, American International Pictures had
targeted a teen-age audience and was churning out cheap films for a ready
market.  Their main staples were quickly-thrown-together horror films and
their "Beach Party" series.  That series included BEACH PARTY (1963), MUSCLE
BEACH PARTY (1964), BIKINI BEACH (1964), PAJAMA PARTY (1964), BEACH BLANKET
BINGO (1965), HOW TO STUFF A WILD BIKINI (1965), and GHOST IN THE INVISIBLE
BIKINI (1966).  Annette Funicello starred in the first six and Frankie
Avalon in the first five.  (Only Harvey Lembeck as Eric Von Zipper was in
all seven.)  Inspired, perhaps, by the trend to take 50s and 60s TV programs
and do 80s sequels, Paramount is this year telling the story of what
happened after Annette and Frankie grew up and got married.  They are a
generation older and returning to the haunts of their youth.
     Today, Annette is a perky peanut-butter pusher and Frankie owns a Ford
dealership in Ohio.  They take their would-be punk son to visit their
daughter on the old beach in California.  Their daughter (played by Lori
Loughlin, who seems to be the only one in the film who knows how to act) is
shacking up with a fiance about whom she has not told her parents, and
Frankie reacts just like any of the fathers in the old series.  Also along
for the ride is Connie Stevens as Annette's "bad girl" rival in the earlier
films.  This is something of a trick on the audience, of course.  Connie
Stevens never appeared in the original series.
     BACK TO THE BEACH is enjoyable for about half an hour.  Then the
premise starts wearing thin and the comedy gets very uneven.  The producers
have assembled a dozen or so TV characters from the 50s and 60s plus a
somewhat out-of-place Pee-Wee Herman.  The best line of the film, delivered
by an aging Bob Denver, is a wry comment on the logic of GILLIGAN'S ISLAND.
On the whole, BACK TO THE BEACH is better than might have been expected, but
it is still only a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Terry Laskodi
     "Aren't we the corniest couple you ever saw?" asks Annette Funicello at
the end of BACK TO THE BEACH.  And the answer is: a resounding yes!!!
     BACK TO THE BEACH is actually a parody of all of the "beach" movies of the
early '60s Annette made with teen-age heartthrob Frankie Avalon, combining
different elements of the seven movies made.  There's the obligatory big
bonfire/party, a pajama party, good-people/bad-people on the beach (updated
for the '80s audience), bikini shots galore along with the muscle-types one
always sees at the beach (at least in California!!!), and, of course,
surfing!!!
     The plot is minimally simplistic, just like its predecessors.  Without
giving too much away, suffice it to say that Mom/Dad (Annette and Frankie) now
live in midwestern Ohio, and desperatley need a vacation.  Hawaii is the place,
but with a small stopover in Los Angeles to see their daughter.  What happens
once they arrive in Los Angeles is sheer lunacy.  Nostalgia reeks over them
once they arrive at "the beach" where they once hung out as teenagers (for
Annette immediately; Frankie takes a little longer).  Mom and Dad have a little
spat, and are separated briefly.  But, just like the old films, every- thing is
just hunky-dory by the end of the film ("even, with no winners and no losers,"
to borrow a line from the film).
     The movie is non-stop corn from beginning to end.  It pokes fun at the
simplistic morals of the originals without sounding too preachy.  It also pokes
fun at all the hawking Annette did for various products on TV, concentrating on
peanut butter, probably what she is most famous for.  Annette does not mind
poking fun at the old, naive, innocent image she projected in the old movies,
wondering aloud if "just once, I'd like to play the bad girl," but immediately
reminded that was impossible.
     But the movie does play loosely with people's memory of the originals.
Annette and Frankie are the only original cast members from the originals,
although the movie would have us believe there are more.  Connie Stevens plays
a minor role here that keeps reminding us that she must have been in the
originals, although she was never in any of the "beach" movies with Annette and
Frankie (side note by me: Didn't she star in the original "Where The Boys Are"
back in the early '60s?  [No, that was Connie Francis -ecl]).  There are
cameos by stars of late '50s-early '60s TV shows that for the most part, work
remarkably well, along with various "in-jokes" about the series they played in.
The one that works best is Bob Denver, Gilligan in GILLIGAN'S ISLAND, lamenting
the fact that "he was so smart he could take a pineapple (or was it a
coconut?), and some string, and he'd have a nuclear reactor, but could he fix a
two-foot hole in the boat??"  And when Don Adams, Maxwell Smart of GET SMART,
did his "Would you believe" bit, I was rolling in the aisles.
     However, there are problems with the movie, and some things just didn't
seem to fit into the "feel" of the movie.  Pee Wee Herman makes an appearance
as himself in the movie that, for me, just didn't fit in with the feeling of
the movie.  Also, it was painfully obvious that it took quite a few days to
film some of the beach scenes, as the weather went from bright sunlight to
overcast back to bright sunlight in the same scene.  Finally, if I see another
Siskel-Ebert impression, I'll scream (using Tony Dow and Jerry Mathers from
LEAVE IT TO BEAVER, one of the few cameos by stars that didn't work).
     All in all, though, BACK TO THE BEACH is a fun and enjoyable film you
should see if you're tired (as I am) of all the violence-lousy sci-fi films
that seem to take over during the summer months.  One word of warning, though:
leave the little kids at home for this one.  I saw the movie at a 5:00 PM
matinee that consisted mostly of young couples with young children (5-7 years
old), and the kids were getting a little restless during the movie.
