Title
Review for Carpool (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Pam Grier as a transsexual in ESCAPE FROM L.A.?  Ellen Barkin as a
Sports Babe sportscaster in THE FAN??  Marlon Brando impersonating a
Polynesian circus tent in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU???  We've had no
shortage of strange sights this summer and, yet, none may be as weird as
what ends CARPOOL, an excruciatingly dumb kiddie flick that puts five
brats and two adults (Tom Arnold and David Paymer) in a minivan and
chases them by the police under the guise of a hostage situation.  Tom
Arnold plays the crazed carnival owner with a gun, while Paymer attempts
an exasperated advertising executive.  Together, they provide the
running commentary during such silly set-pieces as a mosey through the
middle of an indoor shopping mall.  Groan, he says, remembering that THE
BLUES BROTHERS did it first and better.
     Only in the final reel does CARPOOL warrant a walk-out.  A runaway
Ferris wheel signals the beginning of the end-- an atrocious two-part
finale where the story tries to get serious.  Paymer playing Spiderman
and climbing a carnival ride is a sight to behold, but none is more
strange, more weird, and more utterly unexpected than that of Rod
Steiger's grumpy grocery store owner expounding upon the delights of a
chocolate donut.  Don't ask.  The movie is bad, the endings are
terrible, and, after a mere ten minutes of screen time, Mr. Steiger has
managed to sink even lower than his Cuban- accented turn in the stinky
SPECIALIST.  Directed by Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
President Arthur Hiller, who proves what Paymer's character says on the
subject of carpools:  "They're not supposed to be fun." (Rated "PG"/93
min.)
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tom Arnold, David Paymer, Rachel Leigh Cook, Micah Gardener, 
      Mikey Kovar, Colleen Rennison, Jordan Warkov, Kim Coates, 
      Rhea Perlman, Rod Steiger
Director: Arthur Hiller
Producer: Arnon Milchan and Michael Nathanson
Screenplay: Don Rhymer
Cinematography: David Walsh
Music: John Debney
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     What starts out as a short trip into family entertainment ends up 
as an interminable, dead-end journey that's likely to have both kids and 
adults asking the question, "When are we going to get there?"  This is 
the longest-seeming chase movie since Charlie Sheen fled the police in 
1993's THE CHASE, but it's not nearly as amusing.  Ninety minutes stuck 
in a minivan with Tom Arnold, David Paymer, and five annoying kids is 
not my idea of a fun time at the movies.  And, if for some reason you 
decide to see CARPOOL, it probably won't be yours, either.
     Things might have been okay if this film had gone someplace, 
anyplace, but it stalls early, then coasts through an hour of minimally-
amusing material before screeching to an amazingly improbable stop.  The 
humor is too feeble to overcome the repetitive lethargy of the formulaic 
storyline.  Sure, it's fun to see a few cars careening around inside a 
mall, but do we really need to endure fifteen minutes of such filler?
     CARPOOL introduces us to Daniel Miller (David Paymer), one of the 
most anal retentive ad men in the world.  He's so obsessed with being 
punctual that he sets his watch ahead ten minutes.  How he managed to 
marry a beautiful wife and take enough time off to have two kids are 
mysteries the script doesn't address.  On the morning of his big 
presentation at work, his wife is ill, so, despite all his worries about 
being late, he has to drive the carpool.  One-by-one, he picks up his 
five passengers, but, because nobody had breakfast, Daniel has to stop 
at the local supermarket to buy some donuts.  While he's waiting in the 
checkout line, he becomes involved in a stick up.  Soon, he's being held 
hostage by Franklin Laszlo (Tom Arnold), an innocent customer who is 
mistakenly identified as the robber.  With Daniel and his five young 
charges in tow, Franklin makes his getaway.
     As things develop, it turns out that the kids like Franklin, the 
"nice bad man", better than Daniel, the workaholic good guy.  So, during 
the course of their flight from a couple of incompetent cops (Kim Coates 
and Rhea Perlman), Franklin and Daniel bond, and the repressed father 
learns to let loose and have fun.  By the end, he's actually trying to 
help Franklin avoid the police and a jail sentence.  If you're 
interested in seeing just how far some movies will flaunt logic and 
believability in order to attain the happiest possible ending, CARPOOL 
would make a good case study.
     Tom Arnold brings a likable, off-the-wall enthusiasm to his role, 
blunting the more abrasive edges of his usual screen personality to 
present someone whom children will find appealing.  In fact, Arnold's 
performance is the only enjoyable aspect of this production.  David 
Paymer is adequate as the stiff-as-a-board Daniel -- this is the kind of 
role he's played more than once.  Rhea Perlman and Kim Coates, who are 
supposed to be contemporary keystone cops, are more irritating than 
funny.  And all of the child performers could use a few years of acting 
school.
     A handful of CARPOOL's jokes work, but, basically, this is just the 
latest in a long line of dumb motion pictures thrown out in an attempt 
to sucker in families.  It's an offensive movie -- not as a result of 
salacious or violent content, but because it takes for granted a 
fundamental lack of audience intelligence.  Neither children nor their 
parents are quite as stupid as the film makers think they are, and, 
despite the promise of the accompanying Loony Toons cartoon, "Superior 
Duck", it's likely that CARPOOL is headed for a deserved box-office 
wreck.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1996) *1/2 - C:Tom Arnold, David Paymer, Rod Steiger, Rhea Perlman.
Keep in mind that this film is directed by Arthur Hiller, the man who is the
president of the Motion Picture Academy. The man who theoretically should
have seen every good movie made since his term of office began. The man who
directed the hilarious Alan Arkin/Peter Falk comedy "The In-Laws" and also
such acclaimed films as "Love Story" and "The Hospital". Keep in mind that
the film's producer, Arnon Milchan, has produced some of the best films in
the last fifteen years, such as "The King of Comedy", "JFK", and "Falling
Down". With such experience, these men know exactly what makes a movie
great. Which is why it's so shocking that "Carpool" is a truly horrible
mess.
The plot is extremely simple. As a matter of fact, the plot is beyond
simple. Tom Arnold robs a gourmet pastry shop, kidnaps David Paymer and
takes his minvan, only to discover that Paymer was driving the neighborhood
kids to school. And for the rest of the film they have to not get caught by
the Seattle police, who are portrayed as the most inept police force on the
planet.
What's so troublesome about the film is that it's "PG". It's meant to be a
kids film. But there are things in this film that are completely
inappropriate for kids. There are gay jokes, jokes about breast enlargement,
young teenage boys grabbing and feeling young teenage girls, and other such
things. Also, Tom Arnold is portrayed as a hero and the cops, of course, are
idiots. Good message for the children. And the worst thing about the film,
regardless of what kinds of jokes there are, they just aren't funny, no
matter how old you are. The crowd in the theater when I saw the film laughed
once, and that was when a kid stuck a gummi bear up his nose. Comedy gold to
little kids you know. There were one or two lines in the film which I found
humorous, but certainly not enough to carry the entire film.
There's one ridiculous thing about a scene in the film I'd like to comment
on (there are many actually, but I just don't have that kind of time to
comment on all of them). At one point the "good guys" are at a carnival,
fleeing from the bad guys. One of the kids is riding a ferris wheel and
someone bumps a lever and the ferris wheel starts to spin dangerously fast.
And of course they have to save the kid. Now, why would an amusement park
ride have a setting on it which would never be used and is certain to cause
death? Just a thought.
Now I need to justify why I saw this film. The ONLY reason I watched it was
because my favorite actor, Rod Steiger, was in it. Arthur Hiller was smart
enough to get an actor he's worked with in the past (1976's "W.C. Fields and
Me") and then not smart enough to give him anything to do. He's in the last
five minutes of the film and he does a good job as always with what he's
given, but it's just not enough. And Hiller should be beaten for actually
putting Steiger in a clown outfit at the end and having him sell doughnuts
at a carnival. Booooooooooo Mr. Hiller.
At one point in the film, David Paymer says to someone "This isn't
funny".  Mr. Paymer, you're exactly right.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.
