Title
Review for Gambler, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Legacy Releasing
 Director: Karoly Makk
 Writer:   Katharine Ogden & Charles Cohen and Nick Dear
 Cast: Michael Gambon, Jodhi May, Polly Walker, Dominic
West, Luise Rainer, Johan Leysen, John Wood
   When Al Gore invented the Internet, he gave humankind its
greatest boon since Carrier knocked out the first air
conditioner in 1902.  The Web is so addicting that we have
no difficulty understanding the willingness of its devotees to
spend 18 hours a day staring at the screen.  Cigarette
addiction: easy.  Nicotine and tars are more compelling than
cocaine.  Alcohol?  It's in the genes.  But gambling?  How to
comprehend people's desire to throw away their rent money
when the house always wins?  Go to Atlantic City at any time
of day or night and just try to get a place at one of the one-
arm bandits!  People of all ages, often of modest means, plug
away trying to line up the lemons in a row.  From Monte
Carlo to Vegas and throughout most of the Far East,
croupiers keep busy raking in the money.  Finally, with
Hungarian director Karoly Makk's exquisitely photographed
production, "The Gambler," we have the answer.  People
gamble because they want to lose.  The desire is
unconscious but given the fact that we're all loaded with a
lifetime of guilt feelings, losing money rapidly in an exciting
environment provides us with redemption.  Who better to
describe the influence of suffering and guilt than the Russian
novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky?
   Makk's movie about an episode in the life of Dostoyevsky,
"The Gambler" is no long, rambling tale of the strange
lifestyle of speculators. This has already been done by
Robert Altman in his 1974 "California Split," which
demonstrated the emptiness of winning--a muddled story with
a grotesque soundtrack.  Instead Makk weaves an actual
account of a meeting that the Russian writer (played by
Michael Gambon) has at the age of 45 with a 20-year-old
stenographer, Anna Snitkina (Jodhi May) with the fictional
tale that Dostoyevsky is dictating to the lovely scribe.  The
two, separate stories are braided together so seamlessly that
we in the audience are caught up in the same passion that
the innocent, shy young woman feels as she reports for work
day after day, giving free rein to her fantasies about the
imagined personalities.  Anna soon catches on that the book
is actually a thinly veiled description of the author's
experiences despite the contrast she sees between his
cluttered St. Petersburg digs and the gorgeous, sun-drenched
streets and casino in the German town of Roulettenberg.  
   As Dostoyevsky, prodded compulsively by his enraptured
steno, dictates away at a yarn about young Alexei (Dominic
West--as the thinly veiled Dostoyevsky), who is tutor to the
children of the General (John Wood) and who falls in love
with the General's charming and stunning daughter Polina
(Polly Walker)--Anna fantasies herself as the sophisticated
Polina, imagining the middle-aged Dostoyevsky as the
dashing Alexei.
   Adding considerably to the story's fascination is the
contract which the author had, in desperation, signed with 
his publisher.  In return for a then much-needed sum of
money, Dostoyevsky is bound to turn in a novel of 160 pages
within 27 days.  If he fails to do so, the publisher would own
rights to everything the author should produce for the rest of
his life.  This race against time adds a melodramatic flourish
to the enterprise, while it puts Anna--who had been virtually
engaged to a boring but rising young government official--in
the position of a gambler herself.  Should the writer not finish
the manuscript on time, Anna would not receive the 50 rubles
compensation she so desperately needs.
   Michael Gambon is astonishing in the wonderfully
developed role of a self-destructive genius, afflicted with
epilepsy, a penchant for alcohol, and a calamitous
compulsion to gamble away his money.  In Anna's role, the
gently beautiful Jodhi May frames the picture, wandering
sadly in search of the man who had become her husband,
afflicted with periods of extreme poverty, but remaining
faithful to the man who showed her how to live.
Not Rated.  97 minutes.  (C) 1999 by Harvey Karten
