Title
Review for Assistant, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
For director Daniel Petrie (The Betsy, etc), bringing Bernard
Malamud's Pulitzer Prize winning 1957 novel to the screen has been
something of a labour of love.  The result is a profound, intelligent
and affecting tale that has some provocative messages.  However, the
film, which was completed in 1997, has taken a couple of years to
reach our screens.  This delay is not due to any inherent lack of
quality, but rather to the distributor's lack of faith.
It is the middle of the depression and jobs are hard to come
by, and a lot of small businesses are struggling to survive.  The
Bobers are a family of Jewish emigrants who have fled the rising tide
of anti- Semitism and prejudice within their homeland to make a new
start in America.  Morris Bober (German actor Armin Mueller-Stahl, who
is probably best know for his role as David Helfgott's father in the
brilliant Shine) runs a small grocery store.
Enter Frank Alpine (Ally McBeal's Gil Bellows), a drifter who
is unable to find honest work in this uncertain climate.  He somehow
hooks up with Ward Minogue (Jaimz Woolvet, from Unforgiven, etc), a
petty thief, who robs the Bober' store and pistol-whips Morris.  Frank
is consumed by guilt over the crime, and returns to the Bober's store
the next day and offers to help out.
Morris sees in Frank a reflection of his own son, who had died
years earlier.  His wife Ida (Joan Plowright) is less trusting, and
urges caution.  A romance slowly blossoms between Frank and the
Bober's daughter Helen (newcomer Kate Greenhouse), largely against the
wishes of the conservative Ida.  But the catalyst that irrevocably
changes the uneasy relationship between the Bobers and Frank comes
when Morris learns that he was one of the robbers.  While Ida's worst
suspicions are confirmed, Morris' belief in tolerance is put to the
ultimate test.
The presence of Mueller-Stahl and Plowright brings to mind
Barry Levinson's elegiac epic Avalon, in which the pair played
emigrants establishing their own family in Baltimore in the early
1900's.  Rather than a sprawling family saga though, The Assistant is
a powerful and quietly affecting tale of prejudice, tolerance and
forgiveness, crime and punishment.  Although the film has a darker
tone, Petrie deliberately keeps the whole thing low key and
understated.  His restrained and gentle pace perfectly suits the
material.  The ugly spectre of fascism raises its head in a brief but
evocative scene in which Frank and Helen witness a Nazi rally and
march.
Petrie draws insightful and honest performances from the
ensemble cast, who nail the essence of their characters with unerring
accuracy.  Working together for the third time, Plowright and Mueller-
Stahl strike sparks and develop an easy going, comfortable
relationship as the Bobers.  Bellows brings a certain charisma to the
role of Frank, and elicits the audience's sympathy.
please note that my reviews are rated on a scale out of five stars.
