Title
Review for Blind Vengeance (1990) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
All three of these films are available on home video.
Blind Vengeance (TV-1990) **** - C:Gerald McRaney, Lane Smith, Marg
Helgenberger.
An intelligent made for TV movie? Not possible you say? Well, it's true.
"Blind Vengeance" is a smart and original TV flick. At first you're led to
believe otherwise. Two boys are killed in a small town for unknown reasons
by three locals led by Lane Smith. But the three men are found not-guilty
because of a legal technicality. One of the boys' fathers (McRaney) come to
town to seek revenge on those who murdered his boy. You're thinking that
it's just going to be another "Death Wish" clone where the father hunts down
and kills the bad guys, but that isn't so. What he does instead is he starts
to slowly torment the killers, within the confines of the law, in hopes to
get them to turn against each other. The film's only flaw is a completely
unnecessary romantic sub-plot. "Blind Vengeance" is well worth watching.
The Great American Traffic Jam (TV-1980) 1/2 - C:Desi Arnaz Jr., Michael
Lerner, Rue McClanahan, Ed McMahon, Al Morinaro, Vic Tayback, Abe Vigoda,
Lyle Waggoner, Charles Napier, Howard Hesseman.
Absolutely dreadful TV movie with one of the most ridiculous and completely
boring stories ever written. A group of characters all get stuck in a big
traffic jam and then sit in their cars and talk about their problems. Tense!
Gripping! Exciting! Anyway, there's also a stupid subplot about the Traffic
Control Center trying different things to get traffic moving again. The
characters in the Traffic Control Center keep acting like this traffic jam
is the worst catastrophy in human history. This might have been meant to be
a parody of the disaster films from the period ("Earthquake," "The Towering
Inferno," etc.), but I just can't give a TV movie that much credit. As a
comedy it doesn't work, as satire it doesn't work, and it's a complete waste
of 100 minutes of your life. Also known as "Gridlock" but who cares.
Not My Kid (TV-1984) **1/2 - C:George Segal, Stockard Channing, Andrew
Robinson.
Typical TV movie about the effects of a teenage drug addict on a normal
family. After an entertaining first half, the film becomes a series of
tearful confessions by teenages in a drug rehab facility. Somehow it ends up
being the fault of the father (Segal) and he has to be the one to make the
final confession. (!) Be sure to applaud when Segal says the film's title.
Irritating music score and a laughable ending.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.
