Title
Review for Boys on the Side (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Joan Ellis
     Take a bunch of traditional elements, add a 90s twist, give it a
shake, and you have BOYS ON THE SIDE.  It is a road movie with a love
affair, an illness, and relationship problems, but this time around the
disease is AIDS, and the love affair is between two women.  The good
news is that the first half of the movie is played for laughs and gets
them.
     Jane (Whoopi Goldberg) is the lesbian, Robin (Mary-Louise Parker),
a smart gal with a problem, and Holly (Drew Barrymore), a refugee from
a lover who is an abusive cretin.  During the long drive to Tucson,
their personalities bubble up in comic conflict.  The rational,
orderly, sensible Robin appears to be, but of course isn't, a Donna
Reed retread whose favorite road songs are Carpenter hits.  Jane is a
rock singer who has seen enough of life to be relaxed and flexible
about whatever comes her way.
     The odd couple is joined at the last minute by Holly, who jumps
aboard with nothing in hand but a flirtatious spirit that is ignited by
every man she meets.  She's all attitude with platinum hair and bright
red nails, and she's thoroughly incorrigible.  Together they make
crazy, zany, flaky fun on the kind of journey that washes even the most
conservative of women in a freedom that only the open road can offer.
     The problems start when the road trip ends.  Once in Tucson, the
movie shifts abruptly to a leaden focus on the serious problems each
has brought from her old life.  It turns sad.  The sad side of comedy
is usually implicit and doesn't need to be hammered home as it is
here.  Director Herbert Ross lets sweetness turn to melodrama.
     As long as it stays on the wacky periphery of the American highway
culture, it's a good time.  Enjoy the airplane sitting in a suburban
backyard.  And be grateful that, just as we feel the movie slipping
away, Ross whips us back up, mercifully, with Holly's exactly right
love affair with a straight cop, who is thrilled she is pregnant with
another guy's child.
     The performances save the movie.  Whoopi Goldberg makes the most
of her wise tolerance for the foibles of others, wringing many of the
laughs from her reactions to the antics of her friends.  Mary-Louise
Parker lights up a fairly grim role with some inspired kidding around
on the road, rising to full flower as the mediator of a comically
horrible fight between the cretin and the flirt.
     Drew Barrymore has a true comedian's enviable ability to telegraph
what's coming without overdoing it, greatly prolonging the fun.  She is
delightful as the thickheaded, sweet-spirited flirt.  If you want an
hour of good laughs against a landscape of 90s dilemmas, then this
one's for you.  It is surely weakened by the final melodrama, but it
still beats staying home to pay the bills.
--
Permission is granted free of charge to quote Joan Ellis reviews
for any promotional, editorial, or critical use provided credit
is given: Nebbadoon Syndicate -- JOAN ELLIS
Please send information regarding reuse to 'nebbadoon@telecomp.com'
or 393 Hanover Center Road, Hanover Center, Etna, NH 03750
Tel 603-643-0400, Fax 603-643-0404

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, the characters talk about "chicks'
films."  There they mean romance, but there is something else that is
much more a chick's film.  There is a whole sub-genre of films like
RICH AND FAMOUS, BEACHES, STEEL MAGNOLIAS, and TERMS OF ENDEARMENT.
They are bittersweet explorations of women bonding with each other
through good times and bad, often to the beautiful and lush strains of
a score by Georges Delerue.  [His title theme for RICH AND FAMOUS is
one of the most beautiful film themes I know.]  Delerue died in 1992,
sadly, but the kind of films he scored go on with the latest entry
being BOYS ON THE SIDE.
     Actually BOYS ON THE SIDE begins atypically for a women's picture
with two very different women sharing a cross-country ride.  Jane
(Whoopi Goldberg) is a crude club singer who makes racist comments and
tells cab drivers to go back to Pakistan.  Robin (Mary-Louise Parker)
appears to be a slightly ditzy real estate broker with a penchant for
banal Carpenters songs.  Along the way they pick up Holly (Drew
Barrymore), the girlfriend-victim of an extremely obnoxious drug-dealer
and junkie.  While there is an initial tension between Jane and Robin,
of course women of goodwill always learn to respect each other
eventually.
     Curiously, near the middle  the film seems to run out of steam and
its apparent whole reason to be.  Suddenly it is no longer a road film
and the plot, after a short section of aimlessness, goes off in another
direction.  In an almost artificial manner the major women, and even
some of the minor, get to show both positive and negative traits.  It
is better than painting them as saints, but it appears to be just a bit
too deliberate.  Overall, however, the film plays it safe, pushing the
right buttons and espousing the right causes.  Director Herbert Ross
knows his audience a little too well.
     Whoopi Goldberg is obviously winning as an actress, but her acting
range has always seemed to me to be very limited.  She has a more
restrained performance in "Star Trek: The Next Generation," and Steven
Spielberg definitely got her to act in THE COLOR PURPLE, but she and
most of her directors are content to let her play the same character
time after time.  In BOYS ON THE SIDE she is playing a woman with a
personality almost identical to the one in JUMPING JACK FLASH or SISTER
ACT.  This is a film in which she could have shown some real dramatic
range, if nothing else as an investment in her own career.  The
meatiest part in the film actually is Mary-Louise Parker's and while
her role is not as flamboyant as is Goldberg's--in fact it appears very
unpromising at the beginning of the film--she makes much better use of
opportunities the story affords her.  We see more different facets of
her personality and even of Barrymores's than of Goldberg's.
     After a promising start this film gives us little besides a few
nuances in Parker's character that we have not seen better elsewhere.
Rating: low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Whoopi Goldberg, Mary-Louise Parker, Drew Barrymore.
Screenplay:  Don Roos.
Director:  Herbert Ross.
     I have nothing against that ever-growing sub-genre of American
filmmaking known as the "chick flick;" however, I do have a problem
with the idea that women will flock to any slapdash attempt at a sob
story, any muddled mess which happens to include female friends,
mothers and daughters and truckloads of tragedy.  Hollywood knows a
lot about how to market films to women, but it has done a pretty
miserable job of making them.  Fortunately, BOYS ON THE SIDE is that
rare creation, an emotional film that actually takes the time to
develop characters, although it goes a bit overboard in its third
act.
     BOYS ON THE SIDE begins in New York, where night club singer
Jane DeLuca (Whoopi Goldberg) is experiencing something of a career
downturn.  She decides to try her luck in Los Angeles, and looks for
someone to share a ride.  She finds Robin Nickerson (Mary-Louise
Parker), a prim real estate agent looking for a change of scenery,
and the very odd couple begins their cross-country trek.  Along the
way they are joined by Jane's friend Holly (Drew Barrymore), who is
fleeing from an abusive relationship, and the three women take to
the road.  But circumstances force them to stop before L.A., and the
relationships between the three friends are complicated by love,
illness, pregnancy and a murder trial.
     The first half of BOYS ON THE SIDE is surprisingly funny and
effective, thanks largely to three winning performances by Goldberg,
Parker and Barrymore.  Goldberg has coasted quite a bit lately,
playing the same hipper-than-thou character with a perpetual furrow
in her brow as she deals with dopey white folks, but she is quite
good here.  Her Jane is more layered, a lesbian with an unfortunate
habit of falling for straight women, and Goldberg is solid in a more
emotional role than any she has tackled since THE COLOR PURPLE.
Parker is a more subtle actress, and she has to be in a role that
easily could have become a fussy stereotype; instead, Robin is an
extremely sympathetic and appealing character.  But it is Drew
Barrymore who steals every scene she is in as the hopelessly
flirtatious Holly.  There is a positively infectious energy in her
performance, and the scene in which the three women subdue her drug
dealing boyfriend includes several hilarious highlights.
     BOYS ON THE SIDE is very funny, but there is more to it than
that.  Director Herbert Ross (who previously covered similar ground
in STEEL MAGNOLIAS) makes some interesting choices which add real
depth to the characters and play against expectations.  In one early
scene, Robin sprays disinfectant on Jane's headphones before using
them, and Goldberg gives us a "you've got to be kidding" reaction
shot.  But that moment takes on a different resonance when it is
revealed that Robin has AIDS, and might be taking basic precautions.
Similarly, it is a surprise when Jane refuses to hold Robin's hand
after learning of her illness, since we expect a nearly divine level
of understanding from gay characters, but that moment is complicated
by the realization that Jane might be falling for Robin, and that
pulling away is just a way of expressing her fear of those emotions.
     There are numerous surprises like that, both funny and
touching, throughout the first half of BOYS ON THE SIDE, but the
second half is much more uneven.  Once the women stop in Tuscon,
much of the film's energy stops with them, and humor inevitably
gives way to bathos.  The relationship between Holly and an earnest
young cop (Matthew McConaughey) is fairly silly, and the
relationship between Robin and a bartender (James Remar) is hampered
by his complete blandness as a character.  Most frustrating is a
murder sub-plot, which is largely unnecessary and symptomatic of
screenwriter Don Roos' tendency to pile far too much into far too
little time.  This is a film about the friendships between these
three women, and it seriously falters when those friendships are not
the focus of the story.  When they are the focus, BOYS ON THE SIDE
does exactly what it sets out to do:  it makes you laugh, it makes
you sad, and it makes you care.
