Title
Review for Slumber Party Massacre, The (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Not quite as good as THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE 
but not quite as awful as SILENT NIGHT DEADLY NIGHT, 
SLUMBER PARTY MASSACRE is still toward the bottom of the 
barrel of slasher entertainment. It's the one with the driller killer, a 
guy who was convicted of killing five people and has just broken 
out of jail, on the same night some debs are planning a slumber 
party that will be "just like old times." It's going to be just like old 
times for the driller killer too, whose first victim is a pretty phone 
repairman, who gets it after turning down a couple shaggy-haired 
dorks.
        The shaggy-haired dorks figure prominently in the plot 
(if you can call it that) of SLUMBER PARTY MASSACRE as they 
peek in the window of the girls at their slumber party. These are 
the braless girls who change their shirts in the middle of the night 
with the shades up for no reason: Needless Boob Shot #2. The first 
one comes earlier in the movie, as the girls shower after gym class, 
after which the killer sticks around to claim his second victim with 
the drill again. After the fourth or fifth drilling, it gets way too 
tedious.
        Back at the slumber party, we get a couple really stupid 
scares when a man sneaks down the stairs, only to reveal himself 
as the next-door neighbor, checking in on the girls. This same guy 
lurks in the garage later as one of the girls comes out to make sure 
it's closed (just one of many hardly-believable contrivances to get 
people out of the house) and of course the girl doesn't even wonder 
why the overly-concerned neighbor is hiding in her garage. By the 
time the nosy neighbor becomes the third victim, we're more than 
ready for him to pull into that great garage in the sky.
        The movie progresses more slowly than most horror 
movies (despite only lasting 77 minutes), with supposed scares 
(the cat jumps out of the closet, etc.) and non-gory murders at all 
the usual places, while two sisters left home alone next door wonder 
why the lights have gone out in the next house and there are girls 
screaming. The people in this movie are far less intelligent than the 
usual slasher movie characters; one boy wears a shirt with the 
number ten emblazoned across his chest and you wonder why 
he'd advertise his I.Q. like that.
        I don't have to tell you to stay away from SLUMBER 
PARTY MASSACRE, a movie which induces slumber for most of 
its viewers. Although its writer and director were both women, the 
female characters are never anything more than giggling idiots who 
don't even think to take the drill away from the killer after knocking 
him down. The killer himself is a fool with no motivation to be 
hacking up a bunch of teenagers, his only dialogue coming at 
the end, when he starts telling the remaining victims, "I love 
you," over and over. But no one has ever said that about this 
movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
