Title
Review for Negotiator, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Academy Award winning actor Kevin Spacey is easily one of the most
interesting actors working in film today.  Never to be taken for
granted, he brings a cool unpredictability to any part he plays.  In THE
NEGOTIATOR his cherubic face masks an intelligence and intensity that
makes his character completely captivating.  It's never clear what his
next move will be.  "I'm a stranger to you," he warns his costar Samuel
L. Jackson.  "You have no idea what I am capable of."  No kidding.
     Director F. Gary Gray's taut thriller starts with a formulaic
approach, but soon takes some major side turns.  From beginning to end,
the well-executed film has the audience on the edge of their seats.
Although there are some bad plot choices, as when one character's
bravado turns almost suicidal, the story is a well-developed and
intelligent mystery about police corruption.  With plenty of action to
keep the adrenaline pumping but not so much as to overwhelm the
psychological drama at the heart of the story, the movie strikes just
the right balance.
     The brightly written script by James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox mixes
in just enough humor without transforming the tone of the picture.  It
assumes the audience has enough intelligence to see some obvious ruses
even before most of the characters in the drama realize what is
happening.
     It all starts with hotshot police negotiator Danny Roman (Jackson)
freeing a little girl from her deranged father, who is holding a shotgun
to her head.  Risking his own life, Danny enters the room and talks the
father away from his hostage.  In the process, some of his men believe
he endangered their lives, so his triumph is less than complete.  This
scene serves to set up his character as being a prime risk taker and to
demonstrate some hidden resistance and resentment toward him from some
of his coworkers.  Most, however, view him as a hero and a role model.
     The body of the story has Danny creating his own hostage situation.
When he is falsely accused of killing his partner and of embezzling
money from the police pension fund, he captures the head of Internal
Affairs and others who he thinks may be in on it or may be able to help
him.  J.T. Walsh, in his prime before his recent, untimely death, plays
Inspector Niebaum, the head of Internal Affairs.  Walsh, who specialized
in portraying characters with shady reputations, is perfect for the
part.
     A good thriller becomes an even better one, when Danny announces
that he will only negotiate with Chris Sabian (Spacey), another
negotiator and one whom Danny has only met once.  As good as Jackson is
as the story's central character, Spacey is even better.  Chris and
Danny go into a beautifully scripted series of negotiations.  Danny is
the funniest, but Chris is the most surprising.  Suffice it to say that
you wouldn't want to play cards with either of them.
     (Chris first enters the story in the midst of his own tricky
negotiation.  He is trying to talk an angry wife out of the bedroom and
a resistant teenage daughter off of the phone.  He seems on the verge of
losing both battles when the call comes about Danny.)
     Russell Carpenter, TITANIC's Academy Award winning cinematographer,
gives a fast-paced energy to the picture's look.  Using fast moving
close-ups, slow motion, and a few cuts to black and white, he gives the
movie a gritty intimacy.
     The engrossing movie has a strong supporting cast that includes
David Morse, Ron Rifkin, and John Spencer among others.
     The test of a mystery and an action thriller is how well the
writers can bring the story to a conclusion.  THE NEGOTIATOR has some
well thought through ending surprises that are completely plausible and
fascinating to watch unfold.
     Finally, get a piece of paper and write down this movie rule.  If a
film has Kevin Spacey in it, you will not be disappointed.  Even if
Spacey should find his way into a bad movie, his part will be well worth
seeing.
     THE NEGOTIATOR runs a little too long at 2:15.  It is rated R for
violence and profanity and would be fine for most teenagers.

Author
Matt Williams
Like a successful hostage negotiation, hostage negotiation dramas tend
to follow a set pattern.  As such, most hostage films fall into one of
two camps:  those where you sympathize with the hostage takers (see Dog
Day Afternoon, or Cadillac Man), or those in which you're diametrically
opposed to them (such as Die Hard, or any of its clones).  The
Negotiator tries to have it both ways, with strong actors on either side
of the line, and surprisingly is able to pull it off.
Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson) is one of Chicago's finest hostage
negotiators.  Not only does he have an encyclopedic knowledge of the
"rules" of negotiation, but he has a quick wit and firm resolve.
However, someone inside the police department is pulling a dangerous
scam, and Danny seems like the perfect fall guy.  Before he knows it,
Danny finds himself charged with a serious crime.  To prove his
innocence, the negotiator takes his own hostages.
At Danny's insistence, Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey), an unknown
negotiator from across town, is brought in to help resolve the
situation.  But can Danny truly trust this stranger...or will the
conspirators continue to weave their deadly web?
Hostage negotiation dramas have lost their luster in recent years. Even
the twist of having a hostage-taker who knows the rules is less than
fresh.  Way back in 1988, Hans Gruber was already using negotiation
tactics against the negotiators in Die Hard.  However, what works in The
Negotiator is not the methods used, but the sheer clash of wills between
Jackson and Spacey.
The casting in the central roles couldn't have been better. Samuel L.
Jackson can channel a thinking man's desperate anger with a single
furrow of his brow.  Kevin Spacey, on the other hand, displays his icy
intensity with cool, calculated precision.  Watching the battle of wits
between these two men is definitely the high point of the movie.
Ample comic relief is provided by the omnipresent, yet underacknowledged
Paul Giamatti.  He plays a weaselly con artist/computer hacker who,
through no fault of his own, gets taken hostage by Roman.  His comic
jibes lighten up a few of the film's more tedious moments.
Several times, the film falls back on a tired crutch wherein control is
wrested from the negotiator by an outside force (be they renegade cops,
or sinister FBI agents).  Despite having been done to death, this
meaningless plot device interrupts the best parts of the film, when
Jackson and Spacey go mano a mano.
Despite this, The Negotiator still emerges as an exciting thriller,
showcasing two very good actors at the top of their form.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Bob Bloom
 Sometimes as you watch a film you get a sixth sense that something is
lacking.
 I'm not talking about some grade-Z slasher film with a no-name cast, but a
major studio production with bankable stars.
 On the surface the movie, about a highly-decorated Chicago police hostage
negotiator who takes hostages of his own after being framed for his
partner's murder and the theft of $2 million from the police pension fund,
is enjoyable as well as being predictable.
 But it's missing that spark, that added something that raises it from the
mere ordinary.
And it's in the performances of Samuel L. Jackson and Kevin Spacey that
this fault lies. Both are very fine actors who usually dominate the screen.
But in The Negotiator they seem to only be going through the motions. Both
give workmanlike performances. Both are very professional and smart. Both
are very good. But it's as if they didn't put their hearts and souls into
the project.
 It's more like the movie was just another job, another paycheck.
 With Jackson and Spacey as protagonists - Spacey's character, like
Jackson's, is a hot-shot police negotiator - sparks should fly when they
face off on screen.
 But nothing happens. Just two fine actors throwing lines at each other. A
remoteness is emitted from the screen. An invisible barrier keeps you from
any emotional involvement in either character or Jackson's predicament.
 Jackson and Spacey are too intelligent and too charismatic to allow their
characters to be nothing more than two-dimensional archtypes. They endow
their roles with enough business to keep you interested. But, perhaps
because of their reputations or their past performances, we've come to
expect more.
 Maybe it's because the screen just doesn't explode from the force of their
personalities. Or maybe it's because they are so focused on each other that
they forgot there's an audience watching.
 It doesn't help that The Negotiator has a been-there, done-that feel to
it. An honest cop, framed by dishonest bretheran. We've seen it all before.
 And after a while it becomes obvious who the secret leader of the
conspiracy is. While everyone else involved in the hostage situation wants
to rush in and shoot Jackson's Danny Roman, only one of his superiors
remains the calm voice of reason.
 Fans of Jackson and Spacey should enjoy The Negotiator. It's just that
considering the fine cast, which also includes David Morse, Ron Rifkin and
John Spenser, you'd expect more of an edge, a bit more unpredicatibility.
 As it is, The Negotiator is merely routine. And that is not enough.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: F. Gary Gray
Writers: James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, J. T. Walsh, Ron Rifkin, John
Spencer, David Morse, Regina Taylor, Paul Giamatti, Siobahn Fallon, Paul
Guilfoyle
"The Negotiator" is almost drowning in cliches, but they're only extremely
evident once the movie has ended.  For instance, the film opens with a
sequence where the film's one negotiator, Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson),
does a tough negotiating job with a homicidal lunatic.  He manages to talk
his way into the room, and even allow the police to get a wound shot on
him, all without even getting a scratch.  Afterwards, they go to a bar and
party, laughing at the news when it covers the situation they were just
present at.
How many times have we seen this in a film like this?  I can remember
"Speed," but at least that whole bit had to do with the actual plot.  The
things that happened in that sequence resulted in the rest of the movie. 
Here, the film is trying to prove three things: 1) that Danny likes to risk
his life for his job, 2) that he's very excellent at his job, and 3) that
he's just too cool for words.  And generally, it does a good job of setting
his character up for the rest of the movie, where he will be stripped away
of everything and turned into a desperate creature.
As you've no less seen in the previews, "The Negotiator" deals with another
in the long line of "Dog Day Afternoon" rip-offs, where hostages are taken
and we're given more of a glimpse on the inside with the bad guys and less
on the outside with the good guys.  In this film, though, it's an almost
impulsive move.  After the opening sequence, Danny's partner (Paul
Guilfoyle, who IS in everything these days), who was investigating stolen
funds from the department's treasury, is killed and Danny is framed for the
murder.  Danny didn't do it and we know it, but as the evidence comes in,
everyone points the finger at Danny, and he goes over the edge when he
walks into the office of the man investigating the crime, Inspector Niebaum
(the late J.T. Walsh, playing a creep for the last time), and in a fit of
rage, takes him and three others hostage.
After a bit of pandemonium, Danny refuses to speak to anyone except for a
West-Side Manhattan negotiator he's never met, Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey),
who comes over and begins to ease the tensions between Danny and the cops
who are trying to take him out, probably because some of them are the guys
who framed him.  It's a story we've all seen before, although told a little
differently since the kidnapper knows all the little twists of negotiating,
and worst of all, knows everyone who's trying to take him out so he can
perhaps juice up their emotions a bit.  As the film goes on, we're treated
to the intensity of the situation as well as a giant conspiracy that slowly
unravels as the film moves on.  Who set Danny up, and can he find out
before the cops break in and kill him or someone who knows something?
Since you've seen this all before, basically, I'll give you two good
reasons to see this particular entry: Samuel L. Jackson and Kevin Spacey. 
Here we have two of the best actors working today, the former a master of
fiery intensity, the latter a master of calm intensity.  And since the
entire film, or basically most of it (following a lengthy exposition),
these two are playing cat-and-cat games with one another, the film is
intensely watchable.  Who wasn't holding their breath the first time they
saw the final scene of "Pulp Fiction," where Jackson gave such a powerful
performance that when he lost the Oscar to Martin Landau, we were all with
him when he mouthed "Shit" on the air?  And who wasn't on the edge of their
seat throughout "The Usual Suspects," just listening to Spacey weave that
story from beginning to end?  Watching one of them is amazing enough, but
when they're both on screen, playing off eachother with flawless chemistry,
it's just pure movie magic.
Now, let me sidetrack to talk about something else.  When reviewing a movie
like this, it's almost a rule that you point out all the little plot holes,
flubs, and generally be extremely cynical about it all, because this, after
all, is a genre-pic, one that has been made many a time before, sometimes
several times in a year.  When reviewing films like this, reviewers often
just say something like "I liked it when I watched it, but when I left the
theatre, I began to realize that the film was weak" blah blah blah.  This
is a fault, and it's something that I've done before as well (just read
some of my older reviews for proof of this).  Of course a film like this
may seem weak when it's over: you're not watching it.  Film, in any genre
or form, is generally supposed to be one thing: an experience.  Unless it's
a very complex film that you're trying to figure out the plot or theme(s)
to, it's pretty much a waste of time to rely on afterthoughts because
they're usually totally ignorant.  I know someone who saw "Titanic" twice
last year, and just now has deemed it crap because they realized
"glossiness doesn't cover up plot holes."  This person damn near cried when
they saw it.
The same goes for this film.  The chief pleasure in this film is just
watching it, and when watching a film that's pleasing, it's not entirely
evident of the plot holes and cliches till afterwards.  It's such a pot
boiler that looking back on it may reveal things that might not work out in
retrospect, but it's such a well-directed film (thank you, F. Gary Gray)
that it's edge-of-your seat the whole time.  He handles all the action well
in short interludes of chaos.  He balances just the idea of a hostage
situation and a mystery that is totally involving all the way.  He gets
brilliant performances from Jackson and Spacey, and even gets strong
support, especially from everyone's favorite actor they don't know, Paul
Giamatti (playing a sleazy, hysterical hostage).  What's the point in
mentioning any plot holes this story may have when it doesn't matter when
this film is just happening?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) DIE HARD is a good movie. True, it is formulaic, but it is
very well made by someone who really understands the genre. The same can be
said of THE NEGOTIATOR. 
For the first fifteen minutes, THE NEGOTIATOR looks like it's going to be
just another cop movie. Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson), the hero cop, is
introduced to us in an unoriginal set piece. A police negotiator, he talks
down a potential murder-suicide long enough for snipers to kill the man. The
badly-written press fawns over him, the hero of the day. His new wife wants
him to be more careful at work. 
His plot device, I mean partner, secretly tells him that he's heard some
crooked cops, in Roman's own precinct, have been stealing from the
disability fund, and that internal affairs is in on it too. Before they can
meet again to get specific, his partner is killed, and the murder AND
corruption are pinned on Roman. 
Roman marches into the office of internal affairs, just for a minute, to
demand answers. One thing leads to another, and Roman finds himself as a
hostage taker. He clears the floor of everyone but his four hostages: two
cops, a secretary in internal affairs, and a mediocre crook. 
It is here that the movie's pace picks up. Jackson starts to shine as the
smart, determined cop forced into an awkward situation. Roman knows exactly
what the officers will try to do, so he has the edge. He plays it up, taking
away the "eyes and ears" of the cops, and taunting and abusing the rookie
negotiator assigned to the case. 
The first thing Roman does is to demand that Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey) be
his negotiator. The two haven't met, but Roman knows Sabian works slow, and
he can't trust anyone in his own precinct. 
Spacey is a very good actor with a commanding presence, and when Sabian
shows up, his deliberateness and intensity make the local cops shrink. When
the locals botch a rescue attempt, his indignation is so fierce that even
the audience can't help but wince. 
Sabian is finally given full command of the situation. Roman, relieved, is
able to leverage some help from Sabian in finding the real embezzler. Sabian
is not Roman's lapdog, but he is reasonable, and Roman knows how to exploit
that. Slowly, with the calculated timing of a good mystery, evidence
clearing Roman starts to fall into place. Don't forget that this is an
action movie and not a mystery, so there are lots of bullet-ridden
interludes of the dirty cops trying to cover their tracks. But that is not
all there is to this movie. 
Once it got going, this movie really drew me in. Part of the reason is the
great performances by Jackson and Spacey. It's not much of an ensemble
movie, but the stars give standout performances. 
Another part is the well-paced, fleshed-out script by James DeMonaco and
Kevin Fox, two relative newcomers. The script is full of detail in the
construction of the conflict, the revelation of the real crook, and the
resolution of the story. In addition, the secondary characters are
well-chosen, well-written and (relatively) three-dimensional. 
Yet another part is the direction by F. Gary Gray, also a relative newcomer.
Gray deserves a lot of the credit for the pacing and intensity of the film. 
The only filmmaker who's not a newcomer is the cinematographer, Russell
Carpenter, who won an Oscar for TITANIC.He gave the film a cohesive, dark look. 
As I said, this film is good like DIE HARD (or SEVEN, for that matter): it
is well crafted by a director and screenwriters who really know how to work
in the genre. It surprised me to learn that they didn't have more
professional experience than they do, but hopefully they have earned
themselves some more work after THE NEGOTIATOR.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
David Nusair
Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, J.T. Walsh
"The Negotiator" is the best movie, alongside "The Truman Show", I have
seen this summer.  It is intelligent and well-acted and does not feature
any comets or asteroids or lizards, just a expertly crafted storyline and
some of the best acting you're likely to see in any action movie.
The movie is about an expert hostage negotiator (played by Samuel L.
Jackson) who finds himself being framed for murder by an unknown source. 
He thinks he can find some answers in the office of an Internal Affairs
officer (very nicely played by J.T. Walsh) and ends up taking the place
hostage.  Being a hotage negotiator, he "knows the rules of engagement"
and, as his first demand, requests a negotiator of his own choosing (Kevin
Spacey).  Much of the remainder of the film involves Spacey and Jackson
talking to each other on the phone, trying to work the situation out.
Now, from my description, this movie may sound like a standard hostage
taking plot, along the lines of "Dog Day Afternoon", but it's not.  It's
really so much more.  For one thing, there's the brilliant performances of
Jackson and Spacey, two actors at the top of their game.  Jackson hits
just the right note as a man who's innocent, but not afraid to do whatever
it takes to clear his name.  Spacey plays an imperfect hero, if he can be
called that, who constantly finds himself trying to assert his authority
over cops and FBI agents who want to end the situation quickly, but
violently. 
Without a good script, the performances would have been worthless.  That
is not the case here.  The dialogue comes off as realistic and, more
importantly, not just as words the screenwriter might have thought would
"sound good".  For example, there is a scene early on in the film in which
Jackson and his partner are sitting in a parked car talking, and a fellow
police officer interrupts them.  The following exchange between the three
of them felt real, and not just like something a writer might have
throught police officers sound like.  Sure, it's a small thing, but it's
also very important.  
The ending is a bit of a letdown, though.  I won't spoil it, but let's
just say that everything is wrapped up a little too nicely.  The
revelations that come during the final few minutes all arrive in a way
that seemed, to me, way too conveniant.  It's as if the writer had painted
himself into a corner, and couldn't think of an original way to get out. 
The real surprise of the film is J.T. Walsh, in a complex role that a
lesser actor would likely have been unable to pull off.  He gives such a
subtle performance as the internal affairs officer who may or may not know
more than he lets on.  He is able to say with merely a glance what most
actors can't say with a whole page of dialogue.  Sadly, this is his last
film.  He died last year of a heart attack.  He was a profound talent, and
this film is a fitting showcase for his talent.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  F. Gary Gray
Cast:  Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, John Spencer, David Morse, Ron
Rifkin, J.T. Walsh, Regina Taylor, Joey Perillo, Siobahn Fallon
Screenplay:  James DeMonaco, Kevin Fox
Producers:  Arnon Milchan, David Hoberman
Runtime:  140 min.
US Distribution:  Warner Bros.
Rated R:  violence, profanity
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        I'm not sure of the Negotiator to which the title of this film refers: 
is it Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson), a Negotiator accused of taking
hostages to prove his innocence, or is it Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey),
the Negotiator Roman wants called in to talk to him?  Perhaps it's not
important.  What is important is that Roman has been accused of killing
his partner, and now his friends and colleagues all believe he's is
guilty.  So, he heads up to the Internal Affairs office, where he
suspects Inspector Niebaum (J.T. Walsh) is conspiring against him.  And
he takes everyone hostage.
        The Negotiator is, unfortunately, a professional execution of a very
mediocre script.  I came close to recommending the film with more
enthusiasm, but the problems in the story grew very tiresome by the last
scene.  Like so many thrillers, The Negotiator starts off with an
interesting premise and concludes with sequences that make no sense.  It
should have been all psychological, featuring a showdown between two
terrific actors (Jackson and Spacey).  It has great scenes between the
two, but there's too much contrived plot here to fully enjoy the
chemistry.  By the time the credits rolled, I wondered if I had seen a
masked entry into the Fugitive series.  
        The film was directed by F. Gary Gray, and he is good at what he does. 
Just about every scene here -- even the ridiculous ones at the end --
are sharp and exciting.  Consider, if you've seen the film, the scene in
which men armed with machine guns go in to kill Roman, without Sabian's
consent.  Gray shoots this scene with skill, and it has the kind of
claustrophobic feel that action scenes in small places need to be
successful.  The problem is that the scene is not necessary, nor is it
realistic.  The Negotiator's strongest points are in the electricity of
the dialogue, and scenes like this break my concentration. 
Screenwriters should learn that, more often than not, words are more 
interesting than bullets.
        But there is a lot to like about this film, particularly in the
performances and Gray's observation of them.  Spacey is a miracle of an
actor, and I'm elated that he's not being typecast as a psycho.  The
first scene with him is terrific, showing him in a comical scene with
his family (this scene is also nice because few thrillers even take the
time to show us a little bit about the characters).  Physically, Spacey
is not an imposing man -- he's actually much shorter than most of the
other actors in this film -- but he has a way of delivering dialogue
that demands attention.  He's a magnetic screen presence, and one of the
few of these who can actually act.
        Jackson is equally good, and plays the desperate man well.  Jackson is
one of the more versatile actors working today, proving in film after
film that he's not bound by any limitations as a performer.  He speaks
his lines with conviction and ease, and never lets the audience slip out
of the moment.  The two actors are fascinating together, even when
speaking through a telephone.  One of the best scenes in the film is a
moment in which the two stars and the director are working perfectly in
sync -- just as Sabian arrives on the scene, and he's talking to Roman
for the first time, the two men speak calmly as Sabian is preparing to
negotiate with him.  It's hard to explain the energy in this scene, but
it's all visual, displaying the talent of the actors intertwined with
Gray's swift style.  
        There are also some terrific supporting performances.  Paul Giamatti,
whom I will always remember as Howard Stern's nemesis, Pig Vomit, is in
every movie this summer; here, he's hilarious as one of the hostages. 
David Morse continues with his string of roles that require him to play
bad ass military guys (which he does well).  The late J.T. Walsh is
adequately dark as the mean Internal Affairs bad guy.  And Regina Taylor
gives a good performance as Roman's wife.  None of the characterizations
in this film are particularly strong, but it's one of the few pictures
I've seen in which acting talent actually makes up for the lack of
characters.
        Reader, you can't understand how much I want to like this movie just a
little bit more than I do.  The acting is so good.  The direction is so
good.  But the script is so silly, so profoundly dumb, and so shameless
in its regression from interesting to absurd, that I just can't quite
say that The Negotiator is a good film and live on with my clear
conscience.  Why did we have to have another story about a man clearing
his innocence?  Why did I need to see more silly scenes in which people
hack into computers to find out hidden information (the computer is the
*worst* place to keep incriminating information)?  Why did there have to
be silly shootouts, and machinegun battles in close quarters?  Actors
this talented don't need all this plot -- just contrive a crisis, put
them in a room, and let them do the rest.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Oscar veterans Samuel L. Jackson and Kevin Spacey star in yet another
hostage film that rakes the coals over last year's dismal MAD CITY
(5/10), while getting close to the nail-biting ambience of the 70's
classic DOG DAY AFTERNOON (8/10). 
PLOT:
Hostage negotiator extraordinaire Danny Roman (Jackson) suddenly
becomes suspect number one in a fellow cop's murder. Sensing a setup,
Danny decides to take matters into his own hands, and holds a couple of
hostages of his own. Enter negotiator number two, named Sabian
(Spacey), who climbs into the picture to talk our man Danny and the
hostages down safely from their plight. The tension builds...and
there's your movie.
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining thriller that grabbed me from its first few minutes,
generated some genuine interest despite its lengthy runtime, and
continued to accentuate the incredible charismatic acting abilities of
one Samuel L. Jackson. Now this positive review comes despite the fact
that this film's plot line seemed to have been completely given away by
its "morons for hire" marketed movie trailer. So even though I pretty
much knew what to expect going into this movie, I must say that the
tension and thrills were still there for me, so kudos go out to the
director and the notable actors in that regard.
This movie always seemed to keep me interested in its direction, and
despite a couple of slower moments in its midst, the "I wonder what's
gonna happen next?" vibe never left my back pocket. It reminded me a
lot of the walkie-talkie conversations that Bruce Willis and Reginald
VelJohnson had in the original DIE HARD (8/10) movie, but on a much
larger scale, with more tension and less action. Having said that, I
must admit that some of the plot points did escape me in this one, but
matter not, since the film as a whole worked on the tray that it was
prepared, which was a fun, action thriller. 
Points to Pig Vomit from Howard Stern's PRIVATE PARTS (7/10), Paul
Giamatti, for scoring nicely as the comic relief in this thrilling
tale, as well as a posthumous tip of the cap to J.T. Walsh who
delivered icicles as the implicated internal affairs rep. But for the
most part, I think that it's the continuing great work by Sam Jackson
that makes this film stand out as much as it does! I mean, the plot
doesn't necessarily revive the genre by any stretch of the imagination,
but Sammy always seems to keep us interested in his character, and
curious as to his next outcome or action. Mr. Jackson's genuine aura
oozes from the screen and into your psyche, as he continues to staple
himself as one of the most gifted, and watcheable actors of this
generation. Overall, this film delivers great acting, consistent
thrills, a mediocre plot line, and a solid nacho-muncher of a good time
at the movies.
Little Known Facts: 
This film was dedicated to actor J.T. Walsh, who passed away at the age
of 53, after the production of this film was completed. He died on the
27th of February, 1998 of an apparent heart attack while on a holiday.
He received further posthumous recognition when Jack Nicholson
dedicated his Best Actor Oscar for AS GOOD AS IT GETS (7.5/10) to him. 
Sam Jackson played one of Eddie Murphy's uncles in RAW (7/10), and
Stacks Edwards in Martin Scorsese's masterpiece of the mob GOODFELLAS
(9/10). Sam's middle name is Leroy, and he was an admitted drug user
until he completed drug rehab two weeks before playing a drug addict in
Spike Lee's JUNGLE FEVER (7/10).
Kevin Spacey's real name is Kevin Fowler.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Negotiator (1998)
Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, David Morse, Ron Rifkin, John Spencer, J.
 T. Walsh, Regina Taylor, Siobahn Fallon, Paul Giamatti, Joey Perillo, 
Nestor Serrano, Jim Jenkins, Randy Walker. Written by James DeMonaco and 
Kevin Fox. Directed by F. Gary Gray. 138 minutes.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
"The Negotiator" is one of those films where you can virtually see the 
gears turning in the writers' heads. Having come up with a nifty concept -
- what if two top-notch hostage negotiators faced off against one another 
--  the writers must figure out how to get the characters into their 
proper places, and that's where the film suffers. Plot contrivances, 
overly abrupt attitude changes and awkwardly grafted-on action sequences 
keep this thriller from hitting the bull's eye, although it still 
entertains despite the problem areas.
Shrewd casting helps. Two of the finest actors working today, Samuel L. 
Jackson and Kevin Spacey are masters of intensity. Jackson's specialty is 
creating fiercely intelligent characters with a love of language, while 
Spacey takes a more low-key approach, focusing on droll, erudite types 
who mask their humanity with layers of finely-honed cynicism. What a 
treat to watch them interact in the same film.
Combining elements of "The Fugitive" and "Die Hard," "The Negotiator" 
deals with a very good man in a very bad situation. Danny Roman (Jackson) 
is one of Chicago's best hostage negotiators and a bit of a show-boater. 
After a tense, well-staged opening scene, where he risks his life to 
rescue a little girl held captive by her deranged father, Roman promises 
his recent bride that he'll stop taking such extreme chances and start 
coming home every night for dinner. As any seasoned moviegoer knows, cops 
making statements like that are just begging for trouble.
Sure enough, trouble finds him when his partner, ready to spill the beans 
about departmental embezzlement of retirement funds, is murdered and 
Roman becomes the prime suspect. The film hits an awkward spot here, as 
the department turns against the heroic cop almost instantly. While the 
move is handy for the plot, it just doesn't wash. As a number of real-
life police situations have shown, officers are generally given the 
benefit of doubt within the department even when their misdeeds are 
witnessed by many. The idea that Roman's fellow officers, knowing what 
kind of man he is, would turn against him based solely on shaky 
circumstantial evidence is patently unbelievable.
Realizing that his life is about to be destroyed by a lazy plot device, 
Roman makes a desperate move, taking hostages in the 20th floor Internal 
Affairs office. As a "Dog Day Afternoon" street scene develops, Roman 
insists he'll only speak with Chris Sabian (Spacey), another top hostage 
negotiator from a different precinct. Roman's logic is clear. Since any 
of the officers he knows could be involved in the embezzlement scheme and 
murder, the only chance he has of getting to the truth is by dealing with 
an outsider. But can he get Sabian to believe him and become an ally 
instead of an adversary?
"The Negotiator" works best during its middle section, as the mind-games 
between Roman, Sabian and the rest of the force are in full flower. 
Jackson gets the lion's share of the good scenes, tersely explaining 
Hostage Negotiation 101 to a patrolman trying to talk him down, and 
making Internal Affairs Inspector Niebaum (the late J.T. Walsh) sweat as 
he interrogates him while explaining how he can tell whether or not a man 
is lying simply by observing his eye movements.
Spacey has a ball as the tightly-wound Sabian, attempting to maintain a 
modicum of cool while trying to outthink both Roman and a lot of trigger-
happy cops. Spacey's dark eyes radiate a keen intellect that enhances the 
palpable tension propelling the story. 
As entertaining as Jackson and Spacey are, their characters would have 
been more involving had they been given some shading. Each actor 
establishes a tone for his character and essentially stays there for the 
entire film. Roman and Sabian are dynamic, but they seem defined solely 
by the film's extreme situation. Some insight on how these men became the 
way they are would have helped broaden the characters.
Two of the supporting hostages make a strong impression. The always 
entertaining Paul Giamatti is a hoot playing a snitch with a fatalistic 
loosey-goosey attitude, and Siobahn Fallon, the peculiar farm wife from 
"Men in Black," is fascinating as a secretary whose loyalties are 
maddeningly uncertain.
Of course, when dealing with a high-concept storyline, you have to figure 
out how to resolve the situation, and "The Negotiator" falters in this 
department, with plot contrivances and standard-issue action scenes 
diminishing the tension so carefully established before. Some major 
revelations are telegraphed earlier in the film, making the big surprises 
not all that surprising.
Despite its flaws, "The Negotiator" succeeds more than it fails, 
maintaining a satisfying level of tension for most of the film and 
providing a strong showcase for the contrasting acting styles of Jackson 
and Spacey. Had the filmmakers been as careful with the script as they 
were with the casting, this could have been a real beaut.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./ Regency Enterprises
 Director: F. Gary Gray
 Writer: James Demonaco & Kevin Fox
 Cast:Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, David Morse, Ron
Rifkin, John Spencer, J.T. Walsh
   When I was seven years old I was certain that doctors
never got sick.  The thought that a doctor could be treated by
another physician simply did not enter my mind.  After all:
teachers knew everything.  Would a teacher have to continue
reading books and taking courses?  F. Gary Gray's police
drama "The Negotiator" raises a similar issue.  What happens
when a hostage mediator takes a hostage himself?  Would he
dicker with himself over the terms of surrender?  That's silly. 
But since he knows all the tricks of the trade, would any other
arbitrator be able to put one over on him?  Not likely.  Unless,
we see, the negotiator is Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey), the
guy hand-picked by Lt. Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson) to
be his go-between.  Since Roman has now become the
victor-victim with a handful of hostages in tow, he can't be
fooled by the usual maneuvers like being "talked down."  This
means that Sabian must improvise for the first time in his life
to bring an end to an unbearably tense situation.  How he
does this--and how Roman deals with his new status--are the
concerns of the melodrama, scripted by James DeMonaco
and Kevin Fox.
   Though "The Negotiator" fits seamlessly into the season of
formulaic summer spectacles, two particulars lift it above the
commonplace.  One is DeMonaco and Fox's series of twists
and turns. Some of the guys you'd swear are bad turn out to
be just doing their job, while at least one of the angels is not
what he seems.  The other is the tension-riddled performance
of Samuel L. Jackson, who creates a believably taut role as a
super cop now suspected of murder and, together with the
wonderful Kevin Spacey as his adversary and friend light up
the screen with verbal histrionics and sizzling action.  
  The story opens as do many others of the genre with an
action unrelated to the central theme.  Roman is negotiating
with a crazed man who is holding a small girl hostage,
demanding to see his estranged wife.  The perp, unfamiliar
with the tricks of the trade, falls prey to Roman's banter
allowing the girl to escape unharmed.  Soon after this,
Roman's partner (played by Paul Guilfoyle) is murdered in his
car and Roman is charged with the crime.  We are thrust into
a sometimes convoluted plot involving the theft of two million
dollars from a policemen's disability fund with evidence
pointing to Roman's guilt.  Refusing to be taken into custody
(he could not tolerate being away from his beloved wife
Karen, played by Regina Taylor), Roman takes Inspector
Niebaum (J.T. Walsh) hostage in the latter's office together
with the local snitch (Nestor Serrano) and Niebaum's
secretary.  After making the negotiator on hand look like a
stuttering dimwit, he insists on speaking only with master
haggler Sabian.  The central part of the movie is occupied
with the badinage between the two brothers-in-arms, Roman
insisting on his innocence while Sabian torments the
frightened game almost mercilessly.
   The on-and-off exposes of bad cops by the press add
resonance to the tale of larceny and murder as we try to
figure out which of the cops was in on the embezzlement and
the murder.  Is the guilty party Commander Frost (Ron Rifkin),
known as Frosty, who is himself a hostage of Roman?  Could
it be Commander Beck (David Morse), the humorless officer
who is so insistent on shooting Roman that we wonder what
he is himself covering up? Or possibly the sinisted Inspector
Niebaum, who sits smirking in his chair, insisting on his
innocence but made suspect in our eyes because, well, J.T.
Walsh is not often known as the good guy.  Or could is be the
snitch, who supplies most of the story's comic relief?
   Shot on location in the streets of Chicago, "The Negotiator"
unfortunately regresses into the usual high-explosive category
when it would have been served better had it focused strictly
on the verbal chess game between the two principals.  For a
look at how the movie could have been a true blockbuster
rather than one which forces volatilility through chemical
explosives, take in the video of "Glengarry Glen Ross," also
highlighting the talent of Kevin Spacey, or just as well "The
Spanish Prisoner," an intricate, wholly involving story of a
scam which forbears  smoke-filled scenarios.  

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE NEGOTIATOR
(Warner Bros./New Regency)
Starring:  Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, David Morse, Ron Rifkin, J. T.
Walsh, John Spencer, Paul Giamatti, Siobhan Fallon.
Screenplay:  James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox.
Producers:  Arnon Milchan and David Hoberman.
Director:  F. Gary Gray.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  137 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Sometimes it's obvious that a film isn't about the plot, it's about
the names above the title.  COCKTAIL was no more a coming-of-age story
than it was a geopolitical thriller; it was about Tom Cruise smiling and
mixing drinks.  UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL was about as interested in
journalistic ethics as the National Enquirer; it was really about Robert
Redford and Michelle Pfeiffer sharing soft-focus love scenes.  And could
you differentiate between any two non-TERMINATOR Schwarzenegger action
films with a gun to your head?  For better or for worse -- more often the
latter, contemporary Hollywood films often sell personalities rather than
stories.
     If you watched commercials or previews for THE NEGOTIATOR closely
enough, you'd realize that Warner Bros. isn't selling us a story about a
veteran Chicago hostage negotiator named Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson)
who takes hostages in a police building after he's framed for insurance
fraud and the murder of his partner (Paul Guilfoyle).  It's not about the
cool negotiator named Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey) whom Roman demands as
his police liaison.  No, THE NEGOTIATOR is about a showdown between
Jackson and Spacey, two actors whose intensity and burning intelligence
make them magnetically watchable.  Even with theatrical trailers awash in
spraying bullets and shattering glass, you expect that the real warfare
will be psychological, a chess match as much between Jackson and Spacey as
between the characters they play.
     If THE NEGOTIATOR had delivered on that promise, it would have been
one of those rare exceptions where a "personality plot" would have been
the right choice.  You just know it's headed in the wrong direction when
it becomes clear how much time will be spent figuring out who's behind the
police conspiracy to set up Roman.  Is it internal affairs inspector
Niebaum (the late J. T. Walsh)?  Grandfatherly Commander Frost (Ron
Rifkin)?  Hard-nosed Commander Beck (David Morse)?  Mission chief Travis
(John Spencer)?  Will the mysterious informant turn up?  Will computer
files tell all?
     Who cares?  For all the sound and fury surrounding both the
conspiracy and the attempts to take Roman by force, THE NEGOTIATOR is
built on the clash of two characters who win not by shooting faster, but
by thinking faster, by turning words into their most effective weapons.
Jackson and Spacey take the two similar roles and turn them into distinct
individuals so deftly that the slices of family life provided as
back-story seem embarrassingly clumsy by contrast.  In Jackson's hands,
Roman is less a super-cop on a quest for justice than he is an arrogant
super-star who can't believe he's being treated like an ordinary citizen.
The flicker of instability which makes it possible to believe he'd kill
contrasts perfectly with the icy resolve of Spacey's Sabian.  When those
two characters lock wits and eyes, each struggling to size the other up
and determine whether he's an ally or an adversary, THE NEGOTIATOR is
compelling stuff.
     Those moments just don't come nearly often enough.  Spacey doesn't
make his first appearance until nearly 45 minutes have passed, leaving
plenty of time for the film to detour onto well-worn action-suspense
avenues.  Though Paul Giamatti (fast becoming the most recognizable
unknown actor in movies) provides solid comic relief as a con artist among
Roman's hostages, even the one-liners further emphasize that this drama
really isn't anything special.  It could have been and should have been
more than another DIE HARD clone, more than an over-long mystery where you
begin to feel you should leave as soon as you figure out the real bad guy.
THE NEGOTIATOR should have played to the strength of its cast, with more
scenes of Roman reducing his colleagues to blubbering bowls of putting, or
Sabian taking control of a room with the force of his confidence.  It's a
disappointing reverse-tease:  with two great stars to show off, it has the
nerve to go and offer us a plot.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"The Negotiator" is yet another generic "Die Hard" clone crossed with "Speed" mixed with "The Fugitive" and, for fun, a dose of "Dog Day Afternoon," action thriller. The difference is in the ebullient casting.
Samuel L. Jackson is Danny Roman, an admired hostage negotiator who is framed for a murder he didn't commit. Really? In a stunning reversal of roles, Danny decides to hold some hostages in an office building, including the late, great J.T. Walsh as a seemingly corrupt Internal Affairs chief, and the hilariously nervous chatter of Paul Giamatti (best known as Pig Vomit in "Private Parts"), as a credit-card fraud artist. Has Danny gone too far off the violent end, or will a smooth-talking negotiator, Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey), defuse him and his actions? 
To see the dynamic Samuel L. Jackson and Kevin Spacey together is a real treat, and some of the dialogue between them and the hostages tingles with excitement and true fervor. But director F. Gary Gray ("Friday") can't resist throwing in a few action scenes and broken glass to distract from the power of the dramatic confrontations, and the movie ends with a pat, stupid conclusion that looks more like last-minute revising and intervention by a committee than a screenwriter's block. Not half-bad, and worth it for Spacey and Jackson's performances, but still - as ordinary as thrillers get.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
Like the art of music, the art of film draws its influences from many
different sources and the key to making a good motion picture is to
present your own idea and make it unique without ripping off someone
else's work.  'The Negotiator' works on several levels.  As a taut and
melodramatic hostage situation, it boils over with memories of 'Dog Day
Afternoon' attached to it.  With its story of an honest man framed for a
crime he didn't commit, and set in Chicago, 'The Fugitive' comes to
mind.  It's strange how 'The Negotiator' works on its own merit, but it
does.  I tried at every point to look for some major flaw that would
bring it down and I couldn't find one.  Besides its believable and
gripping story line, it works at the acting level just as strongly with
Oscar worthy performances from two of its cast members.
Samuel L. Jackson is a Chicago police officer who is also one of the
city's chief hostage negotiators and he is very good at his job indeed.
Not because of his willingness to put his life on the line like every
cop does but because his ability to use psychological pressure on his
targets is so intense with a cool measure of duty that you actually
believe that Jackson IS his character.  The film opens with dialogue
exchanged between a hostage taker and Jackson in the hallway of a run
down Chicago apartment building.  Jackson's mission is successful, and
later his partner (David Morse) tells him that some corrupt cops are
stealing money from the police pension funds.  Before he can fill
Jackson in further, he's murdered, and Jackson is framed for the crime.
After the district attorney gives him one day to think about striking a
plea bargain, Jackson visits an internal affairs official (J.T. Walsh)
and demands to know what is going on, believing Walsh is somehow mixed
up in the corruption at hand.  All hell breaks loose in the office and
Jackson takes four hostages and demands to resolve the situation by
investigating the case that will prove his innocence.  Jackson agrees to
speak only to one hostage negotiator (Kevin Spacey).  We later find out
why.
At 139 minutes, you would think that the film would be too long but this
isn't the case at all.  Screenwriters James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox have
written a convincing screenplay that doesn't use a phony sense of
audience manipulation to make its case.  Director F. Gary Gray uses a
powerful tone of authority on this picture as the film is a good
character study, exciting thriller and it stops just short of being an
action picture, probably the director's most intelligent decision that
keeps 'The Negotiator' from becoming a throw away action picture.
Samuel L. Jackson's portrayal of a police officer is probably the most
intelligent and believable I've seen since Al Pacino's turn as a
ferocious cop with attitude in 1995's 'Heat'.  Jackson should be
seriously considered for an Oscar nomination for this role.  Spacey is
admirable and worthy of an Oscar nomination himself, but the picture
belongs to Jackson.  Both actors get to showcase their talent vividly.
Much better in fact than their appearance in 1996's 'A Time to Kill'
when both of their characters in that film were underwritten and ended
up flat in the film's final outcome.  Spacey doesn't materialize in 'The
Negotiator' until 45 minutes into the film but his presence is well
noticed and the matching of wits between two men of the same profession
at odds with each other on opposite ends of the law is like watching a
strategic chess match between them.
'The Negotiator' is a clever film which prevents itself from going over
the top and its characters remain people you'll care about.  Rare in a
summer release!
Visit the 'new look' FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
Walter Frith's Top 100 Movies Of All Time Are Now Online At:
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/wftop100.htm

Author
James Brundage
Its been how long since I've seen something like this? Well over a year.
After all, it was about when I moved here a year and a week or so ago when I
last viewed my copy of Silence of the Lambs, and got down to the business of
being challenged on a psychological level. Wait, no. I watched Heat a few
weeks after that, and THAT is the last movie that even measures up to The
Negotiator.
F.Gary Gray (director, "Set it Off") was actually trying to match (in
character chemistry and psychological suspense) "Heat", the Michael Mann
crime saga in which it was plainly stated that, in the game of cops and
robbers, there are no bad guys. In this film, however, there ARE bad guys:
just none of them are the main characters. Not to say they're angels no
way. The film dances in the namesake of the director: the Gray.
The plot is simple nothing out of the ordinary that we haven't seen: Clean
Cop A (Samuel L. Jackson) is a star man on the force, but is still falsely
accused of murder, so he tries to bring in Cop B (Kevin Spacey) to clear his
name, while Cops C and D don't believe him, and IAD Cop E (The final
performance of J.T. Walsh) is downright psychotic about getting him pinned
with the murder. One difference in this one, though: he decides to get
nasty, screw having us sit through a length legal movie or the standard cop
investigation, and takes four hostages in the IAD department in a federal
building. (at last, DEVIATION FROM THE NORM!).
OK, down to the review. I went to see the movie at about 10, and, with
movies that late, I sometimes end up just falling into that trance between
asleep and awake that happens when you watch Nascar for 6 hours on end. Not
this time, not this movie. No way, no how. To put it in a tidbit sentence
The Negotiator is an edge of your seat psychological thriller, with razor
sharp suspense, intense action, and enough raw thrill to let me quit coffee
for a week (and with all the coffee and cappuccinos I drink, that's one huge
thrill.)
I said earlier that Armageddon was the best summer movie. I hate to say this
more than anything as a critic, and this is twice that I've done this since
I've been reviewing here, but this time I'm sure: THIS is THE summer movie
of the year. And it's THE crime drama of the year (unless they come out with
an LA Confidential sequel or adapt another Elmore Leonard, which somehow I
doubt). And it's THE cop movie of the year (unless above conditions are
met). And it's THE  well  you get the point. SEE IT.

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, David Morse, Ron Rifkin, J.T.
Walsh, Paul Giamatti, John Spencer
The Negotiator opens with a tense hostage situation that is extremely
well-directed. A man is pressing a shotgun to the head of a little girl
as Danny Roman (Jackson) attempts to talk him down, risking his own
life. At the end of the ten minute scene, the audience lets out their
breath. You'd think they'd been holding it the whole time. After that
scene, we get the obligitory set up for the focus of the film. That calm
sequence lasts another ten minutes. Then hold on to your wigs and keys,
folks, because the next hour and fifty minutes takes you on one hell of
a ride.
Danny Roman is a top-notch hostage negotiator who has been accused of
killing his partner and embezzling funds from the department. In a last
resort attempt to clear his name, he takes hostages on the 20th floor of
the Chicago Federal Building. His demands are that in eight hours, the
informant be found, the muderer be found, and he be let off the hook.
The catch is that Chris Sabean (Spacey), a prime negotiator from
Chicago's west side, must act as the mediator. Roman knows the man's
strengths, and believes that since his friends have turned on him, that
only a stranger (one of equal mind) can be trusted.
F. Gary Gray, a student of the MTV style of movie directing, does a much
better job than most of his peers. Though The Negotiator occasionally
feels like a spinoff of The Rock, Gray does some fantastic work. His
greatest achievement is keeping the audience on the edge of their seats
for nearly two hours. Once the film gets going, it doesn't let up. There
is a constantly moving camera (which adds tension to any film), but it
is very subtle and takes small slow movements to build up tension.
Some of The Negotiator's best moments come from the dichotomy created
from having a major negotiator dealing with his contemporaries. One
scene early on is extremely funny, and it breaks the ice between
characters. In a sequence reminiscent of Jules' "What does Marsellus
Wallace look like?!!" interrogation from Pulp Fiction, Roman educates an
inexperienced cop on what NOT to say during negotiations.
Paul Giamatti, a two bit crook in the wrong place in the wrong time,
provides excellent comic relief as well. He has the film's best lines by
far. The two leads provide nothing less than their best as the two
strangers who know each other well. Jackson runs the gamut of emotions
and does them all well. Spacey, who seems to pinball back and forth
between psycho and good guy in his career, manages another fine turn as
a take-charge smart cop. J.T. Walsh, who died shortly after the film
wrapped, ends his filmography with another perfect scumbag. But he never
broke from that pattern, and he too turns in a fine performance. Who
better to play the loathesome heavy?
Though the ending is a bit anti-climactic, The Negotiator is as good as
any in its genre. It equals Die Hard and Lethal Weapon in it's strength
and originality. (Though there is a fair share of "borrowing" from
previous films.) And there is no doubt that we could use another
Spacey/Jackson pairing real soon.

Author
Jamey Hughton
While it has the workings of a standard hostage film, The Negotiator is
something more than that. The reason? The two lead performances spark so
much interest and tension that the material is lifted above the regular
ante. As they face off against each other in a battle of wits and
intelligence, Samuel L. Jackson and Kevin Spacey stretch a limited
subject into a filling two-hour, twenty minute time slot.
Renowned police negotiator Danny Roman (Jackson) is in quite the pickle:
he's been framed for his partner's murder and accused of stealing money
from the police pension fund. While Roman stresses that he is innocent,
there is so much evidence against him that even his colleagues and
friends are pondering his guilt. And it's quite possible that someone in
his precinct is involved - he just has to find out who.
And so Roman does something crazy. At least it would seem crazy at first
glance; he walks into Internal Affairs and dukes it out with Inspector
Niebaum (J.T. Walsh) as he searches for the truth. Things get out of
hand, and Roman ends up taking hostages on the 20th floor. They include
Niebaum, his prickly secretary (Siobahn Fallon), and a computer fraud
specialist (Paul Giamatti) who was in a meeting at the time. The
incident is turned into a full-blown media event, which is exactly what
Roman had planned. He wants to intimidate Niebaum until he divulges the
identity of the killer, and this tight situation is the perfect way to
make him sweat it out.
Roman requests fellow negotiator Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey), refusing
to listen to anyone else. The connection between the two is a simple
one: Sabian is a stranger, and right now Roman is having difficulty
trusting any friends. When Spacey enters the picture, The Negotiator
gets very interesting. Both are in the same profession, and each is
aware of the rules of the game. Roman can predict each move that Sabian
is planning next, and this is a marvelous tension builder. It becomes
clear that this is going to a long, hard-fought battle between two
determined men who are trying desperately to outsmart each other. It's a
treat, to say the least, while watching these verbal showdowns.
The Negotiator is still aware of it's basic hostage/takeover premise,
and it relies on this more toward the end. Roman ends up searching
Niebaum's files on his office computer, until some mysterious phone taps
come up. If there's one disappointing aspect of the film, it's the
obvious route for the resolution. For a movie so exciting and original
to turn into something conventional in the end is rather a
disappointment. But even when The Negotiator experiences an occasional
lapse in development, director F. Gary Gray is right there to set it
back on course once again.
As for the question of `whodunit?', it's one of the little worries.
We're so caught up in the fiery foreplay of the two stars that we nearly
forget about the initial plot. At some point, though, you begin to make
assumptions of the real killer's identity. It's a tough decision,
because everyone is a possible suspect. The arrogant team-player Beck
(David Morse) could be involved, or the chief (John Spencer) perhaps...
But take my advice: don't suspect anyone of the crime just because of
their relationship to Roman, because in the end it has little bearing on
the outcome.
Everything in The Negotiator would have been fairly routine if it
weren't for the quality of acting. Jackson and Spacey are both
excellent, commanding, and appropriately cast. Without their intense
confrontations, this film would collapse helplessly. But because of the
amount of excellence applied, this is one of the smarter action films to
come along in a while. And it's the best star vehicle that either actor
may get in many years to come.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Christian Pyle
Police hostage negotiator Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson) wows the press and
annoys his fellow cops with his daring maneuvers to take out hostage-takers. 
One night Danny's partner Nate (Paul Guilfoyle) tells him that cops in their
precinct are stealing money from the disability fund.  Nate is soon murdered,
and Danny is accused of both his friend's murder and the theft of the
departmental funds.  Faced with certain conviction, Danny takes his only
suspect, internal affairs inspector Niebaum (J. T. Walsh in his last role), and
three others hostage.  Danny knows that Niebaum's co-conspirators will be
nervous that the inspector will talk, so they will reveal themselves and try to
kill both Danny and Niebaum.  Since he can't trust anyone in his precinct,
Danny demands that the hostage team bring in a negotiator from another
precinct, Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey).
"The Negotiator" is character-driven, so its success rides on the able
shoulders of its lead actors.  Jackson and Spacey complement each other well: 
Jackson -- angry, on edge, striking out at everyone around him; Spacey -- calm,
crafty, perceptive.  Their scenes together are tense and suspenseful.  Danny
stalks around with a gun, spewing threats and coming ever closer to killing a
hostage.  Chris approaches the situation like a chess match, and he tries
various gambits to gain control of the board.  The conflict of negotiators is
built around talk, of course, and Jackson and Spacey are two of the best
talkers in Hollywood.
The cast is filled out by a familiar group of character actors.  As the major
suspects to be the mastermind that framed Danny:  David Morse (the father in
"Contact"), Ron Rifkin (the DA in "LA Confidential"), and John Spencer (the FBI
director in "The Rock").  Paul Giamatti offers some welcome comic relief as a
petty crook among Danny's hostages. Regina Taylor (from TV's "I'll Fly Away")
plays Danny's wife.
The down side?  Even though Danny is supposed to be an unpredictable
risk-taker, we also know early on that he is a) innocent and b) a good cop. 
This undercuts a lot of the suspense; despite the movie's elaborate attempts to
make us believe that Danny will kill his hostages, we know he's too decent a
person to cross that line.  
"The Negotiator" won't make anyone's Ten Best list, but it is solid genre fare
with a strong cast.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.wpd.net/madreview/

Author
David Sunga
Written by: James DeMonaco,  Kevin Fox
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey
Synopsis: 
Samuel L. Jackson plays ace Chicago police hostage negotiator Danny
Roman. Unknown to Danny, corrupt cops in Danny's precinct are running a
scam involving faked insurance claims. They kill Danny's partner and
friend, and frame Danny for the murder.
Danny's not an investigator, but as an expert in hostage negotiation, he
knows all about taking hostages. Danny finds the corrupt Internal
Affairs man whom he think is responsible. Desperate to prove his
innocence, he captures the corrupt official and two office personnel and
holds them hostage in their Chicago office, hoping to wring out a lucky
confession. The police besiege the office building, trapping Danny
inside with the hostages. Thus begins a tense standoff involving SWAT
teams, FBI, gunfights, and clever negotiations.
Opinion: 
THE NEGOTIATOR is a successful balancing act between hostage crisis and
slam bang action flick. Because the main situation takes place in a
small space involving hostages arguing with their captor, THE NEGOTIATOR
sometimes feels like a tight theater piece. But the drama is interrupted
by timely action sequences. (The authorities periodically break in with
escalating firepower, and Danny desperately outfights them to buy more
time to prove his innocence.) 
Danny hopes that either the bad guy might confess, or else enough
evidence to prove his innocence might be found laying around the office.
But the creative twist in THE NEGOTIATOR occurs when an intriguing third
possibility arises. Holed up in the office, Danny refuses to negotiate
with anybody accept Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey), a steadfast police
negotiator from a non-corrupt precinct. If he can just convince Sabian
of his innocence, Danny might be able to get outside help. Similarly, if
he can win some of the office hostages over to his cause, he might be
able to enlist their aid. Danny's ability and resources for proving his
innocence become a game of negotiation.
THE NEGOTIATOR is about corrupt cops. In the beginning of the movie it
seems the heroes are trying to discover who is stealing from police
pension funds. But by the end of the movie, pensions funds are
forgotten, and the crime seem to be all about insurance fraud. Confusion
about the nature of the actual corruption is my only small complaint
about THE NEGOTIATOR. Ignoring the minor the scam confusion, THE
NEGOTIATOR is an otherwise well-acted, satisfyingly taut,
mouse-versus-cat thriller. It's the only chess game in town that comes
with theater-style drama in addition to SWAT teams, grenades, and police
helicopters.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Curtis Edmonds
They didn't have a lot of the scenes I wanted to see in The Negotiator,
but there was one scene I particularly missed.  It was the scene where
Chief Deputy United States Marshal Samuel Gerard is sitting on his
couch, watching the mayhem of the movie on WGN.  I envision Gerard
putting his feet up, taking a puff on a confiscated Cuban cigar, and
intoning:  "What a bunch of amateurs."
The way this movie was advertised was as a cat-and-mouse game between
two professional hostage negotiators.  Samuel L. Jackson as framed cop
Danny Roman versus Kevin Spacey as outside negotiator Chris Sabian.  It
all looked so promising, with two of Hollywood's best actors going
mano-a-mano in a Chicago-themed action flick, just like in Jeb Stuart's
script for The Fugitive.  And throw in a bit of Stuart's Die Hard
script, with Jackson as the lone hero cop trapped in a tall building...
it looked very, very promising.  What a shame that The Negotiator is in
the hands of amateurs.
The premise of the movie is that it's a duel between the hostage
negotiators.  Jackson, wrongfully accused of theft and murder, snaps and
takes the police department's internal affairs department hostage.  He
calls on Spacey to serve as his personal negotiator (after a very funny
scene where he pokes holes in the confidence of the poor schmuck
originally designed to talk him down).  So, this ought to be a great
battle of wits, right?  Right?
The Negotiator would have us believe that the most important skill of a
good hostage negotiator is lying.  You can make a good movie about lying
-- say, House of Games or The Sting -- but it's hard to make a good
action movie about lying.  And especially here, where all the lying
concerns finding the evidence that will free Roman of the charges
against him.  We already know he's telling the truth, and we don't much
care about the scandal, so that's just not interesting.
What I would have like to have seen is a little more of the tricks of
the trade being displayed.  The only time we really see the Chicago PD
being sneaky is when they try to snake mini-cameras to view the hostages
-- Jackson sees them, as any reasonably observant person would, and
yanks them out.  There's nothing really improvisational or imaginative
about the whole setup.  (Contrast the imaginative hostage negotiation
between Bill Murray and Jason Robards in Quick Change.)  Throw in a
couple of unrealistic plot twists (totally unworthy of Sam Gerard or any
other law enforcement professional) and what you end up with is a mess
of a movie.
Jackson's best performances have always come when he has a character to
play that's basically unappealing.  For example, both Jules in Pulp
Fiction, and Ordell Robbie in Jackie Brown were both very bad, very
unlikable dudes -- but the audience was sympathetic to both of them, in
a way, because Jackson's sheer force of talent makes them magnetic.
Danny Roman is meant to be appealing -- the audience has to be on his
side the whole movie -- but he's never magnetic.  There's only one
little scene where Jackson is allowed to go over the edge into
unlikability -- and it's a cheat.  Not a great performance, although
it's many, many fathoms better than what we saw when he was at the
bottom of the ocean in Sphere.
If Jackson doesn't live up to his potential in The Negotiator, Spacey
steps all over his and grinds it into the mud.  Spacey is a great actor,
capable of a wide range of parts, and what they've done here is put him
on Macho Mountain without any rope.  Other than a too-long cutesy scene
between his wife and daughter that's completely contrived to establish
his credentials as a negotiator, Spacey is made to participate in scene
after scene of macho posturing.  He's consistently in screaming matches
with Jackson and the cops.  His voice must have been really, really
hoarse after production was completed.
The rest of the cast is a tribute to the majesty and power of
typecasting.  John Spencer, so good as Harrison Ford's cop friend in
Presumed Innocent, is the chief of police here.  The late, great J.T.
Walsh plays an oily creep who knows more than he's saying.  Ron Rifkin
plays a devious-but-bland cop in the same manner as his guest turn on ER
not too long ago.
Speaking of ER, here's a memo for Anthony Edwards:  make sure your agent
sees this movie, because you don't want to end up like David Morse.
Remember him?  He was the sensitive-yet-tough doctor who led the
ensemble cast on the hospital drama St. Elsewhere.  Unfortunately, he's
only able now to get parts as mindless toughs for some reason.
Something to think about, OK?
There really isn't much that wrong with The Negotiator, and I don't want
to talk you down from your stadium seat.  It's perfectly serviceable,
mindless summer movie entertainment.  But it could have been so much
better, and that's a shame.
Movie Reviews: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
Hollywood Stock Exchange: http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Baseball should always be played outdoors,
 on grass, with wooden bats."

Author
Brian Takeshita
The police negotiator is the person with the entirely unenviable job
of going into ground zero and attempting to talk a dangerous criminal
out of doing whatever he or she intends to do.  Lives are often at
stake, and the criminal is usually armed and most likely mentally
unstable, prone to turn on the negotiator at a moment's notice.  The
negotiator must therefore be something of an actor, psychologist, and
sham artist, in addition to being a police officer; he must be able to
think on his feet and either work toward the goal of ending the
confrontation without violence, or failing that, must be prepared to
facilitate the conclusion of the crisis through firepower.  Most of
all, the negotiator must be able to enter a situation with as little
intelligence about the scenario as possible, and quickly gain control
of the situation, dominate the conversation, and influence the
perpetrator into thinking that the end of the conflict is what he
really wants.  It takes a pretty smart person to do that.
But what if the hostage-holding criminal is just as smart?  What if
he's also able to think on his feet?  In fact, what if he also knows
all the tricks to turning the situation to his favor?  It is this
circumstance which forms the basis for F. Gary Gray's THE NEGOTIATOR.
In this film, police negotiator Danny Roman (Samuel L. Jackson) is
tipped off by his partner to corruption within the Chicago police
force.  When his partner turns up shot to death and Internal Affairs
finds incriminating evidence in Roman's home, Roman becomes the prime
suspect of both embezzling from the police disability fund and murder.
Faced with the scorn of most of the police department, and under close
scrutiny by the media, Roman is forced to turn in his badge in one of
those typical scenes in the captain's office.  I don't quite remember
if the captain actually said, "I hate to do this, but...", although it
wouldn't surprise me if he did.
Luckily, the film soon shakes off the conventionalism and concentrates
on the interesting premise mentioned above.  After being offered a
take-it-or-leave-it deal by the District Attorney, Roman resolves to
prove his innocence by walking into the office of Internal Affairs
Inspector Niebaum (J.T. Walsh), taking him and others hostage, and
proclaiming he has been framed.  Although Roman's actions seem forced
due to the compressed nature of his motivational build-up, Gray
redeems himself by involving us with the negotiations between Roman
and fellow police negotiator Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey) which soon
ensue.
Jackson, while a superb actor, is miscast in the role of Roman.  The
actor has become so popular, and so often identified as a protagonist
(notable exceptions can be found, such as in JACKIE BROWN), that we as
an audience have a difficult time believing he will carry out his
threats.  The script also clearly sets him up as the good guy who is
only trying to prove his innocence.  How can we believe he's going to
shoot a hostage, no matter if the hostage tried to kill him earlier?
Unfortunately, this preconception saps the film of some of it's
would-be suspenseful moments, and anything good left in those scenes
is largely attributed to Jackson's acting ability.  Almost every time
he's in a scene, Jackson steals it without looking back.
When Spacey appears, the film has already run about a third of its
course.  His is an interesting character.  Made out to be some kind of
negotiating superman, our first look at him has him hopelessly trying
to get his family moving to set out on vacation.  "I can talk a man
out of blowing up the Sears Tower, but I can't talk my wife out of the
bedroom or my daughter off the phone," he says.  When he gets the call
to action, however, he quickly changes gears and becomes the man we
expect him to be.  Soon, his character has to negotiate not only with
Roman, but also with the SWAT commander (David Morse) who is itching
to send in a team to take Roman out, all the while keeping wary of the
FBI agents who are waiting to take over the operation, should
negotiations fail.  This complex set of pressures are reflected well
in Sabian the negotiator and Spacey the actor.  As the second
protagonist, Spacey measures up nicely.
Gray really lucked out with this cast.  David Morse as Commander Beck,
Ron Rifkin as Commander Frost, and John Spencer as Police Chief Al
Travis are all more than competent, and can hold their own in scenes
with Jackson and Spacey.  The only problem is the bit of typecasting
that results from these choices:  Morse played a similar role in THE
ROCK, Rifkin played the D.A. in L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, and Spencer played
a police detective in COP LAND.  With the level of acting, however,
this can be forgiven.
Also in the supporting cast, Paul Giamatti as Rudy, one of the
hostages, is notable for the comic relief he provides.  His character
is initially so slimy, and Giamatti himself just looks so shifty, that
you expect to laugh before he even says anything.  Fortunately, this
doesn't distract from the seriousness of the rest of the film, but
instead provides some nice breathers from the level of tension which
Gray manages to sustain throughout.
J.T. Walsh, as the suspicious Internal Affairs inspector, clocks in
with one of his final performances.  Sadly, the talented but
underrated actor passed away in late February of this year, and the
soon to be released PLEASANTVILLE will mark his last film.  Walsh
appeared in dozens of movies such as GOOD MORNING VIETNAM, BACKDRAFT,
and NIXON.  For one of his best performances, check out SLING BLADE,
in which he plays a mental patient sharing a ward with Billy Bob
Thornton.  When Jack Nicholson accepted his best actor Oscar in March,
Walsh was one of the men to whom he credited his success (the actors
performed together in A FEW GOOD MEN).  THE NEGOTIATOR is actually
dedicated to Walsh, and while Inspector Niebaum may not have been his
best role, it certainly characterizes the type of character for which
Walsh had become most famous for playing.
In the end, THE NEGOTIATOR has a plotline that parallels it's reality.
We're served with the premise that two equally deft negotiators are
battling each other to resolve the conflict in the manner which will
suit each of them best.  As an audience, we're also given a situation
where two wonderfully talented actors are thrown into a movie, and
we'd like to see if one will dominate the film.  Both provide some
pretty good entertainment.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
NEGOTIATOR, THE (director: F. Gary Gray; cast: Samuel L. Jackson (Danny
Roman), Kevin Spacey (Chris Sabian), David Morse (Commander Beck), Ron
Rifkin (Commander Frost), John Spencer (Chief Al Travis), J.T. Walsh
(Inspector Niebaum), Regina Taylor (Karen Roman), Paul Giamatti (Rudy),
Siobahn Fallon (Maggie), 1998)
An inanely delightful and slickly done and predictable escapist film,
based on an actual hostage situation in St. Louis. The story now takes
place in Chicago. It makes for a tense actioner pitting veteran Chicago
hostage negotiator Lt. Danny Roman (Jackson), wrongly accused of his
partner's murder and the misappropriation of a police disability fund,
against his counterpart, negotiator Lt. Chris Sabian (Spacey). They are
both known to be cool customers who use force only as a last resort.
Danny is the best negotiator on the force. The twist in the story comes
about when he takes hostages in a federal building in order to get the
real culprits and he now gets a taste of what it is like from the other
side of the fence. He does this after his partner is executed
gangland-style in the spot where he was to meet him and be told about an
informer who has information about the money being stolen from the
police fund and about why he shouldn't trust the Department of Internal
Affairs.
This gives Danny a chance to match wits with Sabian, and the two stellar
actors take it from there. They both try talking through the tough
situation they are in. And since Danny knows all the tricks of his
trade, it is fun to watch him try to get out of this jam. The only thing
the story surprisingly lacked was an intelligent dialogue, though the
story itself often took the high road as it was presented in a
reasonably intelligent manner. It didn't stoop to gratuitous violence
and seemed to be trying to say something about the proper procedures to
follow in a hostage situation.
It's all routine-fare, with hardly any surprises, a stylish and
carefully orchestrated film,  challenging what the concepts of loyalty
among colleagues and friends means when things go wrong, and how well
you really know someone that you have been friends with, even if it is
as long as 20 years.
What holds our attention for this seemingly long film, it did run for
about 140 minutes, was the drama revolving around the hostage situation
in the police department's Internal Affairs office and who it is that is
framing Danny.
The cast includes David Morse, in a robotic role as S.W.A.T. leader Adam
Beck, J.T. Walsh as Internal Affairs Chief Terence Niebaum (Walsh died
shortly after this film), Ron Rifkin as the less than trustworthy
Commander Frost, Siobahn Fallon as Niebaum's assistant and fellow
hostage, and Paul Giamatti (son of A. Bartlett Giamatti, late
president of Yale University and Commissioner of Baseball) as Rudy,
an informer who happens to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.
It is directed with a certain air of incredulousness by F. Gary Gray,
who seems to make light of the fact that Danny had to take hostages to
prove his point. The director continues to glamorize him for doing this
despite the fact he is doing something that is dangerous to the public
and can certainly be considered a criminal act. But it leaves us no
choice but to accept that this was Danny's only way out of his troubles.
The film moves along at a quick pace, interrupted by valid action scenes
from time-to-time, allowing the film to be an easy watch for those who
are not that demanding of a storyline but prefer instead good action
sequences.
This glossy run-of-the mill action film should be very successful on its
video rental trade, as it is a visually pleasing film, with a happy
ending to boot, and nothing symbolic in it to tax your brain. Just about
right for the market it is geared to.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Kong
Movies can be seen as bookends and the books in between. The bookends are
the opening and closing of the film and the books contain the story and
subplots of the film. Most movies have beautifully crafted bookends and
thin poorly written books. The Negotiator goes the other way. The bookends
for The Negotiator are bent out of shape and not beautiful at all. The
books that the bookends hold are tense and well written.
The Negotiator has a cliched and unbelievable opening. Danny Roman (Samuel
L. Jackson) is the best negotiator in his department. In the opening, Roman
is trying to talk a man out of killing his own daughter. Roman finally uses
some dangerous tactics to get the girl free and for this, he takes some
heat from his commanders. What we find out later, during the cliched
after-I-saved-the-day party, is that Roman's partner suspects that some of
the officers in the department are stealing money from the department.
Before Roman finds out too much from his partner, his partner is killed.
Roman is suspected of killing his partner. Though we know that he is being
framed.
What comes next is the contrived part in an instant, Roman's whole
department turns against him. They all think he's the killer. What doesn't
ring true is that from what I've seen, cops are pretty protective of each
other. What is portrayed onscreen just doesn't jive. But, this is also the
point in which the movie picks up a lot of steam. Roman takes hostages, one
being a key figure in the money stealing deal. Roman wants to force this
person to admit to what has been happening; he wants to clear his name.
Roman demands that a negotiator from outside his department do the
negotiating, and he will only talk to Chris Sabian (Kevin Spacey). Jackson,
who by himself is already a great actor and a big presence on the screen,
is now joined by Kevin Spacey as the negotiator. From now on, the acting of
these two intense actors drives the movie.
One other thing drives The Negotiator. Though we think that the person that
Roman is holding hostage is maybe one of the people involved in the money
stealing scheme, we also know that there are others from Roman's department
that are part of the scheme. But who? Director F. Gary Gray and writers
James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox throw all kinds of bones out. And it isn't
until the very end that we find out who is behind all of this. I loved this
because it kept me guessing as to who was in the scheme and who wasn't.
Jackson and Spacey are from two different ends of the intense-acting
spectrum. Jackson is verbal and loudly eloquent. Spacey, on the other hand,
carries an inner intensity that radiates with his eyes and his calm
exterior. The two light up the screen. It is the dialogue between these two
that kept my attention.
The script by James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox is very knowledgeable about the
ways of negotiators. Watch for the lessons about negotiations by Roman
during the film. I loved how DeMonaco and Fox worked in a lesson on what to
say to hostage takers. Roman also talks about what to look for in order to
see that a person is lying. I think that DeMonaco and Fox did some good
research before embarking on writing this script. The script itself has a
meaty midsection that is sandwiched by a weak opening and closing.
Director F. Gary Gray keeps the movie tight and tense. Roman takes hostages
in an office in the midsection of a high rise. Gray uses the tight quarters
of this office fully. The only complaint I have is that Gray and the
writers threw in an action sequence halfway into the film that didn't feel
right. I thought that Gray and the writers were doing very well with the
negotiations between Roman and Sabian, but then all the sudden there
appears this action sequence. But, this is a small complaint. Kudos to Gray
for putting together a taut film.
The supporting actors all fare well. Look for the late J.T. Walsh in his
final performance. David Morse and John Spencer turn up good supporting
performances.
Don't let the bookends of The Negotiator fool you into thinking that it's a
raggedy movie. Don't Miss The Negotiator in the theatres. This is a solid
film that will keep you at the edge of your seat from the beginning to the
end.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Academy Award winning actor Kevin Spacey is easily one of the most
interesting actors working in film today.  Never to be taken for
granted, he brings a cool unpredictability to any part he plays.  In THE
NEGOTIATOR his cherubic face masks an intelligence and intensity that
makes his character completely captivating.  It's never clear what his
next move will be.  "I'm a stranger to you," he warns his costar Samuel
L. Jackson.  "You have no idea what I am capable of."  No kidding.
     Director F. Gary Gray's taut thriller starts with a formulaic
approach, but soon takes some major side turns.  From beginning to end,
the well-executed film has the audience on the edge of their seats.
Although there are some bad plot choices, as when one character's
bravado turns almost suicidal, the story is a well-developed and
intelligent mystery about police corruption.  With plenty of action to
keep the adrenaline pumping but not so much as to overwhelm the
psychological drama at the heart of the story, the movie strikes just
the right balance.
     The brightly written script by James DeMonaco and Kevin Fox mixes
in just enough humor without transforming the tone of the picture.  It
assumes the audience has enough intelligence to see some obvious ruses
even before most of the characters in the drama realize what is
happening.
     It all starts with hotshot police negotiator Danny Roman (Jackson)
freeing a little girl from her deranged father, who is holding a shotgun
to her head.  Risking his own life, Danny enters the room and talks the
father away from his hostage.  In the process, some of his men believe
he endangered their lives, so his triumph is less than complete.  This
scene serves to set up his character as being a prime risk taker and to
demonstrate some hidden resistance and resentment toward him from some
of his coworkers.  Most, however, view him as a hero and a role model.
     The body of the story has Danny creating his own hostage situation.
When he is falsely accused of killing his partner and of embezzling
money from the police pension fund, he captures the head of Internal
Affairs and others who he thinks may be in on it or may be able to help
him.  J.T. Walsh, in his prime before his recent, untimely death, plays
Inspector Niebaum, the head of Internal Affairs.  Walsh, who specialized
in portraying characters with shady reputations, is perfect for the
part.
     A good thriller becomes an even better one, when Danny announces
that he will only negotiate with Chris Sabian (Spacey), another
negotiator and one whom Danny has only met once.  As good as Jackson is
as the story's central character, Spacey is even better.  Chris and
Danny go into a beautifully scripted series of negotiations.  Danny is
the funniest, but Chris is the most surprising.  Suffice it to say that
you wouldn't want to play cards with either of them.
     (Chris first enters the story in the midst of his own tricky
negotiation.  He is trying to talk an angry wife out of the bedroom and
a resistant teenage daughter off of the phone.  He seems on the verge of
losing both battles when the call comes about Danny.)
     Russell Carpenter, TITANIC's Academy Award winning cinematographer,
gives a fast-paced energy to the picture's look.  Using fast moving
close-ups, slow motion, and a few cuts to black and white, he gives the
movie a gritty intimacy.
     The engrossing movie has a strong supporting cast that includes
David Morse, Ron Rifkin, and John Spencer among others.
     The test of a mystery and an action thriller is how well the
writers can bring the story to a conclusion.  THE NEGOTIATOR has some
well thought through ending surprises that are completely plausible and
fascinating to watch unfold.
film has Kevin Spacey in it, you will not be disappointed.  Even if
Spacey should find his way into a bad movie, his part will be well worth
     THE NEGOTIATOR runs a little too long at 2:15.  It is rated R for
violence and profanity and would be fine for most teenagers.
