Title
Review for Center of the World, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
Ah, fantasies!  About to become filthy rich from his hot B-to-B IPO, which makes
you wonder what the movie's sequel would be like, Richard (Peter Sarsgaard)
hires drummer Florence (Molly Parker from KISSED) to spend a 3-day weekend with
him in Vegas -- where else?  Florence, whom he meets in a coffee shop, normally
finances her music career as a lap-dancing stripper at a place aptly named
"Pandora's Box."  In CENTER OF THE WORLD, by director Wayne Wang (SMOKE), the
action is hot but never quite hot enough.
Vociferously pointing out that she doesn't accept money for sex, Florence only
agrees to take Richard's $10,000 stipend under strict conditions, "the rules"
she calls them.  Between the hours of 10 P.M. and 2 A.M., she will be available
for his pleasure, but there will be no touching, no mouth kissing, no
penetration and no talking about feelings.  That these regulations will prove
problematic for both is obvious from the start.  
"It's all an act," Florence tells Richard soon after accepting his trip
proposal.  "You know that, right?"  She needs her restrictions because they
allow her to maintain her fantasy that she's just an actress.  Richard goes
along with them because he's so smitten by her that he'd agree to stand on his
head if she asked him.  Before Florence came into his life, he was a
three-monitor kind of guy: one for stocks, one for video games and one for porn.
 With her, he has a real flesh-and-blood woman.  Imagine that!
Although basically a two-person picture, an incredibly sexy Carla Gugino (the
mom from SPY KIDS) shows up briefly to suggest the possibilities of a ménage ŕ
trois.
The movie has an ugly look almost as if they eschewed filming it on digital tape
and purposely chose VHS instead.  Maybe this was intentional, and Wang wanted to
imitate the look of an old porn tape.
In a movie about sex that chooses to come in unrated, the surprise is that there
isn't more, well, sex.  For all its verbal and physical explicitness, it is in
some ways quite prudish as it completely avoids full-frontal nudity when to show
it would have been much more natural.  
The movie's transparent message is that there's a difference between love and
sex -- well, duh!  Richard and Florence's first sexual encounter ends in
laughter, hinting of a realism that never quite materializes.  The movie ends up
being one big tease.  There are a lot of scenes that titillate, but, as soon as
they are beginning to be successful, Wang cuts away to some pretentious small
talk.  Why can't movies follow through with their convictions?
CENTER OF THE WORLD runs 1:26.  It is not rated but would be NC-17 for graphic
sexuality, nudity and language.  It would be acceptable for college students and
older.
The film played as part of the San Francisco International Film Festival
(">http://www.sfiff.org>) this year.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
Dot com millionaire Richard (Peter Sarsgaard, "Boy's Don't Cry") thinks the
center of the world is his computer while stripper Flo (Molly Parker, "The Five
Senses") thinks it's between her legs.  These two both go on a journey of
self-discovery and self-delusion when Richard hires Flo to spend a weekend
in Las Vegas in director Wayne Wang's "The Center of the World."
Director Wang's ("Anywhere But Here") attempt to show man's inability
to make a personal connection as he ironically gets increasingly connected 
via the internet is a topical idea, yet Wang alienates his audience with
the shallow characterization Ellen Benjamin Wong's script provides his
two leads.
When Richard meets Flo, she gives her career as a rock band drummer
but admits that her income comes from stripping.  Richard chooses to see
her making money, and, beguiled by her professional come-on, soon begs her to
accompany him on a three day trip to Las Vegas, offering $10,000.  Against
her better judgement, but attracted by the cash, Flo insists on rules.
She'll be at his beck and call from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. with no kissing on the 
mouth, no penetration and no talk about feelings.  Richard prepares to leave,
even as he promises his boss to be present for an important client meeting
prior to their IPO kickoff.
Perhaps the ultimate city of illusion, Las Vegas proves a perfect backdrop
for this artificial relationship, but things quickly get out of hand as
Richard is charmed by Flo's openness and Flo is forced to assess her own
part in the play when her friend Jerri (Carla Gugino, "Spy Kids") too 
aggressively inserts herself between the twosome.
While the sex may be hot (the film is unrated), the spark between Richard
and Flo is not.  We're given no idea why a rich, handsome nice guy like
Richard would need to pay a woman for company.  He initially tells Flo
that his father recently died and that they were very close, but quickly
insists 'It's okay.'  It's also inexplicable why he would
bring his laptop with him and continue to work on the game designing he's
made his fortune with, yet do everything in his power to scuttle an IPO
that would cement his career and wealth.  
Flo's character is even more problematic.  Whenever we glimpse her involved 
with her music, all she projects is boredom.  Her only other known human 
connection, Jerri, is admittedly the whore Flo resists being labelled as.  
Flo's arc goes from reminding Richard that 'It's all an act, you know' to 
telling Jerri 'I think I kinda like him' to playing dead as her ultimate 
rules are broken.  The only time these two characters seem to be enjoying
themselves together is when Flo plays Richard's video game.
Digital video cinematography by Mauro Fiore features color drained scenes
when outside of Vegas or Flo's strip club, and flat, dingy looking color
on the streets of Vegas.  Vegas itself is presented in an original way,
recalling the artificial world of "Babe:  Pig in the City" with its Statues
of Liberty and Venetian gondolas.  The connecting hotel rooms, where the
bulk of the action takes place, however, don't convince as accommodations
chosen by a millionaire.
Wang nicely ends his film with a bit of intriguing ambiguity, but it's too
little too late - "The Center of the World" can't sustain interest in its
own central characters.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Hey, I'm a dotcomer who founded a major organization--
how come I haven't made my first million like all those 23-
year-olds running around in Silicon Valley?  Could be that I
was influenced by all those articles that took pity on computer
geeks, people whose only contact with the human race is
with the white letters that pass across their blue computer
screens.  I guess I preferred to spend more time at the
movies with people who shared my love for cinema rather
than sit in the bedroom or the "home office" living room peck-
peck-pecking throughout the day and night.  Yeah, that's it I
think.  Along comes Wayne Wang ("Smoke," "The Joy Luck
Club," "Blue in the Face") with a striking and, dare I saw
sexy, movie about such a geek, a kid in his early twenties
who by the end of the story has 20 million dollars but is not
really happy.  You see, despite his good looks, his aw-shucks
charm, his gentle manner, he doesn't have a girl friend (yeah,
right) so he thinks he has to buy sex.  Wang's latest, "The
Center of the World" acquires its title comes from the area of
the anatomy to which Richard Gere's character Dr. T.
dedicates his career, an area considered so vital to the
cutting-edge businessmen in the Bay Area that they inevitably
take their clients to San Francisco's upscale strip joints such
as the one cited in the story, Pandora's Box.  According to
the voluminous press notes for this film, a considerable
amount of business gets completed under the persuasive
influence of lithe young women who know their way around
laptops--and we don't mean computers.  If you haven't
guessed yet, this movie is about sex, a subject about which
Mr. Wang states he was determined to make, having given
us some other down-to-earth, authentic human relations
stories like "Blue Smoke"--which is about intertwining lives
around a Brooklyn smoke shop including a philosophical
manager, a burnt-out novelist, and a worldly-wise teen.
   Only a fraction of the film takes place in Pandora's Box,
which is fine, because Wang gets a lot of action in the
capacious suite of a 5-star Las Vegas hotel rented for three
days by a disarmingly unpretentious young multimillionaire,
Richard Longman (Peter Sarsgaard).  Richard, who spends
all his waking hours in his room surrounded by three
computers, would like to believe his virtual relationships are
all he needs.  He gets whatever goods he needs by punching
in a few letters (presumably like drugstore.com and
netgrocer.com) but he knows something is missing. 
Fascinated by the gyrations of a stripper in a club, Florence
(Molly Parker), he invites her to spend a weekend with him in
a Vegas suite, which she accepts but not until she gets his
agreement to some pretty rigid rules.  No penetration, no
kissing on the mouth, working hours are 10 p.m. to 2 a.m.
only, separate bedrooms.  "I don't do sex for money," she
insists, and with a list of regs that resemble the complexity of
the Magna Carta, he agrees.  And he pays her $10,000--not
bad if you can get it.
   Filmed in digital video, giving sharp colors when needed
and more earthy tones for the closeups, cinematographer
Mauro Fiore directs his camera on the games these two
people play, to the way they silently or overtly re-negotiate
the terms of the agreement as two lonely people out on a
business weekend actually get to feel something for each
other.  Will she or won't she?  This is the most pressing
question, although on a broader level, of course, we're all
wondering whether somehow Richard and Florence (or Flo,
when she's performing just for him between 10 and 2) will
finally break through their sequestered selves--she, who not
surprisingly feels alone and unconnected when on the stage,
he, when he's pecking away on his three computers or even
when he's talking about a lucrative business in which he has
amazingly lost interest.
   But we in the audience don't lose interest, not if we have
normal libidos at any rate and not if we have the capacity to
care about two people who could--give or take a few million
and, perhaps, lose the stage and the night club and
substitute a cubicle at the local accounting firm--be any of us! 
The 51-year old Hong Kong-born director, equally at home
portraying Chinese culture as he is at depicting the cutting-
edge techno society here in the States, gets nice
performances from Parker and Sarsgaard and also from
Carol Gugino who performs in the role of Florence's friend
Gerri, the young woman who allows Richard to get to know
more about his new friend than he would if he were
interested (like some men I know) only in the center of the
world.
Not Rated.  Running time: 86 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Ah, fantasies!  About to become filthy rich from his hot B-to-B IPO, 
which makes you wonder what the movie's sequel would be like, Richard 
(Peter Sarsgaard) hires drummer Florence (Molly Parker from KISSED) to 
spend a 3-day weekend with him in Vegas -- where else?  Florence, whom 
he meets in a coffee shop, normally finances her music career as a 
lap-dancing stripper at a place aptly named "Pandora's Box."  In CENTER 
OF THE WORLD, by director Wayne Wang (SMOKE), the action is hot but 
never quite hot enough.
Vociferously pointing out that she doesn't accept money for sex, 
Florence only agrees to take Richard's $10,000 stipend under strict 
conditions, "the rules" she calls them.  Between the hours of 10 P.M. 
and 2 A.M., she will be available for his pleasure, but there will be no 
touching, no mouth kissing, no penetration and no talking about 
feelings.  That these regulations will prove problematic for both is 
obvious from the start.  
"It's all an act," Florence tells Richard soon after accepting his trip 
proposal.  "You know that, right?"  She needs her restrictions because 
they allow her to maintain her fantasy that she's just an actress.  
Richard goes along with them because he's so smitten by her that he'd 
agree to stand on his head if she asked him.  Before Florence came into 
his life, he was a three-monitor kind of guy: one for stocks, one for 
video games and one for porn.  With her, he has a real flesh-and-blood 
woman.  Imagine that!
Although basically a two-person picture, an incredibly sexy Carla Gugino 
(the mom from SPY KIDS) shows up briefly to suggest the possibilities of 
a ménage ŕ trois.
The movie has an ugly look almost as if they eschewed filming it on 
digital tape and purposely chose VHS instead.  Maybe this was 
intentional, and Wang wanted to imitate the look of an old porn tape.
In a movie about sex that chooses to come in unrated, the surprise is 
that there isn't more, well, sex.  For all its verbal and physical 
explicitness, it is in some ways quite prudish as it completely avoids 
full-frontal nudity when to show it would have been much more natural.  
The movie's transparent message is that there's a difference between 
love and sex -- well, duh!  Richard and Florence's first sexual 
encounter ends in laughter, hinting of a realism that never quite 
materializes.  The movie ends up being one big tease.  There are a lot 
of scenes that titillate, but, as soon as they are beginning to be 
successful, Wang cuts away to some pretentious small talk.  Why can't 
movies follow through with their convictions?
CENTER OF THE WORLD runs 1:26.  It is not rated but would be NC-17 for 
graphic sexuality, nudity and language.  It would be acceptable for 
college students and older.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
