Title
Review for Love, Honour and Obey (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on April 7, 2000; certificate 18; 98 minutes; 
country of origin UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Dominic Anciano, Ray Burdis; produced by Dominic Anciano, Ray 
Burdis.
Written by Dominic Anciano, Ray Burdis.
Photographed by John Ward; edited by Rachel Meyrick.
The main actors in "Love, Honour and Obey" are making a serious gangster 
flick, the supporting performers are trying goofy comedy, and the filmmakers 
are wasting celluloid. This is a seriously confused movie which switches 
uneasily from lame gags to out-of-context drama, and mixes in a series of 
karaoke numbers and a dead man in a clown outfit telling a story that has 
nothing to do with the images onscreen. Confusing? You betcha.
The first person we meet is Sadie (Sadie Frost), a soap opera actress who is 
engaged to a leading London gangster, Ray (Ray Winstone). The outlaw's nephew 
is a flashy geezer named Jude (Jude Law), whose best pal Jon (Jonny Lee 
Miller) is just about to enter the crime business himself. This gang's two 
main henchmen are Dominic (Dominic Anciano) and Ray (Ray Burdis). Rivals 
include Sean (Sean Pertwee) and Matthew (Rhys Ifans).
You will have noticed that most of the characters are named for the actors. 
In last year's best film, "The Blair Witch Project", this tactic helped keep 
up the pretence that the story was true. Here it's just a gimmick -- one that 
Anciano and Burdis (who wrote, produced and directed) also used in "Final 
Cut", a film I have not yet seen but am told is abysmal. Perhaps the 
intention is to boast that the movie has been made by a team, who are so 
close that everyone's role is tailor-made. If so, I'm at a loss to understand 
why talented thesps are so happy to be working with incompetent hacks.
This is a picture devoid of story or tone. It opens by focusing on the 
relationship between Ray, Jude and Jon, which we suspect will disintegrate 
into a violent mess, because of the elegiac tones and past tense of Jon's 
narration. But this is never allowed to develop -- every time a scene is set 
up with these characters, the film cuts away to some odd subplot, like the 
one with Dominic and Ray talking about their sex lives. Ray is suffering from 
impotence; Dom is giving him lectures on kinky toys that should relight his 
fire.
These silly comic asides aim pretty low; they expect us to titter at rude 
words and guffaw when a woman uses a cucumber to imitate fellatio. The 
potentially good performances of Winstone, Law and Miller, who take things 
seriously, are ruined by these stupid interruptions. Anciano and Burdis act 
them with such forced emphasis and lack of spontaneity that it's 
embarrassingly obvious they're reciting memorised passages.
"Love, Honour and Obey" sounds like it was recorded with an old camcorder 
microphone, and the editor uses flashes of lightning and abrupt fade-outs to 
move between scenes. Crude production values, though, are hardly the 
principal problem, because slicker ones would not have smoothed over the 
film's jumpy shifts from humour to menace. We see participants in a vicious 
gunfight suddenly begin a laughing fit. A man writhing in pain from a stab 
wound while everyone around him takes it as a joke. Two messengers getting 
stripped and tortured by guys who then feed them dog food. Ho ho ho ho ho. At 
one point I asked my companion if we were watching a comedy or drama. "I 
don't know," she said, "but I hate it either way."
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
