Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Cameron Shelley
In retrospect, I should have seen Mel Gibson's Braveheart when it was
out in theaters. Having failed to do that, however, I finally got
around to renting it a couple of weeks ago. Unfortunately, seeing this
film on the small screen with a single, little speaker did not produce
the sense of epic grandeur that this film obviously aimed at. After
all, these big budget, star-studded, action-packed period flicks are
all about dressing up, talking funny, and grinding the mad-cow beef of
evil into the mincemeat of justice! (Yes, I've been watching "The
Tick," but I do think that these film epics work with the basic
emotions or not at all.) It's interesting, isn't it, that just having
Mel Gibson in a picture makes it count as "star-studded?"
Braveheart does indeed work on the "basic" emotions, love, anger,
lust, and loathing mostly. William Wallace is an angry young man,
fresh from a tough childhood and tempered by a continental education.
Onscreen, we witness the obligatory childhood traumas that will
explain why Wallace is such an unyielding guy: His father is
treacherously murdered by the English, hung from the rafters of a
barn. After this, we know his life will be dedicated to making life in
Scotland as miserable as possible for the English occupiers. At his
father's funeral, he meets Murron, his future wife. They are both mere
youngsters, but the focus on their brief interaction assures the
viewer they will be together soon. What we aren't shown are his
subsequent travels on the continent with his relatives, where he picks
up French, Latin, and a civilized intellect. Upon returning to
Scotland, Wallace elopes with Murron (to avoid the egregious law
enacted by King Edward that gives the local English noblemen the right
of "first night" with new brides) and professes a desire to raise some
kids and some crops. Fat chance!
Getting the character development out of the way like this did not
provide a very compelling opening for the movie. Basically, almost
every B-grade martial arts flick begins with a similar sequence: The
evil warlord burns down the young man's village, murders his parents
(with an option to rape his sister and shoot his dog), and then waits
20 years for the young man to grow up, master Kung Fu, and come to get
him. Braveheart's developmental sequence is not so trite, but it
shares the property of getting any character motivation fixed early so
that the audience can just sit back and enjoy the kicks, punches, and
witty banter. This is fine for B movies, but I think it is ultimately
counterproductive in Braveheart.
There are other options. You could use flashbacks, or possibly just
have characters refer significantly to past events and let the actors'
reactions speak for themselves. If I recall, Rob Roy used this latter
technique quite well to explain why Rob was so stubbornly honorable.
In any case, the setup makes the rest of the plot feel rather
inevitable - the way events unfold seems relentlessly foreordained,
which becomes annoying during a picture with a three hour runtime.
Wallace is understandably angry when the English murder his doomed
wife, and unswervingly pursues them with an army all the way to York.
Frankly, the simple inflexibility of his character made Wallace's
constant occupation with "freedom" seem more like an idee fixe than a
noble frame of mind. At a guess, I would say that the character of
Wallace was written to be ambiguous: either a zealot the way the
English and Scottish nobles saw him, or a sympathetic patriot the way
the Scottish commoners saw him. It is difficult to play a sympathetic
zealot, however, and I think the problem was that Gibson sometimes
sounded like a zealot while acting like the sensitive, heartthrob
type.
While I'm complaining, I'll just add that I found the handling of
Robert Bruce a bit bothersome too. I appreciate the contrast between
him and Wallace: Wallace's father died early and inspired his son,
whereas Bruce's father clung unnaturally to life (or so it appeared)
and served only to poison his son's spirit. Freud would certainly be
nodding his head knowingly at Bruce's predicament - sons must separate
from their fathers to have a healthy adulthood. But the half-shift in
focus from Wallace to Bruce late in the film was distracting in nearly
inexplicable, at least if you didn't already have some idea of the
role the actual Robert Bruce played in Scottish history. In
Braveheart, Wallace's execution, Christlike, redeems Bruce from his
role as a Scottish Judas and shows him that he must carry on the good
fight. But Bruce's introduction and development are accomplished
somewhat laboriously by simply having the camera follow him around
here and there. When this is finally over, Bruce becomes more
interesting and ultimately extracts himself from the backpocket of
King Edward, changing himself from a leaf in the tide to a leader.
This review does little justice to the good points of the film, but
most other reviews I've seen (and they've been out for a while now
too) do an adequate job of this, so I figured some criticism was in
order. As a spectacle, Braveheart is well executed without being
stagey or treacly, and the battle scenes, I think, epitomize this
quality of the film. But the general lack of depth in the characters
is made too apparent by a conventional development and some
unfocussed, lingering direction. Better to see it on the screen,
perhaps, where you can always enjoy the setting when the pacing
wanders a bit.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-1211 x2555
         Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle>
             CEL: http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/>

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     With the directorial experience of just one film, THE MAN WITHOUT
A FACE, Mel Gibson has tried to make his own film comparable to
SPARTACUS, built around the late 13th Century Scottish hero and freedom
fighter Sir William Wallace.  He has given the film a 177-minute length
of which could have been better used to tell the story of this larger-
than-life hero.  Unfortunately, Gibson's pacing is a bit off and the
film gives way to some dull stretches.  This is a film that I am happy
I did my homework for before seeing to avoid being too impressed by the
film and then having to be disillusioned later when I discovered the
film's inaccuracies.
     The story, with many obvious parallels to that of the film
SPARTACUS, tells of the young Wallace growing up in a Scotland occupied
by the troops of Edward Longshanks (a.k.a. Edward I, played by Patrick
McGoohan).  William's father narrowly misses being murdered with some
other important Scots, then is killed fighting Edward.  William is
brought up by his uncle and taught to fight with his wits rather than
by brute strength.  He returns home to live as a simple farmer, and the
story slows down to tell the story of his romance and marriage.  But
soon Edward's injustice reaches out to him.  Wallace strikes back, is
outlawed, and becomes a powerful leader of the rebels fighting against
English rule.
     In a large film with a big cast Patrick McGoohan walks away with
all honors as the villainous pre-Machiavellian Machiavellian King
Edward I.  Rarely has the screen produced so ruthless a tyrant.  While
more ruthless than the character he played in DANGER MAN (a.k.a. SECRET
AGENT), he brings the same cold, calculating efficiency to this role.
Gibson seems to have had his hands full directing the film and brought
little to his role more than expected.  Besides the apparent love of
freedom, he could have been playing his character Mad Max.
     Curiously, this film seems less anachronistic than its trailers
made it feel.  Occasional lines seem, if not out of place, at least
overly fine-tuned for the late 20th Century.  Having characters
exclaiming "Excellent!" seems better attuned to the time of Bill and
Ted than of William and Edward.  Gibson's visual style seems not yet
matured so that he overuses slow motion scenes, sometimes telegraphing
the action.  Some of his scenes seem contrived and unbelievable.  One
such scene involves a dead body that drips blood just at perfect
instant.  Another involves what has to be the world's least skittish
deer.  (You have to have seen the film to know what I mean.)
     Gibson tries to create a realistic feel by making Scottish
communities seem properly grimy, though he applies this standard far
less to women than to men.  He has a great deal of violence, graphic
and implied, in the course of the film.  Toward the end of the film
there are certainly some painful scenes to watch.  Gibson also has some
fun with the battle scenes that I suspect was not inspired by any
historical record.  Unfortunately, while the battle scenes are exciting
and colorful, what we see bears little relation to what actually
happened in the battles portrayed.  In fact, while the film seems to
say that Wallace was trained to use his wits in battle rather than
brute force, that is not how he is portrayed on the screen.  The
historical Wallace used his wits far more in battle than Gibson's
representation, who seems to rely on a good speech and little more than
headlong berserker assaults.  (The battle shown are very little like
the real battles.  See the historical note after the review.)
     BRAVEHEART is well-intentioned and ambitious, but is
disappointingly flawed.  It probably required a more experienced
director--and one who would have demanded a little more from Gibson.I
give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     HISTORICAL NOTE (possible light spoilers):
     In the years just preceding William Wallace's revolt Edward I knew
his real enemy was France to the south with a military force much
superior to his own.  England had been at peace with Scotland for more
than a century and Edward expected little trouble from the north.  But
John de Balliol, King of Scotland, allied himself with Philip IV of
France rather than supply Edward with men and arms to fight the French.
It was not a strong alliance since France had little faith in John's
power to defend his title as king.
     Edward was already taxing England for the war with France and did
not relish the idea of fighting a war against Scotland and France at
the same time.  He certainly did not want to tax his people for both.
In 1290 he had expelled the Jews from England and without them to
borrow from any more he was finding that the decision to expel had been
a costly one.
     Edward decided to confer with Scotland's King John and to assure
John's loyalty.  He called upon John to meet him at Berwick.  John
refused.  Edward took this as a declaration of war and invaded Scotland
with intent to conquer, sacking Berwick.  King John then renounced any
homage to England.  But Edward's commander, Warenne, the Earl of
Surrey, defeated King John at the Battle of Dunbar.  He captured John
and imprisoned him.  Edward declared himself to be King of Scotland
before returning to fight France.
     Edward set up a puppet government in Scotland, not expecting much
resistance.  William Wallace, the son of a poor knight, was outlawed at
this time when he got into a personal argument with a young Englishman.
The Englishman Selby insulted Wallace and Wallace killed him.  Wallace
joined one of the several bands of outlaws.  With a band of 30 men he
burned Lanark and killed the sheriff in May 1297.
     Wallace organized an army from the small landowners and organized
guerilla attacks on the English between Forth and Tay.  Through this
time Edward was fighting in France and Wallace was fighting the Earl of
Surrey.  Surrey brought a large army to fight Wallace in September.
The two armies met September 11, 1297, at the Battle at Cambuskenneth
(a.k.a. Stirling) Bridge near Forth.  (This is very different from how
the battle was portrayed in the film.)  A narrow bridge separated the
two armies.  The Earl's own advisors told him that he could not get his
full army across the bridge in under eleven hours and if he tried
crossing he could bring only a small part of his army to bear on
defense.  He ignored the advice and ordered him men across the bridge.
Wallace awaited the proper time, when about half the army was across
the bridge, and attacked.  Half the army watched helpless on the far
bank as the other was driven back into the river to drown.  Wallace
earned a stunning victory and in the process captured Stirling Castle.
     Edward made a truce with France by marrying the king's sister and
betrothing the king's daughter to his son.  He was off in Flanders when
he found out that Wallace had defeated his army and, flushed with
victory, had invaded England and was sacking Cumberland and North
Umberland.  Wallace was knighted and given the guardianship of Scotland
ruled in Balliol's name.  He decorated his shield with the skin of an
English tax-collector.
     Edward I, having his truce with France, re-invaded Scotland,
marched to Stirling, and met Wallace's army at Falkirk on July 22,
1298.  Wallace formed his forces into four schiltrons.  That is a
circle of men with spears pointed outward (similar to what the film
showed at Battle of Stirling Bridge, but that was a straight line).
Edward's knights could do little against these phalanxes and so were
called off.  Instead the English used a shower of arrows from long
bows.  This made quick work of the Scottish army.  Wallace, however,
survived by hiding in a dense nearby wood.
     Wallace resigned his guardianship, but still fought a guerrilla
war against the English in Scotland.  In 1305 he was arrested at
Robroyston near Glasgow.  He was found guilty of being a traitor to
Edward, though he had never sworn allegiance to the king.  He was
executed that same year, much in the manner shown in the film.
     Contrary to the film, however, Edward I did not die until 1307,
Edward II did not marry until 1308, and Edward II's and Isabella's
first child was Edward III who was not born until 1310.  Henry the
Minstrel, also known as "Blind Harry" made Wallace a popular hero by
immortalizing him in an epic romance poem in the 15th Century.

Author
Ralph Benner
     You gotta give to Mel Gibson what he deserves -- a movie Hall of
Shame award for having his publicity machine spend $25 million dollars to
buy ten Oscar nominations (including best makeup!) for a movie that,
thrice at the box office gate, only collected a domestic total of
something around $70 million, the same amount he spent to make his
blooded-up poem of an epic, one that's progressively more gruesome and
childish to sit through as the minutes turn into almost three hours.
BRAVEHEART, about Sir William Wallace, the 13th Century Scottish renegade
lionized as the heroic impetus for Scotland's freedom from England's
tyranny, looks like it was no picnic to make, and, for all but his beer
guzzling, blood thirsty compadres, it's not a whole lot of fun to watch.
It's a militia instructional manual -- directed by Rambo of Scots. 
     As with Spain's Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, about whom little is known
except legend born out of the anonymously written "Cantar de mio Cid,"
Wallace's place in Scottish history is dependent upon a poem written by
Scotsman Henry the Minstrel some two hundred years after Wallace's death.
Historians are in agreement that the author lacks the foundation to build
but a mythical monument, yet, witness the examples, a lack of fact has
never stopped a nation from veneration. History accepts, however, that
Wallace was the driving force behind Scotland's revolt against the
English, and the following accounts in BRAVEHEART are factual occurrences:
that Wallace defeated the British at Stirling Bridge and sacked Edward I's
northern-most outposts; that Wallace was defeated at Falkirk; and that,
after exiling to France for an unknown period, Wallace returned, was
captured by Sir John de Menteith, was tried, convicted and executed.
Everything else in the movie, except for the presence of the English king
and his gay son Edward II, is fictional filler. 
     The movie's structure has SPARTACUS branded all over it,
especially the presentation of the armies and their anxious biding before
combat. On more than one occasion we're reminded of Kirk Douglas, only
here Wallace has been updated to Sylvester Stallone: when shouting from
atop his horse, Gibson (unintentionally) sounds like him, packing the same
fake, butch frenzy. I think this is where the movie gets into trouble:
borrowing his hair from the prairie rat in THE ROAD WARRIOR and his war
paint from RAMBO, something phooey is being dispatched -- a village
people's "Macho Man" gung ho that displaces the Rodrigo chivalry. If some
of us can't suspend disbelief long enough to get passed his poor
Scotsspeak, or get passed the fact that's he's too contemporary a famous
figure to become history, I can't accept that it's our fault: a more
discriminating director would have scaled back the cheap plugs and steals
and enfantilism (sic). And is there any other box office idol more in love
with his own bare ass? Is his eager display a pitch for the virtues of
sodomy? Or a way to avoid the fact that he's boxed himself in, hoping we
don't recognize that he's not exercising enough as an actor? That he's
vegging in his second childhood? There's a rigged effort to deemphasize
Gibson's comely appeal in BRAVEHEART while at the same time baiting us --
Quick, find me in that chorus line of frontal nudity. His famous
flirtatious "on the couch" charm hasn't much of a place on the hills of
Scotland, yet the bloody and painted face is a new criterion for barbarous
sensuality -- he's a visual primer for a Stallone course about T.E.
Lawrence as warrior of darkness. It's repulsive, but considering the
current hunger for carnage, some will get their kicks. It's what those
Oscar noms represent.
     Rod Lurie blurbs that BRAVEHEART is "one of the best films I've
ever seen...the most sumptuous and involving historical epic since David
Lean's LAWRENCE OF ARABIA." What total bull shit. Photographed by John
Troll, BRAVEHEART has an Argus-eyed ambiance, with the same overcast
picturesqueness as ROB ROY. (Consider ourselves fortunate that neither is
as cloudy, misty, hazy as THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS or 1492: CONQUEST OF
PARADISE. Only the meteorologists earned their pay on those foggers.)
Raves about the battle scenes too -- "Some of the most vivid ever
filmed...The most spectacular battle scenes ever." Vivid they're not and
what's spectacular about them is the breakneck speed of the editing.
During the Stirling Bridge battle, the images warp by us so fast that
they're almost blurry and we're watching in busy fashion, hoping to catch
at least half of what's going on. The plunges, stabbings, chops, slices
and decapitations whiz by in both this sequence and at Falkirk, so we're
spared spurts of blood and splatterings of innards. Yet we're removed from
the suffering; we just sit there viewing the aftermath, wonder more about
what hell the horses might have gone through. (According to NBC's
Dateline, not much.) Gibson standing in the middle of the dead and
half-living is meant to cause grief and revulsion, like Kenneth Branagh's
slow-motion staging walloped us in HENRY V. Yet Branagh's futility of war
isn't Gibson's Spartacus-like call for freedom at any price; becoming
selective about emotions, Gibson posits that body counts (and torture)
equal heroism.  
     Lifting the "let my people go" from SPARTACUS, appropriating the
gallantry of EL CID and, given the repeated treacheries, foisting itself
off partly as a sort of darkened, humorless LION IN WINTER, Randall
Wallace's script concocts scenarios more fitting a rigger than legendary
liberator: the ladies are eager to disrobe, a ghostly wife relieves the
pain of martyrdom, an unwilling Judas becomes Braveheart's champion.
Wallace manages to work in "fock," the original Scottish spelling and
pronunciation of that more famous four letter expletive. One problem:
though the Scots were probably the first to use the slang pejoratively, it
wasn't in use until the 15th Century. Another problem: GLAADers are up in
armed purses again over Gibson's homophobia, this time protesting
BRAVEHEART because of the treatment of Edward I's son Edward II. They're
onto something still unexpressed: Gibson, so quick to flaunt his pretty
little ass on the big screen, has stereotypic views on gays -- he's the
kind of Roman Catholic who notices not the priests ogling the alter boys
but only the flaming hairdressers -- and he's brought his prejudices to
Eddie 2, who, played by an actor who could be Rachel Ward's brother, is a
swish weakling. But would Edward II have betrayed his arranged-for bride
(Sophie Marceau, wearing a headdress that, under the crown, looks like
white cerebra) at the very point of taking wedding vows? In front of his
father? Patently foolish, this corrupt character establishment is for the
unsophisticated Oscar voter; its message is that even royal homos, of whom
history knows many, are contemptible lowlifes. (Quite a few, including
Alexander the Great and Richard the Lionheart, were anything but.)
GLAADers are also upset that junior's lover gets it, but, breaching my
libertarianism, I found the lover's exit the movie's one amusing and
best-directed interior shot. Additionally, and very clumsily, director
Gibson gets swept away by masochistic intent over content: the Christ-like
torture sequence has the obligatory Inquisitional flavor -- complete with
its own combo of Basil Rathbone and Vincent Price -- but the crowd's
reactions are mood alteringly inappropriate; there are too many "Look, Ma,
I'm in this here movie" grins. Yet such errors earn Best Film Editing
nominations.
     Gibson is WYSIWYG, seemingly so uncomplicated that, until now,
it's been just about impossible not to like him. We've overlooked his lack
of finesse, his apparently convenient lack of tolerance about what the
real world is made up of, because once he flashes that smile, or locks
onto us with those eyes, we're wasted: we all become Sigourney Weaver's
Jill in THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY. Even his Pizzahead in THE MAN
WITHOUT A FACE disarms. Gibson's directorial debut, FACE is a much better
directed movie than BRAVEHEART. A proud dad of (is it?) six, he knows the
wandering adventures, use of forbidden language, insensitivities, the
instant querulous eruptions of kids. As director, he appears to know the
ill-effects of falsifying otherwise innocent situations: if FACE has the
depressing moralistic posturing of Diane Keaton's THE GOOD MOTHER -- that
sometimes truth isn't enough to open the minds of Philistines -- it's also
a reminder that children are used to shield adults from the fear of truth.
(In America, we're more afraid of what is true than the Judeo-Christian
belief of damnation for breaking the 9th Commandment.) The way Gibson
handles the subject matter that inevitably springs up is evidence of
sensitivity to society's punishing hypocrisies; it confirms he's got a
golden heart. What angers many of us about Gibson's choices of movies is
that he so frequently retreats from humanity. As if he's afraid of losing
his kinship with his fellow prankster buddies in the audience. No longer a
theory, Gibson's popularity among men isn't based on his comic lunacy and
sport -- these are his least worthy attributes -- but on tantalizing
solicitation, something resembling a subliminal communal desideratum.
While the growing numbers of sexually insecure American men would balk
with faked hostility at the suggestion, how else do they explain male
movie makers exploiting his Nautilized gluteus maximus? Strictly for the
distaffers? Demographics are well known: the majority of those seeing the
LETHAL WEAPON pukers, and most especially in repeats, are blue collar
swains, so whose secret reveries are being teasingly fed?  Gibson elicits
these feelings, he knows it, and his public denials are disguised conceit.
He told Larry King that he'd like to return to Shakespeare, perhaps on
stage, and play Iago in "Othello." With his penchant for making villainous
mock out of inverts, what would he do to the Bard's murderous coxcomb?
Many of us want to believe some of Gibson's material is method towards
aesthetics. That the highs -- from THE ROAD WARRIOR to LIVING DANGEROUSLY
to MRS. SOFFEL to HAMLET to WITHOUT A FACE to looking more stunning in
kilt on Jay Leno than any Scot I've ever seen -- are indications that a
doctrine of artistry is being strived for. But then the money making
juvenilia -- lows that have eventually done in every other superstar.
(Just ask Burt Reynolds.) And, apparently, Gibson's agreeable to stumping
so low as to purchase a flock of undeserving awards nominations. Like it
did with Shirley MacLaine for TERMS OF ENDURANCE and Clint Eastwood for
UNFORGIVEN, Hollywood may decide to honor Gibson with awards he doesn't
artistically earn just to shut him up. The 1995 Oscar nominations recall
those of 1988. Foofs blame the FISH CALLED WANDA voting block for the foul
smell winners generated that year. Some insiders think THE POSTMAN has the
surging dark horse gallop to surpass the competition. Others think APOLLO
13 will be Opie's lucky number. If not, then 1995 will have the smell of
BRAVEFART.

Author
Magus
OK.  I just saw this movie a few days ago.  Why so late?  I missed it in the 
theatres mainly cause I was worried about its length.  I have missed it on 
video for a while since there is never a copy at the local Blockbuster.  But a 
few days ago, and after my friends convincing me to see it, good old 
Blockbuster had a copy.  So was the movie spectacular enough to win the 
numerous Oscars it did?  Read and find out...
Braveheart has a lot good things going for it.  One is the surprising fact 
that the 3 hours go by relatively quickly.  Another is the wonderful scenery 
and the stirring music in the background.  Yet another is the solid acting.
So what WAS the problem with the movie?  A generally ho-hum plot.
OK.  I know that Braveheart was "based on a true story".  I have never read 
anything on William Wallace (Mel Gibson's character).  But the plot has no 
surprises in it.  Nothing is very original about it.  But the stuff that is 
there is watchable at least.
The plot basically begins when William Wallace is a kid and his father is 
killed in an attack on the English.  William Wallace lives in Scotland and the 
evil King of England is ruling over Scotland.  The Scotland peasants want 
their freedom.  William Wallace then gets a visit from his uncle who tells 
Wallace to come with him.  William basically has no choice since he only lived 
with his father, so he goes with his uncle and it is implied that he learns 
sword fighting skills as he grows up.
Then the film continues on to when William Wallace is grown up.  The rest of 
the film deals with Wallace gathering more people in his army of peasants and 
engaging them in huge epic war battles.  It has your standard lost loved-one 
and double crossing along the way.
Overall I would reccomend Braveheart to Mel Gibson fans or to people who loves 
battles where thousands of people charge against eachother and fight on huge 
fields.  Or if you want to see a violent war epic with some drama thrown in.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Historical epic as a genre was almost banished from
Hollywood in early 1990s. For many critics, scholars and,
most importantly, film producers, it was a thing of the past
- something that could have attracted crowds only in the era
of black-and-white television and non-CGI special effects.
But in 1995, same as in the case of DANCES WITH WOLVES five
years ago, there came the man who decided to use of all his
energy and talents of actor, producer and director in order
to revitalise that particular genre. And, same as in the
case of DANCES WITH WOLVES, he was awarded for his effort
with "Oscars". The name of the film was BRAVEHEART, and the
name of its director and main actor was Mel Gibson.
The plot chronicles the life of Scottish warlord and folk
hero William Wallace (1272 - 1305). In his time, English
king Edward I "Longshanks" (played by Patrick McGoohan) has
almost completely subdued entire British Isles, including
Scotland, whose proud inhabitants are now subjected by "ius
primae noctis" and various other forms of humiliation and
oppression by English knights. Although English had killed
his father many years ago, young Scottish commoner William
Wallace (played by Mel Gibson) doesn't care about politics
and wants only to have peaceful life with his new bride
Murron (played by Catherine MacCormack). Murron's death
changes that and Wallace takes arms and, together with small
but dedicated band of followers, begins guerrilla campaign
that would systematically destroy almost every English
garrison in the country. Through time, more and more people
join his ranks and in 1298 Wallace's rag-tag army scores
surprising victory against English knights in the Battle of
Stirling Bridge. But the newly won freedom is endangered by
the internal squabbles between Scots themselves, especially
nobles under pretender Robert the Bruce (played by Angus
MacFadyen), who wouldn't like to have a simple commoner as a
national leader.
BRAVEHEART was only the second film in the directorial
career by Mel Gibson, so it wouldn't be fair to compare it
to the better known genre classics directed by David Lean or
Anthony Mann. However, even when we apply such criteria
BRAVEHEART is more than decent historical epic that takes
new and refreshing approach to the genre. The most
noticeable element of this approach is naturalism. While
older Hollywood films set in medieval Europe used to give
fairytale-like vision of picturesque castles, splendid
costumes and knights in shining armour, Gibson shows us the
extremely unpleasant world of poverty and feudal injustice
where might made right and life was hard, short and brutish.
This general unpleasantness is especially underlined in the
scenes of battle, where hand-to-hand combat is
naturalistically displayed in all its gory details, never
seen since Verhoeven's ultra-naturalistic FLESH & BLOOD.
Compared with this naturalistic approach, most of Old
Hollywood epics look like stage plays. BRAVEHEART also
employs humour at the right places, not only to make bloody
realities of medieval British Isles more bearable to
sensitive audiences, but also to underline its down-to-earth
atmosphere, so different from previous historical epics.
What makes BRAVEHEART "larger than life" is his protagonist.
Mel Gibson obviously invested plenty of his energy and
talent in bringing the mythical figure of William Wallace
and, as a result, character of 15th Century poems is
transformed into superhuman being that resembles late 20th
Century comic book hero. Wallace is more than superior to
his enemies, both physically and mentally, yet he is able to
show his sensitive, more vulnerable side. Naturally, when
the character is based on epic poems, most of historical
accuracy is going down the drain (which was the case with
almost every historical epic from Hollywood in 1990s).
However, even those who don't particularly care about
history or are willing to give poetic license to
scriptwriter Randall Wallace might think that he went over
the top in idolising Wallace, especially in the second part
of film when Scottish superhero manages to seduce Princess
Isabel (played by Sophie Marceau) and make her a child.
Because of that the disbelief is hardly suspended, and final
scenes aren't as effective as they should be.
Mel Gibson as an actor is truly wonderful, and he is also
helped by small army of very good British and Irish actors.
Most memorable of them all is Patrick McGoohan, whose cold,
calculated and evil medieval monarch is one of the most
effective villains seen in contemporary cinema. Brendan
Gleeson (who would later become famous for his role in
Boorman's GENERAL) is also very good as Wallace's trusted
companion, as well as Ian Bannen is effective as
leprosy-stricken King John Balliol. David O'Harra is very
entertaining as Wallace's Irish ally, and Angus MacFadyen
brings a lot of anxiety into his conscience-stricken
character of Robert the Bruce. Women in this film have
rather thankless roles, especially Marceau as
one-dimensional French princess. Catherine McCormack as
Wallace's wife was more interesting, but she was eliminated
from the picture early on. From the technical point of view,
the film is also very good. Photography by John Toll brings
a lot of Scottish natural beauty to the screen. On the other
hand, the musical score by James Horner employs too much of
modern-day instruments for period piece set in medieval
times.
Although mostly welcomed by critics and audiences alike,
BRAVEHEART was often criticised for homophobia and other
forms of extreme conservatism. The main reason for that was
the fact that Gibson, among many historical facts, chose to
be faithful only to those related to sexual orientation of
"Longshank"'s son Prince Edward (played by Peter Hanly). He
is not only presented as a villain, but also as one of the
less competent in villain's camp - and portraying of
homosexuals as villains or inferior to heterosexuals is
almost unforgivable sin in "politically correct" Hollywood.
To make things even more obvious, Good Guys in this film are
the total opposite of effeminate and incompetent Edward -
rugged macho men of mountains who are more practical and
efficient because they tend to employ conservatives' common
sense instead of fashionable theories of ivory tower
liberals. However, although the message of this film might
look right-wing, it owes more to leftist ideology of various
national liberation movements in 20th Century. According to
that ideology, oppressed classes (workers, peasants) are
better suited to fight for national freedom because their
members has less to lose in that struggle and, as such, they
are more radical, less willing to make compromises and more
efficient; on the other hand, privileged classes
(aristocracy, bourgeoisie) are more likely to betray the
cause of freedom and be in cahoots with foreign oppressors
in order to keep their privileges. This Marxist worldview is
presented in BRAVEHEART without any subtlety.
In the end, whether the audience is patient enough to
discover hidden meanings or simply wants to enjoy
entertaining historical epic, BRAVEHEART is more than
adequate choice for all fans of this recently resurrected
genre.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Michael Bendner
     BRAVEHEART is based on the legendary true story of Sir William
Wallace, the 13th Century Scot who started a rebellion to drive the
English from his homeland after the Scottish throne was seized by the
ruthless King Edward I (Patrick McGoohan).
     The plot:  William Wallace (Mel Gibson) is a Scottish native whose
parents were killed by the English while he was still a child.  His
rich uncle adopts him and educates him well by taking him on some trips
around the world.  When William returns to his village as an adult, he
falls in love with a woman he knew as a child (Catherine McCormack),
and they get married in secret.
     When some English soldiers try to rape her, he defends her by
beating them into a bloody pulp. The English nobleman who has
commandeered that particular village ties her to a post and slashes her
neck in public as a means to get to William.  When William discovers
what has ensued during his absence, he returns with the intent to
kill.  After a few vicious blows of his sword, the other villagers are
inspired and start revolting.  Within minutes all the English soldiers
are dead.
     William is now determined to rid Scotland of its English
oppressors.  With the help of the leader of the Scottish nobles, Robert
the Earl of Bruce, William unites the clans and builds an army.  King
Edward I, now old and dying, sends English troops into Scotland to fight
them.  Through William's smart military tactics, his army manages to
defeat armies of English soldiers much larger than themselves.
     William and his men start taking cities back and dismembering the
English.  The King sends Princess Isabella (Sophie Marceau), wife of
Prince Edward his son, to negotiate with William.  The princess, being
the victim of a planned marriage knows that her side is the evil one
and helps William out as much as she can.
     BRAVEHEART was filmed on location in Ireland and Scotland.  It is
very authentic, thus very bloody.  This movie is not for the meek.
Intense battle scenes lasting several minutes feature death by hammer,
sword through head, arrow through head, sword through stomach, you name
it.  There are scenes of throats being slashed, dismembered body parts
being carried about, and people being hanged.  These wonderful things make
it all the more historically accurate, I suppose.
     The performances of all actors are excellent.  Quite a feat
considering up to 2000 extras were used at one time for some of the
battle scenes.  Gibson is very convincing to a point that one gets the
impression he really feels he is the character he is portraying.
BRAVEHEART is the second film Gibson has both directed and starred in,
and if he keeps it up at this level of excellence, we have a lot to
look forward to.
     The film runs about three hours, which may seem a tad long for
some.  While the first 45 minutes are vital to setting the scene, I
think they could have done it in 20.  The last-2 1/4 hours however,
more than make up for the first bit with non-stop, intense action and a
throroughly involving storyline.

Author
Mike Townsend
     Mel Gibson directs himself in BRAVEHEART, a three hour epic about
13th century Scot Sir William Wallace and his fight for Scottish
freedom from England.  The film takes many liberties with the
historical Wallace.  So much so that the historical Wallace gives way
to the mythical Wallace, something of a Scottish George
Washington/Nathan Hale/Patrick Henry, and one of the first voices of
the nationalistic fever that remade the face of Europe.
     Wallace is reluctant to fight the English presence in Scotland
despite having experienced their terror as a child (James Robinson).
But when the English brutalize his young wife Murron (Catherine
McCormack), he changes from would be farmer to rebel leader.  The
rebellion becomes enmeshed in a complex web of intrigue centering on
two families, the English Plantagenets, King Edward I and his son
(Patrick McGoohan, Peter Hanly), and the Scottish Bruces (Ian Bannen,
Angus McFayden), claimants to the vacant Scottish throne.  Fathers are
pitted against sons, Bruces against Plantagenets, Bruces against rival
Scottish claimants, and Plantagenets against the young Princess of
Wales (Sophie Marceau), who finds herself simultaneously attracted to
the charismatic Wallace and repulsed by her husband and father-in-law.
Wallace, whose earlier pacifism has been replaced by a single-minded
nationalism, is unaware of many of these conflicts and bewildered or
angered by most of the rest.  He ultimately is overpowered by the
forces surrounding him, but comes to accept it with an almost religious
equanimity.
     Gibson and screenwriter Randall Wallace do not stray from the
traditional epic format.  The film has all the textbook features:
panoramic shots, bold and sweeping themes, a protagonist of heroic
proportions, a larger than life treatment, and a long running time.
     Moreover, the film borrows heavily from other sources.  The basic
story line is more than reminiscent of Stanley Kubrick's SPARTACUS, and
the relationship between Wallace and his lifelong friend Hamish
(Brendan Gleeson) is clearly patterned after that of the Saturday
matinee Robin Hood and Little John.
     But there are many distinctive touches as well.  Gibson's version
of the battle of Stirling arguably is worth the price of admission.
The staging and editing (Steven Rosenblum) leave the audience both
enthralled and horrified.  The archers, calvary, and infantry provide a
13th century version of a football kickoff; there is even Wallace's
Knute Rockne like pep talk.  The hand-to-hand combat is choreographed
rather than directed, and the strategies unfold gradually, giving
viewers the feeling of watching a lawn chess match using people as
pieces.  Finally, the battle proper is framed by shouting and posturing
of such primal intensity that one is uncertain at times whether the
Scots are men or some pre-human ancestors.  The film has smaller
effective moments as well.  The parallel between the two key families
is maintained at many levels, even down to the fathers' health.  Viewed
in this light, the controversial scene in which the King ejects his
son's male lover is an essential counterpart of the elder Bruce's
treatment of Wallace, the young Bruce's object of fascination.
Parallelism is order of the day--note the segment in which deer is
hunted by man who is hunted by assassin who is hunted by counter-
assassin.  Other things worth looking for include the recurrent use of
dream imagery to highlight the mythical Wallace, and several muted
references to the Scottish love of learning that was to culminate
centuries later in the Scottish Enlightenment.  Viewers also should
examine the way the movie uses simple objects such as a thistle and two
wedding cloths to develop the story.
     For Gibson fans, the film will be a triumph.  He creates a
Wallace who dominates the movie without being oppressive.  Indeed,
those who like well-defined supporting roles should be pleased.
Despite limited screen time, McCormack and Marceau produce such
striking characterizations that BRAVEHEART fairly can be
described as a love story.  Other smartly done characters include
Hamish's father Campbell (James Cosmo) and Wallace's Irish aide-de-
camp Stephen (David O'Hara), a madcap who provides much of the
film's comic relief.  Action-adventure fans will not be
disappointed, nor those interested in complex political intrigue. 
Technical buffs will enjoy the production values.  Check out the
sets (Tom Sanders--especially the progression of forts), costumes
(Charles Knode--especially the dresses for the Princess), and
cinematography (John Toll--especially the Wallace/Murron wedding
night scenes).  Film score enthusiasts will appreciate James
Horner's melding of original music and well-known Scottish motifs.
     Viewers expecting historical epics to be historically accurate
will be disappointed by what is added to, and deleted from, the
film's Wallace.  Those preferring protagonists to have dark sides
will find this Wallace to be simplistic, if not superficial. 
Viewers more comfortable with a standard two hour length and
relatively uncluttered story line will have trouble with the three
hour running time and multitude of subplots.  Finally, this picture
is not for the truly squeamish.  Most of the violence is quick or
off screen, and many of the most gruesome types of incidents have
appeared in other mainstream films.  Nonetheless, the sheer volume
of mayhem combined with the intense emotional tone of the film will
leave few unaffected.

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by Mel Gibson
Starring: Mel Gibson. Sophie Morceau, Patrick MacGoohan, Catherine McCormack
Produced by Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd Jr., and Bruce Davey 
Written by Randall Wallace
Director of Photrography  John Toll
     There are times when art touches a personal chord, and for me the
viewing of Mel Gibson's BRAVEHEART was one of those times.  I was born
and raised not far from Stirling in Scotland where William Wallace's
monument stands and his first battle took place.  As you can imagine,
the stories of Wallace abound in that area, and it is of great joy to
review that Gibson has done those stories and legends proud.  As with
any historic film, Gibson has taken some liberties with fact, but
overall he has kept to the spirit of Wallace and that is extremely
important.  It is the best film to grace the screens so far this year.
     Set in 13th Century Scotland,  we find the Young William Wallace
ready and willing to go and fight with his father and brother against
Edward II who killed off the nearest threats to his throne in
Scotland.  William's father tells him something which will stay with
him throughout his life and throughout the film: "It's our wits that
make us men."  Wallaces father and brother are killed and the young
William is taken from his home by his uncle Argyle, played by the
brilliant Scottish character actor Brian Cox.
     After some years, Wallace returns to his village and meets up with
his old friends and an old flame from his father's funeral, Morren.
They two fall in love, wed secretly and seem happy in their intended
life together.  However, the local English lord thwarts these plans
when he kills Morren, and then waits for Wallace.  This is the start of
a life of battling for Scotlands independence for Wallace.
     Wallace gathers an army and fights of the English at Stirling, and
then continues to York where he takes over the Northern English
castle.  The battle scenes in the film are quite amazing, and the gore
and bloodshed only help the gritty, realistic feel Gibson has given
this film.  From the battle scenes to the romance sequences Gibson
really has done a superb job and has shown he can Direct action as well
as anyone at the moment.  I would go as far as to say the battle scenes
are as energetic, exciting and well done as the action scenes in
SPARTACUS and BEN HUR.  But above all this, Gibson has a good grasp in
this film of the spirit and romance we surround with the time.  He is
not afraid to let images and little dialogue tell the story, which is
too often a mistake made by young directors.  Two scenes early in the
film prove this.  At his father and brother's funeral, William is given
a thistle by a young Morren and this is done with such beautiful and
simple imagery it is quite breathtaking.  Also, shortly after William
stands outside at night with his uncle Argyle and sees people up by
the graves with a piper, he asks what is going on.  Argyle replies,
"They're saying goodbye in their own way.  Playing outlawed tunes on
outlawed pipes."  Gibson doesn't ram down your throat the fact that
the King banned Pipes, but he uses it in a subtle way to show that the
Scots are a proud race, and not beyond taking risk for their culture.
Beautiful!!
     Scenes like these are all the way through BRAVEHEART, and never
let you realize the film is three hours long.  The acting is very good
throughout, and many of the supporting cast are as well written as
primary characters in most other films.  Gibson makes great use of
slow-motion, and also keeps a great sense of humour in the film.  I
would be surprised if John Toll, last years Academy Award winner for
Cinematography, is not up for the honors again this year.  His work
here is really gorgeous.
     This film I highly recommend, and do not worry about the graphic
violence, it is all in proper context.

Author
Christopher Null
     Mel Gibson deserves a lot more credit than I've been giving him.  A
few years ago, no one could have conceived that the action star could pull
off the lead role in a dazzling, epic, historical
adventure-thriller-romance, let alone direct it.  But he does, making
BRAVEHEART a vastly entertaining and powerful film.
     Gibson plays Scottish hero William Wallace, a Scotsman with simple
roots who finds himself thrust into a role as leader of the Scottish revolt
against England in the late 13th century.  After the despicable King Edward
the Longshanks (Edward I) decrees that English nobles will have the right
to sexual relations with all newly-wed Scottish women, the revolution is
set in motion.  Wallace takes up the cause, only to find himself facing
incredible odds against a superior English army and fighting Scottish
nobles who want to negotiate peace instead of fight.  In fact, it's the
nobles who turn out to be the bigger obstacle.
     The film is exquisite in its melding of romance, political intrigue,
and some of the most effective (and gory) battle scenes I've ever watched.
At the forefront is the surprisingly capable portrayal of Wallace by
Gibson, who comes off as such an awesome Everyman hero that he makes Rob
Roy look like a wuss.  Also, the film is so effective at making the English
seem so overwhelmingly evil--*really* evil--that the audience is nearly
ready to rush the screen.  Patrick McGoohan, who plays the embodiment of
this evil in King Edward, deserves an early nod as Best Supporting Actor
for his staggering portrayal.
     The only real problem with the film is that it is *way* too long.
Clocking in at three hours, Gibson spends far too much time on certain
sequences, like the half-hour of Wallace as a child.  While entertaining,
they add little to the picture as a whole, and the long panning shots of
the Scottish highlands, while beautiful, get old after awhile.
     Thematically, BRAVEHEART explores the definitions of honor and
nobility, reinforcing what we've always known:  that true nobility is not
the result of your birthright, but that it arises from the way you live
your life.  It's an excellent reminder that stays with you long after the
film is over, and that is all too rare in Hollywood these days.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BRAVEHEART is set in Scotland in the 1200s.  It tells the true
story of William Wallace who was a famous commoner who led his people
in a rebellion against the English.  The movie is of epic proportions,
length and grandeur.  We learn the entire history of William Wallace
from the age of 8 until his death.
     Mel Gibson, in what I found to be his best role ever, plays the
grown up Wallace.  Gibson directs the movie as well.  The story is full
of fascinating history of which I knew little.  I have a good English
history background but was surprised at what little early Scottish
history I knew.  Wallace wants to live in peace and ignore the English
atrocities he has witnessed, but circumstances force his hand, and he
declares war on the English.  His battle cry is freedom and many poor
people follow him in his quest.  The story itself is quite compelling,
and the script is excellent.
     The political intrigue among the Scottish nobles makes you wonder
whose side they are on.  As the story unfolds, you come to realize that
they are only interested in enriching themselves and do not care about
their own people.  They constantly counsel Wallace to compromise his
ideas in order to achieve some lesser, but more practical solution.
His vision is a singular one of freedom for his people.  I found myself
thinking of Gary Cooper in THE FOUNTAINHEAD and the similarity between
his role and that of Gibson's.  All of the leaders who were the
"wisest" urged constant compromise on their rising young stars in both
movies.
     Actually, the movie most like BRAVEHEART is GETTYSBURG for both
had huge and realistic battle scenes with wave after wave of humans
charging each other and dying.  Of course, many people will compare
BRAVEHEART with ROB ROY.  They are both about old Scottish heroes, and
in my book, BRAVEHEART wins hands down.  Finally, you may find yourself
thinking of the Judas story from the Bible except here the movie has a
plethora of Judases.
     One example of the quality of the script is that the writer
manages to introduce a very funny character without it seeming like
merely a plot device, which of course it is.  This character is a mad
Irishman who steals every scene he is in with his dialog.  I laughed
out loud many times.  Although there was little humor in this serious
tale, there was just enough to keep me from ever tiring even though I
had to stay seated for three hours.
     Too often period pieces seem like merely exercises in style.  I
found QUEEN MARGOT to be one such movie.  Here the wonderful costumes
and set decoration feel totally authentic but in a natural way.  I felt
like I was actually in the thirteenth century where people's faces were
frequently dirty and in general personal hygiene was minimal.  When
they made their kills in battle or in revenge, I could sense how close
they were to animals then.  The blood would splat on their faces, and
they could just as easy have been wolves.
     I have been to Scotland many times and it is gorgeous.  In a low
key but quite impressive way, the cinematography makes one feel the
beauty and the isolation of countryside.  The music with the recurring
and haunting melody of the lone Scottish bagpipe sets a sad and yet
serene tone and mood.
     BRAVEHEART runs a long, but well worth it, 2:52.  I would not want
it shorten.  It is rated R, but NC-17 would be more appropriate.  It is
THE goriest movie I have ever seen and that too I would not change
because it allows one to vicariously live through what actual battles
in that period would be like.  Please be warned that you will see
almost every part of the human body being chopped off or stabbed in one
scene or another.  Imagine any physical horror, and there is probably a
scene of it in BRAVEHEART.  Nevertheless, there was not one scene where
I thought the violence was gratuitous.  I would let older teenagers see
the movie, but would be careful with impressionable younger ones.  I
give BRAVEHEART a strong recommendation and award it *** 1/2.  Don't
miss it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/24/95
Running Length: 2:50
MPAA Classification: R (Graphic violence, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Mel Gibson, Patrick McGoohan, Sophie Marceau, Brendan Gleeson,
      Catherine McCormack, Angus Macfadyen
Director: Mel Gibson
Producers: Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd Jr., and Bruce Davey
Screenplay: Randall Wallace
Cinematography: John Toll
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     The crown jewel of 1995's summer blockbusters appears to have
arrived early.  It's hard to imagine any motion picture released between
now and August matching Mel Gibson's BRAVEHEART for spectacle.  With its
clashing armies, heartstopping action, and grand sense of romance, this
is the sort of film it's a pleasure to see and review.
     Let me state my preferences up front.  I'm a big fan of the epic
adventure, a category in which BRAVEHEART, like cream, rises to the top.
There's a lot in this film that's praiseworthy--not the least of which
is its ambition.  Those viewing this picture may be easily reminded of
GETTYSBURG, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, GLORY, and such classics as
LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, EL CID, and SPARTACUS.  The grandeur is certainly
present; nevertheless, Gibson gives us not only memorable battles, but
characters of real substance.
     Borrowing from masters like Sam Peckinpah and David Lean, the
actor/director has crafted an exceptional cinematic tapestry in only his
sophomore effort.  Most of the time, three hour movies have a few flat
spots, but BRAVEHEART is constantly on the move--riveting from start
to finish.  When the end credits began to roll, I was hard pressed to
accept that nearly 170 minutes had elapsed.
     The title character is William Wallace (Gibson), a hero of Scottish
history whose legend has surely outstripped fact (in its own unique way,
the film acknowledges this).  Wallace fought for Scotland's freedom in
the late 13th century, wielding his broadsword and influence to defeat
the forces of King Edward I (Patrick McGoohan), the British monarch who
had declared himself king of Scotland upon the former ruler's demise.
     BRAVEHEART builds slowly to its first gritty climax.  Much of the
early film concentrates on Wallace's love for Murron (Catherine
McCormack).  Their courtship is unhurried, yet this is all preparation.
The real meat of the story, which includes political mechanations,
betrayal, and dramatic battles, is yet to come.  Patrick Henry once
said, "Give me liberty, or give me death!"  That might well be Wallace's
motto.  "It's all for nothing if you don't have freedom!"  The nobles of
Scotland fight for land and riches, but Wallace stands for the
individual, and earns respect with words and deeds.
     Bulked up and wearing a long-haired wig, Gibson brings his usual
wealth of charisma to the title role.  Patrick McGoohan, best known from
TV's SECRET AGENT MAN and THE PRISONER, is almost unrecognizable beneath
a snowy beard.  His Edward the Longshanks exudes an aura of cold menace.
He's a worthy foe for Wallace because his intelligence matches his
ruthlessness.  Sophie Marceau, the French actress who plays Princess
Isabelle, and Catherine McCormack are both immensely appealing.
     BRAVEHEART is a brutal, bloody motion picture, but the violence is
not gratuitous.  The maimings, decapitations, and other assorted
gruesome details make Wallace's world seem real and immediate.  In
addition, few theatrical moments make a more eloquent statement against
war than when Gibson shows women and children weeping over the dead on a
body-littered battlefield.  War is a two-headed beast, and both
faces--the glorious and the tragic--are depicted.
     Lately, certain films have come in pairs: two Robin Hoods, two
Columbuses, two Earps, and now two Highlander epics.  ROB ROY, the
first, is a fine motion picture.  BRAVEHEART, however, is better,
offering an exhilarating, and occasionally touching, experience that has
viewers leaving the theater caught up in an afterglow of wonder.  These
days, heros like William Wallace are as rare as motion picture displays
of this high, uncompromising quality.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Brian Koller
"Braveheart" is a very good film despite serious flaws.  The
cinematography, costumes, and direction is excellent and
generally overcomes problems with plot and character development.
"Braveheart" takes place in Scotland, during the Dark Ages.
Scotland is repressed by England, led by brutal King Longshanks.
William Wallace (Mel Gibson), a Scot commoner, avenges the 
death of his father, grandfather, wife, etc. the hands of 
the British by leading the Scots in a war for freedom.
There may be some spoilers in the following paragraphs.
Historical accuracy in epics is not always important to
a film's quality.  Any film that is not a documentary should
be considered fiction, anyway.  However, if history is to
be rewritten for the sake of simplification (Scots are
just and good, Brits are cynical and bad) or drama (Longshanks' 
son is gay, and Wallace beds the Princess of Wales) it should 
at least be credible.
I thought that there was excessive violence in the film.
There are endless spearings, stabbings, beatings, etc.
"Braveheart" appears to be both pro-violence and pro-war.
Wallace is invincible in hand-to-hand conflict, killing at
least a dozen Brits, including several after an arrow
has punctured his chest.
To justify the carnage, the British king is depicted as
evil incarnate, needing only to shoot lightning out of
his fingers to match the wickedness of the emperor in
the Star Wars films.
I didn't like the character of Longshanks son.  He is so
homosexual that he can't kiss his gorgeous bride at his 
wedding.  His hair and clothes are sissy.  He has a lover 
who is pushed off a tower by Longshanks, and no doubt 
the audience is expected to applaud this gesture.
Surely Hollywood should be beyond such depiction by now.
In a three hour film, I counted four women who have lines.
Two of the characters are very minor, the other two are
very beautiful women, one of whom is Wallace's wife, while
the other bears his child.  In the world of "Braveheart",
women only serve to supplement Wallace's manhood.
Despite these annoying flaws, I still believe that
"Braveheart" is a very good film.  The major redemption
comes from the cinematography.  The forests, valleys are
villages of Scotland are filmed in panning shots to full
advantage.  The costumes are great, and Gibson's direction
(the aforementioned problems can be blamed on the story)
is also excellent.  The length of the film and its slow
pace also help, since it broadens the characters and
builds the dramatic tension.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Chad Polenz
****
1995, R, 177 minutes [2 hours, 57 minutes]
[drama/adventure]
starring: Mel Gibson (William Wallace), Patrick McGoohan (Longshanks - King
Edward I), Angus McFadven (Robert The Bruce), Catherine McCormack (Murron),
produced by Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd, Bruce Davey, written by Randal Wallace,
directed by Mel Gibson.
"Braveheart" reminded me of "Star Wars" in a way, as both are essentially
the same stories of rebels (who we know are righteous) fighting against
impossible odds for their freedom from the evil oppressors.
 The film starts out by giving us a sense of Scottish history and culture,
as we learn a lot about the main characters and why they really are the "good
guys" and why the oppressive British are such "bad guys." The Brits are
tyrannical and cold hearted, they don't care about the Scots, except for
taxing them and conquering their land (that sounds familiar). The interaction
of the screenplay and directing captures the essence of the oppression and
sympathizes with the rebellion. 
The Scots' leader, William Wallace, falls in love with a woman, Murron
(McCormack), but they must have secret affair because the British could
separate them. When one of the British attempts to rape Murron,Wallace comes
to her rescue and kills the officer. This causes a chain reaction as all the
other villagers begin to revolt against the British, and thus the first major
step towards freedom has begun.
In some ways, the violence in this film isn't much different from the
typical action/adventure movies. We get a lot of fighting, but it seems
justified and is more exciting because the villains are portrayed as such
evil tyrants we're glad they get what they deserve. At other times the film
starts to seem like something out of legends and fairytales (a la "Robin
Hood"), but there are no magicians or dragons, nor any cartoony characters in
this story, and that is why it works as well as it does. Gibson's breezy
storytelling style and superb acting makes us sympathize with the Scots.
Like in any other movie, the villain must be hated, and Patrick McGoohan
does an excellent job in portraying the relentless Longshanks - Kind Edward
I, a king who considers the Scots to be scum and cannot believe it when he
hears that some of his soldiers have lost battles.
The plotline to this film is so complex I cannot begin to describe it. It is
your basic fight for freedom, but in a more poetic way than in most films. It
relies heavily upon characterization to tell the story, as we know the Scots'
love for their homeland and for each other is what really drives them.         
"Braveheart's" sense of characterization and storytelling style make it a
modern masterpiece. This is not just a story about the Scots' freedom, but
about the price and value of freedom itself - we must never take freedom for
granted.
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
redman@bvoice.com
Mel Gibson is William Wallace, the Scot commoner who started and lead the
rebellion against the English and shamed Robert the Bruce into joining and
finishing their fight for freedom. An epic film in all senses of the word, the
movie is a spectacular feast for the senses.
In this story, Wallace goes on a killing spree when the occupying English
troops kill his wife to draw him into battle. His search for revenge draws in
their village and eventually the entire country.
The rebellion of sons and the fulfillment of their father's desire themes runs
throughout the tale. Wallace is raised by an uncle when his father is killed
and he is living his father's warrior legacy. The treacherous English King and
his son have a strained relationship to put it mildly, as do Bruce and his
Machiavellian father.  Two of Wallace's most trusted warriors are a father-son
team. 
The battle scenes as the blue-painted `Woad Warrior' Gibson and his army of
berserkers attack the invaders are impressive and convincing in their blood
and gore. It makes sense that a war with hundreds of men armed with swords and
battle axes would not be a pleasant sight, but viewers with an aversion to
graphic violence are forewarned. Gaping wounds and decapitated bodies by the
score surround the blood-splattered Scots.
There are a few cultural stereotypes  a hot-blooded French babe, a weak gay
prince, a mad Irishman  that go against the grain of the current politically
correct wave, but they're still intriguing, believable characters.
The film is long, but you won't want to miss a minute. Skip the 10-gallon
Coke, you won't find a convenient time for that trip to the restroom.
[This appeared in the 5/30/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
John Benjamin Strelow
It was with great anticipation that I sat down to view BRAVEHEART last 
week as it premiered on American cable.  The Academy Award winning film 
had been highly acclaimed.  It also featured the music of one of my 
favorite film composers, James Horner.  What I was in for was a 
disappointing and overlong film which was anything but the best picture 
of 1995.
What drags BRAVEHEART down is its screenplay.  It abounds with high 
production values:  John Toll's award-winning cinematography (which also 
graced Edward Zwick's 1994 LEGENDS OF THE FALL), a gorgeous score by 
Horner, and the sort of logistics that make you wish assistant directors 
were household names.  But this does not save a misguided script.
The film wishes to paint its central character as a hero, but the 
viewer's only response to his "heroism" is intellectual:  William Wallace 
(producer-director Mel Gibson) is fighting for freedom and against 
tyranny, so we have to root for him.
But Wallace's actions paint a different story.  He speaks of freedom and 
acts of vengeance.  Though one intellectually realizes Wallace is on the 
right side, the film paints an unconvincing emotional portait, in which 
Wallace is just not as bad as the English king.
Wallace speaks of freedom, but his acts point toward vengeance.  After 
kicking the English out of Scotland, he decides to invade England.  This 
is evident of a "Spartacus Complex", and this example applies both 
historically and cinematically.  The historical Spartacus at one point 
moved from liberating slaves to sacking Roman cities; the film SPARTACUS, 
like BRAVEHEART, has high production values and competent performaces and 
is dragged down by an awful screenplay.
It is a shame that such an excellent score is part of such a terrible 
film.  Horner's score tries to make emotional connection, but the 
performances and the script do not help.  Gibson portrays Wallace in such 
a way that the audience cannot relate to him or identify with him.  This 
drags down any emotional connection to the film's plot, and turns three 
hours into a total waste of time.

Author
Rui Sadio
Along his carreer, Mel Gibson has collected several successes, not only 
from an economic point of view but also from an artistic point of view. 
For all that, I think no one could guess the skills and abilities now 
disclosed in BRAVEHEART.
The australian actor decided to produce and direct a film about Sir 
William Wallace, a popular Scotch hero of the 13th Century, where he 
would also perform the principal role.
Accepting so huge challenge, Mel Gibson run the risk of stain all his 
work of years, with a suppoosed failure, just to see recognized, by 
everyone, all his potentialities and, that way,to consolidate his position 
in Hollywood. It was, definitely, an enormous risk but I'm sure Mel knew 
exactly well what he was going to face.
BRAVEHEART is, in fact, a magnificent and magisterial film. For three 
hours we are completely absorbed by the narrative's rhyitm which never 
gives place to a single moment of monotony or uninterest.
The William Wallace's story is the story of so many others brave 
liberty's defenders who fought and gave the life for that essential 
value, along the centuries. 
Seeing himself and his people victims of injustices and violent 
repression, William Wallace dares to face the powerful Edward I, King of 
England, in a war by the autonomy of Scotland. As the victories succeed 
the number of fighters with Wallace goes growing up. His courage and 
inteligence are admired by everyone, including the princess Isabelle of 
Wales, wife of Edward's son.
However, William Wallace was also surrounded by enemies and some of them 
were closer than he thought.
BRAVEHEART may not be an historically corrected movie but the nature of 
its message make us think about the importance that we give to Liberty, 
nowadays.
Mel Gibson directs with a lot of brilliancy a brilliant cast. Patrick 
McGoohan has a very nice performance as Edward I, the King Longshank. The 
scene when he waits for the death and loses his voice is really good. 
Sophie Marceau, as princess Isabelle, has along the movie no more than 
fifteen minutes of performance but Mel Gibson gave to those minutes such 
a very special treatment that princess Isabelle soon becomes one of the 
major characters in BRAVEHEART. I also liked the performances of Angus 
MacFadyen, as Robert the Bruce, and, of course, Mel Gibson, as William 
Wallace. However, I think this time the Mel Gibson's work as director was 
much better than his work as actor.
The excellent music composed by James Horner is another thing that helps 
BRAVEHEART to be the success that it really is. When we join that music 
to the beautiful Scotch landscapes, view by the camera of John Toll, then 
we realize all the beauty of this film.
BRAVEHEART is, in my opinion, one of the best movies of 1995!
I've heard some people saying that Mel Gibson is gonna be a new David Lean.
For now, let's see if BRAVEHEART equalizes the 6 oscars of LAWRENCE OF 
ARABIA. It won't be easy! It's gonna be one more challenge for Mel Gibson.    
