Title
Review for Laura (1944)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LAURA (director: Otto Preminger; screenwriter:from the novel by Vera
Caspary/Jay Dratler/Samuel Hoffenstein/Betty Reinhardt; cinematographer:
Joseph La Shelle;cast: Gene Tierney (Laura Hunt ), Dana Andrews (Mark
McPherson), Clifton Webb (Waldo Lydecker), Vincent Price (Shelby
Carpenter), Judith Anderson (Anne Treadwell), Dorothy Adams (Bessie
Clary), James Flavin (McAvity), Clyde Fillmore (Bullitt), 1944)
"Laura" is an elegant but campy B&W "who-dun-what," noted for its witty
dialogue and exquisite romantic atmosphere among the upper-class society
types being confronted by a detective from the proletarian-class. It is
the first major film Preminger directed and arguably his best, in a film
that he was originally fired from by 20th Century Fox's studio head,
Darryl Zanuck, only to be rehired by him after his replacement Rouben
Mamoulian didn't pan out. This didn't stop the constant bickering
between Otto and Darryl, as the studio head wanted John Hodiak for the
Dana Andrews part, and he did not want newcomer Clifton Webb in the
villain role, nor did he want first-time cinematographer Joseph La
Shelle to do the photography for the film. It is a good thing Otto won
his argument, because his choices all did great jobs, and Webb, LaShell,
and Preminger all received Oscar nominations, with only the
cinematographer winning. It should also be noted that Jay Dratler,
Samuel Hoffenstein, and Betty Reinhardt, were nominated for best
screenplay.
The French reviewers in the 1940s were the first to call this kind of
dark thriller, a noir film. It is one of six or so films they named,
such as "The Maltese Falcon." Though "Laura"  was different in nature-it
was not based on a hard-boiled novel-it still became a prototype for
this emerging genre. "Laura" has a majestic bent to it, exhibited from
the very first scene, where a self-centered, debonair columnist/radio
personality, with an acerbic wit, Waldo Lydecker (Webb), provides the
voiceover, as he sits in his bathtub writing Laura's biography, as the
audience tours his swank Manhattan penthouse. He also immediately
impresses the viewer with his unsavory characteristics and sexual
obsession with a woman who was just found murdered. He is being
questioned about his relationship with Laura by the detective, Mark
McPherson (Dana), who is his complete opposite. He is a ruggedly
handsome, muscular type, who speaks in the common-man's vulgar tongue as
compared with the snobbish effete lingo of Waldo.
The question of love is posed, as the efficient McPherson wants to know
about the relationship between Waldo and the beautiful Laura, believing
he can nail the murderer by knowing something about the woman killed.
Waldo is portrayed as being obsessed with her, but their relationship
was not a sexual one, but one of friendship, where she got her first
break through him and she quickly moved up in the advertising world into
a position of prominence through her own ability, where she could now
afford a luxury townhouse apartment and a maid. When the question of
love gets kicked back to the detective by Waldo, as he asks if he's ever
been in love, he snappily retorts, "A doll in Washington Heights got a
fox fur out of me once."
In Laura's place, Mark sees the portrait of her, and finds her to be
captivating, but when asked by Waldo what he thinks, he can only say,
"not bad." Waldo volunteers information about how obsessed he is with
her and jealous of her other boyfriends in the 5 years he knew her. He
tells of Laura falling for the artist who painted her portrait, and how
he broke up that relationship by doing a hatchet job on the mediocre
artist in his newspaper column, thereby getting Laura to come to her
senses and see what a second-rate fellow he was. He also talks about her
current boyfriend, Shelby Carpenter (Price), whom he despises as being
someone who is a weakling, a scoundrel and a scam artist. Laura's older
aunt, Anne Treadwell (Judith), is in love with Shelby, and doesn't care
if his character is rotten, even supporting him with money, as the broke
society person from Kentucky, whose credentials are dubious, has no
shame about his different affairs coinciding.
These three are suspected by the detective, who in his relentless quest
to get the murderer, digs into Laura's life. He reads the love letters
Waldo wrote her, her diary, and is curious about the gifts Waldo gave
her, such as the big clock in her parlor. He wonders about Shelby's
alibi and the lies he gets caught telling, and he wonders about the key
to Laura's apartment that Shelby said he didn't have but which turns out
he did have. He wonders about who is telling the truth about Laura's
engagement, when Waldo said she went to her country home for the weekend
to think it over whether she should marry Shelby, all because she is
perturbed to find out that he is seeing on the sly a model who works in
her place. While Shelby maintains that she will surely marry him, there
is no question about it. The detective wonders about the aunt, who seems
to be obsessed with having Shelby for a lover, whom she considers a
kindred spirit, both being nasty.
The sexual nature of the three suspects seems perverse, as homosexual
aspects to their character furtively emerges in their mannerisms. The
only straight people are Laura and the cop who fell in love with her
portrait, a sort of necrophilia type of romantic notion.
The film brought out the following observable things about the suspects:
Ann seems more masculine than feminine, Shelby appears to have
stereotypical "gay" tendencies, while Waldo is a flaming bitch; as they
all exhibit, in the very least, a certain amount of sexual ambiguity.
The plot twist occurs when Laura returns home Monday evening and Mark is
sitting in her living room, startled to see her. Recovering from his
shock, he learns the body discovered was of the model. He quickly puts
the puzzle together and learns that Shelby was with the model in the
apartment and that when she answered the door, the intruder fired a
shotgun at point-blank range disfiguring her, which is why when the maid
discovered the body, it was wrongly identified. He now adds Laura as a
possible suspect, believing jealousy could be her motive, as he catches
her calling Shelby and secretly meeting him when she leaves her
apartment, after she told him she wouldn't, and she also lied when she
told him the marriage was off.
What it all boils down to, is melodramatic, leading up to a maddening
conclusion, as the prissy he-men, who both seem to be oddly sexually
attracted to Laura, become the two most likely suspects. The film's
theme of obsession over a love affair, ends on a psychopathic note,
showing which of the "sickies" is capable of murder to sustain his
egomaniacal desires, not willing to give up his ideal woman to another.
As for Mark, Laura was his ideal woman when he viewed her portrait
thinking of her as dead, but now that she is alive, the strong-willed
and imperfect decision-making woman, becomes a greater challenge to
romance, though of all her other lovers, he probably stands the best
chance of succeeding.
What made this a special film, a classic, was how stylishly smart it was
and the magnificent performances of both Andrews and Webb. The former's
performance being done with a subtle wink of an eye, was stolid,
steadfast, and no-nonsense, complementing the caustic performance of
Webb, who is viewed as someone ailing from a Pygmalion complex. Also
adding to the film's aesthetics, was Preminger's impassive direction,
allowing the audience to become voyeurs, with his direction offering no
resistance for them seeing whatever they have to about these characters;
and, finally, there is the arresting cinematography of La Shelle,
creating a moody atmosphere and a mise-en-scéne that is provocatively
twisted. It is hard to find fault with this very satisfying seductive
thriller. The film even had a great theme song, written by David Raksin
especially for the film, which takes the same name as the title.
The character Clifton Webb plays is remarkably similar to the daunting
New York critic Alexander Woollcott, who presided at the famous
Algonquin Round Table, and in one scene Webb is shown seated there when
he first meets Gene Tierney, who is trying to get him to endorse a pen
her ad company is pushing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jude Wanniski
Memo To: Website browsers, fans & clients
Author: Jude Wanniski http://www.polyconomics.com
Re: #5 Laura
Continuing with the "movie list," here is number five of the ten 
films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite films. 
They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest 
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are 
favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you 
can tell as you read each entry. Try to think of your own 
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of your
life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you live 
it, to know how things such as books and films and magazine 
articles alter your path in significant ways. Sometime last year 
the Sunday NYTimes "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece on how 
difficult it is to think of a movie that may have changed 
history. The only movie they could think of was a silent film by 
D.W. Griffith, Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the 
KuKluxKlan that the author believes changed national thinking 
about the KKK. How silly. Each of the ten films listed here 
changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would not 
have helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't 
move masses. They move individuals who move masses.
5. "Laura" (1944) I was only eight when I first saw this 
mystery/romance, but that was enough to make me a life-long fan. 
It featured Gene Tierney and Dana Andrews and Clifton Webb and 
Vincent Price and Judith Anderson. It isn't the mystery that 
shook me up, but the romance. Gene Tierney is on my all-time 
list of gorgeous movie ladies, a very classy lady. I, of course, 
identified with Dana Andrews, who plays a detective who probably 
came from a working class family much like mine. While the high 
society types are sipping their wine and chewing on canapes, 
Andrews is playing with a handheld pinball game while he 
investigates "Laura's" murder. What knocked me out was that he 
winds up getting the classy lady once he finds out she has not 
been murdered after all. Impossible dreams can come true and in 
Laura there are two in combination. Throughout this era, there 
were hundreds of movies where the shopgirl winds up with the 
wordly man of means. This one was for me, the son of a 
coalminer. The theme song can still make me dreamy about Genie.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Author
Rod Crawford
20th Century Fox, B&W, 88 min.                        Film-Noir/Mystery
Director: Otto Preminger (AAN)
Cinematographer: Joseph LaShelle (AA, B&W cinematography)
>From the 1943 novel by Vera Caspary (all 3 screenwriters AAN)
Stars: Gene Tierney, Dana Andrews, Clifton Webb (AAN supporting actor),
Vincent Price, Judith Anderson. Full details in Internet Movie Database.
A notable lack of reviews of classics in the r.a.m. review archives has
led me to try my hand at what may turn into a series...starting with one
of Hollywood's better attempts at filming a mystery novel with atmosphere. 
In fact, Preminger here lays on atmosphere with a trowel. The original
novel is a nice, readable mystery with good character development, but it
falls short of being a classic in its own right. The screenplay adheres
closely to the original story, with necessary compression, but adds
episodes to make the character conflicts (external and internal) more
cinematic and allow for the stormy-night and darkened-room images of the
film noir style. A surprising change is total omission of the crucial clue
(I won't spoil it) that, in the novel, leads McPherson to the killer. This
can't be accidental: in the movie, the mood is the thing, not the mystery.
A very brief plot summary: Homicide detective Mark McPherson (Dana
Andrews) investigates the murder by shotgun of advertising executive Laura
Hunt (Gene Tierney) in her posh apartment. Among the suspects: her fiancee
Shelby Carpenter (Vincent Price) whom she may have been about to dump; her
social mentor and platonic lover, super-cultured and bitterly sardonic
Waldo Lydecker (Clifton Webb); her jet-setting aunt and heir (Judith
Anderson) who is, shall we say, rather fond of Shelby herself.
In physical types, casting made major departures from the novel, where
Waldo was fat (Webb is thin), Laura was thin (Tierney is not), McPherson
limped (Andrews doesn't) and Shelby was a hunk (Price is hardly that,
though in 1944 he was not yet typed in sinister roles). In acting,
however, Webb makes the role of Waldo a dominating one; he thoroughly
deserved his Oscar nomination. He also has most of the best lines in a
script full of delightful zingers like "I'm not kind, I'm vicious. It's
the secret of my charm."  Gene Tierney, whom we meet turning heads in
flashbacks, was not one of the decade's more charismatic actresses, but
her beauty atones for much, and she is here photographed with such
lustrous, flattering skill that we accept without question her devastating
effect on the men in her orbit. Price is believable in a weak role, but
his intermittent attempts at a southern accent are best forgotten. Judith
Anderson is perfect; those whose image of her is conditioned by REBECCA
(1940) will be surprised at how glamorous she looks here. Dana Andrews
starts the film as his usual stolid self, but gets better as he goes
along. He really begins to come to life in the scene where McPherson
realizes he's falling in love with a woman he knows to be dead: a bizarre,
almost necrophilic touch that really gives you an idea of the film's mood.
So here we are, back with mood and atmosphere. David Raksin's haunting
"Laura" theme music (which became a big-band standard) contributes
largely, as do settings, dialogue and all. Scenes like the mob of
sightseers outside the apartment building give a welcome touch of
film-noir cynicism. But pictorial effects contribute most to making LAURA
a true classic (more so on the big screen than in video). As with more
typical film noir, much takes place at night; even by day, cinematographer
LaShelle somehow manages to backlight key characters most of the time. The
high-contrast black and white images are sharper than "real" life. Shadows
are used with skill and precision; the brief scene where McPherson follows
Shelby through a stormy night is a gem of its type. And the key, almost
dreamlike scenes in Laura's apartment are suitably dominated by the large,
watchful-seeming portrait of Laura on the wall. Preminger meant to give
his audience the shivers with a very subtle, non-horror dose of pure
atmosphere. Despite some small plot holes, I think he succeeded.


Author
Brian Koller
"Laura" is a highly entertaining murder mystery.  Well directed
and scripted, with several surprise plot twists, it rarely
drags, and survives many improbable sequences.
Laura (Gene Tierney) is an attractive, successful young woman 
who has been murdered.  The primary suspects are her suitors: 
conceited, sneering columnist Clifton WebbX and opportunistic 
ladies man Vincent Price.  Dana Andrews plays the police detective
who becomes obsessed with solving the case.  Further complicating 
matters, Price has two other girlfriends, and, well...
better not say anymore!
After seeing Price ham it up in endless horror movies, he
appears miscast playing a hearthrob.  It must be remembered
that audiences in 1944 had never seen him in any of those
movies.  Still, with unmistakable affected voice and manner,
it is difficult to believe two lovely models and a wealthy
spinster would be falling all over him, despite their better
judgement.
Clifton Webb's character is the most interesting.  Considered 
a great wit, he is in fact insecure and frail.  He is fixated 
with keeping Tierney as a potential girlfriend, never admitting
to himself that he is too old for her and she will sooner or
later take someone else.  Still, he hangs about her, shooing
off paramours, and if one lingers, pries into his affairs
for dirt to prove him unworthy of her.  All his fame and success
means nothing to him, and he will throw it all away if he
can't have her.  He gets more screen time than anyone, but
only has third billing.  I guess movie audiences would rather
see Tierney and Andrews, who are more physically attractive.
There are many silly moments in "Laura".  In no manner should
this movie's plot be compared with an actual murder investigation.
But if the characters don't behave like real people would in
their situations, they do behave consistently.  And they
are all very entertaining.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Everyone's obsessed with Laura (Gene Tierney), who, in Otto Preminger's 1944
film, LAURA, has gotten herself murdered.  I was privileged to see this classic
suspense movie on the big screen at a local revival house, the Stanford Theater.
 Our almost packed audience ate it up, especially its wry comedy.  Listening to
the conversations beforehand, it seemed that about half of the people there had
not seen it before.  Well, both new and old viewers were in for a treat.
Dana Andrews plays Detective Lieutenant Mark McPherson, a man with a mission
that starts off as mundane but quickly gets interesting as he comes under the
spell of Laura's picture and her apartment.  An unflappable type, he likes to
disclose the minimum amount of information on his investigation to the suspects,
which is just about everyone, and to the audience.  With an ever-present
cigarette hanging out of his mouth, he's about as taciturn and unforthcoming as
he can possibly could be.  In one of the movie's unintentionally funny scenes,
he turns two enormous spotlights on a suspect during an interrogation.  They did
that a lot in crime dramas in the 40s.  Another visual that seems funny now, but
probably wasn't then, is the sight of one of Laura's big hats with its huge
floppy ears made of a gaudy plaid.  Since the story is told mainly in flashback,
we see a lot of Laura.  
Clifton Webb plays Waldo Lydecker, a wealthy and pompous newspaper columnist and
radio personality.  He discovered Laura and made her the toast of the town. 
Waldo is proud of his caustic and self-centered personality.  "I'm not kind," he
tells Laura when they meet, "I'm vicious.  It's the secret of my charm."  And
he's right.  He provides a deliciously snide narration for the film.
A clean-shaven and dashingly handsome Vincent Price plays Laura's fiancé, Shelby
Carpenter.  "I'm a natural born suspect," he confesses to the detective after
being caught in a lie, "because I'm not the conventional type."
There are several other possible candidates for the murderer.  The story, after
following a intriguing but nonetheless conventional structure through most of
the movie, has a dramatic twist just before the last act.  It is the twist, as
much as the acting, that I suspect is the secret to the film's long lasting
appeal.
I do have one confession to make.  It may be viewed as heresy by the movie's
many fans, but I think that this is a story that could have been even better if
Alfred Hitchcock had directed it.  Preminger too often goes for the laughs when
Hitchcock would have treated it all a bit more sinisterly and seriously.
LAURA runs 1:28.  The film is in black and white.  It is not rated but might be
PG for mild violence.  It would be fine for kids old enough to be interested in
the story, which probably means kids around 12 and up.
The movie is available on tape but not yet on DVD.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
