Title
Review for Bait (2000)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c6be01e76e80952f8825695b0003bddf?OpenDocument
The American fascination with personal surveillance and voyeurism has
reached a new and strange level.  TV shows such as Survivor, Big Brother
- and movies such as Enemy of the State and The Blair Witch Project have
raised the bar for compulsive interest in other peoples' lives.  It is
as if America has become a nation of stalkers and shut-ins locked away
behind their television and computer screens.  The new Jaime Foxx film
Bait is a prime example of how this sadistic, cultural phenomenon has
been constructed into mainstream Hollywood fodder for the masses.
I didn't know what to expect of Bait.  From the media blitz in the past
couple weeks, the movie looked like a weird hybrid of Blue Streak, Enemy
of the State, and Hackers without Angeline Jolie (dammit!).  The story
follows Foxx as an inept thief named Alvin Sanders who involuntarily
helps Federal agents track down an ultra-cool computer hacker -- Doug
Hutchison (that asshole guard Percy Wetmore from The Green Mile) -- who
has robbed the U.S. Gold Reserve with lackey Robert Pastorelli of 42
million dollars.
The lackey takes off with the gold, buries it in secret place, and ends
up being arrested on a DWI, all on the same night.  Busy guy.  The
lackey then lands in the same cell as Alvin Sanders (Foxx) who has been
arrested for stealing shrimp - I mean prawns - from a Brooklyn fish
plant.  The lackey, who has terrible heart problems, confides in Alvin
to tell his wife of a secret code of the location of the buried gold. 
The lackey dies during an interrogation by a big and mean Federal agent
played by David Morse, and both the hacker and the feds are left with no
leads except Alvin.  The feds then secretly plant a tracking device
under Alvin's jawbone and use him for you guessed, it... bait to lure
out the hacker.  Humorous dialogue, uncomfortable dramatic moments, and
loud car chase scenes follow.
Bait is reminiscent of many of its numerous contemporaries, but it is
able to maintain a sense of direction under the cool hand of director
Antoine Fuqua.  Known mainly for music videos and The Replacement
Killers, Fuqua is no Hype Williams, but he can move the camera like
Malick and capture action scenes like Peckinpah.  Foxx is always a
surprise to watch as an actor, because he can come off as a chump one
minute and a serious actor the next.  Morse is a perfect straight man to
Foxx's inane attempts to return to respectability.  But the most
interesting character is Hutchinson's hacker, who comes across as
faceless while holding a cold control over nature, like a predator
stalking his prey.
Bait is a solid action movie despite a weird pace to the film.  One
minute Foxx is joking around about being a player, the next minute he is
committing to his girl and a new baby boy.  The movie has been sold to
public as an "action-comedy" but in reality - the film is tinged with
dark moments of cold-blooded murder and Orwellian themes of surveillance
and control.  In other words, this ain't no Big Momma's House.
Director: Antoine Fuqua
Starring: Jamie Foxx, David Morse, David Paymer, Kirk Acevedo, Doug
Hutchison, Robert Pastorelli
Producers: Sean Ryerson
Writers: Andrew Scheinman, Adam Scheinman, Tony Gilroy
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./Castle Rock Entertainment
 Director: Antoine Fuqua
 Writer:  Andrew Scheinman, Adam Scheinman, Tony Gilroy
 Cast: Jamie Foxx, Kimberly Elise, Robert Pastorelli, Doug
Hutchison, David Morse, Mike Epps, David Paymer, Jamie
Kennedy
   Antoine Fuqua ("The Replacement Killers") aims to hook us
with his "Bait," but only the hungriest are going to bite. 
Those who do fall prey will find the meal less than fulfilling
but you can bet your last worm that they'll probably go back
for more and more and more in years to come.  Not that
"Bait" lacks entertainment value, if you can't get enough car
crashes, explosions, feats of derring-do and the lure of
intermittent comic touches from a guy who has racked up
heady box-office figures in urban markets.  But ultimately this
"Bait" is, as its title gives away, just another decoy that'll take
you away from more substantial fare in other waters.
   The narrative is motivated by gold, 42 million dollars' worth-
-though I can't imagine how the bandits expect to fence the
bars.  Judging by the fees my dentist charges for a root
canal, I'm sure he could take half the stash, but who's going
to spring for the other 21 mil?  But that's not Fuqua's concern
nor does it distress scripters Andrew Scheinman ("North"), 
Adam Scheinman ("Mickey Blue Eyes") and Tony Gilroy
("Armageddon"), who probably rely on the animators and
editors and photographers and Roberto Fiumano who mans
the Rotoscoper--and oh, yes, Doug Sloan, the horse
wrangler-- to provide eye candy where suspense would be
nicer and a solid rap track including Derrick Fitzgerald's
"Back in Deez Streetz" and Ice Cube's "24 Mo Hours" to cue
us that somethin' is about to go down.
   The opening scene is best, however hackneyed, ironically
cross cutting a robbery of the nation's most secure room
which houses the gold with the attempted burglary of a
couple of buckets of prawns from the kitchen of a Brooklyn
restaurant.  (The prawns have nothing to do with the title of
the movie, but comedian Jamie Foxx can get mighty witty
each time he explains to fellow mobsters and cops alike that
prawns are not the same as shrimp.  In other words, he's a
big-time robber after all.)  When Alvin Sanders (Jamie Foxx)
is easily captured and imprisoned, he gets a cryptic message
from his heart-challenged, gold-digging cellmate (Robert
Pastorelli)--something about the Bronx Zoo and there's-no-
place-like-home--that makes the successful computer-hacking
bandit at large, Bristol(Doug Hutchison) suspect that Sanders
knows the location of the loot.  Aware that small-time crook
Sanders could be used to capture Bristol--who had
senselessly executed to bound-and-gagged guards at the
Gold Reserve--Sanders is knocked unconscious at the orders
of Treasury Department chief investigator Edgar Clenteen
(David Morse), implanted with a tracking device, and set free. 
Clenteen has no regard for the life of the small-timer, stating
"you know what happens to bait," and since the killer thinks
that Sanders knows something when he actually does not,
Sanders can be in for some deep quandaries.
   "Bait" is part-comic, part romantic-sentimental, and mostly
a plain-ol' cop movie, succeeding best whenever the
generally humorless David Morse is on the screen and least
when Jamie Foxx is using his motormouth demeanor to make
up with his girl friend, Lisa (Kimberly Elise), who had recently
given birth to Sanders' son.  Some clutter is provided by a
subplot involving Sanders' brother Stevie (Mike Epps), who
does some stolen goods trafficking, and whose underworld
work leads Sanders into problems with a couple of idiot
mobsters.
   The Toronto and New York photography by Tobias
Schleissler ("The Guilty") and production design by Peter
Jamison ("Carrie 2") are convincing enough, especially when
complemented by Edward Bell's editing--at its best in an
extended scene at a race track that finds Alvin Sanders
jockeying for position against a field of better contenders. 
Though the movie should ideally be oceanic in suspense, this
pedestrian "Bait" gets no fish out of water.
Rated R.  Running time: 118 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Chad Polenz
Here I sit at my computer about to write my review of the recent action 
comedy "Bait" starring Jamie Foxx and David Morse. This is a review I don't 
even want to write because I'd just be laying the same criticisms on it that 
I would with any other so-generic-and-predictable-it's-beyond-ridiculous 
piece of Hollywood fluff. If they're not going to give us, the audience, just 
a little credit and put something together with half a brain, why should I 
waste my time and mental energy criticising it?
Last summer I took this same approach with my review of "The Mummy," in that 
review I just quoted phrases my reviews of other sub-par movies. I think I 
shall do the same thing here but with a few less quotes (not all are 
applicable). I hope this goes to show you what I think of "Bait" and why you 
can find out all you need to know about it without having to take a wild 
guess. It's genuinely unfunny (I, and the other audience members only laughed 
ONCE during the entire two hours), unoriginal and unthrilling. It's not so 
bad to the point where it's fun to watch because of its badness and it's no 
so bad you absolute loathe it and are pained by watching it, it's just such a 
cliche in and of itself, that, uhh... lost my train of thought. Anyways, 
here's those quotes, enjoy!
"Getting an audience's attention right from the beginning plays a major role 
in how today's films work. We want to have something exciting to watch, not a 
slow build-up of a story (God forbid!), and this film plays right into the 
mainstream's hands..." - review of "Armageddon."
"It's clear the film doesn't want to waste time on reality and thus the 
attempt to establish plausability (the most minimal amount necessary) comes 
across as a half-assed effort. Supporting characters and shady sup-plots are 
introduced, but as is the case with films made up of a large cast of 
characters, only a handful have any real significance... There's a fine line 
separating homage from plagiarism...," - review of "Godzilla" (1998)
"Unfortunately, as is the case with most modern thrillers, once the film 
showed potential for authenticity and intelligence, the cliches and action 
sequences take over," - review of "The Jackal."
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Author
Bob Bloom
 BAIT (2000) 1 star out of 4. Starring Jamie Foxx, David Morse, Kimberly
Elise, David Paymer and Doug Hutchison. Story by Jeff Nathanson, Andrew
Scheinman, Adam Scheinman and Tony Gilroy. Screenplay by Scheinman,
Scheinman and Gilroy. Music by Mark Mancina. Directed by Anthony Fuqua.
Rated R.
 "Bait" is one of those annoying movies in which flash and camera tricks
substitute for a lack of substance.
 A derivative piece of work, borrowing liberally from such movies as
"Enemy of the State" and "Blue Streak," "Bait" also suffers from the sin
of indecision. The film can't decide whether it's an action comedy or
action thriller, so it tries to be both - falling flat on either count.
 The movie stars Jamie Foxx, who performed so well in Oliver Stone's
hyper-kinetic "Any Given Sunday." But here Foxx flounders, trying to
magically switch from comical to serious not as he character demands,
but as the script dictates.
 It is not Foxx's fault that he does not succeed. The actor has a screen
presence, which is wasted in pap such as "Bait."
 As a matter of fact, a line in the movie aptly describes his
predictament: "What do you do with bait when you're done with it?"
 In this case, you let it founder in a formulaic script that makes about
as much sense as naming Bob Knight dean of Miss Manners School of
Etiquette.
 What is most preposterous about "Bait" is its plot, which begins with
the heist of $42 million in gold bullion.
 The theft was a two-man job: The mastermind, a computer genius,
escapes; the second man - who conveniently has a weak heart - dies
before he can tell the feds where he hid the loot.
 So the only way to retrieve the gold is to use Foxx's Alvin Sanders as
bait. And why Sanders?
 Because he spent about eight hours in a holding cell with Mr. Bad
Ticker, so the feds think he may have been told where the gold was
stashed.
 So to find the $42 mil, the government spends about $200 million on
newly developed surveillence equipment, including installing a device in
Sander's jaw. (This was done by having him beaten in prison so he would
need surgery).
 Not only is Sanders bugged, but helicopters fly all over the place,
seemingly following him wherever he goes, and two or three unmakred vans
- also filled with snoop gadgets - are constantly trailing him.
 Only the U.S. government would authorize the spending of hundreds of
millions to find a measly $42 million. Come to think of it, that's the
most plausible aspect of this nonsense.
 "Bait "is MTV filmmaking: a lot of quick cuts making it hard to discern
who's doing what to whom; loud music that tries to pump up the action;
and big, loud explosions, which look like a fireworks display gone mad.
 And it is riddled with cliches: the soft-spoken psychopath,
computer-nerd (Doug Hutchison); the tough-talking and acting fed (an
overwrought David Morse) who's as obsessed as "Les Miz's" Javert to
capture the criminal and recover the gold; the car chase in which 150
vehicles are smashed, but no accident reports get filed. You get the
idea.
 Wasted in this entire outing is the lovely Kimberly Elise, who was so
wonderful in "Beloved." Here she plays Alvin's girlfriend. She's an
intelligent, self-sufficient woman, which makes it hard to comprehend
what she sees in Alvin.
 "Bait" is nothing special. At a bit over two hours, it is at least a
half-hour too long. The movie is just an excuse to nosh on popcorn. Try
not to let this movie hook you.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Antoine Fuqua.
Cast: Jamie Foxx, David Morse, Doug Hutchison, Kimberly Elise, David Paymer, 
Mike Epps, Robert Pastorelli, Jamie Kennedy, Tia Texada.
2000 - 119 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and sex).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 16, 2000.
Ever seen 1998's "Rush Hour?" How about 1999's "Blue Streak?" Do these two 
films have anything in common with "Bait," the new action-comedy directed by 
Antoine Fuqua (1998's Chow Yun-Fat/Mira Sorvino-starrer, "The Replacement 
Killers")? Well, aside from all three being released the same exact weekend 
of each progressive year, they also star an African-American comedian in a 
plot dealing with characters out to steal, or get, money. "Bait," more than 
either of its still-cliched predecessors, is a complete hack job, bankrupt of 
original ideas and likable characters. Fuqua's one attempt at distinguishing 
his picture from the rest of the generic lot is his intentionally choppy and 
quick-paced cinematography, equipped with extreme close-up shots of the 
actors' faces and the action happening onscreen. Not only is this camerawork 
annoying, however, but director Oliver Stone is far superior at the same 
thing, and usually has a point to make along with his stylistic choices.
Alvin Sanders (Jamie Foxx) is a well-meaning small-time thief who, at the 
start of the film, has just been arrested once again for the theft of a bunch 
of prawns--extra large shrimp--in a seafood house. He is put into jail with a 
cellmate in the form of John Jaster (Robert Pastorelli), an ill man who was 
forced into helping the technologically brilliant and psychotic Bristol (Doug 
Hutchison) attempt a grand-scale robbery of gold equaling up to $40-million 
in currency. Before long, Jaster meets an unfortunate demise, and the U.S. 
Treasury investigator on the case, Clenteen (David Morse), suspects that 
Alvin must know more than he is letting on. Unbeknownst to Alvin, he is 
decided to become the bait of the still-at-large Bristol by having a tracking 
device cleverly placed within his jaw, and set free.
Meanwhile, Bristol malevolently decides that Alvin is the only living person 
who may know where the missing gold that was taken by Jaster is hiding, and 
sets out to not only stalk him, but threaten his girlfriend Lisa (Kimberly 
Elise) and 2-year-old son, the latter whom he has only just now discovered.
While never an inherently terrible movie, "Bait" digs itself a deep grave 
early on, simply by its own sheer mediocrity in every aspect. Aside from, 
perhaps, the charming appeal of Jamie Foxx (who otherwise deserves to not be 
wasting his time with such superfluous material), nothing stands out as being 
anything other than marginally tolerable, and more often than not is strictly 
of the "been-there/done-that" variety.
An obviously talented actor who shined in 1997's "Booty Call" and 1999's "Any 
Given Sunday," "Bait" is below the intelligence level of Jamie Foxx, and his 
character (an unlucky, often goofy guy struggling to put his life back 
together) a strict rehash of roles Chris Tucker, Martin Lawrence, and Eddie 
Murphy have played in the past. In the supporting cast arena, Kimberly Elise 
(1998's "Beloved") adds validity to the otherwise thankless part of Alvin's 
weary girlfriend Lisa, as does David Morse (1999's "Crazy in Alabama"), who 
resembles an older Russell Crowe. Finally, Doug Hutchison (1999's "The Green 
Mile") appears as the overly nasty and severe Bristol; Robert Pastorelli 
(1996's "Michael") serviceably plays the conflicted robbery accomplice, 
Jaster; and Jamie Kennedy (1996's "Scream") tiresomely retreads the same 
character he has played in at least three other movies--the computer whiz 
working to track someone down.
The screenplay, by Andrew Scheinman, Adam Scheinman, and Tony Gilroy, is 
predictably sloppy and uninspired, not to mention entirely far-fetched. The 
idea of placing a tracking device in someone's chin is not only absurd for a 
mostly reality-based film, but also right out of a sci-fi picture starring 
Arnold Schwarzenegger. The attempts at comedy, too, fail the majority of the 
time and are forgettable. In fact, "Bait" as a whole is exactly the same 
way--aside from Foxx's fetching energy, there is nothing present that is even 
notably intriguing or worthwhile for any viewer, aside from die-hard action 
fanatics. All involved should have known better.

Author
Steve Rhodes
So what do you get when you cross two bad movies?  Nothing good, that's 
for sure.  
Mixing large doses of a preposterous, high-tech, crime drama with 
smaller amounts of a lame, slapstick comedy, Antoine Fuqua's BAIT, 
starring Jamie Foxx as doofus crook Alvin Sanders, doesn't give 
moviegoers any reason to see it.  A completely derivative film, it 
steals its clichés from other movies but finds no ways to improve upon 
them.  
When we meet Alvin, he and his buddy are busy robbing a fish warehouse 
of some prawns.  Much is made of it being prawns and not shrimp.  "A 
prawn is like 5 or 6 shrimp," Alvin explains pedantically to his cohort 
in crime.  How silly does it get?  Alvin is so dumb and the comedy is so 
stupid that he's proven guilty by a shrimp behind his ears.  Excuse me, 
a prawn.
While Alvin is sneaking out with a bag of shell fish, a more 
sophisticated operation is stealing 42 million dollars worth of gold 
bars.  Bristol (Doug Hutchison) is the mastermind of masterminds behind 
the gold theft.  To get inside the government's vaults, Bristol breaks 
into agency computers so secure that the same encryption is used for the 
computers that launch nuclear weapons.  
Bristol's klutzy sidekick, John Jaster (Robert Pastorelli), manages to 
make off with the gold from the heist.  When Jaster dies in the same 
jail cell as Alvin, a super secret agency, led by Agent Edgar Clenteen 
(David Morse), sets up Alvin as bait to lure in Bristol.  After 
implanting a tracking chip in Alvin's jaw, they make Bristol suspect 
that Alvin is the only guy who knows the location of the loot.
The underwritten script by Andrew and Adam Scheinman and Tony Gilroy 
falls back on retreads of lines that were pretty ludicrous the first 
time you heard them.  "Exactly how many laws are we breaking here?" one 
agent asks Clenteen .  "You don't want to know," he replies.  And 
towards the end, Clenteen gives his men ruthless, shoot-to-kill orders, 
saying "You shoot.  I'll answer the letters."
In order to fully comprehend how bad BAIT is, let's review some of its 
many inanities.  1) Jaster (Robert Pastorelli) is so dumb that he sets a 
bottle of prescription drugs with his name on it down on the dark floor 
during the robbery.   2) The cops let Clenteen beat up Jasper and drag 
him through the jail.  3) The large, extremely expensive, clandestine 
operation is chock full of agents that "don't exist."  4) A gigantic gas 
tanker truck speeds side ways out of control down a street, but Bristol, 
who is standing in its path, doesn't move even an inch until it 
miraculously stops right next to him.  5) And a tracking device put 
under a car has a bright red blinking light and a loud clicking sound.
The film's overly sleek look is photographed in hazy steel blues and 
grays with shadows everywhere and lots of luminescent computer screens.  
It tries, without much luck, to trick us into thinking that we are 
watching a movie with substance.
In a film filled with low moments, none is lower than its ridiculous, 
over-the-top ending extravaganza, which includes baby endangerment.  
Overacted and overdirected, BAIT should have gone straight to video.  
Maybe late at night on the small screen, its many flaws might be been 
easier to ignore.  The problem with BAIT is that editing out these flaws 
wouldn't have left enough to make even the trailers.
BAIT runs a long 1:59.  It is rated R for language, violence and a scene 
of sexuality and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
There's a lot that "Bait" wishes that it could have
accomplished.  It put forth some ideas that could have
been entertaining.  However, amateurish storytelling
and the film's pedestrian pace will ensure a speedy
trip into your local video store.  Look for it to be
prominently placed next to another similarly trite
film, "Chill Factor" (and there are an incredible
number of similarities between these two films that I
would list, but I doubt that you would have seen
either of these two).  This movie features a couple of
interesting elements, but as a whole, it can't put it
all together to make this offering anything more than
a marginally serviceable action film.
"Bait" begins with the improbable heist of $40+
million in gold bricks from the Manhattan Gold
Reserve.  Two men carry out this theft.  One is a
brilliant but psychotic madman, Bristol (Doug
Hutchison), who has the ability to break into and
bypass the most advanced security systems as if he was
hot-wiring a car.  This allows him to plan such a
daring robbery with clockwork precision.  However, he
has no compunction about harming others, whether it's
shooting an innocent bystander or setting off a bomb
that may kill hundreds.  And, he talks in this
whispery monotone, making him sound like he graduated
with top honors from the John Malkovich School of
Method Acting.  
Meanwhile, his partner, John Jaster (Robert
Pastorelli), is just some poor construction
worker-schlepp that he needed because he couldn't move
all that gold by himself.  However, when Jaster
finally learns how mentally unstable Bristol is, he
takes off with the gold and buries it in a secret
location.  This is not a very bright guy.  In fact,
sometime later that night (after he hid the gold), he
is stopped for a traffic violation and sent to prison.
His temporary cellmate is Alvin Sanders (Jamie Foxx),
a small-time crook who just can't make the right
decisions in life.  He has a good heart but not many
opportunities to show it.  Jaster's heart, however, is
about to fail.  And before it does, he gives Alvin an
enigmatic message.  Treasury agents, led by angry
investigator Clenteen (David Morse), are too late in
learning anything from Jaster.  But they suspect that
Alvin might know something.  Their plan is to implant
a tracking/listening device inside his jaw
(unbeknownst to Alvin), spring him loose, and wait
until Bristol makes an appearance.  And boy, do we
wait quite a long time.
"Bait" is a hackneyed production at best, but it's not
the fault of Jamie Foxx, who is amiable and possesses
a charismatic insouciance.  The real problem is that
the film just can't generate any momentum.  For most
of the film, we're just waiting for the bad guy to
show up.  Until that point, we get a handful of
tangential subplots, glitzy visuals, and some neat
editing touches, but nothing of any substance.  By the
time the 'suspense' happens, it pounces on you so
quickly that it's impossible to really comprehend the
moment.  Imagine virtually nothing happening for the
first 90 minutes, and then for the remaining 15
minutes, our hero must defeat the bad buy, save his
loved ones, AND find a way to dispose of a truck-sized
bomb.  Given this kind of dramatic arc, "Bait"
probably won't catch on with many moviegoers.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and interviews with the stars of "Bait", visit
http://www.joblo.com/
I guess everybody and their uncle is going to compare this movie to BLUE
STREAK and ENEMY OF THE STATE, so let me get that out of the way up front.
Yes, this film definitely has elements from both flicks! From the former, we
have the "funny thief going to jail and being the only one with knowledge of
the stash's whereabouts" element, and from the latter we have the
"technological mumbo-jumbo tracking of an unsuspecting man" angle. So what's
different? Well, despite not being as funny as BLUE STREAK, it does have
more action. And despite not having as much action as ENEMY OF THE STATE, it
does have more humor. Actually, now that I think about it...it's pretty much
a mix of the two!
PLOT:
A two-bit thief gets thrown in jail for stealing shrimp. While in jail, he's
given some information by an associate of the villain as to the whereabouts
of about $42 million in gold. The associate dies soon thereafter but the
government needs to capture the villain, so what do they do? They release
the two-bit thief, implant a tracking device in his jaw and wait until the
villain catches up to him. Simple enough?
CRITIQUE:
A decent action/comedy ride but probably a little too familiar for most
seasoned moviegoers. Credit Jamie Foxx for boosting this film's quotient
with many funny lines, and director Fuqua for jazzing the film up with a
Tony Scott-ish brush, but don't expect the film to toss too many surprises
your way or offer anything very original. Of course, one could argue that
I've seen too many movies in my day and that my opinion regarding
originality is tainted therein (okay, Mrs. JoBlo loved it and might've
mentioned that I was being too critical...doh!), but that wasn't the only
thing about the movie that didn't blow my pipes. The humor was fast and
furious during the first half hour of the film, but unfortunately absent for
much of its second half. There were also too many shots of people sitting in
the "tracking" room, listening to action taking place. Howsabout showing us
more of that action, folks?!
Having said all that, the film is actually a perfect video movie! It's got a
fun comedic element, a couple of cool car sequences, gun play, a grandiose
plot line which is pretty ridiculous when you really think about it (way too
many people chasing this one guy!), a hip soundtrack and David Morse playing
the ultimate A-hole once again. And he's not even the bad guy! (I'm not
giving anything away here...we know who the bad guy is from the start).
Actually, that's one thing that did bother me quite some. Why do these
government agents always have to be such one-dimensional pricks? I mean,
c'mon fellas...lighten up a bit, there's more to life than just catching bad
guys. How about giving them just a little depth from time to time? Doug
Hutchison was decent as the villain, with a hint of John Malkovich's
Oscar-nominated villainous role from IN THE LINE OF FIRE mixed in for fun.
So there you have it...the film is okay, provides enough laughs, action and
drama to satisfy your average movie-goer looking for a good time out, but
for originality, unpredictability and a quenching aftertaste, this movie
doesn't really cut it. So there's the bait...are you gonna bite?
PS: As mentioned earlier, Mrs. JoBlo loved this movie and especially the
performance put forth by the villain, Doug Hutchison. As it turns out, we
saw this film at the Montreal Film Festival with director Fuqua, Foxx and
Hutchison present in the audience, so the Mrs. was nice enough to approach
Doug after the show and praise his performance. Hutchison was very gracious
and delivered two sweet kisses onto the Missus' cheeks. Hmmmm...now that I
think about it, what the heck was that all about?! Since when do these guys
kiss their fans...gotta go speak to the Missus... :)
INTERVIEW with director Antoine Fuqua:
http://www.joblo.com/fuqua.htm
INTERVIEW with Doug Hutchison:
http://www.joblo.com/hutchison.htm
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jamie Foxx's birth name is Eric Bishop. He chose the androgynous "Jamie"
because he learned that women got preference for mike time on open stage
nights (Jamie began his career as a standup comic). Jamie was a quarterback
in high school, auditioned for Cuba Gooding Jr's football player role in
JERRY MAGUIRE and finally starred as a quarterback in Oliver Stone's 1999
football movie ANY GIVEN SUNDAY. He was chosen after Sean "Puff Daddy" Combs
left the project over "creative differences".
This is director Antoine Fuqua's second film. His first was 1998's THE
REPLACEMENT KILLERS. He has been married to beautiful actress Lela Rochon
since 1999. He's also the man behind Coolio's "Gangsta's Paradise" music
video, as well as Prince's "The Most Beautiful Girl in the World".
Actors David Morse and Doug Hutchison previously starred together as two
guards in the 1999 weeper THE GREEN MILE.
This film was shot in Fort Erie and Toronto, Ontario, Canada and New York
City.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BAIT (2000)
Rated R; running time 119 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0211938
Official site: http://www.baitmovie.com/
Written by: Tony Gilroy, Adam Scheinman, Andrew Scheinman
Directed by: Antoine Fuqua
Cast: Jamie Foxx, David Morse, Doug Hutchison, Kimberly Elise,
Mike Epps, Robert Pastorelli, David Paymer (Wally), Jamie Kennedy
(Blum), Nestor Serrano (Boyle), Kirk Acevedo (Ramundo), Jeffrey Donovan
(Julio), Megan Dodds (Walsh), Tia Texada (Tika)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbait.html
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Bristol (Doug Hutchinson), a Weird Compugeek with a sadistic streak,
along with his bumbling partner Jaster (Robert Pastorelli), steals $42
million in gold from a Manhattan gold reserve, and in the process
Bristol kills two guards, causing Jaster to wig out (with the obligatory
"you said no guns!" cliche) and leave Bristol to fend for himself.  At
the same time, petty thief Alvin Sanders (Jamie Foxx) and his brother
Stevie (Mike Epps) plan to break into a shrimp...er, prawn factory in
Brooklyn.  Alvin is, of course, caught by the cops, and just happens to
bunk with the also-caught Jaster, who may have told Alvin a lil' sum'n
sum'n about where the gold is hidden before Jaster leaves his cell.
At least Treasury Agent Edgar Clenteen (David Morse) thinks so; and with
the aid of (completely unconvincing and unintentionally-humorously
overblown) Modern Technology, sets up Alvin as live bait to reel in
Bristol by "leaking" info through The Internet that Alvin knows where
the gold is - unbeknownst to Alvin, who wants to go straight to win back
the love and respect of his girlfriend Lisa (Kimberly Elise).
There's Other Stuff, but you get the picture, eh?
The Upshot:
Sometimes, "that didn't Stink" is the best you can say about a flick;
and in the case of BAIT - which, admittedly, I didn't hold much hope for
from jump - that's enough for a middle-of-the-road yellowlight rating.
All that to say, this'll be a fairly short review.
The sillyness of the setup itself (Weird Compugeek Plots Revenge On Feds
By Offing Those Who Stand In His Way While Tough Cop Grimaces And
Unknowing Clown Clowns), the too-long by thirty minutes length of BAIT
(which reminds me, it was obviously cut: one scene shown in all the
trailers I saw on TV, where Alvin humorously confronted his unknowing
mother when he breaks into her house, was inexplicably cut out.  And the
movie still weighed in at a top-heavy two hours long), the
wifflebattedness of David Morse's hardnose cop character, the cheesy,
tired, wanna-be-a-playa clowning by Jaime Foxx and Mike Epps - all these
things conspired to completely underwhelm me.  And, apparently, the rest
of the American movie public, as witnessed by the anemic box office draw
($5.3 million) of BAIT in its opening weekend.  I'll put it this way: as
much as I love David Morse as an actor, I'd really rather just forget
his role in this movie.  For that matter, I'd really rather just forget
this movie.
About the only surprise was seeing Kimberly Elise.  I cannot explain
why, but I was expecting to see a light-skinned actress playing Alvin's
neglected girlfriend; and when Elise opened the door, I got a pleasant
shock.  Indeed, Elise was the best thing about this whole flick to me,
and I kept watching simply for her sake.  Well, her, and that fine
brother who played the unnamed Federal agent.
[I'd normally explain the significance of light/dark skin in The "Black
Factor", but for some reason, I just can't be arsed to care enough about
this flick to do so.  For your further edification, fast-forward to the
Jigaboo/Wannabe sequence in Spike Lee's SCHOOL DAZE].
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Jaime Foxx failed to cash in on his outstanding performance in 1999's
ANY GIVEN SUNDAY, David Morse pushed the Tough Cop buttons too hard, his
THE GREEN MILE co-star, Doug Hutchinson, played Weird to little
effect...all around, BAIT just failed to hook me.
BAIT (rating: yellowlight):
Not exactly Stinky Bait, but it certainly wasn't very fresh.

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Antoine Fuqua
Written by: Andrew Scheinman, Adam Scheinman, Tony Gilroy
Alvin Sanders (Jamie Foxx) is a small time crook who was just caught for 
trying to steal a bag full of shrimp (sorry, prawns). Two crooks, John 
Jaster (Robert Pastorelli) and Bristol (Doug Hutchison), just stole 42 
million dollars in gold at the exact time Alvin was stealing his 
crustaceans. Jaster double-crosses Bristol when he finds out what a 
psychopath Bristol is, and then winds up in the slammer with Sanders. Jaster 
has a weak heart though, and just before dying of a massive coronary, he 
tells Sanders something about the gold being at The Bronx Zoo and there's no 
place like home. The US treasury department, led by Agent Edgar Clenteen 
(David Morse), is trying to track down Bristol and they decide to use 
Sanders as bait. They implant a tracking device in his jaw, and make it 
known on the streets that he knows where the gold is. Now they just have to 
wait for Bristol to try and contact Sanders. The only thing they didn't 
count on was Sanders trying to go straight so he can be with his old 
girlfriend, Lisa (Kimberly Elise) and his newly discovered son. Now Bristol 
is chasing Alvin, the government is chasing Alvin, and the only person who 
doesn't know what's going on is Alvin.
Like "Bless the Child", from earlier this year, "Bait" is the sort of movie 
that will start to leave your mind about an hour after seeing it. In three 
or four hours you'll most likely have forgotten the movie entirely. This 
isn't because "Bait" is a bad movie (though it certainly isn't a good one 
either), it's just a mishmash of harmless fluff that we've all seen before. 
Okay, fine, so we've seen it all before, but what you really want to know is 
if it's entertaining, right? Well, it has its moments, few and far between 
as they may be. Jamie Foxx ("Any Given Sunday") carries the movie with his 
no inconsiderable comic talent, but the film's biggest problems lie with its 
writers. Andrew ("North") and Adam Scheinman ("Mickey Blue Eyes") don't seem 
to know what kind of a movie they're trying to create. "Bait" goes from 
goofy, slap-stick humor when Jamie Foxx is on screen, to almost disturbing 
seriousness when Doug Hutchison ("The Green Mile") is on screen. Is "Bait" 
an action film? Not exactly. Is it a comedy? Not really. Is it a brilliant 
mix of the two like James Cameron's "True Lies"? Not by a long shot.
I remember seeing Jamie Foxx back on the Wayans brothers series, "In Living 
Color". At the time I couldn't understand why he didn't get more attention 
as a comic actor. Now that he has it, the only thing I can't figure out is 
why he doesn't get better roles. Do you remember "Held Up", from earlier 
this year? Of course you don't, it was in and out of theaters in about two 
weeks. It's likely "Bait" will share the same fate. Foxx's performance in 
"Bait" does have its funny moments, but I'm sure some of his better comic 
scenes were marred by the fact that I couldn't understand what he was 
saying. The man seems to have a mouth full of marbles in this movie. David 
Morse ("The Green Mile"), who I've always liked, turns in one of his lesser 
performances as the treasury agent, Edgar. It's not entirely his fault, he 
does get some pretty lousy dialogue, but he also shamelessly overacts for 
the entire first half of the film. I'm not sure why he suddenly throws it 
into neutral for the last half, but it was a welcome change. Last and least 
we have Doug Hutchison. I didn't like Hutchison as the the little weasel, 
Percy in "The Green Mile", and I liked him even less as the slimy Bristol in 
"Bait". There's just something aggravating about his acting style. As long 
as he keeps it tightly reigned in he's tolerable, even a little creepy. Yet 
the moment he starts to act angry he becomes laughably bad.
I suppose if you're one of those people who can't get enough of tacked on 
car chases and explosions you'll find "Bait" to be entertaining enough. If 
(like me) you're someone who wants a little more from your movies, you'll be 
disappointed time and again. This is quite a shame because the movie does 
have a few points in its favor other than the star. Director Antoine Fuqua 
("The Replacement Killers") does an excellent job with the film's dreary 
script. He keeps the story moving along nicely, and uses some really 
interesting techniques. There's a scene where a man is tied to a chair, 
surrounded by a massive bomb. If anyone opens the door it will explode, and 
the police are about to smash the door in. Sounds more than a little 
cliched, right? Normally it would be, but Fuqua films it in such an 
interesting way that you'll probably forget you've seen the situation a 
hundred times before. He effectively uses slow motion in this and several 
other scenes, and he utilizes some wonderful cinematography by Tobias 
Schliessler ("Candyman II"). Schliessler uses broad, panning shots of New 
York City combined with some excellent over-head shots of the city at night. 
Fuqua only drops the ball once or twice when he succumbs to Oliver Stone 
syndrome and breaks away from monologues to lighting flashing through the 
sky for no apparent reason.
It's a shame a good star, a good director, and a promising cinematographer 
are wasted on this script. A part of me really wanted to like "Bait", but 
the fact that I'd seen it all before combined with a few bad performances, 
yet another rap soundtrack (I'm so tired of those I can't see straight), and 
a climax which destroys all the film's credibility kept me from really 
enjoying it. Speaking of the soundtrack, that was one of the biggest 
disappointments. I'm not entirely sure why Fuqua decided to set it up like 
this, but half the film contains rap music, and the other half (like in that 
scene I mentioned earlier) contains some really nice instrumental music by 
Mark Mancina ("Con Air"). Why did Fuqua keep switching back in forth? All I 
can figure is he was trying to cater to both groups (those who like Rap and 
those who like purely instrumental), but I think all he really succeeded in 
doing was irritating both sides by not being able to decide on one tone. The 
last point going against "Bait" is the running time. You're average film of 
this genre is going to run about an hour and a half, maybe 100 minutes. 
"Bait", for some bizarre reason, runs 119 minutes. I don't know what the 
film's editor, Alan Edward Bell (what a surprise, he also edited the 
horrible "The Story of Us") was thinking, but I could have cut at least a 
half hour out of this film. I'd recommend "Bait" to fans of typical, cliched 
Hollywood fare (there are a lot of these people out there) and give it three 
out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Michael Dequina
        _Bait_ does serve its primary purpose: to serve as a showcase for
the comic talents of star Jamie Foxx, whose excitable energy is mirrored
by the slick direction of Antoine Fuqua.  Too bad there's too much of a
story that asks that the suspension of disbelief be stretched to
uncomfortable lengths.
        The bait of the title is Foxx's Alvin Sanders, a none-too-bright
thief who is released early from prison because his arresting officer
falsified evidence.  Or, rather, that is the excuse cooked up by U.S.
Treasury agent Edgar Clenteen (David Morse), who really wants to use
Alvin to lure one Bristol (Doug Hutchison), the murderous mastermind
behind a multimillion-dollar gold heist, out of hiding.  Why Alvin?  It
turns out he was the cellmate of Bristol's now-deceased partner, who gave
Alvin clues as to where the still-missing gold is hidden.
        There is even more to this story.  Alvin has been implanted with
an electronic device that enables the Feds to monitor his every move and
word.  His release, let alone his being outfitted with such experimental
technology, was done under the radar of the government highers-up, so in
order for Clenteen's plan to work, Alvin has to stay out of trouble--a
difficult thing for a career criminal such as he.  However, Alvin does
have some added motivation to stay on the straight and narrow--among the
things he finds changed after 18 months in the pen is that girlfriend
Lisa (Kimberly Elise, wasted) is now also mother to his baby son.
        As can easily be gleaned, _Bait_ is seriously overplotted (Andrew
and Adam Scheinman and Tony Gilroy are the credited writers), let alone
wildly far-fetched.  This is, after all, an action comedy, and the
scribes would have been wiser to pay more attention to the jokes. 
Nonetheless, given the narrative overload, _Bait_ works better than
expected.  Foxx is able to sell even the weaker one-liners, and he is
convincing when the story pushes him into action.  Fuqua, who previously
proved his ability to stylishly handle an action scene in
_The_Replacement_Killers_, brings similar visual pizzazz to the set
pieces here.
        But the good in _Bait_ isn't enough to overcome the crippling
excess.  In addition to the convoluted plot, there's the matter of the
curious performance of Hutchison, who plays bad Bristol by channelling
John Malkovich and Kevin Spacey's most effete mannerisms.  Even Fuqua
lets himself get out of hand, employing his flashy technique for a scene
where Alvin quietly recalls a warm childhood memory.  But these quibbles
are likely to be lost on general audiences, whom I suspect (and
understandably so) will not only eat up this shiny piece of product, but
be satisfied by it as well.  But for anyone looking for true cinematic
nourishment, _Bait_ is not a meal.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Bob Bloom
 BAIT (2000) 1 star out of 4. Starring Jamie Foxx, David Morse, Kimberly
Elise, David Paymer and Doug Hutchison. Story by Jeff Nathanson, Andrew
Scheinman, Adam Scheinman and Tony Gilroy. Screenplay by Scheinman,
Scheinman and Gilroy. Music by Mark Mancina. Directed by Anthony Fuqua.
Rated R.
 "Bait" is one of those annoying movies in which flash and camera tricks
substitute for a lack of substance.
 A derivative piece of work, borrowing liberally from such movies as
"Enemy of the State" and "Blue Streak," "Bait" also suffers from the sin
of indecision. The film can't decide whether it's an action comedy or
action thriller, so it tries to be both - falling flat on either count.
 The movie stars Jamie Foxx, who performed so well in Oliver Stone's
hyper-kinetic "Any Given Sunday." But here Foxx flounders, trying to
magically switch from comical to serious not as he character demands,
but as the script dictates.
 It is not Foxx's fault that he does not succeed. The actor has a screen
presence, which is wasted in pap such as "Bait."
 As a matter of fact, a line in the movie aptly describes his
predictament: "What do you do with bait when you're done with it?"
 In this case, you let it founder in a formulaic script that makes about
as much sense as naming Bob Knight dean of Miss Manners School of
Etiquette.
 What is most preposterous about "Bait" is its plot, which begins with
the heist of $42 million in gold bullion.
 The theft was a two-man job: The mastermind, a computer genius,
escapes; the second man - who conveniently has a weak heart - dies
before he can tell the feds where he hid the loot.
 So the only way to retrieve the gold is to use Foxx's Alvin Sanders as
bait. And why Sanders?
 Because he spent about eight hours in a holding cell with Mr. Bad
Ticker, so the feds think he may have been told where the gold was
stashed.
 So to find the $42 mil, the government spends about $200 million on
newly developed surveillence equipment, including installing a device in
Sander's jaw. (This was done by having him beaten in prison so he would
need surgery).
 Not only is Sanders bugged, but helicopters fly all over the place,
seemingly following him wherever he goes, and two or three unmakred vans
- also filled with snoop gadgets - are constantly trailing him.
 Only the U.S. government would authorize the spending of hundreds of
millions to find a measly $42 million. Come to think of it, that's the
most plausible aspect of this nonsense.
 "Bait "is MTV filmmaking: a lot of quick cuts making it hard to discern
who's doing what to whom; loud music that tries to pump up the action;
and big, loud explosions, which look like a fireworks display gone mad.
 And it is riddled with cliches: the soft-spoken psychopath,
computer-nerd (Doug Hutchison); the tough-talking and acting fed (an
overwrought David Morse) who's as obsessed as "Les Miz's" Javert to
capture the criminal and recover the gold; the car chase in which 150
vehicles are smashed, but no accident reports get filed. You get the
idea.
 Wasted in this entire outing is the lovely Kimberly Elise, who was so
wonderful in "Beloved." Here she plays Alvin's girlfriend. She's an
intelligent, self-sufficient woman, which makes it hard to comprehend
what she sees in Alvin.
 "Bait" is nothing special. At a bit over two hours, it is at least a
half-hour too long. The movie is just an excuse to nosh on popcorn. Try
not to let this movie hook you.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Susan Granger
  Motor-mouthed comedian Jamie Foxx's thriller-comedy may be
called "Bait" but never it grabs the hook. Foxx plays a good-natured,
small-time thief on parole who, as the story begins, is caught
stealing prawns from a Brooklyn restaurant with his brother (Mike
Epps).  What the hapless brothers don't realize is that, across town,
two professional criminals are lifting $42 million in gold bars from
the Federal Reserve. But Foxx finds himself sharing a jail cell on
Rikers Island with one of the pros (Robert Pastorelli), who has buried
the loot in a secret location and then suddenly dies of a heart
attack. Thinking he can use Foxx as "bait" to track down the other pro
(Doug Hutchinson), a computer wizard who masterminded the "heist of
the decade," a ruthless treasury investigator (David Morse) has a
tiny, satellite-controlled radio device that continually broadcasts
his location secretly implanted in Foxx's jaw.  Knowing that the
high-tech hacker can get into their computers, the agent sends
internal Treasury e-mails implying that Foxx is actually an undercover
agent who has discovered the whereabouts of the stolen gold. The ploy
succeeds but soon the petty criminal finds he, his girl-friend
(Kimberley Elise) and their baby son are in danger. Three writers -
Tony Gilroy, Andrew and Adam Scheinman - and director Antoine Fuqua
("The Replacement Killers") make the fragmented plot almost
incomprehensible. The only thing that's made abundantly clear is the
difference between shrimp and prawns, and that Hutchinson is trying to
imitate John Malkovich. Plus, the galloping finale at the racetrack is
simply ludicrous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bait" is a
dismal 3. The hip-hop soundtrack rocks, but Jamie Foxx needs far
better material if he wants to be a major movie star.
