Title
Review for Soul Food (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Seth Bookey
The theme of a special persn who keeps a fractious family together is
certainly nothing new; nor is the theme of the loving Grandmother.  *Soul
Food* is able to make these tried and true ideas seem fresh and special.
Narrated by young Ahmad (Brandon Hammond), he comments that "Big Mama"
(Irma P. Hall) had a way to let you know you were her favorite. He also
realizes that she was able to make everyone feel that way. He also tells
us she had no enemies; if she did, she would just invite them over for
Sunday Dinner and the enmity would be buried under heaping helpings of
collard greens and egg pie (to name but a few).
The Sunday dinners, the family house, and the effort Big Mama puts into
maintaining both help keep her three daughters from continuous fighting. 
Teri (Vanessa Williams) is a driven attorney married to another attorney
(Miles, played by Michael Beach of ER) who wants to quit and become a
musician. Teri never misses an opportunity to remind Maxine (Viveca Fox,
playing Ahmad's mother) how much money she contributes toward their
mother. However, Maxine is recognized as "the strong one." Bird (Nia
Peeples) is married to an ex-con (Lem, played by Mekhi Phifer), and is
running her own beauty salon with help from Teri.
Rounding out the family are mysterious and unseen Uncle Pete, the hermit
upstairs who takes his meals upstairs, and the ironically named Faith
(Gina Ravera--who gets to show more of her talent here than in Kiss the
Girls), Big Mama's screw-up niece who is a stripper turned serious dancer,
and whose arrival means trouble for a few people.
Without giving away too much of the plot, I can say that a crisis spurs a
variety of problems to devolve horribly--problems that probably would have
been avoided if people just spoke to each other. 
Along the way, a lot of issues are explored: unemployment, male-female
relations, the importance of family and role models, and having dreams,
however simple they might be. The movie tempers its dramatic moments with
a lot of humor, and even stops twice to provide some musical moments. A
real lump-in-the-throat moment was shattered when Linda leaned over and
said, "Here's where you lose it, right?" (She was right.) There really is
something for everyone in *Soul Food*.
*Soul Food* earned a respectable number-two spot at the box office its
first weekend at theatres. This is especially respectable when you
consider how much profit was made compared to the special effects fiesta
that was in the number-one slot: The Peacemaker. While it obviously grew a
large black audience, it has also drew large audiences in general. The
theme of having a special relationship with a loving Grandmother and
Matriarch is a winner, and when it is done without heavy-handedness like
it was in *Soul Food*, a good time will be had by all. 
There is also a nice little Soul Food Website at
http://www.foxmovies.com/soulfood/. 

Author
Tim Scott
Writer/Director:  George Tillman, Jr.
Starring: Vanessa L. Williams, Vivica A. Fox, Nia Long, Michael Beach, 
Jeffrey D. Sams, Mekhi Phifer, Irma P. Hall & Brandon Hammond
        Surely, most of us have memories of going home to visit Grandma. 
ThereUs always that moment when we walk into the kitchen.  Our senses are 
flooded by the mouthwatering sights and smells of all those favorite 
dishes sheUs made just for us.  What magic elixir did she put in that 
sweet potato pie? What was the secret to the bliss of biting into a piece 
of her golden fried chicken? Soul Food, a delectable film from director 
George Tillman, reveals the hidden formula, blending sweet slices of life 
with spicy family drama.
        The film centers around the relationship between three sisters in 
the Joseph family.  The JosephUs are a multigenerational, 
African-American family living in Chicago.  We follow them as they laugh, 
cry, fight and mostly love their way through the joys and struggles of life.
        Vanessa L. Williams (Eraser) , following in the 
singer-turned-actress footsteps of Whitney Houston, stars as Teri.  Teri 
is the oldest, most educated and financially successful sibling.  She's 
become a lawyer with the annoying tendendency of letting everyone know 
just how successful she is.  When asked by her younger sister, Maxine,why 
she's always reminding people that she pays for everything, she smartly 
quips, "Because I do."
        The most palpable tension within the family is between Teri and 
Maxine, the middle sister, surprisingly well-acted by Vivica A. Fox 
(Independence Day).  Maxine is widely considered the strongest of the 
three daughters.  This is evidenced by the stable family she has raised 
with her husband, Kenny, charmingly played by Jeffrey D. Sams (Waiting to 
Exhale).  It seems Teri is jealous of the simple life Maxine enjoys; a 
jealousy feuled by the fact that Kenny was Teri's boyfriend first.
        All of this and more is explained through the eyes of Ahmad, 
Maxine's pre-teen son.  Ahmad provides the films emotional center and 
exhibits a surprising maturity and positive attitude he attributes to his 
Grandmother.  Mama Joseph (Irma P. Hall, A Family Thing)  or "Big Mama" 
is the glue of the family.  It is tradition in the Joseph family to get 
together for a soul food dinner every Sunday.  It is a chance for the 
whole family to sit down and enjoy a meal as they share their joy and 
sorrows. Because, as Ahmad has learned from Big Mama, "it's one of the 
things that's missing from black families nowadays."
        The youngest daughter is Serena, who is affectionately nicknamed 
RBird.S  Bird is portrayed by actress Nia Long (love jones)  who is 
building an impressive resume in her young career.  As Bird, she is the 
inexperienced sister, trying to do the right thing but not always knowing 
how.  The film opens on her wedding day. Her new husband, Lem (Mekhi 
Phifer of Clockers) is a former drug dealer who spent some time in jail.  
Phifer also adds flavor to the mix as he juggles with his sense of 
dignity and the responsibilities of being a husband.
        In a unexpectedly powerful moment, Ahmad takes a ride in LemUs 
truck. As they begin talking, Ahmad discovers a gun in the glove 
compartment.  Obviously, this is foreshadowing of trouble yet to come. 
The danger is not lost on young Ahmad who uses his keen insight to offer 
Lem a warning. "Big Mama always tells me you have to love yourself," he 
comments. "Maybe you should try that."
        Soul Food  is full of compelling moments like this. The wonderful 
thing about it is how it never falls into preachiness. Although it's very 
easy to tell who is going to screw up and why, Soul Food  still works as 
great storytelling because we know all these characters from our own 
families.  The familiarity enables us to care about these people in the 
deepest way.  Some would say using standard family stereotypes is not 
good filmmaking.  In most cases, I would certainly agree. What sets Soul 
Food apart is the ease with which this familiarity is developed.  There 
is no overacting.  There are no moments where you feel the film has 
gotten away from its inherent groundedness.  It is very easy to see how 
well these actors know who these people are.  It is a credit to 
writer/director George Tillman and his virtuoso cast.  The roles are 
handled with sincerity and reverence.
        Much has been said about how thankful the black community is to 
have a film like this even get made at all.  The film is produced by the 
husband/wife team of Kenneth and Tracey Edmonds.  If you're unfamiliar 
with the name Kenneth Emonds, he is better known as pop music artist and 
record mogul, "Babyface."  This trend of having black entertainers 
investing in positive film projects (such as Spike Lee's Get On The Bus), 
is one that I hope will become more the norm than the exception.  There 
is something about watching this film that screams to the audience, 
"We're finally getting to tell our own stories...the real stroies."
        The real story behind Soul Food is best described by the food 
itself.  As Big Mama tells us, "Soul food is about cooking from the 
heart."  It's about making the most of what you have and being thankful 
for having it.  It's about acknowledging that we all bring something 
unique to the table. Unless we all share, the meal just isn't as good.
        My one criticism of the film is early on I felt the film tried to 
tackle too many issues at once. I have nothing against being ambitious, 
but sometimes if you pile too much on the plate it's hard to taste 
everything.
        If there is one truly noteworthy aspect of the film it is the 
acting of Brandon Hammond as the young narrator, Ahmad.  This is not just 
another precocious child actor dropping one-liners faster than an action 
hero.  Hammond brings genuine charm, honesty and poignance to his 
performance.  Just as Ahmad is given the job of pulling the family 
together, Hammond is called on to tie the film together.  Needless to 
say, he does.  His talents are estimable.
        It would be wrong to call Soul Food "a family film."  There is 
enough language and sexuality in the film to justify itUs "R" rating.  
Yet, Soul Food is certainly a film that adults should see. Then, perhaps 
they can talk about it with their family over Sunday dinner.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 9/26/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:55
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual situations, brief violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Vanessa L. Williams, Vivica Fox, Nia Long, Michael Beach, 
      Mekhi Phifer, Jeffrey D. Sams, Brandon Hammond, Gina Ravera, 
      Irma P. Hall
Director: George Tillman Jr.
Producer: Tracey E. Edmonds, Robert Teitel
Screenplay: George Tillman Jr.
Cinematography: Paul Elliott
Music: Lisa Coleman , Wendy Melvoin
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     When it comes to "food" movies, you know the titles:  BABETTE'S 
FEAST, EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN, BIG NIGHT, and so on...  You also know the 
advice:  eat before coming to the theater or suffer a grumbling stomach 
for ninety-plus minutes followed by a mad dash to the nearest restaurant 
once the end credits start to roll.  And, while SOUL FOOD, the first 
major release from director George Tillman Jr. (who previously made a 
low-budget feature called SCENES FOR THE SOUL), isn't on the same level 
as the previously-mentioned motion pictures, there's at least one scene 
that's a literal feast for the eyes.
     Whether it's BOYZ 'N THE HOOD, DEAD PRESIDENTS, or SET IT OFF, the 
tendency for movies aimed at black audiences is to make them fast-paced, 
loud, and violent.  As a result, a kinder, gentler movie like SOUL FOOD 
is something of a rarity (although, with entrees like THE PREACHER'S 
WIFE and LOVE JONES, they are becoming a little more common).  This film 
is a celebration of life and family, and a recognition that, through 
good times and bad times, the ties of blood provide an unbreakable life-
line.
     SOUL FOOD tells the story of the trials of the Joseph family when 
their beloved matriarch, Mama Joe (Irma P. Hall), slips into a diabetes-
induced coma.  Without Mama Joe's ritual Sunday dinners to keep everyone 
together, the family begins to drift apart, with gaps widening between 
sisters and spouses.  The film essentially follows the lives of Mama 
Joe's three daughters.  Terri (Vanessa L. Williams), the eldest, is a 
driven lawyer who puts work above her neglected husband, Miles (Michael 
Beach).  Miles is tempted away from his steady, well-paying job by the 
lure of his true love, music, and away from his wife by the proffered 
charms of Terri's cousin, Faith (Gina Ravera).  Maxine (Viveca Fox) is 
happily married to Kenny (Jeffrey D. Sams), and spends her days caring 
for her husband and three children.  Bird (Nia Long) is newly hitched to 
ex-con Lem (Mekhi Phifer), an intense, caring man whose volatile temper 
often proves to be his undoing.  
     SOUL FOOD is told from the point-of-view of young Ahmed (Brandon 
Hammond), Maxine and Kenny's son.  While a few of his observations are 
insightful, most of his voiceover narrative is superfluous and even 
irritating.  75% of what he says is either needless exposition or 
useless trivia.  Simply put, the kid won't shut up.  It's one thing to 
open and close a film with a voiceover, but Ahmed's voice can be heard 
throughout, dispensing pearls of wisdom that we could have easily done 
without.
     Because the main characters are female, it's easy to compare SOUL 
FOOD to the uneven WAITING TO EXHALE.  Both films feature their share of 
small melodramas, and neither has an especially high opinion of the male 
gender (although SOUL FOOD, which is written and directed by a man, 
doesn't come as close to "male-bashing" as EXHALE did).  But, despite a 
share of minor cliches and the occasional too-pat resolution, SOUL FOOD 
is easily the better film.  The acting is more believable, the storyline 
is more true-to-life, and the characters are more sympathetic.  SOUL 
FOOD stays a cut above the average melodrama by keeping the characters 
grounded and the situations from becoming too ripe.  There's a fine line 
between good, solid drama and the sudsiness of a soap opera, and, 
although there are times when SOUL FOOD crosses over, the movie remains 
predominantly on the right side.
     With a uniformly attractive cast, SOUL FOOD isn't hard on the eyes.  
Everyone (including Vanessa Williams, who isn't known as a stellar 
actress) acquits themselves admirably, although it's worth noting that 
none of the roles are terribly complex, so there's little need for 
anyone to stretch their range.  And, while the meals don't take on the 
same importance as in certain other food movies, we still get an eyeful:  
deep-fried catfish, chicken and dumplings, cornbread, cakes, and other 
assorted dishes.  SOUL FOOD contains enough diverse cinematic 
ingredients to add a little zest and flavor to the pleasant-but-familiar 
cinematic fare of an African American family drama.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
**** (out of 4)
Directed by George Tillman Jr.
Starring Vanessa Williams, Vivica Fox, Nia Long, Brandon Hammond, Mekhi 
Phifer, Michael Beach, Irma P. Hall, Gina Ravera
There is a scene early in Soul Food, George Tillman's comedy-drama about 
a large African-American family and the ordeals they go through during a 
crisis, that caught me completely off guard. During a wedding, the groom 
is flirting with some tramp, and in an attempt to to prevent a scene, his 
mother in law, played by Irma P. Hall, comes to the rescue. The way in 
which she does this makes me think Irma P. Hall is one of the greatest 
actresses around right now. However, this is just one magical moment in a 
movie filled with them.
Vanessa Williams, Vivica Fox, and Nia Long star as three sisters who have 
each gone their own way in life. Williams is Teri,  a successful lawyer, 
who is frustrated by her husband Miles attempts at a music career. Fox is 
Maxine, the strongest of the sisters, which can be confirmed by the 
stability of her marriage and the wisdom of her son Ahmad, who narrates 
the film. Long is Bird, a hairdresser who is the last of the three to get 
married. Her husband Lem is an intense passionate individual whose temper 
gets the best of him sometime but never stops loving. At the center of 
everything is Irma P. Hall, as Big Mama Jo.
Every Sunday, the family gathers together for dinner at Mama Jo's house. 
There is lots of conversation, lots of laughs, and the occasional 
controversy. Mama Jo presides over the family like all mothers should. 
She is stern and disciplined, but also caring and forgiving.
Everything is going fine, until a tragedy befalls Mama Jo. All of a 
sudden, a chain reaction of events begin to destroy the family. It gets 
so bad, Sunday dinner is even cancelled. Without Mama Jo's guidance, 
there is noone to keep the family together, which frustrates Ahmad.
Miles and Maxine's marriage begins to fall apart, as he focuses on his 
music and flirts with the troublesome Faith. Lem's temper gets the best 
of him when his convict past starts to catch up to him. And Teri tries to 
prevent Maxine's efforts to sell Mama Jo's house. The third act of the 
film deals with Ahmad's attempts to patch things up. He decides to take 
over where Mama Jo left off, and tries to get the family back together 
for one more Sunday dinner.
The acting by everyone in the ensemble is outstanding, with special 
notices to Irma P. Hall and Brandon Hammond. Hall gives a performance 
that deserves to be recognized by the academy. Her Mama Jo is one of the 
most memorable characters I have ever encountered in a movie. Brandon 
Hammond is an actor with a bright future. He is wise enough not to play 
cutesy and shows an admirable range and depth, and speaks the final lines 
of the movie on the perfect note.
Tillman obviously based this movie on his own memories of growing up. 
Every scene in the movie is purposeful and convincing (except maybe an 
odd flashback sequence). The dialogue is beleiveable and funny. And then 
there's the food. Tillman gives us several close ups of the soul food, 
and it indeed looks very tasty. I can see why Sunday dinners became such 
a tradition for this family. Soul Food is one of the most purely 
entertaining movies of the year. 
