Title
Review for Intervista (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
I would like to call this film the CINECITTA's version of Hollywood's THE
PLAYER.  We'll have to rename it THE DIRECTOR.
I think this film suffers from FILM INTERRUPTUS once too often, and while
Fellini's totally free shooting style, and outrageous ideas, as seen from
the very tall crane shots, pretty much sums up the whole thing.  No one, in
that major studio second only to Hollywood in number of films ever made, can
ever stand up and feel the  freedom of creativity which the aging master has
enjoyed.  And while in his earlier days, his films had a feeling of
necessity, a feeling of desire, and a feeling of wanting to create something
new and different, this time, it has dried up a little, and the film becomes
a series of moments, and events, during the filming of any work.  And in
between a Japanese crew is working diligently to try to interview the famous
director and try to get him to  discuss his ideas, which generally he does
not. He doesn't call them ideas, he calls them life.
And the difference is quite apparent, when he proceeds to show a house full
of guests ( Anita Ekberg's  ) a few moments of his best film, 8 1/2.  That
film had a dreamy nature which few have been able to re-capture, even
Fellini himself, though his attempts now appear very pale in comparison.
While still a fun film to watch, there are a lot of absurd bits and pieces
 the screaming director, the elephants, the Mel Brooks send up ), it also
undoes some of the magic which film creates.  The  scenery from the trolley
car which goes around the studio is obviously  canned, and we see the start
of it, and then the feeling disappears as we are inside the trolley and we
can no longer see the mechanical part of the work anymore.
But for watching a film master, whose ideas are not in his head, but in the
film itself ( GODARD once said he didn't want to make a film about politics,
he wanted to make a political film and statement ) and pretty much asking us
to figure it all out ourselves.  INTERVISTA, is not a film about figuring
out anything, but a simple film about how someone like Fellini actually
works.
Amidst the great mess, and mad ego studios, he manages to create his own
scenery and do it well.
FUN TO WATCH.
IT IS A GOOD FILM, THOUGH AMERICAN AUDIENCES MAY WONDER WHAT THE HECK...
