Title
Review for Dreaming of Joseph Lees (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DREAMING OF JOSEPH LEES (director: Eric Styles; screenwriter: Catherine
Linstrum; cinematographer: Jimmy Dibling; editor: Caroline Limmer; cast:
Rupert Graves (Joseph Lees), Samantha Morton (Eva), Lee Ross (Harry
Flyte), Holly Aird (Maria), Miriam Margolyes (Signora Caldoni), Frank
Finlay (John, Eva's Father), Lauren Richardson (Janie, Eva's younger
sister); Runtime: 92; Fox Searchlight Pictures; 1998-UK)
"Dreaming of Joseph Lees" is a tedious romantic melodrama, set in
Somerset, England, in 1958. The film was shot on the rugged, isolated
terrain of the Isle of Man, which added to the film's bleakness. This
drawn-out tragic love story manages to get at the characters it
highlights, though what it uncovers is more obvious than startling or
insightful. The somber story itself fails to be engrossing, though there
is one marvelous scene of Rupert Graves, the one Samantha Morton pines
for, visiting her heartless father's household for tea, while her family
and the boyfriend she is living with is present. It was a thoroughly
uncomfortable but poignant scene, shot in mostly brown and yellow
coloring.
Eva (Samantha Morton) is a prim, reticent girl of twenty, who works
dutifully as a clerk at the sawmill and does the household chores for
her crabby father (Finlay) and precocious younger sister (Richardson).
The bookish Eva fell in love with her second cousin, Joseph Lees
(Graves), a geologist, when she was 14 and secretly pines for him ever
since, even though she hasn't seen him since he lost his leg in a quarry
accident in Italy.
She learns that he will be at her cousin's wedding, but somehow she
moved in with a boy she doesn't love, Harry (Ross). He is the opposite
of what she is seeking, being a dim-witted, clinging type, who is a pig
farmer. He is without regard for culture or books. But he is obsessed
with her, piquing her sexual curiosity, becoming hysterically despondent
without her. She refuses to marry him but lives with him while secretly
resenting him and dreaming of Joseph.
Having met Joseph at the wedding, she realizes she can't be with Harry
anymore and uses the excuse to leave him when she discovers he had a one
night stand with another girl. Harry goes on a potential suicide trip to
woo her back, playing on her guilt and her good nature in helping
others, while Joseph shows he's the refined gentleman who can warm her
heart by saying nice things and turning her on to art books.
The script provides no plausible explanation for all the confusion going
on in her head. One is therefore hard-pressed to figure out why she's
with Harry when Joseph is there for her. It seemed to be a no-brainer
which one to choose.
Everything is so bleak and weary, even the love scenes seemed
exasperating, as it was hard to make heads or tails about what the poor
girl was so befuddled about, though befuddled she and her two lovers
were. When she goes back to Harry, it is Joseph's turn to cry out that
he needs her. Harry will then walk the ledge of his roof for her love,
threatening suicide, and Joseph will be willing to cut her all the slack
she wants before she makes up her mind. By the time she resolved things,
I was bored to death. It was obvious from the get-go that Harry wasn't
for her, therefore the film lacked tension in her choice of who to be
with. This film reminded me of a Thomas Hardy type of novel that was
written by someone who didn't have the writer's obvious talents and has
come up with a story that mostly captures the stark atmosphere of the
rural community but does not put a proper perspective on the psychology
of the characters.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DREAMING OF JOSEPH LEES"  (Fox Searchlight Films)
This Gothic tale of romantic obsession revolves around a young woman
 named Eva, played by Samantha Morton ("Under the Skin"), who is preoccupied
 with her second cousin. Eva lives with her teenage sister (Lauren
Richardso n) and stern, elderly father (Frank Finlay) in the rural
English county of S omerset. She works as a clerk but fantasizes about
Joseph Lees - that's Rupe rt Graves - who has been the unrequited
object of her affection since childh ood. When her precocious little
sister discovers her secret, she plots to ge t the two together. The
fact that the handsome ex-soldier, now a geologist, has lost his leg
in a quarry accident in Italy only increases Eva's fervent
fascination. And she's hardly deterred by the ardent pursuit of a dull
local pig farmer, Harry Flyte (Lee Ross), with whom she moves in,
which is an inexplicably daring and rebellious move, considering it's
the late 1950s. Her explanation is that she doesn't want to "make the
same mistake" that her divorced parents did. Finally, Joseph Lees
trouble begins. There's an immediate physical at traction, pure lust,
which is soon consummated - much to Harry's distress. At this point,
Harry's suicidal depression abruptly becomes the dramatic focus,
resulting in Eva's distraught soul-searching.  Screenwriter Catherine
Linstrum and director Eric Styles concentrate on Eva's sensuality and
character development, leaving Joseph Lees as somewhat of an enigma
and ignoring large plot loopholes. In addition, Harry is such a
clumsy, unappealing rival that there's no tension. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dreaming of Joseph Lees" is a confused,
conflicted 4. It's a murky melodrama about emotional repression that
remains strange and shallow.
