Title
Review for Celtic Pride (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Dan Aykroyd and Daniel Stern are well-cast as a pair of rabid 
Celtics fans who kidnap the opposing team's star player (Damon 
Wayans) before the last game of a tied championship series.  They 
make a good, goofy couple:  Stern as the gym-teaching, distracted 
husband whose wife, once again, wants a divorce; Aykroyd as the 
never-dates plumber with a head full of stats and an apartment full 
of kitsch.  The movie, unfortunately, doesn't give the pair nearly 
enough to do.  Their gags are too often air balls and the verbal 
interplay-- between them and the sour-mouthed Wayans-- doesn't 
score the way it should.  (To make matters worse, the distressingly 
underwritten film is distressingly overscored by composer Basil 
Poledouris.)   Sports fans should find this funny, but lay people 
may want to lay off such a lame lay up.  Now, if only someone would 
make a movie about rabid *ACC* fans... 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Ben Hoffman
     To each his own.  There are those who can be glued to their TVs
watching every sports program and there are those who could not care
less.  Celtic Pride is about two of the former taken to the nth
degree.  Yes, it's a comedy about two basketball fans, Mike O'Hara
(Daniel Stern) and his pal Jimmy Flaherty (Dan Aykroyd), both fanatics
about their Boston Celtics.  Actually, the silliness that this film
engages in can hardly be called "comedy" without demeaning the word.
     Mike and Jimmy are a couple of crazies who are watching Lewis
Scott (Daman Wayans) lead his Utah Jazz team beat the pants off the
Boston Celtics in the game that will decide who is the best team in the
NBA.  Before long, the series is tied at the sixth game and it looks
like the Celtics are going to go down to defeat in the final game.
     When Mike and Jimmy discover that the Jazz's start player is
enjoying an evening at a local nightclub, the two idiots decide to get
Scott drunk so he will be unable to play well the next day.  Need I say
more?
