Title
Review for Public Access (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
     A few words about PUBLIC ACCESS, a 1993 film that is now getting a
limited theatrical release.  Produced by the team that brought us THE
USUAL SUSPECTS, PUBLIC ACCESS is a "first work" that is only now being
distributed to ride on the 1995 film's coattails.  Upon watching PUBLIC
ACCESS, it's pretty clear why this film never went anywhere at the time it
was made, even though it won the Grand Jury Prize at Sundance.
     PUBLIC ACCESS is a perplexing little movie about an insidious drifter
named Whiley (Ron Marquette) who stirs up controversy by starting his own
public cable access show in the small town of Brewster.  He asks one
question of his viewers, "What's wrong with Brewster?"  And slowly, it
becomes clear that there's an awful lot wrong, culminating in several
murders.
     I heard screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie speak about the film, of
which he was highly embarrassed.  Most viewers were confused about some
aspect of the movie, as was I, and McQuarrie's canned answers to their
questions generally ranged in the "We had 10 days to write it," and "It
was our first movie" type of responses.  These are valid excuses.  PUBLIC
ACCESS, as a feature film, seems far from finished, as if it needs another
run or two through the editing room.  The unfortunate result of this is
that when the movie isn't incomprehensible, it's pretty dull...so boring
that I actually dozed off.
     Fans of THE USUAL SUSPECTS may get a kick out of seeing what
McQuarrie and director Bryan Singer have risen from.  Otherwise, you're
just as well off watching your own public access channel.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Ron Marquette, Dina Brooks, Charles Kavanaugh.
Screenplay:  Chris McQuarrie, Bryan Singer and Michael Feit Dougan.
Director:  Bryan Singer.
     Life in the middle-American town of Brewster will never be the
same after the arrival of drifter Whiley Pritcher (Ron Marquette) in
PUBLIC ACCESS, the Grand Jury Prize Winner at this year's Sundance
Film Festival.  Whiley is a charming, affable fellow who immediately
makes (air)waves when he begins a call-in program on the local public
access cable station.  His one and only question:  what's wrong with
Brewster?  The citizens at first seem unwilling or unable to find any
flaws in their town, but eventually callers begin expressing their
anger at neighbors, teenagers and even Brewster's popular mayor Tom
Breyer (Charles Kavanaugh).  Whiley also attracts the interest of
Rachel (Dina Brooks), a shy young librarian.  As tensions rise in the
town, Whiley begins working towards fulfilling his ultimate purpose in
Brewster.
     PUBLIC ACCESS is an ambitious, stylish film that manages to find
itself both inches from brilliance and inches from complete
impenitrability.  It's a dark tale of family values gone awry, and
manages to establish an effective tone of simmering menace.  The
problems really begin when that simmer should be turning into a boil.
The first half of PUBLIC ACCESS is thoroughly intriguing, introducing
Whiley in a manner that makes it clear that something about him is not
quite right, but keeps you guessing as to what exactly it is.  Ron
Marquette, a dead ringer for Harry Connick Jr., plays Whiley as a
telegenic Mr. Rogers, a smiling snake oil salesman with a comforting
tone who has discovered the perfect medium for getting what he wants.
As long as Whiley remains a mystery, PUBLIC ACCESS is a gripping
drama.  However, the resolution leaves mutliple threads hanging and
inspires a great deal of head scratching.  What were Whiley's
motivations, or do they even matter?  Has he succeeded or failed in
what he set out to do in Brewster?  A climactic confrontation between
Whiley and a vocal critic was disappointingly short on tension, and the
pivotal montage which brings the film to a close seems so deliberately
opaque that it's just off-putting.
     Viewers of PUBLIC ACCESS will likely find immediate similarities
to David Lynch's BLUE VELVET.  Director and co-writer Bryan Singer
seems not at all shy about paying homage to influences like Lynch, Alan
Parker and the Coen brothers.  Unfortunately, he never quite combines
all these elements into a style all his own.  The interjection of a
couple of eccentric public access programs is jarring, and leads the
viewer to believe that PUBLIC ACCESS is going to be *about* cable
television, which it absolutely is not.  Nothing in Singer's direction
really stands out except lingering shots of a ceiling fan and a glass
of water which scream "meaningful."  The technical credits are superb,
particularly the evocative score and taut editing, both by San Jose
native John Ottman.  Singer just doesn't deliver when he really needs
to.
     I do wish to single out Ron Marquette's performance as a creepy
triumph.  He provides a solid counterpoint to the naturalistic
performances of the townspeople, and his rendering of Whiley Pritcher
almost sells PUBLIC ACCESS singlehandedly.  When it comes right down to
it, though, ACCESS isn't accessible enough, and it doesn't sprint to
the finish.
