Title
Review for Cronos (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Federico Luppi, Ron Perlman, Claudio Brook, Tamara Shanath, 
Margarita Isabel.
Screenplay/Director:  Guillermo del Toro.
     Horror films with any semblance of wit or style are so rare
that I'm tempted to be even warmer in my embrace of CRONOS than my 
head tells me to be.  This Mexican import puts a unique spin on its 
tale of a search for eternal life, features some extremely arresting 
imagery and has a nicely twisted sense of humor.  Yet as much as I 
admired the artistry of CRONOS, I couldn't help but notice a gaping 
hole at the center, namely a central character who steadfastly refused 
to engender any sympathy.  A viewer willing to overlook its lack of 
heart will be rewarded by a project full of a new director's 
excitement at being allowed to realize his vision.
     CRONOS opens with a narration describing the efforts of a 14th
century alchemist to find the secret to eternal life.  In our own 
time, that secret has fallen into the hands of antique dealer Jesus 
Gris (Federico Luppi), in the form of a mysterious golden egg called 
the cronos device.  After unwittingly activating it, a change begins 
to come over Jesus which worries his granddaughter Aurora (Tamara 
Shanath).  And his transformation is not the only dilemma facing 
Jesus.  Dying industrialist Dieter de la Guardia (Claudio Brook) also 
knows of the existence of the cronos device, and wants to use its 
power to save himself.  He sends his brutish American nephew Angel 
(Ron Perlman), who covets an inheritance from his uncle, to obtain the 
device--a quest which proves exceedingly difficult.
     Thanks to the half-dozen or so credits which precede the title,
CRONOS reportedly boasts the second highest budget in Mexican film 
history (behind only LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE), and Guillermo del Toro 
leaves it all on the screen.  True, the make-up effects seem cheesy by 
modern standards, but elsewhere CRONOS sports a high polish.  The art 
direction team of Brigitte Broch and Maria Figueroa have created some 
dynamic sets, most notably Dieter's antiseptic living quarters, filled 
with dangling statues and jars containing Dieter's excised tumors.  
Also noteworthy is the cronos device itself, and del Toro's creative 
use of it, including showing its elaborate inner workings.  Director 
of photography Guillermo Navarro shoots the film with an emphasis on 
big spaces, and the result is a deliciously spooky atmosphere.
     For all its visual flair, CRONOS may be most satisfying on the
level of del Toro's off-beat sense of humor.  There is a glorious 
perversity to a scene in which Jesus finds himself inexplicably 
compelled to perform a unique clean-up job after a gentleman with a 
nosebleed in a public restroom, and to the image of Aurora clearing 
out her toybox to serve a purpose for which it probably was never 
intended.  There is also a quirky performance by Daniel Jimenez Cacho 
as a mortician who takes inordinate pride in his craft, and Ron 
Perlman (of TV's "Beauty and the Beast") as the slightly dim-witted 
goon obsessed with getting a nose job.  Guillermo del Toro manages to 
put a lot of bite into his script, in more ways than one.
     There is that one big problem, though:  Jesus Gris is
completely bland.  Del Toro doesn't connect Jesus' fate with his 
character in any noticeable way; in fact, it might be a stretch to say 
that Jesus has a character.  With his ultra-symbolic name, you would 
assume that there might be some attempt to go deeper into the 
psychology of his "resurrection."  But there is no sense of who he was 
before his experience with the cronos device, and more early 
characterization would have been extremely useful.  I also had 
problems with Aurora, whose placid response to bizarre events is 
stylized but ultimately tedious.  Of course, style is ultimately 
CRONOS' strongest asset, and it's very strong at that.
     Guillermo del Toro has said that he only wants to make horror
films.  With a bit of seasoning as a writer, these projects could 
prove well worth anticipating for the thinking fright fan.

Author
al@167-290-33.hexacom.com (al)
     Perhaps insects are God's favorite creatures, after all.
Mosquitoes can walk on water, resuscitation is common amongst some
species, some can live for centuries trapped inside rocks, etc.
     CRONOS takes its name from a device made in the 1500s by an
alchemist, a device that can make someone eternal.  Inside this device
we find gears of all sorts and also what looks like an insect larvae
that filters a certain amount of blood pumped by the device.  The
device was entrapped in the base of a statue at one point, and was
discovered by an antique dealer in our present times, who have no idea
what it is about but of course, will soon find out.  The device comes
with an instruction booklet although this booklet found its way to a
rich dying man who deciphered it and knows what the device is about,
sending his gorilla-like son to hunt antique shops trying to find the
statue.
     CRONOS is at times a black comedy, at times serious.  When we get
a peek inside the device it reminds a graphic imagery from DELICATESSEN
or Gilliam's BRAZIL.  The general ambiance is on the light side,
although a serious under-current goes through.  The grand-father (the
antique dealer) and daughter team makes for an original bunch.  The
rich (as in 'stinkin' rich') man is what we expect him to be, living in
sanitized quarters and served by his son who looks like your typical
small-minded gorilla, always worried about the shape of his nose at
that.
     You may remember some "Twilight Zone" episodes where there was both
suspense/ horror and a touch of humour.  CRONOS is in the same vein.
Although some people may not like it because it is not blatantly
straight-forward, it is still good entertainment value.  It may also
remind some people of early Cronenberg movies.
     The print shown here in Montreal was in Spanish/with sparse spoken
English and English sub-titles.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Federico Luppi, Ron Perlman, Claudio Brook, 
           Margarita Isabel, Tamara Shanath 
Director:  Guillermo del Toro 
Producers:  Bertha Navarro and Arthur Gorson 
Screenplay:  Guillermo del Toro 
Music:  Javier Alvarez 
Released by October Films 
In English and Spanish with subtitles 
Reprinted with permission from THE VAMPIRE GAZETTE, Volume 348, Issue 
5, May 1994. 
     Throughout the ages, human beings have harbored a not-so-secret 
fascination about our kind.  "Children of the night" they call us, 
romanticizing the price that we pay for immortality.  If only they 
understood the pain, the hunger, the loneliness...  But I digress.  We 
are all aware of those things.  They are in our blood. 
     Human movies made about vampires invariably get almost all of the 
facts wrong.  They see us as demons, beings motivated by evil.  They 
ascribe to our actions an eroticism that is never intended.  For the 
first time, however, a mortal has delved beneath the legends to find 
some strain of truth.  The movie is CRONOS and the director, Guillermo 
del Toro, has removed all the religious and sexual trappings from his 
tale - as well as the fangs (stupid things, fangs - wolves have them, 
not vampires). 
    CRONOS follows the transformation of one Jesus Gris (Federico Luppi) 
from a human antiques dealer to one of us.  The stages of his change 
are familiar to those who have gone through it, although not 
necessarily similar to what other movies show.  Who among us has not, 
like Jesus, bent on hands and knees to lick spilled blood from a 
floor?  And who has not felt the sting of the insect as it tears into 
our flesh to change us from living to undead? 
     Jesus accidentally discovers the "Cronos device", a golden egg-
shaped instrument that, if used properly, unlocks the door to immortality.  
Whether Jesus operates the gizmo correctly is immaterial (personally, 
I did things a little differently when it was my turn, but that's off 
the subject).  In the end, he gets his desire, although not in the 
manner he hopes for or expects.  Instead of living a full life, he 
becomes a member of the undead - the real undead, that is, not the 
fictitious creations of human storytellers. 
     A mortal (Claudio Brook) is after the Cronos device for his own use.  
Dying of cancer, he will do anything to continue his feeble existence.  
So he sends his oafish nephew Angel (Ron Perlman) to procure the 
instrument at any costs.  Of course, Angel messes up and his actions 
unwittingly become crucial to Jesus' passage from the mortal world to 
that where we dwell. 
     Since we can't be photographed, a real vampire obviously can't play 
the part of Jesus (more's the pity).  Instead, a human actor by the 
name of Federico Luppi, who reminds one of Geppetto in PINNOCHIO, is 
made up to look like one of us.  Actually, it isn't a very convincing 
makeup job.  The latex applications aren't all that realistic.  I, for 
one, would never be fooled.  One might have hoped that for the first 
genuine motion picture treatment of vampirism, they would have spent a 
little more money.  Oh well.  This wasn't made in Hollywood, after 
all... 
     There's one disturbing thing in CRONOS that should bother all real 
vampires.  Jesus has a weakness that none of us would dare permit - 
his love for his granddaughter.  While such an emotion is 
understandable before the transformation, its presence afterwards 
serves only to dilute his viciousness and mute his killer instinct.   
     With the exception of Aurora (Tamara Shanath), Jesus' grand-
daughter, none of the humans are developed particularly well.  This is 
especially true in the case of Angel, who comes across as a bumbling 
idiot.  CRONOS is more concerned with ideas and atmosphere than 
people, which is fine with me.  I don't think much of the human race 
in general, so why waste precious movie time delving into their 
personalities? 
     There's one really frightening moment near the beginning of the 
movie, where a vampire is shown with a stake through his chest.  This 
scene gave me the shivers and I felt myself reflexively patting my own 
left breast for reassurance.  Other than that, there were no unnerving 
images in CRONOS.  There's a lot of blood and gore - but that's rather 
routine. 
     After sitting through countless re-tellings of the DRACULA story, 
it's refreshing to finally see something that gets close to reality.  I 
give all the credit to writer/director Guillermo del Toro, although I 
wonder where he got his remarkably accurate information from.  Has 
anyone seen Mr. del Toro between dawn and dusk, I wonder?  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Max Hoffmann
Seen 5/2/95 Kabuki Theatre, SF (SF Film Festival) 
Director/Screenplay: Guillermo del Toro 
Producers: Bertha Navarro, Arthur Gorson
Camera: Guillermo Navarro 
Editor: Raul Davalos
Cast: Federico Luppi, Ron Perlman, Claudio Brook, Margarita Isabel, Tamara 
Shanath
Distribution: October Films (address/phone at end)
     Every so often, about once a year, you stumble upon a quirky film
that is so suffused with humanity, that so touches you in a unique and
tender way, that you forget all the turkeys you've sat through for the
past year ... that you almost turn religious thanking God for the
privilege of being a movie goer.  It is what film festivals were made
for.  For me, in 1993, it was TANGO ARGENTINO.  This year's find is
CRONOS.
     This jewel of a film defies classification: almost even balance
between an effective, low-budget horror flick, Hitchcock suspense, and
a touching, personal family drama.  It's an amazing debut for director
Guillermo del Toro (who also wrote the taut screenplay).  Guillermo
Navarro's honey-toned camera virtually hides all signs of the limited
budget, and the inspired casting makes this film a gift.  A world of
choices must have been rejected by the deft art director.  With an
alchemist's touch, director del Toro has turned something as hoary as a
vampire tale into solid gold.
     Sadly (see interview with director at end, which contain
plot-spoilers), over twenty minutes of the film was lost, due to a
flawed lens, so there are times that the story line is a bit abrupt.
If the lost footage had survived, this may have been another SHOP ON
MAINSTREET.  What survived from this single camera shoot comes damn
close to that treasure of a film.
     THE PLOT: a fast paced prologue reveals that an alchemist fled the
Spanish Inquisition to Colonial Mexico, while working on the secret of
eternal life through a timepiece of sorts (the Cronos, which resembles
a Faberge Easter Egg, "with a twist.").  A collapsed ceiling in the
1930's sends a sliver of wood and plaster through his heart, calling it
"curtains" for the 500-year-old vampire/alchemist.  Narration assures
us that though every item of the alchemist's estate was catalogued and
auctioned, the Cronos device was never found.  The camera makes a brief
sweep of what might have been Jeffrey Dahmler's kitchen.
     Fast forward to 1997, where the impish director/screenwriter gives
us a wry view of post NAFTA Mexico: signs in English/Spanish/Russian/
Japanese and Chinese fortune cookies being served as part of the
Christmas festivities.  English freely intermixed with Spanish
dialogue.
     Jesus Gris and his eight-year-old granddaughter, Aurora, have a
suspicious visitor to his antique shop.  The stranger is overly
interested in a Colonial archangel (which we've earlier seen in the
alchemist's Colonial laboratory).  The visitor, who was obviously casing
the joint, leaves without a purchase.  Curiosity piqued, Jesus pries
open the base, and discovers the alchemists secret Cronos-device.  His
curiosity sets the device in motion, and it literally gets its
"clutches" in him (shades of ALIEN!) altering the course of his life ...
forever.  Soon it's revealed that a wealthy, cancer-ridden villain,
who has the alchemist's instruction manual, but not the Cronos-device,
catches on to Jesus's "secret."  But the screenplay departs from all of
the usual plot turns one is accustomed to in a mainstream Hollywood
potboiler with a heavy dose of "chase" at it's core.
     Inspired casting includes Ron Perlman (THE NAME OF THE ROSE),
very recognizable as Linda Hamilton's "Beast" from the pre-Disney TV
series.  He plays an overgrown dufus, nephew to the eternity-obsessed
villain.  His obsession with an upcoming nose job, and nauseating
personal habits that literally defy description, provide steady comic
relief.
     But it is the enchanting combination of Argentinian actor Federico
Luppi as the grandfather, and Tamara Shanath as his hauntingly
beautiful, mute granddaughter, which elevates this film above the pale
of similar films about the "undead." Some of the lost footage (see
below) explained their deep connection, but the silent looks they
exchange in the surviving footage convey world's of meaning.  You may
find yourself holding your breath involuntarily at several points
throughout the film.  Ultimately, this grandfather literally goes to
hell and back, as a price for his curiosity, becoming a Christ-like
figure who must choose between eternal life and sacrifice for the one
he loves most.
     Incidentally, del Toro wrote his screenplay with Argentinian
actor, Federico Luppi, in mind.  Due to del Toro's youthful appearance,
Luppi thought he was a delivery boy when he showed up on his doorstep
with the script.  Luppi dismissed del Toro as an arrogant young pup,
when the hopeful director said, "I'd like to discuss this with you once
you've read it."  Luppi's world-class performance may inspire you to
reach for those Berlitz Spanish tapes you put on the back burner, in
order to more fully appreciate his earlier films in their original
tongue.
     The film contains grisly, explicit violence, which often comes off
amazingly inoffensive, when balanced with the rest of the film.  The
director treads a very thin line at times, between classic Alfred
Hitchcock suspense and John Waters high camp, black humor.  It is a
line that has tripped more experienced talent (Peter Bogdonovich and
Mel Brooks numerous times).  Del Toro might be a candidate for Cirque
du Soleil for succeeding in his amazing balancing act.  The inspired
musical score has a lot to do with the successful weight of the film.
(Please, God, let there be a soundtrack!  It's in Dolby.)
     Another unique aspect of this film is its almost 50/50 balance
between English dialogue and subtitled Spanish.  The American
characters understand everything that is said to them in Spanish, yet
stubbornly answer in English.  (How like the first Anglo arrivals to
California.)  As a result, the experience doesn't have the "feel" of a
foreign language film.
     Director del Toro confessed to combining two obsessions in his
screenplay;  his fascination with insects (there is a live one at the
heart of the Cronos device) and what he sees as the "synergy" between
vampirism and Latino Catholicism. "I always thought of the host and
communion as Christian Sushi," he joked, in heavily accented English,
"as a child I wondered how they preserved that body of Christ for such
a long time, to still be eating it in church!"
     "My grandmother was so religious," continued the boyish,
anglo-looking director, "that by age 11 I was the official spokesperson
for the Virgin Mary."  What del Toro described as the unbalanced
emphasis on damnation over redemption in his local church obviously had
a heavy hand in some of the haunting makeup and imagery chosen for the
film.
     Deliberate parallels to the life of Christ and insects were
sprinkled throughout the screenplay.  The grandfather, who
eventually/temporarily "dies," resurrects on the third day.  One
character comments that God may have loved insects most of all,
"mosquitos walk on water ...  Jesus walks on water."  There are several
plot references to insects being "perfect machines," while the man-made
machine (Cronos) runs awry in the havoc it wrecks on the main
characters.
THE LOST FILM REELS:
     Due to the low budget, footage was shot in Mexico, and processed
in Los Angeles.  "We had weeklies, not dailies," del Toro commented.
Tragically, over a week's worth of shooting was lost due to a flawed,
out of focus lens.  Budget and schedule  didn't permit any retakes.
     WHAT WAS LOST: the original screenplay revealed that young Aurora
retreated into a mute fantasy world after her parents left, never to
return.  She is being raised by Jesus, her grandfather, and his wife,
who teaches Tango lessons.  A lost scene showed Jesus lovingly writing
fake post cards to Aurora from her dead parents.  The fact that she
accepts this fantasy of distant, yet loving parents, makes her
non-chalant reaction to her grandfather's predicament (she's the only
witness) ring true.
     In a brief, touching scene that survives, we see the resurrected
and deteriorating Jesus painfully writing a love letter to his grieving
"widow," trying to explain why he can't permit her to see him.  In a
lost, succeeding sequence, Jesus then silently slipped into his wife's
bedroom, where he tenderly placed his note in her sleeping hand.  He
falls asleep, unnoticed, next to her, until dawn, when he must leave
(having become a vampire).
     On waking, the "widow" can't believe the note she finds, and
logically assumes that mute Aurora has written it. "What do you think
this is, another one of your crazy postcards?" she screams, tossing the
family secret out into the open.  According to del Torro, the look on
young Aurora's face, in the badly fogged footage, was unforgettable.
     The surviving footage has a rather abrupt jump, early in the film,
to the rejuvenated grandfather (after his first dose of Cronos) finding
that his antique shop had been trashed.  Lost in the fogged footage is
what sounds like a wonderful scene, where the night before, he
rediscovers his lost virility.  He tries to romance his wife, only to
be rejected, because she's too tired from her Tango lessons to realize
what she's missing.  This lost scene makes her later refusal to believe
or accept his painful post-mortem note even more touching.  What does
survive, is an unforgettable image of the resurrected grandfather,
fresh from the mortuary, calling his wife from a pay phone in the
pouring rain, only to have her hang up on him (because it obviously
must be a "crank" call).
     The film was shot on a budget of $1.2 million, which actually cost
over $2 million American due to the 30% Mexican interest loans.  It was
completed on a frantic eight-week schedule.  Though we'll never know
exactly how great the film might have been with the lost footage, we
can celebrate having found a new director who may be just the one to
shed light on the newly changed relationship between America and
Mexico.  By any measure or scale, CRONOS is an amazingly brilliant
first effort.
     Fortunately, this film has distribution.  Run, don't walk to your
nearest repertory film house and direct them to:

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     This is all about the CD.  Not the Compact Disc or a Certificate
of Deposit but the Cronos Device that is supposed to ensure
immortality.  It was invented by an alchemist who, fleeing the
Inquisition, came to Mexico in 1574 and became an official watchmaker.
The device looks like an outsized golden scarab,o, in the director's
own words, a Faberge egg
     Apparently there's a glitch in this gizmo: although it kept its
inventor alive for centuries, he did die in a 1930s earthquake.  You
can't trust anything.
     Cut to 1997.  Meet elderly antiques dealer Jesus Gris, his much
younger wife Mercedes and his granddaughter Aurora.  Mercedes is a
tango teacher who may or may not be unfaithful.  Aurora's provenance is
unexplained, as is her near-mutism.  A lot is unexplained in this
movie.
     The CD turns up inside the base of a wooden angel that Senor Gris
sells to Angel, the gangsterish American nephew-henchman of terminally
ill industrialist Dieter De la Guardia.  But Gris keeps the
contraption, which Angel and Dieter are after.  It is only later that,
in its muddled, non sequitur way, the film reveals that Dieter owned
the alchemist's diary and knew about the CD.
     The CD comes without instructions.  When Gris winds it up, it puts
out needle-pointed claws that pierce, let out blood, cause pain, but
also somewhat rejuvenate the man.
     There's more muddled stuff as Gris vampiristically needs the blood
of others (he licks a nosebleed off a bathroom floor); as the bad
Angel beats up and kills Jesus Gris; as Gris's corpse is, in repellent,
graphic images, patched up ... and later comes to life; as, with the
help of Aurora, Gris fights separately Angel and Dieter.
     The movie is a ghoulish goulash of nonsense, plot holes, loose
ends, discontinuities and illogicalities, even by horror flick
standards.  At every step we are left wondering about things natural,
unnatural and supernatural.  What is the nature of the May-December
Gris couple? What do the De la Guardia Enterprises manufacture? How can
the resuscitated Gris use a pay phone without change? Why does grungy
surgeon-embalmer-mortician Tito cremate an empty coffin?
     The film may be a narrative mess but it is a minor triumph of
techniques and visuals.  Whether the sights are silly, repulsive or
both, the images are striking.  The real raison d'etre of the movie
is its art work, photography, colors, lighting, special effects, moody,
stylized or surreal decors.
     By Mexican standards, the CRONOS budget (about two million
dollars) is huge, second only to that of LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.
The movie would have cost ten times more if made in North America.
     The 29-year old Guillermo del Toro, self-avowedly
"genre-impaired," is exclusively fascinated by "grotesque tales and
horror with Gothic sensibility." Obviously a student of horror and
science-fiction, he has thrown into his film everything save the
prosaic kitchen sink.
     Among the elements: Vampires and the Undead, the Search for the
Fountain of Youth (in the tradition of the Spanish Conquistador Ponce
de Leon), the  Golden Bug, Egyptian-like scarabs (a staple of The
Mummy's Curse school of movies), the Cronos of Greek mythology (a
Titan who devoured his own children) and The Time Machine (Chronos
with an "h" means "time" in Greek).
     There are also whiffs of Catholicism (prayer, redemption, etc.)
and of the Frankenstein moral: don't fool around with what God has
created.
     Add to this much would-be humorous symbolism of names: Angel (of
darkness), Aurora (Dawn in Latin), Tito (as in Yugoslavia=B9s), De La
Guardia (the late Mayor of New York and a reference to guarding or
protecting?) and more.  And, of course, Jesus Gris (cf. Jesus Cristo).
Jesus is a common Hispanic name, but here there are pointed references
to would-be immortality.
     CRONOS swept the Mexican Oscars with nine "Ariels,"including Best
Picture, Screenplay and Director.  It won the top prize at the Critics'
Week of the 1993 Cannes Festival.  In the U.S., its critical reception
has been quite mixed, although in some quarters it is becoming a cult
movie of sorts.

Author
Pedro Sena
CRONOS, is a nice film, in the gothic vein of things.  Were it not for the
fact that the film really has an obvious lack of funds for its making, this
might have looked better, than it does.  And with as little as it
appears to have had, it does bring forth a story that is nice, although the
modernization of what might have better been a period piece, but appears to
suffer due to some ill chosen locations.
It is the story of an elder man ( Jesus ) who has an antique store, and
happens to be carrying some items that are historical, unbeknownst to him.
And he finds out that one of the statuettes he has is actually a very old
piece that contains a special piece of machinery that fits in a hand that
injects a special fluid, that was created by some mysterious alchemist
several hundred years ago.  Jesus, finds that the fluid happens to stop the
aging process.  But also finds that it leads to the tendency to look for
blood, and the person to become a vampire.
His battle, towards the end, is quite heroic, his name being an obvious
attempt at making a connection, while another man ( Dela Guardia ) is
craving the piece of machinery simply to keep his apparently large  business
empire going much longer.
There are no tricks, no fancy things, just a nicely photographed film with a
very small budget, from the looks of things.  Lights are dim, which creates
an atmosphere that helps the film and the story
but does not specially do anything else.
Federico Luppi does very well as the old man who is having a tremendous time
with his discovery and gets better as he gets older, and has to fight his
addiction.  Unfortunately the film seems to take a downturn at the same
time, although the story of good and evil comes forth and gets clarified.
Though not a film in the class of the moody Hammer material, this film is
still nice, and actually reminds me of another Spanish film maker who did
very well with a slight budget, and made Barbara Steele famous.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
