Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
33

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, R, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
starring: Keanu Reeves (Kevin Lomax), Al Pacino (John Milton), Charlize
Theron (Mary Ann Lomax), Jeffrey Jones (Eddie Barzoon), written by Tony
Gilroy, Jonathon Lemkin, produced by Arnold and Anne Kopelson, Arnon Milchan,
directed by Taylor Hackford, based on the novel by Andrew Neiderman.
Seen Monday, October 20, 1997 at 7 p.m. at the Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas in
Oneida, N.Y., by myself for free (free pass). Theater rating: ***1/2
It's clear the premise to "The Devil's Advocate" is, "What if the devil came
to Earth in human form today?" That's certainly an original concept, and
surprisingly, this isn't any kind of disguised horror film. The problem is,
it's impossible to tell where the film intends to go with this concept until
the very end. 
Keanu Reeves stars as Kevin Lomax, a defense attorney from Florida who
doesn't always enjoy defending the accused, but he's never lost a case and
sees no reason to quit. The opening scene involves the trial of a child
molester which seems realistic for the most part, although one can't help but
notice the Hollywood atmosphere to it all. Still, Lomax manages to get
through the trial by introducing new evidence and twisting facts. For some
reason, it's hard to dislike Reeves' character, especially considering how
stiff he seems (playing a lawyer doesn't help any).
Soon the movie progresses as Kevin and his wife Mary Ann (Theron) move to
New York City where Kevin has just been offered a job at the top law firm in
the country. He knows how to pick favorable juries, and he proves his mettle
with these big shots as soon as he arrives. Kevin is so good, John Milton
(Pacino), a senior partner of the firm, not only congratulates him but
completely befriends him. Pacino is excellent and especially charming here as
this confident, intelligent executive. Milton  takes Kevin under his wing and
for the entire mid-section of the film, we get nothing but the atmosphere of
the rich, debutante lifestyle. Unfortunately, this is also the film's biggest
problem.
We already know Milton is actually Satan himself, but why is he here on
Earth and what does Kevin have to do with anything? The film barely provides
us with any clues to these questions. Some hints are slowly dropped, but
they're done so in generic horror manners. Instead of the characters'
dialogue and actions revealing their true identity, we get visions of demons
that are more startling than they are scary. Most of these incidents involve
Mary Ann, and of course she tries to explain what's going on and begs Kevin
to leave, but she also seems to be going insane. There's also an overall
feeling of surrealism and it's difficult to tell if things are real or
hallucinations or dreams. The screenplay's pacing does this in a
Hitchcock-esque way, but it doesn't play up its humanism as well as it
should.
For much of the film I just wondered where everything was going. There is
essentially no plot at all, and although the storytelling is fine, there just
seems to be an emptiness to it all. The first half concentrates mostly on the
characters which makes for good drama, but the second half seems to turn on a
dime into melodrama. All Mary Ann does is cry and scream while all Milton
does is talk to Kevin in more rhetoric which doesn't seem to have any
relevance.
The last act is not a resolution, but a culmination of the everything to
come before. The entire film exists for the ending, which is a cross between
modern mythology and classic philosophy. It's interesting to watch at the
time, but in retrospect, there still seems to be something missing. There's
actually two endings to the film - the first of is poetic, but the second I
didn't think was necessary (hint: it's reminiscent of "The Shining").
There's a lot of good stuff to "The Devil's Advocate," but the screenplay
and the individual events never seem to lead to anything or have a point. Its
originality is commendable, but this film could have been and should have
been much better than it is because it doesn't take enough advantage of its
thematic elements.


Author
David Sunga
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron
Ingredients: 
Satan, yuppie lawyer and wife, moral decisions, hallucinations
Synopsis:
Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves ) is an upcoming ambitious yuppie lawyer with
a beautiful wife and a religious mother. When small town guy Lomax gets
hand picked to join a prestigious New York law firm, he brings his
family to New York. But he doesnt realize its part of an even larger
picture concerning God, the Devil, and the world. The film Devils
Advocate is a cross between a back-in-time-loop flick and a morality
play. Lomax, a man of average morality and resistance to temptation,
eventually discovers he is not who he thinks he is; he is actually part
of a divine comedy where the price of making an immoral decision is the
end of the world.
Opinion:
This is one of those films that seemed long and not particularly
exciting when I watched it. Typically, we get to watch Mary Ann Lomax
(Charlize Theron) spend many minutes selecting wallpaper, followed by a
partial face morph of one of her neighbors into a demon and back to
normal again, followed by another long period of selecting wallpaper and
so on and so forth - - which makes the movie seem unexciting.
I felt better a few days after the movie was over and I had time to
think about the story, and the infinite time loop Lomax is stuck in, and
how - - if he ever makes a mistake - - it means the end of the world. 
This film boasts a talented cast and interesting cinematography. For
example, in terms of cinematography, the standard fades and wipes
between scenes are replaced in Devils Advocate by scenic time lapse
photography of clouds and lightning or by pans of medieval ceiling
paintings. Pacinos monologues as Satan can be mesmerizing, and Charlize
Theron displays great acting range in portraying a wife slowly losing
her sanity.
Trivia:
In the story, Lomaxs boss goes by the name of John Milton. This is a
play on words and an insight into what Devils Advocate is supposed to
be about. In real life John Milton was the moralistic 17th century
English author (1608-1674) who wrote the classic poem Paradise Lost
(published first in 1667). Milton believed he had been called upon to
serve as a poet/priest of Gods will. Typical of Miltons main works
('Paradise Lost,' Samson Agonistes,' 'Paradise Regained') is the
underlying theme of a messianic hero in a fallen world who is eventually
led to a clearer understanding of his own divine role.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Taylor Hackford
Writers: Jonathan Lemkin and Tony Gilroy (based on the novel by Andrew
Neiderman)
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron, Judith Ivey, Connie
Nielsen, Jeffrey Jones, Craig T. Nelson, Tamara Tunie, Ruben
Santiago-Hudson, Debra Monk, Heather Matarazzo, Don King, Delroy Lindo
Taylor Hackford's "The Devil's Advocate" has a really cool, satirical
gimmick in it: that lawyers are really working for the devil, like we all
expected anyway.  But the film itself is one of those which is full of
flaws, and seems to be out to just exploit this idea in a cheap way. 
Watching it is very manipulative: the story seems to be going nowhere until
a final scene sums it all up, and it all seems great.  Normally, I'd try to
be cynical and say this is what "brings it down, causing it to be less than
what should be there," or something like that.  But then again, I've been
known to go against the norm.
"The Devil's Advocate" deals with a hot shot young lawyer, Kevin Lomax, who
is straight out of a Grisham novel with the exception that he's played by
Keanu Reeves (ha ha).  After winning a ton of cases consecutively in the
south (wait till you hear Keanu's in-n-out accent - you thought his french
accent in "Dangerous Liasons" was bad), he's hired at the top law firm in
the country, located in Manhattan.  Despite the christian coalition rants
from his Bible Belt mother (Judith Ivey), he and his wife, Mary Ann
(Charlize Theron), move to Manhattan to a lush, spacey apartment.
Soon enough, he catches the attention of the firm's head, John Milton (ha
ha), played by Al Pacino, who tempts him into becoming one of his top
lawyers on the edge of the building's roof with a waterfall toppling over,
and a gorgeous shot of the city, showing that he's going to take a fall if
he sides with Milton.  After awhile of workaholic-dom, the lonely Mary Ann
becomes detached from him, and is soon seeing images of people as demons,
driving her nuts.  We begin to suspect that Milton is not really
human...although we all know what he is from the previews.
The film, which is long and pretty plotless through most of it, wanders
around for a lot of its running time, never seeming to go anywhere.  But we
the audience stay tuned because we know that the end will explain
everything, and that all the big questions will be answered, like: why is
Kevin drawn to the sexy lawyer Christabella (Connie Nielsen) so much that
he imagines he's porking her while he porks his wife in real life?  Or why
is Mary Ann the only one being haunted?  Why not Kevin?  And, of course,
why is Kevin being shown as a heartless man defending criminals when he
obviously has a heart?
The ending, which consists of twist upon twist upon twist, is what makes
everything worth it.  Towards the end, Kevin and Milton have a giant
confrontation in his office, which we've seen clips of on the commercials,
which is explains everything and even contains several unexpected twists. 
This trend in movies, where the ending is the thing that makes everything
worth it, has been going strong with the movie audiences since "The Usual
Suspects" did it with style, and while this film doesn't do it as
masterfully as that film did, it sure makes the long wait well worth it.
To fully understand "The Devil's Advocate," one needs to realize this is
not art: it's a crowd pleaser.  It's the kind of film that tempts you
throughout it, with lots of cool individual scenes and great cinematic
moments which seem disjointed from everything else until the grande finale
blows you away, and leaves you giddy afterwards.  I'd love to say that I'm
one of those critics who can "see through the film and was the only one who
booed afterwards for it being manipulative," but the film was able to
snatch me up into it, and by the ending, with the Rolling Stones' "Paint It
Black" playing over the end credits, I was leaving with a big fat smile on
my face. The ending makes all the apparent flaws of this film seem like
they were good.
Why did I enjoy this?  Well, I think that it's a good film because of all
these things, which would be called problems from another perspective. 
It's a film that saves everything for the ending, going out with a bang. 
Even the final twist at the end, which would seem really really cheap in
another film, is backed up with a great sense of logic when you think about
it.  Is Kevin really this cold blooded lawyer, or is there an alternate
influence in his life which makes him this way?  The ending, which is kind
of like the ending of Scorsese's "The Last Temptation of Christ," made me
moan at first, but then seemed worth it with the final frame.
But what really makes this a really great pleasure to see is the way it
feels.  Taylor Hackford (who also directed "An Officer and a Gentleman" and
produced "When We Were Kings") has directed this film with a wild visual
flair which makes everything seem amazing.  I adored the production design,
especially that of Milton's office which is one of the best sets of the
year.  I loved the "Koyaanisqatsi"-esque time elipses, with time seen
blowing by in a matter of moments.  And one of the final scenes, with lots
of wild special effects, and even some rampant nudity of one special
character (hee hee), is long but jaw-dropping.
Unfortunately, this film does have its share of problems.  The direction
and mood are all over the place, with scene tone ranging from
overly-melodramatic to high camp.  The film never decides whether it's a
serious satire on lawyers or a black comedy.  But once again, the finale
choses what it is (and at least it goes out with style and a big laugh). 
While I said that the manipulation of the viewer can be viewed as a good
thing, that doesn't mean it can't also be viewed as a negative point
against the movie.  Watching "The Devil's Advocate" is like reading a
college freshman's term paper that stumbles around until the last paragraph
where it makes its final point.  While it's pleasing at the end, you can't
help but feel like the first bit of it was a bit cheap.  
However, the final feeling to the film manages to be satirical and
entertaining, feeling cheap at first, then feeling great.  The satirical
gimmick is also pretty great: that lawyers are actually hounds of hell
ready to take over the world from God (Milton points out that there are now
more law students than lawyers - freaky deaky).  The fact that it's able to
hold this up throughout the film without it ever seeming cheap is something
to be rewarded.
A big shock of the film is Keanu Reeves, who, if you know me at all, is one
of the main actors who I make fun of a lot (I adore doing an impersonation
of him in "Much Ado About Nothing"), but I will admit that he sometimes
delivers a performance which is believable and passable.  Here, he's at his
best, which might not be very good, but is at least passing.  I believed
his performance, and after awhile, I forgot that it was Keanu Reeves, the
ex-Ted of "Bill and."  Yes, I was incredibly skeptical about it (when you
hear Keanu Reeves is a "hot shot attorney," you just laugh) and was ready
for some heavy duty ridicule, but after actually seeing it, I
actually...liked him in it.  Yikes indeed.
Charlize Theron, who came out of nowhere last year to give great supporting
work in "That Thing You Do!" and "2 Days in the Valley," is once again
great in a role which is suprisingly deft.  Mary Ann's character is never
clearly defined in the film, but she fills in the gaps, creating a gradual
descent into madness which actually seems realistic enough to be taken
seriously.  In the beginning, she's bright, sunny, and lovable; later on,
she's clearly gone off the deep end, needing the support of her ever
distancing husband.  Her acting in this film is great.
And then there's the man...Al Pacino, who beat out Jon Voigt for best
overacting of the year (he hammed it up big time in "Anaconda").  Every
scene Al's in, he shows his talent for being larger than life, saying each
of his lines with unbridled enthusiasm, and creating a character who's
lovable and seductive, even if he IS the devil.  I wanted to applaud after
every line he uttered, and every time he smiled and did his great laugh (a
la "Scent of a Woman"), I just giggled like a school girl (hee hee). 
Watching Al Pacino on screen in this film, playing a role he would
hopefully kill for, is one of the few total pleasures of this year
movie-wise.
Watching "The Devil's Advocate" forces the viewer to forget about plot or
ongoing themes, and just remember everything for the big twist at the end,
where everything finally makes some bit of sense.  And what an ending it
is.  Sure, it's a scene between Pacino and Reeves, and that would already
sound kinda iffy, but it makes everything suddenly feel like it was worth
it, and leaves you with a satisfying taste in your mouth.  Sure, everything
up that point is pretty cool, albeit a tad mediocre at some points, but
this film is further proof that sometimes, it's all about the ending.  And
that devilish grin by Pacino...
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Duncan Stevens
Taylor Hackford's latest effort, "The Devil's Advocate," isn't a dreadful
effort, but it could have been much better than it is. The premise is
played for thrills--if there had been thought involved, we might have
gotten perhaps a glimpse or two of consideration about whether a lawyer
should go against his conscience in defending someone he believes to be
guilty. Or, for that matter, whether anyone should uphold the standards of
the profession regardless of moral compunctions. These are real questions,
but it would take an entirely different film to address them--and Hackford
did not, ironically, have many Bigger Issues in mind in making this.
The plot: Kevin Lomax, a young Florida lawyer (Keanu Reeves), is recruited
by a prestigious New York firm, and he heads to the Big Apple with wife
Mary Ann (Charlize Theron) in tow, over the objections of a Bible-thumping
mother (Judith Ivey). His success in winning cases continues, but only to
serve as contrast to his wife's descent into madness and his own moral
disintegration, as it turns out that the firm is involved in rather more
than defending rich clients. And so it turns out that...
Stop a moment. Pretend that you don't know what the real twist is; pretend
that the trailers didn't give it away. How much more interesting a movie
might this have been if it had turned out that the firm was simply an
ordinary one, representing rich clients who wanted to buy their way out of
a conviction? It would be "The Firm" in New York, you say, but it
wouldn't--at least, it wouldn't have to be. There's plenty of room for
development along these lines: the cases that the lawyer gets handed get
more and more questionable, until finally his conscience steps in and he
says no. Firm: where's your conscience been up to now? Lawyer: well, maybe
it should have been there all along. There are a variety of places it
could go from there, some more interesting than others, but at a time when
lawyer jokes are standard, perhaps that would have been a more noteworthy
movie than this.
What we do get, as you no doubt know: the firm turns out to be operated by
none other than ol' Scratch himself (Al Pacino), and the various partners
and employees are a variety of demonic minions and henchmen. Mary Ann's
deterioration is spurred along by her recognition of what's really going
on--as illustrated by various characters' faces morphing between human and
monster, well placed and very effective. Things spin way out of control,
naturally, leading to a climactic bit of over-the-top monologue by
Pacino--but by then, the horror element has taken over and all
restrictions on realism are off, plotwise. Various twists ensue, none of
them successful at bringing things back to this planet.  
Where did this go wrong? One of the problems is that Reeves is supposed to
be playing a character; it's one thing to let a plot take surreal twists,
but it's quite another to have supposedly ordinary folks whose actions
just aren't believable. True, there is exactly one role that Reeves can
convey effectively--clueless surfer dude--and it isn't his fault if
misguided directors keep calling him and shoving him into parts that don't
involve saying "excellent" repeatedly. But he's so painfully ineffective
that it's rarely clear what he wants to convey, or what his character is
supposed to be thinking. Does he neglect his wife completely because he's
self-centered? Obtuse? Stupid? It's hard to tell. This is, in other words,
a remarkable bad performance by Reeves; ordinary bad performances present
certain ideas to the audience ineptly, in ways that make the audience
think, hey, may as well hold up a sign saying THIS IS WHAT I'M THINKING,
but what Reeves manages here is a character with no discernible
motivations at all. He's just there, and the plot goes on around him. The
part might have been better written, perhaps, but with only one mode of
delivery, Reeves isn't likely to take advantage of what's there. (Response
to Pacino's question on whether he goes to church: "I guess I'm on parole
for time served," in monotone. What is he? Joking? Bitter? Bemused?
Rueful? The world may never know.)
Pacino is quite good, as usual--and, at one particularly memorable moment,
he even makes fun of Reeves' clunky intonation. The guess here is that the
screenplay called for him to make fun of the southern accent that Lomax is
supposed to have, but the way that accent comes and goes--and the comic
qualities of Reeves' voice even without a silly affectation--makes it even
funnier. As John Milton, Beelzebub's disguise (my, my, literacy in 
Hollywood, will wonders never cease?), Pacino is appropriately smarmy and
insinuating; as the real thing, veil down, he is mesmerizing, despite some
gratuitous bits. (Lip-syncing to Frank Sinatra?) The contrast between the
nuance of the lawyer persona-- only a leer here or a chuckle there suggest
anything more sinister--and the sheer over-the-top force of the Devil with
the chance to say everything that's on his mind is the best part of
Pacino's performance.
Theron steals virtually every scene from Reeves--I would call it taking
candy from a baby, but we've had enough Keanu- bashing already--and
genuinely captivates even with not much to do besides go to pieces. (Her
role is that of the ordinary person trapped in a horror movie, and she
captures the audience's sympathy. Reeves, though his role is not so
dissimilar, is not recognizable as an ordinary person.) Most of the visual
shocks in the movie are hers--we see most of the shocking images at the
same time she does--and her reactions are convincing enough that we care
about what happens to her. If there is a downside to Theron's performance,
it's that her baby-face beauty makes Keanu looking at other women rather
improbable. (Plus, though it isn't her fault, Reeves hardly shows her any
convincing affection, so it isn't clear why she'd be upset when he starts
to neglect her.)
As noted, there is something of an identity crisis here, in that
Hackford has the beginning of a moral drama going on and then lets it get
all supernatural--in short, become a horror film. That's his right, of
course, and it's not unprecedented for horror films to be less than fully
logically realized--but there's a certain silliness in casting the Devil
with no real acknowledgment of a supernatural counterpart. Ivey has little
to do as the Bible-carrying mother who warns dolorously of the temptations
of the city; it's such a caricature that the audience doesn't take her
seriously. Her character is weak--and, even, shallow--to the point that we
don't necessarily think she's sincere. And the only other character to
acknowledge the existence of God is, naturally, Pacino, whose rant against
God ("he's a SADist!") seem just a bit bizarre given that Reeves has never
expressed any belief. Like, who you tryin' to convince, Al? The point is
that the Devil is classically imagined as actually trying to steal souls;
with no one to steal them from, the exercise feels a little dumb. All that
was required was some implication that anyone in the movie was trying to
do the right thing (ideally, out of some sense of relationship to God, but
let's not get picky), and Pacino was twisting their motives or playing up
their frailties to ensnare them. But Reeves has no apparent interest in
the right thing. Again, the idea isn't necessarily that Hackford should
have given God a fair shake, a chance to yell back at Pacino, merely that,
since God's existence is presupposed, there should have been at least a
scene or two that didn't paint that belief is silly and antiquated. A
conflict between good and evil might have been compelling; when good
wasn't allowed to show up, what was left became a tad uninvolving.
Despite the drawbacks, there are many memorable moments here,
chief among them Theron's death; the blood on Reeves' shirt in the
following scenes, underscoring what happens, is perhaps the best thing
about his performance. The visuals are skillful--a sex scene where Theron
is exchanged, in Reeves' mind, with another woman, a chilling dream
sequence involving Theron and a baby--and genuinely jarring. If you can
suspend disbelief sufficiently to enjoy the ride, give it a shot; if
poorly realized characters bug you, skip it.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Author
Homer Yen
As a hot-shot defense attorney, Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) has a special
talent for picking juries that will ultimately acquit his clients.  He
is also an excellent judge of character, knowing just which strings to
pull to sway the jury while breaking down a potentially damaging
witness's testimony.  And, on top of that, he's a damn good trial
lawyer.  In the opening scene, it is obvious that the defendant that he
represents is guilty, but it doesn't hamper Lomax's desire to creatively
squeeze his client through the doors of reasonable doubt, thereby
getting an acquittal.
His unblemished record of victories soon captures the attention of one
of the most prestigious firms in the country, headed by John Milton (Al
Pacino).  He is brought to their headquarters in NYC, where he
immediately impresses Milton, and is subsequently offered a full-time
position as head of their newly-created criminal law division.  Lomax is
soon given the case of his life.  He must defend a real estate tycoon
who has been charged with a triple homicide.  The draw of fame and his
desire to prove just how good he really is begins to isolate him in his
own hell.  He works late, defends the guilty, pledges his soul to his
firm, and begins to neglect his smart but fretful wife, Mary Ann
(Charlize Theron).  
But what starts off as a promising John Grisham-like story about
conscience-stricken lawyers takes an abrupt detour as supernatural
forces begin to tinker with the story.  It begins like a typical parable
where a small-town boy makes it big, but then has to balance his sense
of self against the allure of money, power, and greed.  But Milton is
far more than just a corrupt partner of the firm.   Quite literally, he
is the Devil in disguise, and as the movie progresses, he reveals some
uncanny talents that one could have only if he had sold his soul long
ago.  Freaky and frightening things begin to happen, and after much of
the film has elasped, Milton's horrifying intent is finally revealed.
The movie tries to give us two separate and distinct acts.  The first
involves the comeuppance of Lomax as a big-city trial lawyer.  The
second focuses on Milton and his ulterior motive for employing Lomax.
Unfortunately, the two never mix well into a cohesive story, and what we
get are two underdeveloped stories that rely too much on one shaky
revelation to tie them together and an impressive production piece to
give it an underlying atmosphere.  Granted, the film is very
handsome-looking.  You'll enjoy the final scene where the wall mural
seemingly comes to life during a heated speech given by Pacino.  You'll
also like the images of power and temptation expressed through the
fleshy and flashy parties.   You'll also feel the loneliness and
insanity that sets in with Mary Ann, knowing that her husband is slowly
drifting away.  This was one of the better storylines, but
unfortunately, is only a sub-plot.  
As with all thing's involving the Devil, you can expect nothing but the
worst.  In the first few scenes, Reeves anchors the film, but then
slowly drifts into the background.  His path from self-vanity to
self-consciousness is never fully explored.  His actions seem arbitrary,
and his reasons for them not fully known.  Pacino's comical portrayal is
spirited, but the vanity of his character begins to shift the focus of
the movie.  There is another plot or two that is introduced, but never
gets revisited.  The focus seemed inconsistent throughout, and the final
payoff seemed quick and cheap.  This movie tries to be horrifying,
thrilling, and dramatic all at the same time.  However, while The
Devil's Advocate strives to get noticed, ultimately it makes very little
impression at all.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Al Pacino, Keanu Reeves, Charlize Theron, Judith Ivey, 
      Craig T. Nelson, Jeffrey Jones, Ruben Santiago-Hudson, 
      Connie Nielson
Director: Taylor Hackford
Producers: Arnon Milchan, Arnold Kopelson, and Anne Kopelson 
Screenplay: Jonathan Lemkin and Tony Gilroy, based on the novel by 
      Andrew Niederman 
Cinematography: Andrzej Bartkowiak
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Taylor Hackford's THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE has many laudable qualities, 
but subtlety is not among them.  The story, which postulates that the 
devil is walking among us today, gives Satan's human alter-ego a truly 
obvious name:  John Milton (for those who don't know, he wrote the 
landmark poem about man's expulsion from the Garden of Eden, "Paradise 
Lost").  And, in what is arguably the most believable aspect of the 
movie, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE takes lawyer-bashing to its logical extreme 
by making Lucifer the head of a prestigious law firm.  Of course, since 
it's fashionable to attack attorneys these days, the zeal with which the 
movie launches into its barrage on the profession (law is referred to as 
Satan's "new priesthood") is guaranteed to strike a responsive chord 
with audiences.  See what I mean -- no subtlety.
     That being said, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is a highly-enjoyable motion 
picture that's part character study, part supernatural thriller, and 
part morality play.  Although the film isn't a landmark combination of 
unique elements (viewers will find themselves reminded of both THE 
WITCHES OF EASTWICK and THE FIRM), it has a lot of energy and the rather 
long 145-minute running time passes quickly.  Co-writer Tony Gilroy (THE 
CUTTING EDGE, DOLORES CLAIBORNE), who was brought in by director 
Hackford (DOLORES CLAIBORNE) to expand upon Jonathan Lemkin's original 
adaptation of Andrew Niederman's novel, has produced a script that 
transcends any one specific genre, criss-crossing back and forth from 
horror to satire to melodrama.
     THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE's protagonist is Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves), a 
Florida prosecutor-turned-defense attorney who has never lost in more 
than 60 cases.  Kevin's approach to a trial isn't that it's a forum for 
justice, but a game to be won or lost -- and he is willing to do 
anything for victory, even if he knows that his client is guilty (the 
official term for this kind of person is a "sleazeball").  When he 
successfully gains an acquittal for an accused child molester in a 
difficult-to-win case, he attracts the attention of a big-time New York 
lawyer (Ruben Santiago-Hudson), who invites Kevin and his beautiful 
wife, Mary Ann (Charlize Theron), to Manhattan to meet the head of his 
firm.  Once there, Kevin finds himself being offered a very attractive 
job by the charismatic John Milton (Al Pacino).  But John isn't just a 
very powerful attorney and astute businessman -- he's the devil 
incarnate -- and he has special plans for Kevin.
     During the course of his long and varied career, Al Pacino has 
played the good (Â…AND JUSTICE FOR ALL), the bad (THE GODFATHER), and the 
ugly (SCARFACE), but this is his first chance to play Satan, and he 
accomplishes the task with his usual panache.  Of course, this is the 
kind of over-the-top role that Pacino plays best, and his virtuoso 
performance comes complete with a pair of the kind of monologues that he 
does better than anyone else working in Hollywood today.  Of all the 
recent approaches to this role, Pacino's Dracula-esque method stands 
alongside the work of Jack Nicholson (THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK) and Max 
von Sydow (NEEDFUL THINGS) as the most memorable.
     Although the spotlight shines squarely on Pacino, there are other 
actors in the film.  And, while Pacino's performance is the best, it's 
not the most surprising.  That distinction goes to the work of the 
usually-wooden Keanu Reeves, who is actually believable in his part 
(despite a Southern accent that can best be described as 
"inconsistent").  There are times when Reeves lacks the subtlety that 
would have made this a more multi-layered portrayal, but it's 
nevertheless a solid job.  Spicy Chalize Theron (TRIAL AND ERROR) is 
fine as Mary Ann, bringing equal parts sex appeal and pathos to a 
surprisingly well-developed role.  Supporting players include Judith 
Ivey as Kevin's Bible-thumping mother, Jeffrey Jones as the law firm's 
managing partner, Craig T. Nelson as an "is he or isn't he guilty" 
client, and Connie Nielson as the tempting fruit dangled in front of 
Kevin.
     Aside from Pacino's performance, the greatest strength of the film 
is its delicious build-up to an operatic climax.  And, although huge 
parts of THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE are overblown and overplayed, it's never 
as silly as it has the potential to be -- and this quality consistently 
keeps the picture out of the dangerous realm of self-parody.  The 
movie's greatest weakness is its ending, which, by trying to be too 
clever, ends up cheating the audience of a legitimate conclusion.  While 
there's a sense of closure, it's not an especially satisfying one.
     Oddly enough, with two of the most high-profile horror films of the 
year (SCREAM 2 and AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS) slated for a December 
release, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE may be the best option for a "Halloween 
flick," and the pairing of Pacino and Reeves should assure it a healthy 
bow at the box office.  It doesn't hurt that the script is more 
intelligent that one might initially suppose and that the storyline is 
developed better than the theatrical previews cause it to appear to be.  
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE certainly has problems, chief of which is the 
subtlety thing, but Pacino's performance is so fun to watch that it 
eclipses the most significant of them.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Steve Kong
I had my doubts about Devil's Advocate when I went to see it. Usually, I
clear my head of doubts (or any other biases) before going into see a
movie. It was a hard thing to do when the thought of Keanu Reeves playing a
big shot lawyer comes to mind. I'm happy to say that I stepped out of the
theatre without a doubt that Devil's Advocate is, so far, one of the best
films of this fall.
Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) is a small lawyer in Florida. But, he's a good
lawyer, never losing any of his sixty some odd cases. He's so good that a
big time law firm in New York wants his services. John Milton (Al Pacino)
heads the law firm. The story follows Lomax and his wife Mary Ann (Charlize
Theron) as they make the move from their little town in Florida to New York
where Milton puts them in a very nice apartment and showers them with
money. But, what for?
Devil's Advocate's twist on the story is that Milton is really the
human-ego of Satan himself. And logically, Satan would be a lawyer. This
twist is easy to believe, and it was not hard to suspend my disbelief when
this was revealed. Devil's Advocate is a large chunk of character study, on
both Lomax and Milton. It has a bit of supernatural horror thrown in for zest.
Reeves performs admirably, and he, at least in my mind, redeems himself for
his terrible performance in Chain Reaction. It was a little hard, at the
beginning, to believe that Ted from Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure
could be a lawyer, but it does work out after awhile.
Charlize Theron is perfect as Lomax's wife, Mary Ann. She plays the sexy
wife as a lonely woman who sees early on that the law firm and Milton are
not what they seem. She literally goes insane because Lomax starts to work
too hard for the firm.
But, the real show stealer is Al Pacino as John Milton. Pacino is way over
the top with his performance and it is this that makes Devil's Advocate
such a joy to watch. His performance, especially at the climax of the film,
is just dripping evil but still at the same time fun. Pacino has played
many parts in his life, and I've seen a few, and this one is on the top of
my list as one that everyone should see.
Taylor Hackford (Dolores Claiborne) does very well as the director of
Devil's Advocate, mixing real life with supernatural, and never going past
the point of driving the audience into disbelief.
Devil's Advocate is a definite Must See Movie that you shouldn't miss in
the theatres. The film is an all around winner, but if anything, see the
film for Pacino's excellent performance as the Devil himself.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Unlike most movie reviews, I don't like to bog mine down with a
summarization of the plot. Usually when someone reads a movie review,
they have a general idea what the movie is about. Otherwise, they
would probably skip by it. So if you're looking for summaries, I'm
not the person to go to. My reviews are nothing spectacular, just
simple, to-the-point opinions. With that out of the way, let's begin.
I was actually quite amazed at Keanu Reeves sudden signs of life
in this movie.  It was the first time I was actually Reeves might
actually have a pulse. To say "This is Reeves at his best!" sure
doesn't mean a lot, but it is true.  But it is quite obvious that
when Al Pacino is in a movie, nobody's going to outshine him. And
Pacino was devilishly good in this one. An Oscar nomination? If
the Academy has any senses, there should be. The superbly delivered
speech by Pacino at the end of the film is absolutely captivating!
Truly one of the best dialogues of the year!
The visuals of the movie were unique, intriguing, and rich! I didn't
want to blink. This film's climax was superb in all departments:
acting, directing, and writing.
The very, VERY end of the film was a little disappointing and hokey.
They wrapped this movie up with all the garnishings, with a pretty
little bow on top. I almost have to wonder if they should've just
left out the whole ending, which I won't give away, but it seemed
off from the rest of the film, and therefore slighty jarring.
Overall, I was extremely pleased with the movie, and I would definitely
recommend it!!!

Author
Nicholas Amado
Taylor Hackford has crossed over to the Dark Side. Perhaps he has tiptoed his
way there with films like "An Officer and a Gentleman", "Against All Odds",
and "Dolores Claiborne", but with his latest "The Devil's Advocate", there is
no turning back. 
He has assembled quite a fine group of talent for this twisted satire;
 Veteran Director of Photography Andrzej Bartkowiak, 8 time Oscar nominee Al
Pacino, and special effects and make-up guru Rick Baker. Bartkowiak is of
particular interest to this writer because of his extensive work with master
filmmaker Sidney Lumet. Baker is known for his work on "The Nutty Professor",
"Coming To America" and "Wolf" (as well as Michael Jackson's "Thriller"
video.)
Reeves stars as a Florida Assistant DA turned defense lawyer Kevin Lomax who,
after the realization of his client's guilt, decides to go for the gold and de
stroy a key witness on the stand in a cruel and heartless manner. His
unblemished record catches the eye of a major Manhattan law firm and it's
senior partner John Milton, played by Al Pacino. Reeves and his wife
(Charlize Theron, in a break-through role) are given the royal treatment and
a glorious appartment on the upper west side.  Lomax is the new ace of the
firm, aided without question by the mysterious Milton, and is given a triple
homicide trial. But as Lomax becomes more greedily involved in his case load,
his neglected wife witnesses gruesome and violent scenes, from
disembowelments to gruesome murders and flashes of demonic faces. Her visions
lead to insanity, and Lomax is forced to choose between  his wife and the
case. We realize that Milton is indeed Satan, and is controlling the lives of
this young couple, and virtually everyone else around him. (And Milton
spelled backward is Notlim...think about it.)
This bold and daring film makes a number of interesting statements, some more
 obvious than others. It is no mistake that attorneys are chosen to represent
evil here. They control the law, and the law controls us. But the movie is
telling us that evil easily appeals to our vanity, and that our egos will
give in. Even when we think we've managed to dodge it, or even stop it, evil
remains, lurking around the corner.
"The Devil's Advocate" is dangerously close to an NC-17 rating. The violence
is rather grotesque, but spread out in small amounts over two and a half
hours, and thus not terribly overdone. The full frontal nudity and graphic
sexual situations, though, rival that of any erotic piece of recent
filmmaking. Demi Moore would have needed a lot more than $12 million to
expose her breasts as long as some of the women in this film. Due to the
extensive and intense dialogue, the intriguing storyline and the beauty of
the cinematography (and again, a two and a half hour running time....) this
can't be categorized as a horror film, but it comes close. Don't bring your
10 year olds, folks.
Pacino gives a top-notch performance as Lucifer. His loud, over-the-top
actions that became so popular with his performance in "Scent of a Woman" are
brought out again, this time in a much more devious and cocky manner. Pacino
manages to get in a few chuckles from the audience as well. Indeed, this fine
actor is worthy of another Oscar nomination. And you can certainly win for a
bad-to-the-bone villian. Just ask Anthony Hopkins. Pacino certainly may once
again be nominated twice in the same year for an Academy Award. Recall his
performance as Lefty Ruggerio in "Donnie Brasco".
Reeves is trying so hard to show us that he really thinks he is a good actor,
and he certainly manages to impress now and again. But as happens so often,
the actor's power is lessened by his silly attempt at holding an
uncomfortable accent. Reeve's southern accent, though always slight, flutters
in and out so often, you just don't know who he is trying to be. This
inconsistency really knocks a few points off of an otherwise superb
performance. Theron plays Reeve's wife and may have just signed a letter of
intent for stardom. Her sexuality and porcelain doll face make her the
perfect victim for Satan to crush. Though she spends much of her time yelling
and crying, she does a perfect job of portraying her frustration at not being
able to communicate with her husband. Theron breaks to pieces in the film,
but does so slowly and methodically, and really gives a grade-A performance.
Jones and Nelson met with chuckles from the audience upon their first
appearance on-screen. Obviously, "Mr. Rooney" and "Coach" were the first
thoughts on the minds of many, but that shouldn't get in the way of these
fine performances.
This twisted tale of sexual depravity and omnipresent evil makes for a good
scare, and some deep thinking. Some of the visuals may be a bit harsh now and
again, but it isn't overbearing. The editing is astonishing throughout.
Mostly because it is so bad in some cases and so fantastic in others. But
Bartkowiak's and Hackford's camera work is brilliant and worth a second look.
The special effects are simple but un-aviodable. They make themselves
apparent in every effects scene, however they don't ruin a thing. Rick Baker
certainly leaves his mark. "The Devil's Advocate" doesn't need to be as long
as it is. (Yes, two and a half hours.) Fifteen minutes could easily have been
cut. But Pacino, Theron and even Reeves to some extent, as well as
Bartkowiak's masterful work, and the exceptional Art Direction, make this a
thrilling and creepy ride. It keeps you on your toes to the end. And when I
say "end" I mean the final shot. Don't leave to go to the bathroom. 
Three out of Four stars.
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado

Author
Boyd Petrie
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron, Craig T. Nelson,
Connie Nielson, and Judith Ivey
If there is one thing that bothers me about Hollywood films it's their
predictable endings.  THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE has the atypical Hollywood
ending, when everything that should happen does.  Unfortunately for
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, this ending nearly collapses in on itself, and
ruins the entire film.  Nevertheless, the film does provide two and a
half hours of pure entertainment (note to self: kill whomever was in
charge of the previews for this film).  I don't think I was quite
prepared for this movie because the trailers made it appear to be some
supernatural horror film about Satan.  Well, it does contain this
element, but what is not mentioned in the ads is the other plot
elements (and seemingly more interesting ones at that).
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE begins in Florida with an ongoing trial in
session.  Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) is the defense attorney, working
for a client whom has been accused of raping a young girl.  He ends up
with a not-guilty verdict, despite an emotional testimony from the
victim (Heather Matarazzo).  He leaves the courthouse with his lovely
wife Mary Ann (Charlize Theron) where he is approached with an offer
to travel to New York City to help choose a good jury.  He accepts
(mainly after seeing the paycheck he will receive) and he flies to New
York with his wife.  After proving his worth for selecting juries (and
his perfect winning streak in court), the head of the firm, John
Milton (Al Pacino), asks him to work permanently as a criminal lawyer.
He graciously accepts, where he is treated almost as a god.  He is
given an incredible apartment (which is bigger than my entire house
now), and a hefty paycheck.  His life seems to be on the rise.
And of course, his life suddenly begins to waver and slowly decline.
He is attracted to fellow employee Christabella (Connie Nielson), and
his wife begins to feel very lonely in her large apartment.  Mary Ann
takes up a friendship with a neighbor who always gives advice,
especially if it is not wanted.  Meanwhile, Kevin nabs a case
surrounding Alexander Cullen (Craig T. Nelson) who apparently murdered
three people.  He spends hours upon hours with this case, while
forgetting his loving wife, who may or may not be going insane.  All
of this while John Milton may or may not be the devil himself.
After a while, things turn completely upside-down, as Kevin's wife
claims to have seen monstrous images superimposed on her friends.  A
fellow employee is murdered in the park, and his mother (Judith Ivey)
reveals information about Kevin's real father.  Is it all just a big
nightmare?  Or is John Milton really Satan, playing tricks with
Kevin's life?  THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE plays out fairly straight-forward,
but for some odd reason, the screenwriters wanted to surprise everyone
by giving us something we don't expect.  Is this surprise conclusion
supposed to make us feel good and go home without feeling depressed or
disturbed?  If so, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE messes up completely, and
ironically, I felt more depressed because of the ending as is now,
than I would have if it had ended ten minutes early.
I went into THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE expecting a shocking horror film, and
that is exactly what I got.  I was settled in to be disturbed mentally
and emotionally, and that is what I got.  But what was the most
disturbing and horrible aspect of the movie is the poor ending (did I
mention that I didn't like the ending?).  The producers of this film
take you on a thrilling roller coaster ride and just as it is ending,
they pull the rug out from under you.  Films like SE7EN and THE USUAL
SUSPECTS can survive with this surprise ending because it is expected,
more or less.  We know it is going to end in an unpredictable way.
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, on the other hand, ends unpredictably, not from
us knowing a lot, but knowing nothing at all.  If that is confusing, I
recommend watching the film, and then reading that again.
As for the film overall, I enjoyed the entire first two hours, being
drawn in by a terrific character study and then adding the
supernatural plot to increase the tension build from the character
study.  The film runs like a well-built clock, slowly building until
finally exploding with a highly charged climax (and an unpredictable
one at that).  And then you settle in for a nice resolution, which
does not occur.  It was at this point that I felt cheated.  Taking us
on a terror ride of intrigue, we follow Kevin Lomax around, as he is
the centerpiece of the film.  Everything occurs from his perspective.
He is our representation on screen (sort of).  But we are forced to
witness a conclusion which makes most of the film seem like a game.  I
don't want to spoil the ending, so all I can say is go see the film
and decide for yourself.
Perhaps the most shocking thing about THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is the
extreme amount of everything.  It earned its R rating for a reason.
There is plenty of nudity, sex, violence, gore, and then you have
gore, violence, sex, and more nudity.  This film really isn't subtle
about anything, showing us everything.  It actually surprises me that
this film did not receive an NC-17 rating, as it is quite harsh.
However, the movie does have its merits, and nudity and sex are among
those.  I don't condone sex and nudity in films, but if its there, I
might as well enjoy it.  The biggest merit of this film is also the
most interesting to watch.  The confrontations between Kevin Lomax and
John Milton are entertaining, but what stands out amidst this extreme
hatred is the decline of the wife, Mary Ann.  Portrayed by the
extremely effective Charlize Theron, Mary Ann's problems are
incredibly intense, and I found myself wanting to witness her decline.
This may sound uncaring, but I wanted to watch because I felt sorry
for her.  She is the most interesting character on the screen, who is
forced into a world where she is not wanted.
Something THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE contained actually shocked me for
reasons other than extreme violence and nudity, especially for a film
of this nature.  The story actually has something to say about
humanity.  In one of the last scenes, John Milton explains to Kevin
Lomax the game God plays with his children (he is Satan, of course).
He comments that it is human nature to lust and loathe in vanity.
Then, God sets up rules which contradict human nature.  This
semi-religious bashing is more humorous than frightening.  What Milton
says is so true about our society that I found myself laughing out
loud, partially thinking it was funny, but patially realizing it was
true.  These moral dilemmas are present throughout THE DEVIL'S
ADVOCATE, giving it an added depth many films skip over in their
writing (but I'm sure they came straight from the novel it was based
on).  When a film has something to say about our society, it deserves
to be watched.
The cast of THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is one of the highlights, as we see
memorable faces, and they put spins on those memorable faces we don't
expect.  Heather Matarazzo makes a brief appearance as the terrorized
victim in the opening court case, and she does a great job.  Probably
the big surprise of this film is Keanu Reeves.  He has proven himself
an uneven actor (successes such as SPEED and bombs such as JOHNNY
MNEMONIC), but he tops himself with this performance.  I have never
seen him more believable to date.  Al Pacino is of course the scene
stealer.  His devilish performance is equal to those of Jack Nicholson
(THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK) and Max von Sydow (NEEDFUL THINGS).  He
could have easily gone too far over the top in many scenes, but he
remains completely believable (if that is the correct term).  Jeffrey
Jones (mostly known as the principal in FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF) also
gives a good performance as Eddie Barzoon.  Judith Ivey manages a
credible performance as the mother who holds a secret to Kevin's past.
Connie Nielson is very effective in her role, and she also appears
naked several times.  One familiar face with a twist was "Coach" star,
Craig T. Nelson, who gives a very good performance.
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is rated R for sexuality, nudity, violence,
language, and some gore.  At 144 minutes, this film moves along fairly
quickly.  For the first two hours, I sat completely engaged in the
good performances and strong characters.  The technical quality is
also remarkable, with great special effects and a good musical score.
Director Taylor Hackford has managed to create a very disturbing
motion picture, only to ruin a good chunk of tension with the final
fifteen minutes.  I guess my biggest problem with the ending is the
fact that I went into the theater expecting a disturbing film, and
Hackford gave me just that for a long time.  But just before the end,
he got jitterish and relied on the Hollywood safety net in order to
make his film more mainstream.  Personally, I would have preferred it
ending fifteen minutes early.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Max Scheinin
The idea at the center of The Devil's Advocate, which is, thus far, one of
the three or four best films of 1997, is that no matter what decision is
made, evil will triumph -- God is a trickster, Satan is a humanist -- "The
LAST humanist". He appears in many guises, and seduces many men and women
-- in his own words, "Vanity -- by far my favorite sin". Al Pacino plays
this role with relish, and gets to chew some delectable lines ("Lemme givya
a piece o' inside wisdom on God...","I have a million names..."), as John
Milton -- the devil. The main idea -- that he can appear as anyone, in any
form (in this case, a buisness man), harkens mainly back to Terry Gilliam's
The Time Bandits. But the film, is something else, something original. Part
of what makes it so very good, is that it never takes itself too seriously
-- it dabbles with morality, vanity, death, and child abuse, but doesn't
try to become any profound study of power. This is a marvelous confection
-- cocky, funny, thought provoking. It is also entertaining. There is no
way you could possibly predict the ending -- it pulls back upon itself,
drawing purely out of the mind's eye. The final shot is more creative, more
daring, more challenging, then anything in cinema since the white sock in
the Coen's Fargo. The central themes are fascinating (sometimes reminiscent
of James' The Turn Of The Screw, and Oates' Accursed Inhabitants of The
House of Bly), and the product that is built around it really wows. Its
nice to know that things like this are still being made. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 24 October 1997 with Lynne and Sandy for $8 at the Squire Cinemas,
Great Neck, NY
It was not too difficult to imagine, based on the commercials, to think
that Devil's Advocate was going to be crap. Seeing Al Pacino boiling Holy
Water with a single finger, who wouldn't? Happily, I wound up seeing one
of the more satisfying commercial vehicles of the year. It is not as
subtle as Rosemary's Baby, but is much more safisfying and sophisticated
than the classic Devil and Daniel Webster.
Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) is a prosecutor turned criminal lawyer who has
never lost a case on either end of the spectrum, who lives with his
devoted wife Mary Ann (Charlize Theron) in Florida. After ensuring the
freedom of his client--a pedophile junior high school teacher--he is
approached by a representative from a high-profile law firm in New York.
They offer everything--first class transportation, a huge salary, an
eight-room apartment in the posh Carnegie Hill neighborhood near Central
Park.  
In fact, isn't it a little weird that the entire building is inhabited by
members of the law fim? Boss John Milton has the penthouse atop the
spooky, urban haunted house. While Kevin thrives in the high-pressure
atmosphere and passes the tests before  him, his hitherto happy wife has
her reservations. She doesn't quite like being left on her own, shopping
wih the superficial, creepy wifes of the other associates, and wondering
if Kevin is sleeping with the slinky Christabella (Connie Neilsen). She
doesn't quite like her nightmares either--and neither will you. During a
visit, Kevin' Bible-quoting mother notices how poorly Mary Ann is doing;
Kevin does not.
Al Pacino's performance as John Milton (a/k/a The Devil) changes the whole
tone of the film whenever he appears on screen. The movie is well written,
but it seems especially well written for him. Larger than life (as Satan
should be, I guess), it is a joy to see his eyes and face light up
whenever he appears, whether he is luring Kevin into temptation, or
confronting a hooligan on the subway (the only way he will travel).
It is also gratifying to watch a basic morality story that does not hit
you over the head over and over again. Obviously the temptations offered
are evil, but watching how Kevin reacts to them, rationalizing them, helps
keep the film nicely paced. Like Young Goodman Brown, Kevin too will see
demons  everywhere.
Brava to Roberta J. Holinko, the set decorator. Milton's office and
apartment are as wide as widescreen will allow, and decorated appropriate
to his satanic position. Devil's Advocate shows a lush superrich side of
New York most people do not see, like the courtrooms with WPA murals, or
high-rise apartments with gilts wall and ceilings and spectacular views,
or offices that have Manhattan at your feet. A lot of churches appear in
this movie too, some of the most beautiful, cavernous ones Manhattan has
to offer. Yet, there is always a firey glow somewhere in the distance, or
down a hallway, to remind you what road you are on, even if the best
intentions are propelling you. 
All of this is so enjoyable, the ending(s) sort of take the wind out of
you as they hit you repeatedly over the head. There are other ways I would
have ended the movie. If you would like to know, email me and I will tell
you (sethbook@panix.com).

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
1) To get one of those apartments that overlook the Park, you either
have to be the Devil, or be in Satan's immediate employ.
2) The scene that most amazes New Yorkers is when Keanu Reeves goes off
to confront Satan at the end of the film.  He walks onto 57th Street,
near First Avenue.  57th Street is empty: you see nothing all the way
to the Hudson.  My reaction: "Damn, those are great special effects."
All in all, not a bad film.  The basic plot is this: Keanu, a hot shot
lawyer in Gainesville, FL, is hired by a big NYC law firm.  He's
treated like a prince, like an heir apparent.  There's the fab
apartment, vast amounts of money, rubbing shoulders with the Great and
Good of the land (Sen. D'Amato does a cameo; that he's in league with
Satan is unsurprising), etc.  He's assigned a big case: a wealthy real
estate magnate is suspected of killing wife and kids.  He's able to get
an acquittal, despite seriously believing that the man's guilty.
During the course of these events, his young wife is isolated in the
huge apartment, and she starts seeing weird things all over the place.
Weird dreams ensue, demons appear in mirrors, and so on.
I actually liked this film a lot.  The previews and the commercials
make it seem hokey, but it's pulled off well.  I also have a large bias
against Keanu being anything other than Ted (which, btw, was on TBS a
couple of weeks ago), but, unlike in, say, Johnny Mnemonic, he didn't
suck.  I suppose this was the first step in the road to redemption,
that eventually leads to The Matrix.  I watch "Buffy The Vampire
Slayer" in part for its idea of personifying high school trauma in the
form of vampires.  I suppose I can only appreciate this attempt to make
literal the idea of a defense lawyer selling his soul to get a guilty
client off.
One very nice touch: when Keanu's first in NYC (the city, by the way,
is in the "whore of Babylon" mode in the film), he's taken by Al Pacino
to the roof of the building (the office decor actually looks like a
well-lit Quake room, which merely means I've played too much Quake).
They bargain for his employment while strolling along the edge.  This,
I suppose, is a reference to the part when Satan tempts Christ in the
desert, the part when they go up on the mountaintop and Satan offers up
the dominion of the world.  Keanu, of course, accepts.  (This may be
one flaw with the film: Keanu accepts too readily; there's some moral
choice, but we don't feel it viscerally.  Keanu doesn't really fall, he
just sort of drifts down there.)
Actually, in a further divergence, I had a flashback to high school
English class, where, I think, we talked about Graham Greene or
Sommerset Maughin (sp?).  One of them extended the parable of Satan
tempting Christ with a final offer by Satan: "Go up on the cross, wear
a crown of thorns, and you will become the savior of mankind."  If I
recall, the passage goes on with Christ accepting, and Satan laughing
until his sides hurt, knowing all the wars and destruction that will be
committed in the name of god.  I'd like to read a similar thread in
this movie.  At the end, Al Pacino has grand plans for Keanu.  One can
read the sin of vanity into this, and the film's very neat ending.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DEVIL'S ADVOCATE ** 1/3  Directed by Taylor Hackford. Screenplay, Jonathan
Lemkin & Tony Gilroy, from the novel by Andrew Neiderman. Photography,
Andrzej Bartkowiak. Production design, Bruno Rubeo. Editing, Mark Warner.
Music, James Newton Howard. Cast: Keanu Reeves (Kevin Lomax) Al Pacino
(John Milton), Charlize Theron (Mary Ann Lomax), Jeffrey Jones (Eddie
Barzoon), Judith Ivey (Mrs Lomax), Craig T. Nelson (Alexander Cullen),
Connie Nelson Christabella), et al. A Warners release.144 min. R
(nudity,sex,blasphemy,possible incest)
In 1935, that great stylist and inventor of the Marlene Dietrich persona,
director Josef Von Sternberg, made "The Devil Is a Woman" from the French
novel " The Woman and the Puppet" (1898)  by Pierre Louys. The devil
(figuratively)was a heartless seductress played by Dietrich.
In 1997, Taylor Hackford ("An Officer and a Gentleman," "Against All Odds,"
"Dolores Claiborne") made "Devil's Advocate." The Devil is (literally) Al
Pacino. The advocate is Keanu Reeves as Gainesville, Florida, trial lawyer
Kevin Lomax. Kevin used to be a prosecutor who won all his 64 cases before
he switched to being a defender who never lost a single case. He seems to
have powers of observation that approach divination, especially for jury
selection and psyching. His insights get almost like semi-funny parodies of
Sherlock Holmes explaining his clues to Dr. Watson.
The films gets off to a good, slick start. Lomax defending a creepy high
school teacher accused of molesting a girl, wins again, even after
detecting that his client was guilty. The supporting roles are well cast
and played and so remain throughout the movie.
Before you can say "what the hell," an envoy from New York legal firm
recruits our Southern genius. His wife is pleased, his acutely religious
mother worries about his move to the New Babylon. In the Big Apple (shown
as the Colossal Apple) Kevin is impressed by what appears to be the biggest
and wealthiest firm on the planet.
The Boss is Pacino. His nom-de-film is John Milton, a too-cute literary
conceit  wasted on those audiences that never heard of "Paradise Lost."
Mr.Milton shows Lomax around, tempts him-- not on a mountaintop, but on the
roof of a dizzyingly tall building. The site, the sights, the legal
offices, everything else range from spectacular to awesome.  Lomax is
impressed by the red-carpet treatment. So is does his wife Mary Ann. (He
calls her Mare, which is a diminutive that has always bothered me). Kevin
and Mare are a beautiful couple, in love and into touchy-feelies. She's a
sexy blonde with just a soupcon of trashiness. In their new milieu of New
York they and we can almost smell the money. It's not the best of odors as
it is obvious that the firm is a shady international power with tentacles
all over the world. So what we have in the movie's first part is primarily
a big and unflattering expose, a kind of long, blackly humorous lawyer
joke.
The young couple's social education continues at a huge Who's Who party
that includes Senator D'Amato and boxing promoter Don King. To the credit
of Reeves and Theron, the young couple reacts with relative sobriety, even
as Milton does his seduction number on Mare and beautiful, law partner
Christabella, does hers on Kevin.
Milton tests Lomax with a case of a Haitian cited by the health authorities
for slaughtering a goat in a squalid basement, as part of his ju-ju. The
man,we learn,is worth 15 million dollars. (This is one loose end among
many). As expected, Lomax wins again. As expected, the sweet (?) smell of
success affects him, but he does not undergo a radical transformation.
Still, he changes enough for Mare to start feeling neglected and building
up a hatred of New York. She has frightening, off-on visions, flashes of
monstrosities. People are not what they seem. Mare, becoming unbalanced, is
on the road to insanity. The plot thickens to the coagulation point when
Milton decrees that Kevin is his choice to defend real-estate magnate
Cullen accused of a triple murder....
"Devil's Advocate" is a high pressure film, very flashy in all departments,
brilliant in photography and sets. The latter are grandiose, purposely
overdone, often tackily gaudy. Donald Trump's own monumental penthouse was
used for Cullen's. It is in monumentally bad taste.
Milton's abode is rich and strange. "Where does he sleep?"says Kevin. What
a naive question! We all know that the Devil never sleeps -- and here's the
rub. The audiences come to the movie knowing that Milton is the Devil, and
even if they are somehow unaware of this, watching the story makes it
obvious. From Chinese to Russian to Spanish Milton speaks all languages
fluently -- but not with a pure accent, which goes to show that even the
Devil would have a devil of a time with totally native speech. Or with
English grammar for that matter, as Pacino says "different than" instead of
"different from."
Milton knows what goes on everywhere (note the subway scene). Milton
switches easily from cajoling to flirting to advising to asserting
authority to all else. And throughout Pacino plays him in an over-the-top
way that attempts to be amusing but in practice can get tiresome. We get
clobbered by Pacino, mugged by his mugging, while Reeves goes to the other
extreme of playing in almost  minimalist style.
The movie, starting out as a lawyer thing, veers into a "Rosemary's Baby"
thing. But while "Rosemary" deals only with Satanism, "Devil" is vitiated
by its unholy mix of the social, the societal and the supernatural. The
latter is well executed thanks to morphing and masks and other visuals, but
since we know the answers, the surprises are for the eye, not the brain.
The supernatural defuses the real and the social, and vice versa.
The other mix, of would-be black humor, pathos or tragedy, doesn't really
work either. True, the movie is sufficiently twisty, visually imaginative
and stocked with enough shocks, so that with tolerance and ever-increasing
patience, the captive audience can keep going without yawns. But the big,
satirical punch-line that lurks  ( Who Needs the Devil When We Have
Lawyers?) is only perceived through a glass darkly, confused and diffused
by exaggerations.

Author
Jamie Peck
Warner Bros. / 2:14 / 1997 / R (language, violence, nudity, sex)
Cast: Keanu Reeves; Al Pacino; Charlize Theron; Jeffery Jones; Judith Ivey; Craig T. 
Nelson; Delroy Lindo 
Director: Taylor Hackford 
Screenplay: Tony Gilroy; Jonathan Lemkin 
Al Pacino plays none other than Satan himself in "The Devil's Advocate," but as 
insidiously campy as the resulting premise might sound, the movie is a cunning treasure 
rather than a guilty pleasure. Here's a black comedy-thriller that succeeds in earning 
both hearty laughs and jolting shocks, a probable crowd-pleasing synergy that should 
keep audiences packed into theater seats well into late autumn. 
"The Devil's Advocate" is Pacino's movie even if it does cast Keanu Reeves in the lead 
role. Reeves plays Florida lawyer Kevin Lomax, whose in-court prowess is proved when he 
single-handedly turns the tables on a young witness who is accusing his creep 
schoolteacher defendant of sexually molesting her. We get the feeling the guy did it, 
but Kevin gets him off regardless. Among the courtroom audience is an attorney from a 
powerful New York firm who has heard of Kevin's no-miss acquittal record and would very 
much like to recruit him. Kevin succumbs to the promise of financial solvency, and 
heads up north with his pretty wife Mary Ann (Charlize Theron of "2 Days in the Valley" 
and "That Thing You Do!") despite the objections of his Bible-thumping mother (dowdy 
Judith Ivey). 
Upon his arrival, Kevin quickly bonds with the firm's president, a rich, enigmatic man 
named John Milton (Pacino). Kevin is easily seduced into his new friend's world of 
wealth and power, but things are different for Mary Ann. After seeing frightening,
supernatural occurrences she can't explain (including glimpses of some of the partners' 
wives' faces changing briefly to something altogether sinister), she begins to doubt 
that everything is as perfect as it seems. Kevin dismisses her paranoia as anxiety over 
their lack of time to start a family and instead, focuses on a high-profile murder 
defense for a probably-guilty client (Craig T. Nelson) that could win him even more 
acclamation. 
Given that both the previews and the title give away the movie's central twist -- 
obviously that Milton is really the devil -- I had feared that the movie would fail at 
creating suspense and pretty much be a one-joke yarn. But what's so great about The
Devil's Advocate is how dramatic the material is. It matters less that Milton is Satan 
than what will happen to the two protagonists -- Kevin's temptation and redemption and 
Mary Ann's dilapidating stability take center stage here. The resulting mental 
tug-of-war between the three is scary, sexy and altogether superb, allowing a 
two-and-a-quarter-hour running time to speed by faster than the 93-minute "Playing 
God." 
Of course, the Ira Levin-esque story ("Rosemary's Attorney," perhaps?) is only made 
stronger by extremely lavish production values. The cinematography and set design, 
particularly Milton's sacrificial chamber-like office and the erotic mural that hangs
behind his desk, are dark, creepy and effective in establishing mood. James Newton 
Howard's score always teases upcoming surprises but never becomes manipulative. The 
movie even surprises in limiting its reliance on showy special effects, notwithstanding 
a spectacular end 20 minutes that caps off with one of the best closing scenes ever put 
to film. As things are playing out, you keep wondering how on earth a satisfying finale 
will be possible. Not only does it sate expectation, but it's also loaded with the 
genius downbeat-but-upbeat deviousness that sent "The Usual Suspects" into the send-off 
stratosphere. 
The acting from Pacino is exactly as suspected -- stellar. He eats (or burns) the 
scenery up, playing each horrific scene with a devilish smile that you can't help 
nodding at. He's got a number of great scenes, the best of which is probably when he 
calmly subdues a pair of vicious subway hoodlums. With this and "Donnie Brasco" under 
his belt this year, he's got two chances at Oscar gold. Theron is award-worthy too, 
fleshing out a character that a lesser movie would have employed as window dressing. 
She's beautiful and strong, and holds her own in scenes with Pacino. Reeves is the true 
surprise here. His on-again, off-again accent is a tad distracting, but Reeves 
accomplishes his best dramatic role to date. When the movie spins a nasty surprise past 
the three-quarter mark, he emotes beautifully. The directing by Taylor Hackford is 
seamless, as well as a fantastic follow-up to his exceptional 1995 thriller "Dolores 
Claiborne."
Like John Milton, "The Devil's Advocate" can be called so many things. It's Faust meets 
John Grisham. It's "Rosemary's Baby" for the age of legal extremes. It's a morality 
tale with one heckuva moral. "The Devil's Advocate" is all of these and more, rolled up 
into one fascinating, near-flawless movie. 
Å  1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Curtis Edmonds
 by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Imagine a movie with this premise:  After years of struggling with his
private law practice, a young Southern lawyer gets an opportunity to
work for a large New York law firm.  The work is absorbing, he feels the
need to prove himself to his partners, he likes the money -- so he
spends more and more time at work.  His wife, on the other hand, hates
New York, hates leaving her family and friends back home, hates the
people her husband works for and the New York social scene in which she
feels pressured to participate.  As her husband becomes more and more
engrossed in his job, she sees less and less of him and becomes lonely,
isolated and depressed.
The husband is handed the case all of New York is talking about, a
triple homicide committed by a wealthy and evil real estate developer.
As the evidence against his client mounts, however, the lawyer's wife
begins to deteriorate.  She begins to have hallucinations --
specifically, that the people her husband works with are possessed by
demons.  The lawyer must choose between the fame and fortune that will
come if he gets his wealthy, guilty client acquitted or dealing with his
wife's fragile mental health -- and then is forced to watch as his
choice goes tragically wrong.
Sounds like a great movie, doesn't it?  And it almost got made, too.
Unfortunately, this is not the movie we're reviewing today.  What we
have is The Devil's Advocate, starring Al Pacino as the Devil.  Pacino
is the senior partner at the New York law firm of the aforementioned
young lawyer (Keanu Reeves), and is trying to use the power of a
high-dollar silk-suit New York law firm to wreck the world.  (Not a bad
choice of tools, either.)
Reeves still can't act, and is not at all believable as a slick young
lawyer -- and especially not as a slick Southern lawyer (he never
masters the accent).  Let's not talk about him.  The heart of this movie
is two great performances, one from Pacino as Satan, and Charlzie Theron
as Reeves's neglected wife.  Both actors do a fine job -- however, their
hard work is ultimately wasted because somebody thought it would be a
good idea to put them both in the same movie.
Pacino is good in this movie because Pacino is good, period.  In the
climactic scene, where Pacino is revealed to be Lord of Hell, Pacino
gives a screaming, ranting polemic against God.  And he does such a good
job, and is so effective in the role, that it's not until after the
movie that you realize that what he's saying didn't make a word of
sense.  (I felt the same way about his rant at the end of Scent of a
Woman as well, if that tells you anything.)  Pacino isn't the best
screen Devil -- that would be Jack Nicholson in The Witches of Eastwick,
in my opinion -- but he's enjoying himself, he's a pro, and ultimately,
he's Al Pacino.
If Pacino is just living up to our high expectations, Theron surpasses
them.  We first see her as a Southern party girl, drinking, dancing and
romancing with her lawyer husband.  Later we see her as abandoned and
alone in an eight-bedroom apartment... and still later, heading down the
slippery slope to madness.  She goes from being completely superficial
and annoying to being heartbreakingly tragic in the course of this
movie.  It's an impressive performance in a very well-written part.
What makes The Devil's Advocate a flat failure is that it cheapens
Theron's performance.  By placing the blame for her collapse on Pacino's
diabolical schemes and manipulation instead of on Reeves, the filmmakers
have turned a potentially decent tragedy into a theater-of-the-absurd
black comedy.  There's a wonderful, haunting shot of Keanu Reeves
silently wandering down a digitally emptied New York street that should
have been the last shot in the movie.  Instead, it's just a segue into
the final supernatural confrontation with the Devil that's nothing more
than an excuse for Pacino to chew the scenery.
It's a shame that a really good performance by Theron, a really good
premise, and a really good town like New York (which looks wonderful)
gets wasted in a dumb, useless, John Grisham wannabe movie like this. I
suppose the filmmakers could say that "the devil made us do it", but I
doubt that he needed the help.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
Your Guide to the Hollywood Stock Exchange
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 145 minutes (2 hours 25 mins)
Starring Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino and Charliz Theron
Directed By Taylor Hackford
You can see straight away why Pacino decided to play the role of
John Milton in this below average shocker. That's because, of
course, he gets to play Satan himself, complete with rantings,
sticking out of tongue and menacing eyes. Sadly, although Pacino
seems to be having a good time with this film (probably because he
is getting paid to shout and scream), there is hardly any
entertainment here for the audience at all.
Reeves plays hotshot Florida lawyer Kevin Lomax, who has never
lost a case. After successfully defending a school teacher accused
of sexually abusing a schoolgirl, he is approached by an employee
of Milton law firm, who offer Lomax a job. Lomax accepts,
unaware that his boss, John Milton, is the Devil, played well, if a
bit over the top, by Pacino. Kevin's wife Mary Ann (Theron)
reliases that Milton is the devil long before Kevin does, but she
slowly goes crazy and then dies. It's then up to Kevin to confront
Milton in a showdown complete with shouting and over the top
special effects. 
The entire film is directed in a slapdash fashion by Hackford, with
many scenes looking messy, and badly planned and directed. The
acting, apart from Pacino, isn't too good either. Reeves is rubbish,
with his Florida accent disappearing and reappearing every so
often. Sometimes, he even seems to be mumbling his lines, with the
audience unable to work out what he is saying. And his face can't
show emotion, so we never really know what he's thinking or
feeling. Finally, all his lines are said in the same tone of voice, much
like David Duchovney of X-Files fame. Theron is marginally
better, but she dosen't really have to do much in the film, apart
from act mad, and cry a little. In fact, she is pretty much wasted in
the film, serving no real purpose whatsoever.
It's up to Pacino, then, to carry the film, and when he's on screen,
the film picks up. He seems to be having such a good time, the
audience starts to enjoy themselves aswell. Sadly, as soon as he's
off the screen, it's back to watching Reeves, who is boring,
unintresting, and totally inferior to Pacino. Also, the supporting cast
are unremarkable, with average performances from Jeffrey Jones
(Beetlejuice, 1988) and Craig T. Nelson (Poltergeist, 1982).
Even the god worshipping, religous character (in this case Kevin's
mother), usually hillarous in horror movies, is dully played by Judith
Ivey. 
Another problem with the film is that it can't make out what genre
it wants to be. The title, The Devils Advocate, immediatly
conjures up images of a horror movie. But the bulk of the film is
based on a court case, so The Devils Advocate is one of the
wierdist mish-mash of genres ever, the courtroom-horror. The
problem, though, is that the courtroom sequences are basic, and
the horror just isn't scary. The film should of made it's mind on
what genre it was going to be, and stuck to it.
Apart from Pacino's performance, there is one other thing that
saves the film from getting a one star rating. And it is, amazingly,
the special effects. Usually, effects make a film worse, but here,
they actually make the film better. They are subtle, actually quite
disturbing, and great fun. Sadly, there is some effect overkill during
the last twenty minutes, but they are used throughout the rest of the
film very well. 
The Devils Advocate, then, is not scary, not exciting, and
generally just not very good. As a vehicle for Pacino, it's perfect.
As an entertaining horror movie, or even courtroom drama, it falls
flat on it's face, due to poor scripting and underwritten, and
underplayed, characters (apart from Milton, of course). The
Devils Advocate, then, is hugely dissapoiting. 

Author
Nikki Lesley
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron, Jeffrey Jones,
Judith Ivey, Craig T. Nelson.
The Devil's Advocate's last 30 minutes or so are so much better than
the early sections of the movie that it's easy to forgive a lot of its
problems. I left the cinema with a real sense of enjoyment that
gradually fades as I remember the earlier pieces of the film.
First the trivial but distracting: Mr. Keanu Reeve's ache-saynt. It
wanders all over the fifty states of America. Because of the
storyline, his character, Kevin Lomax, had to be from the south so I
understand the need for the fake accent but it was distracting all the
same.
>From what I can tell by talking to other people, I'm in a minority
group who believes that Mr. Reeves can act. Now I'm not saying that
I'd pay money to see him play Hamlet but in the right role, I think he
is quite good.  Although not a great movie, I thought he was quite the
part in Chain Reaction and I think as the vain, cocky, pretty-boy
lawyer, he does a great job. He's less convincing as the anguished
husband but perhaps that's in character: as one who chooses his career
over his wife, time and time again, maybe deep down he's not all that
anguished.
Ms. Charlize Theron as Mary Ann gives a solid performance although
it's a pretty horrible role. I can see the attraction for an actor as
it allows the performer to run the gamut of emotions and really
stretch herself.  It's hard, however, to understand this person. If
she really is so lonely and bored, why doesn't she look for a job, try
to meet people, join a basketball team? As a result, Mary Ann's
progression through the movie is less sympathetic than it could have
been.
The other lead, Mr. Al Pacino as John Milton, was inspired
casting. This is the role Mr. Pacino was born to play. Schooled in the
tradition that if he's not hamming it up, he's not acting makes him
ideal for this role. His devilish grin, his wicked leer - he's having
the time of his life.
The main problem with this movie is the set-up. This is contrary to
most films. The majority of movies seem to have this great premise and
no idea how to end the story. The Devil's Advocate has this great
conclusion and has trouble working out how to set it up. It's too long
in getting to John Milton's big speech with too many little side
issues getting in the way, such as the story involving the Weaver
investigation. As well as being slow, there are large chunks of the
movie that just don't work. The cocktail party, for example, is saying
"look at me, I'm so clever" but the lines lack any zing and the whole
scene becomes a time waster. More frustrating is the scene where Eddie
Barzoon (Mr. Jeffrey Jones) is out jogging. John Milton delivers some
sort of speech during this event but I found it impossible to
concentrate on the monologue with all that was happening on the
screen.  Perhaps that was the intention of the film-makers but, if so,
it was a waste of two pages of the script.
Like all mainstream films, The Devil's Advocate has the male/female
double standard. We get lots of full frontal female nudity but no such
male scenes.  Also, as expected, God and Satan are male (you knew I
wasn't going to let that one pass).
Although outlandish and over the top, The Devil's Advocate poses some
interesting philosophical arguments, especially concerning the role of
God, the role of the Devil, free will and what is right. Of course, we
are only getting one side of the story here.  Be warned: although this
movie left me with a sense of enjoyment, it is a very gruesome,
violent film. It probably got its R rating for the nudity but the slit
throats and the bashings couldn't have helped.
Viewing The Devil's Advocate means sitting through a lot of tedium but
not going means you miss a great conclusion. Damned if you do and
damned if you don't!
Nicole Lesley             http://www.cs.usyd.edu.au/~nikki/        
Basser Department of Computer Science, University of Sydney
ph: (02) 9351 6098  rm: G90b    email: nikki@cs.usyd.edu.au        
Movie Reviews: http://www.cs.su.oz.au/~nikki/m_r/Intro.html

Author
Michael Dequina

The Devil's Advocate (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        Heard any good lawyer jokes lately?  Taylor Hackford's fantasy/morality
tale The Devil's Advocate starts out as a decent one but soon falls prey to
Hollywood excess and gimmickry.
        Keanu Reeves plays Kevin Lomax, a hotshot Florida attorney who is not
above anything to win a case, even (gasp) coming up with convincing
defenses for clients he knows are guilty.  This, of course, means he his
headed for the big-time, and the golden opportunity comes when he is
invited to join a lofty New York firm headed by the brash John Milton (Al
Pacino).
        As the poster's tagline goes, "The newest attorney at the world's most
powerful law firm has never lost a case.  But he's about to lose his soul."
 Known to every moviegoer going in, Milton is not only a bad guy, he is
_the_ bad guy--the Devil himself.  But it takes a while for Kevin to
realize this--and for director Hackford to explicitly suggest that he is.
As such, The Devil's Advocate comes in at a bloated two-hour,
twenty-plus-minute running time.  However, the film's setup is much more
interesting than the overblown payoff offered by Hackford and screenwriters
Jonathan Lemkin and Tony Gilroy.  Up until the climax, the obligatory
visual effects are fairly subtle, convincingly conveying the story's
fanciful elements while not undercutting its anchor in reality.  But the
Hollywood mentality of "more _is_ more" takes hold in the final reel, and
Hackford employs an extravagant and extremely extraneous array of effects
for the final showdown.  Similarly Hollywood are a couple of contrivances
that cap the picture.  The Devil's Advocate takes a pair of wild twists in
its conclusion, the last of which is a definite crowd-pleaser, but it also
makes no logical sense.  I will not give it away, but it reeks of blatant
audience pandering (and, perhaps, test screening tinkering), offering a
quick fix of enjoyment while simultaneously going against just about
everything that immediately preceded it.
        Reeves-bashing has become so commonplace that it can be seen as a critic's
easy way out, but, forgive me, I cannot resist here.  One of Reeves's worst
characteristics is his flat voice, and while punching it up with an accent
would seem like a harmless way of giving it a jolt, for Reeves it is
ruinous.  His Southern drawl is horrendous, not to mention inconsistent,
yet mercifully so--he is much easier to take when it disappears.  Another
common problem with Reeves is his inexpressiveness, which was perfect for
the action hero in the original Speed but is a huge hindrance in something
halfway-dramatic as this.  When some sign of emotion is called for, his
face appears to be under great strain, painfully contorting to shape an
expression of some affect.  Most of all, however, his natural blankness
makes Kevin's spiritual change from mostly good to bad barely noticeable;
the only difference I could make out between the "before" Kevin and the
"after" Kevin is that the "after" Kevin smokes.
        It comes as no shock, of course, that the lightweight Reeves can barely
hold his own with Pacino, who deserves billing over Reeves for the sheer
entertainment value of his performance if not his more illustrious career
and box office track record.  At first it is slightly disappointing to see
Pacino retreat to the broad theatrics of most of his recent work after the
beautiful subtleties of Donnie Brasco, but his shameless showboating is not
only called for here (after all, the Devil cannot exactly be restrained),
but a lot of fun.  The sole pleasure of the overdone climax is the sight of
Pacino throwing all caution to the wind and cutting completely loose: he
not only gets to act angry, sad, happy, and all points in between, he also
gets to do a song and dance.  Pacino has a blast, and it is hard for you
not to, either.  His sparkling presence really holds the picture together.
        More surprising, though, is Reeves's poor showing against up-and-comer
Charlize Theron, who plays Kevin's wife Mary Ann.  Theron has the largest
dramatic burden to bear--throughout the course of the picture, she has to
change from a naive, bleached-blond-and-permed bumpkin to a dark-haired,
severely distressed woman driven to the brink of insanity--and she carries
it with very little, if any, trouble.  She has a critical emotional gravity
that Reeves lacks during their more serious scenes, which belies her fairly
limited experience in film (and acting, for that matter).  It is amazing
that over the course of only four films in the past two years--2 days in
the Valley, That Thing You Do!, Trial and Error, and this--Theron has
displayed a greater depth and range than vet Reeves has in his entire career.
        Theron is great, Pacino is, too, and the film has a delicious, if
improbable, hook, but in the end The Devil's Advocate is a fable with a
fairly simpleminded moral--do the right, honorable thing.  It is a lesson
we have all been told before one way or another, and in a number of more
satisfying cinematic ways.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in you heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Walter Frith
Of all the notable actors who have portrayed Satan in the last decade or so,
among them Jack Nicholson in 'The Witches of Eastwick' (1987) and Robert
DeNiro in 'Angel Heart' (1987), none have captured the charismatic style
quite like Al Pacino has in 'The Devil's Advocate'.  The latest film from
director Taylor Hackford ('Dolores Claiborne', 'An Officer and a Gentleman',
'Against All Odds') uses conscience as a metaphor to tell an old fashioned
morality tale that avoids using cliches to transmit its dreamy message of
morality.  It uses each scene as a carefully thought out stepping stone to
reveal its real intentions late in its running time of 141 minutes.  Not
always on target but never boring, the audience is given clues to the film's
resolution in leading up to its chilling climax enhanced with some of the
most mind twisting visuals seen on film this year.
Keanu Reeves is a young, ambitious and talented defense attorney in Florida
who has never lost in over 60 cases he's been associated with and upon
representing one client whom everyone believes will be convicted, Reeves gets
him off and meets a representative from a New York City law firm who has been
scouting his talents and persuades him to travel to Manhattan with all
expenses paid to meet the firm's mentor (Pacino) in an attempt to obtain his
services.  Reeves agrees and along with his wife (Charlize Theron), they are
introduced to a world which seems alien to them but the goodies seem to
attractive to resist.  As the film progresses there is a feeling that
something is not quite right in their lives and the wife wants to leave.
 Reeves tells her that his career is going well and that leaving is out of
the question.
The first thing that should be said about this film is noting the progression
of Keanu Reeves as an actor of some merit.  Although his southern accent is
sometimes used inconsistantly in the movie, he holds his own for the most
part with any other actor in the picture and is totally convincing as a fiery
lawyer.  He is the reason the courtroom sequences in the film are so
pleasantly executed and director Taylor Hackford has extracted a complex and
multi dimensional performance from Reeves.  As for Pacino, what can you say
about an actor who has triumphed at every role he's ever played.  Even in his
films that have bombed in both a critical and financial manner, Pacino always
burns up the screen with his authoritative manner and disciplined command of
character.  Portraying Satan is another triumph for Pacino who delivers a sly
and slightly over the top performance.
If you are turned off by movies which deal heavily in explicit and
supernatural gore and violence and are offended by openly sexual scenes and
nudity then 'The Devil's Advocate' should be avoided because the film is
shockingly explicit on all of these counts but for others it will scorch your
senses with an original twist but it has an ending which may leave you cold
and unconvinced but it's still a good ride most of the way.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Apart from the enormously entertaining finale, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE
is one Hell of a long sit.  Keanu "Now you know why I avoid ocean lin-
ers" Reeves plays a hotshot Florida attorney with an unbroken winning
streak and one small problem to go along with it:  he's increasing
sickened by the scum that he's chosen to defend.  Before he can reflect
on the matter-- or at least give a call to Dr.  Laura-- he's offered a
dream job in New York City, at a high-powered law firm, where he and his
doting wife (Charlize Theron) are given personal attention by the found-
er, John "Paradise Lost" Milton (Al Pacino), a cackling, charismatic
character who keeps a fire burning in every room, prefers to travel
underground, and seems willing to grant their each and every imaginable
desire.  Hmmmm, could this be... Satan?
     If you didn't catch the tell-all trailer, director Taylor Hackford
(DOLORES CLAIBORNE) flashes the secret sign at least a double-dozen
times.  All the usual tricks are trotted out-- quoted scripture,
religious imagery, exaggerated sound effects, and, even, a handful of
mighty morphin' power demons.  (The latter are first imagined/ actually
seen by the wife, whose sanity starts to go the moment that she sets
foot into their enormous Park Avenue apartment.) The director doesn't
sustain that sinister sense of dread, though, and that's one of the
fundamental problems right there.  The other is an imbalance in plot:
we get too much of Reeve's character and not enough of the wife.  She
descends into madness much too quickly, while it takes forever and a day
for him to come back to the moral crisis that got him into trouble in
the first place.  (Of course, it doesn't help that Reeves is entirely
wrong for the role.  He doesn't have the swagger that the role requires.
Hell, he isn't even fully awake in every scene.)
     Damned by a flabby midsection and a stiff leading man, THE DEVIL'S
ADVOCATE is saved by a strong supporting cast (Heather Matarazzo, Craig
T. Nelson, Don King, etc.), sumptuous set design (by Bruno Rubeo), and
Pacino's command performance as ol' Scratch.  Al plays it cool for most
of the movie-- a leer here, a flickered tongue there.  For the grand
finale, though, he throws the door wide open.  You can almost hear the
director yelling "more!  more!" as Pacino abandons any remaining notion
of restraint, tearing into a priceless monologue that allows us to
finally hear what the Big L. has to say on the subjects of God ("he's a
sadist"), love ("biochemically, it's no different than eating large
quantities of chocolate"), and man ("guilt is like a bag of fucking
bricks.  All you gotta do is set it down").  Even Reeve's mush-mouthed,
come-and-go Southern accent can't ruin the moment.  I haven't been this
grandly entertained in months.

Author
Tim Voon
What started out as a standard court room drama, took a turn for the
worse when the subject material went from weird to out right bizarre. In
fact much of the material is quite sickening if one has time to
contemplate it. The Devil is not just an allegory for someone evil in
this movie, the evil is actually THE DEVIL himself in flesh and blood.
Let's talk about bizarre. Keanu Reeves, the advocate, lawyer character
in this movie, is trying to make a baby with his wife on the lounge room
floor. As this is occurring the image of his wife keeps flipping between
her and another mysterious woman. He's confused at first, there is
hesitancy in his eyes, but then he really starts coming and going. His
wife is receptive, the other woman aggressive, it begins to turn him on
as he loses himself in this three way fantastic orgy. The only thing of
note about this entirely depraved scene is that Keanu Reaves has a hairy
bum.
If you were brought up in the Catholic, Christian, Jewish or Muslim
faith, then you may find the end scenes difficult to handle. The Devil
(Al Pacino) has a field day mocking God and some of the words spoken are
nothing short of blasphemous. So be warned. Issues like spawning the
Anti-Christ through incestuous relations between the devil's seed are
prominent themes in the movie. Not to mention sex, mutilation, nudity,
lunacy, suicide and any evil thing you can think off. If you can excuse
all of this, or if you like this sought of thing, then you will probably
enjoy the movie. Personally it's not something I could stomach.
Al Pacino does an over the top performances as the Devil. I feel of late
that he has been overacting with most of his movie roles. As for Keanu
Reeves, his is actually quite good in this movie, and this is probably
his best performance since Â…Â….well since Â….. BILL AND TED??? I
personally disliked the content of this movie, much more so than its
make. This is not a movie for those with strong religious convictions.

Author
Randy Turgeon
A hotshot lawyer gets an obviously guilty child molester acquitted, and
shortly after during the victory celebration gets offered an opportunity to
show his prowess in New York City. The lawyer, Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves)
is not offered a job yet, he is asked to simply pick a jury. He accepts.
The jury he selects work out well and before long he is offered a job with
the firm. Making his decision easy is the fact that not only is he offered
big money, but a gorgeous apartment. He convinces his wife, Mary Ann
(Charlize Theron) to make the move to New York.
The first case given to him is a big test; a "winless" case concerning a
man who sacrifices animals in his basement. The charge was health code
violations and Kevin once again shows his skill and earns an acquittal. His
new boss and partner in the firm, John Milton (Al Pacino) is quite
impressed and takes Kevin under his wing, explaining many of his
philosophies on law, women and sex, and angles the promise of a blissful,
wealthy life. Kevin's next case is a dream case, given to him by Milton
himself (much to the chagrin to his colleagues), defending a triple murder
suspect who has had a history of problems with the law. 
Although Kevin's career is taking off, his home life is not doing very
well. Mary Ann is starting to have numerous problems. She is experiencing
severe depression over Kevin's long hours, and before long is having
horrible dreams and hallucinations of people turning into ghouls, their
faces becoming horribly disfigured. Kevin does not help matters by
dismissing his wife. He does not spend more time with her as he explains to
Milton that he needs to spend as much time on the case as possible to get
it over with, then focus all of his attention on his wife. Not helping
matters is the fact that Kevin is having ideas about a possible affair with
a sexy lawyer (Connie Nielson) also working with the firm. 
Mary Ann falls deeper into her madness as Kevin spends more time away from
home. Kevin eventually looses control of his life and has to
institutionalize his wife, and gets disturbing news from his mother (Judith
Ivey) about the mystery concerning the identity of his father. He also
starts to lose control of his case.
Kevin learns that all of his problems have been caused by the work of one
man. That man is his boss, Mr. Milton, a truly evil character who just may
be the devil himself. Kevin must somehow confront Milton and thwart
whatever diabolical plan he has in store. But how do you defeat the devil? 
Why is it that most courtroom scenes in the movies are absurd? Do
filmmakers really believe that "normal" courtroom drama doesn't fit the
bill and they have to juice them up? The courtroom scenes in this movie
would never happen in a real courtroom, which wouldn't have been too bad if
it weren't Keanu Reeves trying to pull it off. I give Reeves credit for
trying hard, but throughout the movie I never saw the Kevin Lomax
character, just an actor trying very hard to play Kevin Lomax and coming up
short. Charlize Theron defines the term "over-the-top" in her performance
as Mary Ann Lomax, a disappointment in contrast to her good performance in
"2 Days in the Valley".
The only good performance in the movie is by Al Pacino, but I kept asking
myself what the heck he was doing in this mess? Maybe he felt it would be
interesting playing the devil, and you can tell he is having fun doing so,
but his skill as an actor cannot save the poor performances and lackluster
script that surround him. It's pretty standard stuff, including the fact
that the hotshot lawyer appears to be the only competent person on the
planet who can do anything right in the courtroom.
Please read no further if you do not want the ending spoiled, but I have
to get something off of my chest. In 1986 I remember watching a movie
called "Wisdom" with Emilio Estevez and Demi Moore, and the ending of that
film did the worst possible thing that a movie could do. What I like to
call "Guess what, it was all a dream" scenario. In "Wisdom" the two lead
characters are killed at the end, only to have one of the characters "wake
up" from an apparent and say "Gosh, I'm glad that didn't really happen!". I
considered it inexcusable the way the audience was toyed with. Well, the
same thing happens in "The Devils Advocate", and although arguments could
be made surrounding whether it was actually a dream (perhaps Milton went
back in time to try a different route for his plan, since it failed and he
is the Devil), but the point is that the last 90% of the film didn't
happen. I know it's a stretch, after all it is a movie and nothing really
happened, but I just get annoyed to get toyed with like that.
Of course, the dream ending could almost be forgiven if the story that
precedes it was at least an interesting one. As I recall, "Wisdom" was a
decent film. "The Devil's Advocate" is not.
Directed by Taylor Hackford
John Milton..................Al Pacino
Kevin Lomax................Keanu Reeves
Mary Ann Lomax...........Charlize Theron
Mrs. Lomax..................Judith Ivey
Eddie Barzoon...............Jeffrey Jones
Christabella..................Connie Nielson
Written by Randy Turgeon, March 18, 1998.

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Satan. Lucifer. BeÃ«lzebub. De duivel heeft vele namen en sinds kort kun
je daar een nieuwe bij toevoegen. Het is een acteur dieschitterde in
films als "The Godfather", "City Hall" en "Donnie Brasco". Ik heb het
natuurlijk over Al Pacino, die in "The Devil's Advocate" een nieuwe
definitie geeft aan het woord 'overacting'. Want niemand kan de duivel
zo neerzetten als Pacino. 
Keanu Reeves is Kevin Lomax, een in Florida wonende advocaat die nog
nooit een zaak verloren heeft. Na weer een zaak gewonnen te hebben,
wordt hij benaderd door een medewerker van een groot bedrijf, die erg
geÄnteresseerd in hem is. Hij krijgt een groot bedrag aangeboden en even
later vertrekt hij met z'n vrouw Mary Ann Lomax (Charlize Theron) naar
New York, de stad waarin het bedrijf gevestigd is. 
Daar aangekomen ontmoet hij John Milton (Al Pacino), de man waar hij
voor moet gaan werken. Milton biedt hem alles wat z'n hartje begeert:
een groot appartement, veel geld en grote uitdagingen. Lomax accepteert
dit maar al te graag en werkt zich kapot om zo aan de wensen van Milton
te voldoen. Mary Ann weet dat er iets niet klopt. Zij krijgt visioenen
van monsters en probeert niet haar verstand te verliezen 
Helaas is er niks meer aan te doen. Langzaam maar zeker takelt Mary Ann
af, totdat er niks van haar overblijft dan een zielige, zieke vrouw. Ook
Lomax' moeder (Judith Ivey) is zich bewust van het kwaad en porbeert hem
nog te waarschuwen. Lomax trekt zich nergens wat van aan, maar als Mary
Ann eenmaal gek is geworden, ziet hij dat 'ie te ver is gegaan. 
"The Devil's Advocate" is een ervaring op zich. Het verhaal is bijzonder
goed geschreven, heeft veel plotwendingen en maakt gretig gebruik van
Bijbel-citaties. Keanu Reeves is verrassend goed en Charlize Theron laat
zich van haar allerbeste kant zien. Maar hoe goed deze acteurs ook mogen
zijn, veteraan Al Pacino is degene die zich helemaal in z'n rol kan
uitleven. Niet alleen krijgt hij juweeltjes van monologen
voorgeschoteld, ook heeft hij de mooiste vrouwen tot z'n beschikking,
waarmee hij Reeves naar de donkere zijde probeert te halen. 
Dat is ook te zien in de climax van deze film, die werkelijk fantastisch
is, qua script en special effects. Reeves moet in deze scene een
moeilijke beslissing nemen en ik kan alvast zeggen: de uitkomst is
verrassend. Maar meer zeg ik ook niet, want "The Devil's Advocate"
blijft je tot het einde verrassen. Als alleen maar dat allerlaatste shot
was weggelaten... 
And you can find my film reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Martijn+van+Turnhout

Author
Alex Fung

THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE (Warner Bros. - 1997)
Starring Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron, Jeffrey Jones,
  Judith Ivey, Connie Neilsen, Craig T. Nelson
Screenplay by Jonathan Lemkin and Tony Gilroy, based on the novel by
  Andrew Neiderman
Produced by Arnold Kopelson, Anne Kopelson, Arnon Milchan
Directed by Taylor Hackford
Running time: 144 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Given current popular sentiment, it's almost a cliche to depict
   lawyers as the underlings of Satan, but such is the case in Taylor
   Hackford's THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, a delightfully glorious romp that
   begins with a simmer and culminates with a devastatingly impudent
   climax, only to ultimately boil over with a disappointingly
   unsatisfying conclusion.
   The protagonist of THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is young defense attorney
   Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves), who seems to have everything going for
   him at the film's opening: a beautiful wife Mary Ann (Charlize
   Theron), and perhaps most importantly from his perspective, a
   thriving and successful practice.  Kevin's courtroom record is
   unblemished, and it doesn't take long to understand why in an
   audaciously funny opening sequence which sees him defending a
   schoolteacher charged with molestation.  As victimized schoolgirl
   Barbara (Heather Matarazzo, perfectly cast as the hapless, awkward
   witness -- I kept waiting for the jury to burst into a spontaneous
   chorus of "Wiener Dog!") recounts her accusation, any question Kevin
   may have of his client's innocence vaporizes when the defendant
   virtually salivates in arousement at her tale.  Nonetheless, Kevin
   puts aside any moral qualms to ruthlessly cross-examine Barbara and
   ultimately win his client's acquittal.
   Kevin's good, but there's only so far he's going to go in
   Gainesville, Florida.  Fortunately, a bigger fish has been keeping a
   watchful eye on his progress, and soon enough Kevin is lured by a
   flatteringly generous offer and lushly exorbitant new Fifth Avenue
   digs to New York, where he joins the powerful firm of Milton,
   Chadwick and Waters.  Falling under the wing of enigmatic senior
   partner John Milton (Al Pacino), Kevin is put on the fast track to
   the top with a series of difficult and intriguing defense cases and
   becomes single-mindedly devoted to his work, oblivious of Mary Ann's
   slow meltdown.
   Although it's not explicitly revealed until the end of THE DEVIL'S
   ADVOCATE, it's quite apparent from the outset (and the promotional
   trailers for the film make no attempts to hide this fact) that Milton
   is the Devil.  Even Milton himself performs little subterfuge to
   disguise his alter-ego, continually emphasizing his demonic qualities
   with his wild-eyed stares and gleeful looks -- I particularly liked
   the scene in the restaurant where he adjusted his dress shirt collar
   up to resemble the traditional devil's cloak.  While in this respect
   THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is fun in its recklessness, I wonder how the
   film would have played out had it been more coy with its
   machinations.  Due not only to the promotion of the film, but of the
   horrific hallucinations undergone by Mary Ann relatively early on,
   there's no real sense of intrigue and no involvement required in
   order to decipher what's occurring in the film; it's simply nothing
   more than a thrill ride.  As the conclusion of THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE
   nears, only Kevin is in the dark with respect to Milton's true
   nature, and his ignorance comes across more as incredulous than
   sympathetic.
   Still, Mr. Pacino makes the devilish role his own, and this is a
   terrific piece of casting for THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE.  While a few
   actors come to mind as possessing the sort of look and acting chops
   to portray the Prince of Darkness -- Jack Nicholson, for one, and I
   could certainly envision a demonic Jeremy Irons -- Mr. Pacino is
   perfect in the part because he makes The Devil so much, for lack of a
   better word, fun.  This is the perfect outlet for the scenery-chewing
   which has been plaguing many of his recent performances; here, such
   an over-the-top approach is entertainingly beneficial, as opposed to
   a hindrance.  By the end of the film, I was basking in wicked delight
   at Milton's unrestrained theatrical rants, and blasphemously rooting
   as much for Mr. Pacino's witty Antichrist as I was for Mr. Reeves'
   bland hero.
   Mr. Pacino seems to relish every minute of his role, and delves into
   the part with great enthusiasm.  He's way over the top with his
   now-customary bellowing, grandiose gestures, and plenty of demonic
   grins galore, while Mr. Reeves, despite a Southern accent which
   wavers into every third reel and then abruptly disappears, does some
   of the best work I've ever seen from him.  His physical performance
   severely outclasses his line delivery -- he often recites his
   dialogue with distractingly little conviction -- but he's not a
   liability here.
   Ms. Theron's attempt at a Southern accent is far better (particularly
   considering she's from South Africa), but it's disappointing that
   she's saddled with such a generic and uninteresting role: the
   obligatory wife who cries neglect (although at least in THE
   DEVIL'S ADVOCATE she gets to combine this with the person-in-the-know
   staple).  She often has a startling resemblance to Ashley Judd, which
   is perhaps emphasized all the more in that her performance in the
   film echoes back to some of Ms. Judd's earlier work -- Ms. Theron's
   scene in a church is eerily similar to Ms. Judd in NORMA JEAN &
   MARILYN, while Ms. Theron's portrayal of her character's breakdown
   is brings back memories of Ms. Judd's emotional volatility in John
   McNaughton's NORMAL LIFE.
   Judith Ivey's role, as Kevin's mother, is even more frustratingly
   generic: a bible-thumper whose purpose it is to serve on the polar
   opposite axis to all of the film's demonic aspects.  You dread her
   solemn recitation of some gravely-worded scripture-referenced
   warning, because you know she's ultimately going to be proven
   correct.  Still, as insufferable as her character is, it's worth it
   for a deliciously funny scene where Mrs. Lomax and Milton awkwardly
   share an elevator ride.
   THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE builds up to a wonderful, if excessively
   visually extravagant, conclusion which is deliriously operatic in
   nature and genuine high camp in style.  I was stunned and thrilled by
   the sheer fearless temerity of the film's climax -- no American film
   had delivered such a similarly nihilistic knockout blow which left me
   as thunderstruck since David Fincher's SE7EN -- so I was consequently
   crestfallen that the film badly drops the ball and kicks it away with
   a final coda which can only be classified as condescending and
   absurd.  After teasing at a provocative and daring conclusion, THE
   DEVIL'S ADVOCATE buckles under and provides an epilogue which lacks a
   fraction of the bite.
   Technically, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is terrific to look at: Andrzej
   Bartkowiak's cinematography is superb, and the much-ballyhooed
   production design by Bruno Rubeo is extremely impressive, from the
   spectacular rooftop scene to the inventive design of Milton's office.
   The film is cast remarkably well, although I'd have liked to see
   Delroy Lindo (curiously unbilled as a animal-sacrificing voodoo
   practitioner whom Kevin defends) and Craig T. Nelson (as Alexander
   Cullen, a smarmy real-estate tycoon whom Kevin defends on a murder
   charge) swap roles.
   Mr. Hackford's helming on THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is generally solid,
   although the film's build-up is a bit too long.  There are too many
   scenes which involve Mary Ann complaining about neglect and Kevin
   defending himself, and a sequence where Jeffrey Jones' Eddie Barzoon
   character on the run from Milton is particularly ineffective, given
   that his fate is a foregone conclusion.  Mr. Hackford also goes a bit
   overboard with the use of time-lapse photography to generate an
   ominous atmosphere, showing days and nights on each other's heels as
   storm clouds zip through the sky.  Once or twice is enough, but after
   this technique is reused over and over, I felt like I was watching a
   7th grade science class film, and was hoping that he might insert
   time-lapse footage of a seedling sprouting from the earth and
   blooming into a flower or something of that sort.
   All the same, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is good fun for the most part and
   it's highly amusing to watch Mr. Pacino run rampant in a film which
   provides the proper context for his unbridled theatrics.  There's a
   scene where alluring Christabella (Connie Nielsen) interrupts a
   gleeful Milton rant with an unamused "Shut up.  You talk too much."
   What, and lose the most entertaining element of the film?
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Don't leave this girl alone with any handsome deaf-mutes Marty, that's my
 advice to you." - Parker Posey, THE HOUSE OF YES

Author
Alex Ioshpe
"..Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
To reign is worth ambition through in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heaven!.."
- John Milton
  Despite of its misleading title, "The Devil's Advocate" is a shocking and
inspiring thriller, visually beautiful as well as thought provoking. The
Devil has been portrayed thousands of times throughout the years. Every year
Hollywood produces countless movies about the Evil One. Yet, there has not
been a single film or book (besides "Rosemary's baby" ) that was good enough
to be called interesting. Most of what we see about the subject is either
regular horror films, that despite of their primitive premiss take
themselves too seriously, or we watch action films of supernatural forces
where the Devil is nothing more than a foul beast. In either case 90% of
these movies are pure cliches - dumb and predictable. When I went out to see
"The Devil's Advocate" I was expecting one of the two "genres" mentioned
above. I got neither. What I saw was a fabulous, intelligent and amazing
film, which engages both heart and mind. The first surprise was the cast,
which can boast of Keanue Reeves, Charlize Therone and Al Pacino. Only the
fact that some of the most famous, and not to mention, talented actors of
our time agreed to star in this film immediately draws your attention.
Throughout the picture, you start realizing the unusual complexity of the
story and script.
Kevin Lomax (Reeves) is a success in the courtroom and out of it. He's a
young Florida defense attorney who has never lost a case. No matter how
repugnant the crime, no matter how guilty the defendant, Kevin Lomax has the
power to mesmerize the jury into accepting his arguments, buying into his
logic, being convinced by his charisma; and freeing his clients. Soon after
he has successfully won the case, where he defended an obviously guilty
child molester, Lomax is invited to New York, where a powerful law firm has
become aware of the Florida hotshot's acquittal record. Here he meets John
Milton (Al Pacino), the founder and head of "Milton, Chadewick, Waters", a
mysterious and powerful law firm with contacts and clients all over the
world. It is this charismatic and charming man that opens the door to a
completely different world; a world of luxury and pleasure, wealth and
power; a world of endless possibilities. This is heaven on earth. But as
Lomax tastes the power of being a wealthy New York attorney, something in
him changes. Winning is no longer just a goal; it becomes an obsession. Soon
he starts to realize that things are not what they seem to be; and all the
things he once had and cared about -a happy marriage with Mary Ann (CHARLIZE
THERON), his relationship with his mother, all his happiness - everything
disappear amidst the sparkling illusion of paradise. He suddenly realizes
that Heaven and Hell can coexist..at the same place and at the same time.
I do not intend to reveal anything else, since all of the interesting
surprises will be presented in the intense and inspiring climax. 'The
Devil's Advocate' is a story about some characteristically American values:
ambition, drive, materialism. Going after success and its trappings is a
classic American male behavior, and Kevin Lomax shows us what can happen
when that behavior gets out of hand. Winning has become such a core value in
our culture that we never stop to consider the consequences of our own
actions. This is a story about a man that has always been a winner and was
rewarded for it with the kind of things that winning brings - wealth and
power. At the end he realizes that winning may not always be the best thing,
but then it is too late. The characters in this film are both complex and
real, partly because of the good writing, partly because of some wonderful
performances by every actor. This is probably Reeves' best performance. He
manages to create a believable character - a kind of example, a role model
for the American way of life. Kevin's wife, Mary Ann is most likely the
hardest character to play, since she goes through a complex and difficult
emotional evolution. From being strong, devoted and ambitious (a female copy
of her husband) to vulnerable, hurt and on the verge of madness. Charlize
Theron gracefully floats into this character. The most interesting of
performances and characters is John Milton - the essence of Kevin Lomax's
temptation. The invitation by a modern-day Satan to enter a world,
represented by the excess of our most worldly pleasures. Al Pacino is
nothing less than astonishing, an award worthy performance that is as good
as anything seen this year. His power and presence is felt everywhere
throughout the film, even where he is not present. This eerie and unsettling
feeling is one of the elements that help creating the movie's intense and
frightening atmosphere. At the same time he provides the most entertaining
moments and colorful quotes. I can't imagine an audience not smiling when he
screams out: "I am a humanist!" . And the fact that Milton's law firm is
involved in all the dirty business, from drugs and money laundering to
murder, doesn't prevent the Devil to call himself John Milton, who is the
author of the most brilliant epic about Christianity. This is entertaining
by itself.
 As I have said previously, the major difference from the other films with
diabolical themes, is the complexity of the story. The Devil is not shown as
a ugly monster with red eyes. And the purpose of his existence is not to
posses innocent children. One of the many interesting things in this film is
the fact that the Devil is never really pulling the strings by himself --
he's giving people their choice, their free will to decide -- a demon whose
world is our own, with all its mundane events. He appears in human form and
presents human choices, and his greatest lure is what we have in common with
him: our greed, ego, jealousy, competitiveness, lust, dishonesty.  Another
thing is that the director is very careful to not let the monster out of the
box, so to speak, by using any images that are obvious. Things appear and
disappear in a moment; sometimes they seem real and sometimes they seem like
a bad dream, so that when the events in the story actually do emerge into
reality, the Lomaxes don't know what's real and what isn't anymore. The
third element is the fabulous production design, grand art direction and
rich cinematography. These elements help creating a strange and surreal
world - heaven and hell almost floating into each other. Hell is here not a
blackness, haunted by ghosts and monsters, but the rarified world of New
York's ultra-wealthy and privileged society.
After a thought provoking finale, I sat amazed by what I have seen. If you
are looking for entertainment, action and ugly monsters, this is not the
right answer for you, but if you are interested in a more serious and
inspiring film experience, this is a spectacular and meaningful movie that
is well worth your money and time.
"..There is no greater calamity than lavish desires.
There is no greater guilt than discontentment.
And there is no greater disaster than greed.."
- Lao-Tzu


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Kevin Lomax is one terrific lawyer.  He has an uncanny way of
sizing up prospective jury members and knowing who will be sympathetic.
Sixty-four cases in Florida and he has not lost a case.  It does not
matter if the defendant is guilty or innocent, good guy or scumbag--if
Kevin prosecutes the defendant is found guilty; if he defends, the
verdict is innocent.  People start to notice.  Someone who has noticed
is John Milton, the head of a prestigious and extremely powerful New
York law firm.  Milton is a slick and charismatic lawyer.  He is in bed
figuratively with the rich and powerful.  He is in bed literally with
sleek and the sexy.  And his gifts to those he likes are nearly
everything that are really worth having.  Impressed with Lomax and his
wife Mary Ann (Charlize Theron), Milton is anxious to bring Kevin into
the firm, to use his genius, to pay him in money, with a palatial
apartment, to see Kevin's every sexual fantasy fulfilled. Mary Ann is
at first overjoyed at the success her husband is having and is willing
to give up some of his time and his intimacy for the success that is
everything she could not get back in Gainesville.  But a bit at a time
she discovers that her husband is making too many sacrifices of what
she shared with him and giving it to the firm.  Kevin never worried
about being a scrupulous lawyer in the past, but this job is taking too
much of a toll on his soul.  As he gets pulled deeper and deeper into
defending the guilty, Mary Ann is slowly disintegrating and Kevin is
powerless to stop it.  THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is a good old- fashioned,
well-plotted horror film in the style of the horror films of the 60s
and 70s.  No geysers of blood or crazed stalkers.  The first half hour
could be from a John Grisham novel.  Then weird things start happening.
The law firm seems to have its hands in evil, not just figuratively,
but also literally.
     In the past I have not been fond of Keanu Reeves's acting which I
generally find wooden.  Here perhaps that quality works to his
advantage, both to contrast to Al Pacino and to present the feeling
that there is something mysterious going on in his mind that we cannot
quite fathom.  And if there is not quite enough going on the screen
with Reeves's performance, there is more than enough supplied by
Pacino.  Pacino is far more expressive in part because his character
can afford to be.  He gives a high-energy performance that would steal
a scene from a puppy.  There are, however, two scenes in the film when
he turns the performance up too high and he goes into overload mode.
One is a pivotal scene involving the character played by Jeffrey Jones;
the other time is an extended scene very near the end of the film.
Both times his performance gets to be just a bit overripe.  Charlize
Theron is rather nice as the incredible dissolving wife. Also nice to
see is an uncredited part by the always watchable Delroy Lindo.  The
acting is all brought together by Taylor Hackford, who previously did
the under-rated THE IDOLMAKER, as well as AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN
and DOLORES CLAIBORNE.  The set design by Roberta J. Holinko is very
nice with some really memorable artwork.  Other effects by Rick Baker
are perhaps not up to some of his finest, but are still very worth
seeing.
     This may not be the most intelligent film of the autumn season,
but it stands among the best horror films we have seen on the screen in
the last few years.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Redman
Al Pacino is one actor that usually looks as if he is enjoying his job. His
over-the-top performances are a joy to behold and this one is about as hot as
they get. Think Scent Of A Woman meets Rosemary's Baby.
Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) is a southern lawyer who just can't lose a case.
Recruited by big city lawyer John Milton (Pacino in a not very subtly named
role) for his law firm, Lomax is unaware that he is in for the ride of his life.
Everyone who's seen the previews knows that Milton is actually old Scratch
himself and out to seduce the young idealistic attorney over to the dark side.
And the wrong path has never looked so inviting. Satan lives the good life
rolling in the dough in a penthouse apartment with a gorgeous babe on each arm.
Until the finale, the special effects are kept to a minimum, but well used.
People change to demons out of the corner of your eye for just a second. Other
scenes drip with evil and sex which is one of the aspects that made me a bit
uneasy. Sex, voodoo and Asian ways are connected with the Devil throughout the
film equating them through guilt by association. Of course The Archfiend as a
lawyer is an easy metaphor, as unfair as it might be.
Although Reeves can't hold a candle to Pacino, he doesn't come off badly. In
fact, this may be the first film that he demonstrates any acting ability. It
must be that proverbial cold day down below.
[This appeared in the 11/20/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In John Grisham's "The Firm," lawyer Mitch McDeere may have
thought he had joined the law firm from hell, but he hadn't.  In
contrast, Kevin Lomax in DEVIL'S ADVOCATE does and finds the perks in
working for God's opposition to be seductively satisfying even if there
are significant drawbacks.  To be sure, he does not know that his boss
John Milton is the Devil incarnate, and the beauty of the film is that
it keeps this obvious secret from Kevin until the end.
     Most films dealing with the supernatural border on being
unwatchably ridiculous.  And fictional films about God and temptation
are even worse.  Only THE RAPTURE and COMMANDMENTS come to mind as
films worth seeing that cover the latter.  DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, thanks to
Tony Gilroy and Jonathan Lemkin's smart and witty script, based on
Andrew Neiderman's novel, is worth adding to this short list.  The
picture has you alternating between thinking and laughing.
     The story starts in a small courtroom in rural Florida.  Kevin has
a perfect record as a lawyer due to his omniscience in jury selection.
A nerdy teenage girl, played with childlike innocence by Heather
Matarazzo from WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE, is on the witness stand.  With
a quivering lip, she testifies that her teacher sexually abused her.
As Kevin is ready to rip her to her shreds in cross-examination, he
sees his client's eyes lusting after her and fondling the desk exactly
as the girl claims he fondled her.  Realizing his client is guilty as
sin, Kevin goes into a panic attack.  In a cold sweat, Kevin resolves
his conscience conflict in favor of winning.
     As Kevin, Keanu Reeves turns in his best performance since SPEED.
With his suave demeanor and his yuppie drive for money, power and
success, Kevin is ripe pickings for John Milton.  As a consummate
business manipulator, Al Pacino plays John, the head of a big Manhattan
law firm that makes Kevin an incredibly lucrative offer to come to work
for them.  Defending the slimeballs of the world and shredding
documents before investigators find them, John's law firm is a bastion
of evil.   Pacino is in his prime during the show.  Punching out lines
both powerful and humorous.  ("What about love?"  Kevin asks him at one
point.  "Biochemically overrated," John explains.  "It's no different
than a big box of chocolates.")
     John's highly religious mother, played by a haggard looking Judith
Ivey, warns him that New York is a modern day Babylon.  With Andrzej
Bartkowiak's stunning time lapsed cinematography of New York's
skyscrapers, the metaphor seems apt.  Bruno Rubeo's sets combining
Rococo with the ultra-modern further enhance the image.  Especially
memorable is the large stone diorama that graces the wall of the large
room where John works, lives and sleeps.
     From the beginning John taunts Kevin even while serving as his
mentor.  John wants to know why he no longer goes to church with his
mother.  "It didn't work out -- The book?  The church?"  John inquires.
"I'm on parole," Kevin replies, smiling obsequiously.  "Early release
for time served."
     Charlize Theron from TRIAL AND ERROR, plays Kevin's incredibly
beautiful wife Mary Ann.  When they go to live in a huge company
apartment overlooking Central Park, she gives up her job repossessing
cars.  "Are you really this good?"  she asks him when she sees their
new palatial digs.
     Theron's superlative acting in this supporting role fills out the
storyline.  As Mary Ann becomes aware of what is happening, she begins
a slow descent into madness.  ("I know we've got all this money, and
it's supposed to be okay, but it's not," she says while suffering from
rapidly increasing depression.)  Several of her scenes are so strong
that they are not likely to be forgotten.  One happens on a shopping
spree with other wives, whom she comes to detest.  The other involves
conjugal relations.  The movie uses transformation scenes sparingly but
effectively. And one of the times her busy husband pencils her in for
sex, a transformation occurs with spectacularly jarring visual results.
     Pacino's street-smart and superrich Devil has such credibility
because of his likability.  With his charisma, his money, his power and
the beautiful and sexy people surrounding him, he has all the
temptations in the world to offer a young protege.  If you're not
careful, you'll find yourself wanting to hang with John.  But if you go
astray, it's not his fault.  "I only set the stage," he argues.  "You
pull your own strings."  John is a big fan of free will.
     In a long and somewhat surprising ending sequence that blends the
sublime with the outlandish, John reveals himself to Kevin and explains
why it was so easy to entrap him.  "Vanity, definitely my favorite
sin," John tells Kevin as one reason why Kevin was so vulnerable.  And
boy, are there are others.
     DEVIL'S ADVOCATE runs 2:18, and although it does not need to be
that long, the film amazingly does not suffer because of it.  The movie
is rated R for sex, full frontal nudity, violence, profanity, and
mature themes -- remember, this IS a movie about the Devil.  The film
would be fine for mature teenagers.  I recommend the film highly and
give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
jon ridge
Keanu Reeves  -  the anti-actor he proves himself to be on a continual
basis  -  has a dynamite scene in DEVIL'S ADVOCATE.  His beautiful,
grace-fallen wife has been admitted to a mental hospital.  She's seen
demons that even her husband is blind to (because of his ambition).
Every- one thinks she's crazy.  She locks herself in a room, props a chair
under the doorknob, and takes a broken shard of glass from the floor to her
throat.  Reeves is watching, from just outside, helplessly.  He grabs a
chair, smashes it through the window on the door and the metal screen
behind it, until he has gotten to her.  It's too late.  He is screaming,
crying, holding her, calling out for help, while the life slips out of his
wife.  I've no idea what Reeves did to prepare for this scene; he's never
done it before, and certainly nowhere else in this new film of his has
that has a thing to do with his character is it displayed.  But, during
that one isolated stretch of film, he acts and reacts exactly like a
real person would, faced with a situation so traumatic.
     DEVIL'S ADVOCATE does a good job setting up his character,
though.  He plays Kevin Lomax, a lawyer from Florida with a perfect,
unbeaten record.  At picture's start, we see him defending a blatant
pedophile - a teacher who has made sexual advances toward  a student.
The girl is on the stand.  Lomax knows what he's dealing with; he is
reasonably uncomfortable and angry with his client, and yet his pride
and ardor for profession are just as much at stake.
     By the time this overlong film ended, I think I understood pretty
much what it was trying to get at, and I liked the intention.  Lawyers
are evil, because they rescue other evil men.  And leading them, at
the head of some big firm someplace may, in fact, be the evilest of
evil people.
     That's who Kevin meets, when he is recruited by a renowned law
firm in upscale New York.  Now only does Kevin win his cases, he
has a stong tendency to pick juries that will acquit, even when a case
would appear unwinnable.  Unthinkable.  "He's always been then.
I know that, now" Kevin says at one point, and I think the line doesn't
refer just to the big surprise in the film, but to Kevin himself, as a
person.  Because of the people he defends, and for how he gets
his victory in court.
     Anyway.  This new company couldn't be any happier with Kevin,
and none within the company could be more overjoyed than one of
its partners, John Milton (Al Pacino).  Kevin's ethics mesh well with
Milton's, because Milton knows how to pick really, really horrible
scum - depraved people, whom, because of who he is, Milton
wants to keep out there in the world.  And Kevin knows how to
keep 'em right there.
     Milton presents his protege a life impossible to resist:  the
girls, the money, the fancy apartment, a perfect environment to mature
his considerable talent and feed the ego hand-in-hand "Because
the law, my boy, puts us into everything."
     It's during a case involving triple homicide that Kevin goes full-
tilt, leaving responsibilities in his marriage in wait, breaking tiny
promises to his wife and distancing his knowing, religious mother.
     "Never let 'em see you coming" Milton tells him, meaning
don't come off as anything special, and there's no threat.  Yet,
that's where the real threat comes from.  Makes sense.  I liked
the subtle points made now and again, like a scene in which Kevin's
mother asks him to quote scripture; when it seems like he can't,
that must mean he isn't ready for what he has gone and gotten
hisself into - but then, he does quote the verse, which means he
is ready.
     I also liked Charlize Theron, as the wife, though her character
was equally under- and overdeveloped; under, in that her insanity
seems to come out of left field (I think she mentioned something
about a panick attack, but that's all the preparation we receive);
over, in that the insanity is taken too far too quickly (what tells
us she's the kind of person that would try to kill herself?).
     If there's a deadspot, besides Reeves in almost every scene
except the one I mentioned, it's the triple homicide thing.  It
goes nowhere, slow, when the very thing to solve it becomes
and remains so obvious.  The case merely serves as a turning-
point of sorts for Kevin, and it should've taken up less movie.
     Hey, why would Kevin get disbarred?  I mean, don't lawyers
sometimes do what he did?

Author
Jason Overbeck
I joked with my friend before the movie that wouldn't it be funny if the
big plot twist was that Pacino is the devil, which was told in the
trailer.  When I came to the realization that this was the big plot
twist I didn't care, I was too busy being entertained.  This movie is
fun.  I liked it a heck of a lot.
Reeves plays a lawer, with 64 straight convictions, recruited into a
lawfirm in New York.  This sets up several amazing scenes that revel in
briliant set construction and production design.  A building's rooftop
has water that reaches the sky.  A fun scene as Pacino walks dangerously
close to the edge, looking over the vast, dangerous city.
Reeves is also married to Charlize Theron, they settle into a grand
apartment.  While he works cases, she stays home and fixes it up.  She
is also slowly driven insane, alone.
Pacino and Theron are both perfect in their roles.  Pacino has a
egotistical way of using his motions to alow you to see that something
more devious is brewing.  Theron, one of the most talented new
actresses, is fun in a role that is somewhat minimalist.  Yet she makes
it her own.  Poor Reeves, acting next to these two great performers is
somewhat stale but still right for the role.  He has this southern drawl
that is annoying and disappears (and good ridance) in cerain scenes.  
All that said, this movie is a great entertainment.  Both funny and sexy
with a great climatic monologue from Pacino.  He goes so over-the-top in
this film, yet you have a feeling Pacino knows exactly what he is doing,
He's always great.  Yet it is Theron who consistantly suprises me.  She
is great looking and that probably detracts from her acting ability,
with this film she proves that we can expect great performances from
her.  Her last effort Trail And Error had me thinking that might be so,
this confirms it.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Some viewers will put "Devil's Advocate" down because,
they'll say, it's just not believable.  True, there may be a few
items in the movie that will dare you to suspend disbelief.  But
only once does it become wholly incredible: when it suggests
that anyone married to an adoring Mary Ann Lomax (Charlize
Theron) might spend one minute looking at another woman. 
Otherwise, what comes out of the supernatural thriller are
words and hints of pure gospel.  For example: "New York is
the dwelling place of demons" (said by Mrs. Lomax played by
Judith Ivey).  That lawyers sometimes tell fibs.  That vanity is
everyone's preferred sin, (without which there would be hardly
any movies).  That giving cameo appearances to Senator
Alfonse D'Amato and boxing promoter Don King is silly.  That
it is impossible for Al Pacino to be anything but magnetic in
any medium he chooses to appear.  And that Keanu Reeves
really can act.
   "Devil's Advocate" is a morality tale whose ingenious coda
is not simply a final unravelling.  The tack-on--for which you'll
have to wait for almost all of its 144-minute length--confirms
screenwriters Jonathan Lemkin's and Tony Gilroy's view that
we human beings never learn.  The Devil will always take the
hindmost.  
  Dramatizing a case in which Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves)
successfully defends an obviously guilty sleazeball on trial for
molesting a high-school kid, director Taylor Hackford
acquaints us with a professional who has not known the
meaning of the word "defeat."  When Lomax was a Florida
prosecutor, he ran up a string of sixty-four consecutive
convictions.  Now, as a defense counsel, he continues his
unbroken record of victories.  The American legal system
does allow an attorney to do his best for his client even if he
believes the latter to be at fault--that's the adversarial
system--but "Devil's Advocate" is uncomfortable with the
presumption of innocence, allowing Lomax to work out for
himself the morality or immorality of his calling.
   Lured to New York by the charismatic John Milton (Al
Pacino), who runs a prestigious law firm, Lomax and his drop-
dead-gorgeous wife Mary Ann take up residence in a plush
Fifth Avenue apartment against the advice of Lomax's Bible-
thumping mother (Judith Ivey).  While his wife begins to go
bonkers with boredom and loneliness, Lomax continues his
string of wins, defending a bizarre man who sacrifices goats
in his basement (Delroy Lindo) and one Alexander Cullen
(Craig T. Nelson), a tycoon accused of killing his wife, 
stepson, and maid.  Like the Robert Rodriguez-Quentin
Tarantino film "From Dusk Till Dawn," the picture heads into
off-the-wall occultism at that point, giving way to excesses
which both debase its intelligently cynical tone and threatens
to turn it into juvenalia.  Mary Ann begins to see monsters. 
First, the face of her neighbor Jackie (Tamara Tunie) turns
momentarily hideous. Later the kind and supportive Pam
(Debra Monk) appears equally macabre.  Considering that we
know pretty much from the start that the sharply-dressed,
sophisticated and witty John Milton is the Devil, it's a
disappointment to see the movie lose its urbane veneer and
give itself over to adolescent indulgence.
   This fault aside, "Devil's Advocate" remains an edge-of-the-
seat stew peppered with comic dialogue throughout.  Its
extravagant budget shows through Bruno Rubeo's production
design, particularly his concept of John Milton's office with its
opulent bas-relief, its telltale fireplace, and its outdoor patio
featuring a pool which seems to run right off the penthouse
roof.  James Newton Howard's soundtrack is devilishly eerie,
fashioned to be played at full theater volume, adding
considerable tension and even wit to the production.  What's
more it is blessed by actors with remarkable chemistry for one
another, highlighting a climactic face off between Reeves and
Pacino and an intensely emotional relationship between
Reeves and Charlize Theron.  Theron, the 5'9" South-African
born beauty, has her career-making role as a spirited party
girl who goes off the deep end when she moves from her
laid-back Florida surroundings to the fiendish Big Apple in a
movie which--however excessive at many points--provides
chic repartee, handsome design, and professional
performances. Rated R.  Running Time: 144 minutes.  (C)
1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Tim Voon
What started out as a standard court room drama, took a turn for the
worse when the subject material went from weird to out right bizarre. In
fact much of the material is quite sickening if one has time to
contemplate it. The Devil is not just an allegory for someone evil in
this movie, the evil is actually THE DEVIL himself in flesh and blood.
Let's talk about bizarre. Keanu Reeves, the advocate, lawyer character
in this movie, is trying to make a baby with his wife on the lounge room
floor. As this is occurring the image of his wife keeps flipping between
her and another mysterious woman. He's confused at first, there is
hesitancy in his eyes, but then he really starts coming and going. His
wife is receptive, the other woman aggressive, it begins to turn him on
as he loses himself in this three way fantastic orgy. The only thing of
note about this entirely depraved scene is that Keanu Reaves has a hairy
bum.
If you were brought up in the Catholic, Christian, Jewish or Muslim
faith, then you may find the end scenes difficult to handle. The Devil
(Al Pacino) has a field day mocking God and some of the words spoken are
nothing short of blasphemous. So be warned. Issues like spawning the
Anti-Christ through incestuous relations between the devil's seed are
prominent themes in the movie. Not to mention sex, mutilation, nudity,
lunacy, suicide and any evil thing you can think off. If you can excuse
all of this, or if you like this sought of thing, then you will probably
enjoy the movie. Personally it's not something I could stomach.
Al Pacino does an over the top performances as the Devil. I feel of late
that he has been overacting with most of his movie roles. As for Keanu
Reeves, his is actually quite good in this movie, and this is probably
his best performance since Â…Â….well since Â….. BILL AND TED??? I
personally disliked the content of this movie, much more so than its
make. This is not a movie for those with strong religious convictions.
