Title
Review for Rob Roy (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Pedro Sena
This is a much better film than most people expect. And unlike many films
that show a lot of class, this film also adds a tremendous
showcase of acting, that is exceptional.  One need only watch Tim Roth, in
an exceptional performance as the bad guy in this film,
to recognize that indeed this is an Oscar level performance, and extremely
well deserving of its nomination.  Winning it will
depend on the amount of favoritism for home town actors.
ROB ROY is the story of an Irish man, who became a folk hero and leader of a
large group of Irish people, with whom various kings
had some problems.  And as is usually the case, there were many instances
where there are political interests that interfere
with the people's plans, if not the king's.  In this case, one of the king's
best men, has become a bit of an enemy, and
spends the whole film chasing, and finally getting a chance to  meet his
nemesis.
In between, we get all the intrigues that make this story worth while, and
special. Rob Roy's wife gets raped, and most of his
village gets destroyed.  But in the long run the honest prevail in this tale
between good ad evil, and whose side is the right
one, the law, or the people.
This is a very well directed film, at least it is done with much care and
attention to detail, and while the main character, played
by Liam Neeson, does not display much of the definition and attention to
detail that all others do, he at least tries to hold his own.
A lot of it may just be a struggle with the dialect, but all in all he does
alright.... it might have been easier to have cast
someone local, with a better handle on the language to get a stronger film.
But Liam is not bad, although one gets the
feeling that he is struggling with his lines at times. By comparison, the
work of Tim Roth as the villain, and John Hurt
as the king, are much smoother and well done.
In many ways this is the way Hollywood likes it. A good looking man to
attract the ladies, and the rest a cast of magnificent loons
that can hold just about any script they are given. Tim Roth's work, is just
way above and beyond all others, and stands out as
the single element that moves this film as far as it does, and creates a
more powerful conclusion to the epic.
With some magnificent cinematography, displaying the virgin country sides,
this is a very pretty film to see, although it
has its moments where the violence is a bit too strong.  But, the director
keeps these moments to the minimum.
Excellent film all around. Worth seeing.  Well directed.
One word.... Tim Roth.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Robert Roy MacGregor (1671-1734) is the most famous of the
Scottish MacGregor clan.   It was he who fought to keep the clan
together despite the poverty they faced and the greed of the lords.
The photography of the film is something to behold; its lakes and
mountains and the barrenness of so much of the country.  This is all
captured by Director of Photography, Karl Walter Lindenlaub.
     Rob Roy (Liam Neeson) is a cattle drover.  When he seeks to better
his condition for his wife (Jessica Lange) and his family, he borrows
1,000 pounds from his lord, the Marquis of Montrose  (John Hurt) in
order to buy cattle and make a profit. The money is stolen from him
and he must now repay his lord.  How the stealing came about and how
he is harassed is the story of the film.
     What lifts the movie way up is the acting of Tom Roth who plays
the role of Cunningham, a fop, a dandy, and a most malicious villain
whose face never loses its constant sneer.  Roth just about steals the
film from the much better known Neeson and Lange.
     The only thing that made me laugh was in a final duel when he
takes off his wig (which all the nobility wore) and tosses it aside
while I thought ""No more Mr Nice Guy."

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 4/7/95 
Running Length: 2:15 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, mature themes, sex, nudity, rape) 
Starring: Liam Neeson, Jessica Lange, John Hurt, Tim Roth, Eric Stoltz, 
          Brian Cox, Andrew Keir 
Director: Michael Caton-Jones 
Producers: Peter Broughan and Richard Jackson 
Screenplay: Alan Sharp 
Cinematography: Karl Walter Lindenlaub 
Music: Carter Burwell 
Released by United Artists 
     Ultimately, it's of minor import how much of ROB ROY is based upon 
historical fact and how much has been embellished by the pen of 
screenwriter Alan Sharp.  As a hero of 18th century Scotland, Robert Roy 
MacGregor is known to have walked through the mists of the Highlands, 
living by the code that made his name a legend.  This film takes the 
skeletal myth and builds a real person around those bones.  As embodied 
by Liam Neeson, Rob Roy is a tremendous protagonist--a naive man whose 
belief in honor and whose love for a woman, family, and clan make him a 
figure to cheer for. 
     ROB ROY has great villains as well.  Tim Roth, one of today's finest 
character actors, takes on a role so different from that in PULP FICTION 
that it's only his distinctive face that identifies him.  Roth plays 
Cunningham, a fop with effete mannerisms and a deadly blade.  He's a 
sociopath who kills and rapes without compunction or remorse, and whose 
primary goal in life is to make the best out of a tormented existence in 
Scotland.  Hunting down Rob Roy gives him something to do--something he 
enjoys. 
     Veteran actor John Hurt plays Cunningham's "keeper," the Marquis of 
Montrose, a Scottish lord who has become so used to a pampered life that 
he can't imagine things not going his way.  Like his henchman, his sole 
objective is amassing wealth.  He doesn't care who gets hurt in the 
process, and is willing to turn a blind eye to Cunningham's immoral 
actions as long as the net result is his own profit. 
     The fourth major player is Rob's wife Mary (Jessica Lange).  Her 
relationship with her husband is one of the cornerstones upon which ROB 
ROY is founded, and her inner strength makes her a character to be 
reckoned with.  This is no mere "stand by your man" role--in many ways, 
Mary is as important to the story as Rob himself. 
     It's the forcefulness of the characters and the talents of the 
actors who play them that give ROB ROY its soul.  After all, almost 
everyone loves a movie with admirable heros and detestable villains.  But 
there is more to this film than that.  The story is well-developed, 
exciting, and visceral, and works equally well as an epic drama or an 
historical adventure.  Those who enjoyed THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS and 
LEGENDS OF THE FALL will almost certainly find ROB ROY to their taste.  
By almost any standard of film making, this motion picture is in the same 
league.   
     Director Michael Caton-Jones, who has helmed such films as SCANDAL, 
MEMPHIS BELLE, and THIS BOY'S LIFE, adds another impressive credit to his 
resume.  This movie, like his previous efforts, capably blends diverse 
motion picture elements into a satisfying whole.  It's the depth of 
character development and uncompromising devotion to an intelligent 
narrative that mark ROB ROY as a standout of its genre.  It's refreshing 
to find a movie that makes the effort to set up things before entering 
the meat of the tale.  Too often, background is given by a quick voice-
over at the film's outset.  Not so here. 
     The picture is well-crafted, with expert editing, impressive 
camerawork, and an atmospheric musical score.  Composer Carter Burwell 
has combined traditional Scottish folk songs with original material to 
form an audio tapestry that compliments the lens work of Karl Walter 
Lindenlaub (whose last job as a cinematographer came on STARGATE).  With 
all the elements coming together so flawlessly, Caton-Jones can be 
justifiably proud of ROB ROY, sure to be one of 1995's most absorbing and 
exhilarating epic adventures. 
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Like Robin Hood, or for that matter Billy the Kid, Rob Roy
(actually Robert Macgregor--nicknamed Roy for his red hair) was a real
outlaw who has passed into the realm of legend and folklore.  The film
ROB ROY is based on these legends, though no specific source is
credited.  It bears little connection to the Sir Walter Scott novel of
the same name, except that the same outlaw appears in the novel.
Instead, the film is based on historic and legendary accounts of the
outlaw, the best known of which was "The Highland Rogue" by Daniel
Defoe.  On a very high level, the story of the film is accurate, at
least to the legends, although clearly there are pieces of other film
adventures mixed into this film's plot.  The stories say that he did
borrow money for a cattle venture from a former employer, the first
duke of Montrose, who held lands near Rob Roy's.  When Rob Roy was
unable to pay the loan back in 1712, he lost his home and was outlawed.
To survive he turned bandit, mostly preying on Montrose and his tenants
but remaining friendly with another neighbor, the duke of Argyll.
Though the film invents some, this part of the plot is true to the
legend of Rob Roy.
     This film is the stuff of the old matinees of the 40s.  The
decision to make this film was likely inspired by the success of THE
LAST OF THE MOHICANS, and with the exception of that film, it is a
sub-genre we see too rarely these days.  Too often what could be this
type of film comes out more as a poorly-conceived self-satire like the
bitterly disappointing ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES.  That film had
little accuracy to the legends of Robin Hood, threw in devices like
telescopes that have no place in the legends, and had a Sheriff of
Nottingham playing way over the top.  ROB ROY is a much more
intelligent adaptation of a heroic legend.
     While being the sort of larger-than-life historical heroic
adventure that would have starred Douglas Fairbanks and Errol Flynn, it
respects itself and its source material.  The major stylistic
differences include better photography, a little sex, and a fascination
with the obscure (but obviously considered very important) historical
fact that the period shown predated indoor plumbing.
     The story is much the same as above.  Rob Roy (Liam Neeson) is an
occasional thief who has a strong sense of honor concerning his word.
He is made an outlaw by three particularly nasty (and well-cast) screen
villains, the Duke of Montrose (John Hurt), his assistant Killearn
(played by Brian Cox, Hannibal Lector from MANHUNTER), and, worst of
all, Archibald Cunningham (Tim Roth--Pumpkin from PULP FICTION), whose
slight build and exaggerated effete, foppish manners hide a sadist and
a clever strategist as well as a deadly swordsman.  Rob Roy's wife
Mary, more earthy and less bloodthirsty than Walter Scott's version of
her, is played by Jessica Lange.  The duke of Argyll is played with
dignity by Andrew Keir (who played Quatermass in QUATERMASS AND THE
PIT, a.k.a. FIVE MILLION YEARS TO EARTH).  Finally, as a fellow
clansman, is Eric Stoltz in a real departure for him.  To an American
ear, the Scottish accents are thick enough to make listening an effort.
To me they sounded accurate, but I am willing to take a second opinion
from a Scot.
     ROB ROY has gotten the treatment of a big spectacular.  Karl
Walter Lindenlaub's camera takes full advantage of the Highland
scenery, using wide screen to capture a symmetry in the mountain
landscapes.  His frame typically will be centered between two hills of
equal height at the two sides of the frame with a pleasing downward
curve between for a valley shot.  That speaks of careful camera
placement.  He uses this pleasing symmetry of his shots to
counterbalance the negative effect of the fog-shrouded mountains.  The
opening showing the MacGregor Clan running over the hills seems like an
allusion to the opening of THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, but in general
Michael Caton-Smith goes for unusual effects.  A key sword fight is
done without underscoring music, leaving the actors to build the
suspense rather than to have a composer create the emotion, an approach
used all too rarely.
     ROB ROY is a well-made heroic adventure film with a little more
sex and grossness than a 1940s MGM adventure film might have had, but
not more than what modern audiences expect.  I give this film a +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Christopher Null
     The classic Rob Roy cocktail:  pour 1-1/2 oz. scotch whiskey and 1/2
oz. sweet vermouth into a mixing glass with ice, stir, and strain.  Add
one maraschino cherry.  Make more than one; you'd better drink up before
you head off to see this dog of a picture.
     ROB ROY is not, unfortunately, a film about bartending.  Rather, it's
the first of three upcoming swashbuckler movies for 1995.  Liam Neeson is
Robert Roy McGregor, the famed Scottish highlander with a heart of gold. 
Jessica Lange is his headstrong wife.  After half an hour of proving what
a Great Guy he is, Rob plans to make a bundle of profits on driving some
cattle across Scotland.  He borrows some money from a nobleman to fund
this campaign, only to have it is stolen by Bad Guy Cunningham (Tim Roth).
     Well, the nobleman isn't so happy that his cash is gone, so he sends
none other than Cunningham (who's running scams on everyone) to hunt poor
Rob Roy down.  This goes on for quite some time.  Two and a half hours, to
be exact, until the Big Swordfight Scene...which turns out to be
not-so-big, and rushes us into the obligatory Happy Ending.
     ROB ROY can basically be summed up in one word:  boring.  When it
isn't boring, it's incomprehensible.  And when it isn't incomprehensible,
it's disgusting, featuring very off-color humor, bodily excretions, the
disembowelment of rotting cattle, and the like.  Believe me, I did *not*
need to see Jessica Lange squatting.  (Yes, I'm serious.)
     Only some lush scenery saves this film from utter disgrace.  Trivial,
predictable, and, in the end, irrelevant, I almost couldn't bear to sit
through it.  Director Michael Caton-Jones and everyone else involved in
this disaster should be shot for wasting the public's time.  The rating is
generous.

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by Michael Caton-Jones
Starring Liam Neeson, Jessica Lange, Tim Roth, John Hurt, Brian Cox
     Based on the famous Scottish legend, Director Caton-Jones
(Scandal) gives this story top notch treatment.  Neeson stars as Rob
Roy McGregor, a highlander who is the leader of his clan, which with
himself work for the Marquis of Montrose (Hurt) and also owns his own
piece of land.  Making the decision to borrow money from the Marquis
and try to sell cattle he herds with the men of his clan, Roy steps on
the toes of a visitor of the Marquis played by Tim Roth, and the
Factor, Brian Cox.
     The story then unfolds as Roy must prove to the Marquis he did not
steal his money and also confront Roth, who is the most devilish
villain in quite some time.
     Being Scottish,  I was a little apprehensive about this film, but
Jones really has done a superb job.  There is great detail given to the
way of life and to every facet of Scottish civilization in this
period.  Neeson is the quintessential hero, and is overpowering in the
fight scenes. Lange (BLUE SKY) once again proves why she is one of the
hottest actresses around, giving a memorable performance and pulling
off quite a good accent.  The supporting cast is first rate as well.
Hurt (ALIEN) is perfect as the pompous, yet fleeting Marquis, and Cox
(HIDDEN AGENDA) is extremely well cast as the Marquis right hand man.
However, as has been said by almost all reviews so far, the film
belongs to Roth (PULP FICTION, RESERVOIR DOGS) who steals every scene
he is in.  With just the right amount of effeminate gesturing, his
ruthlessness is all the more disturbing.  Truly one of the best
villains in the past few years.
     Karl Walter Lindenlaub's cinematography is exquisite, showing the
simple beauty of Scotland.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Period adventures have been around as long as the movies.
Throughout that time, and especially into modern efforts, such films
have rarely navigated successfully between the twin perils of the
genre:  tedious hero-worship on the one hand, grade-B schlock on the
other.  Rare is the film that manages to be both exciting and
intelligent, both compelling as character-based drama and a good
old-fashioned good guys vs. bad guys tale.  ROB ROY does manage
both, and then some.  Though the film's love story doesn't quite
click, the main story is wonderfully acted and exhilarating to
watch.
     Liam Neeson stars as the title character, 18th century Scotsman
Robert Roy MacGregor.  A caretaker for the lands of the Marquis of
Montrose (John Hurt), MacGregor is also the de facto leader of his
impoverished clan.  Determined to make a better life for himself,
his wife Mary (Jessica Lange) and his entire clan, MacGregor borrows
1,000 pounds from Montrose to buy cattle and turn a significant
profit.  But Montrose's accountant Killearn (Brian Cox) and devious
housegest Archibald Cunningham (Tim Roth) conspire to steal the
money, leaving MacGregor with a massive and unpayable debt.  When
Montrose offers to erase the debt in exchange for MacGregor
tarnishing the reputation of Montrose's rival lord, MacGregor
refuses, leading to a war of honor between Englishmen and Scotsmen,
and between MacGregor and Cunningham in particular.
     The plot of ROB ROY is a fairly dense one, including a healthy
dose of post-Restoration English political machinations which might
leave many viewers wondering why being accused of being a "Jacobite"
would be such a big deal.  These instances are rare enough, however,
not to be distracting.  Perhaps one reason is that in its structure
and tone, ROB ROY has the archetypal appeal of a Shakespeare play,
with the political elements serving only to set up conflicts, not to
define them.  The characters' relationships are laid out in classic
dramatic terms:  Cunningham, a bastard who plays the role of
courtier, hates his benefactor Montrose even as he envies his
position; MacGregor has a virtue (devotion to the concept of honor)
which also becomes the source of his misery.  Alan Sharp's
screenplay makes sure that even though the characters have mythic
dimensions, they do not remain one-dimensional.
     That's the academic end.  ROB ROY is also just a fine piece of
movie-making, beginning with the superb direction of Michael
Caton-Jones.  His opening shot is the perfect introduction to an
epic, a breathtaking view of the highlands into which the characters
slowly wander and draw closer.  The pacing lags here and there, and
the more brutal elements of the story are occasionally excessive,
but those are exceptions in an otherwise top-notch job, particularly
a pair of magnificently staged duels.  Special note should also go
to Carter Burwell, who provides a stirring Celtic-themed score.
     For my money though, ROB ROY works fundamentally because its
villains--all three of them--are fantastic.  As fine a job as
Liam Neeson does with MacGregor, his character is essentially a
legend, a striking figure but fairly static.  Tim Roth, on the other
hand, is a showy delight as Cunningham, the fop with a serious
sadistic streak, and he takes it to the limit.  John Hurt's Montrose
is a cold-eyed political back-stabber, and expert manipulator of any
situation to his benefit.  The best of the three might be Brian Cox,
best unknown as the "other" Hannibal Lecter in 1986's MANHUNTER.  He
is frighteningly vile, and the scene in which he turns a threat from
Jessica Lange's Mary back on her is one of the film's best.
     As for Lange, she may be the weak link.  Her acting style has
never been one of my favorites, and sometimes her emotions feel
forced.  ROB ROY tries to build the love story between Rob and Mary
into one of the central elements, but the conflict between Rob and
the Englishmen is always more interesting.  Nevertheless, all the
elements combine into an extremely satisfying whole.  ROB ROY is not
for the squeamish, with its swordplay and a lengthy rape scene, nor
is it for those looking strictly for a lusty romp.  It is a story
about characters as much as it is about battles, and it succeeds as
both.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Michael Caton-Jones
Starring: Liam Neeson, Jessica Lange, John Hurt, Tim Roth, Eric Stoltz
Screenplay by Alan Sharp
     Sometime in the last few decades screen villains became sympathetic
figures.  Even Darth Vader eventually had a sad story to explain how he
was driven to become evil.  ROB ROY is not one of those revisionist
films.  The villains in ROB ROY are simply evil people.  The only good
thing you can say about them is that their costumes are nice.  Sure, the
film is really about Rob Roy MacGregor, a Scottish folk hero, but the
villains make the film worth seeing.
     John Hurt was born to play this kind of role.  He is an unpopular
English born nobleman, the Marquis of Montrose.  He talks in
pseudo-Shakespearean double entendres.  He is just plain evil.  His young
ward, Archibald Cunningham (Tim Roth), however, goes beyond plain evil.
Every dimension of his being is evil.  He proclaims himself to be a noble
bastard and proves this in every scene he is in.  The real threat that
these two pose goes beyond class conflict and 18th century politics.
Montrose and Cunningham are both spineless coxcombs.  They wear wigs,
make-up, and embroidered clothing.  They  make exaggerated courtly
gestures with lace handkerchiefs.  Their threat isn't to Rob Roy
specifically, but an affront to the hard working agricultural lifestyle
in general.  To make matters worse, Archibald Cunningham is an unbeatable
swordsman.
     In stark contrast to these characters are Robert Roy  MacGregor and
his followers.  They are the Highlanders of Scotland.  Extended families
live close to the land raising cattle.  Among them, a man's word is his
bond.  Rob Roy (Liam Neeson) seems to be an overgrown boy scout expecting
all men to be men of honor.  He is head of his clan, but listens
democratically to his kinfolk and tries to guide them with compassionate
wisdom.  His wife Mary (Jessica Lange) considers him to be proud and
stubborn, but together they share an idyllic love that can only be found
crowd pleasing romantic action films.  Rob Roy is as good and honorable
as his opponents are deceitful.  Few films have such black and white
characters since the classic ADVENTURES OF ROBIN HOOD with Errol Flynn.
     These two world views, the unquestionably rugged one of Rob Roy and
the decidedly foppish one of the Marquis of Montrose quickly come into
conflict.  The plot is a pretty dusty one- a variation on the westerns
like SHANE and ONCE UPON A TIME IN THE WEST.  Evil people conspire to run
honest hard working folks off their land.  Transporting this plot from
the western plains to the Scottish Highlands makes it easy to forget
that you've really seen it all before.  The good guys wear kilts instead
of white hats.  Sword fights replace gunfights.
     Action and romance are emphasized at the expense of history.  A few
terms like "Jacobite" get thrown around.  The film never really explains
what this is, but when it is clear that Rob Roy is one and the Marquis
of Montrose isn't, one can guess that being a Jacobite is a good thing.
The film spends no more time on it.  ROB ROY is not meant to be an
informative historical drama.
       The three lead male characters bear the brunt of the action.  The
romance belongs solidly to Jessica Lange.  She brings a fresh quality to
her role.  Most often the lead actress is way too glamorous for her rural
surroundings, the peasant woman in designer gowns.  Jessica Lange brings
a realistic earthy quality to her character.  Her clothing looks
homemade, and her red hair blows wild in the wind.  Even more strikingly,
she is a female film character with more common sense than many of the
headstrong men around her.  Typical of the role of women in legends, her
efforts are towards peace and settlement, while the male characters
strive toward conflict.
     As a populist crowd pleaser, ROB ROY is a classic film.  It is easy
to root for a hero that tries to fight fair against corrupt government
officials, and easy to boo at the vainly shallow Archibald Cunningham.
The film has no surprises, but it does have some well-staged action
scenes, edge of the seat suspense, sharp dialogue and striking Scottish
locations.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ROB ROY is a story set in the Scottish Highlands in the year 1713.
It tells the story of a legendary figure known as Rob Roy.  How much of
the story is true and how much myth, I have no idea, but I am ready to
accept it all as fact since it seemed plausible enough to me and its
degree of truth was irrelevant.
     Rob Roy (Liam Neeson) is a man who values his honor about all
else.  It is more important to him than his wife Mary (Jessica Lange),
his children, and his native Scotland - all of whom he loves dearly.
In order to make money buying and selling cattle, he borrows 1,000
pounds for 3 months at 20 percent interest from the evil Marquis of
Montrose (John Hurt) and pledges on his honor and with all 300 acres of
his land as collateral to pay it back in time.
     The Marquis has a visitor from England, Cunningham (Tim Roth), who
is a prissy and penniless young man that has gotten into trouble.  He
parents have sent him north so that he will cool off and straighten his
life out under the care of the Marquis.  Other than thievery and
murder, Cunningham's main claim to fame is that he is a swordsman of
unrivaled ability.
     Many good minor characters including Rob Roy's right hand man
McDonald (Eric Stolz).  and the Marquis's "factor" Killearn (Brian
Cox).  A factor is a Scottish assistant I guess.  The nobility kept
saying things like, "I'll have my factor talk to your factor." Kept
making me think of prime numbers.
     You can probably guess what happens to the 1,000 pounds.  Suffice
it to say it is the catalyst for this entire episode of Rob Roy's life,
and it is a rollicking good tale as they say.
     On the whole I liked ROB ROY, but was disappointed since I expect
more.  As a soap opera a la an average Masterpiece Theater episode, it
works nicely.  The cinematography (Roger Deakins and Karl Walter
Lindenlaub) is lovely without overpowering.  We get a lot of vistas and
a lot fog.  Although charming, I think it could have been even more
powerful given the inherent beauty of that part of Scotland.
     The acting is good all round.  Lange and Hurt, who are wonderful
actors and who have a tendency to overact, were carefully controlled in
their emotions in this adaptation.  Neeson is always good, and he was
here as well.
     Easily, the most impressive job was the acting of Tim Roth.  He
owned every scene he was in.  He had a boyish grin and yet he was the
devil incarnate.  His performance reminded me some of Ralph Fiennes as
the concentration camp leader in SCHINDLER'S LIST.  He had that same
appearance of I look sweet on the surface but I may slit your throat at
any minute and without provocation.
     My main problem with the show was the directing (Michael
Caton-Jones) and the editing (Peter Honess).  I found that I did not
empathize with the characters as they seemed sort of distant.  Given
all that happened in the show, I should have gotten angry at the
villains and scared for the good people.  Instead, I found myself with
a feeling of interest yet detachment.  It is hard to put my finger on
why other than it seemed too much like a slow soap opera.  The editing
pace added to the problems.  Much more of the footage should have been
left on the cutting room floor.
     Other than the Academy Award nomination quality performance by Tim
Roth, there is one other outstanding aspect to the movie - the sword
fight scene.  There is more than one, but the long one is the one to
which I am referring.  It is, without doubt, the best sword fight I
have ever seen.  This time, the editing and the sound effects editing
were outstanding.  Listen to the sounds of the steel against a
background of silence broken only by the fighters breathing.  The
choreography of this sequence was marvelous.
     ROB ROY runs way too long at 2:20.  It is rated R for numerous
bloody murders plus one rape.  There is no bad language, but there is
frequently low, mumbled, and highly accented Scottish that you may have
trouble following.  I think this movie would be fine teenagers of at
least modest maturity.  I recommend this movie to you as I think almost
everyone will enjoy it, and I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
