Title
Review for Feiying gaiwak (1990)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The "new" Jackie Chan film has one ingenious, arguably brilliant
sequence.  It happens at the end of the movie, in an old WWII wind
tunnel, built by the Nazis and buried somewhere in the Sahara, along
with a fortune in stolen gold.  (240 tons worth, if you can stand it!)
Chan's character, a super-spy adventurer with the code name Condor, is
squaring off against a pair of mercenaries, two of several villains who
want the gold for themselves.  The three combatants get tossed and
turned and slammed against walls and sucked toward giant propellers and,
at times, appear to hover in midair.  It's a great bit that's better
lit, better paced, and more meticulously edited than any other action
sequence in the film.  Alas, the rest of OPERATION CONDOR is strictly
lower-grade J.C.  Wacky dubbing and frantic editing are the chief
culprits, both of which may be attributable to the repackaging process.
(Chan, who also directed, trimmed some 13 minutes from the original,
which was released as ARMOR OF GOD II in 1991.) His sense of humor is
still a strong selling point and, with a "story" that takes place on
three continents, the accompanying scenery is quite nice.  I just wish
he'd staged that motorcycle sequence better.  I couldn't tell if that
was him in every shot or not.

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
(1990; American release 1997; written and directed by Jackie Chan,
produced by Leonard Ho)
Jackie Chan's "Armour of God II: Operation Condor" is scheduled to hit
American theaters sometime early next year (with the "Armour of God
II:" part of the title removed so as not to confuse the American
audience).  In an effort to make a pre-emptive strike on
rec.arts.movies.reviews well ahead of the crowd, I went out and rented
it from a local specialty film rental shop [any specialty film buffs
in or near Columbia, MO who don't know about it already, email me!] to
see what I thought.
The version I rented was dubbed, using actors whose voices I
recognized from Streamline Pictures's anime releases.  It was actually
a pretty good dub, compared to some I've seen, but it will almost
certainly be redone for American release, likely with Jackie Chan
doing his own voice.
Dub quality aside, this is what I have to say about the film.
It will be interesting to see how "Operation Condor" goes over in
America.  The two prior Jackie Chan films to see American mass-market
cinematic release (both directed by Stanley Tong), "Rumble in the
Bronx" and "(Police Story III:) Supercop," mostly follow the
traditional Western action-movie formula--relatively tight plotting, a
straight and serious story, lots of action.
"Operation Condor", on the other hand, typifies the traditional
Hong Kong movie style--more laid back, with abrupt and sometimes
bewildering mood swings--fairly serious one moment; complete goofball,
often slapstick humor the next moment.  It's directed by Jackie Chan
himself; this is the style of movie he likes to make.  But is it the
style of movie that American audiences will like?
In "Operation Condor", Jackie Chan reprises his "Armour of God"
role as "Jackie," a gadgeteering fortune hunter who is kind of a cross
between Indiana Jones and James Bond.  Shortly after a narrow escape
from a savage tribe, Jackie returns to civilization to find himself
asked to assist the hunt for hidden Nazi gold, buried in a secret base
in northern Africa at the end of World War II.
However, this expedition is not going to be easy.  Along the way,
Jackie has to contend with the three inept women who comprise the rest
of his party, and at least two different groups who both want to get
their hands on that gold.
The word that best describes "Operation Condor" is "zany".  Here
are some of the most oddball chase scenes and fight sequences ever
filmed, including a car chase where Jackie just can't seem to stay on
his motorcycle, and hand-to-hand combat in a wind tunnel blowing at
full force.  Jackie fans won't be disappointed; the fight scenes are
some of the best since the original Police Story.  It remains to be
seen whether American audiences will enjoy the odd mix of humor and
action, or else just not "get it".
In a way, both "Armour of God" movies contain some not-so-subtle
homages to the James Bond films, from the pre-theme opening gambits to
the gadget-laden vehicles and devices Jackie uses, and Jackie's
character also borrows from the Indiana Jones films.  One of the later
scenes is drawn almost directly from "Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade".
All in all, I'm not surprised that "Operation Condor" is acclaimed
by Chan fans as one of his all-time greatest films.  I just wonder
whether American mass-market audiences will agree.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for distribution through rec.arts.movies.reviews and all
associated archival.  Permission granted for free redistribution via
cyberspace as long as this message remains attached.  All other rights
reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Author
Homer Yen
Admittedly, it gets increasingly difficult to review films that star the   
ebullient Jackie Chan.  One film is just like another.  Fortunately, each   
film is as cutely entertaining as another.  Like all is films, he chops,   
socks, flips and somersaults with the greatest of ease.  His playfulness   
makes him very likable.  You can't help but laugh at the cheesiness of   
the dubbing; you can't help but stare in awe at the wonderfully   
choreographed fight scenes; you can't help but gasp in delight and   
amazement as he performs his own stunts.  In this movie, you get 90   
fun-filled minutes of cheesiness, awe and delight.
This latest Chan vehicle to hit the American landscape is basically a   
take-off of the Raiders of the Lost Ark genre.  Tons of gold, purloined   
by the Nazis during WWII, sits in a secret German base buried in the   
Sahara.  It's up to Jackie to find it.  Now, this is not a really   
creative story.  I mean, even Jackie Chan's character name isuhJackie.   
 But, Chan movies are not meant to have significant depth (or any for   
that matter).  Watch as scenes are seemingly incongruously edited   
together.  Watch mysterious bad guys appear out of nowhere and pop back   
up at the most awkward of moments. This is no masterpiece to be sure.   
 But it is the situations that Jackie finds himself in, and the   
incredibly amusing way in which he gets out that is the hallmark of these   
films.  Jackie is also accompanied on his quest by 3 different women.   
 All are attractive and have a minor purpose for their inclusion, but   
their roles amount to little more than fodder for more comedy and   
silliness.  And, there are the usual odd assortment of bandits, thugs (my   
favorite rarely-used word), nazis and mercenaries that all try to get   
Jackie.  My feeling is that when there are more people in his films, more   
fighting can happen.  After all, that is what we want to see.  That is   
what we've come to expect.  And, smartly, that is exactly what we get.
For those that have never scene the previous Chan releases (Rumble in the   
Bronx, Supercop, or First Strike), this is a unique movie-going   
experience, mainly because Chan is so different than the Van Dammes,   
Bruce Lees or Steven Segals.  Chan can fight with the best of them (if   
not better), but he wants you to laugh at him and with him too.  Like all   
of his other movies, Jackie is a 3-ring circus of entertainment.  In one   
ring, we can enjoy his boyish charm.  In another ring, we can see him at   
the center of some amazing action-sequences and martial arts encounter.   
 And in the 3rd ring, we can enjoy the humor that he injects to brighten   
anybody's spirit.  Chan is a trapeze artist, lion tamer and clown rolled   
into one.  In this case, Chan and his film can be enjoyed by ladies and   
gentlemen and children of all ages.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Moviemaking is a lot like being the general manager of an NFL team in
the post-salary cap era -- you've got to know how to allocate your
resources. Every dollar spent on a free-agent defensive tackle is one
less dollar than you can spend on linebackers or safeties or centers. In
the NFL, this leads to teams like the Detroit Lions, who boast a
superstar running back with a huge contract, but can only field five
guys named Herb to block for him. In the movies, you end up with films
like "Spawn", with a huge special-effects budget but not enough money to
hire any recognizable actors.
Jackie Chan is the Barry Sanders of moviemaking. He spins and darts
across the screen like Sanders cutting back through the defensive line.
Watching Jackie in Operation Condor as he drives his motorcycle through
the crowded streets of Madrid, fleeing an armada of pursuers in
identical black compact cars, is reminiscent of Sanders running for
daylight with the Chicago Bears in hot pursuit, except that Sanders
doesn't have to worry about rescuing runaway baby carriages.
But like the Lions star, Jackie doesn't have anybody to block for him.
Almost every cent that's invested in a Jackie Chan movie goes for
stunts, and as Chan does his own stunts, the rest of the money goes to
pay his hospital bills. This leaves about 75 cents to pay for things
like directors (Chan directs), scripts and dubbing and supporting
characters, not to mention the hideous title sequence. This also
explains why the movie was shot in odd places like Morocco and Spain.
(Chan's first release in this country, "Rumble in the Bronx", was
supposedly set in New York, but was filmed in Vancouver, and in the
chase scenes the Canadian Rockies are clearly visible.) Heck, Jackie
doesn't even have enough money for a haircut, looks like, much less a
personal hairstylist.
In Condor, Chan plays the same character he's always played, himself, a
mixture of Bruce Lee and Tim Allen, a master of both kung-fu and
slapstick-fu. Jackie is sent by the UN to retrieve a cache of lost Nazi
gold in the North African desert, and is chased by a horde of neo-Nazi
sympathizers and two stereotypical Arabs (one of the things I like about
Jackie Chan movies: no political correctness). He is joined by three
women, who have little to do except scream, "Jackie, save us!", and
misuse firearms. The villain is an old Nazi whose legs were broken in
the secret base so that he has to be carried everywhere, and he's more
pathetic than evil.
En route, we have an extended motorcycle chase scene, a hilarious fight
in the Moroccan version of Motel 6 with the neo-Nazis, and two
confrontations with savage natives. Once at the secret desert base,
there is a long chop-socky sequence, followed by the film's centerpiece,
a wind-tunnel fight that's even better than the one in Face/Off.
This is where the money was spent, on well-choreographed kung-fu
sequences, on giant Kevlar hamster balls, on smashed-up crates of
bananas, and on scorpions. Ignore the gaping holes in the plot (how,
exactly, if the villain's legs were broken, did he escape from the
secret Nazi base, and why didn't he take the key with him?). Don't worry
about the production values, or what, exactly, the Japanese girl was
doing hitchhiking across the Sahara. Just go see the movie.
Operation Condor has pretentions of being a "Raiders of the Lost Ark"
knockoff, but one wonders what Jackie could do with the Raiders
franchise blocking for him -- with a Lawrence Kazdan screenplay, a John
Williams score, Spielberg directing and George Lucas producing, Condor
might be an A+ movie. However, you've got to go with what you've got,
and what you've got in Jackie Chan is something special -- a talent that
mainstream Hollywood should, could, and ought to utilize.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
Your guide to the Hollywood Stock Exchange -- http://www.hsx.com
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
Brian Takeshita
The first scene of OPERATION CONDOR has Jackie Chan preparing for a
secret mission.  He attempts to pop a couple of pieces of chewing gum
into his mouth, but misses.  After they ricochet off his face, he
says, "Not a good start."  As it turns out, this line not only gives
foreshadowing to the opening sequence, but to the rest of the movie as
well.
In this, the latest of the Jackie Chan movies to be released in
America after first runs in Hong Kong, Chan plays an international
operative codenamed "Condor", and is tasked by the United Nations with
finding a stash of gold hidden at a secret base by the Nazi's during
their retreat across the Saharan desert during the Second World War.
For some reason, Condor is given his mission at the U.S. embassy in
Spain.  I think this may have been done so that in a chase scene, they
could honor the time old tradition of knocking over a fruit cart.
Watch for it in any chase scene set in a foreign country, most notably
in Europe.  The chase will take itself through a marketplace, and a
fruit cart will be overturned.  It's almost a guarantee.  Anyway....
Condor is given a key which is supposed to unlock a giant vault in
which the gold is hidden; the problem is that the key has insulators
integrated into it, which may mean a booby trap might be
electronically triggered if the key is used improperly.  To help him
figure out where the gold is hidden and how to use the key correctly,
Condor is accompanied by a desert expert (Carol Cheng) and the
granddaughter of the captain who was in charge of hiding the gold (Eva
Cobo).  There aren't supposed to be any relatives of the Nazi captain
living in Spain, but Condor finds the granddaughter by looking her up
in the phone book or something.  Although these two women are supposed
to be integral parts of the mission, they prove no help at all except
to get in trouble and provide an excuse for Chan to jump into his
martial arts.  In fact, most of the scenes are so ridiculously
contrived that it seems everything is just a way to set up a fight.
I suppose this isn't so bad, since Chan's action is really the best
part of the movie, and the only reason you go to see one of his films
anyway.  If you've never seen a Jackie Chan movie, don't expect a
great plot, but do expect to be entertained by his moves.  They are so
well choreographed and often so amazing that you wonder if this guy is
human.  Knowing that he does his own stunts, and knowing that this is
the real stuff (no computer-masked bungee cords here) makes the action
sequences all the more exciting.  You've got to hand it to a guy who's
probably broken every bone in his body for the sake of his art.
Also of note in this, as in any Jackie Chan movie, is the humor.  As
far as I know, none of his films take themselves too seriously, and
even the dramatic parts have a certain tongue-in-cheek quality about
them.  What is almost masterful is the way that humor is even
integrated into the fight scenes.  Unlike a martial arts film such as
anything with Jean Claude Van Damme, where the fights get you on the
visceral level, fight scenes in Chan's movies are simply entertaining.
You marvel at both his moves and at the way he employs them in such a
way to make you laugh.
Unfortunately, even Chan's mastery can't save this film.  The plot and
characters are so weak that they don't hold the movie together at all,
and the acting is terrible.  Carol Cheng has apparently won best
actress honors at the Hong Kong Movie Awards in the past, but since
OPERATION CONDOR is a dubbed movie it kind of takes all bets off.
This, combined with an obviously low production value made we want to
turn away from the screen until I heard those kicks start flying.

Author
Jesse Kaplan
OPERATION CONDOR  A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
 The newest of Hong Kong, and world Superstar Jackie Chan's (RUMLE IN
THE BRONX, SUPERCOP) movies has arrived to the US. Operation condor
definately rates as one of his best.  Not since RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, has
Chan delieved the amount of fighting and humor the American Audiences.
Basically in this story, Chan plays a hing kong special agent named
Jackie.  He needs to find a lot of gold that the nazi's left in the
Sahara desert in which many a shady character are trying to get their
hands on.  If you think there are references to all of the INDIANA JONES
sagas, you are right on.  However the plot means nothing as we come
looking for the action.
Chan fights through hotels, the desert, underground castles, and wind
tunnel in this one boys and girls.  As only Jackie Chan can do, he uses
any weapon available, let it be either a scorpion or a towel.  OPERAION
CONDOR is great fun and and great action as Chan mixes funny humor with
amazing kung-fu.  Of course there are outtakes at the end so stay tuned
for them.
"Have you had enough?"
"HA HA HA HA.....NO!!"
 Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The easiest put-down of the ever popular Jackie Chan movies is
that if you've seen one, you've seen 'em all.  Although the statement
has an undeniable truth, Jackie has so much charisma that seeing him
again can be a delightful little diversion.  Afterall, the James Bond
films have a remarkable sameness, but a legacy that appears endless.
     Jackie's skills are many and his energy is boundless.  His shtick
can best be described as an action ballet played to the physical limits
of endurance and always firmly rooted in comedy.
     His more recent releases, JACKIE CHAN'S FIRST STRIKE and RUMBLE IN
THE BRONX, take themselves somewhat seriously.  His 1990 film,
originally titled ARMOUR OF GOD II: OPERATION CONDOR and rereleased as
simply OPERATION CONDOR, has a more innocent looking Jackie, if that is
possible.  This film, unlike his more recent ones, stays firmly in the
campy vein.  All of the actors have the word "farce" written at the top
of their contracts, especially the bad guys, of whom there are legions
for Jackie to confront.
     Jackie has played in over fifty films and directed thirteen with
this one being the last he directed.  For someone as young looking and
hard driving as Jackie, one wonders how he does it.  Cloning?
     This movie finds Jackie in the African dessert where he has been
commissioned to find buried Nazi gold.  It starts with a scene that
seem lifted out of INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE, which was
released the year before, but director Jackie stages it for much
broader humor that Steven Spielberg did.
     The carefully choreographed, non-stop action sequences sometimes
go awry as shown in the crazy outtakes at the end.  But in the final
cut of the movie proper, they would get near perfect scores from any
Olympic judge.  A typical scene has Jackie, riding on his motorcycle,
being chased by a convoy of villains in identical black sedans.  When
he gets trapped in a narrow alleyway, he flips the bike around and
drives over them, breaking all of their windshields.  And then of
course the chase continues.
     Jackie's attractions are many -- his teddy bear demeanor, his
intense likability, his seeming vulnerability and most of all, his
mastery of the delayed reaction.  He does all of his own stunts, and it
is a miracle that he is still alive.
     What OPERATION CONDOR lacks is a compelling story and a credible
script.  ("Stop hitting me," Jackie politely requests of the guys
beating him to a pulp.  "Stop hitting me, okay?")
     After innumerable fighting sequences we come to the film's big
conclusion set in a wind tunnel.  This admittedly clever idea, goes on
so long it far overstays its welcome.
     This fun little show, which has no pretenses, will amuse most
people, but Jackie's true fans may view it as a kind of masterpiece of
the genre.  For those of who are not fans, its laughs will be forgotten
minutes after we exit the theater.
     OPERATION CONDOR runs a fast 1:30.  It is in jarringly dubbed
English.  The film is rated PG-13 for the constant, but campy martial
arts action.  The show would be fine for kids around eight and up.  I
give it thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jamie Peck
Dimension / 1:28 / 1991/1997 / PG-13 (comic violence, glimpses of nudity)
Players: Jackie Chan; Carol Cheng; Eva Cobo de Garcia; Shoko Ikeda; Alfred 
Brel Sanchez; Jonathan Isgar 
Director: Jackie Chan 
Screenplay: Jackie Chan; Edward Tang 
Two givens for any Jackie Chan import: The star is amiable and the action is 
big. But all the charisma and dynamo in the world couldn't save "Operation 
Condor" from mediocrity. Chan's fourth stateside theatrical release 
(following "Rumble in the Bronx," "Supercop" and "Jackie Chan's First 
Strike") sports a storyline that sinks and stinks where those of his previous 
trio were at least enjoyably silly. When the star isn't kicking enemy butt, 
the film flounders so much that it's not out of the question to hope "Condor" 
meets a quick extinction. 
"Operation Condor," originally released in Hong Kong in 1991 under the title 
"Armor of God II," casts Chan as Jackie (no stretch there), a secret agent 
employed by the United Nations to uncover 240 tons of Nazi gold buried 
somewhere in the Sahara before a group of nasty terrorists get there first. 
Every hero needs a sidekick, and Jackie has three -- a trio of shapely 
lasses, each solely identified by hairstyle and all annoying. None of them 
come even close to rivalling Michelle Yeoh, Chan's "Supercop" sidekick. 
Chan's best U.S. release thus far is arguably "First Strike," an 
affectionate, if not terribly solid, tweaking of James Bond standards. Condor 
starts out on a similar, much more obvious foot, complete with a detached, 
pre-credits action sequence (where Jackie rolls down hills and off a cliff in 
what appears to be a giant hamster ball!) and flashy opening titles. But once 
the head-scratcher of a plot kicks into gear, "Operation Condor" turns into 
something akin to an Indiana Jones adventure only without the bullwhip, 
fedora and fear of snakes -- or the charm, for that matter. Thanks to a story 
that acts as sluggish, uninspired padding between the action scenes, 
"Condor"'s running time doesn't exactly fly by. 
Because Chan pulls acting, directing and co-writing duties, "Condor" holds a 
promise of wall-to-wall fun -- if he's so much fun in front of the camera, 
imagine what he's like behind it. Sure, his physical feats are impressive, 
but the number of biggies is strictly limited. Every good, funny sequence, 
like a hotel room brawl where a towel-clad woman is as effective a weapon as 
either of Chan's appendages, only makes the rest of the movie seem dreadfully 
dull by comparison. Even the climax -- a doozy of a high point in "Strike" 
and "Supercop" -- falters; as powerful fans send Chan and his enemies through 
the air with the greatest of ease, gone is the no-strings-attached riskiness 
of his usual shtick. 
Even if "Operation Condor" flops, there still might be a future for Chan's 
oldies in American -- because studios put up little more than dubbing fees, 
they likely turn a quick profit. But if the trend continues, more care ought 
to be taken in the selection process. Take away the martial arts maestro's 
trademark stuntwork and you've got the makings of a straight-to-video vehicle 
for any given wrestler-cum-actor. "Operation Condor" with Rowdy Roddy Piper, 
anyone? 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Everything about Jackie Chan's OPERATION CONDOR seems to scream out
"James Bond wanna-be." The American ad campaign for the film places Jackie
in a heroic pose in front of Spandex-clad, gun-toting babes, a pre-opening
credits sequence sets the stage with a few impressive stunts, and the
opening credits themselves are full of silhouette images.  The plot,
meanwhile, concerns flirtations with a female associate, narrow escapes,
nefarious traps, exotic locations and one wheelchair-bound arch-villain.
Anything sound familiar?
     Imagine, now, that in the course of mimicking one of the most iconic
adventure series of the last thirty years, someone managed to improve on
it.  When the creative force behind the result is Jackie Chan, it's not a
tremendous stretch of the imagination.  OPERATION CONDOR is simply the
most ridiculously entertaining action film to grace American screens this
year, a dazzling combination of energetic comedy and virtuoso stunt work
which shames the multi-million dollar detritus offered this summer by
Hollywood studios.  
     OPERATION CONDOR, a 1990 Hong Kong release originally titled ARMOUR
OF GOD II, casts Jackie as a secret agent/soldier of fortune named,
creatively enough, Jackie.  Jackie's mission, should he choose to accept
it, is to help the United Nations recover a fortune in stolen gold hidden
in the Sahara by Nazis near the end of World War II.  Along for the ride
are Ada (Carol Chang), an expert in desert geography, and Sasha (Eva Cobo
de Garcia), the granddaughter of the Nazi officer who originally hid the
gold.  Making life difficult for Jackie and company are a variety of
bad-tempered mercenaries, including a pair of inept Arabs and the
aforementioned wheelchair-bound arch-villain, all of whom have their own
designs on the gold.
     And none of it really matters in the least, except to the extent that
it provides a set-up for action sequences.  That structure doesn't
distinguish it much from most late-model Bond films, or from the majority
of late-model action films of any make.  What does distinguish OPERATION
CONDOR is the action it delivers -- not just big, loud and expensive
action but inventive, thrilling and beautifully choreographed action.  A
Jackie Chan fight sequence can do something absolutely extraordinary in
the jaded age of the blockbuster:  it makes action seem original.  You may
spend half of OPERATION CONDOR's running time -- particularly the
spectacular wind tunnel finale -- wearing the goofy expression of someone
who can't believe he just saw that.
     You may spend the other half enjoying the presence of Chan himself,
though the Bond analogy certainly breaks down at this point.  Chan is a
lot of things on screen, but suave ain't one of them.  You get the feeling
you'd be more likely to see him in a cardigan and slippers than in an
Armani tuxedo; he's like Mr. Rogers if he could do a spinning back kick.
(My apologies, Fred, if you _can_ do a spinning back kick.)  Yet it is
exactly that polite, boyish charm which makes Chan such a great action
hero.  He's in on the absurd joke of action films, but not in the raised
eyebrow, quip-spewing way which passes for wit in other genre entries.
Chan is willing simply to laugh at himself, at the idea of a vulnerable
nice guy who defeats his opponents with grace and style rather than with
an Uzi.  One of OPERATION CONDOR's best gags has Jackie trying to avoid
being noticed by Sasha while sneaking through her house, when Sasha
sneezes.  For a split-second, we see Jackie fight the instinctively
gentlemanly reaction which could blow his cover:  he _almost_ says "Bless
you."
     There are a few clumsy transitions in OPERATION CONDOR, many the
result of editing which trimmed almost twenty minutes from the original
cut of ARMOUR OF GOD II, as well as predictably stiff supporting
performances and grossly caricatured accents in the dubbed voices.  Big
deal.  OPERATION CONDOR is _fun_, fun in a way which should make people
embarrassed for using the same word to describe CON AIR or THE LOST WORLD.
If I were Pierce Brosnan, I'd be looking over my shoulder right about now.

Author
Steve Kong
Released in 1990, Operation Condor was originally released over-seas as The
Armor of Gods 2:Operation Condor. But seeing the original is not important,
Condor is a self-contained story.
Dimensions Film has put together a new English dubbing and soundtrack for
the US release of the film. This is along with a few edits here and there.
Unlike the previous three Jackie Chan releases (Rumble in the Bronx,
Supercop, and First Strike), which were directed by Stanley Tong, Jackie
Chan is directing, writing, and starring in Operation Condor. Also
different from the previous three releases, Operation Condor has a
different feel to it.
Jackie Chan plays an agent for the UN named Jackie, but code-named Condor.
After a spectacular opening sequence, which is a hilarious parody of the
opening sequence to the first Indiana Jones film, the UN calls Jackie.
There is a stash of gold buried somewhere in the Sahara by some Nazis. The
Nazis stole the gold during World War 2 and buried it at the end of the war
just as they were losing the war. To tag along with Jackie is Ada, a
beautiful Chinese liaison who knows about the gold. But along the way the
grand daughter of the leader of the Nazi group that buried the gold joins
them. Also joining is a Japanese woman who has a pet scorpion.
Jackie and group are battling two groups of men trying to get to the gold
also. But, as most of us know, we don't go to see a Jackie Chan film for
plot and character development. We see Jackie films for action, and there
is plenty of action in Operation Condor. The action consists mostly of
fighting scenes that are all well choreographed and highly entertaining.
There is also the crazy, funny, and silly comedy for which Jackie has the
perfect timing for. Most of the times the comedy will leave a silly grin on
you face.
Of all the re-released Jackie films in the US, this one is the one with the
most action. It is also the one that is most quirky. The film switches
moods quickly and abruptly, but, doing this well. It can go from dead
serious to slapstick comedy in the snap of a finger.
Operation Condor is a funny movie with lots of spectacular action. It is
also a film you'll want to see on the big screen. So, go see it. And don't
leave right when the credits roll because you'll miss the outtakes.

Author
Sang W. Park
Movie:  Armour of God II: Operation Condor (1990)
A review by: Sang Park (http://www.geocities.com/Tokyo/Towers/2713/)
As many reviewers and all Jackie Chan movie buffs know by now,
"Operation Condor" is hardly a "new" movie in that it was released
previously some seven years ago in Asia and in Chinatown theater/video
stores everywhere.  Personally, I was surprised six months ago when I
found out through Miramax's website that they are planning to release
this in theater since most Jackie Chan fans probably have seen this film
in one form of video or another.
Jackie (once again dubbed in English as himself) reprises his role as
"Flying Dragon (or Condor or whatever his code name is)" seeking a lost
bundle of gold stash somewhere in the Sahara Desert.  This time there
are three leading ladies that he must deal with.  As in the case of just
about all of his movies (except for Supercop and Young Master) women are
of no help to him; rather, they are the reasons in which he gets into
troubles and slapstick blunders.
Of course his fighting choreography and stunts are spectacular.  Why
else would you want to watch his movies if it wasn't for his
over-the-top eye-popping in-your-face actions.  Operation Condor does
deliver in that sense right from the start.  For the benefit for those
who have not seen the film, I won't describe the stunt/action sequences,
except that it involves large beach balloon, cars, motorcycles,
windtunnel, guns, and towels, no name a few.
Most Jackie Chan directed films has a bit more of himself as a slapstick
clown than his other movies.  Operation Condor, too, has a heavy dose of
that as well.  If don't care much about his farce, you have been warned
here.
Personally, I'm still waiting for an original Jackie Chan movie made
here in the US that would match the grace and intensity of the Drunken
master II or the over-the-top excitement of Dragons Forever.  Until
then, I'm willing to support his quest for the US action greatness by
recommending Operation Condor.
(comments??  reply to this posting or email me at: sangwpark@juno.com)

Author
David N. Butterworth
In 1990, no longer content performing all of his own stunts, diminutive
Hong Kong martial arts star Jackie Chan took another turn at co-writing and
directing one of his own features, "The Armor of God II."  Retitled and
re-released as "Operation Condor," it's the third Jackie Chan movie to
reach these shores in the past six months (following "Jackie Chan's First
Strike" and the reissued "Supercop"), and it's a decision that ultimately
proves you *can* have too much of a good thing.
Chan fans (Chan-atics?) can tell you that the plots of his movies are the
least interesting elements.  Fortunately, the plot of "Operation Condor" is
a relatively simple one: Jackie battles bad guys in search of some Nazi
gold.  This leaves plenty of room for what makes a Jackie Chan film worth
watching: lots of spirited, high-kicking action, a little low-brow comedy,
and plenty of stunts.  In "Operation Condor," Chan the director,
recognizing his marketability as a lovable action star, gives us a
globe-trotting slapstick adventure peppered with chopsocky action
sequences, rather than the reverse.
There's a superfluous James Bondian pre-credit sequence in which
Aboriginal-like cave dwellers with picket fences on their heads chase
Jackie after he drinks their holy water.  "Holy?"
There's a shoot-out in a Moroccan hotel that goes on for days, with
Jackie's demure, towel-wrapped co-operative, Ada (Carol Cheng) fighting for
her modesty.  It's a testament to the film's lunacy that the worst thing
that happens to her is that it finally comes off.
And there's a finale in an underground German munitions store that makes
full use of a huge fan and some wind tunnel technical effects that grow
more jaw-droppingly ridiculous by the minute.  It's as if Chan's goofy grin
isn't enough; he had to subject it to some face-changing G-forces as well.
Still, the stunts and set pieces, no matter how exhausting, are pretty
amazing as usual.  Chan rides a motorcycle like it's an extension of
himself, this time crashing through a banana warehouse in an attempt to
out-maneuver his adversaries.  The culminating stunt, when he leaps from
the harbor-bound cycle onto a bale of cargo being loaded onto a ship, is
almost lost in the mayhem.  Fortunately Chan photographs it from two
different angles, and leaves both shots in the film!  With the agility of a
springbok, Chan traverses a 10-foot high wall with an effortless, Z-shaped
leap, yet the customary end-credit outtakes illustrate just how difficult
it is to nail the landing.  And to be fair, there are some very funny bits
in and among the frenetic fisticuffs, as when Jackie batters a bad guy who
is holding Ada in front of him as a shield.
The obligatory babe role is played by not one, but three!, winsome
charmers.  The aforementioned Ada.  A Brigitte Nielsen-styled blonde (Eva
Cobo DeGarcia), who happens to be the grand-daughter of the German officer
who buried the hoard of bullion at the end of the war.  And a dum-dum with
a pet scorpion called Ding Ding, played by a squeaky Shoko Ikeda.  By the
time these bubbleheads form an alliance and start beating up on the doltish
opposition, it's like watching a female version of the Three Stooges.
The film's reworked title, by the way, is every bit as meaningless as the
plot.  Ada very briefly refers to Jackie as "Condor" during the mission's
initial setup--blink and you'll miss it--but for all the thought that went
into that decision the movie could have gone by "Operation White-Throated
Grebe."  In "Operation Condor," as it turned out, Jackie's motto is "Expect
the worst.  Hope for the best."  While this principle holds true for almost
any Jackie Chan movie, his latest effort falls precariously somewhere in
between.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Ever since New Line Cinema's highly profitable, early 1996 release 
of RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, New Line and Dimension/Miramax have been busily 
acquiring the rights to older Jackie Chan motion pictures.  They 
recognize that Chan's American fan base is such that even a moderately 
successful first weekend box office can turn a profit.  As a result, in 
the space of a year, we have seen SUPERCOP (1993), FIRST STRIKE (1995), 
and now the older OPERATION CONDOR (1991).
     OPERATION CONDOR, originally released in Hong Kong as ARMOR OF GOD 
II, is something of an odd choice to release, since all die hard Chan 
fans are likely already familiar with it (it's available on video).  
Dimension has invested a little money for the creation of a newly dubbed 
audio soundtrack (complete with music by Miramax regular Stephen 
Endelman), but, other than that, the viewing experience isn't much 
different.  All indications are that the distributor wanted to put out a 
Jackie Chan movie this summer, and settled upon something that was cheap 
and readily available.
     As far as plot goes, this film, like many of the action superstar's 
efforts, is decidedly silly and disjointed, often bordering on 
incoherent.  Any Chan storyline is, after all, just a flimsy excuse to 
permit the leading man to perform a number of amazing stunts, engage in 
astonishing martial arts fights, and present a series of hilarious 
comedy bits.  All of those elements are present here, but the connecting 
material is exceptionally feeble, to the extent that the patches between 
action sequences are not just filler, but boring filler.  Of the four 
recent U.S. Chan releases, OPERATION CONDOR is the weakest, although it 
still offers a certain degree of episodic entertainment value.
     The film, which Chan co-wrote and directed, plays like a merger of 
an Indiana Jones outing and a James Bond adventure, and makes far less 
sense than any entry into either series.  Chan plays a soldier of 
fortune named Jackie, and, in the company of an attractive female 
historian (Carol Cheng) and a feisty, platinum blond German woman (Eva 
Cobo deGarcia), he goes to North Africa on a treasure hunt.  Equipped 
with a map and a key, he crosses the Sahara desert in search of a hidden 
stash of Nazi gold.  In pursuit are all sorts of bad guys, including a 
pair of bumbling Arab terrorists who keep turning up like bad pennies.
     OPERATION CONDOR is light on spectacular action sequences and heavy 
on fights and comedy.  There are only two hardware-intensive scenes:  a 
chase that has six cars in pursuit of motorcycle-riding Chan and a brawl 
in a wind tunnel.  There are numerous hand-to-hand combat incidents, all 
of which are meticulously choreographed (things still go wrong, as shown 
in the end-credit outtakes that are a hallmark of Chan's films).  
OPERATION CONDOR also features a high humor quotient, with loads of 
quick gags and longer physical comedy setups, that is enhanced by the 
cheesy dubbing.
     From an acting standpoint, Chan is the only one worth paying any 
attention to.  As always, he's a leaping, whirling dervish of madcap 
energy and exuberance.  His ability to make any action sequence both 
funny and exciting is a testament to his talent.  He's Keaton, Chaplin, 
and Van Damme all rolled into one.  Other players in OPERATION CONDOR 
fill their roles effectively, but no one comes close to accomplishing 
what Michelle Khan did in SUPERCOP -- encroach upon Chan's place in the 
spotlight.
     It's debatable whether each new (or, in this case, old) Jackie Chan 
movie needs a unique review.  Give or take a few minor variations, Chan 
films are essentially the same, which is what the fans want.  
Fortunately, Chan is so enjoyable that, even though the plots and 
characters vary from recycled to irrelevant, mediocre films like 
OPERATION CONDOR still feature bursts of undeniable entertainment.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
