Title
Review for Opposite Sex and How to Live with Them, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David Pimmel
Starring Arye Cross, Courteney Cox, Kevin Pollack, Julie Brown
Rated R for language and adult humor
Arye Cross and Courteney Cox star as a pair of Bostonians who meet in a
bar, go to the movies, fall in love, move in together, etc.
     Well, if you haven't seen WHEN HARRY MET SALLY or HE SAID, SHE
SAID, or if you don't watch LOVE & WAR on television, you might think
this is the most inventive film to come along in ages.  However, if
you've seen any of these, than you have seen most of this film.  This
of course doesn't mean its bad.  Some of it is amusing, but overall, I
just had to ask what's the point?
     Arye Cross is the stereotypical single male who falls in love.
Kevin Pollack is the stereotypical female-fearing best friend who make
a lot of rather sexist and vulgar jokes, most if which weren't very
funny.  Couteney Cox is the stereotypical career-minded woman who falls
in love.  Julie Brown is the stereotypical bizarre best friend of said
woman.  (Notice the frequent use of the word stereotypical.  This film
uses a lot of formula, the plot is basically known from the opening
credits.)
     So what is good about the movie?  Well as I said there are a few
amusing moments.  Surprisingly, Julie Brown, who I usually find just
plain goofy, was the best thing in the film.  Also there are several
very funny sequences involving analysis of the human mating ritual.
     Gee, this is really short.  Not much to say about the film
really.  It is just kind of there.  Watching it on video might not be a
complete waste of time, but I wouldn't recommend hiring a baby sitter
or spending a lot of money to see it at the theatre.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Arye Gross, Courteney Cox, Kevin Pollak, Julie Brown
Director:  Matthew Meshekoff
Producers:  Robert Newmyer and Stanley M. Brooks
Screenplay:  Noah Stern
Music:  Ira Newborn
Released by Miramax Films
     From the moment of their first meeting, David (Arye Gross) and
Carrie (Courteney Cox) are hopelessly attracted to each other.  THE
OPPOSITE SEX chronicles their first date, early relationship, first
night together, and other aspects of their relationship.  Kevin Pollak
plays Eli, David's best friend and Julie Brown is Zoe, Carrie's
roommate.  These two occasionally help, but more often hinder, the
developing attachment between David and Carrie.
     THE OPPOSITE SEX is an extremely funny and surprisingly insightful
look into the mating game.  Similar in style to SINGLES (although this
film was made first), THE OPPOSITE SEX concentrates on one relationship
instead of several.  Its depiction of the various stages of David and
Carrie's courtship is filled with little details that movies often find
unimportant but which are critical to real-life situations.  Many of
these are approached from a humorous vantage, but much of the comedy is
successful because the circumstances are so true-to-life.
     As for the humor in the film, it ranges from wit and satire to
belly- laughs.  Some of the best moments come when characters break the
fourth wall, turning to address the audience in the middle of a scene
with occasionally side-splitting asides.  Two of many amusing instances
involve a profane-but-hilarious parody of FIELD OF DREAMS' catch
phrase, "If you build it, he will come," and a sequence where David and
Carrie become subjects of a nature film crew doing a program on human
mating habits.  Also memorable, although far less humorous, is a
takeoff of ABC's NIGHTLINE.  Kevin Pollak does an impressive Ted
Koppel.
     As irreverent as the movie frequently is, it has a lot to say
about relationships.  As a result, THE OPPOSITE SEX has more depth than
might initially be supposed.  It isn't just another run-of-the-mill
romantic comedy, but one with bite and backbone.
     The main cast of four all do fine jobs.  None are well-known
actors, although Kevin Pollak has become more recognizable following
his role in A FEW GOOD MEN.  Courteney Cox and Arye Gross manage to
find the right balance between drama and comedy to bring across
real-seeming, sympathetic characters.  One of the great intangibles,
their chemistry, is flawless.  Julie Brown and Kevin Pollak, often
serving as a kind of "Greek Chorus" to detail the activities of their
friends to the audience, are equally as proficient.
     The production team of THE OPPOSITE SEX should be congratulated.
They have created a fresh, inventive comedy that is definitely worth a
look.  It's a wonder why it took Miramax so long to pick up the movie
for distribution, and a sad fact of life that, given the relative lack
of publicity, it won't be in theaters for long.  Nevertheless, there's
no denying that THE OPPOSITE SEX is a pleasant surprise.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mattias Thuresson
Cast: Arye Gross, Courteney Cox, Kevin Pollak, Julie Brown
David hangs out on a bar with his best friend Eli. Both are trying
to pickup women to take home and have sex with. Also in the bar are
Carrie with her best friend Zoe. As you can expect from a romantic
comedy David sees Carrie and can't keep his mind from her, although he
and Eli eventually go home with two other women. However, the four of
them meet at a football stadium the following weekend. David takes
Carrie out and they fall in love. Not before long, Carrie moves in with
David. What follows is just what you can expect from a romantic comedy,
they have to face the ups and downs of a relationship,
somewhat like Rob Lowe's and Demi Moore's About Last Night (1986).
What really annoyed me about this movie is the many times when
the film suddenly stops and Eli starts to talk to the audience,
giving his views about men, women and relationships. I guess he is
supposed to be the funny side-kick that provides the comedy,
but I just think it slows the movie down. Besides that, what he
says is pretty silly anyway.
When it comes to the actors, Arye Gross is a much too pale actor
for a leading role. On the other side, Courteney Cox is perfect in
the role of Carrie and Julie Brown does a good job as Carie's
exuberant girlfriend.
All in all, this is a good movie for a quiet Monday evening in front
of the TV. Renting it on video? I don't think so
