Title
Review for Don Juan DeMarco (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 4/7/95
Running Length:
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, nudity, profanity)
Starring: Marlon Brando, Johnny Depp, Faye Dunaway, Rachel Ticotin,
          Bob Dishy, Geraldine Pailhas
Director: Jeremy Leven
Producers: Francis Ford Coppola, Fred Fuchs, and Patrick Palmer
Screenplay: Jeremy Leven
Cinematography: Ralf Bode
Music: Michael Kamen
Released by New Line Cinema
     Over the past fifteen years, Marlon Brando (ON THE WATERFRONT, LAST
TANGO IN PARIS, THE GODFATHER) has been mostly absent from the screen.
With the exception of a few small parts--some good (A DRY WHITE SEASON,
THE FRESHMAN) and some terrible (CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS: THE DISCOVERY)--
the man once hailed as the greatest American actor has eschewed leading
roles.  Until now, that is.  With DON JUAN DEMARCO, Brando is attempting
something of a minor comeback.
     The title character, a modern day Don Juan (with the Italian last
name of DeMarco), is played by Johnny Depp.  At the age of 21, he claims
to have made love to more than 1500 women.  He has been rejected only
once, by the enchanting and innocent Ana (Geraldine Pailhas), but, as is
so often the case, she was "the only one who really mattered."  So, with
no possibility of a life with his true love, Don Juan decides to kill
himself.  He climbs high atop a billboard and demands that the police
send him the greatest living swordfighter so he can die in a duel.  What
he gets instead is Dr. Jack Mickler (Marlon Brando), a massively-
overweight, near-to-retirement psychiatrist who pretends to be Don
Octavio de Flores and talks Don Juan down from his perch.  Then, at
Woodhaven State Hospital, where the young man is temporarily held, Jack
petitions his boss (Bob Dishy) for the right to supervise the newcomer's
treatment.
     DON JUAN DEMARCO is a lighthearted, frothy fable about romance and
the way a patient's fantasies affect his doctor's reality.  Despite
several astute lines which give the film an intellectual appeal, this is
not an exceptionally deep movie.  The playful, often humorous tone,
coupled with Don Juan's accent, suggests THE PRINCESS BRIDE.
Writer/director Jeremy Leven takes pleasure in clouding the division
between what's real and what isn't, but he never stretches matters to
such an extreme that DON JUAN DEMARCO is reduced to a mindless farce.
     Johnny Depp is appealing as the Latin lover, but the truly meaty
role belongs to Brando.  His Jack Mickler (aka Don Octavio) represents
the audience's anchor as the film shifts between romantic illusion and
clinical reality.  There's nothing overtly original in the character, but
Brando shows he can still give a strong performance.  This is far from
his best work, but he's more than a match for the part, and brings to
Jack a human quality that encourages compassion and empathy.
     DON JUAN DEMARCO has a seductively sensual veneer, but the full
compliment of the title character's sexual conquests lacks the romance of
the low-key relationship between Jack and his wife (Faye Dunaway).  These
two act like they've been married for thirty-two years, and her wonder at
his sudden re-awakening is charmingly unaffected.  There is proof here--
as if any is really needed--that couples don't have to be under thirty
to capture an audience's heart.
     With so much blurring between reality and fantasy, there are bound
to be a few missteps, but Leven keeps these to a minimum, and the film is
mostly a success in its approach to its themes.  Don Juan asks the four
essential questions about existence:  "What is sacred?", "Of what is the
spirit made?", "What is worth living for?", and "What is worth dying
for?"  The proposed answer to all is "love", that singular emotion which
pervades this disarming motion picture.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Joan Ellis
"Don Juan DeMarco" sprinkles fairy dust on the audience, and
in a mere 90 minutes casts a lovely spell. The British did it
with "Enchanted April," and now Jeremy Leven has written and
directed the kind of lighthearted fable that rarely flies free of
Hollywood's heavy hands. If that isn't enough, he has encouraged
his inspired cast to have a good time. They do, and so do we.  
The opening scene is a tone-setting treasure. Don Juan
DeMarco (Johnny Depp), clothed and masked as his mythical hero,
has lost the love of his life and is about to end his own--at 21.
He poses grandly on the ledge of a modern skyscraper, while Dr.
Jack Mickler responds to the emergency, his enormous bulk borne
skyward in the bucket of a giant cherry picker. Marlon Brando,
of course.  
We learn quickly that the inside of Don Juan's head is where
the eminent doctor wants to go. Why on earth would he want to
cure a man who is touched at every turn with romance?  Touch me
if you will, he says, with just a little of your magic. 
In sessions with Jack, Don Juan's wondrous story unfolds,
gathering an irresistible momentum that carries Jack and the
audience into its spell. As he tells his tall tale, huge moons
shine, swords flash and brave men defend beautiful women. As he
listens, Jack bends under the weight of his own envy.   
By now, Jack is bringing bits and pieces of the spirit of
his exotic new patient to his wife Marilyn (Faye Dunaway), who
listens with bemused interest. "I feel we've surrendered our
lives to the momentum of mediocrity," he says of his impending
retirement to their flower-covered house in the suburbs. Little
by little, he takes her hand and they take flight. 
Marilyn smiles on her enormous husband with radiant
affection. He adores her in return and revels in his rediscovery
of her. "I want to hear about your hopes and dreams that got
lost along the way while I was thinking about myself."  She cries
gently and replies, "I thought you'd never ask."  
Brando and Dunaway make pure magic of their scenes. Dunaway
is buoyant and subtle, while the massive Brando moves about with
the lightness of the reborn. Their deep self-assurance allows
them to turn their roles into a romp. They have fun together. At
once electric and playful, their presence fills the screen. They
sparkle.
Johnny Depp is just right as the romantic who has found the
secret to the tedium of life, just right as the poet who can pass
it along to the rest of us.  As Jack says to his colleagues who
insist on dealing with reality, "That's such a limited view of
the situation."   Don Juan's delusion has become Jack's romance,
and for a light and lovely evening, it becomes ours.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     You've had a hard day, and the circuits in your brain have gone on
overload.  You know you should see the latest Swedish film since it is
full of angst and deep hidden meanings, but you got so depressed after
the last message movie you saw that you couldn't sleep afterwards.  You
are too busy to see, much less smell the daisies.  Romance?  Well,
forget it.  You figure romance these days only comes in cheap novels
next to the tabloids at the supermarket.
     Does any of this ring true for you?  Then, I have a light hearted,
fairy tale of a romance for you.  It is called DON JUAN DEMARCO.  There
is not much in it, but what there is is a delight and will reaffirm
your belief in life and especially in romance.
     DON JUAN DEMARCO asks the question what is reality and why do you
care.  Is reality a bunch of messy old facts or can you adopt a
wonderful fantasy and make it your reality through force of will?  Is a
firmly and completely believed fantasy more valid than mere facts?
     DON JUAN DEMARCO (Johnny Depp) is the world's greatest lover.  By
the age of 21, he has made love to over 1,500 women, but he says he has
seduced none of them.  He always wears a large hat, a mask, and clothes
that his Grandmother says makes him look like Zorro.  His name is
Italian, he speaks with a Castilian accent, he claims to have come from
Mexico, and he is lives in the US.
     Nobody can sweet talk women like he can.  His handholding scene is
the most erotic I have ever seen excepting only for the one in THE AGE
OF INNOCENCE.  When his one true love asks him on the beach on the
Island of Eros how many lovers he has had before her, he feels he must
tell her the truth.  He says, "1502 including you".  After she then
leaves him forever, he comments "I think she was expecting a lessor
number".
     After she ditches him, he decides his life is not worth living
since he can only love her, and he decides to commit suicide.  On the
way to kill himself, he drops by the Hotel Seville and first makes love
to just one more stranger.  He is saved from his death by a local
psychologist, Dr. Jack Mickler (Marlon Brando).  Dr. Mickler agrees
to treat him without medication if Don Juan will tell the doctor his
story.
     As the mesmerizing story unfolds, Dr. Mickler becomes a believer.
Moreover, it begins to work a spell on him and starts to rekindle his
love life with his wife of thirty years (Faye Dunaway).  Don Juan's life
is fascinating.  He was sexual precocious from a small baby.  Girls
lined up to pay to kiss him when he was an adolescent.  By the time, he
reached sixteen, well, let's just say that many adventures awaited him.
     There is a lot to recommend this delightful bit of fluff, but let
me get the bad news out of the way first.  I am sorry to report that
the great Marlon Brando has been kidnapped!  In his place, they have a
much larger, quite mediocre, and very boring actor.  Although he does
look like Brando, he is clearly someone else.  The great Brando owned
every scene he play in.  Even when he overacted, he always commanded
attention.  This clown makes you look at your watch every time the
camera is on him.  Faye Dunaway tries to mimic his stoicism and comes
close.  Their non-performances were able to knock my rating down a peg
or two.
     There is a lot wonderful about DON JUAN DEMARCO, but at the top is
the marvelous performance by Johnny Depp.  The words flow from his lips
like butter.  His screen presence was completely convincing.  There was
no doubt in my mind that he was DON JUAN DEMARCO.
     The script by Jeremy Leven is worthy of the Brothers Grimm.  The
cinematography by Ralf D. Bode and the set decoration of Mexico is
evocative of a romantic era of long ago.  It has the feel of LIKE WATER
FOR CHOCOLATE.  The natural and richly colorful sets and the warm glow
of the filming makes happiness flow through all of your veins.  The
costumes by Kirsten Everberg are full of romance and love.  Finally,
this was the first film in a while that has a musical score that I
thought really adds to the ambiance.
     The director, Jeremy Leven, understood the mood he wanted to
create and did it quite well.  Why he had to cast Brando and Dunaway, I
will never fully understand.  Yes, I guess, he must have figured that
they would add to the box office take, but when he saw the dailies, why
didn't he change his mind and get some other actors?  Oh well, ...
     DON JUAN DEMARCO runs a quick 1:32.  It is correctly rate PG-13
for two very brief nude scenes, a bloody and deadly sword fight, and a
subtle love making scene with all of their clothes on.  Any kid older
than 12 who is interested in romance would like it.  I recommend it to
you, and I award it ** 1/2.  As I said earlier, it had the potential
for a much higher rating.

Author
Scott Renshaw
DON JUAN DEMARCO
Starring:  Marlon Brando, Johnny Depp, Faye Dunaway.
Screenplay/Director:  Jeremy Leven.
     Once upon a time, Marlon Brando was considered by many to be
the best American actor in film.  It is difficult to keep that in
mind sometimes, since so many off-screen issues have turned him into
something of an eccentric joke:  his infamous rejection of the 1972
Best Actor Oscar via Sacheen Littlefeather; the massive weight gain;
his stream-of-consciousness turn in APOCALYPSE NOW; most recently,
his televised smooch-fest with Larry King.  Brando has been on the
big screen only a handful of times in the last twenty years, so the
myth has transcended the actor.  That is a shame, because not only
can the man still act, he has shown a great sense of humor about
himself.  Exhibit A:  his hilarious self-parody in 1990's THE
FRESHMAN.  Exhibit B:  DON JUAN DE MARCO, a wonderful romantic
comedy in which the unlikely pairing of Brando and Johnny Depp adds
up to an enchanting fantasy.
     Brando plays Jack Mickler, a psychiatrist at a New York mental
hospital who is just a few days shy of retirement when he comes upon
a most intriguing case.  That case is a young man (Johnny Depp) who
claims he wants to die--and who also claims that he is Don Juan de
Marco, the world's greatest lover.  Mickler is intrigued by the
young man, and asks to treat him until his committal hearing.  Over
the next several days, Don Juan tells Mickler his life story, a
fanciful tale full of love, adventure, tragedy and exotic locations.
Although Mickler questions the veracity of the stories, he finds
himself drawn into them, and inspired to re-discover the romance in
his 30 year marriage to wife Marilyn (Faye Dunaway), and in all
aspects of his life.
     DON JUAN DE MARCO is the kind of story which has been done many
times before--the benevolent eccentric who teaches a lesson to
unhappy realists--but Jeremy Leven works wonders with it wearing
both of his hats.  As writer, he has crafted a screenplay full of
instantly quotable lines.  When Don Juan describes telling his true
love about his 1,500 previous lovers, he explains, "I could see that
the number was substantially more than she was expecting."  The
opening sequence, in which Don Juan seduces a woman in a restaurant,
is also a highlight, full of big laughs.  But as clever a script as
he has at his disposal, it is one of Leven's choices as a director
which makes it something special.  While the narrated flashbacks of
Don Juan's life are given a surreal tinge both by the nature of the
subjects and Don Juan's florid description, the scenes involving
interactions between other characters are almost hyper-real.  The
dialogue is simple, with lines frequently overlapping, and the
camera is usually stationary.  DON JUAN DE MARCO is most about the
beauty of a romantic life, and the manner in which Leven juxtaposes
Don Juan's world with the "real" world is ideal.
     Leven also coaxes two superb performances out of his lead
actors.  Brando is effortless as the run-down Mickler, whose early
connection to Don Juan in the persona of Don Octavio belies his
latent romanticism.  He is marvelously tender in his scenes with
Dunaway, and a riot when he takes a shot at his own girth in a scene
working out with a home exercise unit.  It is a light and very funny
performance, matched and perhaps surpassed by Johnny Depp.  Don Juan
is in the mold of the romantic dreamers Depp has played in films
like BENNY & JOON and ED WOOD, but with a sexual dimension he hasn't
showed previously.  Much of DON JUAN DE MARCO depends on Depp
selling his conviction that the stories he narrates are true, and
his passionate delivery makes it work.
     He works so well, in fact, that several scenes between Brando
and Dunaway probably ended up on the cutting room floor to allow
Depp's character more screen time.  That's something of a shame,
because the film is really about how Mickler changes, and how those
changes re-energize his marriage, and Dunaway is too good to be so
under-used.  However, it is quibbling to fault DON JUAN DE MARCO for
what isn't on the screen, when what is on the screen is so
appealing.  Sweet, funny and unapologetically upbeat, DON JUAN DE
MARCO is a perfect breezy spring entertainment.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Don Juan DeMarco is the last of the great romantics.  Although he
has slept with exactly fifteen hundred and two women, it is his first
love that truly has his heart.  Without her, he does not wish to go on
living.
     Starring Marlon Brando, Johnny Depp, and Faye Dunaway, DON JUAN
DEMARCO is a small, romantic tale about love, sex, women and the
relationship between a doctor and his patient.
     Dr. Jack Mickler (Brando), a veteran psychiatric clinician who is
on the verge of retirement, is sent to talk down a suicidal man wearing
a mask who claims to be Don Juan DeMarco (Depp).  After succeeding in
talking him out of suicide, Mickler becomes Don Juan's doctor for a ten
day evaluation to see if the young man should be institutionalized.
     At first, all assume Don Juan to be disillusional.  However, as
Mickler listens to DeMarco's detailed, romantic stories, he becomes
unsure whether or not this is the case.  Don Juan's adventures include
sword fights and duels, pursuing a beautiful woman whom he met while he
growing up in Mexico, and his being sold into slavery where he was
mistakenly placed in a harem with fifteen hundred women.  Inspired by
Don Juan's passions, Mickler begins to rekindle the fire in his own
relationship with his loving but complacent wife, Marilyn. (Faye
Dunaway).
     Writer/director Jeremy Leven has chosen an understated tone for
this film which borders on being limp.  However, his dialogue is well
written and he gives Depp and Brando plenty of breathing room.
     What makes this role different for Brando is the tremendous
subtlety he uses in playing a normal guy.  Unlike Stanley Kowalsky or
Don Corleone, Dr. Mickler is not larger than life but is just a man who
wants to rediscover the "fire" that is now missing from his happy but
dull life.  Sub-titles are needed at times to understand him, but
Brando combines warmness with quiet desperation and the result is a
magnetic and surprising performance.
     In his role as Don Juan, Johnny Depp once again proves himself to
be a fearless actor who can handle almost any role.  His face still
looks too young for facial hair but his commitment to the part, as in
all of his work, is one hundred percent and his acting is devoid of any
self-consciousness.
     Romance takes two and Faye Dunaway and Brando work well together.
There is a feeling of chemistry between them and Dunaway has sufficient
screen presence to balance Brando where as many other actresses would
have been blown off the screen.
     DON JUAN DEMARCO is a pleasant surprise and shows that Hollywood
has not completely forgotten how to make romantic movies.  It offers a
gentle story with a heart, a sense of humor and superb acting.

Author
Pedro Sena
This film is ample proof what a first rate actor can do for a film that is
basically nothing, to begin with.
Were it not for the subtle, polished, and so very clean work that the two
experienced actors in this production show, this film may have otherwise
fallen apart.  But with Marlon Brando, and Faye Dunaway, this film takes on
different proportions, which
are rather unusual, and turn what might have been a so- so film into
something rather nice to watch, at least for people who have a taste for
impeccable acting work.
This is the story of a young man who thinks he is Don Juan, the legendary
lover.  But he is having problems, he has fallen in love with one particular
woman, and he is now living in a mental institution where some doctors are
eager to drug up the young man, and put him away. But Dr. Minkler has
different thoughts. He engages the young man's trust and takes helps him
come through his hard time. In the process the young man affects the
doctor's own private life which has become stale.
A simple story, all in all, but by the time you get a hang of both Marlon
Brando and Faye Dunaway, as his wife, this film  takes on different
proportions.  And it is their acting that
keeps this film going. One doesn't even recognize Faye Dunaway, and it is
such a surprise that she is so smooth in this film rather than the showy
actress that she has been for so long.
As the story develops the doctor is discovering that his stale marriage is
all of a sudden becoming a bit more exciting and that they are starting to
enjoy each other a little more... and much of the credit goes to the young
man that is on the edge of being instituted.  He has an incurable
romanticism that is hard to let go, that affects many of the people around
him.
It is a pleasure to watch such a magnificent actor in this film do his
thing. He is so relaxed, and so well prepared that if forces everyone around
him to do that much better. And his relationship with his wife, which
appears to be boring at the start, turns out to be a really nice match of
actors, that work their way through things rather nicely, and it is a
pleasure to watch.
The film is nicely directed with a few touches here and there, and a
noticeable lack of close ups so that we do not get so emotionally involved
with the young man. With such a  great pair of actors around him,  it is
hard not to enjoy this film.

Author
Christopher Null
     Don Juan, the world's greatest lover is ... Johnny Depp?  I can
believe it, after seeing DON JUAN DEMARCO, a new film by first-time
director Jeremy Leven.  With excellent flare, Leven brings us this
beguiling tale of a young man who may or may not be the legendary
seducer of over one thousand women.
     When a distraught Don Juan is about to commit suicide because of
the loss of his (most recent) love, psychiatrist Jack Mickler (Marlon
Brando) is brought in to bring him back to reality.  This proves to be
a major undertaking, as Mickler slowly begins to realize that the
"delusional" Don Juan may actually be who he says he is.  As his last
case before retirement, Mickler is given ten days to determine whether
or not to institutionalize Don Juan, and there, the journey into the
man's past begins.
     What the doctor finds is a perfect blend of comedy and romance, a
serious questioning of our perceptions of reality, and a serious
analysis of our beliefs about love.  Depp's convincing portrayal of the
great lover keeps us constantly guessing as to his true identity, and
Brando pulls off his role as a comic foil perfectly.  Faye Dunaway has
a few good scenes as Brando's wife, with whom he rediscovers their
cooled passion as a result of his conversations with Don Juan.
     This romantic fable is the type of story that is generally labeled
as "cute," but its exquisite performances and comic sensibility prevent
the film from taking itself too seriously and becoming a trite sitcom.
Instead, the film manages to be touching and convincing.  Despite the
highly contrived plot and the silly ending, DON JUAN DEMARCO is a
memorable update of an ancient tale.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is an old theme to juxtapose the cruel, real world with the
seductive fantasy of a madman.  Certainly that is the power of
Cervantes's DON QUIXOTE.  And there is some attempt in DON JUAN DEMARCO
to capture some of the power of DON QUIXOTE or perhaps even the
strengths of Anthony Harvey's THEY MIGHT BE GIANTS.  But for such a
story to work, the fantasy under-story has to be compelling.  The Don
Juan story of DON JUAN DEMARCO is less a compelling fantasy that
captures the viewer and more a satiric burlesque.  Lord Byron's near-
epic poem version of the adventures of the amorous nobleman was itself
intended to be a light social satire, perhaps no more compelling than
CANDIDE.  Jeremy Leven's screenplay takes three incidents from what was
apparently the Byron version of the story.  (He does that loosely,
incidentally; Leven changes some of the character names and the island
incident should have preceded the harem captivity.  Also in the Byron,
Juan's father died when Juan was a very young boy.  Still, of the many
versions of the Don Juan story, Leven seems to be basing his on the
Byron.)  But the story works only if Leven can make the reader
wistfully wish the fantasy were true.  There would be nothing
compelling about a patient straddling the real world and, say, that of
PEEWEE'S BIG ADVENTURE.  Rather than having DeMarco's fantasies give
resonance to his madness and make us want to believe them, they leave
us with nothing we really feel like believing in either the sane or the
mad world.  It is one of several miscalculations novelist Jeremy Leven
made in directing DON JUAN DEMARCO based on his own screenplay.
     The story begins with Don Juan DeMarco (Johnny Depp) dressed in
the clothing of a Spanish nobleman, but we quickly discover he is in a
modern American city.  He seduces one last woman and then goes to
commit suicide for the love of the one woman he could not win.
Psychiatrist Jack Mickler (Marlon Brando) talks him out of the suicide
by playing along with the imaginings.  When Don Juan is admitted to an
asylum for ten day's observation, Mickler arranges to do the observing.
There the doctor finds himself drawn into Don Juan's charming fantasies
and finds that the young man's pleasant delusions transform his own
life and his relation with his wife (Faye Dunaway).
     Johnny Depp does a fairly good job as the seductive Spaniard,
adding one more likable misfit to what is becoming a long list of such
roles.  Heresy Alert!  Marlon Brando does as well as he is physically
able to do with the role but it has been a long time since he has
turned in a really good performance--in fact, forty-one years!  Since
THE WILD ONE, he has relied on his physical presence and his natural
speech patterns, not unlike John Wayne.  Today he is rotund, he lisps,
and he is surprisingly in need of elocution lessons.  Dunaway puts just
a bit more edge in her role, but has no chemistry with Brando.  It is
unclear what it would mean to have chemistry with Brando in his current
state.  Bob Dishy is unusually restrained as the chief doctor of the
hospital.
     A gentle fantasy along the same lines could have been a very
welcome film, but DON JUAN DEMARCO fails in the execution.  I give it a
low 0  on the -4 to +4 scale.
