Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
Number of Reviews
33

Author
Nigel Polhill
A friend of mine from California suggested I post a review of this movie
here since it doesn't open in the States until Friday.  Speaking as a
devoted movie buff and avid 007 fan - don't hold your breath!
Advance publicity hadn't exactly won me over with listening to the
Sheryl Crowe single on Capital Radio for the last 2 weeks.  Perhaps, I
thought, it will seem better when accompanied by the visuals of the
opening credit sequence.  Oh dear!  An entertaining enough pre-credit
action sequence leads into the worst opening titles of the entire Bond
series - accompanied by a very indifferent title track.  And somehow
that just set the tone.
A potentially imaginative idea about having a media mogul as the
villain of the piece is completely wasted by a wafer-thin story line
involving a stealth ship (Oh pleeaase!!!!), some GPS satelite
technology and World War 3.  Jonathan Pryce struts around as the mogul
looking, for the most part, not very menacing at all.  His sidekick is
a blond German guy who looks as though he's just stepped off the set
of a Die Hard movie.
The film does have some redeeming features.  As usual there are some
neat stunts and some exciting action sequences - the best involving
cars and bikes.  The BMW 750 easily steals the show for best gadget
and best action sequence and is definitely the high point of the
movie.  Pierce Brosnan puts in another solid performance.  Judi Dench
as 'M' delivers the one and only decent one-liner at the expense of a
certain deceased media mogul.
There are 2 Bond girls.  The first is played by Teri Hatcher (Lois
Lane from The New Adventures Of Superman) - looks great but never gets
a chance to do much other than shrug off her dress.  The second is
Michelle Yeoh as a Chinese secret agent - cue lots of martial arts
action stuff which is also entertaining.  Also gets the most
gratuitous moment in the movie when she stands under a shower in a
white top.  Titillating yes, but not exactly Bond's style.
Even the exotic locations seem wasted.  The Vietnam stuff with the
bike chase is probably the best.  Kowloon is woefully under-used -
sailing around all those tiny little islands looking far more romantic
in The Man With The Golden Gun.
Bond films are never a complete waste - the production values are
generally high enough to see to that - but this one certainly won't be
a DVD purchase. (Incidentally the bass on this soundtrack is even
stronger than Goldeneye).
Rates about a 5 out of 10 and comes as a great disappointment after
Goldeneye. Makes you wonder whether this is a sign of things to come
now that Cubby is no longer at the helm!

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, PG-13, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
starring: Pierce Brosnon (James Bond), Jonathon Pryce (Elliot Carver),
Michelle Yeoh (Wai Lin), Teri Hatcher (Paris Carver); written by Bruce
Feirstien; produced by Barbara Broccoli, Michael G. Wilson; directed by Roger
Spottiswoode; based on characters created by Ian Fleming.
Seen December 28, 1997 at 8:45 p.m. at the Crossgates Mall Cinema 18
(Guilderland, NY), theater #8, with Matt Perreault and my sister Jena for free
(Matt paid using pre-paid passes).
        If there's ever been an exception to the perils of excessive cliches and non-
stop action, the James Bond films are it. And if there's ever been a James
Bond film that not only proves this, but does so by pushing it to the extreme,
"Tomorrow Never Dies" is it.
        Opening sequences almost always make or break action films. When done
properly, not only are they actually exciting, but they foreshadow things to
come. This film starts off on the right foot by establishing the kind of
atmosphere that could only be found in an action movie, but with a sense of
the self-aware, enclosed universe where James Bond movies take place in. 
        First there's a high-tech, slightly complicated scene involving a British
warship crossing into unfriendly, Chinese waters. There's definite tension as
there seems to be an unknown, but certainly hostile, third party involved who
is manipulating both sides. When the scene ends in tragedy, it's clear there's
some kind of powerful conspiracy going on, and who else to call on for such a
case but James Bond?
        The film uses good judgment in the way it introduces us to Bond (Brosnon). As
the enemy was portrayed as evil and mysterious, Bond is clearly (and
obviously) depicted as an out-and-out hero. He single-handedly takes out a
small army of terrorists, and then must escape in the nick of time by flying
away in a fighter jet while the co-pilot tries to strangle him and a terrorist
in another jet tries to shoot him down! This might sound like the kind of
cliches films like this are notorious for (over-)using, but it works here
because the film knows how to get our attention quickly. It's not about the
payoff because it's obvious Bond will escape, instead, it's the way it
processes the action sequences by going over the top and not apologizing for
it, all the while creating for witty, hysterical comedy.
        It seems less emphasis is placed on the villains in thrillers anymore,
because of political correctness, and just plain copping-out on behalf of the
filmmakers (even the term "villain" sounds passe). What the film deserves
kudos for is its ability to create a villain as heinous as they come, yet
making him seem completely plausible. Jonathon Pryce delivers a perfect
performance as the arrogant, cunning Elliot Carver, a media mogul whose goal
is to take over the world, that is, through his massive media empire, not
through nuclear weapons. Through some interesting detective work, Bond and the
English Ministry of Defense believe Carver is behind the trouble brewing in
the southern Asian seas as a way to create and accurately cover his own news.
Not only is that an original idea for a conflict, but one which could carry
over into reality.
        Surprisingly, this is about as detailed as the story allows the specific plot
to become. The film's hook is the action, and of course those cool gadgets and
we get plenty of that here as Bond goes out to investigate Carver and finds
himself in a jam or two along the way. The story works much like Bond himself
- always on the run and concentrates more on the individual conflicts than any
general plot. Somehow a Chinese agent, Wai Lin (Yeoh), bumps into Bond a few
too many times and they find themselves working together. The chemistry
between Brosnon and Yeoh is rigid, but also works because of this, not in
spite of it. The two are constantly on the run from Carver and his goons, yet
the film manages to balance the stunts and special effects with its clever
story.
        Although "Tomorrow Never Dies" is far from perfect, it is quite an impressive
film in terms of its ability to be so cliche and cartoony and not make
plausibility an issue. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Roger Spottiswoode
Writer: Bruce Feirstein
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher,
Ricky Jay, Goetz Otto, Judi Dench, Desmond Llewelyn, Joe Don Baker,
Vincent Shiavelli, Samantha Bond
The Bond series is an island in the film world; where else would we look
forward to cliches, and all of the other things that occur in most of
these films?  Where else would pure escapism, a vulnerable hero, the
"talking villains," blatant product placement, predictable action
sequences, and lots of promiscuity be hoped for instead of a significant
change?  I don't understand it myself, but that's what the Bond series
is based on.  For (I think) 18 films, we've mostly got the same thing
over and over again, with some variation (and a bit of change, most
notably in the two Dalton films).  But even I, a king of cynicism, can't
bitch about it.  And "Tomorrow Never Dies," the (again, I think)
eighteenth Bond film, and second Brosnan Bond film, is no exception. 
Thank god!
The plot, as in most of them, is pure balderdash, but seems to have a
nice kind of edge to it.  Instead of just plain billionaire psychotics,
we get a Rupert Murdoch-esque media mogul/psychotic - Elliot Carver
(Jonathan Pryce, looking bitching with a white-haired cru cut, and
always talking like he's out of breath), who has the admittingly
ingenius idea of getting ratings by creating a war.  No, this is not
"Wag the Dog" - he wants a real war, between China and England, and is
stupid enough to put the coverage out before anyone else discovered
it...in comes Bond.
James is sent all around the world, trying to do research on Carver,
fighting with his men, and running into (on more than one occasion) a
Chinese secret agent like him: Wai Lin (Michelle Yeoh, Asian action star
extraordinaire...and co-star of "Supercop," nearly stealing the screen
from Jackie Chan in that one).  The two eventually, and predictably of
course, begin working together, and yes, there is some sexual tension
between the two.  Luckily, their relationship is never strained, and she
never gives into his Cassanova-ness until the finale.  Thank god again.
In every Bond film, James bags, on average, three women (sometimes more,
sometimes less - the latter being more potent towards the
AIDS-cautionary Dalton), and he doesn't spoil this one (though we never
see them, of course - I mean, they need to stay around a PG-13 rating). 
There's always one at the beginning with some chick we never see again,
the big Bond girl (Yeoh), and this time we have an almost-cameo by Teri
Hatcher as Carver's wife, Paris, who, it seems, was once one of the
girls he bags at the beginning.  Yes, Teri's very attractive, but she
seems kind of dull.  Of course, it's not really her fault; her part is
under-written, and she's only in a small part of it.  Oh well.
And there are always the big henchmen, the guys who do the dirty work
for the polished big villains.  This time we get a tall, arian-looking
(not to mention Robert Shaw in "From Russia With Love"-looking) guy
named Stamper (Goetz Otto), who is pretty awesome, although a bit stiff
(well, mostly his posture, really).  And for a bit of comedy, we get a
cameo from Vincent Shiavelli as a German or Austrian assassin who is
ordered to do in Bond at one point.
The government people have small parts, as usual, with Q (Desmond
Llewelyn, looking near death, sadly) getting only one scene (in a more
grouchy mood than usual), and M (Judi Dench), getting more than M
usually gets (I mean, it is Judi Dench).  And for no reason whatsoever,
except 'cause he was so good in "Goldeneye," Joe Don Baker shows up
again as Wade, admitting he has no reason for being there, and is this
time more annoying.  Again, oh well.
The action sequences are not a let-down, although sometimes go on too
long.  They pop up every now and then, mainly because they have to (for
the sake of the series), and some significant ones are the opening one,
one in a garage with a BMW that runs on remote control, and a motorcylce
chase (on a BMW cycle, nonetheless) through China streets (or was it
Vietnam...the plot's not really essential).  They're more high-tech, and
feature much more laughs, which, yeah, I dig.  So what if they're
distracting; they're supposed to be!
The acting, from most around is great.  Yeoh is, actually, one of the
better Bond girls, mainly because she's so unique.  The better Bond
girls are more independent, and have a certain wily-ness to them.  Pussy
Galore, with her homoerotic undertones and all, is one of the best, and
Diana Rigg, who married Bond at the end of "On Her Majesty's Secret
Service" only to be killed, added some emotional depth.  Yeoh is notable
since she's so active, and has great chemistry with Brosnan.  Pryce is
an awesome villain, being slimy and lovable at the same time.  And
Brosnan is, once again, the mack daddy.
The Bond series is built on cliches, mainly because they're so fun and
add to the escapism.  If you can remember the Dalton years, and they're
serious direction, you remember how unsuccessful they were, both
financially and aesthetically.  The series would falter if bogged down
with too much plot, too many themes, and too much characterization. I
don't really understand it myself, yet I'm one of the bigger fans of the
series in the Northeast United States.  Having seen all of them more
than once (yes, I've seen this twice already), you can tell I adore
them.  While it's not one of the best, like "Goldfinger" or "From Russia
With Love," "Tomorrow Never Dies" is nonetheless a truly awesome
installment, even if not being as fully amazing as some of the better
ones.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

I suppose it was inevitable.  The end of the Cold War, and all the
geopolitical change that entails, finally made its effects felt in a
Bond film.  The Cold War really is over.
Yes, "Goldeneye" was called the first post-Cold War Bond film, but it
was only that way simply because it was made after 1991 and had the
Russians as friends from the start.  There was the self-conscious title
scene with the usual sillouetted naked ladies, this time wielding
hammers and sickles, but the film still had an old Bond feel to it,
whatwith with supervillains and plots to take over the world with a big
ray gun.  Instead of SPECTRE and Blofeld, we have renegade Russian Army
units; names are differnt, but methodologies are the same.
The new Bond film, though, is far more embedded in the late 1990s.
Yes, there are nifty gadgets, impressive I-want-to-do-that
globetrotting, beautiful women (Teri Hatcher needs something to do
nowadays) and serious cars, but there are material changes in this
installment.  The Russians aren't even mentioned except in the
pre-credits teaser.  And, then, even that mention has a certain
post-Cold War mixture of dreadfulness and decline, referring to loose
Russian controls over their nuclear weapons.  Not quite Russians as
Keystone Kops, but certainly not Russia as fearsome superpower.
The main foreign country, in fact, is China, but this is really a minor
point.  The filmmakers simply pick the country that's vaguely
threatening, certainly powerful, in a sort of fill-in-the-Great-Power
way.  Amusingly, at least to Americans, Britain is still shown having
geopolitical weight.  I suppose in this way, the new Bond film looks
back to the Empire, or at least to a Britain that wouldn't have had a
hard time taking on Argentina.  Even in the Connery films, it was
acknowledged that World War III would be fought out by the Americans
and the Soviets, with Britian only as a supporting player.  My guess is
that this episode of imperial nostalgia was brought about by the
handover of Hong Kong around the time the movie was released, a sort of
schoolyard "we didn't really have to hand it back if we didn't feel
like it" mood.
The real innovations of this film is the focus on Ted Turner as a Great
Power.  The historical reference is Hearst and the Spanish-American
War, but magnified by satellite TV.  Missiles, warships, and all the
other tokens of military power are subservient to almighty broadcast
news.  That CNN logo in the lower right corner, so indelibly etched
into our memory of the Gulf War, of NATO airstrikes, of any situation
that potentially means war, has, in this Bond film, been elevated to
superpower status.  (I would have been amused to see "logo burning"
legislation before the Congress.)  Great Power conflict has been
morphed into ratings wars and sweeps week.  While not exactly a new
concept -- CNN, I think, caused America to send troops to Somalia and
ultimately Kosovo, and I'm sure there have been scads of academic
papers being shed on this subject -- I suppose the idea achieves a
certain pop culture status by its inclusion into a Bond film.
The Bond Girl in this installment happens to be Michelle Yeoh, who we
know is more than capable of kicking Pierce Brosnan's ass.  A minor
issue: we can safely assume she's not on the motorcycle that's jumping
over the helicopter, whereas in the Jackie Chan movies, she really,
really is on the motorcycle jumping on the moving train; the blooper
outtakes shows her missing a number of times.  The thrill isn't quite
the same.
Oh, yes, the self-referential toss-offs.  There's the one that was on
the TV ads: "Bond... you know the rest": Bond, as entirely embedded in
popular consciousness.  He doesn't even utter his tagline "martini,
shaken not stirred".  Teri Hatcher does this; she knows what his
favorite drink is as well as the rest of us.
A more interesting Self-referential Moment is near the end.  Yes, the
big bad guy has once again explained his secret plan before attempting
to kill the good guys (at least there's a motive for this peculiar,
recurring stupidity: "I like an audience").  Just before Bad Guy gets
waxed, Bond tells him that the most important thing in the media biz is
to "give them what they want."  The bad guy then expires in a very
ouch, very messy way, giving all of us what we expect to see finish a
climatic mano-a-mano at the end of an action movie.
One oddity is Teri Hatcher as a previous love interest/entanglement.
Seeing her again is sufficient to drive Bond to drink (more).  I don't
believe he's acted like this before (that whole marriage thing
excluded, though that's immaterial since that's forgotten with this Gen
X Bond).  This is a change from the autonomous independent Bond,
perhaps an attempt to give him a new past.  It's a half-hearted effort,
and the filmmakers drop it without much issue.  I don't think it works
-- our image of Bond is already fixed.
Bond, thankfully and entirely unlike Ethan Hunt in "Mission
Impossible", does not have a Macintosh laptop and does not even mention
the Internet.  This saves us from having to mock the movie for a really
bad depiction of retrieving e-mail or that the Mac has powers to upload
a virus into an alien mothership (thereby saving the world).  Think
Different.
Perhaps one thing that isn't there to give it a truly late 1990s spin
is the lack of conspiracies in smoke-filled rooms, UFOs and maybe new,
exotic plagues.  But that may be a peculiarly American way of
thinking.  Or, maybe, something to put into 1999's Bond film.
Oh, at the end of it all, I liked the movie.  It's fun, perhaps not the
best Bond film, but up there.

Author
Max Scheinin
The man in the black suit strides out into the center and looks over his
shoulder. He quickly turns around and fires a few shots. This is James Bond
(Pierce Brosnan), the highly trained super-spy, with remarkable talents,
spontaneous rebukes, and goregous women all up his sleeve. Agent 007,
(thats Double-o seven, not just seven), is among the greatest heros of the
action genre -- right up there with Indiana Jones, he represents solid
morals, ideals, and disguises wrapped into one explosive package. In a
moment, we watch him running through an airport, attaching and detaching
various bombs, hurriedly scurrying onto the back of a truck, leaping into a
plane and shooting into the sky, delayed by another plane's explosion, but
making it through all the same. As I watched, I knew that I was going to
get what I had been promised -- explosive action, goregous women, and lots
of fun. As the film progressed, I started to smile -- the job was being
done with style. Brosnan is a good Bond, probably second best (who can
forget Sean Connery?). He's charming, funny, and you actually believe that
he could perform these stunts, throw himself into the line of fire, seduce
these women. The cold-hearted villains shoot with no hesatation (as the
center villain, Johnathan Price does a good job -- he wants to start World
War III, just to keep his ratings up). The sights are terrific -- the best
scene is a break-in where Bond steals a red box (look, its important, don't
be skeptical), and races through various halls, jumping over balconies, the
whole schtick. He piles on the drinks,  shaken not stirred. Gulping them
down as he goes along, you start to feel somewhat giddy. There are corny
moments ("We seem to have made an attachment to eachother"), and some of
the stunts would never happen. No matter, in the context of the film, you
will believe. The main song ("Tommorow Never Dies"), is dissapointing, a
weak effort, especially after the livelier opening to Goldeneye. Even so, I
continued to enjoy the film, never growing skeptical. after agreeing with
one of my Internet correspondents (you know who you are), that it looked
rather crappy, I went in expecting very little. Instead I enjoyed the
crackling mix that added up into a nice vehicle. The Bond-mobile is the
best car that anyone has ever dreamed of -- it places high above the
Melehan mobile. (Ted Priddge -- I got your MiB joke, but NOBODY will get
this). I couldn't help but think that it was carried a little bit out of
range. Even so, its hard to grow skeptical. My advice: Get up and go see
Tommorow, today. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"Movies are really a kind of dream state, or like taking dope. And the
shock of walking out of the theatre into broad daylight can be terrifying.
I watch movies all the time, and I am also very bad at waking up."
- Martin Scorsese, from Scorsese on Scorsese

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Terri Hatcher,
et al.
>From that first magical moment when the spotlight sweeps across the
black screen and James Bond turns and fires, accompanied by that
oh-so-familiar musical sting, "Tomorrow Never Dies" delivers the kind
of Bondian punch that was sadly lacking in "Goldeneye".  The 18th
official Bond franchise film, not counting "Never Say Never Again,"
brings us fully back to the old familiar Bondian formula, a formula
which has been sadly lacking in recent Bond movies.  And it brings in
a few _new_ tricks as well.
As far as the storyline is concerned, TND owes a lot to past Bond
films.  As in "Moonraker" and "The Spy Who Loved Me," Bond runs into
and must work with an agent from a foreign intelligence outfit with
whom the British Secret Service normally competes.  Also as in "The
Spy Who Loved Me," the villain plans to use assaults on naval military
vessels to play both Britain and the foreign power du jour, China, off
against each other, starting a war by attacking the military forces of
both sides.  However, in a uniquely '90s twist on the old James Bond
formula, the villain, Elliot Carver (played with panache by Jonathan
Pryce) doesn't want to rule the world, or kill everyone in it and
found an empire based on his eugenically-handpicked select few.  He
just wants the media rights.
This film, more than any other Bond film in at least the last ten
years, is a Bond devotee's delight.  There are literally dozens of
scenes harking back to Bond movies of the past.  The guns.  The girls.
The gadgets.  The vodka martinis.  The supercar (a BMW this time,
thanks to the magic of product placement, though the old Astin Martin
does make a brief appearance).  The chase scenes, including the
occasional jaw-dropping stunt.  The heavily-guarded-and-beweaponed
enemy stronghold to be stormed.  The pre-credit opening gambit.  The
venerable Desmond Llewellyn, once again on hand as the venerable Major
Boothroyd, more commonly known in the movies simply as Q, who once
more gets to tell Bond to "grow up".  (Funny how Bond keeps getting
younger and younger, and Q keeps getting older and older...)  All the
things that keep the Bond movies a working franchise are _all there_.
Even the good old original Monty Norman James Bond theme makes
repeated appearances in the soundtrack, after being absent from the
last several films.
Many people are prone to knock films for being "formulaic."  In many
cases, they're right.  Formula can be the deathknell of many a film,
due to Hollywood's habit of jumping on a bright new idea and wringing
every last penny out of it, and beating the dead horse until it
resembles finely-ground chuck.  (Witness "Home Alone," and the endless
parade of clones and sequels it has inspired.)  However, with Bond
films, "formula" has meant something else--in the Bond films' heyday
at least, it was a near-guarantee of some good, solid entertainment.
When the Bond franchise first began, it broke new ground for both the
science-fiction _and_ the action genres.  It improved over the years,
particularly while Sean Connery was the leading man.  Now, however,
James Bond is no longer the only spy-action movie game in town.  In
order to distinguish itself from all the other action movie games in
town, Bond has stopped trying to reinvent himself as a strict (and
strangely monogamous) action hero, as he had become through the
Timothy Dalton Bond films, and has returned to a more traditional Bond
formula, suitably updated for the '90s.  The appeal of "Tomorrow Never
Dies" to fans of past Bond films may be summed up in just one word:
_nostalgia_.
However, this is not to say that TND is strictly "same old same old"
Bond.  There are some interesting new twists, most notably perhaps the
first Bond girl ever who can fully take care of herself, and is not
simply around to look pretty and be rescued by Bond in time of need.
Michelle Yeoh plays Wai Lin as an almost exact reprise of her
"Inspector Yang" character from "Supercop"--the Communist Chinese
agent who has to work with an agent from the British Empire (in
"Supercop," it was Jackie Chan from Hong Kong) to prevent some great
threat to China.  Michelle even gets a one-on-many fight scene all to
herself, which she handles with great grace and poise, thanks in part
to the Hong Kong stunt crew she brought in to play the bad guys.  When
it comes time to storm the enemy stronghold (in this case a stealth
ship), Michelle's Wai Lin takes her place as an equal partner to
Brosnan's James Bond insofar as ass-kicking and name-taking goes.
How do all the Bond regulars do?  Pierce Brosnan seems to have settled
into the role of Bond, playing him with a kind of spirited panache not
seen since Connery's portrayal of the agent.  Judi Dench plays M in a
dry-witted manner much after the fashion of Bernard Lee's portrayal of
Bond's old boss.  Samantha Bond's Moneypenny is a witty foil to Bond
in the scenes they share, and gets one of the best lines in the entire
film, about James Bond's linguistic skills.  Desmond Llewellyn is
inimitably Q, though at his age, surely he won't be for very much
longer.  Even Joe Don Baker is back for two scenes, reprising his
Felix Leiterish role of Wade, Bond's liason with the CIA.
As for the villains and the bit players, they are mostly also to the
film's credit.  Elliot Carver (played by Jonathan Pryce) is a
wonderful evil mastermind, harking back to the Blofeld/Goldfinger
school of villains--the kind who are megolomaniacal and aren't afraid
to show it while explaining precisely what they plan to do and how
they plan to do it.  He chews the scenery in grand style, and carries
off the villain's part with a wonderfully evil flair.  Gotz Otto plays
Stamper, the consummate henchman, who is more than up to the task of
giving Bond a hard time.
The bit players are mostly unremarkable; they come on screen, they
speak their parts, they (for the most part) die.  Vincent Schiavelli
renders a brief but interesting turn as Dr. Kaufman, a hit man who
just happens also to be a forensic doctor and pistol marksman.  Terri
Hatcher, the film's "other" Bond girl, is the only bad part in the
film; supposedly an old flame of Bond's, she is nonetheless so flat
that we the audience have a hard time figuring out just how James Bond
could have fallen for such an uninteresting person.  This also seems
to conflict with the established history of Bond as having only ever
loved one woman in his entire life (from "On Her Majesty's Secret
Service").  Fortunately, Miss Hatcher's role in the film is rather
abbreviated compared to the far more interesting and vital Michelle
Yeoh's.
It seems that director Roger Spottiswoode, or someone on the film's
production staff, is a fan of Hong Kong movies.  Michelle Yeoh's
inclusion as a very similar character to her "Supercop" portrayal is
one clue, but there are other little borrowed touches of note.  At one
point, Bond dives onto a mechanic's creeper and lets it carry him
through a door, keeping him low to avoid enemy fire--rather like Chow
Yun-Fat did in "A Better Tomorrow."  At several points, Bond and
Wai-Lin fire simultaneously from guns held in both hands, another Hong
Kong film trademark.  These little touches are just another example of
how Hong Kong cinema, the latest new wave to sweep across the western
cinematic horizon, is revitalizing western action movies in general.
TND also benefits from a nicely satirical wit, taking the opportunity
to poke fun at a variety of subjects, from Microsoft to cable
deregulation to President Clinton to car commercials to the media.
The storyline of "Tomorrow Never Dies," as stated before, borrows from
prior Bond films.  There are also scenes that are _very_ familiar,
also being prior Bond retreads.  We've seen Bond scuba-swim through a
sunken ship filled with dead bodies in "For Your Eyes Only."  We've
seen him play with gadgets and make witty one-liners about them in
_many_ Bond films, and the assault on the villain's floating fortress
of doom is familiar as well.  We've seen many of these things before.
Bond detractors will sneer and say, "So?  Why watch them again, then?"
For Bond fans, however, I suspect this will be much like meeting a
long-lost friend after a long time of separation.  It's the _formula_
that makes Bond movies Bond movies, and the minor variations that make
them worth watching individually.  Forget the line at the end of the
credits crawl that says "JAMES BOND WILL RETURN."  He has already, and
he was _long_ overdue.
(This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | ICQ UIN: 5477383
Robotech_Master    | http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/index.html
robotech@eyrie.org | -----------------------------------------
robotech@jurai.net | Co-moderator, rec.games.mecha

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher, Gotz
Otto, Judi Dench, Desmond Llewelyn, Samantha Bond, Geoffrey Palmer, Joe
Don Baker Director: Roger Spottiswoode Screenplay: Bruce Feirstein
In the secret place of every man's heart, there lies a fantasy to be
perfection incarnate. In this fantasy the gentleman is a distinguished
soldier, a polished diplomat and an insatiable lover all rolled into
one. Immaculately clothed, ingeniously armed this warrior/lover creation
of Ian Fleming emerges once again after forty year of immortal
existence. Bring out the caviar, serve the champagne and watch the
spectacular display of destructive fireworks caused by Bond, Mr James
Bond.
It must be Bond's legacy to taste every woman from every walk of life.
If women could be compared to fine food, then my favourite Bond dishes
would be the delectable Honey Ryder submerged in layers of chocolate,
the Pussy Galore dipped in whipped cream, and Alotta Fagina with Alotta
Fagina - sorry that's a missing page from my Austin Powers cook book.
Like any good Bond film, this movie begins with the usual culinary
delights of finger food appetisers, before moving on to the spicy main
course. Terri Hatcher, better know as Superman's girl, tries her hand
with Bond, but only lasts a good undressing and bedding before being
murdered by a jealous husband. Having served the purpose of a cocktail,
the next course is the perfect example of exquisite oriental cooking,
the sort that wriggles and sizzles on your plate. I'm referring to the
sumptuous Michelle Yeoh. I freely admit to being a sucker for woman in
dark leathers with multitalented use of their hands and legs. I haven't
been this fascinated by the thinking/fighting woman well, since Bambi
and Thumper decided to go group action with Bond.
Once again, the question asked is how does this James (Pierce Brosnan)
compare with the other Bonds? Well he's not as manly as the heartthrob
Connery of the sixties, not as clean cut as the single dimensional Moore
of the seventies, and not as emotional as the ordinary Dalton of the
eighties. Brosnan is like the corporate executive of the nineties
deciding he needs a bit of Rambo in his life. So far he's doing a good
job interpreting the nineties Bond and should hold together for another
decade.
The plot surrounds events of news making ground breaking news. Evil
Media Mogul Elliot Carver (Jonathon Pryce) has decided that there is no
better news than bad news, and the best publicity usually comes from
oneself. Why wait for heaven and hell to arrive when you can create it
yourself. Now that the Soviet Union is no longer considered a serious
threat to world peace, the Chinese have become unwitting victims for
beginning WWIII with the British. Carver's plan basically surrounds the
use of stealth boats downing naval vessels of both sides and
antagonising all concerned.
In summary, TOMORROW NEVER DIES is what every Bond film should be. A
mixture of light-hearted humour sprinkled over the noisy, undertones of
special effect driven action, with a coating of classy babes to help the
food go down with as little indigestion as possible. My compliment to
Cubby Brocolli for once again bringing as back the Bond that every man
wants to be.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 12/19/97 (wide)
Running Length: 2:00
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Violence, mild profanity, sensuality)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher, 
      Gotz Otto, Judi Dench, Desmond Llewelyn, Samantha Bond, 
      Geoffrey Palmer, Joe Don Baker
Director: Roger Spottiswoode
Producers: Barbara Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson 
Screenplay: Bruce Feirstein 
Cinematography: Robert Elswit
Music: David Arnold
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     The scrutiny surrounding TOMORROW NEVER DIES, the eighteenth 
"official" James Bond film (not counting CASINO ROYALE or NEVER SAY 
NEVER AGAIN), isn't as intense as it was around GOLDENEYE, but the 
attendant hype is, if anything, even more severe.  Product tie-ins are 
everywhere.  Turn on the TV, and you'll see Pierce Brosnan's Bond 
hocking cars and credit cards.  (Product placements in the film are at 
an all-time high.)  With GOLDENEYE, producers Barbara Broccoli and 
Michael G. Wilson successfully re-invented 007 for the '90s (although, 
truth be told, little modification was necessary) and proved that the 
venerable action hero could still be a viable box office draw (GOLDENEYE 
was the first Bond film to break the $100 million mark).  Now, with 
TOMORROW NEVER DIES, it's back to business as usual -- continuing the 
once-again healthy franchise. 
     TOMORROW NEVER DIES is a better film than GOLDENEYE.  In fact, it's 
the best Bond film in many years.  For the first time since the 
legendary Sean Connery left the part, this movie feels like a Connery 
Bond adventure.  Pierce Brosnan, having left behind the jitters he 
occasionally exhibited during GOLDENEYE, now inhabits his character with 
a suave confidence that is very like Connery's.  The villain of the 
piece, Elliot Carver (played with panache by Jonathan Pryce), is cut 
from the Blofeld/Goldfinger mold -- sinister, cunning, and charismatic.  
(How many of the Roger Moore/Timothy Dalton bad guys fit this type?)  
The henchman, Stamper (Gotz Otto), bears more than a passing resemblance 
to Robert Shaw's killer in FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE.  The ever-reliable "Q" 
(Desmond Llewelyn) is still around, showing off his latest wares and 
telling 007 to "grow up."  Added to that are the usual Bond girls (Teri 
Hatcher and Michelle Yeoh), the gadgets, the chase scenes, the fights, 
the explosions, and a John Barry-esque score (by David Arnold) that 
makes repeated and effective use of the "James Bond Theme."
     As is usually the case in a 007 flick, the bad guy is a 
megalomaniac.  There's a twist, however -- Carver doesn't want to rule 
the world, he wants to rule the world's media.  The Rupert Murdoch-like 
figure is launching his own cable news network, and, to encourage 
viewers to tune in, he has decided to literally make headlines.  Using 
the advanced technological capabilities of the Carver Media Group, he 
engineers a conflict in the South China Sea between two Chinese planes 
and the HMS DEVONSHIRE.  The ship is sunk and one of the planes is 
destroyed.  War between China and Britain looms, with Carver having the 
inside story.  And that's where Bond comes in.
     Equipped with a brand new BMW that can almost drive itself, 007 
goes undercover into Carver's empire, pretending to be a banker.  At a 
posh party held by the tycoon, he meets Carver's wife, Paris (Teri 
Hatcher), an old flame.  Also present is Wai Lin (Michelle Yeoh), a 
Chinese secret agent posing as a newswoman.  It doesn't take long for 
Bond to rub someone the wrong way, and soon he's ducking behind a 
printing press to escape a hail of bullets, then racing through the 
streets of Hamburg in his souped-up car.  With the clock ticking, Bond 
and Wai Lin have less than forty-eight hours to stop World War III.
     In TOMORROW NEVER DIES, the series breaks a little new ground.  Wai 
Lin becomes the first "Bond girl" to function more as a partner for 007 
than as a love interest, someone to be rescued, or both.  Played by Hong 
Kong star Michelle Yeoh (also known as Michelle Khan), who is best known 
in America as Jackie Chan's co-star in SUPERCOP, this character is just 
as physical and lethal as Bond, and she never screams for help.  Brosnan 
and Yeoh click, and if there was ever a Bond girl worth considering for 
an encore, Wai Lin is it.
     I can't be as positive regarding Teri Hatcher, who turns the 
supposedly-exotic Paris into a bland, unalluring figure.  Her shared 
past with 007 is supposed to bring out his vulnerable side (last seen at 
the end of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE), but it's hard to believe 
that such an uninteresting person could inspire any kind of emotion.  
Hatcher is the film's most obvious weak link -- fortunately, her screen 
time is limited.  
     The action sequences are suitably entertaining.  It's impossible to 
count the number of bullets fired, and there are pyrotechnics aplenty, 
including exploding missiles, a fireworks show on the ground, and a 
fairly spectacular climactic conflagration.  There are a couple of 
memorable chases, including one with a driverless car and another with a 
low-flying helicopter closing in on a motorcycle.  For those who crave 
flashes, bangs, narrow escapes, and other action film staples, TOMORROW 
NEVER DIES delivers.
     While the script isn't as openly jokey as some of the Roger Moore 
screenplays, it contains a fair number of one-liners.  While some of 
these are predictable, several of them are unforgettably witty.  "M" 
(MRS. BROWN's Judi Dench) makes an acid comment about the roles of men 
and women in the politics of war, and Moneypenney (Samantha Bond) offers 
a pun about Bond's canny knowledge of different languages (surely the 
best line of the film).  There's also some playful repartee between 007 
and his Chinese counterpart.
     Bond fans will likely love this movie.  Detractors will yawn it 
away as "more of the same."  In a way, however, that's the point.  No 
one really wants Bond to change or evolve, at least not significantly.  
We attend movies like TOMORROW NEVER DIES because they offer a 
predictably entertaining time with a popular superhero who can save the 
world with one hand while holding his vodka martini (shaken, not 
stirred) in the other.  TOMORROW NEVER DIES isn't fundamentally much 
different from GOLDENEYE or GOLDFINGER, for that matter.  It's the same 
basic formula put to effective use.  What separates a good Bond movie 
from a bad one isn't the plot -- it's the supporting cast, the 
intangibles, and the energy level.  With only a few exceptions, TOMORROW 
NEVER DIES scores high marks in all three categories.  Following this 
effort, there's no doubt that, once again, James Bond will return.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Hessel Visser
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher,
Desmond Llewellyn, Dame Judi Dench and Geoffrey Palmer.
About two years ago, when GoldenEye opened, a new era of 007 spectaculars
has begun. Pierce Brosnan is the 'new' 007, Dame Judi Dench the new 'M',
Samantha Bond the new 'Moneypenny' and Desmond Llewellyn still plays the
good old quartermaster 'Q'.
Some new ingredients were added to the Bondrecipe. Take for example the
role that women play in the film. They are on the same level as Bond is.
And that's, I think, much interesting! 
But 007 has to cope with (a healthy) dosis of female authority. Judi Dench
has proved that she is able to play such a character! Quote: Admiral
Roebuck: "Sometimes I think you just don't have the balls for this job"! M:
"Perhaps. The advantage is that I don't have to think with them all the
time"! 
 Pierce Brosnan seems to be very comfortable with the role. He plays the
part a lot easier than what we saw on GoldenEye. A great compliment for
Pierce Brosnan! He can be very proud.
Martial-artist Michelle Yeoh steals the show as Wai Lin, the Hongkong
agent. She appeared before in a Jackie Chan-movie. As said before, she
plays a Chinese James Bond. She really kicks butt! 
Jonthan Pryce, this time, plays the lead villain, Elliott Carver. He is
good, but he could have been more sinister. 
Teri Hatcher plays a former lover. Paris Carver, now Elliotts 'loving'
wife. She comes and she goes. 
In general, Tomorrow Never Dies is wall to wall action, big time action. It
brings you excitement, intrige, mystery and romance. And offcourse a
title-song, performed by Sheryl Crow. This is not a typical Bondsong, pity
enough! I think K.D. Lang's 'Surrender' would have been more convenient for
the titlesequence.
Visit: HTTP://WWW.TOMORROWNEVERDIES.COM

Author
David Sunga
Starring: 
Pierce Brosnan, Michelle Yeoh, Jonathan Pryce, Teri Hatcher 
Ingredients: 
James Bond, scuba scene, car controlled by cellular telephone
Synopsis: 
Warped media tycoon Elliot Carver (Jonathan Pryce) plots to start a war
between Britain and China in order to boost ratings by using a 'stealth
ship' to fire a captured British missile at the city of Beijing.
Super-agent James Bond (Pierce Brosnan) uses trick gadgets, pluck, and
charm in order to foil Carver's scheme. This time Bond teams up with top
female agent Wai Lin from China (Michelle Yeoh). The film contains
fights, chases, gadgets, and comedic moments. 
Opinion:
It does not have a casino scene or a ski scene, but TOMORROW NEVER DIES
is nevertheless a solid, enjoyable Bond movie. It neither stands out nor
disappoints. In old Bond movies Bond sometimes teamed up with American
CIA agent Felix Leiter. TOMORROW NEVER DIES introduces a new character
in the form of Chinese agent Wai Lin. Like Leiter's character, Wai Lin
would be a sure bet for a cameo in a later Bond movie.
Stars:
Michelle Yeoh was born a Leo in the Western zodiac in the year of the
Tiger on the Asian astrology calendar. I dont believe in horoscopes.
But at an airport I once browsed an astrology book with a section on Leo
Tigers (LTs). 
"Leo Tigers prefer enough solitude to grow at their own pace. LTs are
unbelievably courageous when facing adversity. The LT is also classy,
and has an excellent sense of refinement, but she sees herself as an
adventurer, and prefers freedom of movement rather than flashy status
symbols. This person loves family and friends with a fierce loyalty. She
delights in siblings, nephews, nieces and extended family - -  but she
must have her personal freedom to come and go as she pleases. Sometimes
annoyance at injustice drives her to take up one or two causes. In love
life, the LT has an unfortunate mental block against committing to any
partner who is less powerful than she." 
In real life, Michelle Yeoh is Asia's top female star. Like Jackie Chan,
she does her own stunts. She was born in Malaysia - - a country of many
languages - - and her primary language (the language she speaks in her
sleep) is English. She was taught Malay in school, and learned Cantonese
from bilingual parents. As an athlete Michelle represented Malaysia
internationally. She enjoyed squash, diving, swimming, and rugby. She
studied ballet at the Royal Academy of Dance in London, but switched to
drama after a spinal injury. In 1983 she won the Miss Malaysia pageant -
- without really intending to, since a family member had entered her in
the contest without her knowledge. Notoriety from the contest led
eventually to a movie career as an action heroine. Michelle has survived
a divorce with Asian retail tycoon Dickson Poon; a nearly fatal stunt
accident falling from a freeway overpass which put her in the hospital
for three months, and; a retirement from the movies. Her comeback from
retirement, SUPERCOP (1992) became the top grossing film in Asia that
year. It is not clear what Michelles martial arts style is, but it may
be a theatrical version of wing chun. Of her character Wai Lin in
TOMORROW NEVER DIES, Michelle says, "Wai Lin is the first Bond Girl who
is on a par with Bond, someone who can match up with him mentally and
physically." My own opinion is that casting Michelle Yeoh as agent Wai
Lin was an excellent choice.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
By it's very nature, Tomorrow Never Dies is a film that invites
comparisons.  The film itself with earlier Bond pictures, Pierce Brosnan
with Sean Connery and Roger Moore, the Bond car and gadgets of today
with those of yesteryear...  the list goes on.  And I think it's a fun
game to play, if you're into that sort of thing.
But if we're going to make comparisons...
Is Tomorrow Never Dies a better film than The Peacemaker?
I think that's a fair question.  All of the Bond heritage aside, we
still have to judge Tomorrow Never Dies on its merits rather than on its
illustrious predecesors.  By that standard, Tomorrow Never Dies is a
middle-rung action movie, nothing more.
Tomorrow Never Dies employs the same basic plot foundation as The
Peacemaker -- an irresponsible madman has control of a nuclear device
and plans to explode it to further an irrational agenda.  (Given the
relative stability of geopolitics nowadays, this seems to be the most
popular plotline going.  Mission: Impossible and True Lies used similar
nuclear plots, and  it's even used, in a backhanded, satirical way, in
the current Wag The Dog.)   However, the villian in Tomorrow Never Dies
is a megolamaniacal news tycoon (Jonathan Pryce) whose true enemy is, in
fact, CNN.  His ultimate weapon is a "stealth boat" which can't be seen
on radar, has video teleconference capability, and is much bigger on the
inside than the outside.  And he's trying to start a war between Great
Britain and China to increase TV ratings.  And...
I'm sorry, the plot is just too ridiculous for words.  It really is.
There's just so much about it that's implausible and quite a bit that
doesn't make any sense whatsoever.  It just ambles along with motorcycle
chases and car chases and whatnot until the final confrontation between
Bond and this Rupert Murdoch guy. (I won't tell you who wins.)
Tomorrow Never Dies is a formula movie.  And there's nothing
intrinsically wrong with that, mind you.  It's just that if you're going
to make a formula movie, it needs to have something extra to
differentiate it from the other formula movies out there -- and by
itself, vodka-martini-shaken-not-stirred dialogue and Pierce Brosnan's
suave performance don't cut it.  To its credit, Tomorrow Never Dies does
try to shake up the formula by adding Michelle Yeoh, best known in the
States as a Jackie Chan sidekick. (Or "sidechick"?)  Unfortunately,
she's not given nearly enough opportunity to flex her kung-fu muscles,
and the one scene where she does get to stomp some bad guys looks
tacked-on.
All that aside, though, this is still a James Bond movie, which means
that things are done with class.  Brosnan's 007 has made everyone forget
about Timothy Dalton -- and maybe even Roger Moore.  The chase scenes
are well-done, although they're not compelling.  The plot is nonsense,
but it's well-photographed and well-staged nonsense.  The Bond support
team (M, Q, Moneypenny) do a workmanlike job, as does Teri Hatcher in a
brief role.
So, to answer my question, is Tomorrow Never Dies better than The
Peacemaker?  Let's put it this way:  does anybody want to see George
Clooney in seventeen sequels?
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In one of the key scenes in the latest Bond movie, Bond's new
gadget-laden and remote-controllable BMW engages in a car chase and
demolition derby.  "Unsafe driving can void your warranty," chirps the
car with ironic sincerity.
     The beauty of the James Bond films comes from their lack of
pretensions.  Campy fun from beginning to end, they provide energetic
and forgettable entertainment for the masses.
     The picture's title, TOMORROW NEVER DIES, makes about as much
sense as the movie, which isn't required to make any.  Bond films,
starring Pierce Brosnan these days, are for showing off whiz-bang
technology and for action sequences.  They never take themselves
seriously, and the dialog, this time by Bruce Feirstein, always has
some nice one-liners to tickle your funny bone.
     As Elliot "There's no news like bad news" Carver, Jonathan Pryce
throws himself into the role of media baron and villain.  Not content
to report the news, Carver wants to create an incident that might set
off a world war just so that he can cover it first when he launches his
satellite news service.
     (And that's not his only malevolent tendency.  "Are we ready to
release our new software?" he asks one of his minions, who replies,
"Yes sir, and it's full of bugs so we can release upgrades for years."
This delicious but out-of-place piece of dialog has little to do with
the news business, but it sure did raise the roof in our Silicon Valley
audience.)
     The original Bond movies were considered sexually daring.  Today,
they are remarkably tame.  With strategically placed bed sheets, with
wet tee shirts that are not quite see through, and with camera cutaways
just before anything revealing is shown, they stay firmly in the PG-13
rating territory.
     With a secret army of Aryans and a Roto-rooter torpedo, Carver
tries to make the British and the Chinese each think the other side is
making hostile gestures.  Bond and Chinese agent Wai Lin, played by
martial art, action film star Michelle Yeoh, thwart Carver just in time
to save the world.  (Gosh, I hope I didn't give away the ending for
you.)
     "The key to a great story is not what but why," Carter lectures.
And the why of any Bond picture is to show how our hero can battle a
hundred men and survive.  With a bravado motorcycle chase and with
non-stop action, director Roger Spottiswoode delivers.  The package
isn't much, but it is entertaining.
     TOMORROW NEVER DIES runs a little too long at 2:03.  It is rated
PG-13 for violence, mild profanity, and sexual situations, and would be
fine for kids around eleven and up.

Author
Bill Chambers
TOMORROW NEVER DIES *** (out of four)
-a review by Chambers, Bill Chambers
(What movie do YOU recommend? Cast your opinion on my updated website,
Film Freak Central:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504)
starring Pierce Brosnan, Michelle Yeoh, Jonathan Pryce, Teri Hatcher
written by Bruce Fierstein
directed by Roger Spottiswoode
Let's face it: the $100 million-plus smash that was "Goldeneye" was
not a good film by any means, and as a Bond movie was only marginally
better than, say, "A View To A Kill" or either of the Timothy Dalton
pictures, by virtue of nice pacing. But it did revive the series, and
granted the producers some new directions in which to take the it (ie.
the new "M" is a woman). "Tomorrow Never Dies" is the picture
"Goldeneye" should have been; it's also the most entertaining Bond
outing since "The Spy Who Loved Me".
The new picture opens with China considering war with Britain after a
standard military operation is misconstrued as a hostile threat from
an English submarine. As an attack occurs, the front-page headline is
already being prepared, courtesy of Carver media. Carver (Pryce) the
man is a deluded magnate, a sort of hybrid of Ted Turner, Bill Gates,
and Peter Sellars' German scientist from "Dr. Strangelove"
(physically, Pryce even recalls Sellars in his Kubrick days). It's up
to James Bond to take him down, with assistance, of course, from a
wealth of gadgets (including a multi-purpose cell phone), and
beautiful women. Enter Michelle Yeoh, fresh from "Supercop", as a
Chinese secret agent with her own agenda; with effortless grace, she
cat burgles, dispatches baddies seemingly with the ease of preparing
pasta, and refuses the advances of our philandering hero. They make a
great team.
"Tomorrow Never Dies" is a surprisingly entertaining and efficient
film, given that at the helm is none other than the director of
"Turner & Hooch". Spottiswoode has crafted some breathtaking set
pieces, each much more intricate and impressive than, for instance,
the tank scene in "Goldeneye". Moreover, Brosnan has at last settled
into the role some feel he was born to play; last time out, the fate
of the franchise rested on his shoulders, and there was noticeable
discomfort in his body language. Returned in Brosnan's eyes has some
of the playfulness he demonstrated for so many years on TV's
"Remington Steele", as has his deadpan wit. And though Carver's
motives are muddy (when Carver explains that "genius is insanity with
some success", screenwriter Fierstein is taking a lazy shortcut),
Pryce makes an agreeable, memorable villain. In the future, they
should pursue actors as talented and experienced as Pryce to breathe
life into these cardboard figures.
There a few too many explosions in "Tomorrow Never Dies", perhaps so
many they qualify as dialogue. And it could have used a sharper
script, though I was amused by the double entendres, none of which I
will reveal here. As it stands, the plot suffers many holes (I'm not
taking about implausibilities), and the dialogue tends towards the
hackneyed. Now that the elements are in place: modern special effects
and stunt work, cool Pierce Brosnan, kickass female allies... it's
time to put them to use in something truly special. There's no
mistaking, however, that "Tomorrow Never Dies" is ideal holiday
escapism, and for the first time in perhaps years, you'll walk out
wanting more Bond movies.
-Reviewed December 17, 1997

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     If one looks at FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, there is a lot that
happening in the film.  The plot involves British intelligence, Russian
intelligence, Turkish intelligence, and SPECTRE.  Within SPECTRE there
are competing agents chess champion Kronstein vs. Rosa Klebb.  There is
a false seduction and other double crosses.  There are also fights and
chases, but they are each relatively short in duration.  When Bond
fights Grant it is a believable fight and Grant is dispatched in three
or four minutes.  Then the plot starts moving forward again.  The
result was that FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE was a James Bond thriller.  If
you have James Bond captured by the nasties and twenty minutes later he
is still escaping and the plot is still at a standstill, it does not
matter how many cars have been blown up, how many people have been
shot, or how many helicopters have crashed.  What you have may be a
James Bond action film, but it is not a thriller.  If Bond has to do
some clever deductive work to realize what the villain is up to, you
may have a thriller.  If Bond's success just happens because by
coincidence he is in the right place at the right time, you might have
an action film, but you do not have a thriller.  TOMORROW NEVER DIES
has an unfortunate shortage of plot complexity.  It is an action film
with James Bond, but it is not a James Bond thriller.
     After a shaky start in his first film, Pierce Brosnan is every bit
the James Bond that Roger Moore was, for whatever that is worth.
TOMORROW NEVER DIES reminds on of a Roger Moore Bond film.  After a
mostly irrelevant opening sequence we have a British battleship first
buzzed by Chinese MiGs, then chewed up by some sort of mechanical
device that combines aspects of a torpedo, a tunnel borer, and a
lamprey.  It goes to the bottom much like the Titanic, the film about
which was released in the same weekend.  (I wonder if the allusion
could have been intentional.)  The British and Chinese governments are
on the point of war and James Bond is sent off to figure out another
puzzle.  It seems that while sea-water was still leaking into the
battleship, news of the attack had already leaked out.  It was on the
news channel before anyone could have possibly known unless they knew
in advance the attack was to happen.  The news channel is ruled over by
magnate Elliot Carver (played by Jonathan Pryce).  Pryce seems to
comprise the worst aspects of Ted Turner, Rupert Murdoch, Bill Gates,
and a lamprey.  Can it be that Carver is actually creating the news--
WAG THE DOG style--for his own ends?  Wait till you hear the reasons
why!  But Bond has to get his information pumping Paris Carver (Teri
Hatcher), former Bond lover and now Mrs. Elliot Carver.  The plot works
like a too-well-oiled machine taking us from one fifteen-minute action
sequence to one that is possibly twenty minutes without ever slowing
down for the audience to ask if it all makes sense, which it does not.
     Along for the ride this time are Judi Dench as M, trying to look
as much as possible like Bernard Lee with two X-chromosomes and
frighteningly succeeding.  Desmond Llewelyn is trying to give the
impression that a job in the Secret Service is for life.  He is
probably there mostly for continuity as is Joe Don Baker's superfluous
Jack Wade, formerly of GOLDENEYE.  Jonathan Pryce is a great actor who
makes a nearly colorless Bond villain.  Two characters are not
colorless and should have been used to considerably advantage.  One was
a Chinese agent played by Malaysian actress Michelle Yeoh, a sort of
female Jackie Chan who could well have out-performed Brosnan in the
action scenes.  The other was a terrific small role for Vincent
Schiavelli as Dr. Kaufman, expert in torture and other infamous arts.
Schiavelli has one short delectable scene in a role that cried out to
be expanded.  Also there is a totally lackluster and boring acting job
by Bond's car.  The scenes in which the car appears look like second
rate automobile ads, which by an odd coincidence is exactly what they
are.  (I would not mention that here, but since the filmmakers accepted
all that nice money from the manufacturer to pose the car so much more
carefully than they pose any of the human characters, I feel obliged to
review the car's performance.)
     As a director Roger Spottiswoode is, well, spotty.  His UNDER FIRE
was a very solid political film.  His made for cable adaptation of AND
THE BAND PLAYED ON was a high-point of its year.  Let us not, however,
dwell on his STOP! OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT.  As a director of a Bond film
he was only middling successful.  He should have exerted more control
on the script, making it more intelligent and refusing the product
placements.  David Arnold has written an acceptably John Barry-sounding
score built around Barry's James Bond theme (credited falsely to Monty
Norman).
     TOMORROW NEVER DIES is below average for the Bond films to date.
They never even bother to tell the viewer what the title means.  I rate
the new Bond film a 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high 0 on the -4 to +4
scale

Author
Kevin Patterson
This review is being reposted due to formatting errors which caused some of
the text to be repeated in the original.
Tomorrow Never Dies  **1/2 (out of four)
PG-13, 1997
Directed by Roger Spottiswoode. Written by Bruce Feirstein.
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh.
In a way I almost feel unqualified to write this review since I had never
actually seen an entire James Bond movie until now. Still, I had heard enough
about the series that I had a pretty good idea what to expect here - a suave
British secret agent, with the assistance of lots of high-tech gadgets, blows
away dozens of bad guys, pulls off numerous death-defying stunts, saves the
world, delivers sarcastic one-liners, still finds time to sleep with several
attractive women, and acts like he doesn't notice.
And for the most part, that's what I got when I went to see "Tomorrow Never
Dies." The gadgets and stunts are by and large the best aspects of the movie;
my personal favorite was the cellular phone which also served as a remote
control for Bond's car. This led to the most notable action sequence, in which
Bond manages to conduct a car chase from the floor of the back seat. Brosnan
appropriately manages to make the whole thing look like second nature, except
for one moment when he lets slip a childish grin, like a kid who is delighted
to be playing with his new toys.
The plot, if it matters, is this: media mogul Elliot Carver (Jonathan Pryce)
tries to provoke a war between Britain and China because it will make for
great headlines to coincide with the launching of his new international
satellite network. Both countries' governments sense that something is fishy,
and thus Bond and Chinese spy Wei Lin (Michelle Yeoh) are dispatched to
investigate. Carver, like every other evil genius who aspires to world
domination, has a personal security force the size of a small army and thus
proves to be a formidable adversary for both super-spies. Along the way there
are car chases, motorcycle chases, fights, shootouts, sky dives, etc.
The one problem I had with the movie is that it sometimes didn't push things
far enough. Most of the action sequences were suitably over-the-top, but a few
of them (most notably the final one) are really nothing different than what
you might find in any action movie. There are also too many instances in which
one of Carver's assistants could easily have killed Bond but, for some reason,
waited. Note that I don't object when the primary villain acts like this and
uses the moment to deliver a goofy "I shall rule the entire world!" speech
while the hero cooks up a scheme to escape - some cliches make for good campy
fun, but having a generic thug just stand there with a gun while staring
blankly isn't one of them.
I went to "Tomorrow Never Dies" expecting to see a light-hearted, funny, and
entertaining action movie and to give it three stars. Since some of the action
sequences turned out to be fairly mundane, and a number of the one-liners fell
flat, I have decided to give it two and a half. I wouldn't advise paying full
price for it in a theater, but at rush hour or on video, it's good for a
couple hours of mindless entertainment.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Every schoolkid used to know how the U.S. got involved in
the Spanish-American War.  William Randolph Hearst,
publisher of a right-wing syndicate of newspapers, publicized
alleged atrocities which the Spanish were committing against
the Cubans and, in bold headlines announcing that Spain had
sun the battleship Maine, Hearst developed public support for
military action.  In "Tomorrow Never Dies" (the title coming
from a song on the soundtrack of the 18th entry of the James
Bond series), a billionaire media mogul takes this idea several
steps further.  As played with sardonic villainy by Jonathan
Pryce, Elliot Carver, seeking to scoop the rest of the world's
media, personally creates crises--having written the stories
beforehand for immediate circulation.  By this method, he
expects his newspaper, "Tomorrow," to have an audience of
one billion people and to gain exclusive rights to publish in
China for the next hundred years.
   In what could be taken as a sendup of the control which the
media have over political developments, "Tomorrow Never
Dies" displays a handsome, urbane Pierce Brosnan in the
role of James Bond, now appearing quite comfortable in the
part and perhaps ready to assume the identity of 007 for the
next hundred as did Sean Connery in the previous period. 
His demeanor matches that of Roger Moore mroe than that of
the Scotsman, and this would be desirable except for one
thing: violence has replaced sex in the foreground, at least
since Tim Dalton tried the role on for size, and therefore his
particular refinement is somewhat wasted.  Perhaps not
knowing what to do to make Bond politically correct in concert
with the times, scripter Bruce Feirstein has largely written sex
and double-entendres out of the film replacing them with the
more acceptable firepower.  The movie, directed
by Roger Spottiswoode, is solidly packed with action, has a
fine array of special devices which the super-spy is instructed
to use by agent Q, and fits the by-the-numbers technique
which worked so well when Cubby Broccoli produced the bulk
of the series. As Bond says at one point to his nemesis, Elliot
Carver, "You forgot one rule: give the people what they want." 
Bet that the Bond fans still want the comfort of the formula
which has worked so well in the past since "From Russia With
Love" stirred and shook a wide audience.
   Filmed largely in Thailand which at one point takes the
place of Saigon and also in Hamburg, which is used as the
center of Carver's media empire, "Tomorrow Never Dies" has
the usual plot devices used successfully for thirty-five years. 
These include these details: The villain is not aligned with
either of the major powers but is an independent third force. 
The principal miscreant dies before his supporting knave, the
latter often a figure of great physical strength.  The women
are pliant (though not nearly as much so in today's political
climate).  Some stunning photography is exhibited in exotic
world locales.  Sexual double entendres barb the dialogue. 
The bad guy goes down to defeat even after capturing Bond
and his associates because he talks when he should be
shooting.  30,000 rounds of ammo are directed at the
champion by dozens of perps without a single hit, while
Bond's shots are invariably lethal.  A pre-credit sequence
shows Bond successfully escaping after carrying out a
dangerous mission.
   After fleeing from a British missile attack on a terrorist
bazaar by commandeering a Russian plane, Bond is thrust
into his new mission immediately, this time against a sinister
billionaire who proves once again that money is no substitute
for power.  Elliot Carver (Jonathan Pryce) has set up satellites
throughout the world to beam his headlines to a huge
audience, but he is not licensed to practice his skills in China. 
Using high-tech gadgetry to plunge Britain and China into war,
he throws a British vessel into China's territorial waters,
whereupon Chinese pilots warn the Brits to leave the scene
immediately.  Insisting that they are in international waters,
the English admiral prepares to fight and, when Carver's
stealth ship torpedoes the British, the latter believe the
weaponry is coming from China.  The crisis which this activity
precipitates is reported immediately and exclusively the
Carver's paper, "Tomorrow."  When Bond infiltrates Carver's
network by attending his party in Hamburg disguised as a
banker, Carver sees through the scheme and sends his chief
goon, the super-Aryan Stamper (Gotz Otto), to erase him with
extreme prejudice.  Teaming up with the Chinese agent Wai
Lin (Michelle Yeoh) who, despite her mere 100 pounds is a
powerhouse of kicks, 007 chases and is chased by the
rogues, escaping at one point on a motorcycle ride through
the streets of Saigon and at another point using his heavily
equipped BMW which he drives from the back seat using a
remote control device.  Bond's mission ultimately is to destroy
the stealth battleship inhabited by Carver and his gang, thus
shutting down the mogul's missiles and aborting World War
III.
   The sexual dialogue, however limited this time around, is
effective enough as when 007 reports to his headquarters 
boss, M (Judi Dench) that he is "brushing up on a little
Danish." Moneypenny, who has advised Bond to "pump"
Carver's wife for information, replies that she always
considered Bond "a cunning linguist."  When Carver's wife
reports that she barely knows Bond, her disbelieving husband
repeats, "Barely."
   There is enough mayhem in "Tomorrow Never Dies" to
guarantee that the Bond series, like Broadway's "Cats," will
also never succumb, particularly when support can be
counted on by the wide array of products which are placed--in
this case Smirnoff's Vodka, the BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Avis,
and other luxury commodities representing part of what
Chinese agent Wai Lin refers to as Western decadence. 
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 115 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey
Karten

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
If TOMORROW NEVER DIES, then how long will it take before James Bond is
eliminated? Obviously a bloody long time. Even though the first James Bond
film, DR. NO, was released 35 years ago, he's still going strong. Hell, James
Bond should be retiring by now. He *should* be well over 60, but luckily, due
to casting changes over the years, Bond is still young and fit as a fiddle,
and I don't see him taking his prune juice shaken and not stirred anytime
soon.
In this installment of the long-running super spy films, James Bond (Pierce
Brosnan) is up against a Ted Turner wannabe named Elliot Carver (Jonathan
Pryce). Carver owns a communications company that oversees a growing newspaper
called "Tomorrow", and is now branching out into television with aspirations
of even more. Carver's elaborate schemes will enable him to one day rule over
the media, including exclusive control in China. Not only that, but just to
piss people off, he's going to colorize all the classic movies. Ok, I lied
about that, but this guy is still devious.
This whole scandal is first suspected when a military fowl up results in the
deaths of several Navy officers off the coast of China. It seems the Chinese
told the H.M.S. Devonshire to turn back when it entered Chinese waters, but
the technology inside the British vessel was saying otherwise. Convinced they
were in international waters, the British stood there ground, and eventually,
a group of terrorists killed both the British soldiers and a couple of Chinese
fighter pilots as well. The Chinese think the British attacked. The British
think the Chinese attacked. Only we know that Carver was behind it all,
setting up the entire escapade for the sake of getting "good news".
So why does anybody suspect fowl play? Good question. The answer lies in
Carver's satellites, which were broadcasting on the same frequency as the
ship. Could Carver have intentionally messed with the signal? And, as Carver
himself admits, the more important question is "why?".
Naturally Bond sets out to figure it out and put a stop to it all, sleeping
with beautiful women, driving fast cars, and using whatzit gizmos created by Q
(Desmond Llewelyn) until in the end, he saves the day while never messing up
his hair. That's right - it's typical Bond. Wildly outrageous, totally
implausible, and two hours of brainless action. That's all we expect, and
that's all we want. Bond is merely a testosterone ridden Richie Rich for
adults, and TOMORROW NEVER DIES fits in just fine. But it's also nothing new
whatsoever, and there's only so much of the same stuff we can see.
What makes this one a little more fun and unique is that Bond actually teams
up with someone, and the two are nearly equal in their performances and "hero"
factor. Michelle Yeoh makes her English speaking debut here as Wai Lin, a
Chinese special agent who finds herself on the same trail as Bond. When they
continuously run into each other, convenience has them forming a team to
combat against Carver and his thugs. Yeoh is impressive and a delight to
watch, adding a spark to the film. In fact, if this had been more of a Bond
solo film again, we might actually realize enough is enough. Not with Yeoh.
She keeps things fresh, alive, and (thank heavens) new.
Teri Hatcher also has a small role as Carver's wife, Paris. Hatcher, who
became known for her sexy TV interpretation of Lois Lane, doesn't stand out in
anyway, but doesn't do too bad of a job with her role either. Her lack of
screen pizzaz could be attributed to the little screen time she receives.
She's in this a lot less than you might expect, especially after being used as
a hook in television commercials and movie trailers. In other words, if you're
out to see this film just to drool over her, you'll be spending five bucks for
about fifteen minutes of screen time. That's expensive oogling.
Also known as "Bond 18" for being the 18th "official" entry in the series,
TOMORROW NEVER DIES is the second Bond film to star Brosnan, who rose to fame
as TV's Remington Steele. How good of a job he does at portraying 007 is
something that was likely discussed heavily in reviews of GOLDENEYE, which
was, of course, his first outing as the British secret agent. Seeing as how I
didn't write a review of that film, I'm going to use this opportunity to give
my two cents - Connery will always be the best and truest Bond there was, but
Brosnan comes in a definite second. The thing that Brosnan lacks is *true*
charm. Yes, he's debonair, subtle, sophisticated, seductive, and even
articulate, but unlike Connery, he doesn't have that twinkle in his eye. You
can envision Connery bursting into a hearty laugh. Brosnan, on the other hand,
seems a bit *too* polished and serious.
Bond enthusiasts will, of course, find it crucial to see this film, and
they're not going to be disappointed. If you're not overly fond of 007, or if
you actually haven't seen him before, this is not the one to convert you to
Bondism. It goes way overboard, as any good Bond film does, yet still manages
to leave you passive to the events unfolding on screen. I guess the main
problem is that it's just getting a bit old. I actually found myself bored as
the film was wrapping up. My mind was wandering, and I was trying to see my
watch in the dark to see how much longer it could possibly go. It's not awful
- it's just beginning to feel like we *have* been watching Bond for 35 years
after all.

Author
Homer Yen
A British naval ship is engaged in a confrontation with Chinese jet
fighters.  The Chinese insist that the British ship is in Chinese
waters.  The Captain of the ship adamantly states that they are in
international waters, warning that they will defend themselves.  In
the next few tense minutes, the ship begins to sink while one of the
Chinese fighters is destroyed.  Who was in the wrong?  Both nations
begin to prepare for possible war.  Can this volatile situation be
resolved?  British intelligence believes that media mogul, Elliot
Carver (Jonathan Pryce) may have something to do with this, and they
send their best man to investigate.  
Pierce Brosnan is back, and once again handsomely fills the shoes of
James Bond, agent 007 of Her Majesty's Secret Service.  We learn that
Bond once had a relationship with Carver's present wife, Paris (Teri
Hatcher), and is tartly instructed to get reacquainted and to 'pump'
her for information.  Such double entendres is one of the trademarks
of Bond films, and you'll find no shortage here.  The 007 formula also
incorporates a well-choreographed, beginning action sequence; a bevy
of techno-gadgets such as a remote-controlled BMW 750IL; several
frenetic chase sequences; and a charismatic villain with delusions of
grandeur.
The James Bond franchise, to its credit, as been updated to a great
degree.  In this case, the villain is not some would-be terrorist, but
rather a media magnate that wants to launch a worldwide media network.
His avenue of achieving global dominance is not through weapons of
mass destruction but rather instruments of mass information.  Using
his resources, Carver will create the storylines and then subsequently
use his media to sway public opinion. "Caesar had his legions,
Napoleon had his armies, and I have my divisions--TV, newspapers [and
other media]," he gloats.  It's a very clever concept.  Also, the
women are a lot stronger and tougher.  M, Bond's female superior, is a
tireless boss that is stern but compassionate.  Accused by a male
counterpart of not having the 'balls' to make a tough decision, she
candidly replies, "at least I don't have to think with them."  Paris
Carver is able to find a soft spot in Bond's cavalier exterior.  But
the best addition is a little firecracker by the name of Michelle
Yeoh.  As a cool-headed agent from China, she uses her formidable
martial arts skills and intelligence to move forward in her mission,
which parallels that of 007.
The one thing that I found distracting about this and most Bond films
is the issue of product placements.  For example, when Q shows Bond
his new remote-controlled BMW, I was waiting for him to start
discussing lease terms.  In fact, I was amazed that I didn't see
Jonathan Pryce driving away in an Infiniti!  Also, there seems to be
less humor and a subtle shift towards the realm of conventional
techno-thrillers.  007 is becoming a more responsible Bond, straying
away somewhat from his tongue-in-cheek origins.  But moviegoers who
have come to expect lots of action and cool toys won't be
disappointed.  The most inventive scene is a nifty chase, where Bond
is in the back seat of his BMW guiding his car via remote control
through a parking garage.  Using a touch pad, he steers and deploys
his arsenal of weapons at the same time, laughing all the way like
some giddy schoolboy.  That is the essence of bond.  That's what makes
him fun to watch.  

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) TOMORROW NEVER DIES is another link in the chain of
James Bond movies. It doesn't deviate too far from the formula, so if
you know your Bond, you know what you're getting. 
The villain this time is media mogul Elliot Carver (Jonathan Pryce) who
wants his near-monopoly on news and information, to become a monopoly.
He plans to instigate a war between Britain and China, right in front of
his news cameras, using a stealth ship to fool their military forces.
Because he's scripting the war, his news reports can stay well ahead of
the competition. 
James Bond (Pierce Brosnan) is called in to examine possible links
between Carver and strange activity in the waters off China. China sends
Wai Lin (Michelle Yeoh), who becomes Bond's partner and counterpart. 
Bond has encountered strong women before but none who have kicked as
much ass as Yeoh. Yeoh, who has worked in Hong Kong action movies, most
notably with Jackie Chan, is a great counterpart to Brosnan. She has a
scene where she singlehandedly takes out a squadron of bad guys. Bond
shows up in time to "save" her from the last villain, but we know who
really won the fight. Wai Lin's relationship with Bond is professional,
not sexual, which seems at first like a refreshing twist, but is really
a necessity: she couldn't sleep with 007 (in his own movie) and keep her
dignity as an equal. 
Desmond Llewelyn makes his 16th appearance as Q, outlasting every other
Bond actor. He has the usual gadgets for "doublo sev'n," including, of
course, several car-mounted devices that are sure to make for some
excellent chase scenes. Judi Dench returns as the tough new M, making
sure that the men of the intelligence community don't do too much of
their thinking with their balls. 
TOMORROW has all the ingredients that we've come to know and love in
Bond films: the sexy, sexist title sequences; the gadgets; the stunts;
and the big cavernous room with an army of bad guys in identical jump
suits. But this is also what holds it back. Nothing new makes this Bond
anything more than just a link in the chain. I enjoyed the movie, but it
won't go down in the Bond books as a classic. 
If this film had been made ten years ago, it might have been more of an
achievement. But in this age of computer-generated special effects, some
excitement is lost. We know or are wise to suspect that some of the
stunts and gimmicks are more fake than they used to be. The days of a
"real" fistfight on the back of a jet are gone. But as the politics of
Bond have been updated, so too must the look be updated. 
One thing hasn't changed though. "James Bond will return."
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Matt Petras
Rating: ** out of ****
Length: 125 min
Director: Roger Spottiswoode
Producer(s): Barbara Broccoli, Michael G. Wilson
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher, Joe
Don Baker, Ricky Jay, Gtz Otto.
        As time moves forward and more movies are filmed, certain
formulas become readily apparent and they are exploited. Also as
sequels are created franchise series' are found and exploited. This
being yet another movie in the enormous Bond series it is hard to tell
what we should expect from it. Since it is obvious the series is being
exploited, it's particularly obvious after the you find out that this
is the eighteenth official Bond movie. From the beginning Bond has
been somewhat formulaic, I cannot readily recall a movie in which Bond
DIDN'T save the world from peril or from some grand external force.
Since both the basic formula for a Bond movie seems to still be
popular and still be something that is in demand, then so be it. Let
there be Bond movies. Simply because the character of Bond is popular
doesn't mean that the story has to be terribly predictable. It is
obvious that Bond is going to win the moment the ticket is purchased,
that doesn't necessarily mean that you can predict everything that
happens in this movie. 
        For example: Enter,  Wai Lin something of a copy of Bond but
with a Chinese tone. This is a fairly original idea having a woman
that is just as capable as good old Mr. Bond, well at least it's
somewhat original for the series. This idea is not played out all that
well for more than once she seems to be this Damsel in distress with
our hero soon coming to the rescue. Wai Lin, played by Michelle Yeoh
is a character that should add flare and life to a Bond movie. But is
only there it seems to assist the hero of the hour, something of a
sidekick rather than the equal she is made out to be. Michelle Yeoh,
seems to be good for the role that the character is best suited for,
not the one that comes through, rather unfortunately. 
        As Bond, Pierce Brosnan fits the traditional formula almost to
the letter. He is everything he is supposed to be, he's even emotional
about his relationships or at least he tries to be. Yes, Bond actually
cares about some of the women he sleeps with. Just makes you teary
eyed thinking about it. Strangely enough that idea was tried with
rather limited success.  Pulled out of a love scene with a blonde
beauty, to go onto this mission, Bond encounters a former flame. Yeah,
so? He's not supposed to go mushy on us, that's not the Bond that is
expected, that's also not the Bond that works. It's also not something
that works very well in the movie. One liner's abound when this
subplot is visited, a rather forced way to bring us another love
scene. 
        Now no formula is complete without a bad guy unfortunately
there isn't much of one in this movie. The idea behind the bad guy is
great it's actually plausible. But the character is not developed
enough and assuming certain things is required. The bad guy is
sinister enough for the part, but you don't see enough of the evil,
not enough of the planning behind the mayhem. Just because the 'Bond
Formula' requires an evil character does not mean that he's being evil
just for the sake of being evil. There just doesn't seem to be much
motivation behind what he does and comes off somewhat aloof from the
story. 
        Now, no Bond movie is complete without its gadgets, its
violence and its action. Well, this movie has those in fair quantity.
Fair enough not to be over indulging and fair enough to keep the pace
going at a fairly high speed to keep our interest. One thing that
strikes as being rather pointless is opening sequence, too elaborate
and too destructive. The whole build up sequence could have been
created much more subtly for much greater effect. Especially since the
opening sequence turns out to be one of the more destructive and more
action packed ones in the movie. Other than that, the Bond formula
holds more than true for most of the film in this respect. The action
is where it is supposed to be and in proper quantity.
        But then when viewing a Bond movie, what is it that you go to
see it's the action, the character and the story. The story is there,
although riddled with holes.  The character is there and in fairly
good standing with only a minor blip. Finally, the action is there
although a bit excessive in the beginning. All in all, this movie is
exactly what it is expected to be. It is a Bond movie, maybe not the
best Bond movie but not the worst one either.  It had the potential to
be one of the better action films of the year, but it fell short by
its shortcomings. In the end, it's a decent action movie supporting an
old franchise with due respect. 


Author
Lax Madapati
Brosnan is back in Bond 18 `Tomorrow Never Dies', a much better
follow-up to the awful `Goldeneye'. This time he fights a megalomaniac
media mogul Elliot Carver, devilishly played by Jonathan Pryce. The
plot involves Bond's bid to thwart Carver's attempt to trigger a war
between the UK and China by provoking each side through manipulation
of Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites with the help of his
army of private mercenaries and an Indian software wizard Henry Gupta.
The payoff to Carver: exclusive media coverage rights from China, the
one prize that has so far eluded him in his quest for world domination
in media coverage.
The film's spectacular (and mandatory) pre-title action sequences
involve Bond's escape from a Russian border area that serves as a
conduit for illegal arms sale, before it is totally destroyed.  After
the title sequences, which for the first time in the Bond franchise
history, do not seem to have been designed by the great Maurice
Binder, we are introduced to Carver's wife, Paris Carver (Teri
Hatcher) at Elliot Carver's lavish party to unveil his global media
network.  Paris also happens to be Bond's ex-flame who still has
enough feelings for him to put her life in jeopardy. Enter Michelle
Yeoh as Wai Lin at the same event, a Chinese secret agent posing as an
aspiring reporter. Paris' character does provide an opportunity for
some tender moments of love but with her short shrift, the film shifts
into maximum overdrive. In continuing the recent trend of mind-numbing
action and violence in the Bond films, we are dragged through various
stunts, chases and killings that have degraded the Bond films to the
level of routine action fare and Bond himself to a one-man death
machine. Throughout this process, Bond seldom uses his intelligence to
get out of tight situations and instead relies on his new issue
Walther and some gadgets fitted into his new BMW by the ever-charming
Q (Desmond Llewelyn). We are continuously made to wonder if Bond
transformed himself from a suave, witty and intelligent spy to a sharp
shooting fist fighter.
Fortunately, the body count is not as much as in `Goldeneye' as thanks
to Zorro, the director of brutal and sadistic violence scenes Martin
Campbell (No Escape) has left the Bond series.  First-time Bond
director Roger Spottiswoode (whose only remarkable film to date is the
average `Shoot to Kill') does not display much understanding of what a
Bond film should be and instead seems to be content working off the
mediocre and hackneyed script that Bruce Feirstein (`Goldeneye') gave
him after umpteen rewrites. Acting, cinematography and editing are
adequate but production design leaves a lot to be desired. Everything
looks too modern and cold and the opulence and majesty that marked the
earlier Bond entries (thanks to Ken Adam and Peter Lamont) is gone.
Even the colors in the film look faded out and something seems to be
lacking in the negative processing. If Lamont is good enough to be
chosen by someone of the stature of James Cameron for his epic
`Titanic' (which also opened today!), why was he not retained for this
movie? Samantha Bond is back as the bitter and caustic M and once
again does some lip service to political correctness that marks this
decade. Product placement is not too loud and obvious as I feared.
Bond's globe trotting is kept to a minimum - Germany, the U.K.  and
Thailand. Location scouting seems to have been done by some really
lazy people as save for some aerial shots of the sea, there is nothing
worth mentioning.
I deliberately saved the best for last, a topic most film critics
don't even comment on - the film's score. After Goldeneye's success,
UA tried to bring back the great John Barry to score this film but
negotiations failed, reportedly due to UA not agreeing to pay Barry
his asking composer fee and not giving him any creative control in
composing the title song with the artist of his choice.  After that,
two names featured the most in UA's quest for a replacement - James
Newton Howard and David Arnold. As things worked out, Arnold was
chosen to score this film and boy, does he deliver! His score is
absolutely delicious and is the best thing about this film. He not
only scores some cues in the wonderful style of Barry (pre-title
sequences titled `White Knight' are reminiscent of Barry's score for
`From Russia with Love' and the Hamburg scenes remind me in places of
the score for `Goldfinger') but also brought back the 007 theme with
even Barry stopped using in the `80's as he felt the theme became
somewhat dated. Arnold also puts his own touch to the score in parts
like `Dr. Kaufman' and `Station Break'. He stops short of using a
variation of the main titles song (or even the end titles song) as his
love theme but instead composed a lovely little theme that should have
been used a little more in the film. As a bonus, he also composed the
wonderful KD Lang song that was used for the end titles, `Surrender',
which remains very true to the Bond franchise and should have been
used for the main titles. It very much reminds me of Bassey's
wonderful `Goldfinger'.  The title song is the worst ever done for a
Bond film and is sung hideously by Sheryl Crow, clearly demonstrating
to us that she does not have the vocal range that is demanded by a
Bond song. It is obvious that Arnold had nothing to do with the Crow
song. Arnold also did some covers of classic Bond music before doing
the score for this film and understands very well what a Bond score
ought to be. He is a truly worthy successor to John Barry.
*********SPOILERS FOLLOW**********
The plot of the film involving total world media domination by
triggering a war between the UK and China is derived from two sources
- the earlier Bond film `The Spy Who Loved Me' that has the villain
stealing weapons from two countries to use them against each other and
trigger a nuclear war. The villain Elliot Carver is a replica of that
in the 1982 book by Irving Wallace, `The Almighty', in which a
newspaper baron "creates" news and is the first to always publish it
in his newspapers, twisting destiny to suit his own needs and desires.
In addition, `Spy' also provides this film with another element - that
of rivals Bond and Wei Lin overcoming their own rivalry to fight a
common enemy. Stamper is straight out of `The Living Daylights"
Necros. We also have Joe Don Baker from the same film playing another
character in this film.

Author
Dean Thomas Sebastian Carrano
TOMORROW NEVER DIES
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher
Seen 12/21/97 at the Sony Theatres Village VII, New York, NY
TOMORROW NEVER DIES is a typical James Bond movie.  Bond beds some women,
uses some hi-tech gadgets, and saves the world.  If you're a sentient
being who's been on this earth for a decent amount of time, you probably
have formed an opinion of Bond movies.  If you like 'em, go see this one. 
If you don't, no need for you to bother. 
Bond saves the world twice in the film, actually.  The first time is
before the opening credits, in a good action scene.  Following the opening
credits, which feature the terrible theme song by Sheryl Crow (whose
attempt to recast herself as hip and jaded is not coming off too well), we
get the "real" movie, dedicated to the second adventure.  A British ship
encounters two Chinese planes near the Chinese coast.  The result is that
one of the planes is shot down, and the ship is sunk.  But is the
explanation as simple as it seems?  Neither the British nor Chinese
government thinks so, and with the two countries on the brink of war over
the incident, the answer must be known.  The British send Bond (Pierce
Brosnan) to investigate a possible culprit, while the Chinese send Wai Lin
(Michelle Yeoh) to do the same.  That suspect is Elliott Carver (Jonathan
Pryce), the owner of a worldwide media empire.  Thanks to some truly
terrible secret agent work, Bond blows his cover in about six seconds, and
the battle is joined.  Bond has to contend with Carver and his goons.  He
also has to decide whether Paris (Teri Hatcher), a former flame who is now
Carver's wife, is on his side or Carver's. 
As in the BATMAN movies, the main character, Bond, is a well-known
constant, so the movies are made or broken on the strength of the villains
and the sidekicks.  This works a little better in the Bond realm than it
has in the BATMAN series for a few reasons: we've had 16 films to get to
know Bond; Bond isn't as complex a character as Batman; and unlike the
BATMAN series, Bond movies have wisely limited themselves to one villain
(plus a "lead henchman") and one sidekick, max.  Brosnan is pretty
believable as Bond.  He's certainly bringing more energy to the part than
Timothy Dalton did. 
As the villain, Pryce is average.  He only really shines in a couple of
moments.  One is early in the film, when he checks in with the presidents
of the various branches of his empire.  The other is much later, when he
taunts Yeoh by imitating her martial arts style.  In these two scenes,
Pryce shows an ability to have fun with the character.  Bond villains
should not be played too seriously.  If they are, we begin to think about
the plausibility of their scheme, and plausibility in general is never a
strong point of Bond movies.  Only at the very end of the film do we get
any kind of semi-logical explanation of why it makes financial sense for
Carver to spend the billions of dollars undoubtedly required for his plan. 
I will say that a media mogul is an interesting choice of villain.  Carver
expresses the fear that many of us have about the power that some players
in the telecommunications industry (Disney, Turner Broadcasting, etc.) 
have gained.  The fear is that such giants will abuse their position as
Carver does and use it to manipulate the news, as in AD CITY or WAG THE
DOG, rather than to report it.  Of course, this movie doesn't dwell on
those issues, nor should it.  But it's interesting to see who we fear as
villains now that the Cold War is over. 
The "lead henchman" here is the Aryan "Stamper", played by the wonderfully
named Gotz Otto.  How often does an actor in a James Bond film have an
even more appropriate name than his character?  Anyway, the filmmakers
should have just given in and cast Rutger Hauer in this role.  It's the
most Rutger Hauer-esque part I've ever seen.  Unlike some of the lead
henchmen in past Bond films, like GOLDENEYE's Xenia Onatopp or
GOLDFINGER's Oddjob, Stamper is not interesting at all.
Hatcher is wasted.  She's in the film mostly to have her top taken off,
and we only get a dorsal view of that.  It's implied that her character,
Paris, may have had more of a relationship with Bond than the expected
one-night stand, and somehow "got too close."  But the issue isn't
explored.  It's probably just as well, since Bond films shouldn't be
character studies.  Nonetheless, it's a silly point to bring up in the
first place if you're not going to make any effort at all to explain what
it means. 
Yeoh, the Hong Kong film legend most familiar to American audiences from
Jackie Chan's SUPERCOP (a.k.a. POLICE STORY 3), makes a very good
sidekick.  She doesn't really have any chemistry with Brosnan until well
into the film, at which point they start to really click.  A scene in
which Wai Lin shows Bond her home is very funny, which is a rare moment in
a film which in general takes itself a little too seriously.
Unfortunately, it's already too late by then for us to fully buy into the
relationship between Bond and Wai Lin.  Still, if you ignore the end,
where she is reduced to a damsel in distress, Yeoh kicks plenty of butt
throughout. 
And, indeed, the action sequences in general are well-done.  A long chase
scene with Brosnan and Yeoh on a motorcycle is particularly good.  My only
beef is that Bond makes out a bit too much like Rambo in this one. 
Outmanned 50 to 1, he shoots himself out of the situation, rather than
finding a more creative solution involving the gadgets he's given or some
other type of ingenuity.  Even hand to hand combat would usually be more
entertaining to watch than gun combat, unless the gunfighting is directed
very well.  A *lot* of bullets are fired in this film; a John Woo-like
number.  In fact, the film pays direct homage to Woo when a character is
shown jumping while firing a gun held in each hand, all filmed in slow
motion.
In another disturbingly RAMBO-esque moment, Bond disposes of Carver in a
particularly gruesome way.  A simple arrest would have sufficed, since
Bond had already thwarted Carver's plot.  I didn't think that the good
guys killed for no reason, even if they had a license to do so.  And in
such a disgusting manner?  Not cool at all.
Sum: TOMORROW NEVER DIES is a James Bond movie.  React accordingly.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Pierce Brosnan; Jonathan Pryce; Michelle Yeoh & Teri Hatcher
Tomorrow Never Dies is the 18th film in the long running series of films
about British Secret Service agent James Bond. Pierce Brosnan returns for
his second stint as 007. Brosnan is joined by Jonathan Pryce as the evil
villain, and Teri Hatcher and Michelle Yeoh as the mandatory bond girls.
This time Bond is up against a madman bent on world domination of the media.
Jonathan Pryce plays Elliot Carver, the head of a world wide media
conglomerate who is expanding his news operations and wants a good juicy
news story to add spice to his new venture. So he decides to create it. As
usual, its up to Bond to stop the crazed villain and make the world safe.
Nothing new here in the basic plot line, but this is a Bond film and we
don't exactly expect an Academy Award winning drama here. This is meant to
be pure escapist entertainment, which it succeeds in being. While Tomorrow
Never Dies might not be the best Bond film ever, it's in the top 5 for sure.
It offers some of the best stunts of the Bond films, and what felt like the
most stunts ever in a Bond film.
Not surprisingly, Bond is backed up by an assortment nifty gadgets provided
by Q (Desmond Llyewelyn in his 17th appearance in that role). The most
notable of which, is his new remote controlled BMW. Like all Bond films
before it, Tomorrow Never Dies is not a deep movie. There are no deep hidden
meanings, nor is it laced with messages of social value. Although it is
laced with other sorts of messages -- Advertising. While this has been
present in the other Bond films (at least since the Roger Moore era) this
one seems to go a little over the top. I'm not sure if it really has more
product placement shots than previous Bond films, or if they are just more
glaring. (Q in an Avis Rentacar uniform) Or perhaps it was the unbelievable
amount of product tie in ads that aired in the weeks leading to the release
of the film. (Anyone who hadn't seen at least one ad must have been living
in a cave -- they were everywhere.)
Brosnan continues to fit well in the role of Bond. Pryce is a fine successor
to all of the Bond supervillans of days gone by. He would give Dr. No or
Goldfinger a run for their money. The biggest treat in this film is the new
Bond girl Michelle Yeoh. She is one of Asia's biggest action film stars.
Basically, she is the female Jackie Chan, doing all of her own stunts while
playing Bonds Chinese equivalent.
Bottom line -- if you are a fan of James Bond in general, and Pierce
Brosnan's in particular, go see this one, you won't be disappointed. On the
other hand, if you have never seen a Bond film that you liked, well, this
one isn't going to change your mind. And most likely you haven't gotten this
far into the review anyway.

Author
Walter Frith
     When Pierce Brosnan came on to the scene as James Bond in 1995's
'GoldenEye', there was new hope for the classic spy character.  There
hadn't been a Bond film in six years since 1989's 'License to Kill' and
there hadn't been a truly great Bond film since 1983's 'Octopussy' which
was the second last Bond movie featuring Roger Moore as 007.
     The 007 franchise has been lacking in insightful screenplays in
recent years and while 'Tomorrow Never Dies' is an average action film,
it certainly shows no relation to the Bond tradition.  It's one of the
most poorly edited films I've ever seen and Brosnan's take on the
British secret service agent this time around is the shallowest I've
ever seen from any of the men who have portrayed the man who likes his
Martinis shaken and not...you know the rest.  Brosnan has very little
dialogue and the plot is a lackluster and cynical one which may not be
too far from the truth the future may hold for planet Earth but its
music video style presentation and protracted action sequences make it
utterly forgettable.
     Jonathan Pryce plays the super villain who happens to be an
extremely powerful international media mogul who is behind the crimes
that eventually make news which his organization capitalizes on and he
draws many parallels to some of the corporate manipulation which is very
real and there are some good inside jokes on the essence of life in the
technologically advanced 1990's.  Pryce's wife (Teri Hatcher) is an old
flame of Bond's and along for the ride is a Chinese government agent
working to achieve the same thing as Bond for her government and she
reluctantly hooks up with 007 at the right moments.
     For some reason, the forces behind the creation of any James Bond
movie seem to think that audiences will enjoy over and over again the
fact that James Bond's cars will be jazzed up with violent gadgets and
self defence devices and it would be nice if they would look for a
different angle.  How about something hidden in 007's bow tie, his
cigarette lighter or even his belt buckle?  In 'Tomorrow Never Dies'
Bond has a remote controlled car that saves his life at just the right 
moment and in many ways the car is more exciting than any of the 
characters, dialogue or situations that go down.  
     I felt as if I was watching a Steven Seagal or Jean-Claude Van
Damme movie instead of a Bond flick.  Trashy but flashy, not boring but
not 
memorable, 'Tomorrow Never Dies' will disappoint a Bond fan but may 
please someone who doesn't care about or has never seen a 007 entry in 
the series, mainly the new generation.  
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
me@alanine.ram.org
As has been repeated several times, the demise of Communism in the
Soviet Union is one of the worst things to happen to Hollywood.
Dozens of plot devices were no longer available. Some writers,
however, kept going, dishing out the same plots, only realising later
that they could no longer bank on the anti-Communist tendencies that
were present in the general populace to carry the movie.  However, a
few movies in Hollywood managed to reinvent themselves.  Fortunately
for us, the James Bond series is one of them.
In the latest James Bond flick, /Tomorrow Never Dies/, not only do we
see cooperation between the Imperialists and the Communists, we see a
more confident Pierce Brosnan playing James Bond, and the contentment
of knowing that the more some things change, the more they stay the
same.
Brosnan is definitely the right person to play 007. Neither George
Lazenby nor Timothy Dalton were very charismatic, and Roger Moore and
Sean Connery are not as young (though it would be interesting to see a
Bond movie set in the future (i.e., depicting an old or retired Bond),
with Connery returning).  To his credit, Brosnan appears to have
settled into the driver's seat, making the depiction of James Bond
/Tomorrow Never Dies/ one of the best.
The plot in /Tomorrow Never Dies/ is essentially the same as 
other Bond movies.  The movie opens with a great action sequence, even
better than the one in /Goldeneye/, which depicts Bond preventing a
plane carrying nuclear weapons from being destroyed by a missile.  The
credits sequence is spectacular, primarily due to the presence of an
"electronic figurine". 
Soon we switch gears and learn of an evil media tycoon, Elliot Carver
(Jonathan Pryce), who seeks to control how information is distributed
around the world.  Carver is a character who literally is symbolic of
people like Ted Turner and Rupert Murdoch, but he reminded me of Bill
Gates.  Of course, the ultimate goal of this control is the epitome of
capitalism: acquisition of wealth.  How ironic then that a movie
series that relied on anti-communist tendencies now relies on
anti-capitalist tendencies to sell itself.
Carver's idea of information control involves being the source of
information generated, so he can be the "first" to distribute it.  To
this end, he manages to create a situation, through the use of his
technology, where China and the United Kingdom are almost at war with
each other.  Bond is assigned to stop him.
As Bond goes about his job, he runs into Carver's loyal henchman
Stamper (Gotz Otto), Dr. Kaufman (Vincent Schiavelli), one of the most
humourous characters in the movie, Wai Lin (Michelle Yeoh), a Chinese
agent who helps Bond fight Carver, and Paris Carver (played listlessly
by Teri Hatcher) an old flame of Bond.
At this point, the burning questions are: how long does it take before
Bond gets to sleep with Paris and Wai Lin? How many times does Carver
try to kill Bond and Wai Lin?  Who dies first: Stamper or Carver?  And
so on. For answers to these, you have to see the movie.
So while it may seem like a lot has changed, but in some ways, the
Bond movie series has still remained the same.
Brosnan and Yeoh are well-matched.  I much prefer Yeoh, who is fairly
charismatic, to many of the other ladies Bond has been paired up with.
Pryce plays a brilliant over-the-top villain. One of the most amusing
scenes in the movie is when Carver mockingly imitates Wai Lin's kicks
and punches, ending with "pathetic!"
The main problem I had with the movie was the less-than-perfect
production.  Perhaps it was due to filming in a foreign country, but
there's a lot of awkwardness among the extras, which indicates that
not enough footage was collected, or  enough attention wasn't paid on
the cutting room floor.  But since I like Jackie Chan movies, this is
only a minor nitpick as far as I am concerned.
The other problems include a suggested conflict between M (Judi Dench)
and a British general, which is never exploited fully.  The one-liners
by Moneypenny (Samantha Bond), whose role entailed little more making
little quips, irked me.  Finally, there is little inventiveness
(unlike in Jackie Chan movies) involved in how Bond gets out of the
scrapes he gets himself from. 
The premise of the movie isn't that far off from reality.  Given the
direction intellectual property laws are heading, nothing short of a
police state will ensure that the so-called "owners of information"
profit from every use of the information.  And who said a Bond movie
isn't thought-provoking?


Author
James Brundage
Officially, the new Bond will get back media because the media is the
villain, much like with Natural Born Killers. Unofficially, it still sucks.
But its, you must understand, more classic bond. That's true for all the
bond scripts, predictable with a bunch of one liners. Think of Bond as
Freddy or Jason, with a change for the good, better looks, and a Makarov
pistol instead of a chainsaw or the Edward Sciscorhands motif. You have to
like the classic kind to like any of them. Goldeneye WAS NOT classic bond,
and, in my mind, that made it an inferior sequel because it didn't work with
Sequel mentality.
That isn't to say that "Tomorrow Never Dies" didn't suck. In fact, most
"Bond"'s are only useful because we get a really good song at the beginning
(I.E. "Nobody does it better" in the beginning of "The Spy Who Loved Me").
That and to help along movies that spoof them (Spy Hard and the infamous
lines in Trainspotting: "He's always been lacking in moral fiber."
"He knows a lot about Sean Connery"
"That's hardly a substitute")
You gotta admit the stunts were good, and on the overall the technological
aspect of the movie was as good as any, but the acting, directing, etc. The
parts that make a movie good, sucked. Brosnan's British accent may be real,
but his part of 007 and his silly interactions, combined with his aged looks
make him not play 007 well. The idea that women would THROW themselves at
him just doesn't make sense. But, hey, women are one of life's mysteries.
As for the women in this movie, combined with Price (I'm reasonably sure he
either was once or wishes to be a woman (murder over jealousy, such a
feminine motive)). I don't know WHY anyone wanted to be in this bond film.
They don't get good lines at all, or good names (Wai Lin?? PARIS???) Nothing
compared to Onatop. Oh well, Expect great and you will be disappointed.
Expect nothing and you won't.

Author
Scott Renshaw
TOMORROW NEVER DIES
(United Artists)
Starring:  Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher.
Screenplay:  Bruce Feirstein.
Producers:  Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli.
Director:  Roger Spottiswoode.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, violence, profanity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Michelle Yeoh is ultimately the best thing about TOMORROW NEVER DIES,
the 18th installment in the phenomenally popular series based on Ian
Fleming's James Bond (Pierce Brosnan).  And in a strange way, she also
points out its most glaring weaknesses.  You see, Bond may be a brand
name, but as I noted in my 1995 review of GOLDENEYE, the franchise no
longer has the market cornered on high-flying, globe-hopping action.  When
the alternatives to the latest Bond adventure include watching the
dazzling Jackie Chan battle international espionage with considerably more
imagination, TOMORROW NEVER DIES starts to look rather bland and
uninspired.  The presence of Yeoh, Chan's capable sidekick in SUPERCOP,
only serves as a reminder that there are new kids on the block.  Brosnan
may look appropriately dapper, but the series just looks old, cruising on
its place in cinematic history.
     The premise has a kind of perfunctory Bond-ian grandiosity about it,
despite an extremely lackluster villain.  Jonathan Pryce plays Elliot
Carver, an international media mogul just about to launch a new satellite
news network.  Operating on the principle that it's easier to create news
than to hunt it down, Carver and his operatives begin making their own
headlines by instigating a conflict between the British navy and China,
one which results in a downed British battleship and talk of war.  Enter
Bond, assigned to determine the dirty details of Carver's operation.  Ably
assisted by Chinese government agent Wai Lin (Yeoh), Bond must stop the
presses before Carver's meddling results in all-out war between England
and China.
     The ho-hum megalomania of Pryce and his obligatory, inhumanly
resilient henchman (Gotz Otto) are only part of an extremely familiar
package which prevents TOMORROW NEVER DIES from ever getting off the
ground.  Token attempts at adding depth to Bond's romantic conquests (he
_really_ cares about old flame Teri Hatcher...no, really, he does) fall
flat, but that's no great surprise.  The real disappointment is the
quality of the action set pieces -- a few flashes of creativity
chaotically directed by Roger Spottiswoode (AIR AMERICA, TURNER AND HOOCH)
to lend the illusion of real energy.  The gunplay is routine, the chases
are routine, even Q's gadgets are routine (a car that drops little spikey
things to flatten the tires of the car behind you...what will he think of
next?).  Even peppering the action with traditional Bond quips doesn't
help, especially when most of the audience is baffled into silence by a
reference to Carver's "edifice complex."
     The only real change of pace is Yeoh, who provides the Bond series
with its best, most exciting leading lady in years (with all due respect
to Maud Adams and Grace Jones).  She's such a match for Bond -- just as
resourceful and even more physically capable -- that it's a shame to see
her reduced to damsel-in-distress status.  Watching Yeoh fly through an
acrobatic martial arts fight sequence conjures images of the more
inventive stunt wizardry of Jackie Chan's films.  Chan has been
out-Bonding Bond for years now, a detail it's hard to overlook while
TOMORROW NEVER DIES is punching and exploding its way through two hours on
automatic pilot.
     Pierce Brosnan once again provides Bond with an appropriate
ruthlessness, but he's also burdened with the anachronistic he-man antics.
Much of the continued appeal of the series can be attributed to the fact
that the more things change, the more James Bond remains the same -- in
the liberated, safe-sex, designated driver 90s, he's still an unabashed
chauvinist who sleeps around, drinks his vodka martinis and kicks ass for
queen and country.  That sense of familiarity may be the series' greatest
financial strength, but it's also its greatest impediment to quality.
Once upon a time, the James Bond series was a bi-annual festival of "can
you top this?"  The goal is simpler now; the producers aren't even trying
to compete with the big-budget big boys.  They rely on one secret weapon
not provided by Q:  nostalgia.  TOMORROW NEVER DIES never once tries to
play "can you top this?"  It's a film content to offer "do you remember
this?"

Author
David Wilcock
Stars Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Teri Hatcher and Michelle Yeoh.
So we come to Bonds 18th Adventure, the rather stupidly titled Tomorrow
Never Dies' Sadly, the plot of the film is as stupid as the title,
involving a media tycoon and China.
Pryce plays the tycoon, who plans to start a war between China and Britain
so he can have broadcast rights in China (The plot is explained better in
the film.) As you can, it's a terrible idea for a story. Maybe
it's the scriptwriter, who was fired from the production and then brought
back again, exacting his revenge.
Anyway, James Bond (Brosnan) is called in to stop the tycoon, and a few
explosions occur, Bond sleeps around with two women (Pryce's wife, played
by Hatcher, and some language instructor at the start) and the tycoons plan
is thwarted, and the tycoon got rid of. There is also the usual one liners,
to make all the
deaths seem funny. It's just a typical action film, but with Bond instead
of Stallone, or Bruce Willis. Andthat's the problem with the film. It's all
been seen before. Like Con Air, everything in the film is just rehashed
from a million other action films and Bond films. There's the usual
helicopter chase, loads of car
chases, but nothing really different. After a while, it just gets tedious.
In it's defence, some of the action scenes are mildly exciting, but nothing
majorly different occurs. This isn't a major flaw really, but it just makes
the film a bit boring. 
Add the lack of originality and some silly continuity errors, plus a rather
weak performance from Pryce,and this is a disappointing Bond adventure.
After the entertaining and silly Goldeneye, Brosnan second film is silly.
and that's all. Overall, then, this film is disappointing. If Bond films
are going to carry on
like this, perhaps the Bond franchise should be laid to rest.

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher
Directed by: Roger Spottiswoode
     I had been comfortable with the idea of Pierce Brosnan as 007 since
the early 80s when he was originally slated for the role.  Goldeneye was a
slight disappointment, however, as James Bond just didn't seem much like
James Bond.  With Tomorrow Never Dies, both Brosnan and those who write
for him as Bond seem comfortable with each other, and the long lasting
series of action films seems destined to continue for a long time.
     This latest offering, for the most part, can compete with various
Bond classics on some levels, but falls a bit short in others.  The plot
concerns the attempt of Media Mogul Elliot Carver to dominate the
reporting of news by making news.  Carver is played with beautiful, slimy,
arrogance by Jonathan Pryce (Glengarry Glen Ross, Evita, Miss Saigon,
Brazil).  He wants to push China and Great Britain into a war and make
sure his cameras are there to see it.  He tricks a British frigate into
invading China's waters, and then sinks it and shoots down a Chinese plane
with his hidden stealth boat.  This forces the two great superpowers into
a showdown, with him in between, firing in both directions, and getting
the news scoop at the same time.  It's up to Bond to reveal Carver's hand
and stop what could lead to a nuclear war.  
     On the way Bond runs into an old flame played by Teri Hatcher (Lois
and Clark, Heaven's Prisoners), and a Chinese agent with the same mission
played by Michelle Yeoh (Supercop). Yeoh lights up the screen with her
martial arts acrobatics and some of the same swaggering and gadgets that
Bond is famous for.  I have to say I would look foward to her appearing in
future Bond films.  Despite the fact that they both work "alone" as
agents for their respective nations, Yeoh's Mai Lin and Brosnan's James
Bond make a good team.  Joe Don Baker also reprises his role as the
American CIA agent who seems to loud and boisterous to do anything
remotely secret.  (Am I the only one who remembers he was a villain in
"The Living Daylights?)
     The action in this film is good, and there is not too much of it, as
there was in Goldeneye.  The stunts are outlandish and over-the-top as in
most Bond films, and we were treated to some bond traditions such as the
obligatory car chase and some underwater action, not to mention a
nail-biting opening sequence where Bond flies by the seat of his pants.
(Literally).  There was a lot in this film that you just do not see in the
run-of-the-mill action film, or if you do, it is so watered down that the
excitement is completely lost. (See The Peacemaker).
     Finally, the thing that nagged at me throughout the whole movie was
the interaction between Bond and his former flame, played by Teri Hatcher.
When he sees her he acts like his misses her, and has this intense sadness
and longing in his face that we NEVER, and I mean, NEVER except from 007.
The usually aloof and arrogant James Bond looked whiny and depressed, and
that cut into the Bond mystique.  It's almost like PC has caught up with
the world's least PC agent.  They dealt with that issue in a very
hilarious way in Goldeneye, but I think they dropped the ball on this one.
I wonder if it has anything to do with the death of Albert "Cubby"
Broccoli, who had been the series producer for some time.  I was reminded
of similar scenes in Batman Forever (well, just about every Batman film
really) where the Bat and the Belle De Jour (Nicole Kidman in this case)
discuss his Dark Past, and reflect on his deep dark character flaws, and
he opens up and is just a man.  James Bond is not A MAN, he's THE MAN.
That is the way that Fleming created him, and that is way he should be,
humanizing a character that is so well-established, changing them, is a
detriment, not an improvement.  
     Despite that major flaw, I found that the villian was slimy and great
in the Bond Tradition, yet still a progression from those in the past, the
action was wacky and "yeah-right" but still entertained, and the writers
managed to write one-liners and jokes that were funny, and not so obvious,
like the best from the Connery and Moore days.  There was a good balance
of Humour and Action and Suspense, but the little bits of Character Drama
threw off that balance a bit.  Despite that, I enjoyed the film, and think
it's the best Bond film since For Your Eyes Only.
My rating, of the $6.50 I paid for it, it was worth $6.50
--

Author
Brian Takeshita
The world is faced with a new threat:  The media.  Elliot Carver is a
media mogul so powerful that he is able to manipulate events so that
"Tomorrow", his flagship paper, has first coverage.  Carver's latest
plot takes the form of provoking a war between China and England by
sinking a British warship in the South China Sea and making it look as
if the Chinese are responsible.  The end goal?  Install a puppet
government in Beijing which will grant Carver exclusive broadcasting
rights in the country for the next 100 years.  To combat this threat,
we've got the same old hero:  James Bond.
For the second time, Pierce Brosnan plays the unflappable operative
from Her Majesty's Secret Service, and you can tell he's already
comfortable with the role.  This is not necessarily a compliment, as
Brosnan's minimalistic performance in being the suave secret agent can
easily be mistaken for simply running through the motions.  It's okay,
though.  Brosnan seems to have been accepted into the Bond fandom, so
he probably won't be saddled with the same fate which befell George
Lazenby.
Opposite Brosnan are Michelle Yeoh as Wai Lin, a Chinese agent, and
Teri Hatcher as Paris Carver, the villain's wife.  Between these two
new Bond women, Yeoh wins hands down.  Hatcher may be attractive, but
her performance in this film is entirely subpar, giving way to the
acting and athletic abilities of Yeoh.  She has some moves which make
Bond look absolutely brutish.
It is often said that the villain makes the Bond film, and TOMORROW
NEVER DIES has a great one in Carver, played so wonderfully by
Jonathan Pryce.  Starting a war to get broadcasting rights.  You have
to admire such a delicious plan, which is not bent on world
domination, but rather opening up a new market.  Capitalism, not
communism, seems to be the enemy in this one, and Carver seems to
revel in the fact that wealth and power can be gained through control
of information.  Pryce plays the role with relish, chewing scenery
whenever the opportunity arises.
One of the things you can depend on about a Bond movie is the action.
In this film, the viewer is not disappointed, as we are treated to
fights, chases, and unique uses of the BMW 750i.  All of the action is
well choreographed, and the stunts are first rate.  The only problem
is that it is all mere eye candy and zero tension.  Bond has been
through this so many times, you know he's going to be all right.  I
mean, the man has not only defied death, he's defied AGE.
It seems to me that James Bond movies are often evaluated on a set of
criteria separate from the rest of cinema.  We consistently ignore the
fact that they are formulaic and usually full of ludicrous situations
and dialog.  While watching the film, we wait for the pre-credits
stunt, then the mission briefing and the little banter with
Moneypenny, then the visit with Q to get his toys, then the encounter
with the villain and the femme fatale, during which he introduces
himself as "Bond, James Bond," then his order of a "vodka martini,
shaken, not stirred," then his fight with some of the villain's
henchmen, then his capture by the villain and subsequent escape, then
his return to the villain's hideout to foil the evil plan to take over
the world.  Did I miss anything?  Oh, yes, his fight to the death with
the villain's chief thug, which occurs just prior to the villain's
island/airplane/space station/ship exploding in a ball of fire.
If this were to occur in a sequel for any other series of films, it
would be criticized to no end for its lack of originality.  The fact
that there have been 17 previous Bond movies, all of which pretty much
followed the same formula, says something.  It says that Bond has
become so much of a cultural icon that all we seem to want is more of
him, even if it's more of the same.  In fact, I would even go so far
as to say that we don't even want to see the formula changed.
Remember when they tried to make Bond monogamous in LIVING DAYLIGHTS?
It didn't work, because it just wasn't Bond.  The problem with the
Bond series is, because the formula has been used time and time again
to the point where we all know what's going to happen, what used to be
exciting is now merely amusing, and each Bond film can only strive to
make itself more amusing than the last.
So here we are with TOMORROW NEVER DIES, and the formula is followed
once again.  Rather than scoff at the repetition, however, we chuckle
with recognition at each of the milestones which must be part of the
Bond movie.  The familiarity is actually very comfortable, and an
experience which can actually be shared between generations, as the
first Bond film premiered in 1962.  What's new about this film is that
it's not trying to milk the last vestiges of the dying Soviet legacy
for plot.  This one fully recognizes that the Cold War is, in fact,
finally over, and doesn't try to raise the specter of reawakening
communism, as did two out of the last three films.  I believe this
film deserves applause, just for being a little different.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     One of the more monotonous entries in the 35 year-old (!) series,
TOMORROW NEVER DIES is long on action but short on style.  (And suave.
And sex appeal.  And...)  Brosnan, Pierce Brosnan is back, looking good
and acting a world more relaxed than his first Bond at-bat, GOLDENEYE.
Though still far from the cool cucumber that Sean Connery was, Brosnan
appears well on his way to eventually outperforming Timothy Dalton, Rog-
er Moore, and ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE one-timer George Lazenby.
Too bad, then, that 1997 finds the role retooled, from secret agent to
super (action) hero.  (Gotta feed the international audience...)  Babes,
bon mots, and battling wits?  Fuggedaboudit.  This year's Bond spends
most of the movie in motion, fighting the bad guys on land, on sea, and
in the air.  (The plot involves a media mogul, played by Jonathan Pryce,
who wants to start a world war to improve ratings.)
     The opening, involving a stolen fighter jet at a "terrorist arms
bazaar," is engaging enough, but quickly displays that director Roger
Spottiswoode (AIR AMERICA, TURNER AND HOOCH) isn't exactly a master of
mayhem.  His sole inspired sequence is a parking-lot car chase, with
Bond driving from the *back* seat of his customized BMW.  (You know, the
one from the TV commercials.) Other problems range from the obvious (no
one behaves as if WWIII is imminent) to the insidious (the high-tech
sets look too much alike).  (Composer David Arnold's persistent quoting
of Monty Norman's original theme is annoying, as well.  And, jeez, did
the miniatures have to look so obviously like miniatures?  At least Judi
Dench is back, as "M.") For a holiday blur of explosions, automatic-
rifle fire, breaking glass, and twisted metal, this is the movie for
you.  Just don't expect to leave feeling either shaken or stirred.

Author
Steve Kong
GoldenEye was just a Bond rehearsal for Pierce Brosnan. Tomorrow Never Dies
is the Bond performance. Brosnan was a tiny bit wooden in GoldenEye,
understandably so, because the whole James Bond franchise was resting on
his shoulders alone. He proved to us that he could be Bond in GoldenEye and
in Tomorrow Never Dies, he proves to us that he is Bond.
I haven't been a long time Bond fan and have definitely not seen all 18 of
the Bond films, but I've seen my share of them. One or two Sean Connery and
Roger Moore Bonds, all of the Timothy Dalton Bonds, and, now, both Pierce
Brosnan Bonds. If you're wondering, I think that Connery is the best Bond
with Brosnan coming in a very close second (and Dalton being one of the
worst Bonds). What I like about the Bond movies is that they never change.
This I find as a good thing in the Bond franchise because it lets me walk
into a Bond movie not expecting too much from the plot and just relaxing
and enjoying the action, cool gadgets and Bond girls. This is the driving
force behind the Bond franchise, the ability to let people just come and
have fun at a movie without the need or worry of following a twisting and
turning plot line. (In some cases this is the weakness of Bond films, for
some of them don't have enough fun, action, and gadgets to fill in for the
plot.)
Tomorrow Never Dies has a fascinating amount of action, a large dose of
cool gadgets, and not one, but two Bond girls. Not to mention a pretty cool
maniacal evil man and a cool just-as-maniacal evil henchman to go with the
evil man.
The plot is pretty simple.  A crazed power hungry media mogul, Elliot
Carver -- played brilliantly by Infiniti's spokesperson Jonathan Pryce --
wants to launch a new satellite broadcast network.  He wants the launch of
this network to start with a bang and what better way to start out a news
network than a world war?  Carver devises a way to get the British and
Chinese fighting and with this he creates tomorrow's news today.  Who do we
have to stop this crazed media mogul?  Bond, James Bond, of course!
What is fascinating about this 18th installment into the Bond franchise is
the introduction of a Bond girl that can resist Bond's every  sly come-on
and also has enough umph in her to kick both the bad guys and Bond around.
Michelle Yeoh, whom we last saw in SuperCop with Jackie Chan, is this cool
Bond girl.  She plays Wai Lin, a female Chinese version of Bond working for
the Chinese government trying to avert the world war.  Yeoh steals every
scene that she's in, even the ones she shares with Brosnan.  She is, so
far, the only Bond girl that I would like to return for another installment
in the Bond franchise.
The other Bond girl is the less vivacious and the obvious weak link in this
Bond installment, and that is Teri Hatcher as Paris Carver, the former love
interest of Bond who is now married to the media mogul.  Hatcher gives a
bland and wooden performance in Tomorrow Never Dies.  And it looks as if
her part was cut a bit short because of her pregnancy which occurred early
on during the filming of Tomorrow Never Dies.
Jonathan Pryce is absolutely fantastic as Elliot Carver, the egomaniac on
drugs of sorts.  His performance has to been seen!  And his quiet henchman,
Stamper (Gotz Otto), is tough looking and a good match for Bond.
So, how's the action?  You may be wondering.  Perfect, I would have to
reply.  The opening sequence was a bit on the weak side compared to some of
the other Bond films (even to the opening sequence of GoldenEye), but it is
an exciting opening for the movie.  The action sequences are great.  Two of
them stick out in my mind.  One is a car chase through a parking structure
with James Bond driving his new BMW 750 from the back seat.  His car is
just cool, featuring all kinds of anti-theft devices and
anti-bad-guys-in-car devices.  The other is the motorcycle sequence in
which Bond and Lin try to escape from a killer helicopter while on a BMW
(can you say BMW product placement?) motorcycle and while also handcuffed
together.
There was something about this film that I really liked as an addition and
that was the humor.  There was a heavy dose of self-mocking and also
general humor in this Bond installment and that made the film feel more
relaxed and homely feeling, which I think was a good thing.  I found myself
chuckling and laughing out loud in many places during the film.
Director Roger Spottiswoode (Air America, Turner & Hooch) does a good job
with his directorial duties keeping the movie moving along at a quick pace.
 He also handled the conventional action sequences well, though I think he
grossly mishandled the martial arts sequences with Michelle Yeoh.
Worth mentioning is the fantastic musical score by David Arnold.  His score
fits the movie very well and is well suited in all of the scenes.  I at
first cringed when I heard that he was going to be scoring this film
because I thought is score for Independence Day was too over-the-top and
melodramatic, but Arnold does a great job with the score for Tomorrow Never
Dies.  The title song though does not fair as well.  Sheryl Crow was flat
and boring during this title song and the song is wholly forgettable.
Tomorrow Never Dies is good installment of the Bond franchise and is
definitely a Don't Miss  film.  The mix of the familiar Bond character,
action, cool gadgets, and humor makes for a good and fun movie.  Look for
great performances from Jonathan Pryce and Michelle Yeoh.  And don't
forgetshaken, not stirred.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 31 December 1997 with Tony for free at the Loews Village VII
As 007 movies go, *Tomorrow Never Dies* provides is a lively entry with
the sexually appealing Pierce Brosnan in his second outing as the fourth
James Bond to grace the series. For reasons that are not completely clear
to me, I have seen a lot of action/adventure movies this year, but this is
the one that *intentionally* made me laugh. Unlike American pictures, the
Brits prove once again that a keen whit can coexist with explosions. I was
laughing within the first five minutes, and the mile-high flames ensued
about three minutes afterward. 
In general, if you've seen one 007 movie, you have seen them all. What
separates them is the strength of the characters and the execution of the
formula. Here, media mogul Elliot Carver (Jonathan Pryce) engineers the
makings of World War III between China and the UK by rearranging GPS
signals, forcing the Chinese to think their waters are being breached,
while manipulating the British into thinking they sank their destroyer,
when he sank it himself. 
Like most 007 movies, the movie makes the most of location shooting, with
a parking garage car chase in Hamburg and a helicopter-motorcycle chase in
Bangkok, after a spectacular fall from an office tower. 
As James Bond, Pierce Brosnan is probably the most sexually appealing of
the actors to play the role of the British agent. He is prone to wearing
open denim shirts than tuxedos and suits like his predecessors. The "Bond
Girls" this time around are the horrible Teri Hatcher as Carver's wife
"Paris," and the formidable Michelle Yeoh as Chinese agent Wai Lin. 
Luckily, Hatcher disappears after the first reel, and seeing Yeoh and
Brosnan handcuffed together on a motorcycle while being chased by a
helicopter was very entertaining. 
The villains are equally good. Pryce is perfectly cast as the billionaire
maniac, a 1990s *Dr. No*, assisted by the evil Stamper (Gutz Otto), an
able successor to 007 villains like Jaws or Odd Job. Carver's visage
appears in a variety of places throughout the movie, projected on TV
screens and hanging from the side of a skyscraper, much like Big Brother
in *1984*.  Also requisite is the 007 gadgetry, and they outdo themselves
this time as Q (Desmond Llewelyn--who has played Q since 1964's
*Goldfinger*) presents Bond with a car he can operate with a finger on a
touchpad on his cellular phone. Judi Dench continues nicely as Bond's boss
tough M, as does Samantha Bond as Moneypenny. Joe Don Baker appears
briefly as a buffoonish American military man.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
