Title
Review for Wilby Conspiracy, The (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
Not the best-known film in the careers of Michael Caine and Sidney Poitier, 
but certainly worth catching.  Don't let the homogeneous Robert Ludlum-like 
title put you off - THE WILBY CONSPIRACY is an adventure yarn with enough 
odd flourishes to earn itself a cult audience.  Caine is a British mining 
engineer vacationing in Capetown who meets his new lawyer girlfriend 
(Prunella Gee) for lunch and ends up on the run to Johannesburg with one of 
her clients (Poitier), a black activist newly released from several years in 
jail.  It looks like some serious exchanges about politics, South Africa, 
and apartheid are being set up to take place between Caine and the 
handcuffed Poitier, (THE DEFIANT ONES springs to mind fairly quickly), but 
you'll have to watch Richard Attenborough's CRY FREEDOM if you prefer your 
chase movies to have a more political bent.  THE WILBY CONSPIRACY raises 
many provocative issues in its opening scenes and then leaves them to 
ferment as background material.  All we have to know about Caine and 
Poitier's escapade is that it is politically motivated - the specifics 
aren't necessary.
The best thing about THE WILBY CONSPIRACY is the wry, lurking humor 
displayed in its snappy dialogue and unusual asides (my favorite is when 
Poitier visits a fellow conspirator who runs a dental practice while Caine 
pretends to watch a movie in Hindi).  Throw in former Miss India Persis 
Khambatta and a very youthful Rutger Hauer piloting his own plane, and how 
can you resist?  But there's more:  the film is stolen by Nicol Williamson's 
laid-back performance as a chain-smoking government security officer who 
seems to occupy a South Africa all of his own, stramming about the 
countryside and remarking "All righty" whenever he's ready to move on.  The 
characters and cast alone could probably carry this movie, but the storyline 
is also engaging.  It splits easily into thirds, each section presenting the 
protagonists with a problem to solve, i.e. a flight from the authorities, an 
operation to retrieve some diamonds, and a plan to cross the border.  It's 
worth noting that this story would have been handled differently if filmed 
twenty years later - the fairly difficult but straightforward trials faced 
by the characters would have become over-elaborate and ultimately 
unrealistic set pieces replete with stunts.  The simplicity of the WILBY 
CONSPIRACY is what gives it its charm, but more importantly it places the 
protagonists' goals within their reach, preventing it from becoming entirely 
unbelievable.  THE WILBY CONSPIRACY is also a lot easier to enjoy now that 
the business of apartheid has been dispensed with in South Africa - it's 
probably just as well the story downplayed this element to begin with.  
Because of the touchy subject matter, director Ralph Nelson filmed on 
location in Kenya instead of South Africa.  Jack-of-all-trades Rod Amateau 
(a former producer, stuntman, actor and sitcom director) wrote the script, 
based on Harold Nebenzal's novel.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Apartheid in South Africa, one of the more shameful episodes in the
last half of this century, seemed to be mostly ignored by Hollywood
until late 1980s.  Before that time, American mainstream producers
didn't dare to tackle the subject of the country that was nominally
capitalist democracy and Western ally, yet with the regime that made
Communism look good. Instead of them, that task was carried out by
movie authors in Commonwealth countries, less troubled with cheap Cold
War politics. One of such projects is 1975 British production THE
WILBY CONSPIRACY, directed by Ralph Nelson and based on Peter
Driscoll's novel.
The movie begins in Cape Town courtroom, where Rina van Niekirk
(Prunella Gee), liberal white lawyer, tries to win freedom for her
client Shack Twala (Sydney Poitier), black anti-apartheid activist who
spent ten years in prison. To her own big surprise, the government
decides to let Twala go, but only hours after the release he gets
again in trouble with police, this time together with Rina's boyfriend
Jim Keogh (Michael Caine), British engineer. Two men become fugitives
and are forced to drive to Johannesburg, where Twala seeks help by
Doctor Mukharjee (Saeed Jaffrey), Hindu dentist and fellow member of
Black Congress. In the mean time, sadistical Major Horn (Nicol
Williamson) from the secret police is on their trail.
Like many thrillers from the 1970s, THE WILBY CONSPIRACY has a rather
complicated plot and some of today's viewers might even get lost in a
quagmire of political intrigue and endless double-crossings between
the movie's protagonists.  But, Ralph Nelson wraps it up as a solid
piece of entertainment, using political reality of contemporary South
Africa mostly as a background for conventional action thriller. So, we
have a lots of humour, fistfights, car chases and even one totally
gratuitous sex scene. Some might argue that the subject of racial
inequality and totalitarian oppression would be inappropriate for the
use in a such mainstream product. Anyway, the actors did a really good
job - Michael Caine brings a lot of charm to his role, unlike Sidney
Poitier, whose almost solemn presence gives a rather nice contrast to
Caine and establishes "buddy buddy" chemistry between the two. Other
performances seems bland, except for Nicol Williamson as very
convincing and intelligent villain. The end of the movie is perhaps
slightly disappointing, but nevertheless THE WHILBY CONSPIRACY as a
whole is worth watching, especially compared with today's "politically
correct" movies.
