Title
Review for Wide Awake (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Matt Williams
Here's a rarity:  a children's film that attempts to tackle a weighty
subject, Is there a God?  Done well, it could have been a gem among the
wasteland of modern children's cinema.  Unfortunately, it isn't.  With
jumbled messages, and an unclear audience, Wide Awake was better left
asleep.
Fifth grader Joshua Beal (Joseph Cross) is in the middle of a moral
crisis. His beloved grandfather (Robert Loggia) has died, and Joshua has
begun a quest. He wants to find God, to discover why bad things happen.
This religious quest is slightly disturbing for his parents (Dana Delany
and Denis Leary), but they do their best to cope with their son as he
explores different religious faiths.  At his Catholic school, his
favorite teacher, Sister Terry (Rosie O'Donnell), tries to give him
guidance, but this is a journey he must make on his own.
Meanwhile, he is having the most momentous year of his life.  He has
several adventures with his daredevil best friend Dave (Timothy
Reifsnyder), he gets his first crush, and begins to wake up to the world
around him while he is on his spiritual journey.
It is somewhat confusing as to what the real audience for Wide Awake is
expected to be.  On its surface, it appears to be a kid's film. However,
it deals with serious issues, and is likely to be boring for today's
instant-gratification kids.  And while it might seem heartening to see
that someone is trying to produce something thoughtful for the kidvid
audience, Wide Awake asks serious questions, but only delivers a cheap
gimmick for an answer.
If there were a bit more meat in the story, adults on a nostalgic bent
might get a kick out of the movie.  The actors who might have created a
great cast (O'Donnell, Leary and Delany) are wasted in roles that amount
to little more than cameos.  The nostalgic elements (best friend,
favorite teacher, first crush, etc.) have been done much better in other
movies, and actually seem more like filler here.
The film's strongest scenes are some touching flashbacks depicting
Joshua's relationship with his grandfather.  They show more depth than
is present anywhere else in the movie.  Maybe the film would have been
better if, instead of playing the relationship through flashbacks, it
were set entirely during Joshua's last year with his grandpa.  It
certainly would have been more entertaining.
Wide Awake can best be described as a failed experiment.  It starts out
with noble aspirations, but never delivers on its promise.  Parents who
do take their children to see this one ought to be prepared to answer
some tough questions...that is if their kids aren't bored to death
first.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Oystein Brekke
Director: M. Night Shyamalan
With: Joseph Cross, Timothy Reifsnyder, Rosie O'Donnell, Robert Loggia,
Denis Leary
First of all: Forget the tagline for this movie. It is for some reason
trying to portray this film as a standard
kids-getting-into-trouble-at-school comedy, when it is in fact so much
more. Yes, it is funny, but calling it a comedy is an oversimplification at
best. Somewhat like calling Shyamalan's later work, "The sixth sense" a
ghost story, and nothing more.
The setting and time-span of this film is a year at a catholic boy's
school. But fifth-grader Joshua Beal (Joseph Cross), has quite different
things in mind than playing outrageous pranks on the teachers. That role is
left to his best friend Dave (Timothy Reifsnyder). Just before school
started, Joshua lost his grandfather (Robert Loggia in several flashbacks).
The two of them were obviously very close, and his death has hit Joshua
hard. The grandfather was a religious man, and firmly believed that he
would be going to a better place when he left this world. Joshua wishes he
was as certain. He is a very precocious kid, in one scene leaving his
religion-teacher (Rosie O'Donnell in a mainly pointless humorous role),
lost for words after asking if his aunt, who isn't baptized, will go to
hell when she dies ("Look, nobody is going to hell, OK?" "You mean the
Bible is wrong?" "...No, the Bible is not wrong." "I don't get it!"). So,
he decides to go on a mission: He must find God, so that he can ask him is
grandfather is OK. Of course, this isn't as easy as he hopes.
The quest for God soon occupies all of Joshua's attention. He tries
practicing all the religious rituals he can think off, and not just
christian ones. He tries to persuade his parents to go to Rome on vacation
so he can meet the pope. His parents (Denis Leary as the father), and
teachers worry, but are unable to completely understand him. 
In spite of Joshua's precociousness, the film avoids the trap of portraying
as nothing but a small adult. While troubled by heavy questions, he is
still just a child. ("When my mum dropped me off [at the birthday party]
she said: 'Try and have a good time.' Why did she say that? I knew I'd have
a good time!").
The film is not perfect, the contrast is sometimes big between the
school-comedy bits, and the religious/philosophical bits. Mostly it works
fine though, and Shyamalan deserves praise for portraying children as
thinking and emotionally complex beings, just like adults are. Cross and
Reifsnyder both deliver good performances, and the narrative progresses in
a natural and unhurried way. In particular the relationship between Joshua
and his grandfather is brought across in a skilfull, and discrete way. It
is a quite spiritual film, and it may come as a surprise to some that the
writer/director himself was not brought up as a christian (he is Indian).
Who should see this film: People who are not afraid of religious subjects,
people who don't mind some sentimentality in movies, people who want to
watch a comedy with some more depth than Dumb & Dumber.

Author
Eric Lurio
One would expect the location. What better place to look for God than in a
Catholic school, right? However, it doesn't work that way at all.
As the film opens, Joshua Beal (Joseph Cross) is about to enter the fifth
grade. He's heavily into sleeping, and his parents (Denis Leary and Dana
Delaney) literally have to drag him out of bed. There is a reason for this, we
soon learn...
Joshua's Grandpa (Robert Loggia) has recently died, and the kid's depressed.
He's shown in flashback as a caring and religious fellow who was very close to
our hero.
Not understanding how God could allow such a terrible thing could happen, Josh
decides to go on a quest of sorts, and find God for himself...
But regular life must go on,of course, and we have a surprisingly affectionate
portrait of life among the nuns. 
What's interesting here is how theology-free this quest is. The only mention
of Catholic ideology we really have is at the beginning when Sister
Terry (Rosie O'Donnell) gives out a homework assignment, and Josh asks her if
the nonbaptised are all really going to hell as mentioned in the workbook.
Director Shyamalan actually gives us a pretty good portrait of the fifth
grade. The kids are all good, especially Timothy Reifsnyder who plays Josh's
best friend Dave O'Hara and Heather Casler as his first crush. But there's
something not right here.
If Josh's parents seem to think that his quest is so unusual, why are they
sending him to CATHOLIC school?  'Tis a puzzelment.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WIDE AWAKE (director/writer: M. Night Shyamalan; cinematograper: Adam
Holender; cast: Denis Leary (Beal), Dana Delany (Mrs. Beal), Robert
Loggia (Grandpa Beal), Joseph Cross (Joshua Beal), Julia Stiles (Neena
Beal), Rosie O'Donnell (Sister Terry) Timothy Reifsnyder (Dave O'Hara),
Dan Lauria (Father Peters), 1998)
This well-conceived but ultra sugary coming-of-age film is not for
everyone, and I include myself as one of those who found it too sappy
for my digestion.
Joseph Cross (Joshua Beal) is a 10-year-old who is saddened by the
recent loss of his grandfather (Loggia) to bone marrow cancer. Loggia is
wonderful in relating to the child in such a wholesome manner, it almost
saves this film from drowning in syrup. The Beals are like a sitcom
idyllic family, where everyone is just so nice and affluent, and
properly religious without being fanatical. The Beals, the father (Denis
Leary) and his wife (Dana Delany), are both successful doctors; Julia
Stiles plays Joshua's older sister, needling her younger brother but
also showing that she really cares about him. This is a family seemingly
conceived in heaven, but living in south Philadelphia, sending their
children to a well-run Catholic school. Joshua, the protagonist and the
narrator of this yarn, is a handsome, sweet, intelligent, friendly, and
endearing child, who does well in school, relates to the nuns and
priests, and talks politely to his well-meaning parents. All this
mawkish interplay makes it almost too nauseating to watch.
The plot arises when Joseph has a problem coping with the death of his
beloved grandfather, who promised to be with him forever. His answer is
to search for God, pretty heady stuff for a youngster his age to do, but
that's just the way it is, sometimes.
This search for God takes us nowhere because, as his friend David
(Reifsnyder) says, where can you look for him if he doesn't exist. Now,
that's a smart kid. But Joseph looks for him in the usual places, and
what better place than to start in the parochial school he attends. One
of his teachers is the kind-hearted Sister Terry (Rosie O'Donnell), who
wears a Philly baseball hat and equates the Jesus stories with baseball,
making him the clean-up hitter, and in my opinion, if she wasn't a big
TV star, would have a vocation as a parochial school teacher, she is
that convincing. Throughout the film, she is saved from answering any
tough (sic!) question about God by the bell, as it rings to end the
class.
Nothing much happens in the search for God, there is no parody of the
Catholic school; though a visiting cardinal is found by the boy not to
be able to talk to God, but this is gentle stuff, no real criticism or
search for God is attempted. What comes next into play is some Hollywood
hokum, which is designed not to upset anyone, as Joseph has a reassuring
encounter with a real, live angel, a blond little boy his own age and
dressed like him in the Catholic school uniform who wears the innocuous
smile of a goody-goody. The film ends as this angel (!!!) tells him his
grandfather is all right. His quest is ended, as apparently angels don't
have wings and are approachable; and God, well, ... maybe that's for
another film down the road. This part of the film was the final straw
for me, I couldn't swallow any more goo.
As this film flopped commercially, his next one, The Sixth Sense, pared
down the schmaltz and came up smelling like a rose. Though if you look
through the cleverness of both scripts, this director is loaded with
hokum, all he has learned how to do, is hide the hokum better. Well, God
bless him, if he can do that. This is a nice family picture and there is
room for it in Hollywood. It's just too bad that it had nothing relevent
or even truthful to say about death, children in a parochial elementary
school, or for that matter, about God. And that family of his, they're
too good for words. Yet the film meant well and its benign message had
its heart in the right place. For those who want to see something soft,
without a bite to it, this is the one.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
Wide Awake (PG) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        The occasionally affecting Wide Awake is a strange paradox of a film.
Although it is clearly targeted at children, this sometimes humorous but
often somber meditation on death and religion will mystify most young
moviegoers.  On the same token, its rather facile treatment of its serious
themes will leave older audiences less than satisfied.
        The existence of God becomes a major concern for the film's protagonist,
10-year-old Catholic school student Joshua Beal (newcomer Joseph Cross, in
a promising debut) after his beloved grandfather (Robert Loggia) dies of
bone marrow cancer.  Joshua cannot comprehend why he had to pass on, and
his fifth grade school year turns into a nine-month long search (told in
three phases: "The Questions," "The Signs," and "The Answers") for an
explanation from a higher power--that is, if one indeed exists.  For a
kid-aimed film, this is pretty heavy, heady subject matter, perhaps a
little too much so to engage the young 'uns.  But writer-director M. Night
Shyamalan does not address these lofty issues satisfactorily enough for
adults, offering simple answers and easy miracles.  I suppose a compromise
of sorts was necessary to reach audiences at the opposite ends of the age
spectrum, but in hitting middle ground he reaches no one.
        More accessible to the tots are the subplots that hover around Joshua's
quest, such as his dealings with his carefree best friend Dave (Timothy
Reifsnyder), a school bully, and a portly schoolmate who desperately wants
a friend.  While some humorous amusement is to be had from these lighter
threads, they degenerate into the manipulative, melodramatic hokum of those
sappy "very special episodes" of sitcoms or, in the case of David,
disease-themed afterschool specials.  Granted, a few isolated moments
involving these stories and the main plot achieve some level of poignance,
but that is more due to the heartfelt, earnest performances of the cast
(which also includes Rosie O'Donnell, Denis Leary, and Dana Delany) than
Shyamalan's writing or directing.
        Towards the end, the newly enlightened Joshua lends the film its title
when he declares himself "wide awake."  Audiences of all ages will have
some difficulty saying the same for themselves.  To borrow the metaphor,
they will indeed be awake (OK, the really little ones may not
be--literally), but likely in that alert-but-still-drowsy state when one
first gets up in the morning.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
James Berardinelli
     In this age of cynicism, it's unusual to find a film like WIDE 
AWAKE.  The movie, brought to the screen by sophomore director M. Night 
Shyamalan, is Capra-esque in its outlook on life and death.  And, while 
the ultimate result is somewhat uneven, there's no denying that WIDE 
AWAKE contains its share of affecting moments, and the production as a 
whole offers enough solid drama and legitimate emotion to earn it a 
recommendation not only for adults, but for older children as well, who 
will relate to the protagonist and narrator.  It's definitely a two 
hankie movie, though.
     This is the second movie in the past year to tackle the subject of 
how a child copes with death.  And, like 1997's PONETTE, WIDE AWAKE 
forces its main character to explore questions of religion and the 
afterlife.  However, while PONETTE used a documentary-like approach to 
depict a young girl's confusion and pain, Shyamalan's movie has a 
different agenda:  presenting these issues within the framework of a 
modern-day fable.  Watching PONETTE was, at times, a grueling 
experience.  The same is not true of WIDE AWAKE, which leavens its 
serious moments with breaks of humor and lighter drama.
     Joseph Cross is ten-year old Joshua Beal, a fifth-grader who 
attends a Catholic school for boys in suburban Philadelphia.  Josh lives 
with his father (Denis Leary), mother (Dana Delany), and sister (Julia 
Stiles), but a key member of the family is absent.  Josh's grandfather 
(Robert Loggia) recently died of bone marrow cancer, and his death has 
hit the young boy hard.  The sudden void causes Josh, an extremely 
intelligent child, to begin questioning many aspects of life, truth, and 
religion.  His quest for answers leads him to begin a year-long search 
for God.
     The most obvious strength of WIDE AWAKE is its appeal.  The film 
creates likable characters who engage the audience, and the storyline 
addresses sensitive, emotionally-compelling issues without becoming 
cloying.  At times, the movie is manipulative, but it's a gentle, rather 
than forced, approach.  I was genuinely moved by the relationship 
between Josh and his grandfather.  The credit for this can be sliced 
into three portions -- one to Shyamalan, who wrote and directed the 
scenes; one to neophyte actor Joseph Cross, who is believable as the 
precocious Josh; and one to Robert Loggia, who is subdued and amiable in 
a part that is, for him, atypical.  WIDE AWAKE contains other solid 
performances as well.  Denis Leary submerges his outrageous personality 
to do a fine job as Josh's "normal" father.  Likewise, Dana Delany 
exudes wholesomeness.  Rosie O'Donnell has a small role as one of Josh's 
teachers -- a nun with a passion for the Philadelphia Phillies baseball 
team.
     Shyamalan has clearly matured since 1992, when he wrote, directed, 
produced, and starred in his debut feature, PRAYING WITH ANGER.  That 
film, about an American-born Indian making his first trip to India, was 
a cliché-riddled, uneven affair that showed flashes of promise.  WIDE 
AWAKE is a smoother, more polished movie with a less porous emotional 
texture, a better-realized story, and more fully-rounded characters.  
This is an example of a young film maker taking a step forward with his 
second film rather than falling victim to the so-called "sophomore 
jinx."
     While it's true that the script for WIDE AWAKE isn't all that 
ambitious, too often relies on the exposition of an overly-verbose 
narrator, and includes a few necessary contrivances, what makes the film 
special are the numerous individual moments that shine.  And, although 
the dialogue is too sophisticated for the way children really talk, it 
is intelligent enough not to leave us shaking our heads in dismay and 
disbelief.  I left WIDE AWAKE feeling the same way I did after seeing a 
number of Frank Capra's movies -- I was aware of the problems, but that 
didn't diminish the warm, fuzzy glow I was experiencing.  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The ad for "Wide Awake" notes, "First kisses.  Outrageous
pranks.  A teacher with a killer fastball.  To survive this year,
Joshua Beal will have to stay wide awake."  Don't be fooled. 
There is quite a bit of drama in the film but most of it is
internal.  One of the teachers may indeed have had a killer
fastball, and if two lips touched, the intimacy happened so
quickly that no one in the audience saw it.  The pranks in
"Animal House" might have been outrageous but the most
abominable undiscipline here is a tie between a kid who rides
a mop and pail through the halls of the Catholic grammar
school and another who takes a picture of the Pope out in the
rain.
   "Wide Awake," unlike other coming-of-age stories, is not
about a kid's fears of not fitting in or not getting a date or of
needing to escape from abusive parents or an intolerable
school.  It deals with a ten-year-old's search for God, no less,
and the principal suspense it generates is, "Does he or does
he not find Him?"  Suspense, however, is no more writer-
director M. Night Shyamalan's concern than is physical action,
and the only resemblance to disease-of-the-week activity is
one young man's suffering an epileptic fit, a contrived gesture
that does nonetheless serve to put the central figure in touch
with the fragility of human existence at all ages.  
   Ten-year-olds, however gifted, do not often spend much
time pondering metaphysical issues.  What prompts the
adorable Joshua Beal's search for God at such a young age
is his closeness with his grandfather, a man who had recently
died of bone marrow cancer and who enjoyed a few heart-
tugging scenes with his grandson that made his condition all
too identifiable.  At one point in Joshua's memory the aging
Grandpa Beal (Robert Loggia) is in church with Joshua
(Joseph Cross), allowing the little one to play with his face,
when the priest calls for all sick members of the congregation
to step up to the pulpit to receive wafers.  At another time,
Joshua is competing with his classmates in a hundred-yard
dash, falls down, and observes his grandpa at the finish line
prodding him to get up and finish the event--as if to say that
this would be the last time the two would enjoy an athletic
event together.
   "Wide Awake" takes a few obligatory pokes at the nuns, but
this is no diatribe from the pen of a Christopher Durang.  The
ladies in habits do not physically abuse their charges, save in
one case in which a kid is dragged back to the classroom by
his ears.  On the contrary they are understanding and even
enjoyed by a bunch of boys who act so unlike some cliques 
in a tough urban school that a cynical city teacher in the
audience would laugh out loud if she were not already
shedding tears over the plight of the sensitive and loving
Joshua.  Rosie O'Donnell as Sister Terry tries to get her class
involved in Jesus' problems by situating him on a blackboard
behind the pitchers' mound hurling the sphere toward Judas
at the plate.  She discusses Joshua's search for God face to
face with the boy, not at all shocked that the fifth-grader has
briefly tried exercises of other religions in his desperate
attempt to locate Him.  Denis Leary fights hard to play a
normal, hard-working dad who, together with his wife played
by Dana Delaney looks with adoring eyes at everything his
son does, and the ensemble of boys in the school play out
their roles without sneaking a look at the camera.  Joshua's
introduction to romance is a fleeting one, but one in which he
observes himself getting "a biological reaction" when a pretty
girl flirts with him and offers him a rose.
   Writer M. Night Shyamalan, whose first movie feature
"Praying with Anger," is about an East Indian living in the U.S.
and making his first trip to India, must have decided he did
not want a G rating, so he threw in the "s" word four times--
which shouldn't bother anyone.  It's good to see a
heartwarming film so well realized that deals not with the
estrangement between generations but with the natural love
that the old and young can share.  Rated PG.  Running Time:
90 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten
