Title
Review for Placard, Le (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE CLOSET" (Miramax Films)
    In this hilarious French farce, a shy, boring accountant (Daniel
Auteil) named Francois Pignon discovers he's going to be fired from his job at a
condom factory. Lonely and distraught, he contemplates suicide. But then he runs
into Belone (Michel Aumont), an elderly homosexual neighbor, who suggests a "sex
discrimination" lawsuit to intimidate management. As evidence, Belone concocts
provocative photographs of Pignon locked in a leather-clad embrace with another
man and mails them anonymously to Pignon's boss. When the racy snapshots start
circulating around the factory, not only does Pignon get his job back but he
suddenly finds himself  the focus of attention as an openly gay man. His lusty
supervisor (Michele Laroque) is so intrigued that she wonders if, perhaps, she
could change his sexual preferences. Even his ex-wife (Alexandra Vandernoot) and
indifferent teenage son (Stanislas Crevillen) drop their disdain. But not
everyone is enchanted. A mucho macho co-worker Felix (Gerard Depardieu), a
self-righteous  homophobe, is stunned and repulsed when he's forced by the PR
director (Thierry Lhermite) to grovel and court Pignon's friendship or risk
losing his own job. Writer/director Francis Verber artfully milks the farcical
comedy as he dissects the hypocrisy of political correctness, veering off-track
only occasionally into pedophilia. Daniel Auteuil ("The Widow of Saint-Pierre")
is delightful - particularly with a blown-up condom perched on his head, riding
on a float in a gay pride parade - and Gerard Depardieu delivers one of his most
restrained, and effective, performances. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"The Closet" is a frankly sexual, adult 8. It's so clever, in fact, that
Hollywood is already planning to re-make it in English, like "La Cage Aux
Folles."

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Francis Veber's light-hearted comedy, THE CLOSET, Daniel Auteuil (THE WIDOW
OF SAINT-PIERRE) plays François Pignon, a man who comes out of the closet that
he never went into in the first place.  When François is about to be fired, his
next-door neighbor, Belone (Michel Aumont), suggests a perfect solution. 
Belone, an ex-industrial psychologist, concocts a scheme whereby François is
"accidentally" discovered to be gay, which he isn't.  Then, the company will not
dare fire him.
For François, whose recurring dream is being born without anyone realizing that
he is already there, the transformation to supposed homosexual means that he is
able to alter his drab life.  Women like his boss, Mlle Bertrand (Michčle
Laroque), who once found him "nice but boring," are suddenly intrigued by him. 
Even his ex-wife begins to answer his phone calls.  The remarkably thin plot
works primarily due to Auteuil's disarming charm.
Gérard Depardieu plays Félix Santini, a big beefy guy who is the head of the
company's human resources department.  Derisively referred to as "Mr. Rugby" by
François, Félix is a homophobe who changes quickly when he thinks that his job
is in jeopardy because of his discrimination.  Félix tries to become François's
bosom buddy in order to prove that he likes gays.  Although he's worried that
people will think that he's "an old queen," Félix does everything he can to get
in François's good graces.  He works hard to erase all of his old homophobic
ways.  He even comes to realize that it's not smart to call the company's rugby
team that he coaches, "a bunch of sissies" when they don't perform up to par.  
What does the company manufacture?  Condoms, in a brightly colored factory that
Willie Wonka would love.  Amazingly, the movie uses the company's product for
only two big jokes.  One suspects that a lot more were left on the cutting room
floor.
THE CLOSET runs just 1:24.  The film is in French with English subtitles.  It is
rated R for a scene of sexuality and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley it is showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Poor François Pignon.  His wife ran out on him two years ago, his teenage
son won't have anything to do with him, and he just overheard he's being
fired from the accounting job he's held for the last 20 years.  So François
does what any cinematic loser would - attempts suicide by jumping off the
balcony of his apartment.  But he's stopped by a nosy neighbor, who helps
concoct a devious plan to keep François employed.
The neighbor is Belone (Michel Aumont), an older man who takes the desperate
François (Daniel Auteuil, The Widow of St. Pierre) under his wing by
instructing him to pretend he's gay in order to keep his job.  It sounds
like something George Constanza would do (or maybe even a nefarious Jack
Tripper plan), although that would be one of three story arcs in a 23-minute
show.  The Closet is a film based on a single joke, making it no different
from any of the recent Saturday Night Live movie bombs. Except SNL films are
based on a single funny joke (all but The Ladies Man, anyway).
But Belone's plan works, earning François not only a promotion but the
attentions of both a curvy female co-worker (Michčle Laroque) and a bumpy
male co-worker (Gérard Depardieu, 102 Dalmatians).  There are a few gags
that made me laugh out loud, but most of The Closet is full of typically
unfunny French humor, which (along with their attitude toward alternative
lifestyles) seems to lag about 30 or 40 years behind the rest of the world.
But I'll give them this - they've got a ban on using cell phones when you
drive. That's almost enough to make up for the whole Jerry Lewis thing.
While the plot may sound similar to the abominable Three to Tango (where
Matthew Perry pretended to be gay to win a contracting job), The Closet was
written and directed by revered French filmmaker Francis Veber, who had a
big hit last year with The Dinner Game (which featured Closet costar Thierry
Lhermitte as François Pignon).
While he's hardly a household name in the States, Veber is directly
responsible for some of the most vile cinematic swill of the last 20 years.
Remember Three Fugitives with Martin Short and Nick Nolte?  Veber wrote and
directed that, as well as the original French version (Les Fugitifs) on
which it was based (it starred Depardieu and a character named François
Pignon, too). He also directed the inane Matthew Broderick vehicle Out on a
Limb, and his French hits spawned the following U.S. disasters: Father's Day
(Billy Crystal and Robin Williams), Pure Luck (Martin Short and Danny
Glover), The Toy (Jackie Gleason and Richard Pryor) and My Father the Hero
(Depardieu).
The really strange thing (other than the fact that people keep greenlighting
films based on his ideas) is that all of these films are about a guy named
François Pignon (or, sometimes, Perrin), and most costar Depardieu.  Veber's
next feature?  An American version of The Dinner Game, starring Kevin Kline
as Pignon.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Closet (Le Placard) (2000)
Daniel Auteuil, Gerard Depardieu, Thierry Lhermitte, Michele Laroque,
Michel Aumont, Jean Rochefort, Alexandra Vandernoot, Stanislas. Written
and directed by Francis Veber. 84 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
This review will be shorter than normal, because there's not a lot to
say about "The Closet," and that's just fine. Light as a soufflé, the
subtitled French farce takes a simple premise and runs with it. Ten
minutes after you leave the theater, you likely won't remember a thing
about "The Closet," except that it gave you one big belly laugh, several
chuckles and a lot of smiles.
The set up: After 20 years of faithful service at the rubber factory,
François Pignon (Daniel Auteuil) is about to be let go. The company has
nothing against the man; he is simply so unmemorable that sacking him
seems an easy way to cut costs. When Pignon tells new neighbor Belone
(Michel Aumont) about his pending fate, the elderly fellow cooks up an
idea: Doctor a photo to make it look as if Pignon is gay, then send it
anonymously to his workplace. Once word spreads around the company,
management will be afraid to fire him and open themselves to charges of
bigotry.
So, despite being 100% heterosexual, Pignon comes out of the closet, and
everything changes. Felix (Gerard Depardieu), a co-worker who bullied
Pignon in the past, becomes fearful that he will fired for being
homophobic and desperately tries to befriend the bewildered man. Other
co-workers who dismissed Pignon as hopelessly bland now decide that it
was all part of his cover. Pignon's sullen teenage son Franck (Stanislas
Crevillen) decides that Dad is now interesting, and his supervisor, Mlle
Bertrand (Michele Laroque) finds him intriguing as well. Meanwhile,
Belone, who was once fired for being gay, savors the irony of the
situation.
That's really all there is to it. As farces go, "The Closet" isn't
ambitious. The film offers no grand statements, just a clever idea and
exceptional cast. In a summer of cinematic disappointments, this modest
offering is a cool drink of water.

Author
Julia Levin
In this lighthearted, unpretentious comedy, Daniel Auteuil sheds the
intensity of his previous roles -- in Les Voleurs, Ma saison préférée,
Manon of the Spring, to name just a few -- and plays a shy,
crooked-nosed accountant too boring to be tolerated by just about
anyone.  His François Pignon -- an appropriate name for somebody who is
about to be fired, literally, for being a bore -- is a harmless
placeholder who has no ambitions and no misconceptions about who he is.
Pignon's wife couldn't stand him and left two years ago, yet he still
phones regularly to her and their indifferent teenage son.  After
learning that he is soon to be fired, Pignon, distraught, returns home
and meets that "perfect stranger" we all want to meet someday: The one
who steps into our life and brings magic into it.  From that moment on,
the neighbor, Belone (Michel Aumont), navigates Pignon's life like a
chess game.
Belone easily persuades François to concoct a story about his
homosexuality so his boss will fear a discrimination lawsuit,
superimposes photographic images and -- voila -- produces a shot of
Pignon in a leather-clad embrace with another man in bun-exposed pants. 
The photo gets sent to Pignon's employer, and the events start spinning
like a windmill in stormy weather, eventually changing Pignon's life
forever.
Oddly, for the rest of the story, The Closet flirts with being
politically correct and is as predictable as it only can be.  What gives
the film a tint of pleasure and saves it from being totally grotesque
and improbable is that the movie never aspires to be anything more than
what it is.  Director Francis Veber 
(The Dinner Game) finds a delightful irony in the fact that Pignon has
to lie that he doesn't like women in order to prove he is a man.  We, of
course, will learn that there is so much more to Pignon than he and his
colleagues could ever imagine.
While watching the film, I caught myself feeling surprised that such a
banal movie could actually be off-the-cuff and entertaining.  The most
distasteful thought in The Closet is how little people really care about
political correctness but how diligent they are in pretending the
opposite.  Office politics always reveal people at their most vile:
There is something unquestionably disturbing and familiar in watching
petty little personalities trapped in their small trivial lives as they
entertain themselves with self-made gossip and lies.
Besides Auteuil, the acting, for the most part, is adequate.  Gérard
Depardieu, for example, starts off great as a gauche, self-righteous
macho rugby couch, a racist, and a homophobe.  However, as Pignon gets
his job back, Depardieu's colleagues make him fearful for his own job
for calling Pignon a "fruit."  The situation becomes repetitiously
improbable and Depardieu is annoying and unconvincing as we learn that
he might actually be the one "coming out of the closet."
Michčle Laroque is especially good as Mademoiselle Bertrand, Pignon's
boss, who not only discovers a real Pignon and subsequently seduces him,
but also demonstrates to us how smart women master the most impossible
situations.
Though maybe not quite so impossible as this film.
Director: Francis Veber
Producer: Patrice Ledoux
Writer: Francis Veber
Starring: Daniel Auteuil, Gérard Depardieu, Theirry Lhermitte, Michčle
Laroque, Michel Aumont, Jean Rochefort, Alexandra Vandernoot, Stanislas
Grevillén
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
