Title
Review for Andre (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Keith Carradine, Tina Majorino, Chelsea Field, 
           Keith Szarabajka 
Director:  George Miller 
Producers:  Annette Handley and Adam Shapiro 
Screenplay:  Dana Baratta based upon A SEAL CALLED ANDRE by 
             Harry Goodridge and Lew Dietz
Cinematography:  Thomas Burstyn 
Music:  Bruce Rowland 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Dogs have always been man's best friend and, as such, it's only
fitting that a sizable number of movies have had their foundation laid
in this popular human/pet relationship.  How else is it possible to
explain the countless incarnations of Lassie and Benji?  Every once in
a while, however, filmmakers decide to throw a bone to the other
creatures of this planet--cats (one of three stories in HOMEWARD
BOUND), horses (BLACK BEAUTY), whales (FREE WILLY), and now--with the
arrival of ANDRE--seals.
     Really, Andre isn't much more than Lassie with flippers.  He does
a lot of the same cute antics and, of course, is ready to come to the
rescue when his foolish human friends need help.  Some might argue that
there's a little more to this film than that, but all of the peripheral
stuff is only so much excess baggage.  It's developed and presented
with little flair and a high degree of obviousness.  Those seeking
hard- hitting drama had best look elsewhere.  The closest ANDRE gets to
that sort of thing is a couple of smarmy scenes that preach the need
for tolerance.
     The film opens, as we're told by narrator Annette O'Toole, in
Rockport, Maine during the spring of 1962.  Harry Whitney (Keith
Carradine) is the local harbormaster and, on one of his rounds, he
discovers a sick seal.  Much to the delight of his daughter Toni (Tina
Majorino), he brings the pup home to care for it, braving the ire of
local fisherman Billy Baker (Keith Szarabajka), who blames seals for
the season's poor catches.  The return to health is a slow process, but
eventually the seal--named Andre by Toni--is ready to return to its
natural habitat.  When that day arrives, the nine year old girl is
heartbroken--but Andre still has a surprise or two in store for her.
     Considering ANDRE as light family entertainment is the only way to
form a satisfying opinion of the movie.  On a strictly clinical level,
it really isn't very good--the cliche-riddled plot is hopelessly
predictable, the characters are broadly realized, and the acting is
merely serviceable.  However, this, much like FREE WILLY, is the kind
of movie that kids enjoy.  It moves with enough snap not to threaten
boredom, and there aren't many deep meanings for children to furrow
their brows over.  The villains are suitably nasty, the heroes are
nicely heroic and, of course, the seal is cute and funny.  Also, ANDRE
has a couple of none-too-subtle messages that everyone will
understand.
     Tina Majorino is a busy young actress--this is her third film of
the year (in addition to WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN and CORRINA,
CORRINA).  She's an appealing performer who shows promise, but she
still has some rough edges to file down.  When she smiles, she lights
up the screen, but her expressions of sadness and grief are less
overwhelming.  Nevertheless, she's considerably more credible than many
actors of her age.
     Those with children can feel confident that ANDRE will present an
enjoyable ninety-six minutes for their offspring.  There's a lot of
saccharine here--perhaps too much for the "intellectual" movie-goer.
ANDRE will appeal most strongly to the under-thirteen crowd, or at
least to those who are of that age in heart, if not in body.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ANDRE is a kid's show based on a true story.  It is set in late
50s/early 60s in a remote fishing village in Maine.  The Dad (Keith
Carradine) makes his living as an admitted inept harbor master.  He is
more interested in animals than doing the labors of a harbor master.
His wife (Chelsea Field), 2 daughters (Tina Majorino and Aidan
Pendleton) and a son (Shane Meier) form the rest of this Brady Bunch
type family.
     The show gets its only interest from a seal (the famous Andre)
that the family adopts as a pup to nurse it back to health when he
loses his Mom to a fishing net.  The only reason that Andre became
famous is that he in turn adopted the family and would not leave.  His
fame went so far as to include an appearance on, what else, the Ed
Sullivan Show.
     The acting is all straight forward as is the script (by Dana
Baratta  based on the book "A Seal Called Andre" by Lew Dietz and Harry
Goodridge) and the directing (George Miller).  This is your
traditional, lets play it conservative and do nothing that could upset
or offend anyone sort of show for little tykes.  The movie takes no
chances.  Other than the obligatory, lets make them think someone is
going to die scenes, it is a sugary sweet show.  I found it frequently
boring, but never offensive.
     On a more positive note, the narration by Annette O'Toole is
lovely - very melodic.  Then again, O'Toole is such a beautiful
actress, I really missed seeing her in the flesh.
     For it being a true story, for the wonderful seal (he IS really
cute), and for the absolutely wonderful ending scene (I came close to
crying in a show that almost put me to sleep), I rate ANDRE **.  I give
it a mild thumbs down, and recommend it only to people under 13.  My
5-year-old boy liked ANDRE, and he gives it a thumbs up, I should point
out.  The movie runs 1:35.  The MPAA rates it PG for reasons that
totally escape me.  THE LION KING was more PG than this show which is
clearly a G.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 11, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
One thing is for sure when you undertake to see a George Miller film. It
will be well written and carefully paged all the way to the end, not leaving
many unanswered questions.  And it will leave you thinking  about the film.
Be it Mad Max, the Road Warrior, or things like The Witches of Eastwick, or
more recently, Lorenzo's Oil.  The scripts may not be the tidiest, or the
best, but somehow, this director makes it all look alright, and still come
off with a story.
ANDRE is a story for children, but it is also a nice story for adults. It is
the story of a seal that got spoiled by a family, that took care of it when
it was young.  And despite the fact that the man taking care of the seal
happens to be the local harbor master, and he is violating rules by keeping
an animal captive, he manages to do his job and make a friend here and
there.  And, during what seems like a bad fishing season, the seal, is being
blamed for the poor fishing that all the hard working fishermen are having,
or at least for the fact that the harbormaster is more worried about the
seal, than he is about the welfare of the fishermen.
In time, the seal ends up going to Boston, some 200 miles from where they
are, and becomes a star in an aquarium.  But more importantly, Andre becomes
a star attraction in the small community, and seems to attract many
tourists.  And despite a few hang-ups, the devil may care attitude that the
seal has, manages to get it and some people in a bit of trouble, but mostly
in good humor.
While there is nothing fancy in this film, there is some real nifty shooting
in the water watching seals, and Andre do his thing, this film is nice
enough to grab your attention.  It isn't great, but it is nice.  And the
kids will love it.  Andre is an attention getter, and quite a critic, and tv
watcher.  And much smarter than we give him, and other seals, credit for.
Worth seeing, make sure the kids see it.
