Title
Review for Trancers II (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
TRANCERS II aka FUTURE COP II; TRANCERS II: THE RETURN OF JACK DETH
USA. 1991. Director/Producer - Charles Band, Screenplay - Jackson Barr, 
Story - Band & Barr, Photography - Adolfo Bartoli, Music - Phil Davies & 
Mark Ryder, Special Effects - Players Special Effects (Supervisor - 
Kevin McCarthy), Makeup Effects - Palah Sandling, Production Design - 
Kathleen Coates. Production Company - Full Moon Entertainment.
Tim Thomerson (Jack Deth), Megan Ward (Alice Stillwell), Helen Hunt 
(Lena Deth), Alyson Croft (McNulty), Biff Manard (Hap Ashby), Richard 
Lynch (E.D. Wardo/Edward Whistler), Martine Beswicke (Nurse Trotter), 
Jeffrey Combs (Dr Pyle), Sonny Carl Davis (Rabbit), Art La Fleur 
(Captain McNulty), Telma Hopkins (Commander Raines)
Plot: Captain McNulty is sent back to the present to bring Jack Deth 
back to the future. But Deth, living in the body of his ancestor, has 
married in the present and is unwilling to return. Deth's wife from the 
future, Alice Stillwell, has also been sent back to retrieve him but 
been locked in an asylum. They are reunited, much to the consternation 
of Lena, Deth's wife in the present. But Deth discovers Alice has been 
sent back from a point just prior to her being killed and all that waits 
her upon her return is death. Meanwhile Whistler's brother, in the guise 
of the asylum doctor, has been conducting experiments to turn the 
homeless into trancers.
Charles Band's `Trancers' aka `Futurecop' (1985) was an entertaining 
crossbreed of time travel story and film noir, one that made a virtue 
out of its low budget. As is wont with almost every film that Band and 
his father Albert produce under either their Empire, Full Moon or 
Moonbeam production labels, it was inevitably spun out into a series, 
producing four sequels of which this was the first. The later sequels 
became fairly silly, sending Deth into fantasy worlds and the like, but 
this one proves a modest and competent enough effort. It has a plot that 
is initially so burdened with exposition that it becomes almost 
impossible to follow. Nevertheless the middle of the film sets up an 
intriguing temporal dilemma with Deth reunited with his dead wife and 
the knowledge that to send her back to their own time will be to send 
her back to face her death which is conducted a degree of bathos that 
the first film never achieved. The rest is fairly standard B-budget sf 
escapades generally following in the footsteps of the first film. Tim 
Thomerson gives another highly amusing performance as Deth. He is quite 
capably supported by Helen Hunt (who must surely regard the `Trancers' 
films as an embarrassment now that she has graduated to Academy and Emmy 
Award-winning actress) and Megan Ward, a worthwhile actress surely due 
more recognition, who has been a find of the Band's in films like this, 
`Crash and Burn' (1990) and `Arcade' (1992).

