Title
Review for Jason Goes to Hell: The Final Friday (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Andrew Hicks
IF IT'S FRIDAY, IF IT'S THE 13TH, IT MUST BE FRIDAY THE 13TH
     What do decapitated teenagers, machetes and hockey masks all have
in common?  Easy, they're all prominently featured in the "Friday the
13th" films, those classic horror movies of the 80's we all know and
love like a part of us (say, a severed arm or leg).  What other movie
can you name offhand that was deep and meaningful enough to spawn eight
sequels?  GONE WITH THE WIND?  Hardly.  CITIZEN KANE?  Jason could rip
that proverbial rosebud to shreds with his bare hands.  No, the "Friday
the 13th" movies are clearly what celluloid was created for, with their
poignant dialogue ("John?  ...John is that you?  ...John? ...John?
AAAAAAAHHHH!!!"), creative death scenes and of course, the enigmatic
killer Jason.
     Supposedly drowned in Crystal Lake at the tender age of seven,
Jason Voorhees lurked in the depths of the lake for twenty years, until
he felt the time was right to begin murdering teenage campers.  By the
end of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VIII, JASON TAKES MANHATTAN, the total body
count was 83 (according to a reference in FRIDAY THE 13TH PART IX).
Never mind that the series would have us believe Jason lived in the
lake for fifteen years and didn't age, yet in the second movie, five
years later, he was an adult.  That just proves that the "Friday the
13th" movies are too deep for any of our finite minds to understand.
     The first 13th movie was released in the Reagan election year of
1980.  Of course, in that one, Jason isn't the one doing the killing,
it's his mean ol' mama (played by Betsy Palmer) out for revenge.  You
see, the reason Jason drowned at summer camp was because the counselors
were too busy with ... uh ... other things to help.  So fifteen years
later, when someone tries to re-open the camp, Mrs. Voorhees decides
to celebrate by killing the new counselors.  The first movie doesn't
give us Jason but it does give us plenty of gore, including a spear
through the chest, axe in the forehead and an excellent decapitation
effect at the end.  Watch for that, unless, of course, you're seeing
the movie on TV.  In that case, forget seeing any of the decapitations,
axe-murders, maimings, gougings, stranglings, beatings and knifings.
     The first movie was successful enough that the next year, through
the scientific miracle of cloning, the producers were able to make a
sequel that looks exactly like the original, with only a few minor
variations.  This time, Jason himself takes up the family hatchet,
passed on to him from his beheaded mother, and slays some horny teenage
camp counselors himself.  No, it doesn't take place at Camp Crystal
Lake (or Camp Blood, as the townsfolk often affectionately refer to it)
again.  The senseless killings occur at the camp across the lake,
which--and correct me if I'm wrong--is never given a name during the
movie.  It's five years after the last series of brutal camp murders
and no one has heard from Jason since.
     Suddenly, on FRIDAY THE 13TH (PART 2), the killing starts up
again.  It seems Jason is out for a little revenge for his mother's
dismemberment, which we relive at the beginning of this movie.  In
fact, the first hour of this sequel replays the last half hour of the
first movie--in slow motion!  Then, in horror movie tradition, the
teenage girls are stalked, in a script obviously written by a teenage
boy.  Take, for instance, this sample dialogue:
     TEENAGE GIRL: Oh my God!  I'm being chased by a madman in a hockey
mask with a hatchet!  Whatever will I do?  ... I know, I'll take off all
my clothes and go skinny-dipping!
     Yes, this is your typical horny teenager movie, with ample sex and
violence.  Rest assured that I didn't see any of the sex, as my mom was
standing by with the remote control, ready to zap anything she deemed
unsuitable.  All in all, I got to see about ten minutes of the movie.
But I did manage to see some pretty gruesome stuff.  For example, some
guy in a wheelchair with a machete implanted across his face.  Ouch!
He might need more than one Band-Aid to take care of that cut!
     The second movie also attracted movie goers across the country who
enjoy the intellectually-stimulating scenes of sex and violence.  At
this point the producers could have released a third movie that was an
exact rehash of the first two with nothing to add to the legend, but
they decided to go one step further and make a sequel that was an exact
rehash, blah, blah, blah, and was also in 3-D.  FRIDAY THE 13TH PART 3
had all the usual 3-D gags (baseball bats and yo-yo's shoved in the
screen) in its theatrical showing (both days of it), but when it was
released on home video, somebody forgot to throw in the 3-D glasses.
So when you watch the video, you see constant inane 3-D gimmicks, like
someone's eyeball flying into the camera, but since you don't have the
glasses, you have to let your imagination do all the work.
     At least FRIDAY THE 13TH PART 3 isn't set at summer camp again.
This time the killings occur in a cabin and barn in the woods.  We meet
the eight victims, who have no names, just the usual horror movie
stereotypes.  There are two horny ones, two chain pot-smokers, two
normal ones, a fat joker with a huge afro (who is constantly faking his
gory death trying to scare his friends so when he actually does walk in
with his throat slit, no one cares), and the poor girl who is dragged
along as the fat joker's date.  As usual, only one girl (it's always
one girl) is left alive by the end of the movie, and she is
relentlessly stalked for the last half hour.
     FRIDAY THE 13TH PART 3 is the first one to have Jason's trademark
hockey mask (in the last Friday the 13th, he had a pillowcase or
gunnysack or something tied around his head to conceal his disfigured
face).  He gets the mask from the fat joker, who was trying to scare
his date with it.
     And of course they couldn't let the saga end with FRIDAY THE 13TH
PART 3.  Too many people would commit suicide when faced with the
prospect of no more "Friday the 13th" movies, so in 1984 FRIDAY THE
13TH--THE FINAL CHAPTER was rushed out.  Yeah, right!  And I guess
FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V is THE FINAL CHAPTER: FRIDAY THE 13TH PART 2.
Without a doubt, THE FINAL CHAPTER is the worst "Friday the 13th" movie
in the whole series.  The usual innovative, creative ways of murdering
teenagers are discarded in favor of the more traditional
blood-and-guts.  It's not entertaining gore like in the first three
movies, it's just disgusting.
     At the onset, Jason's body is being taken to the morgue.  Of
course, it doesn't stay there for long.  Jason revives somehow, with
his hockey mask still on and without the axe wound which chopped up the
mask at the end of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART 3.  He immediately sends a
couple hospital employees to the morgue themselves, if you know what I
mean, with the aid of a hacksaw and scalpel.  He then goes back to the
woods near ol' Crystal Lake, where a group of the horniest teenagers
anyone's ever seen have moved into a rented cabin.  Rest assured that
most of them will be moving out real soon ... in body bags!  And, when I
say horny, I mean horny.  What is this, a horror movie or a soft-core
porn flick?  My mom fast-forwarded through at least half of the movie.
     Despite the appearance of three people I'd actually heard of
(Crispin Glover--George McFly from BACK TO THE FUTURE; Bruce
Mahler--Fackler from POLICE ACADEMY 1, 3 and 6; and future teen idol
Corey Feldman.  I didn't say they were famous, I just said I'd heard of
them.), the movie still stank like last year's milk.  And yes, Jason
does die at the end of the movie--*again*, but take a look at the title
of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VI.  Five additional sequels may clue you in to
the fact that Jason and Michael Meyers (from the Halloween flicks) have
drunk the same immortality potion.
     As predicted, the suicide rate did go up in 1984 once movie-goers
took THE FINAL CHAPTER's title literally, finding there was nothing
left to live for. "If Jason dies, I die," one poor lad's suicide note
read.  The folks at Paramount held a conference and decided lives were
too precious to let the series just end.  After all, if the "Friday the
13th" dry spell had gone on any longer, the nation would have a
full-scale riot on its hands.  So out came FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V: A
NEW BEGINNING in 1985 and the nation began to thrive once again.
     In FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V, the massacre is at a halfway house in
the woods, with some teenage mental patients and troublemakers.  (Is
Jason ever going to get out of the woods?!)  This time someone beats
Jason to the first murder.  A homicidal punk that happens to be
chopping wood misses once and ends up hacking a poor fat kid to death
with the axe.  This bloody murder inspires Jason to kill the rest of
the patients himself and one by one he hacks each of them into tiny
bite-size pieces.  As bad as these movies are, you have to admit that
they've completely redefined the fine art of gore.  For instance, in
FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V, we see someone killed by having a lit motorist
flare rammed down his throat, plus Jason uses an interesting device on
one kid that cracks his skull as it is tightened.  What's next?
Alka-Seltzer tablets on the eyeballs?
     You won't believe this, but there are actually three people left
alive by the end of the movie and only one is a girl.  The other two
are a white guy and that Dudley kid from "Diff'rent Strokes." Gary
Coleman may have been in this movie too, but he's too short for me to
tell.  What I do know is the youth of America were glad to have their
13th movies back once again, even if it looked like the series was to
take a turn for the worse after FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V.  If you've seen
FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V you know that it wasn't really Jason murdering
in that one, but a copycat killer (someone who made copies by day and
killed cats by night).  And if you haven't seen FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V,
your life will be destroyed by your knowledge of that immense secret
before seeing the movie.
     The people wouldn't stand for a Jason imposter and they let
Paramount know it. 20,000 people turned out to picket on a fateful day
back in 1985.  The angry protesters held signs reading "Bring Jason
Back" and "Ve Vant Voorhees" (a touching sentiment from a German 13th
fan).  Paramount decided to bring back the original Jason for FRIDAY
THE 13TH PART VI: JASON LIVES, which came out in 1986.
     If you can hang in there through the first few scenes, you'll
discover that FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VI is actually a pretty entertaining
movie.  Tommy Jarvis, the same kid who killed Jason last time, goes to
the cemetery to dig up Jason's bones just to "make sure" he's really
dead.  He makes sure, all right, when Jason comes back to life and
murders Tommy's friend.  Tommy goes to the cops with the terrible news,
but--as in every single horror movie since the beginning of time--they
don't believe him and lock him up.
     Of course, the sheriff's beautiful daughter lets him out and the
two of them go back to Camp Crystal Lake to stop the masked menace.
Yes, those geniuses have opened the camp again, but they changed the
name from Crystal Lake to Forest Green.  This doesn't fool Jason.  He
hacks up the poor counselors and terrorizes the young campers, as well
as taking care of a few War Game hunters (you know, the ones who go
into the woods and stalk each other with paint guns).  The movie's best
moment comes when one of the hunters shoots Jason with the paint gun.
Jason looks down at the paint splatter in amusement--then rips the
guy's arm off!  Maybe I just have a weird sense of humor...
     In fact, the theme of this movie seems to be "Severed Body Parts"
(hey, wasn't that last year's prom theme?) and that's exactly what we
get.  In addition to the aforementioned arm, Jason also takes off a few
heads.  He should really be more careful.  He might hurt someone!
     Everything was back on track, but none of the screen writers
contracted by Paramount could think up an original idea for the seventh
chapter in the "Friday the 13th" saga.  So they decided to rip off
Stephen King.  The official subtitle of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VII is THE
NEW BLOOD, but we insiders like to call it JASON VS. CARRIE.  The main
character is a telekinetic girl named Tina who presents Jason with his
greatest challenge to date.  Not that anything can stop him.  In FRIDAY
THE 13TH PART VII, he is shot, blown up and basically brutalized by the
girl's levitated projectiles.
     We find out Tina inadvertently caused her father's death as a
young girl and has been institutionalized ever since.  She's checked
into a cabin near Crystal Lake for a weekend of heavy therapy with her
doctor and mom.  She goes down to the lake alone and focuses all her
mental powers on the lake, in an attempt to raise her drowned father
from the dead.  She ends up reviving a well-rested Jason instead.
Oops.  But it was a simple mistake.  After all, her father was a hockey
player.  And, as would be expected, no one believes her tall tales
about the man in the mask.
     Most of the murders in FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VII are just your
basic routine hackings, but a few are noteworthy, even to a fine
connoisseur of "Friday the 13th" movies like me.  For instance, Jason
attacks a woman zipped up in a sleeping bag.  He picks her up, feet
first, and swings the head of the bag into a tree.  Ha ha ha!  ...
Well, I guess you just had to be there.  Another one that caught my eye
amid the mindless choppings was Jason ramming a sharp object (either a
meat thermometer or a small lawn sprinkler) into a girl's eye.  And yet
another has Jason chasing a woman through the woods with a long-handled
electric buzz saw with an even longer cord!
     The gratuitous two-and-a-half star rating is due to Jason's
showdown at the end with Tina.  Even though we all know none of her
mental attacks will harm Jason in the least, it's still fun to watch
him get hit with the flying nails and other manifestations
come-to-life.
     The "Friday the 13th" producers had finally hit their stride.  And
for FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VIII they decided to film a screenplay that
was original, amusing and suspenseful.  But they were determined to
work around those things and make a movie for the 13th fans.  And in
1988 we got Jason Takes Manhattan.  I never thought I'd give three
stars to a "Friday the 13th" movie, much less one with so many numerals
in the title, but FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VIII is several breaths of fresh
air over the tired 13th concept of campers in the woods.  Jason
actually does get out of the woods this time, as he decides to go to
New York for some sun, fun and axe murders--the three ingredients for a
successful vacation.
     Contrary to the title, most of the movie doesn't take place in New
York, but on a cruise ship filled with high schoolers on a senior trip
to New York, many of whom won't be returning on the trip back.  Jason
stows away on board, utilizing some of the luxury liner's best
features.  For example, he takes one of the red-hot rocks in the ship's
sauna and sears an unsuspecting teen.  Believe me, it looks a lot worse
than it sounds.
     Three of the teens (plus two teachers) manage to escape the
deranged Jason and make it to New York safely on a lifeboat.  Bad
news:  So does Jason.  The Manhattan setting provides some of the best
moments in the whole "Friday the 13th" series.  A few examples:
     --Jason going nine rounds with an aspiring young boxer, who 
challenges him to "give me your best hit." Jason knocks the guy's head 
off.  The decapitated head turns up later on the dashboard of a police 
car.  Boy, and I thought fuzzy dice were tacky...
     --Jason kicks over a street gang's stereo.  The gang's about to jump 
him when his raises his hockey mask, showing them what's 
underneath.  They decide to leave him alone.
     --Jason riding the subway, where he completely fits in with the 
other New Yorkers.
     --Jason looks up in bewilderment as he sees a giant hockey mask 
on a billboard.
     What I'd really love to see is a cross between JASON TAKES
MANHATTAN and HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN NEW YORK, with Jason stalking
Macaulay Culkin.  Instead, four years later, the ninth and final entry
in the series was released, JASON GOES TO HELL.  Silly me.  I actually
thought Jason might be dead after that swim he took in the toxic waste
at the end of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART VIII.  Nope, he's alive and well,
face reconstructed and in perfect health after a rejuvenating trip to
Dick Clark's plastic surgeon.
     And he's somehow made it back to his old house at Crystal Lake,
where he's up to his old tricks, as we see at the beginning, when a
teenage girl just happens to walk in to the empty house, take off all
her clothes and take a bath in the abandoned Voorhees house.  They
always say none of the things that happen in the "Friday the 13th"
movies ever come from real-life experiences.  This scene proves them
wrong.  As a matter of fact, I know a lot of girls that routinely bathe
in abandoned houses.  Of course, they've all seen Elvis and been
abducted by UFO's, too.
     Actually, it turns out the nude bathing girl is a plant, designed
to lead Jason into the woods, where he is gunned down and blown up by
the SWAT team.  That's the last we see of Jason for an hour and twenty
minutes.  After that, we get a ridiculously contrived story-line about
Jason's spirit possessing about half the people in Crystal Lake, as he
attempts over and over again to kill his sister and niece.  You know a
horror movie's in trouble, plot-wise, when it stoops to stealing the
plot from other really bad horror movies, in this case Halloween II, 4
and 5, not to mention the worked-to-death plot about being able to
inhabit the form of anyone he chooses.
     It's definitely not a movie for true "Friday the 13th" fans.  I
should know, since, after all, I'm a member of the official "Friday the
13th" Fan Club, complete with limited edition cubic zirconium hockey
mask pin and the series of commemorative plates depicting the best
murders in the 13th series (I particularly like to eat my meals off the
one that has Jason ramming a lit motorist flare down an unfortunate
teenager's throat).
     Speaking of creative murders, this movie couldn't be more lacking
in that category.  We don't get 3-D darts (from FRIDAY THE 13TH PART
III) or motorist flares (featured prominently in FRIDAY THE 13TH PART
V), we just get routine hackings, like in THE FINAL CHAPTER, FRIDAY THE
13TH PART IV.  This movie's almost as bad as THE FINAL CHAPTER, making
it the second-worst movie in the 13th series.  JASON GOES TO HELL is
even worse than the 3-D one!  Hopefully, Jason won't be coming back to
life yet again for FRIDAY THE 13TH PART X.  And I mean that!
     After this overview of all nine Friday movies, I'm sure you
statisticians are looking for something a little more practical than
mere star ratings.  And for you and anyone who's stuck at home on
Friday night and wants to watch people being murdered on a TV screen
instead of just looking out the window and watching people get killed
(like I can in my neighborhood), I have put together a best-to-worst
ranking for the movies. 8, 7, 1, 6, 2, 3, 5, 9, 4.  If you don't give a
damn about watching bad horror movies, then just use those as lucky
lotto numbers.
     Still others may wonder while watching the movies what criterion
the writers have established for the characters, deciding who gets to
be the lucky girl that survives the massacre and get the best of
Jason.  It's hard to say exactly, but I can certainly tell you what
behaviors are sure to get you killed in a "Friday the 13th" movie.
Smoking pot, drinking beer, sleeping with someone, insulting the main
character, talking about how absurd it is to think Jason is still
alive, ranting and raving about how Camp Crystal Lake has "a death
curse," playing a practical joke on one of the other characters, taking
a crap in an outhouse (FRIDAY THE 13TH PART V only), taking a shower or
spying on someone skinny-dipping or taking a shower will all get you a
one-way ticket to the afterlife.
     When all other movies are long since forgotten, the "Friday the
13th" movies will live on.  No time capsule on 20th century
civilization would be complete without them.  And don't you dare think
the "Friday the 13th" canon is complete.  In coming years you'll see
FRIDAY THE 13TH PARTS X, XI and MCMLXXXVIII hit a postage-stamp-sized
screen at the nearest mall quasiplex.  And remember--if the calendar
says it's Friday the 13th, the power just went out and there's a burly
man in a hockey mask standing over you with a machete in hand, don't
say I didn't warn you...

Author
Steve Baumgarten
     Anyone who goes to see a FRIDAY THE 13TH film at this point is
either a hopeless fan or a hopeless idiot; either way, he deserves
exactly what he gets.  I've enjoyed the FT13 concept--if not always
the execution, so to speak--since the first installment over a decade
ago (13 years ago, to be precise); so I like to consider myself a
hopeless fan.  But truth be told, most of the rest of the Times Square
audience with which I saw JGTH last Friday night did their best to
qualify for the other category.  Participatory audiences are fine with
me--in fact, most horror films are so lousy that they're only
improved by a constant stream of catcalls, smart-aleck remarks, and
general wising off until it's time for the next killing.  But this
audience was a little much; needless to say, I now know what 500 people
thinking out loud sounds like.  Listening to 90 minutes of "she's going
to get killed" and "yeah, she's going to take it off" was enough to
make me think that I'd reached *my* final Friday, and that I was now
paying for my life of movie-going sins (like slinking off to FT13 PART
V when I really should have been seeing THE COLOR PURPLE).
     Making things worse was the film itself, which seems to have been
assembled from a jumble of pages from the scripts of other, better
horror films.  It's a little beyond me: why on earth would anyone mess
with success at this late date?  Here we'd all just been relieved of
$7.50, supposedly so that we could see Jason go to Hell--or at least
kill a few scantily-clad teenagers and then retire to Miami Beach,
where he could reminisce about the good old days, back in the early
eighties when the horror film was king and direct-to-video hadn't yet
been invented.  And all we wanted to see was Jason--not an
unreasonable expectation, considering that his billing is even higher
than the day of the week this time around.  But instead we got a very
strange plot, filled with an unpleasant bounty hunter, an unpleasant
tabloid TV personality, an unpleasant yuppie, an unpleasant proprietor
of an unpleasant roadside diner, and an unpleasantly confused idea:
that Jason isn't really beyond explanation, that in fact he's just been
possessed all these years by the spirit of ALIEN.  Sort of.
     I'd like to say that this premise is so lame-brained that the
audience was left speechless, even momentarily.  But alas, they
weren't, although my feeling is that for 90 minutes we were all
subjected to Confuse-A-Cat therapy.  And the sad part of it is
that--briefly, oh so briefly--JGTH looked like it was actually going to
be a rather clever finale to the FT13 series.  I was especially
heartened to see two very witty visuals early on--but two was
apparently the limit for the filmmakers, who after about 10 minutes
managed to drag the film and our expectations--if not Jason
himself--straight down to Hell.  So I'll give away the two visuals,
just to give you a taste of what might have been.  The first came very
early on, when a Standard Issue Beautiful Teenage Girl appeared to be
moving into an abandoned cabin in the beautiful Camp Crystal Lake area,
known the world over for its relaxing atmosphere and plentiful
gardening implements, ever at hand.  As she enters, the light
immediately burns out, and she finds she has to go to an even darker
woodshed to find a replacement.  She does, in fact, find one: an
economy bulb in a package marked "Twice the Life."  I liked that.  I
also liked the insignia on the shoulder of one of Crystal Lake's police
officers: it indicated that they were all in Cunningham County--an
insider smile for those of us who remember the name of Jason's
cinematic godfather, Sean S.  Cunningham, who has made a small fortune
on the character he helped create in the very first FT13 and has since
gone on to make one lousy exploitation film after another.  Including
this one, which he produced.
     The very first scene, is in fact, terrific, as it sends up all the
horror cliches that the FT13 series helped spawn.  And yet they
remained quite effective, even as the S.I.B.T.G. stripped and stepped
into the shower.  Unfortunately, nothing much comes of all this, as the
filmmakers quickly toss aside any thoughts of making a conventional
(read: intelligible, sensible, entertaining) horror film.  Instead we
find that Jason is finally, once and for all, killed, dismembered, cut
up, and generally, well, sent to Hell.  (Pay no attention to the
spoilsport behind the curtain who in a loud and obnoxious voice points
out that Jason dissolved at the end of the last installment in the FT13
series: JASON TAKES MANHATTAN.  On the other hand, that was actually a
very decent film, one of the best in the series, and by the time JGTH
had ended, it had gone up another notch or two on my personal
Respect-O-Meter.  At least it knew what it wanted to do and did it,
which is more than I can say of JGTH.)
     What happens here is very disheartening.  Jason's dismembered
corpse is taken to a hospital morgue and placed on a table so that we
can look at it for a while.  It's in pretty bad shape, all right, but
we have confidence that he'll be able to pull himself together and get
on with it.  You know: JASON TAKES ON AN HMO--something that would
really get the audience into it.  Wonder of wonders, his heart starts
beating, and just as we're all set for the fireworks, the unexpected
happens.  The unwanted, in fact, but what happens is very central to
film's incredibly lame plot.  What happens is that the coroner takes a
big bite out of Jason's heart.  Yum!  And, naturally, becomes Jason in
some undefined way.  In fact, in one of the very few cool scenes in the
film, he passes in front of a full-length mirror, and lo and behold,
there's Jason, in all his hockey-masked glory.  But in real life, all
we have is a wimpy-looking coroner on the rampage.  Hoo ha.
     This was a big mistake.  However, there's nothing anyone can do
about it FOR THE NEXT 75 GOSH-DARN MINUTES!  Instead of Jason, what we
get is a succession of wimpy-looking characters, each of whom seems to
be on the wrong end of a game of tag that requires the poor soul who's
"it" to transfer a slimy-looking thing that looks like it came straight
off the set of PARASITE (which, by the way, is an excellent rip-off of
ALIEN, made in 1982 in audience-pleasing 3-D, and one of many films
that Demi Moore is none too proud of) into someone else's mouth.  That
part seems to have been stolen from LIFEFORCE, an even worse film, but
one which at least had the saving grace of featuring incredibly goofy
dialogue and Naked Female Space Vampires.
     The dialogue in JGTH is just as lame as the plot, which gets more
and more convoluted as we rush headlong toward the promised Final
Friday.  (Actually, I have no idea what day all this was happening
on--shows you just how sloppy the filmmakers were--but to be honest
the whole thing felt like Monday morning.)  And there are no Naked
Female Space Vampires--just coroners, policemen, and tabloid
television journalists on various murderous rampages.  And this
ALIEN-like thing, which really doesn't make any sense, but it's in
there anyway.  Especially as we reach the tail end of the film, when
all is revealed whether we want it to be or not.  By this time we've
heard from the bounty hunter (who doesn't really get to hunt anything,
though he does get to break the yuppie's fingers in a puzzlingly cruel
and rather sour scene) and discovered that Jason wants to be reborn,
but that this can only happen if he manages to transfer the slimy
ALIEN-like thing to his sister or her daughter.  And the sister--who,
to be honest, I wasn't aware of until this installment and who here
seems to be a refugee from Plot Convenience Playhouse--used to be the
wife of the yuppie.  And her daughter doesn't do anything at all in
this film, though in one scene she looks very cute and the whole
audience goes "Awwww!"
     Have I left anything out?  Mind you, this film is exactly 88
minutes long, and if it seems that there's already enough plot for
three lousy horror films--or, more to the point, three much better
horror films that have already been made--you may be shocked to learn
that there is still quite a bit more plot that I haven't even bothered
to mention.  Late in the game we get a smattering of EVIL DEAD ("Wrong
movie!" came the cry from the by now quite actively involved audience)
and a magic letter opener which is the only thing able to permanently
kill Jason once and for all.  Permanently, like.  Forever, this time.
Not ever to return again.  Honest.
     Just to ease your minds and relieve the unbearable tension this
review has no doubt created, Jason does, in fact, get sent to Hell; at
least he gets buried in the backyard by a lot of hands that spring up,
CARRIE-style, though in fact we never do get to see the low-budget Hell
to which he's been consigned.  So you can't sue anyone for false
advertising: after all, this is JGTH, not "Someone Finally Makes A
Great Jason Movie Instead Of Completely Wasting One Of The Best Horror
Movie Characters Of All Time Yet Again."  Whether he'll remain there is
another question, one that I certainly hope no one bothers to answer.
But the signs are bleak: stick around for the surprise finale to see
just how low New Line can sink now that they aren't making mega-bucks
off the Turtles anymore.  Clever horror fans might guess, if they
remember what other properties New Line owns; as for the audience
Friday night, well, they were pleased as punch and looking forward to
the next installment of, well, something.  Anything, really.  We're not
a choosy bunch.  As apparently Mr. Cunningham and New Line have
realized.

Author
Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
By this, we mean that Jason Goes To Hell: The Final Friday is not the
worst horror film we've ever seen. It's not even the worst Friday the 13th
film we've ever seen. But it is pretty much pointless, and loses what
little cleverness it has after the first ten minutes of screen time.
That said, let us focus on those first ten minutes. Like many other such
films, Jason Goes To Hell opens with a young woman arriving at an isolated
location. She spends a few minutes making said location (in this instance,
a cabin at Crystal Lake) more habitable, and is startled a few times by
slamming doors and bursting light bulbs. Behaving logically, she then
takes off her clothes and hops in the tub.
Because this is a horror film, the lights go out, and our heroine must
depart the tub wearing only a towel to investigate the cause of the power
loss. This turns out to be a psychopathic madman with a sharp object. (One
of these days the young woman will merely replace a fuse and return to her
shower, but not this time.) And so, our hockey-masked friend Jason
Voorhees chases the girl out of the cabin and into the woods, where she
falls down, moans pathetically, and scrambles back to her feet, obviously
terrified. She's going to die.
Or is she? Hey, is that a clearing up ahead? Why is she diving behind that log?
Jason is suddenly caught in the glare of a dozen spotlights. It's a trap!
Hooray! Someone finally got smart and sent a battalion of policemen (or
FBI agents, or something) after this freak! Jason is blown away in short
order and his pieces are carted away in a zip-lock bag.
But no, we are then treated to the autopsy, during which Jason's heart (a
nasty black thing) possesses the doctor, reincarnating the killer in the
doctor's body. A couple of gruesome deaths later, Jason is out and about
once again.
By way of a segue, we are given a couple of interesting additions to the
Jason mythology. The best is the fact that Jason is apparently famous,
nationwide, as a serial killer. The "American Case File" tabloid tv
program spotlights Jason's killing spree in the morgue and asks a famous
bounty hunter, Creighton Duke, to speculate on what Jason's next move
might be and how to stop him. Duke (Steven Williams, best known as Mr. X
from The X-Files), of course, lights out for Crystal Lake after the
interview, because killers always return to their haunting grounds.
Now at some point along the line here, it was decided that Jason can be
reborn from another Voorhees and can only be killed by another Voorhees.
So, Jason makes a beeline for his only living relatives, his sister Diana
(Erin Gray), her daughter Jessica, and her new granddaughter. Never mind
that Mrs. Voorhees clearly stated in the original Friday the 13th that
Jason was her only child. Now Jason has a whole gaggle of blood relatives
to stalk.
The upshot of all this is that Jason moves from body to body trying to get
in a position to kill or possess Diana and descendants. The weakness to
this scenario is that Jason is in the bodies of other people, so we don't
get to see our favorite hockey mask-wearing psychopath for most of the
movie. We end up watching various unappealing character actors stalk and
kill other unappealing character actors for most of the hour and a half
that this flick lasts.
On the plus side, our favorite horror movie convention is invoked: Those
who have premarital sex are slaughtered -- and wow, that's pretty explicit
sex! Too bad you guys decided not to use the condom. In today's
politically-correct world, Jason punishes those who decide not to practice
safe sex. Just look at that dramatic shot of Jason's foot treading on the
unused prophylactic.
Perhaps the greatest thing in this movie's favor is that the woman
resolves the plot. Some of our more astute readers may have noticed our
continual annoyance at women who scream their way through an entire movie,
waiting for a man to come solve their problems. None of that here -- all
the man gets to do in this movie is get his butt kicked. It's all up to
Jessica to put Jason away once and for all -- until the next movie.
Speaking of the next movie, the final dramatic shot of this film is one in
which Jason's mask is dragged underground by the clawed hand of that other
horror movie great, Freddy Krueger. This, of course, is in preparation for
New Line Cinema's next magnum opus: Freddy vs Jason. Coming soon to a
theater near you.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:29, Horror, 1993
MPAA rating: R (graphic violence, female nudity, explicit
                language, adult situations)
Rating: three (on a scale of zero to five)
Director: Adam Marcus
Cast: John D. LeMay, Kari Keegan, Allison Smith, Steven Culp,
      Billy Green Bush, Leslie Jordan, Richard Gant, Kane Hodder,
      Erin Gray, Steven Williams
     Kane Hodder (the infamous Jason Voorhees) gets blown up at the
beginning of this film.  His body gets destroyed, but his evil soul
lives on, travelling from body to body until he can get his body back.
Hodder returns to Crystal Lake for much bloody mayhem and is followed
by a bounty hunter who knows how to kill Hodder for good.
     JASON GOES TO HELL: THE FINAL FRIDAY is the ninth entry in the
FRIDAY THE 13TH series.  This film is supposed to be the last film of
the series, but isn't that what the producers said about FRIDAY THE
13TH - PART 4: THE LAST CHAPTER?  I expect that if this film does well
at the box office then yet another one will soon be on the way.  I only
recommend this film to fans of the series, and then only at matinee
prices or off videocassette (when it is released).
     JASON GOES TO HELL, unfortunately, does not live up to the rest of
the series.  Like the earlier film FREDDY'S DEAD: THE FINAL NIGHTMARE,
this film is almost a spoof of the genre and of the FRIDAY THE 13TH
series itself.  At some times the film is intentionally funny and at
other times it is unintentionally amusing.  This film isn't believable
at any level, but what the hell -- if you wanted believable you
wouldn't have gone to see this film in the first place.
     This film keeps up with the gore content of the series, which
could repulse some unexpecting viewers.  The gore effects are well done
and complement the film.  They don't look cheap and should satisfy all
the gore freaks in the audience, because, lets face it, if you are
going to see this film you aren't going to see an Oscar winning
screenplay, you are going for the buckets of blood that shall be
spilled.  The script could have been written better, but as far as
horror movies go, the writing isn't that bad.  The film is predictable
in too many spots, but does have a few surprises in store for the
viewer.  The score isn't overly memorable, but suits the film.  It
doesn't sound that much different from the other FRIDAY THE 13TH films,
which could be that they were all done by the same person (Harry
Manfredini), but it does add a slight chill at the appropriate
moments.
     The acting in this film isn't going to exactly win any Oscars
either.  Kane Hodder (playing Jason for a third time) does a good job
for the little time he is actually on screen.  The rest of the cast
isn't overly spectacular, but aren't extremely bad either.  They are
basically just a normal B-grade horror film cast that can scream on
cue.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  John D. LeMay, Kari Keegan, Erin Gray, Steven Williams
Director:  Adam Marcus
Producer:  Sean S. Cunningham
Screenplay:  Dean Lorey and Jay Hugely, based on the story by 
             Hugely and Adam Marcus
Music:  Harry Manfredini
Released by New Line Cinema
     This may be a first:  a movie title that gives away the ending of
the film.  Come to think of it, some of the other FRIDAY THE 13TH films
did the same thing, didn't they?  Actually, they lied.  Any bets about
this one?
     It's the dark of the night at Camp Crystal Lake and some stupid
girl who didn't watch any of the other FRIDAY THE 13TH movies is taking
her clothes off.  What better (and more obvious) prelude to the arrival
of Jason for his ninth resurrection.  After failing to skewer or behead
his victim on the first try, he chases her through the woods before
finally cornering her in an apparently empty clearing.  Oops.  Jason
has made a mistake.  His prey is actually a plant (not of the flowering
variety, although the performance is a bit wooden) and he's suddenly
surrounded by military-type men with all kinds of firepower.  Fourth of
July!  It doesn't take long before the killer is a mound of burnt up
organs.  It looks like it's all over.  That is, until the coroner takes
too close a look at Jason's oversized heart.  Now you and I both know
that was a dumb move.
     Surprise, surprise!  This film will not make my bottom ten list of
the year.  In fact, it won't come close.  Despite a legacy of horrible
previous efforts under the FRIDAY THE 13TH umbrella (of which I have
seen only three--parts 1, 2, and 8--all on cable), this film actually
has a few good elements buried amidst all the dead bodies, dumb
dialogue, and mystical nonsense.  Chief among these is that JASON GOES
TO HELL has chosen to turn the series in the direction of open
self-parody.
     This movie doesn't take itself seriously--at least not too
seriously.  In between the various maimings, it takes time out to poke
fun at the series' reputation, including a reference to going up to
Camp Crystal Lake to "do drugs, have premarital sex, and get
slaughtered".  It's this warped sense of humor that actually makes the
film somewhat entertaining.  In a genre where it's often difficult to
tell satires from serious attempts, the parodies in JASON GOES TO HELL
are far too obvious to be accidental.
     Of course, horror fans won't be disappointed.  There are the
requisite jump-out-of-your-seat-scares (complete with a burst of
over-the-top music), not to mention a high body count.  Actually, in
terms of showing the gruesome deeds, JASON GOES TO HELL is pretty
tame.  Sure, there are a lot of shots of organs and blood, but most of
the murders happen off screen.  You know how the people are
slaughtered, but you aren't subjected to watching the details.
     In the end, Jason gets his--again.  But is he really dead this
time?  Despite the assertion that if he's skewered by one of his
relatives, he's finally gone, I somehow doubt that.  Unless this film
runs a serious financial deficit--which seems unlikely given the
opening weekend turnout--Jason will be back.  In fact, we're even
given a substantial clue about his next cinematic adventure.
     After the disappointing lack of success of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART
EIGHT, Paramount Pictures, the previous distributor of these films,
gave up on the series.  New Line Cinema quickly snatched up the
rights.  The executives had a great idea for a crossover now that they
owned Jason and Freddy Krueger.  My question is, why not try to get
Michael Meyers (the killer from the HALLOWEEN series, not the guy who
should be axed for foisting SO I MARRIED AN AXE MURDERER on us)?  Then
there could be a real gathering of the Who's Who of Maniacs.  As of
now, however, clues point to it being just Jason and Freddy.  Oh well.
     Make no mistake from any slight praise that I might give this
film--it is in no way a good movie.  Seeing it with the right rowdy
audience while not spending money on it (if I hadn't gotten in for
free, I wouldn't have seen this film) makes Jason's latest apparition
bearable.  For anyone who is even luke-warm about this genre, don't
take this as a recommendation to see the film.  But for blood-and-guts
lovers everywhere, the return of Jason is reason enough to trundle down
to the local multiplex for a midnight showing.  After all, you wouldn't
dare consider seeing this movie during the day!
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
