Title
Review for Rebel Without a Cause (1955)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/
One of our older friends, now fifty-something, once related the experience
of seeing Rebel Without a Cause for the first time:
"I stumbled out of the theater, just in shock... people my age came up to
me and said, 'What's it about?' and all I could say was 'It's about us!'
...In those days, Hollywood just didn't make movies like that. It was
important to suddenly have a movie that was about us."
Certainly, this is Rebel's claim to fame: it was one of the first films to
portray its teen generation of moviegoers in a semi-realistic (if overly
dramatized) fashion. Unfortunately, its success led to a glut of teen
exploitation films which still surface now and again (Switchblade Sisters,
anyone?). But this film itself is not to blame.
James Dean plays Jim Stark, the first in what will be a trio of main
characters with first names starting with J. Jim begins the film nearly
passed out in a gutter, and is brought into the police station on charges
of public drunkenness. There he briefly meets Judy (Natalie Wood) and
Johnny, better known as Plato (Sal Mineo). Jim is new in the neighborhood,
and we guess this is the way he gets to know people -- through the
friendly local law-enforcement offices.
The morning after his parents rescue him from the police (thereby
revealing a whole set of dysfunctional family problems), Jim runs into
Plato and Judy again. Although Plato, an outsider in his own right, is
immediately accepting of Jim, Judy is somewhat harder to win over. She
runs with a rough crowd, and Jim's initiation into that crowd is equally
rough.
During the course of the initiation (a high stakes game of chicken),
Judy's boyfriend is killed, and she immediately bonds with the sensitive
Jim. Meanwhile the boyfriend's gang (including a young Dennis Hopper)
decide that Jim has ratted them out to the police and decide to hunt Jim
down.
The rest of the movie documents what happens that night.
Today, a lot of the movie seems pretty silly. An early scene takes place
during a planetarium show, and the show itself appears to be narrated by
some wierdo who broke into the observatory, started the show, and is just
making it up as he goes along. This is the kind of film where even the bad
kids wear ties. There is also a lot of painfully self-aware dialogue, but
that's pretty much par for the course in any serious film from this time
period.
However, what viewers watching the film today will notice above anything
else is that Plato is gay. Now, Rebel was made in 1955 and there was a
self-censorship board in the U.S. that didn't allow the subject of
homosexuality to be portrayed in films, but Plato is about as gay as a
character could be in a 1950's movie. Besides Sal Mineo's constant
come-hither looks at James Dean, there is also some very interesting
dialogue. Here are some of Plato's best lines, delivered in a rush to
James Dean:
"Hey, you want to come home with me? I mean there's nobody home at my
house and heck, I'm not tired. Are you? See, I don't have too many people
I can talk to... If you want to come, we could talk, and in the morning,
we could have breakfast like my dad used to. Gee, if only you could have
been my dad."
Okay, at the end it gets into kind of a weird area, but you get the idea.
A lot of Plato's problems (his alienation from his family, his ostracism
from the school crowd, his urges to kill small animals) can reasonably be
traced back to the fact that he is gay and from society's reactions to
that. He's completely smitten with Jim, probably because Jim is so
self-absorbed that he doesn't realize that Plato is gay or even what gay
means. But hey, this is all just theory, right? No one actually comes out
and says that Plato prefers the company of men....
Rebel Without a Cause is, if nothing else, a fiercely honest movie (on
points other than Plato's sexuality). Dean's portrayal of Jim is both
vulnerable and defiant, and the disparities between Judy's sex-kitten
school persona and confused, rejected daughter-self at home reveal a lot
about the amount of information withheld from teenagers in the 1950's.
Jim: Nobody talks to children. Judy: No, they just tell them.
We suspect that Rebel Without a Cause (and other films like it) had a lot
to do with the changes in Hollywood that were soon to happen; it was
certainly a harbinger of the change in American culture looming just over
the decade's horizon. In any case, it's a wonderful movie if you can
adjust to the time period and realize that if the lines seem cheesy, at
least the feelings behind them were real.

Author
Nicholas Amado
Rebel Without A Cause spoke to an entire generation of young men and women,
struggling with thier own identities, while living in the confining 1950s. It
taught them how to speak for themself, laugh at authority and wear blue
jeans. But that generation is now in control of this country. They are in
their 50's now, long since moved on from their teen years, and they should
have taken Rebel Without A Cause with them.
James Dean's most breakthrough film, the picture that would have made him one
of the biggest stars in history (and three films alone almost put him there),
does not stand the test of time. Frankly, I don't see how it even stood at
all during the 50's, for bad filmmaking has always been bad. Nicholas Ray
does some interesting things with the camera, has some thought-provoking
metaphorical and symbolic aspects, but fails from a directorial standpoint,
as does the film's screenwriter with his ludicrous story.
The biggest problem with Rebel Without A Cause is what it asks us to accept.
The film opens with Jim Stark (James Dean) being hauled into a juvenile
detention center for public drunkedness. He is a lost and confused soul
because his mother dominates his immasculine father. The next day, he begins
school, and the major events of the film unfold. This is where the tall tale
begins. Jim matures from new kid on the block to punk veteran in the course
of one day. We see him snubed by the pretty girl on campus (Natalie Wood) in
the morning. He's challenged to a knife fight by mid-afternoon, and he gets
the girl and becomes Mr. Cool Rebel by midnight. The tough-guy character of
Buzz is a violent punk, but he comes off like a pussycat. Right before the
Chicken Race, he tells Jim how much he likes him personally, though just
hours before they were slashing each other with switchblades. Judy (Wood) is
Buzz's main squeeze, but when he dies in the Chicken Race, she immediately
falls for the now-cool Jim Stark. By midnight, she is professing her deep
love for him.
Though James Dean gives a fantastic performance, he and all the other teens,
save for Sal Mineo, look more like they are ready to graduate from college
than from high school. Because of that, Mineo, the only one who does look
like a high schooler doesn't fit in! He too gives a fine performance as a
crazed, confused youth, looking for normalcy and a family life.
Basically, all three main characters, Jim, Judy and Plato (Mineo) are looking
for a family that they can't have except with each other. Jim has a weak
father (Jim Backus, who looks stunning in a frilly kitchen apron) who won't
take a stand against his wife. Judy doesn't get the affection she needs from
Daddy, and Plato is being raised by a housekeeper. But only Plato's rage and
confusion is understandable. We never meet his parents, because neither of
them is around for him. But Jim's parents are quite normal (with the average
family quirkiness) He could do a lot worse. But there is never any foundation
laid for his emotional problems. He is reckless, but why? Because his loving
parents aren't quite loving enough? Because the film essentially takes place
in a 24 hr. period, we never get a feeling of why he is the way he is. 
The unrealistic time frame and lack of proper character development make me
wonder why this is regarded as one of the most woderful films of the 50's.
One should only see this film for Dean's performance and perhaps to see what
all the hoopla is about. Should you happen to check it out in it's newest
form, Warner' Bros. widescreen editon, you may be interested in the 25 minute
trailer that shows parts of a TV show hosted by Gig Young. It has behind the
scenes looks at the filming (though the "behind the scene" part is very
stagey) and contains interviews with Jim Backus and James Dean. But by all
means, if you havn't seen it, view this "classic" and come to your own
conclusions.
1 1/2 out of 4 stars
Copyright (C) Nick Amado 1997
*******************************
Comments? (I expect plenty!) Complaints? (Those too) Debate? (Lots of that)
Email me at NAMIAM@AOL.COM

Author
Brian Koller
"Rebel Without a Cause" had an outstanding, if unfortunate,
promotional gimmick.  Young, charismatic lead James Dean,
his star on the rise from his performance in the highly
successful "East of Eden", died in a car accident less
than a month before the film's release.  Perhaps this was a
case of life imitating art, since a dangerous game of 'chicken'
is one of the highlights of "Rebel".  With its attractive
leads, a teens-in-peril theme, and a fast-moving plot,
"Rebel" was a tremendous commercial success.  It also
created a cultural impact that formed the basis for its
critical praise.  Along with "The Wild One", "Blackboard
Jungle" and rock 'n' roll music, "Rebel" fanned fears
(justified or not) among conservative parents that teens
would choose anti-establishment heroes and values.
The story features three teenagers, each from dysfunctional
families.  Jim (James Dean) has a shrewish mother (Ann Doran)
and spineless father, leaving him afraid of becoming a
'chicken' like his father (Jim Backus).  Judy (Natalie Wood)
has a father (William Hopper) who is physically repelled by
her, making her anxious to find love from a father substitute.
Plato is a creepy, sad-faced teen whose parents are absent,
leaving him to be raised by a nanny (Marietta Canty).  Plato
is looking for substitutes for both mother and father,
momentarily achieving this when Jim and Judy appear willing.
Anyway, that is my amateur psychological evaluation of the
leads.  Your mileage may vary.
Our three troubled teens have brushes with the law and
with gangs of tough-talking hoodlums led by Buzz
(Corey Allen) and Goon (Dennis Hopper).  "Rebel Without a
Cause" expresses the theory that juvenile delinquents
from affluent, 'good' families is not the fault of the
mixed-up kids, but their mixed-up parents.  The apparent
conclusion is that the social problem can be solved by
assigning a psychiatrist to every juvenile offender,
ideally with their parents participating.
James Dean's onscreen persona is surprisingly sensitive
and loyal to his friends.  He only resorts to violence
when he is forced to, except for a frustrated attack on
his dithering, hapless father.  Backus actually wears a
large, matronly apron throughout one lengthy scene: Dean,
you'll have to find a role model elsewhere.
"Rebel Without a Cause" was nominated for three Academy
Awards, including Best Supporting Actor (Mineo) and
Actress (Wood).  Dean was posthumously nominated for
Best Actor that year, but for the film "East of Eden",
losing to (believe it or not) Ernest Borgnine.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

REBEL WITHOUT A CAUSE (director/writer: Nicholas Ray; screenwriter:
Irving Shulman/Stewart Stern/from a Nicholas Ray story; cinematographer:
Ernest Haller; editor:William H. Ziegler; cast: James Dean (Jim Stark),
Natalie Wood (Judy), Sal Mineo (Plato), Jim Backus (Jim's father), Corey
Allen (Buzz Gunderson), Edward Platt (Ray), Dennis Hopper (Goon), Ann
Doran (Jim's Mother), Marietta Canty (Plato's Nanny), Frank Mazzola
(Crunch), William Hopper (Judy's Father), 1955)
By the time this film was released, James Dean, the idolized 24-year-old
star of the film and soon-to-be eternal movie-cult icon for all
generations of estranged youth, had died in a head-on car collision on
September 30, 1955, shortly before this film was released.
Coincidentally, one of the themes of the film, is playing 'chickie run',
that is the cars race to a bluff and the first to jump before going over
the cliff, is a chicken. Everyone knows how bad it is to be called a
chicken--it could mess up one's self-image worst than the wind can mess
up a ducktail haircut for a teenager in the 1950s--as this
liberal-inspired social commentary film plunges right into that 1950s
Eisenhower era mind-set, without trepidation.
Nicholas Ray's teenage angst film about rich, postwar, suburban L.A.,
juvenile delinquents who are alienated and can't cope with their
disturbing home life, is arguably the best rebellious youth film of the
1950s and though dated, it still plays well today because the issues
facing the teenagers haven't changed that much. It was based on an
actual case study of a teenage delinquent. It's a film that
sympathetically sides with the rebellious youths and their befuddled
parents, and it doesn't even demonize the police. It airs out the
prevalent problems of the mid-'50s for these youngsters; such as,
loneliness, alienation, lack of love, fitting in with their peers, their
identity crises, and the lack of communication with their folks. It also
hints about a troubled youth, Plato, played with delicacy by Sal Mineo,
whose problem is that he is gay in a time and place where no one talked
about such things or knew what to say about it. Though, the film
stresses that his loneliness problem stems from no father at home and no
mother there to console him and tries to make his withdrawal the problem
rather than his homosexuality, yet there are strong hints that he is
still in-the-closet about his sexual choice. In his high school locker,
there is a glossy fan photo of Alan Ladd pasted on it. He also seems to
be attracted to Dean in a physical way, though the film tries to make it
seem that he mostly wants to induce Dean into being his surrogate
father.
The three main stars of the film, cross paths in the opening scene, in
the police station, which is just the right place for the mixed-up
innocents to meet. Jimmy Stark (Dean) is brought in for public
drunkeness, lying on the street with a toy monkey. He has just moved
here and has no friends. He is visibly upset that his crone-like mother
(Doran) and gutless father (Backus), who are always quarreling, are
still arguing in the police station. He feels that they are not
listening to him and that his bumbling father is not a good role model.
When questioned by the youth officer, Ray (Edward Platt), who uses the
kindly social worker approach in dealing with the young offenders, Jimmy
tells him the truth about his problems and seems to form a positive
relationship with him (I couldn't help laughing at that scene and how
punky Dean seemed). Judy (Wood) has been picked up wandering the
streets, mistaken for a prostitute, and tells Ray the reason for that,
is that her father (William Hopper) called her a dirty tramp. She can't
get her father to offer her fatherly love, as he seems to be repelled by
her. The officer calls home and gets her mother to take her home, when
she wanted her father to be the one to come for her.  The third
innocent, is John Crawford, who goes by the nickname Plato (you know,
like the philosopher). He is being looked after by his black nanny
(Canty), who can't control him. He is at the station because he used his
mother's gun to shoot puppies, seemingly upset because his mother was
not there for his birthday. Another officer than Ray, who had been
handling his case, recommends that his nanny tell his mother to get
Plato a psychiatrist.
The film takes place over one long 24-hour period of delirious activity,
starting on an Easter night in the police station and ending the next
night with police surrounding the planetarium, where the same three
principals from the opening scene at the police station are now at, but
are now in more serious trouble.
Jimmy is naturally nervous about going to his new school the next
morning, but he is not concerned about teachers or subjects, but about
making new friends. He is attracted to Judy, but she rebuffs him for the
crew she stays with, that is a gang of ruffians, led by her
leather-jacketed boyfriend Buzz (Corey Allen). All these well-off kids
ride to school together in this open car, acting loud and stupid, proud
to be dumb Americans. Supposedly, they will later on go on to become
what middle America is about, reflecting dearly on the values it grew up
with and pining for those "good old days" of Eisenhower laissez-faire
policies.
Jimmy's first contact with them is at the school visit to the nearby
D.W. Griffith Planetarium, and it results in taunting and confrontation
outside the building. He is dressed for school in a suit and tie, while
Plato is dressed in a sweater and tie. They are not looking for trouble,
in fact, he is trying his best to avoid it. But Jimmy is hung-up on
being called a chicken, afraid that he will become like his father if he
doesn't respond. He thinks his dad should have answered his harping
mother back a long time ago. So when egged on to a knife fight with
Buzz, after Buzz slashed his tire with his switchblade, which he would
have ignored except Buzz and the gang made chicken sounds. The fight is
broken up by a security guard, but a 'chickie run' is arranged for that
night.
At home, Jimmy tries to tell his father what is going on, why he is
bleeding, by asking his father to tell him what to do about a matter of
honor. Mr. Stark is ironically dressed in an apron and can't directly
answer his son's question: "What do you have to do to be a man?"
The rest of the night turns into a Shakespearian tragedy, as Jimmy bails
out in the nick of time during the 'chickie run', but Buzz's jacket gets
stuck in the car door and he goes over the cliff. Judy gets a ride home
with Jimmy and she becomes his new girlfriend, just like that. At home,
Jimmy tells his parents that he wants to go to the police station and
tell them what happened, but they try to talk him out of that. He then
runs out of the house but has no luck getting the police to listen to
his story, as Ray is not there. Crunch (Mazzola) and the rest of the
gang, who were called into the station for questioning, decide that he
has squealed to the police on them and go after him.
Jim finds Judy and they go to a deserted mansion that Plato told him
about, that is near the planetarium. Plato will join them there later,
bringing his mother's gun along for protection, after he was visited by
the gang and roughed up. They become like an alternative nuclear family,
the one they were searching for in their own homes.
They find some peace during the later hours of the night. But their
happiness is short-lived, as Crunch and the boys find them in the
mansion and Plato wounds Crunch who is coming after him. He then runs to
the planetarium to escape the rest of the gang. With the police
surrounding the planetarium, Jim and Judy run into the place to talk
Plato into peacefully giving up. But despite Jim's efforts, the
ill-fated Plato panics and is shot down by the police, as he tries to
run, frightened by the glare of the police lights. After the incident,
Jim's father reconciles with his son, telling him they will face the
world together from now on, that you tried to help Plato, but it's not
your fault, you did all that you could do, that any man can do. The
picture ends as the light of dawn is barely breaking through the
darkness and an unidentified man (Nicholas Ray) is walking up the steps
of the planetarium.
For all its aging and the changing mores of the times and the
ever-increasing complexities of modern youth, this creaky film still has
a rawness about it, something that is intangible, that gets into your
spine and brings out a chill or two, that tells you this dramatization
was real.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Long Che Chan
When Rebel Without a Cause was released, it was a novelty.  It was one
of the very first mainstream films to depict the turmoil of
adolescence.  Prior to this movie, Hollywood avoided any difficult
themes and every family on screen was a template for the perfect, happy
American family.  The families in Rebel Without a Cause are not
perfect.  They all have their missteps.  I don't believe there is one
family in America that is as superficial and completely joyful as the
Brady Bunch and Rebel brings to light the tortures of parenthood and,
primarily, the tortures of youth.
Jim Stark (James Dean) is a teenager whose parents have moved around so
much just so he will get a chance to make good friends.  His parents are
good and affectionate and nurturing but they just don't understand him.
I suppose that it is difficult for any parent to understand the struggle
of a teenager because they have already passed that awful stage in life
and probably can't or don't want to recall it.  Jim's family is devoted
to him; they buy him whatever he desires but, as any teenager knows,
material things can never fill the sense of emptiness and frustration
that comes with the age.
We first meet Jim at the town's police station.  He has just been caught
drunk on the streets.  Rebel Without a Cause is not a spectacular
movie.  It is the power of several scenes that make the movie so good.
The first sequence is one such powerful moment.  When Jim's parents come
to pick him up at the station, his father comforts him, his mother
chides him, and his grandmother is a bit cold towards him.  He yells,
"You're tearing me apart!" and has a private talk with an officer at the
station who asks Jim to visit him if he feels the urge to do something
wrong again.  I think the brilliance of this scene lies in how honest it
is.  It doesn't sugarcoat as many movies do and it doesn't make the
teenage situation so extreme.  Though the dialogue seems a tad banal, it
brings to the surface wounding issues that plague my age group.
What struck me initially about this scene was when Jim tells the officer
the weaknesses of his father, who always allows his mother to mock and
step on him.  Later in the sequence we meet Judy (Natalie Wood) who was
found walking the streets alone at night.  She too is a teenager and
suffers from conflicts with her father.  He calls her a tramp and she
believes he hates her.  Teenagers take everything to heart and calling
your children ugly names will inevitably have an effect on them.  She,
like Jim, does not come from an indifferent family.  Her parents know
that adolescence is a painful stage but they have no idea how to help
her.
At school, Jim meets Judy and her gang friends.  They tease him with a
switchblade fight and invite him to a gathering that night on a
dangerous cliff.  Another thing that struck me about the character Jim
is that he doesn't want to get involved in trouble but he wants to prove
himself to his violent peers.  He accepts the invitation but later asks
his father what to do.  When his father has no answer, he turns angry.
What follows is the famous scene near the cliff in which the gang leader
and Jim measure who is more cowardly by seeing who will jump out of
their car first as it nears the edge of the cliff.  The gang leader is
killed.
Jim meets Plato (Sal Mineo), a social misfit who comes from a broken
family, and begins a strong friendship with him.  With Judy, whose
involvement in the gang is, of course, but a facade, Jim begins a
romance.  These three characters are lonely and without friends and they
create their own little world by caring for each other.  The climactic
sequence is both painful and saddening.
Rebel Without a Cause has been said to be about juvenile delinquency and
what spawns it, but, to me, it has never had anything to do with that
subject.  For me, it's always been about what troubles teenagers the
most: family, frustration, isolation, and the certain urge to prove
something.  James Dean, in his acclaimed debut, has been dubbed a Marlon
Brando for youth.  His performance as Jim Stark is splintering and so
sensitive.  He is not macho at all but he reflects what is nearly always
behind the tough exterior of young men.  Despite his tragic death two
movies later, he remains very much alive in our culture, an epitome of
anguish-ridden youth.  His image and his red jacket have become the
symbols of the distressed youth cry. This is by far his best
performance.  Natalie Wood gives a good performance here but would top
herself in Elia Kazan's Splendor in the Grass, an equally moving film
about adolescents struggling with sexuality. Sal Mineo plays the timid
Plato and he gives a career-changing performance.
Some say Rebel Without a Cause's elements are dated and, yes, several
elements are.  However, Rebel makes itself not about issues that
tortured teens in the 50s, but about the central, inner, sometimes
self-inflicted pains that plagued teens then and still, to this day,
plague teenagers.  That is why I can relate to Rebel and why generations
of youth will.  Rebel Without a Cause is not a great movie, but parts of
it are simply brilliant.  It is still one of the best teenage movies
ever made, though segments of Truffaut's The 400 Blows and many scenes
featuring Timothy Hutton in Ordinary People moved me, too.  Rebel
Without a Cause will be relevant for as long as adolescence remains the
period of angst.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring James Dean, Natalie Wood, Sal Mineo, Jim Backus, Ann Doran, Corey
Allen, William Hopper, and Dennis Hopper.
"Rebel Without a Cause" is such an important film in American history because
it is a true analysis of youth in America that everyone of all ages can relate
to. Everyone feels that they are different in some way, that they don't belong
in some places and "Rebel Without a Cause" successfully shows on screen these
universal emotions. No matter what generation you belong to, these feelings are
present. This is why James Dean is admired by America, because in this film he
represents us all and his actions are actions that we would also execute. In
our minds, we just try to do the right thing just like Dean's Jim Stark does.
Not only does "Rebel Without a Cause" display these universal emotions for all
to relate to but it also shows that America has suffered a uniqe pattern in its
social structure. Each generation looks at its past generation without a strong
connection. This is because times change and in response people change. No
matter how popular you were once, as your generation grows older, newer breeds
look at you in a different light. This is why Stark and his friends never could
form a strong relationship with their parents. Even if their parents insisted
that they were also rebellious and troublesome in the past, the teens could not
believe this. In one humorous scene, Stark, his girlfriend Judy (Natalie Wood),
and his pal Plato (Sal Mineo) pretend they are adults. They use upper class
British accents and in their conversations they make it out to appear that kids
are no good and should be ignored. This scene shows that what was once cool in
a past generation is the complete opposite in another. Speaking on behalf of my
generation, I feel that Dean has lost a lot of his coolness from our
perspective as the years have grown by.  The only ones who seem to still
lionize him are those members of his generation.Same goes for Brando, Redford,
even Deniro. I can only imagine how vaguely Matt Damon, Ben Affleck, and Brad
Pitt will be viewed at the mid point of the twenty first century. Will Dean
even be remembered when these newcomers are forgotten?
Any film that sparks this kind of thought is certainly a milestone in American
film. Even if "Rebel Without a Cause" has some ridiculous scenes (the game of
chicken - did people really act this way?), an unbelievable conclusion (how did
everyone end up at the abandoned mansion at the end?), and a silly romance
(Wood declares her love for Dean after talking to him for a couple hours) it
still is a fabulous film. The acting is so believable that it is no wonder that
Dean was considered the epitome of cool. Now, however, the coolness is
fading...
visit new website - Lars Attacks
 http://www.angelfire.com/ny3/larsattacks
