Title
Review for Mac (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  John Turturro plays a character based
     on his own father in a film he directs and also co-wrote.
     Turturro proves that the lives of a family of carpenters is
     no less interesting than the lives of a family of criminals.
     Surprisingly entertaining.  Rating: low +2 (-4 to +4).
     The vast majority of employed people in this country have rarely, if
ever, seen someone in the same occupation portrayed in the movies.  There
are maybe fifty or so professions that show up in films and fewer that have
a major part in the plot of the film.  Presumably from the filmmakers'
viewpoint, other professions just are not dramatic.  But, in fact, many
people's stories are dramatic and they do take risks, have dreams, and in
general have stories worth telling.  John Turturro's father, Nicholas
Turturro, built houses.  In the family his adventures in that profession
made interesting conversation, but could the story be transferred to film in
a way that would make anyone want to come to see the film?  John Turturro
apparently thought so, and proves his point with MAC.
     John Turturro plays Niccolo "Mac" Vitelli, a carpenter and brother to
two carpenters and the son of a third.  Mac's father is a genuine craftsman,
but the three brothers work for a Polish builder who takes no pride in work
and who looks for shortcuts to cheat the customer.  Mac gets fed up and,
together with his brothers Vito (played by Michael Badalucco) and Bruno
(played by Carl Capotorto), forms a partnership to compete with his old
boss.  Mac has an eye for detail and assembles a team of quality builders,
but financial problems follow and haunt him.  Even worse, Mac's explosive
temper more than once nearly ruins the family's dreams.  The film also
focuses on the private lives of the brothers.  Mac finds a wife (played by
Katherine Borowitz), but Vito and Bruno both like an attractive beatnik
(played by Ellen Barkin).
     While the screenplay by Turturro and Branden Cole is episodic, it is
nevertheless surprisingly intriguing.  In fact, for interest value MAC holds
it own against films about men building their dreams like BUGSY or TUCKER,
even though the main character has nowhere near the notoriety that Bugsy
Siegel or even Preston Tucker had.  The film has a nice portrait of an
Italian-American family in the 1940 and 1950s.  Turturro plays his role with
an intensity bordering on over-acting at times.  Still, this is an
intelligent treatment of a story unlikely to be made into a film.  I give
this one a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MAC  (1992) *** Directed by John Turturro. Written by Turturro and 
Brandon Cole. Photography, Ron Fortunato. Production design, Robin 
Standefer. Editing, Michael Berenbaum. Music, Richard Termini, Vin 
Tese. Cast: John Turturro, Michael Badalucco, Carl Capotorto, 
Katherine Borowitz, Ellen Barkin, Olek Krupa, John Amos, et al. A 
Samuel Goldwyn release. 118 minutes. R (language).
Filial love, autobiography, pride in craftsmanship, family relations, 
labor ethics and changing times coalesce in "Mac," the first feature 
directed by John Turturro.
As an actor Turturro made his mark in several films, notably in three 
by Spike Lee and two by the Coen brothers. His major breakthrough 
came in the latter's "Barton Fink," for which he received the Best 
Actor Award at the 1991 Cannes Film Festival. The following year, 
also at Cannes, Turturro won the Camera d'Or (Golden Camera) prize 
for "Mac", as best first film.
"Mac" is inspired by the life and the values of Turturro's own 
father, a first generation Italian immigrant who was a carpenter 
before he became a contractor, and with whom John worked on summers 
and vacations.
The film had been Turturro's project since 1980. The movie script 
evolved into a play (co-written with playwright Brandon Cole) of 
which many scenes were staged by Turturro in various small New York 
theaters. But no film producer could be found until Nancy Tenenbaum 
("sex, lies and videotape"),  who had turned down the project several 
times, met with Turturro and, impressed, not only took over the 
production, but talked him into directing the movie.
"Mac" opens in Queens, at the wake for Papa Vitelli in 1954 
(Turturro's father actually died in 1988), who leaves three sons, Mac 
(Turturro) the oldest, Vico (Badalucco), and Bruno (Capotorto) the 
junior.
Of the three, Mac is like a reincarnation of the old man, and 
inherits from him the principle that "There's only two ways of doing 
things. The right  way and my way. And they're both the same." The 
principle involves uncompromising standards of workmanship that, in 
Mac's case, turn into a veritable obsession.
The brothers go to work for contractor Olek Krupa who practices 
shortcuts -- beams spaced too far apart, fewer nails used, and the 
like. Mac's brothers, though disapproving, accept the status quo, 
especially as they have other fish to fry: Vico is a girl-chaser and 
Bruno an aspiring artist as well as a ladies' man.
Mac however eventually rebels (quite violently) and like his Papa and 
Turturro's own goes from carpenter to independent contractor, with 
his brothers. The film follows the work and travails of the outfit in 
the style of "verismo,"  roughly the Italian term for naturalism, 
which in the 1940s led to the neo-realism of Italian cinema and in 
turn influenced Italian-American  directors like Scorsese or Coppola.
Unadorned reality permeates the film. The price of this authenticity 
is that the characters are not fabricated, hence are not particularly 
interesting. But this is made up by the suspense inherent in the 
building trade, with the menace of financial debacles, physical 
dangers, graft and abuses. There are major accidents and lesser 
irritations, like a worker named Joey who is a real Sloppy Joe but is 
protected by his Union representative.
The culmination of Mac's idealistic tunnel-vision is the building of 
four finely-honed houses. The tragedy is that they won't sell, for 
reasons explained in the movie.
More than his brothers, it is Mac's girl, later his wife Alice 
(Katherine Borowitz, Turturro's wife in real life) who counsels and 
encourages him, shows good sense and genuine flair for business 
deals. I cannot tell whether this character is invented or, like much 
in the movie, comes from models. But
strong Alice is a refreshing change from the submissive movie spouses 
of Italo-Americans, before and after the 1950s.
To his credit, Turturro does not overplay his ethnic hand. The 
Sicilian-American atmosphere is inescapable, with macho boys, heavy 
accents, underlit, furniture-choked interiors. But colorfulness per 
se is avoided: no pasta, no cutesy sentiments, no shouts (except for 
the unseen, probably senile mama who screeches from her room), no 
family feuds, no Mafiosi.
At the same time, the predominantly Italianate teams of workers 
include other races and ethnicities. Characteristics are kept, the 
melting pot is more of a mixing pot,  and there is often a true 
feeling of proletarian solidarity.
As the Vitelli Bros. business develops in lurching fashion, comes 
dangerously close to bankruptcy and then bounces back modestly. 
Mac's perfectionism gradually alienates his brothers. They finally 
quit the partnership and the Old World standards, while joining, so 
to speak, the post-war half of the century, a time of sellers rather 
than builders. The disgusted Mac sums up the1950s boom while 
unwittingly prophesizing the excesses of the 1980s : "There are men 
who can do, and men who can talk."
I wonder whether or not Turturro has been remotely affected by films 
like "On the Waterfront" of 1954, the year when "Mac" begins, or 
better still, Italian movies like Francesco Rosi's classic exposé of 
crooked real-estate developers, "Hands Over the City" (1963), with 
Rod Steiger.
Yet no matter what the influences "Mac" is not  derivative. 
Throughout, it remains an actor's movie, with a stress (sometimes an 
over-stress) of closeups of faces, something that might also be 
called a TV technique, yet a system that great filmmakers such as 
Ingmar Bergman can render totally cinematic.
Initially rather slow, the tempo later picks up, notably when Mac 
passionately and heedlessly overbids against his former employer; 
when at last virtue is rewarded by the sale of all four houses; or 
when,  in a scene of  near-Shakespearean pathos, the other brothers 
go their own way.
Also to Turturro's credit, the picture, unlike Mac's building, does 
not attempt to be a "well-made" film with all the rough spots sanded 
down, all characters explained, problems solved, and questions 
answered.
The driven Mac , undoubtedly a pain to live with, is not particularly 
appealing. But the message is. As Turturro said in a 1992 interview: 
" This is a very American film, very large in spirit, that says: to 
build something means something -- and that the most important thing 
a person can do is leave a mark on the world in a simple but 
significant way."

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  John Tuturro, Michael Badalucco, Carl Capotorto,
           Katherine Borowitz, Ellen Barkin
Director:  John Tuturro
Producers:  Nancy Tenenbaum and Brenda Goodman
Screenplay:  John Tuturro and Brandon Cole
Music:  Richard Termini and Vin Tese
Released by Samuel Goldwyn Co.
     In 1954 Queens, New York, three brothers - Mac (John Tuturro),
Vico (Michael Badalucco), and Bruno (Carl Capotorto) - after having a
few bad experiences working for others, decide to band together and
create their own construction business.  The building of four houses is
a painstaking process that pushes the relationships of the close
brothers to the breaking point.
     Credit should go to John Tuturro for exploring a subject -
carpentry and house building - that is not often seen in films.  Not
only does MAC tackle this issue, but manages to make it vital and
interesting.  The best parts of the film are those that show the
various stages of starting a new business and building the houses.  If
only the interpersonal relationships between the brothers had been
handled as deftly and with as much feeling.
     There is no doubt whatsoever that MAC was a labor of love for
Tuturro.  The film took twelve years to reach its final form, and
Tuturro was involved every step of the way.  MAC is dedicated to and
loosely based on the life of Turturro's father, a first generation
Italian American carpenter.  The writer/director/actor has put his
heart and energy into this movie and, while the product is flawed,
there is still enough here to make viewing of this film worthwhile.
     MAC is a visual feast.  Rich images abound and great care is paid
to detail.  The opening credits are especially impressive - as well as
indicative of the quality of the rest of the film - as booted feet
stalk through mud and concrete is smoothed over.  Throughout the entire
film, this flair is never lost.
     At times, Tuturro handles the relationships between the three
brothers well, but not always.  Too often, he goes for melodrama and
directs with a heavy hand.  It doesn't take the audience long to
understand the tensions coursing under the surface, but Tuturro insists
on hammering the point home over and over again.  He does it so often
that, in addition to being repetitious, the entire subject becomes
tedious and uncomfortable.
     Perhaps I would have felt differently had I gotten the impression
of real affection between the brothers.  However, although it's
apparent that the Vitellis are a close-knit family, there are few - if
any - demonstrations of brotherly affection.  My problems with the
disintegration of the relation- ship are partially grounded in an
inability to completely accept what Tuturro takes for granted.
     Tuturro's acting is inspired.  He goes over-the-top on a couple of
occasions, but he infuses this film with an energy that it's badly in
need of.  The explosiveness of his performance is in stark contrast
with the gray, rainy nature of the setting.  This is definitely one of
the film's saving graces.
     At its heart, MAC is a story about integrity and taking pride in
one's work.  As the title character proclaims, "You know what I think
happiness is?  To love your job...  If you hate your work, you hate your
life."  The specific focus of this film may be on an Italian American
family of carpenters, but the message is universal.  This is not a
great film - the character inter- action is often shaky - but the
production is energetic in getting its message across.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
