Title
Review for Michelangelo: A Self Portrait (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MICHELAGNIOLO,SELF PORTRAIT (1989) Produced and directed by 
Robert Snyder.Written by Michael Sonnabend. 85 minutes. Not 
rated.
A plastic,masterful documentary on Michelangelo in which the 
artist narrates his life, works and times through the voice of 
director Robert Snyder, MICHELAGNIOLO (a Tuscan spelling) is a 
most moving  and impressive spiritual and artistic experience. 
The composite text is drawn from Michelangelo's diaries,many 
other writings, conversations with contemporaries like 
artist-writer Giorgio Vasari (who had  also been an apprentice 
to Michelangelo) and the works of Dante . 
The images and the sound amount to a combination 
autobiography, a guided tour of Renaissance art, descriptions 
and exegeses, I suspect that the film also draws on uncredited 
sources, like Vasari's LIVES OF PAINTERS and modern 
scholarship. More, and without invalidating the great quality 
of this film, I have suspicions about its genesis, suspicions 
that set me doing detective work.
The official information is full of deserved, admiring quotes. 
It states too that Robert Snyder, (b. 1916) was awarded the 
1951  Oscar  for Best Documentary Feature ( presumably his 
first film) for THE TITAN: STORY OF MICHELANGELO. The facts 
are different:
In the beginning was MICHELANGELO, DAS LEBEN EINES TITANEN 
(The Life of a Titan) a documentary by an experienced 
specialist in art films, the German Curt Oertel. This film , 
which "avoided the double trap of hagiography and museography" 
and used light, photography and camera movement in a new way, 
was a model work. It was a German-Swiss coproduction, shot in 
Switzerland, and released in March 1940. 
Later, the great American documentarist Robert Flaherty 
reedited Oertel's footage, prepared an English commentary 
(read by Fredric March) "while being vague about the original 
source of his materials," and THE TITAN was released in  the 
USA in 1950." For this reason the film is usually referred to 
as a Flaherty film, which it is not. Credit is long overdue to 
Oertel, whose techniques have had enormous effect on 
subsequent films of this type made for both the commercial 
cinema and television." (David Stewart Hall: FILM IN THE THIRD 
REICH, 1969) 
The Academy Award records show that the Oscar went to "The 
Titan (Robert Snyder, producer)" and in 1950 rather than in 
1951. Flaherty died in 1951. Snyder then went on to making 
other documentaries on artists (Pablo Casals, Henry Miller, 
etc.) and others, like THE HIDDEN WORLD, on insect life. 
The new MICHELAGNIOLO is an updated remake, in color (with 
black-and-white sections) of the black-and-white THE TITAN .  
Screen credits mention that the black-and-white excerpts comes 
from the Oertel movie (which they date wrongly as 1939)  but 
nothing else. 
For the new version, the original plans called for 
distinguished actors from each culture where the film would be 
distributed to appear on screen intermittently and do the 
voice-over. This impractical, illusion-destroying idea was 
replaced by just Snyder's raspy voice which provides a 
credible thread in spite of a most American pronunciation of 
some words,e.g."Il Divino" becoming "Eel Deveeno" . 
This is an inside job. Just as we see and feel how 
Michelangelo would take a block of stone and make the statue 
latent in it emerge, the film,with its wealth of 
documentation, its techniques of three-dimensional 
photography, loving close-ups of details and the like, gives 
us the kind of analytical and synthesizing awareness that the 
unguided mind alone cannot follow in reality and that the 
viewing at a distance cannot capture sufficiently. 
The life of Michelangelo is traced with spellbinding images 
and narration, from his childhood to his "Pieta" sculpted at 
age 21; his "David" finished three years later; his constant 
relationships with the Medici and the Popes.
Michelangelo's struggle, over decades, with the megalomaniac 
Pope Julius II who forced him to paint the Sistine ceiling 
(while Michelangelo kept protesting " I am not a painter") and 
charged him with the nightmarish plans to make a monumental 
tomb for him (Julius); the artist's constant harassment with 
impossible  architectural commissions by other Popes; his 
return to the Sistine chapel to do the Last Judgment 30 years 
after the Creation; the turmoil of the Reformation, the 
Counter-Reformation, Savonarola, Civil wars (Michelangelo was 
a general, against his old patrons the Medici); the process of 
creativity -- at least as much as can be grasped -- come 
through beautifully. So does the artist's lifelong pull by, 
and alternation, between pagan and religious works; or the 
censorship concerning nudity, which made Michelangelo give the 
ultimate reply: "So, clothes are nobler than the body and 
shoes nobler than the foot?" 
Worried as I am about MICHELAGNIOLO's true paternity, I cannot 
deny that the work is not only 85 minutes of fascination but a 
totally humbling experience too.
