Title
Review for Spring Forward (1999)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Robin Clifford
Paul (Live Schreiber) is a young ex-con making a fresh start with the Parks
and Recreation department in a small New England town. He is teamed with
Murphy (Ned Beatty), an old hand at the job and approaching retirement. The
duo gets to know each other and become close friend over a year's time in
writer/director Tom Gilroy's feature film debut, "Spring Forward."
Newcomer Gilroy shows his stage-bound roots in his first attempt at making
a movie. The stagy nature of the film's structure - seven episodes,
chronologically over the course of a year, bridged by idyllic sequence of
small town life in the Northeast - could have been painful to watch in the
small budget film. Except for a pair of big-budget performances by Beatty
and Schreiber.
The trite little story of the once fallen and now found Paul, whose
criminal past stemmed from financial desperation and not a mean streak,
coming into the life of the near-retirement Murphy. As each talky episode
unfolds, we learn more and more about the two, who they are, what their
desires and needs are (Paul, early on, declares his "need" to get laid),
and just what makes 'em tick. There's talk about being a better person as
Paul floats his newly learned ideas of karma and religion before Murphy.
Murph tells his young colleague about his gay son, Bobby, who, off camera,
is dying of an undisclosed disease. (You figure it out.) They even smoke a
joint together in a cross-generational bonding ceremony. There is
philosophy enough for three plays here.
You can overlook the amateur filmmaking of "Spring Forward" as you watch
the two fine performances by the leads. Ned Beatty has had a long career
portraying a variety of characters from his "squeal like a pig" victim in
"Deliverance" to Otis, the sidekick of Lex Luthor (Gene Hackman) in
"Superman," and Sheriff Lester Banks in "Cookie's Fortune." He gives Murphy
the depth you expect from the actor and portrays the man as truly good and
kind in a small-town way. Live Schreiber is also proving himself to be able
to play a variety of types and he makes Paul a real person. He has a past,
but it does not dictate how he will be in the future. His deference to and
respect for Murphy are genuine as the older man's kindness helps to temper
Paul's youthful exuberance and sometimes-foul mouth.
Gilroy brings other characters into the mix, but they seem superfluous in
what is mainly a two-person play, a la "My Dinner With Andre." Campbell
Scott, Ian Hart, Peri Gilpin and others are each brought, briefly, into
some of the episodes to flesh out the background. Their appearances,
mostly, take the attention away from the leads without moving the story
much ahead. Each appearance is so brief that none of the actors are given a
chance to put substance into their stick figure roles.
Techs are all right, especially the soft, nicely lighted lensing by Terry
Stacey which captures the look and feel of small town USA. Although the
bucolic bridging sequences of folks mowing lawns, stringing Christmas
lights and burning leaves kept bringing to mind the TV spots for
Country-time Lemonade.
"Spring Forward" won't be high on any best lists come year's end, but the
two performances by Beatty and Schreiber make this worthwhile fare - at
least on the small screen. Because of the acting, I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Remember when Johnny Depp used to make good films and Michael Stipe used
to make good music?  At some point over the last couple of years, the
two seemed to undergo some sort of swap.  Depp has struck out with roles
in awful films like The Astronaut's Wife and The Ninth Gate, while
playing guitar for a band called P (which, ironically, has a song about
Stipe).  Meanwhile, Stipe produced three of 1999's best films (Being
John Malkovich, American Movie and The Limey), but R.E.M.'s sales
figures have plummeted.
Stipe has also produced Spring Forward – an action fan's worst
nightmare. There's nothing a knuckle-dragging, mouth-breathing Van Damme
fan hates more than a character study, and that's just what they'll get
here.  But Forward is so much more than a film heavy in dialogue and
deficient in superfluous action.  In fact, you'd be hard-pressed to find
a picture that bests Forward in the arenas of acting, directing and
writing.  It is clearly one of the year's best films, but, sadly, the
lack of a major distributor will likely hamper any shot at well-deserved
year-end accolades.
Already the winner of numerous film festival awards, Forward is set over
the course of one year in a small Connecticut town.  The film is
comprised of seven sections that focus on two Parks & Recreation
Department workers.  Murph (Ned Beatty, Cookie's Fortune) has been
married for nearly half a century and is less than a year away from
retirement.  Paul (Liev Schreiber, Scream 3) is a young high school
dropout who has just been released from prison.
As you would expect, their relationship doesn't start off on the right
foot, but as the film progresses, the two men begin to open up to each
other despite the differences in their age and backgrounds.  Surprising
parts of their lives surface, and Murph and Paul begin to bond as New
England's seasons change around them.  By the time the closing credits
roll, the seasons have made a complete arc, as has the relationship
between Murph and Paul.
Although it sounds like it, Forward isn't an Odd Couple ripoff.  Murph
and Paul are two real, down-to-Earth blue-collar guys, and the film
doesn't shove heavy-handed moral lessons or bonding crap down your
throat either (otherwise it would be like another Forward – as in Pay
It).  In a film this finely written, cinematography hardly matters, but
Forward is handsomely photographed by Terry Stacey, from television's
hastily cancelled medical drama Wonderland.
Forward is an astonishing debut from writer/director Tom Gilroy, who
previously played bit parts in a bunch of independent films.  Some
people may have big problems with Gilroy's style, which leaves a lot of
unanswered questions instead of neatly wrapping up every loose end.
Murph and Paul meet various people while painting fences and fixing
gazebos, but once the scenes end, those characters disappear from the
film.  It's a bold move, especially when you consider that some of those
roles are played by some pretty established actors – like Ian Hart
(Wonderland), Campbell Scott (The Impostors) and Peri Gilpin (Frasier).
But this technique allows viewers to concentrate on the fantastically
realistic performances given by Beatty and Schreiber.
1:40 – R for adult language, sex talk and some drug content

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2743c048aa1b0e67882568b80010c594?OpenDocument
Produced by Jim Mackay, Gill Holland, Paul Mezey, Tom Gilroy
Starring Liev Schreiber, Ned Beatty, Peri Gilpin, Campbell Scott
 People will compare it to My Dinner with Andre.  They will inevitably
be wrong.  People will assume that it has something to do with Daylight
Savings Time.  They, too, will be wrong.  People will assume that just
because Michael Stipe executive produced this film, it will end up
seeming like Being John Malkovich.  They, too, will be wrong.  In point
of fact Spring Forward is that rare gem, a film with no brothers or
sisters to deal with, no son to look down upon or father to look up to.
In the family tree of American cinema, the most Spring Forward can have
are a few distant cousins.
 So what is Spring Forward?  Simply put, Spring Forward is unique.  It
is not unique in the sense of Being John Malkovich or Spectres of the
Spectrum (a uniqueness tainted with the surreal), but instead unique in
the point of fact that it a movie that has no plot, that has no
centralized point or purpose… that has nothing but characters.  The
characters are Murph (Ned Beatty, switching back into his serious,
pre-Naked Gun days) and Paul (Schreiber), two city parks department
workers in Connecticut who spend one year talking while on the job.
 The film starts in Spring, when Paul starts his first job after getting
out of prison.  It ends a year later, when Murph leaves his job for
retirement.  Paul is a bookworm.  Murph has common sense.  Paul is
philosophical.  Murph is practical.  The two characters are in almost
every single way opposed to each other, except for the fact that they
are both incredibly charismatic.  This mutual charisma incites Paul and
Murph to form a sort of paternal bond, and for the rest of the movie,
with sit in quiet contention and complete fascination as we listen to
some of the most brilliant conversation ever captured on screen.
Writer-director Tom Gilroy, an actor himself, created a true actor's
haven.  He unleashed Schreiber and Beatty not only on the audiences, but
on each other, and the result is the kind of completely natural
interaction that you run across in real life.  The dialogue is sharp,
the direction on-target.  But that is not what makes Spring Forward
incredible.
 As a film, what makes Spring Forward so absolutely incredible is its
ability to challenge the audience.  As I sit and think about the one
small problem that Spring Forward has, pacing (if the characters are
ever silent, you begin to glance at your watch), I realize that the fate
of Spring Forward is not in it's stars, or its director or producers,
but in ourselves.  Spring Forward is a movie that, having no narrative,
lives entirely in the gray.  When you perceive Spring Forward as slow,
you lose sight of the fact that, in order for a movie to be either slow
or fast, it must be moving in the first place.  Spring Forward does not
move.  Spring Forward does not progress.  Spring Forward simply is.
 And, provided you can let go of conventional thought long enough to
enjoy Spring Forward's just being there, Spring Forward simply is worth
every second you spend in the theatre.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
SPRING FORWARD, a talkfest between two parks and recreation workers, has 
so much in common with MY DINNER WITH ANDRE that it might better have 
been called MY JOB WITH MURPH.  Murph, a long-time city employee, is 
played warmly by veteran actor Ned Beatty.  Murph is breaking in a 
sensitive new worker, Paul (Liev Schreiber), who's just out of prison.  
Paul is a good guy who, after a spot of bad luck, held up a Dunkin' 
Donuts.
Playwright Tom Gilroy directs his first film with a play-like staginess.  
He sets the camera statically and gives his players quasi-poetic dialog.  
The performances are all fine and heartfelt, but the story itself never 
provides much reason for us to care.  We learn that Paul has some 
problems with his emotions and that Murph has a gay son who has been 
ostracized by some and who has a health problem.  Nothing in the story, 
however, has much emotional impact.  Generally the two guys just work, 
never very hard, while gabbing about whatever comes to mind.
Paul, a blue-collar intellectual, reads books on subjects ranging from 
karma to architecture.  He lectures Murph, who laughs off most of Paul's 
pop philosophies.  When he has a bad cold, Paul avoids drugs, even 
anti-histamines, because he is a firm believer in the importance of 
maintaining a natural mind and body.  Murph muses that Paul's recent 
hangover would seem rather incongruous with these beliefs.
Paul meets a kindred spirit in Georgia (Peri Gilpin), who complains 
about the singles at the local bar.  "They all looked like escapees from 
a J. Crew catalog," she complains to him.  No sooner have we met and 
gotten to like Georgia than she goes AWOL for the rest of the movie.
Set in the small town of Stacey, Connecticut -- formed way back in 1708 
the guys' ever-present uniforms remind us -- the pastoral setting is 
full of wide, green lawns and tall, stately trees.  The lushness of the 
scenery almost makes up for the lack of a properly developed script.
After trying several endings on us, the movie's penultimate one 
introduces a brand new character in an almost dramatic incident, which 
is little more than a shameless plot device.  "Everything goes by so 
much faster in the movies," Paul tells Murph in a relative non sequitur.  
Maybe in most movies.  Certainly not in this one.
SPRING FORWARD runs 1:40.  It is rated R for language and some drug 
content and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Men are from Venus and women are from Mars...of is it the
other way around?  If you go by some of the wisdom of
today's self-help books, you wonder how the two sexes ever
got together.  Men talk sports and cars and maybe politics. 
Women talk emotions.  At least that's the stereotype and
that's the pigeonhole which writer-director Tom Gilroy aims to
explode in "Spring Forward."  As co-artistic director of the
New York theater company Machine Full, Gilroy is a man of
the stage, not the screen, which becomes obvious early on in
his feature film debut.  He'd be the envy of Eric Rohmer and
a whole band of French scripters, given the incessant
dialogue that Gilroy feeds to his crackerjack actors in what is
essentially a two-character filmed play-cum-Connecticut
foliage.  Marred by some indistinct vocal fidelity and
photographer Terry Stacey's occasional lapses (in one
instance, he muffs the opportunity to exploit the energy of
some mixed Labrador puppies), "Spring Forward"
nonetheless gives its audience some more exposure to the
talents of Liev Schreiber and Ned Beatty, the latter a veteran
of the screen with oodles of awards and Oscar nominations,
the former becoming one of the hottest names in the industry.
   "Spring Forward," so-named because Gilroy takes us
through four seasons (and seven scenes) in the lives of the
30-year-old Paul (Liev Schreiber) and the 65-year-old Murphy
(Ned Beatty), furnishes us a story of two flawed individuals
ironing out each other's shortcomings, bonding gloriously
despite their differences in age and outlook. Murph, who is
about to complete a career as a department of parks
employee, has taken on a new co-worker, Paul, who had
recently emerged from an 18-month stretch in prison for
armed robbery of a Dunkin' Donuts store.  His interval in the
slammer has turned him into a reader, particularly of New
Age philosophy, and he sprinkles his conversations regularly
with terms like karma and the sayings of the Dalai Lama.  He
also has a penchant for using the "f" word, which his aging
colleague dislikes intensely.  
   We can see from the start that the rough-around-the-edges
Paul is going to get an object lesson in civilization from his
new mentor while Murph, uptight and less willing than Paul to
express his deeper feelings, will learn to open up and relax. 
In a sense the relationship between the two men is not unlike
that of the four businessmen from Atlanta in Beatty's debut
as an actor, John Boorman's 1972 "Deliverance."  This time
around, just two men will get more than they bargained for,
though their experiences in no way match the thrills of
Boorman's canoe trip.
   Stretches of real physical action come and go with no
follow-up--the sex-hungry Paul meets a lonely woman; the
two men discover a strange fellow who seems to live under a
house; Paul and Murphy refuse to help load a truck with
fertilizer because the spoiled young man who asks them to
do so refuses to help; Paul seeks to rescue a battered,
hysterical woman who has run away from home with her
frightened daughter.  Gilroy appears to have no need to wrap
things up, to use these scenes as a foreshadowing of later
events.  In other words, the action regularly springs forward
but never falls backward.  Instead, the movie is content to
spotlight the relationship of these two ordinary men (who in
modern, trendy language could be considered a couple of
white guys sitting around talking), each of whom provides
deliverance for the other.  This is the sort of film that could
ideally be enjoyed on the tube, valuable as show pieces for
the two fine performers.
Rated R.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When ex-con Paul (Liev Schrieber, "A Walk on the Moon") begins work as a
municipal parks worker, he's full of self doubt.  He's partnered with the
much older Murphy (Ned Beatty, "Cookie's Fortune"), a most unconventional
blue collar worker.  Over the course of a year and the change of the 
seasons, a deep and moving friendship will form between the two men in
writer/director Tom Gilroy's feature film debut "Spring Forward."
Paul and Murphy begin to bond when the uppity son of a gardening supply
store (Campbell Scott, "Big Night," perfectly capturing the unctuous manner 
of a man born to wealth unused to being challenged) tries to manipulate them 
into shovelling the manure his father's donated to the city.  Paul, emboldened 
by Murph's refusal to back down to Frederickson, calls Frederickson a vicious 
name and is rebuked by Murph for his language.  Frederickson claims Murphy's
reaction is because the term could be applied to Murphy's son, a gay man.
Paul is devastated that he's caused Murphy hurt.
"Spring Forward" progresses through six additional, real time scenes each
punctuated by a seasonal interlude in the author's home town of Ridgefield, 
Connecticutt.  Paul and Murph discuss religion and get high.  Murph
takes Paul to a house where there are puppies for sale by a woman who
might need companionship as much as Paul does ('Frasier's' Peri Gilpin).
Murph tells Paul about the hurt caused by a lifelong neighbor who refused
to stand up for his son, then the two meet that same neighbor (Bill Raymond)
at Murph's son's wake.  The two find a hysterical woman and her terrified
daughter by the side of the road.
"Spring Forward" is above all an actors' showcase, particularly for Beatty
and Schreiber who are simply sublime together.  Beatty's Murph looks like a 
blue collar everyman on the verge of retirement, but has an unexpectedly 
sensitive soul and Beatty never once makes us doubt this unconventional
package.  Schreiber's Paul has more beneath the surface than one would
expect, having substituted voracious reading for institutional education.  
He too, seems like a potential redneck who's instead opened his mind
beyond where his background should have led him.  Their verbal sparring and 
generational gap give the film a gentle humor.
Gilroy has provided these character riffs in his writing.  Murph has a
habit of making bakery allegories rather than use foul language ('I'd have
been frosted too,' 'He's got a cupcake mentality').  Paul expounds on
Asian spiritual concepts, and, just when he thinks he's flown over Murph's
head, Murph sums up his ideas with a simple cliche - the concept of karma
is translated into 'What goes around, comes around.'
Gilroy's playwright background is stamped all over his film debut to its
detriment, however. Gilroy's decision to film over the course of a year
was a plus for the actors, allowing them to form their bond gradually. 
Yet, every moment is jam packed with a philosophical or heavy moment, never 
giving his characters a chance to breath or his film to form more naturally.  
Director of photography Terry Stacey captures the beauty of his locations,
a rural New England utopia.  Composer Hahn Rowe's score features a folky,
yet plaintive fiddle, accentuating the film's bittersweetness.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
