Title
Review for Gokiburi-tachi no tasogare (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
I imagine director Hiroaki Yoshida chose this title in preference to
`Day of the Cockroaches' (too apocalyptic) or `Night of the
Cockroaches' (too horrific) for this part-animated, part-live-action
tale.  But while `twilight' - evocative of a closing chapter/era - is 
really  more appropriate, it is simply wishful thinking to suggest that
cockroaches have had their time on Earth. 
This is one of those films that you watch and wonder why it was ever
made.  It's hardly box-office material: a love triangle between three
cockroaches during an ongoing war - the war in this case being against
two humans, the indifferent Mr Saito (Kaoru Kobayashi ) and his
neighbor the roach-hating Miss Momoko ((Setsuko Karasumaru ).  Using
real actors in the human roles makes it hard for us to fully identify
with the animated roaches, despite Yoshida's overripe
anthropomorphizing (these bugs make Jiminy Cricket look like E.T.) 
Furthermore, who really wants to identify with cockroaches anyway?  In
some cases it works: the low angle, POV floor shots; the sequence
where one of the older roaches scoots among the shadows to retrieve a
crumb on the floor (he does it on six legs as opposed to walking
upright!).  At other times it's just offputting.  Being a confirmed
roach-hater myself I didn't find anything cute about partying roaches
hanging around a toilet or crowded around leftovers.  Also, the
storyline rambles.  There's just too much to-ing and fro-ing, and at
one and three-quarter hours running time the film is overlong.  Film's
major saving grace is that at no time the roaches burst into song (a
la The Roches, perhaps?) - cartoon characters singing love songs to
each other is another of my pet peeves.  In fact, the simple, delicate
score may be the best thing it has going for it.
It's hard to recommend this movie because its audience is unclear. 
Obviously, those with an interest in animation should check it out. 
It's probably not offbeat enough for cult status (although it surely
marks the cinematic debut of a talking turd).  What's interesting is
that if this film had been made forty years earlier it would have
undoubtedly been seen as a political statement.  The comparisons with
Hiroshima and Nagasaki are plain: the roaches' allies in the
neighboring `country' across the backyard have German names; civilian
roaches are annihilated indiscriminately by insecticide bombs; the
roach army flies into battle on suicide missions; and of course, we
all know which insects will be most likely to survive a nuclear
holocaust, don't we?  This is a GODZILLA destruction allegory pared down
to insect level.  It still doesn't excuse the film from being dull;
the characters are largely static, uninteresting or cliched.  With
some judicious editing the storyline could have been tightened
considerably.  Forget trying to sympathize with cockroaches - watch
CREEPSHOW if you want to see some real roach action.  

Author
Randy Parker
        If Disney were to make a movie about a community of loveable
insects, it might look something like TWILIGHT OF THE COCKROACHES, the
animated feature film from Japan.  The movie combines live action with
animation, a la WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT, to tell an unusual story of man
and roach.
        If you are simply dying to know what the world looks like from two
inches off the floor, this is the movie for you (along with HONEY, I SHRUNK
THE KIDS).  If the cockroaches in CREEPSHOW or THE TEMPLE OF DOOM made you
queasy, then TWILIGHT will not be your cup of tea.  The movie is set in an
apartment inhabited by a lonely bachelor, Mr. Saito (Kaoru Kobayashi), and
by several hundred fun-loving roaches (which are animated, thank goodness).
Using extremely low camera angles, director Hiroaki Yoshida presents the
world strictly from a cockroach point of view.  Chairs, tables, and
refrigerators loom overhead like colossal mountains.  Human beings stomp
around like giant dinosaurs.  Ketchup bottles look like skyscrapers.
        The roaches lead an idyllic existence in the apartment because
Saito's depression has made him indifferent to their presence.  In fact, he
has allowed the bugs to take over the apartment; it is as much their home
as his.  They eat his food, watch his television, swim in his toilet, and
play tennis on his tennis racket.  The roaches live in such peaceful
harmony with Saito they have come to believe humans are their friends.
        The central character in the film is Naomi, a pretty 19 year old
roachette who lives on the floor of Saito's closet in a beat up sneaker.
At the start of the film, Naomi is fairly innocent, having never
experienced violence or cruelty.  Everything changes, however, when she
falls in love with Hans, a wounded roach soldier from a neighboring
apartment.  Hans and his fellow roaches live with a woman (Setsuko
Karasumaru) who, unlike Saito, hates cockroaches.  She is hell-bent on
exterminating them by whatever means necessary, including bug traps,
insecticide sprays, and rolled-up newspapers.  When Naomi visits Hans, she
witnesses human-cockroach warfare for the first time; for example, she
almost gets trapped inside a roach motel, which is full of rotting corpses.
True disaster strikes when the roach-killing woman starts to date Saito
and immediately declares war on the cockroaches in his apartment.  Naomi
and her roach friends find themselves fighting for survival as their truce
with Saito abruptly comes to an end.
        With TWILIGHT OF THE COCKROACHES, Yoshida has achieved the
impossible: he has given Man's least favorite insect charisma.  Through the
magic of animation, the roaches in the film have been sanitized and
humanized--or, in a word, "Disneyized."  They wear attractive clothing,
walk upright on their two hind legs, and engage in human activities, such
as dancing.  Yoshida wants us to sympathize with the roaches and making
them mini-humans was probably the only way he could overcome our natural
aversion.  We feel sorry for the roaches but only because the animation has
made us forget that they are disgusting insects.  If you start to associate
the animated cockroaches with the real thing, you get an uneasy feeling in
your stomach.
        On a technical level, TWILIGHT OF THE COCKROACHES is beyond
reproach.  The juxtaposition of animation and live action is smooth and
fluid.  Yoshida has found imaginative ways for the roaches to interact with
the contents of Saito's apartment.  An empty cigarette carton, for example,
becomes a bed.  With a $3 million budget, the movie is no ROGER RABBIT, but
the animation (while not spectacular) easily surpasses what you might find
on a Saturday morning cartoon program.
        On an emotional level, TWILIGHT is both intentionally and
unintentionally disturbing.  The film, despite its Disneyesque look and
absurd premise, is anything but light hearted.  TWILIGHT is part drama,
part adventure, part thriller, and part black comedy.  According to the
press notes, Yoshida intended the film as an allegorical tale reflecting
the fear that Japan's selfish trade practices may cause other countries to
treat the Japanese like cockroaches.
        The problem is that the film sometimes strains our patience with
its somber tone.  Somehow, animated cockroaches and serious spiritual
themes seem incongruous.  The movie tries to be profound, but much of the
time it ends up feeling pretentious, particularly in the scenes where Naomi
and her grandfather pray to a porcelain bunny rabbit in Saito's back yard,
a concept which is not nearly as funny as it sounds.  Another problem is
that no matter how hard you try, you can never completely identify with the
cockroaches, especially when they make pompous speeches like, "We have
never killed a single human.  So why does man try to annihilate us?  He
fears what he can't understand.  God chose us to inherit the earth."  It
makes you want to stomp on them.
        You will likely appreciate the creativity and originality of this
animated curiosity, but you may leave the theater scratching your head and
reaching for the bug spray.
