Title
Review for Chairman of the Board (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
What are the warning signs of a *terrible* movie? Making it's debut at the
dollar theater? Locally, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD did just that. Having the
annoying prop comic Scott Thompson (better known as Carrot Top) in the lead
role? CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, once again. How about an overly exhausted, paper
thin plot approached with utter incompetence? Did somebody say CHAIRMAN OF THE
BOARD?
That's right, Carrot Top's long dreaded major motion picture debut (at least
for a starring role) is poking up in a handful of theaters across the country.
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD stars the obnoxious, wannabe-zany king of redheaded
standup comics as a lazy but creative, inventive but uneventful Generation X-
er named Edison. Living with a pair of surfer dudes in a small, rented house,
Edison bounces from job to job, always squandering away the money on his
eccentric (to say the least) inventions and ignoring crucial responsibilities
such as rent. This has the crabby landlady, Ms. Krubavitch (Estelle Harris,
best known as George Constanza's mother on "Seinfeld"), threatening an
eviction if past due expenses aren't furnished post haste. As luck would have
it, Edison soon meets Armand McMillan (Jack Warden), an old surfer dude who
just so happens to be president of the multi-million dollar McMillan
Industries. Sharing a passion for more than just riding waves, Armand is
deeply impacted by the young inventor's notebook of dreams and ideas, and when
the old man dies soon afterward, Edison learns he is named a benefactor in
Armand's will.
Predictably, Edison acquires the entire corporation and has to maintain
productivity with absolutely no knowledge of the business world. Predictably,
there is a bitter nephew (Larry Miller) whose lesser inheritance fuels
resentment that will lead to an elaborate sabotage plot. Predictably, there is
an attractive employee (Courtney Thorne-Smith) whose initial repulsion will
transform into love for our doofy protagonist. Predictably, the man who knows
nothing will fight against the odds and give the company it's most profitable
and successful turnaround ever, all because he ran things by common sense and
not greed. It's as though writers Turi Meyer, Al Septien, and Alex Zamm (Meyer
and Septien also wrote LEPRECHAUN 2 together!) pulled a plot out of a hat and
worked Carrot Top into it. The jokes, the "surprises", the developments - all
of them run such a predictable path, it may only be Carrot Top's signature
brazen red hairdo that sets this one apart from the myriad of similar films.
A movie this bad speaks for itself. What's left to say when every element the
movie possesses is a shameful retread of movies past? The script is 100%
recycled, the direction is hokey, and the acting is absolutely horrible. It is
only Thorne-Smith who seems to take her job seriously, an accomplishment which
surely deserves the medal of honor. She certainly went beyond the call of duty
- she has to kiss Carrot Top!!!!!! (Barf bag, please!) Movies like this give
the audience nothing to do but ponder just how many synonyms for "bad" there
really are. CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, without a doubt, deserves each and every
one. The only way this won't end up on everybody's "bottom ten of the year"
list, is if they were lucky enough never to have seen it. Just because you
can't miss his outlandish fiery mane, don't skimp on avoiding this abhorrent
feature.

Author
Matt Williams
Used as a joke in Austin Powers, the infamous Carrot Top movie finally
sees the light of day, and the world is much worse for wear.  A gimmicky
prop comic, Carrot Top (aka Scott Thompson), lacks even the range of
thespian Pauly Shore, and the film's meager compliment of jokes fails to
even be amusing in a bad way.
Carrot Top stars as Edison, a misunderstood gadget genius.  He lives
with his two surfing buddies (Mystro Clark and Jack Plotnick), in a
shack filled with his failed ideas.  One day, he meets an old man (Jack
Warden) with a shared love for inventions and surfing.
Little does Edison know that the man is really Armand McMillan, chairman
of McMillan Industries, and sooner than you can run screaming from the
theater, Armand kicks the bucket and leaves his company to Edison.  Of
course, this doesn't sit well with Armand's nephew, Bradford (Larry
Miller), who has been scheming to sell off the company to a competitor
(Raquel Welch).
Soon, Edison is using the company to produce his wacky ideas while he
romances his co-worker, Natalie (Courtney Thorne-Smith).  Meanwhile,
Bradford does his best to eliminate Edison and destroy the company.
Carrot Top has managed to create a film rarity: a good guy you want to
throttle every time he appears onscreen.  His only saving grace is that
the film is chock full of characters nearly as annoying.  Of the cast,
only Jack Warden and Courtney Thorne-Smith survive with only their
dignity stained.
The plot of Chairman of the Board is familiar and tired.  There's not a
single twist that you couldn't see coming from the opening credits. That
leaves the jokes.  Even in a film as hopeless as this one, a few moments
of humor could have been hidden here or there.  Nope. That's not the
case.  The film's pathetic attempts are so brainless that they're too
stupid to be considered stupid-but-funny.
If you feel a hankering to run out and see Chairman of the Board, you
ought to swallow a handful of thumbtacks.  It will be less painful in
the long run.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
