Title
Review for Mari de la coiffeuse, Le (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND (LE MARI DE LA COIFFEUSE) is a French
film directed by Patrice Leconte, from a screenplay by Leconte and
Claude Kotz.  It stars Jean Rochefort and Anna Galiena.  Not rated;
contains adult subject matter.  English subtitles.
     THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND is a very personal follow-up to Patrice
Leconte's MONSIEUR HIRE (1990).  This new film tells the story of a man
who is obsessed from childhood with the idea of marrying a hairdresser
like the voluptuous Alsatian coiffeuse who barbered and aroused him
during his boyhood vacation to the seaside.  Both films are about
obsession, about erotic fantasy.  Both films are short (89 minutes for
HIRE, 84 for HUSBAND); both are economical, spare, pure, and precise in
their narratives.  However, whereas HIRE was cold, monochromatic,
HUSBAND is warm, romantic, idyllic, intensely restrained, and full of
humor and sensuality.  HIRE is the dark and HUSBAND is the light; this
is not to say that HUSBAND is not ultimately sad, however.
     The two principals are well cast.  The familiar face of Jean
Rochefort (MY WONDERFUL LIFE, PARDON MON AFFAIRE, THE TALL BLONDE MAN
WITH ONE DARK SHOE, and many others) is remarkable in the way it
combines a merry twinkle behind its melancholy, droopy wrinkles.  He is
absolutely charming, utterly convincing, as the man whose happiness to
completely given over to his obsession.  To see him slide and windmill
through the Algerian pop songs he loves to dance to is to see a man who
cares only for the opinions of one other person in the whole world, a
person utterly convinced of his rightness, and doomed to a great love
and a terrible fate for his singlemindedness.
     Anna Galiena is not only a vision of healthy young beauty, she is
self-contained, mysterious, brave enough to marry and love a stranger,
but not ready to be a companion to a mere friend, not quite brave enough
for change.
     The story line is thin, but the emotional content of HUSBAND is
rich in its sensitivities and telling observations.  The use of
character study more than makes up for the lack of story.  We really
don't have to know how Antoine can live without working; he lives on
love obviously.  It is his love for Mathilde that is the point, not some
mundane side issue of mere money.  Mathilde wants to live in an
unchanging world, where love is always the first rush of infatuation,
where people never age, where every day is cutting hair and every night
is making love in the shop.  It is Mathilde's obsession, not Antoine's
-- all he wants to do is live with and love his hairdresser forever --
that leads to the tragedy.  The final scene is the funny-sad result --
the patient waiting for something that will never happen again.
     THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND is a strange movie, a whimsical fantasy,
almost a fairy tale, deeply personal, but quite approachable.  It is
elegantly told.  It is not quite moving in the lachrymose sense, but I
think it will be a movie that will stay with me for some time.
     I recommend THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND.  It is worth even full
ticket prices.
