Title
Review for Diplomat, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Julia Levin
The Australian documentary The Diplomat gives a nearly complete overview
of the situation in East Timor up to its August 1999 elections.  It
starts with the historical background of this small island's
tribulations: Since the 16th century until 1975, the island was a
Portuguese colony.  Then, with the end of the Portuguese revolution,
East Timor declared its independence and was immediately invaded by
Indonesia, its giant neighbor.
The focus of the film is José Ramos Horta, a political activist who
represents the Eastern Timorese Resistance historic leader, Xanana
Gusmao, who was imprisoned in Indonesia for a 20-year sentence.  Horta
is a 1996 Nobel Prize winner who has been fighting for the independence
of this little-known island for 24 years.
The most compelling aspect of the film is its ability to convey how the
tragic events of East Timor and its desperate struggle for independence
have been largely ignored by the world.  Since East Timor has no army to
support its claims for autonomy, Horta says it must have been an act of
God that his people had survived.
Horta's life is that of a peripatetic fighter who is exiled from the
country the independence of which is his life mission.  The challenge of
Horta's mission is accentuated by the fact that there is no unity among
the leaders of East Timor; some of them are satisfied by living in a
country annexed to its oppressors, others are adamant to fight for
complete independence till the end.  The film follows Horta, almost
always dog-tired, from one conference on the East Timorese crisis to
another and intersperses Horta's diplomatic career with footage of hot
events happening in East Timor: President Suharto resigns, Habibie takes
his place, nothing changes.  Indonesia itself has enough to worry about
and when its economic crisis reaches the bottom of the barrel,
Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas is sent to deliver to the world
promises of security and protection for East Timor.
While Horta's mother, Natalina, recollects how Indonesian militia
attacked her residence and took the lives of her children, the actual
footage testifies the acts of barbaric genocide that took place on the
island.  The film hits all the appropriate strings by conveying how
murder, torture, rape, all kinds of physical, sexual, and psychological
violations have been the daily life of the people of East Timor.  It
clearly exemplifies the frightening hypocrisy of the Indonesian
government which declares the crisis stable while more and more people
are being brutally executed.
Unfortunately, up until the depiction of the 1999 democratic election in
East Timor, the film more or less plods along.  It is only then that the
film picks up the pace by showing that just four hours after the
official announcement, the defeated militia gangs start to set East
Timor on fire.  There is a moment of almost sublime irony when President
Bill Clinton visits Indonesia with the intention to stop the genocide
and bring UN peacekeeping forces to the country.  He is greeted with a
military ceremony that, in my opinion, signifies the irreconcilable
difference between the East and the West.
Ironically, the portrait of José Ramos Horta, an indefatigable fighter
who broke the silence about East Timor in the (disinterested) Western
press, doesn't come out as memorable or inspiring.  Unquestionably, the
film is very effective and involving due to its subject matter, without
a mawkish triumph-of-the-human-spirit agenda being pushed.  But what
should have been a celebration of human tenacity comes out as an
intelligent film, though with a somewhat insipid portrayal of its hero.
Director: Tom Zubrycki
Producers: Sally Browning, Wilson da Silva
Writer: Tom Zubrycki
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
