Title
Review for Novocaine (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director: David Atkins
 Writers:  David Atkins, story by Atkins and Paul Felopulos
 Cast: Steve Martin, Helena Bonham Carter, Scott Caan, Laura
Dern, Elias Koteas, Lynne Thigpen
 Screened at: Review 1, NYC, 10/10/01
   Don't you just hate going to the dentist?  Scripters Paul
Felopulos and David Atkins have conjured up one patient who
likes going so much that when she needs a root canal, she not
only looks forward to getting it treated but seeks out four
dentists before she allows any of them to do much with the
decayed molar.  Going to four dentists for the love of meeting
and talking with them? This has got to be a fictional character. 
To be fair, though, young Susan Ivey (Helena Bonham Carter)
has an ulterior motive.  She does not hesitate to seduce them, at
least digging her claws into DDS  Frank Sangster (Steve
Martin), but sex is not her ultimate objective.  Susan is a drug 
addict and dentists carry refrigerators full of chemicals from
novocaine to nitrous to injectable cocaine to demerol.  Susan is
clever enough to persuade the men with the drills to write
prescriptions, forges a higher amount, and off she goes 
to kill her pain.
   "Novocaine" is a dark comedy featuring one of our top comics,
Steve Martin, in a role not as sinister as the one he played in
David Mamet's marvelously written thriller "The Spanish
Prisoner" nor as flat-out hilarious as the dentist in Frank Oz's
"Little Shop of Horrors."  He's somewhere between, first shown
as a highly successful practitioner engaged to anal-compulsive
hygienist Jean Noble (Laura Dern) with Lynne Thigpen as his no-
nonsense but affectionate receptionist.  He becomes the victim of
a series of mishaps that ultimately finds him a suspect for
murder, a dilemma he could have avoided had he not
succumbed to the temptation in the form of an unstable,
conniving woman whose eroticism charms him because Susan is
the opposite of his compulsively neat and orderly fiancee.
   Though David Atkins's film is overplotted, with the director
juggling several conceits including sibling dysfunction.  Susan
has an incestuous thing going with her wastrel brother Duane
(Scott Caan) while Dr. Sangster feels an obligation to care for his
unsuccessful, envious, drug-and-drink addicted sib Harlan (Elias
Koteas).   "Novocaine" is frequently as giddy as a ride on
nitrous--which does not come close to dulling the pain felt by the
good doctor as his life takes on the decay for which rotting teeth
provide an apt metaphor.  
   Czech-born photographer Vilko Filac peppers the narrative with
x-ray shots of patients' teeth and entire heads, skeletal figures
lurid enough to scare the kids at Halloween while a non-intrusive,
effective score is provided by "Edward Scissorhands" musician
Steve Bartek.
   Atkins, whose script for "Arizona Dream" dealt with the loss of
the American Dream, plays winningly with a similar theme this
time around as well,  highlighting a person who has it all and yet
is vaguely dissatisfied and helps bring disaster upon himself
when his brain transfers to a position below his waist.  
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Dr. Frank Sangster (Steve Martin) enjoys a thriving dental practice.  His 
no-nonsense hygienist/fiance Jean (Laura Dern) keeps his life in order and
his bed on fire.  But when Susan Ivey (Helena Bonham Carter) pays him a visit,
successfully wheedling a drug prescription from him, Sangster's comfortable
life is turned upside down in "Novocaine."
The best part of "Novocaine" occurs during its opening credits where eerie 
X-rays, which will intermittently appear throughout the film, are paired with
Danny Elfman's "Edward Scissorhands" meets "Seven" score.  When the story
begins, in an office environment strongly reminiscent of Robert Altman's 
"Dr. T and the Women," it sustains interest for a while, before sinking into
a hopelessly over-plotted tale where the players are jerked around by the
whims of story line rather than character development.
Sangster discovers that the desirable Miss Ivey has doctored his prescription,
so it's no surprise when she doesn't appear for her 7 a.m. appointment the
next morning.  She does appear, all innocent confusion, at 7 p.m. that night,
however, and seduces Sangster in the dental chair, a scene Frank had suggested
to Jean and been denied that very afternoon.  The next morning he finds his 
entire office supply of drugs has been wiped out.  With law enforcement 
breathing down his neck, Frank lies, hoping to allay Jean's suspicions and
set things right on his own.  
Frank tracks Susan down at a seedy motel, only to be threatened by her
hot tempered brother Duane (Scott Caan, "American Outlaws").  This is the 
same guy Frank and his addict brother Harlan (Elias Koteas, "Crash"),
Frank's bane and recent pad crasher, had scuffled with in a bar earlier.
When Duane is found dead in Frank's home with Harlan missing, Frank becomes
the main suspect.
Screenwriter David Atkins ("Arizona Dreams") shows style in his directorial
debut, mainly by his aforementioned creepy use of X-Rays to punctuate the 
action and Frank's symbolic depiction with bunny rabbits.  However, the 
Hitchcockian 'innocent man thrown into circumstances beyond his control' genre
has far better representatives than "Novocaine" and this well assembled cast 
can't keep this one from spiralling out of control.
Steve Martin is capable of great physical comedy ("All of Me"), but here,
his actions merely seem foolhardy.  Helena Bonham Carter, in full "Fight
Club" Marla mode, is sexy in a slouchy, rundown way, but brings little
else to the table.  Scott Caan is menacing as her brother, but is dealt
out fairly quickly.  Laura Dern is bright and chirpy, willing to put her
kickboxing moves up against those that would bring down her man until her
own faith in him is derailed.  The uncreditted Kevin Bacon gets the most
mileage out of his character, Lance Phelps, a self-absorbed actor shadowing
police in research for an upcoming role.
Early on, Frank tells us 'The worst thing a man can lose is his teeth,'
and Atkins doesn't spare us a queasy climax, but "Novocaine" is no
"The Tenant," nor "Marathon Man."  What "Novocaine" eventually is, is 
numbingly convoluted.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
