Title
Review for Beautiful Girls (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Christopher Null
     With a cryptic title like BEAUTIFUL GIRLS, one starts to wonder to
whom this film is being marketed.  Is it the frat boy model-ogling crowd? 
Is it a self-help flick for teenage girls?  Is it soft porn?  The answer,
of course, is none of these:  BEAUTIFUL GIRLS is a *date movie*, and quite
a good one at that.
     Something like THE BIG CHILL meets Generation X, BEAUTIFUL GIRLS is
one of those ensemble character movies that really defies description in
terms of plot points.  The ostensible main character is Willie (Timothy
Hutton), who is ambivalent about girlfriend Tracy (Annabeth Gish) so heads
back home to Knight's Ridge, Massachusetts to sort things out during his
10-year high school reunion.  Here, he hooks up with old pals Tommy (Matt
Dillon) and Paul (Michael Rapaport), each of whom is also flailing
helplessly in his own romantic mess.
     The "beautiful girls" in question include Sharon (MIGHTY APRHODITE's
Mira Sorvino), Tommy's girlfriend, and Darian (Lauren Holly), Tommy's
*other* girlfriend.  Jan (Martha Plimpton) is Paul's seven-year-long
lover, who's now dating the local butcher.  Then there's the visiting
heartbreaker Andera (Uma Thurman) and 13-year-old
"heartbreaker-in-training" Marty (Natalie Portman).  And don't forget a
special appearance by "Elle Macpherson"...Paul's Saint Bernard.
     The entanglements of the some 17 major cast members could fill pages
and would spoil the film.  Suffice it to say that they are mostly very
funny and realistic to boot.  After an awkward and confusing start,
BEAUTIFUL GIRLS really hits hard as a comedy and a romance without
becoming mushy and stilted like your average twentysomething date flick. 
And even more incredible is that director Ted Demme and writer Scott
Rosenberg have managed to imbue every character with life and originality,
something many filmmakers have trouble doing with just one or two.
     The acting is all top-notch, including the big surprise of Rosie
O'Donnell's best 10 minutes of her career, playing the local beautician. 
The young Portman is just fantastic, and Hutton also brings some real
emotion to his role (hopefully this will revive his career).
     And in case you're used to my crusty opinions and think I'm being
rough, my guest insisted BEAUTIFUL GIRLS was one of the best films she'd
ever seen.  Regardless, even if we're both overestimating this picture,
it's still worth a look.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Clarissa Ooon
   Directed by: Ted Demme
   Written by: Scott Rosenberg
   Cast: Matt Dillon (Tommy), Michael Rappaport (Paul), Timothy Hutton
   (Willie), Uma Thurman (Andera), Natalie Portman (Marty), Mira Sorvino
   (Sharon), Rosie O'Donnell (Gina), Lauren Holly (Darian)
   Produced by: Miramax Films
   Length: 110 mins
   Rating: *** out of *****
   Theatres: Golden Village and Cathay cinemas
"You guys, as a gender, will have to get a grip, while the future of
the human race is looking down."
So mouths Rosie while grocery shopping, bearing down supermarket
aisles with Tommy and Willie trailing sheepishly.
BEAUTIFUL GIRLS is a smart funny movie about a group of high-school
buddies in a small town who can't make up their minds about women.
It's a male-bonding flick, but as my girlfriends and I smugly
conclude, it's really a devastating indictment of men--their
insecurities, their refusal to grow up, and hence all the pain they
put women through.
There are several categories of men in this movie. Check which one
your boyfriend/ex-boyfriend falls under.
Tommy is a broodingly delectable specimen of a man. He is also
sleeping with his already-married high school sweetheart AND his
long-suffering, anorexic girlfriend. He knows he's being a jerk, but
he hasn't gotten over high school. He just can't make a choice--or
stick by it.
b) The sad sod with supermodel posters on his bedroom wall
The classic 'you don't know what you got till it's gone' syndrome.
Paul realizes he loves his gal--after ending their relationship and
finding out she's seeing someone else. He alternates between jealous
fits and trying to win her back. Why he broke up with her in the first
place? The "promise" of something better, like one of the supermodels
on his wall coming to life.
c) He's got it all, but he wants the neighbourhood Lolita
Willie has a beautiful talented girlfriend, but now she's talking
marriage and he doesn't know what he wants. So he returns to his
hometown to find himself, and he finds himself falling for his
thirteen year old next door neighbour.
What it takes to shake these men up: a beautiful girl like Andera
(played babeliciously by Uma Thurman) walking into their lives and
telling them how great it is to be in a long-term relationship. And
that is just what happens. Each of them tries to date the visiting
Andera, only to find that all she needs is her man back home. And it
makes them rethink their own relationships.
Of course, unlike my cynical little diatribe, BEAUTIFUL GIRLS does all
the above with humour and compassion. Memorable moments abound: the
teasing, witty interplay between Timothy Hutton's Willie and beautiful
Natalie Portman as Marty; the confusion, indecision and impatience of
Matt Dillon's Tommy.
My favourite is Rappaport's Paul, the screwball who talks too much and
feels too late, who blunders pig-headedly into his ex-girlfriend's
life proposing marriage, retreating finally into his supermodel shrine
of a bedroom to pick up the pieces.
But ultimately, what stands out is the touching way in which a movie
about men comes out on the side of its women. In the words of Tommy
(realizing pathetically how much girlfriend Sharon means to him after
being battered by lover Darian's husband), "Why do we always fuck up
the good ones?"
And BEAUTIFUL GIRLS, to quote its most eloquent character Paul, takes
us women "behind the curtain" to show just how much it takes for men
to commit.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
___________________________________
This review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT
.">http://bizdir.com.sg/inkpot/>. We're inkier! We're pottier! We're
wordy! All flying bricks welcome.  Leave your penguin at the door.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the opening scene in a late night diner, BEAUTIFUL GIRLS
appears to be DINER II.  Again we have the banter of a bunch of young
men in their 20s whose lives revolve around male bonding rituals.  When
they meet each other, they grunt like squealing pigs and run at each
other in order to smash shoulders together.  Gosh, what fun we males
have.
     Any movie like BEAUTIFUL GIRLS that frequently uses loud rock
music to fill in the gaps in the dialog makes me suspicious.  The
sometimes insightful, sometimes ridiculous, but highly uneven script by
Scott Rosenberg needed all of the help it could get I guess.  Let me
say upfront that this is not a bad movie overall, and there are many
characters in it I liked a lot and wish I could have seen even more of,
but too many were caricatures of people I would be happy never to have
known.  With better editing (Jeffrey Wolf) and directing (Ted Demme)
the movie could have survived the script, but alas it was not to be.
     Tommy (Matt Dillon), Kev (Max Perlich), and Paul (Michael
Rapaport) are blue collar workers who make extra money during the
winter as snowplow operators.  They are also best buddies with Mo (Noah
Emmerich) and Willie (Timothy Hutton).  Surprise, they have trouble
relating to people of the opposite sex although, of course, they manage
to have little trouble having sex with them.  As Paul puts it, "They're
all sisters.  It's one big conspiracy.  Trust me."  In an example of
how the script is all over the map, in another scene we have a wise
Paul advising his friend on choosing a wife, "One comes to a decision
based on what one wants, not on what one doesn't want."  In another he
is back again to balderdash with, "A beautiful girl is all powerful and
that is as good as love gets."
     In hands down the best part of the movie, Willie forms a strong
platonic relationship with a 13 year old girl next door named Marty
short for Martin and played in a wonderful, wise, and witty performance
by Natalie Portman.  Although it may sound like a Lolita role, actually
it is quite innocent and realistic of the crush that young girls can
form.  Here the script is at its best, giving her one funny line after
another.  Marty is fond of tall tales, and Portman is great at
delivering them.  The best scene of the show is when Willie tells Marty
their relationship will not work.  Very poignant.
     Like the guys in the movie, some are interesting and some aren't.
Mira Sorvino plays Tommy's girlfriend Sharon.  I liked her role here
better than the one in MIGHTY APHRODITE that got her an Academy Award
nomination.  She clings to Tommy no matter how much he cheats on her
with his now married ex-girlfriend.  Sharon tells him, "How can I get
to you when the high point of your life was high school?  You were king
of the hill then."  When her love life with Tommy starts falling apart,
she tells her girlfriends, "Why is it when a relationship doesn't work,
we say its because he can't commit?  Don't I bear some of the blame
here?"  A sad, but realistic performance of how some people can become
obsessed with others when evidence tells them it is a bad idea.
     One of the least interesting roles is that of Gina Barrisano
(Rosie O'Donnell).  She has to utter one preposterous line after
another.  A typical one is, "You guys, as a gender, will have to get a
grip, or the future of the human race is looking down."  At least she
manages to say such gibberish with a straight face.
     In a show where some of the twenty year olds have families, but
children are treated as creatures rarely seen or heard.  It is
surprising, therefore, that one of the most touching scenes occurs when
a little girl asks her Daddy what is going on.
     Beside Sharon and Gina, the other women in the movie include Jan
(Martha Plimpton), Darian (Lauren Holly), Andera (Uma Thurman), and
Tracy (Annabeth Gish).  Gish doesn't appear until the last part and is
mainly wasted in the film.  She is a talented actress who does manage
to make her little part special.  When her boyfriend Willie wants to
give up his poorly paying career as a pianist and become a salesman,
she advises him, "I don't think you should take that job.  Piano
players are sexy, salesmen are uncles."
     The worst part of the show is the way it treats alcoholism.
Everyone of the buddies has major alcohol problems as do many of the
females, but in the film they drink like fish and yet it rarely affects
their actions, speech, or abilities.  The message of the movie seems to
be that young people drink constantly, but somehow this represents no
problem to them or their lives.  The insidious message for all of the
teenagers who will see this film is that heavy drinking is natural,
everybody does it, it is required for proper bonding, and anyway, there
are no consequences to worry about.  Given the stars, the demographics
of the audience will be heavily tilted toward those most vulnerable to
alcoholism.  Scary.
     Finally, there are great visuals.  One of my favorites is a huge
Saint Bernard sitting up in a pickup between two of the buddies while
on their snowplowing adventures.  The cinematography (Adam Kimmel) has
some great scenes of a small Northern town in the snow.  The most
beautiful scene is a time-lapsed sequence of the snow capped town as
night turns to day.  The sets (Dan Davis) are accurate reproductions of
the claustrophobic clutter of worthless nicknacks from blue collar
homes.
     BEAUTIFUL GIRLS runs 1:53.  It has no sex or nudity but a little
violence.  It is rated R, and whereas I would like to think the MPAA is
punishing the film for its flippant treatment of alcoholism, actually I
think it is because there are a couple of uses of the F word in a film
mainly of fairly mild language.  I would want to talk to teenagers
about the dangers of drinking if they do see this show.  It is a close
call, but I am not recommending the film.  Some characters were great,
namely Willie, Tracy, Marty, and Sharon, but the others made me almost
ashamed to be a member of the male sex.  I do not blame the actors, but
I do hold the screenwriter and the director accountable.  Oh well,
there is a lot of potential not quite realized here; maybe next time.
Finally, I award the show **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The tag line on the poster read "the best date movie of the '90's"
and, so, I was expecting YACF (Yet Another Chick Flick) for my Sunday
matinee.  Imagine my surprise, then, upon discovering that BEAUTIFUL
GIRLS is actually a *guys* movie.  (Yet Another Dick Flick?) Beauty, and
the male illusion thereof, is the subject of this often-funny ensemble
comedy from director Ted Demme (THE REF).  Matt Dillon, Michael
Rapaport, and Max Perlich are the sad sack snowplow operators of
Knight's Ridge, "MA", who wax poetic on the subjects of marriage ("the
Big Fade"), models ("bottled dreams"), and the brotherhood of men
("never let them see the little man behind the curtain").  The Fourth
Musketeer is Willie (Timothy Hutton), an old school chum who has return-
ed on the eve of their 10-year reunion, to ponder the future of a girl-
friend Back Home.
     Balancing the boys club is an appealing cast of ladies/victims,
which includes Annabeth Gish, Martha Plimpton, and Mira Sorvino.  Rosie
O'Donnell is also on hand, as a Greek Chorus of wisdom who delivers a
side-splitting monologue on the grim realities of "real women." But,
alas, even the luminous Uma Thurman-- as somebody's cousin-- can't
compete with the charms of 14-year-old Natalie Portman (HEAT, THE
PROFESSIONAL).  She's a scene-stealer as the too-smart, too-young
neighbor that Hutton inevitably develops a crush on.  [ And thank
goodness it's platonic!  I'd hate to break any laws by describing
anything otherwise!  ]
     I'm not sure how women will react to this movie.  As an ensemble
comedy, it's okay; the momentum comes and goes, as do the laughs.  The
big cast is underused, but they have their moments, such as an amusing
barroom rendition of "Sweet Caroline" with Hutton and Perlich at the
piano.  Most viewers will react favorably, though, to the faux happy
endings-- there seem to be about four of them-- which give the appear-
ance of resolution and are the likely reasons why somebody labeled this
a "date movie." Don't you be fooled-- the endings are just as phony as
what we saw in WAITING TO EXHALE.
     Writer Scott Rosenberg makes a critical error by letting too many
of the male characters *exhibit* the very behaviors that they (and the
film) are attempting to reflect upon.  Pining for a high-school
sweetheart is one thing; committing adultery is another.  Getting away
from your girlfriend to think things over is fine; getting away to get
drunk or get laid is something else entirely.  So, guys, go see
BEAUTIFUL GIRLS.  Take a date, laugh in recognition, and continue to
think that real people actually get *rewarded* for such behaviors.  The
rest of us will be working very hard toward living happily ever after,
in the meantime. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Greta Christina
Guy Stuff
Copyright 1996 Greta Christina.  Written for the Spectator;
posted with permission.  Replies to this review may be printed in
the Spectator Express Mail section; please indicate if your
response is not for publication.
Beautiful Girls.  Miramax.  Starring Matt Dillon, Timothy Hutton,
Rosie O'Donnell, Martha Plimpton, Michael Rapaport, and Uma
Thurman.  Produced by Cary Woods.  Written by Scott Rosenberg. 
Directed by Ted Demme.  Rated R.
     When the lights dimmed and the first few minutes of
Beautiful Girls started rolling, my immediate reaction was to
roll my eyes in dismay.  "Oy," I thought to myself.  "A bunch of
dudes talking to each other about their feelings and
relationships and why they can't commit.  It's a chick movie for
guys.  God help us.  Why don't they shut up about their feelings
and go shoot something?  It'd be much more entertaining."
     But then I gave myself a good, hard mental slap in the face
for being such a typical boneheaded American.  I mean, I gripe
all the time about gender stereotyping in movies and how the
media macho myth cripples men emotionally.  Why should I complain
when a movie seems to be undercutting that myth?  So I sat back
and did my best to give Beautiful Girls a chance.
     My final assessment:  Nice try.  Not a particularly
successful one attempt, but an interesting and apparently
heartfelt one.  The writing is well-meaning but often clumsy,
with characters dropping into long overwritten speeches about The
Meaning Of Life And True Love And Stuff at the drop of a hat. 
And while the performances are earnest and sweet, they lack the
sparkle, the elusive sketching-a-character-in-a-few-short-lines
quality, that's needed to make an ensemble film shine.
     But it is a genuinely nice try.  And more to the point, it
has some interesting things to say about men and men's sexuality. 
Unlike the traditional chick movie, a genre that tends to skewer
men's foibles mercilessly (an understandable exercise and one
I've been known to indulge in myself on occasion), Beautiful
Girls deals with men's foibles from the men's point of view.  It
questions, even mocks, traditional male attitudes towards sex and
love and relationships; but it does so gently, with understanding
and sympathy and good humor.
     Essentially, it's--well, it's a chick movie for guys.  (As
such, it will most likely drop at the box office like a sixteen-
ton weight, so if you're at all interested in seeing it, I
suggest you do so as soon as possible.)
     The story focuses on bunch of guys from a small town in
Massachusetts approaching their tenth high school reunion.  One
of them, Willie (Timothy Hutton) has managed to get out of town
and is struggling to make it as a piano player in New York City;
he's now back for the reunion, to connect with his old friends
and try to make some decisions about his life.  Most of the guys
still live in town, though; they plow snow for a living, hang
out, drink, fight with their girlfriends, try to pick up cute
women, and belt out "Sweet Caroline" in the local bar.
     And they talk.  They talk about sex, they talk about love,
they talk about relationships.  They talk about women; about
their wives and girlfriends and exes, about porn stars and
supermodels and girls they had crushes on in high school.  They
talk about what they want from women and what they think women
want from them.  They talk in a way that guys in movies rarely
talk to each other; showing their awkwardness and fear, their
passion for sex and their disappointment in it and their worry
that the disappointment is somehow their fault, their longing for
something better than what they've got and their anxiety that
they don't have what it takes to make that happen.  And when they
talk, they show a balance between toughness and vulnerability,
swagger and doubt, that has an uncommon feeling of truth to it.
     Now obviously, I don't have any idea whether guys really
talk to each other like this when women aren't around.  (Any guys
who see the movie and feel like clueing me in as to its
verisimilitude, feel free to drop me a line.)  But the dialogue
does have a ring of truth to it.  The style isn't always the most
authentic; much of the language is speechy and poetical and not
very much like the way people really talk.  But the feeling
behind the words, the sentiments driving the sometimes dippy and
flowery speeches, do feel quite real.
     Now, just the very sight of men talking to each other about
love, and talking about it as if it matters to them, is enough to
make this movie stand out in a crowd.  But it isn't just the
sight of men talking with each other about their personal lives
that makes this movie unusual.  A number of the specific things
that they say about their lives, and particularly that they say
about sex and love, are things that I've rarely heard before from
guys in Movieland.
     For instance.  When Paul (Michael Rapaport), who is sort of
the movie's scapegoat/whipping boy, complains that his girlfriend
Jan (Martha Plimpton) is pressuring him into making a commitment,
the other guys rag on him mercilessly, pointing out that he's
been with her for seven years and a commitment is not an
unreasonable thing to expect.  When Tommy (Matt Dillon) gripes
about his girlfriend Sharon (Mira Sorvino) and her insecurity and
shitty self-esteem (not to mention her bulimia), his buddies
point out rather bluntly that his ongoing affair with his old
girlfriend Darian (Lauren Holly) might have something to do with
it.  When Paul gasses on about how terrific supermodels are, how
they represent promise and hope and how he wants to date one more
than anything, the guys roll their eyes in mock despair at his
obsessive evasion of real-life women and real-life relationships. 
And when Willie describes his lovely and talented lover Tracy
(Annabeth Gish) to his pals, they read him the riot act for
waffling about his relationship and sniffing around other doors
looking for something better.  I can't remember the last time I
saw a movie in which the male characters encouraged one another
to take some responsibility for their emotional lives.  It's
quite refreshing.
     But I don't want to get too carried away here, either. 
There are a number of traditional notions about sex and love that
the movie doesn't question at all, and they're ones that I find
particularly annoying.
     The first has to do with the whole idea of marriage and
relationships and commitment.  Yes, it's certainly a refreshing
change of pace to see male characters taking love seriously and
talking to each other about their emotional lives.  But it's not
such a refreshing change of pace to see marriage and monogamy and
Long Term Relationships presented as the ultimate answer to all
these knotty problems of sex and love and intimacy and fear.
     And Beautiful Girls does exactly that.  Although each of the
guys in the movie has a different problem with sex and love, they
all wind up with the same solution:  It's time to settle down. 
The big winners in the movie are the guys who decide to put away
childish things, stick with their women and make The Commitment;
the big loser, Paul, is the guy who realizes just how valuable
his girl is after it's too late and he's lost her for good.  I'm
not saying that Committed Relationships are a bad idea, you
understand.  I'm just saying that a slightly less preachy tone
about it might have been nice.
     The other big problem I have with Beautiful Girls has to
with how the movie sees female beauty, what kind of girls it
perceives to be beautiful.  The wives and the girlfriends and the
objects of desire are all very traditionally attractive in a very
standard Hollywood way; slender and willowy and feminine, with
gym-toned bodies and flat stomachs.  And in a stunningly
unoriginal bit of casting, Uma Thurman plays Andera, the
stunningly beautiful stranger who sweeps into town and knocks all
the men off their fee.  Uma, not surprisingly, is held up as the
ultimate pinnacle of female beauty, the one that all the men
naturally and rightly desire.  The movie repeatedly pokes fun at
men for coveting supermodels and other unreal ideals of female
attractiveness; but although it pokes fun at those ideals, it
nevertheless manages to perpetuate them.  And it perpetuates the
notion that these ideals are based on some sort of objective
truth that all men can and do agree on.
     Now, I will admit wholeheartedly that this is a very
personal grudge I carry against movies in general.  I get real
tired of seeing the same damn female body over and over again
when I go to the movies.  It's not that I don't like tall thin
women; it's just that a little variety now and then would be
nice.  And in the clit-hardening department, Uma Thurman does
just about nothing for me.  I'm a bit tired of seeing her held up
as the reigning sex goddess, and I'm real tired of seeing her
bony body put forth as the ne plus ultra of female sexuality. 
Especially when there's a babe like Rosie O'Donnell on the same
screen.
     Again, I will admit to a bias.  I think Rosie is just about
the hottest woman in the movies today.  I'd do her in a New York
minute, no questions asked.  And it baffles and enrages me to see
her, time and time again, playing the buddy or the best friend,
never getting sex or love simply because she's big.  With the
exception of Exit to Eden, I don't think I've *ever* seen Rosie
O'Donnell presented as the object of anyone's desire--and it
pisses me off.  Every other woman in this movie has a boyfriend
or husband or lover; the guys may be jerks, but they're there. 
You think Rosie O'Donnell has a boyfriend?  You think anyone man
in the movie even considers Rosie O'Donnell as girlfriend
material?  Think again.  She gets lots of smart funny lines, and
she gets to make a very groovy speech about the unrealistic
standards of beauty that so many men hold women to.  What she
doesn't get is laid.  And like so many other Hollywood movies,
Beautiful Girls treats the big woman not getting laid as a
completely understandable and indisputable fact of life.  In a
movie that supposedly questions the concepts of traditional
American masculinity, I find the things that it doesn't question
at all to be very revealing.
-- 
For information on the Blowfish Catalog of erotic books, movies,
comix, edible things and arts & crafts write to info@blowfish.com.
Our WWW home page is located at http://www.blowfish.com/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Director Ted Demme chops together an exhaustive cast of big name
actors, a quaint little snowy New England town, and the follow-up
script of screenwriter extraordinaire Scott Rosenberg, whose first
screenplay turned into THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD (7/10).
Scott's pen was also the one behind CONAIR (6.5/10) and 1998's
DISTURBING BEHAVIOUR.
PLOT:
Willie (Hutton) returns to his childhood hometown when confronted with
a question mark as to the destination of his relationship with
lawyer-girlfriend Traci, and his piano-playing career. Once in town,
Willie mingles with all of his friends of old, who are also caught up
in various levels of commitment, and positions his glad-eye on one
particular thirteen-year old girl living next door. Twenty-somethings
confused about their place in life, their relationships, and the world,
is the basis of this human dramedy. 
CRITIQUE:
Richly penned script, strong acting performances, elegant
cinematography and a solid soundtrack, rate this film as one of the
best of its reflective kind. Solid character driven story in the spirit
of DINER (7/10) that simmers through the sorted lives of several
twenty-somethings caught up in a small town and various stages of
emotional and intellectual development. This movie lingers in
nostalgia, while simultaneously delivering several poignant points of
view from the grab-bag of interesting characters growing up amongst one
another this scanty little blue-collar town (Many of whom were
personally identifiable as well.)
Timothy Hutton shines as the pillar within the group of misguided
"adults" still caught up in their own adolescence, while Natalie
Portman delivers the most dead-on performance as the witty, charming,
and in my humble opinion, overly-literate 13-year old that you've ever
seen. I love the script in all other regards, but a couple of the
overly pretentious lines delivered by some of the characters (generally
Portman), prevented me from completely falling for this film which
touches most bases of relationships, and the fears of commitment. Why
do we always seem to think that there may be someone better for us out
there? Why can we not appreciate the people in our lives until it's too
late?
This movie does not have all the answers, but it does offer many
interesting observations, several classic scenes and funny moments, and
a solid cast of colorful characters interesting enough to keep you
engaged throughout its entire close to two-hour run. I also liked the
fact that the ending did not close or open all doors, and instead, left
you with a mixed sense of melancholic hope. Admittedly, not everyone
will be as interested in this film as I was. I am in my
twenty-somethings, and felt extremely in tune with most of the
characters' thoughts, feelings and trepidations. You might not. Then
again, if you've ever had a moment in your life when you felt like you
could "do better" than the person with whom you were presently engaged,
this movie is certainly one that'll further appetize your food for
ample thought. This film may have been a small movie set in a small
town, but its characters are earnest, its dialogue is smart and witty,
and most of all, its heart is anything but small.
Little Known Facts about the film and its stars: 
Goof in film: When Sharon (Sorvino) is visiting Tommy (Dillon) in the
hospital, her lips don't move when she asks him how he is.
Director Ted Demme is the nephew of better known director, Jonathan
Demme. 
Stars Uma Thurman and Timothy Hutton were apparently heavily dating
during the filming of this movie (Is there anyone left in Hollywood
that hasn't taken a crack at Uma?). 
Timothy Hutton has a son Noah with his ex-wife, actress Debra Winger.
He also directed the music video "Drive" for the 1980's group The Cars.
Natalie Portman was born on the 9th of June, 1981, in Jerusalem,
Israel. She is a vegetarian, and was turned down for the role of Juliet
in the 1996 version of ROMEO AND JULIET (7/10): a part that eventually
went to Claire Danes.
Actor Max Perlich made his feature film debut as the "economics
student" in 1986's FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF (7.5/10).
Writer Scott Rosenberg graduated from Boston University's College of
Communication.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
There have been numerous films about twentysomething males  
who have a fear of commitment and worry where their lives   
are headed. Last year's wonderful independent feature       
"Kicking and Screaming" is an example, and Diner is the     
Citizen Kane of this genre. Most of these films follow a 
similar pattern. The guys spend a lot of time drinking beer,
fantasizing about women they cannot have, and forgetting    
about what they have right in front of them. "Beautiful     
Girls", a recent video release, doesn't offer much new to   
the genre, but what it does offer is a literate, laugh out  
loud script by Scott Rosenberg, sound direction from Ted    
Demme, and a first-rate ensemble cast.                      
"Beautiful Girls" is set in a small New England town where  
nothing changes and nobody leaves. One of the few that did  
escape is Willie (Hutton), who has come back for his high   
school reunion. He is uncertain about his future with his   
current girlfriend, who wants him to make a commitment. 
Then suddenly, Willie becomes entranced by two women. One is
a drop dead gorgeous city girl who is knowledgeable about   
sports and does whiskey shooters to boot. She is the ideal  
woman, almost too good to be true. Then after teaching each 
of the guys a lesson, she promptly vanishes almost like an  
apparition. This is the most interesting work Thurman has   
done to date. 
Then there is Marty, the 13 year old neighbor of Willie's   
father. Willie thinks she might be the ideal woman for him, 
and actually considers waiting 5 years for her when she's   
legal age. As played by Portman, Marty is a girl wise beyond
her years. The dialogue given to Marty is almost too        
literate, but it's a credit to Portman that she can actually
pull it off and make it seem like a 13 year old could       
actually talk like that. The scenes between Hutton and      
Portman are magical. We can begin to understand why they    
like one another, and also why they weren't meant to be.    
Aside from the exchanges between Portman and Hutton, there  
are several other wonderful vignettes in this movie. Rosie  
O' Donnell plays the local beautician who delivers a        
blistering monologue about how blind men can be. And the    
film's higlight is a scene in a bar where the gang firsts   
meets Thurman, who asks Willie to play something, and they  
break out into a chorus of "Sweet Caroline". It's a magical 
scene. For one moment, they are able to recapture the       
memories of youth when life wasn't so complicated.
"Beautiful Girls" is a humorous, funny, and touching film. It doesn't  
take any easy routes to its conclusion, and none of it seems
contrived. It belongs with "Diner" and "Kicking and         
Screaming" as the best in it's genre. 

Author
Michael Redman
Barely scrapping by playing at a NYC piano bar, Timothy Hutton returns to his
Massachusetts hometown for a couple of weeks. On the surface, he's coming home
for a high school reunion, but since this is a movie, you know that he's
really looking for some major life decisions.
A fairly "small" film, this sports an impressive ensemble cast including Uma
Thurman, Rosie O'Donnell and a bunch of actors that you've seen before but
can't quite place. Commendable jobs all around; they seem like real people.
Hutton arrives at his past and is greeted by his spirit-dead father,
terminally goony brother and old high school chums. All of his old buddies are
engaged in the snow removal business and most are in the midst of a
relationship crisis. The perfect stuff for a comedy about people in the
twenties angst.
He meets and falls for the new next door neighbor: a beautiful intelligent
lively girl who is obviously taken with him. The problem is that she is only
13. Unconsummated (no, it's not _that_ type of movie), their relationship
builds and neither knows what to do with it. Star-crossed lovers with no where
to go.
So Hutton is gaga over a barely-teen, one of his buddies is two-timing his
girlfriend with a married old flame, another's girlfriend is sleeping with a
meat cutter ("and she's a vegetarian!"). Things are a mess.
The beautiful stranger in town for a few days is both a delight in the film
and one of its minor downfalls. Her character is fun to watch. Even more
entertaining is observing the guys falling over themselves trying to impress
her. Like the Lone Ranger, before she leaves, she solves most of the problems
and sets everyone onward with their lives. The ending is a bit too pat.
Everything is tied up with a neat little bow.
Rosie O'Donnell is a stand-out in her limited screen time with her brash
personality and "tell it like it is" pronouncements.
Structured somewhat like a "Diner, A Few Years Later", this feel-good story
is a good time, but ends a little too nice.
[This appeared in the 2/22/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 2/9/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:50
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sex, profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Timothy Hutton, Matt Dillon, Michael Rapaport, Max Perlich, 
      Lauren Holly, Natalie Portman, Uma Thurman, Rosie O'Donnell, 
      Martha Plimpton, Mira Sorvino, Annabeth Gish
Director: Ted Demme
Producer: Cary Woods
Screenplay: Scott Rosenberg
Cinematography: Adam Kimmel
Music: David A. Stewart
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Despite its name, BEAUTIFUL GIRLS is actually about a group of 
irritating, twenty-something males whose adolescent attitudes have 
remained with them well into adulthood.  This film centers around a 10-
year high school reunion, which explains why so many twenty-eight year 
olds are gathering in a town where "nothing changes but the seasons."  
Of course, it goes without saying that most of the principals never left 
this sleepy, snowy New England hamlet in the first place.  Of the 
nearly-dozen characters assembled for the reunion, only one -- musician 
Willie (Timothy Hutton) -- had the ambition to head for distant 
horizons.  He returns home with a girlfriend named Tracy (Annabeth Gish) 
and a host of uncertainties about whether or not he should marry her.
     Willie isn't the only one going through an under-30 life crisis.  
Borrowing heavily from other, better films, director Ted Demme and 
screenwriter Scott Rosenberg give each of their male protagonists a case 
of commitment angst.  Tommy (Matt Dillon) is caught between two women:  
the gorgeous-but-married Darien (an unconvincing Lauren Holly) and 
Sharon (Mira Sorvino), a quiet girl who is desperately in love with him.  
Paul (the always-irritating Michael Rapaport) would rather fantasize 
about trysts with supermodels than admit his feelings to his girlfriend, 
Jan (Martha Plimpton).  And Tommy's best friend (Max Perlich) prefers to 
spend his nights drinking rather than risk becoming involved in a 
serious relationship.
     Dozens of previous releases have plowed the paths traversed by 
BEAUTIFUL GIRLS.  This uninspired retread offers little in the way of 
originality or freshness.  Especially disappointing is the ending, which 
pulls together all sorts of melodramatic cliches, then uses handwaving 
to construct hard-to-swallow resolutions for nearly every dilemma.  
Suddenly -- surprise, surprise -- just about everyone is willing to make 
a lifelong commitment.  Along the way to this conclusion, we get lots of 
snappy patter that sounds like it came straight out of a script-writer's 
pen.
     There are some high points.  Several of the characters, notably 
those essayed by Timothy Hutton, Matt Dillon, Uma Thurman, and 
especially Natalie Portman, attain some semblance of believability.  
Portman, playing a charming, precocious 13-year old who develops a crush 
on Willie, deserves special recognition.  While this subplot could 
easily have devolved into LOLITA-inspired soap opera material, Portman 
uses her considerable talent to keep things on a higher level.  After 
each of her too-few scenes in BEAUTIFUL GIRLS, we're eagerly 
anticipating the next one (they're about the only things worth waiting 
for).  It's interesting to note that in her two significant roles to 
date (this film and THE PROFESSIONAL), Portman has fallen for much older 
men.
     Other than the interaction between Portman and Hutton, effective 
moments are rare.  There's an admittedly-dopey sequence in a bar where 
everyone gathers to mangle Neil Diamond's "Sweet Caroline", and another 
where Willie and Andera (Uma Thurman) share a quiet evening conversation 
about life, love, and what it means to devote yourself to someone else's 
happiness.  Besides those rare occasions, though, BEAUTIFUL GIRLS 
doesn't have much to offer.  A great deal of this film is derivative, 
and you're likely to leave the theater with an unpleasant sense of deja 
vu.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
