Title
Review for Zbogum na dvadesetiot vek (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Aleksandar Popovski and Darko Mitrevski.
Cast: Lazar Ristovski, Nikola Ristanovski, Vlado Javanovski, Dejan Acimovic, 
Petar Temelkovski, Sofija Kunovska.
1999 - 83 minutes (in Macedonian w/ English subtitles).
Not Rated (equivalent of an R or NC-17 for one explicit sex scene, nudity, 
violence, profanity, and gore).
Opens November, 1999 in limited release.
Reviewed July 8, 1999.
"Goodbye 20th Century!," a Macedonian sci-fi/drama, is a visionary motion 
picture full of many startling, bold images, and reminiscent of French 
director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's 1995 fantasy, "City of Lost Children." From a 
camera travelling through a toilet drain and into outer space, to a beautiful 
shot of the exterior of a shopping mall as a New Year's celebration goes on 
inside, "Goodbye 20th Century!" directors Aleksandar Popovski and Darko 
Mitrevski prove to have a huge amount of style and visual flair to spare. 
Among these especially stunning technical attributes, however, is a motion 
picture that is as frustrating and incomprehensible as I can remember seeing 
in recent memory. No attempt to follow any sort of coherent path is made, nor 
is there any way that we can identify with the severely selective and vaguely 
written main characters and, therefore, what we are left with is a bunch of 
jumbled storylines that have nowhere to go but crash into each other and 
explode.
The film is made up of two loosely-related 40-minute stories, intercut with 
what is supposed to be the first-ever wedding captured on film in the early 
1900's, between a brother and sister who are deeply in love. Beginning in the 
aftermath of a war in the year 2019 that has left the Balkans a desolate, 
sparse landscape, a man named Kuzman (Lazar Ristovski) is abruptly shot into 
a grave by his fellow comrades after being suspected as the cause of the mass 
deaths of their children. Rising up from the grave afterwards, and 
subsequently, after being shot several more time, Kuzman discovers that he is 
immortal because, as one person notes, "the ground will not take him." 
Meeting a prophet, Kuzman is instructed to travel to the Glass City and kill 
the Man With The Green Hair, who guards a wall that foretells everyone's 
future, including his own.
The latter half of the film then goes back in time to New Year's Eve 1999, at 
the turn of the century. Following a mysterious man dressed in a Santa Claus 
outfit, he solemnly attends an otherwise joyous New Year's party and then 
rents a purely white room from a guy named Peter, which also holds various 
people mourning the recent death of his brother. Discussing different 
theories on what the 21st Century will hold, Santa states in all seriousness 
that time as we know it will stop at the strike of midnight. Everyone laughs 
the notion off, of course, but might this obviously psychotic man dressed as 
Santa Claus be able to correctly prophesize the future? Oh, and the briefly 
aforementioned wedding in 1900 between the brother and sister, find their 
festivities cut short when the brother is shot dead. 
When the confused (to put it mildly) proceedings conclude with the titled 
quote, "Goodbye 20th Century!," you are left with the nagging question, "what 
exactly was the point?" Is the film taking these fantasy elements to make a 
statement on the currently bleak state in the Balkans? Perhaps, but only 
those who are closely related to Macedonia will be able to grasp this 
concept. Besides, even if the film is trying to be earnest, that doesn't 
erase the blatant ludicrous and misguided nature of the narrative, in which a 
farting wheelchair-bound woman; a tattoed, nude hussy who has sex with her 
brother in a bathtub; leather and iron-clad futuristic men; and an old lady 
who gets her brains blown out by Santa, all figure into the story. 
With everything taken under consideration, maybe "Goodbye 20th Century!" is 
simply a parable letting us know that the world has always been a bad place, 
as noted with the murder of the groom in 1900, and is not likely to get any 
better, as the question of apocalyptic doom sweeps over on the eve of the 
year 2000. If this is the case, not only is the film shoddily made on the 
screenplay level, but also comes off as arbitrary and simple-minded, a 
virtual waste of the viewer's time. 
One of the most offensive things about "Goodbye 20th Century!" is its 
treatment of incest, which flows throughout the picture. Not only does Kuzman 
gain his own mortality after animalistically having sex with his sister in 
the first story (which could be looked upon as a good or bad thing), but the 
siblings who are getting married during the interlude between the two 
vignettes are negatively looked upon, and the ceremony ends in death. So, 
what does this mean? Do directors Popovski and Mitrevski believe incestuous 
relationships are a virtuous thing (as referenced with the immortal man)? And 
if so, then why do they go back on their word to portray it in a bad light 
with the wedding? If they are trying to only push their point more firmly 
across that the world is an unfair place, then why must they focus their 
attention on incest, especially since they have nothing interesting or 
insightful to say about the controversial subject?
If this is an example of the best in Eastern European cinema, which I 
certainly don't believe it is, then perhaps filmmakers in that section of the 
world should rethink what they want to say with their films, instead of 
trivializing them with artificial and silly plot occurrences and having 
nothing substantial to say about their subjects to begin with. In short, 
"Goodbye 20th Century!" is an ambitious film on many different levels, and I 
can appreciate that, but it rarely succeeds on any of them. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Marty Mapes
With Being John Malkovich getting such rave reviews, it just might be
possible that surrealism is making a comeback. That would be good news
for the creators of Goodbye 20th Century.
Goodbye 20th Century is a Macedonian film -- one of only 6 listed in the
IMDB. At first glance it looks like an American action film wannabe. A
band of armed men in black leather wander a desolate hillside. Before
anyone speaks, you might almost expect another Mad Max movie.
But it soon becomes clear that this is no Hollywood film. The angled
shots and extreme closeups look either like footage from an amateur
camera-nerd, or a surrealist playing with perspective. It becomes clear
that the latter is the actual case when a white-robed figure is shot,
but not killed. The stunned, would-be killers empty their guns into this
humble, dream-like, invincible man. Eventually, the murderous mob
decides to let their victim go with just a warning.
There is a circular plot to the film -- it eventually ends where it
began, but not before a second act is played out. This second act is
even more surreal than the first, taking place in a completely white
room with people dressed for a funeral. Our hero -- the character with
whom we empathize -- is apparently as confused by the random actions of
the funeral-goers as I was. This act finally ends as a Santa Claus
figure goes on a shooting spree in this pure-white world.
There are so many more details I could mention, but I have no idea how
to work them into any sort of review.
As you may have guessed, I was more confused than enthralled by this
movie. I did see some artistic merit in the staging and execution of
some of the dreamier scenes. I could appreciate the circular structure
of the film and the strumming of timeless themes. But I couldn't tell
you what it was "about."
Nor, unfortunately, could I tell you why you should see it.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"The future is as screwed up as the past."
Starring Lazar Ristovski. Not Rated (the equivalent of a strong R, for
gory violence and an explicit sex scene).
Goodbye, 20th Century is one of only six films produced in the Republic
of Macedonia. It's the only one of the six that I have seen and it
hasn't made me especially eager to see more. It's a frenetic,
nonsensical doo-hickey of a science fiction movie that makes no effort
to be at all coherent and, as such, is a big mess. It's utterly
pointless -- or maybe it's just me. Either way, I'm at a loss.
The film is composed of three vignettes. The first plays like a
pornographic Tuck Everlasting. In a post-apocalyptic society, a man is
condemned to eternal life until he frees himself of the curse by having
sex with his sister. Or something. The second is brief and is "set" at
the end of the 19th century. This one might have something to do with
someone marrying his own sister. Or something. The last one concerns a
deranged Santa Claus on New Year's Eve 1999 and ends in a bloodbath and
the words "Goodbye, 20th Century!"
Or something. I don't know. Maybe it would have all become clearer on
repeat viewing, but I wasn't going to go through that. The fact of the
matter is, to a one-time viewer not familiar with Macedonian cinema,
Goodbye, 20th Century makes absolutely no sense. Lines and characters
seem to come out of nowhere, without any apparent thought behind them.
The running theme of incest is at best curious and at worst repulsive;
either way, why it's there remains a mystery. The film also tries to
interweave the three stories, but the result is even more disjointed.
There may well be some ideas brimming underneath the surface here, in
which case they simply never see the light of day.
>From a purely technical perspective, this is a reasonably well-made
movie. Action scenes are filmed with an effectively surrealistic style
and there is enough deft camerawork to justify the filmmakers being in
the business. The sets are gorgeously bleak and they don't reek of a
low budget. I also like the way the film's finale was staged and
filmed, though I didn't really understand that either. Goodbye, 20th
Century has enough visual panache that, if coupled with a good plot,
which it is laughing, it would be a fair contender for the Best Foreign
Film Oscar this year.
I can't help but think that there was something profound that directors
Darko Mitrevski and Aleksandar Popovski were trying to tell us here. If
only I knew what it was. Before I can perceive understated messages I
have to at least get a jist of the main story line and with this film I
wasn't even fully successful there. In fact, nobody can be expected to
understand the theme of a movie before they figure out what it is
about. That should be the #1 piece of advice at film schools everywhere.
There is no way I can completely dismiss this film considering its
technical proficiency and the nagging possibility that, um, I didn't
get it. But my argument stands: to most American filmgoers, Goodbye,
20th Century will remain a mystery. The story never came together
sufficiently to work on any level other than the visual.
