Title
Review for Disappearance of Nora, The (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Identity crisis has a complete new meaning for the heroine
of THE DISAPPEARANCE OF NORA. In the beginning she (played
by Veronica Hamel) wakes up in the desert, beat up and with
nothing but a red dress. She doesn't remember anything - not
her name nor how she ended there. The instinct tells her to
go to Reno where she meets Denton (played by Dennis Farina),
head of security in on of the casinos. He decides to help
her and employs his detective skills in order to identify
her and thus bring her back to her family. But even when she
is finally given her proper identity, the incident that
caused her amnesia remains the mystery and source of new
frustrations, doubts and fears.
The opening scenes of this 1993 TV movie are in many ways
similar to the opening scenes of SIESTA, 1987 thriller by
Mary Lambert, which also featured amnesiac woman trying to
find her identity. However, the similarities between the two
films end in the beginning - while SIESTA turns out to be
nothing more than over-pretentious drama, THE DISAPPEARANCE
OF NORA remains mystery thriller from the beginning to the
end. Makers of this film, which is basically a routine
television production, perhaps lack artistic ambitions but
they compensate it with experience and craftsmanship. While
the script by Alan Ormsby and Tom Cole has its share of
cliches, and the plot twist at the end is not so
unpredictable, experienced director Joyce Chopra knows how
to compensate those flaws with good atmosphere and superb
cast. Veronica Hamel brings a lot of vulnerability to her
character, Dennis Farina is great as kind-hearted tough guy
and Stephen Collins also makes a good job out of rather
thankless role. Mostly due to their efforts, THE
DISAPPEARANCE OF NORA captivates the viewer's attention and
ends up like a nice little television thriller which should
deserve recommendation or two.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
