Title
Review for Philadelphia Story, The (1940)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Davis Nicoll
     I checked out the local video store last night, hoping to pick up
a good action flick.  Some jerkwad had already rented I COME IN PEACE
and MARKED FOR DEATH, but next to the recent releases shelf, was a shelf
labeled "classics" (old films).  I *like* old stuff; I must have seen
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK and ALIEN a dozen times, so I figured "what the
hell?" and started looking through the old stuff.
     What I picked was this movie called THE PHILADELPHIA STORY.  I
remembered hearing something about a sci-fi flick about a teleporting
battleship, and I *like* sci-fi stuff, but that's not all this movie
has.  The back of the box mentions a character named "Tracy Lord," who
was a porn-star back in the 80s.  I think this is great.  I get to
watch the scum who make porn flicks get their heads kicked in and lots
of tits, too.  Hey, I understand the seamy side of the porn industry!
I've seen LETHAL WEAPON three times.
     I get home and pop the movie in the VCR.  Okay: First problem is
the damn film is in black and white.  It isn't my machine, because when
I take it out and put in ROBOCOP II, the colour works okay.  Fine, the
movie's probably made in Taiwan, or Canada or some other third world 
country that makes cheap films.  I put it back in and settle back for 
righteous bloodshed.  Third-worlders really know how to make good eye-
gougers.
     Next problem: the love story.  Now, I understand why you need a
love story in a film; it gives the squeeze something to watch while you
grope her, and you can get good sex stuff in the film, too.  So, okay, 
there has to be a love story (oh, and you can kill the woman, so the guy
has a reason to get mad and kill people).  The thing is, the damn love
story just kept going and going, and we don't even get to see any skin.
They even have this pool scene that would have been perfect for a skinny-
dipping scene, and they blow it by having the woman wear clothes.
Actually, she was pretty flat, so maybe they had a good reason.  Anyway,
most of the movie is about this woman, and her boyfriends, I think.
They never say *anything* about her porn career, and anyway, the woman
playing Tracy Lord is way too old for the part.
     The really big problem is that there's *no* action!  I mean, these
guys are coal miners, porn stars, and newspaper reporters (There's this 
really cute girl who plays a photographer, but even though she's
obviously a libber, she never takes her clothes off).  These guys wear
fedoras and *everything*, but no one gets shot.  You'd figure that with
two husbands of Lords and a boyfriend too, they'd at least have a ten-
minute fight scene, but the weenie playing the boyfriend goes down with
the first punch!  Geez!  The guy in RENEGADES was gutshot and he did
more!  All the good stuff is missing: no car chases, no gun fights, no
martial arts.  All these people do is talk, talk, talk.  At least I had
time to nuzzle the babe.  It's not like the movie had anything going
on.  
     They drink a lot, more than me and the guys do, even, and they
didn't throw up as much, either.
     Anyway, THE PHILADELPHIA STORY is a lousy action sci-fi film, 
and I'm sorry I wasted the $2.00 to rent it.  
Now, if the first three weren't serious, is it likely this one is?

Author
Brian Koller
It's time for the quiz show, Name That Movie!
A 1940 film starring Cary Grant, based on a play,
in which he tries to break up his ex-wife's next-day
marriage to a man who isn't right for her.  "His Girl
Friday"! Bzzzzt, wrong answer.
Let's try again.  This comedy co-stars Cary Grant
and Katherine Hepburn.  Their romance is threatened
by a next-day marriage by one of them to a third party.
"Bringing Up Baby"!   Bzzzt, wrong again.
The correct answer is "The Philadelphia Story".
This film asks the question, should Katherine
Hepburn cancel the wedding with uptight John Howard,
and instead marry awkward writer Jimmy Stewart, or
perhaps meddlesome ex-husband Cary Grant?  Anyone
who has a seen a film before can safely answer, YES.
With famous names like Stewart, Grant, and Hepburn,
and with well-regarded director George Cukor in
control, how could the film go wrong?  The problem
isn't so much the familiar storyline, which is
complicated by the addition of humble secondary love
interest Ruth Hussey, and numerous extraneous and
stereotypical family members.  The problem is with the
script, which isn't nearly as funny as the writers
believe it to be.  The effect is one comic scene after
another that falls short, like the routine of a mediocre
comic that messes up all his jokes.
How, then, does one account for the great critical
and commercial success of the film?  Perhaps the
impressive cast helped, and perhaps folks caught
in the continuing Depression enjoyed laughing at
the foibles of the well-to-do set.  Or, perhaps I
have simply misinterpreted the film.
James Stewart won Best Actor for his performance.
Perhaps he deserved it, for surviving the lines that
he had to deliver.  His character rapidly changes
from caustic to shameless in his devotion for Hepburn.
They have a "drunk" scene together which perpetuates
the myth of the funny drunk who can't stop hiccupping.
Somehow, Donald Ogden Stewart won the Academy Award
for Best Screenplay, despite competition from films
such as "The Grapes of Wrath" and "Rebecca".
Cukor was nominated for Best Director, Hepburn for
Best Actress, Hussey for Best Supporting Actress,
and the film for Best Picture.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
