Title
Review for Jeffrey (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Steven Weber, Michael T. Weiss, Patrick Stewart, Bryan Batt,
      Sigourney Weaver, Nathan Lane
Director: Christopher Ashley
Producers: Mark Balsam, Mitchell Maxwell, and Victoria Maxwell
Screenplay: Paul Rudnick based on his play
Cinematography: Jeffrey Tufano
Music: Stephen Endelman
U.S. Distributor: Orion Classics
     JEFFREY is a gay romantic comedy with a very impressive laugh-to-
running time ratio.  Written by ADDAMS FAMILY scribe Paul Rudnick (based on
his play of the same name), this film is about as eccentric and quirky as
they get.  Rudnick throws everything at the viewer except the kitchen sink,
and if he'd been able to find a way to get that in, he probably would have
included it.  And, despite all the mirth and mayhem, deep within JEFFREY's
core is a message everyone can relate to, regardless of their sexual
orientation.
     JEFFREY is politically incorrect and proud of it.  It dares to joke
about AIDS and poke fun at the closet gay tendencies of certain Catholic
priests.  It revels in stereotypes, using numerous supposedly
characteristic gay mannerisms and occupations, then turning them upside down
by revealing "real" people underneath.  In no small part due to a tremendous
performance by Patrick Stewart, one such caricature, an interior designer,
becomes someone we come to feel for.
     Jeffrey (Steven Weber) is a sexually compulsive, young, gay man.  After
a number of bizarre in-bed experiences, he decides to give up sex cold
turkey.  It's not an easy decision to begin with, but it becomes almost
impossible when he meets Steve (Michael T. Weiss) at a gym.  Jeffrey is
immediately attracted to Steve, but his current celibate state makes a
relationship difficult.  However, Steve is patient, and it doesn't take long
before Jeffrey starts to weaken.  Then the bombshell is dropped -- Steve is
HIV+.  At first, Jeffrey says it doesn't matter, but he's lying, and the
moment he cancels a dinner date, Steve knows too.
     JEFFREY never attempts to simulate real life.  It's filled with asides
to the audience, strange interludes (including a faux game show and a
ghostly hospital encounter), and parodies of parodies.  One hilarious
segment has Sigourney Weaver playing "the nation's hottest post-modern
evangelist."  Another has Jeffrey talking frankly about sex to his mother
and father.  Then there's Nathan Lane as a randy priest who tries to seduce
Jeffrey before breaking into a chorus of "Everything's Coming Up Roses."  If
nothing else, Rudnick and director Christopher Ashley know how to keep the
audience off balance and in stitches.
     One of the real treats of JEFFREY is watching accomplished thespian
Patrick Stewart, who is in top form as Sterling, one of Jeffrey's best
friends.  Michael T. Weiss is equally strong as Steve, and Bryan Batt plays
Sterling's AIDS-infected lover, Darius, with the appropriate mix of charm
and ditziness.  Acting-wise, unfortunately, the weak link is lead Steven
Weber (from TV's WINGS), an actor with solid comic instincts, but who can't
handle drama.  This becomes a distinct liability as the film progresses,
because after the riotous first forty-five minutes, JEFFREY wanders into the
realm of the serious.  Weber's limitations become especially apparent when
he's placed in a dramatic scene opposite Stewart.
     You don't have to dig too deeply to find JEFFREY's simple message,
which is essentially the same as the one put forth by 1992's STRICTLY
BALLROOM: "A life lived in fear is a life half-lived."  The AIDS epidemic
has scared Jeffrey, and now he's not only hiding from his own sexuality, but
from life in general.  Darius, despite being mortally ill, describes Jeffrey
as the saddest person he's ever known and offers this advice: "Hate AIDS,
Jeffrey, not life."  Ultimately, this is the point of JEFFREY, and it's what
makes this film more than just a laugh-a-minute riot.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Lee Harrington
     Vito Russo's seminal THE CELLULOID CLOSET makes the point that,
until recently, most films which deal with homosexuality at all were
not made by gay filmmakers for gay audiences; rather, they were made by
straight filmmakers for straight audiences.  Russo quotes directors and
stars over and over again asserting that their films were "not about
homosexuality -- they are about loneliness." It is not until we get
into the Age of AIDS that we get gay directors making films for gay
audiences which assume a gay point of view or "sensibility," which he
describes thus:
     While there have been a number of lesbian films released recently,
cinema today still has difficulty in dealing with male homosexuality.
That this is true may have to do with the way straight males fantasize
about lesbians, or with the fact that Hollywood is still a bastion of
power for straight men who cannot accept male homosexuality -- or their
own -- because "gays are the manifestation of what stands between men's
complete love for other men and their acceptance of women as friends."
(In a curious way, then, it's linked to misogyny.)
     Paul Rudnick's JEFFREY means to change all that.  In one of the
sliest bits of reflexivity I've seen in films, director Christopher
Ashley turns the camera on the "audience" after a very hot male-male
kissing scene early in the film and catches the reactions of two
teenage couples.  (It's a wondrous assumption that they might consider
JEFFREY a "date movie.")  The guys are gagging, the girls are going
"Aw...," which is exactly what you might expect, and the actual
audience at the benefit screening last night was on the floor in
hysterics. (Rudnick confided to me at the post-screening reception that
this was his favorite bit in the film, too.) While there have been
several noteworthy films and teleplays dealing with AIDS (like AN EARLY
FROST, LONGTIME COMPANION and PHILADELPHIA), they have dealt in a
mostly serious way with the tragedy and loss so many of us have
endured, and they take the HIV+ point of view.
     JEFFREY inverts all that, taking an HIV- point of view to a
degree, and using (as Jeffrey says to muggers who ask him if he has any
weapons) "irony, adjectives and eyebrows" to make its life-affirming
point, as weapons against despair.  The hero is a gay man who is afraid
of commitment, and who's equally afraid of AIDS; he's afraid of
relationships partly because he doesn't want to invest any emotion in
someone he's going to lose, but that's just copping out.  His
promiscuity before he decides to give up sex "because it's too
dangerous" merely reflects on his inability to connect with another
person at all.
     WINGS' Steven Weber does an excellent job of portraying Jeffrey's
anxiety and superficiality.  Michael T. Weiss, playing his would-be
boyfriend, radiates head and life while giving poignancy to the hurt
and frustration of being rejected because of his HIV status.  STAR TREK:
THE NEXT GENERATION's Patrick Stewart lends grace and authority to
Sterling, Jeffrey's "grand old queen" of a best friend, and practically
steals the movie without resorting to shallow stereotypes.  Bryan Batt
is touching as Sterling's chorusboy lover.  Cameos by Nathan Lane as a
priest-on-the-prowl; Olympia Dukakis as the mother of a male-to-female
transsexual lesbian; Sigourney Weaver as a Marianne Williamson-type
in-your-face televangelist; and Kathy Najimy as one of her followers
are all wildly funny.
     But the real star of JEFFREY is Rudnick's writing.  He adapted the
play to the screen himself, and does an outstanding job of interweaving
exterior scenes, fantasies and stage-like asides into a cohesive,
brilliantly funny, and very insightful screenplay.  While he never
loses sight of the tragedy of AIDS, and the very real toll it takes on
human life and relationships, he manages to find humor in situations
often treated seriously (if not dismally) in other films.
     From the opening montage of Jeffrey attempting to have safe
sex with a number of men (look for the man protected by Saran Wrap for
a real belly laugh); to the phone call to his parents (who are so much
cooler than he is, so much more knowledgeable about safe sex, phone sex
and the rest, that he hangs up, mortified), and Jeffrey's encounter
with his priest (who shows him the face of God on the cover of the
original cast album of MY FAIR LADY), Rudnick's screenplay and Ashley's
direction take us on a relentless, wildly comic ride for nearly two
hours.  While much of this film may go over the heads of straights,
there is enough here done with love and affection to please most
audiences.
     When I was talking with Rudnick at the reception, we lamented the
lack of male-male kissing even in gay films, and he said that while
writing the play he pondered what would be the most objectionable thing
to a straight audience (male-male kissing, of course), and decided to
put it in as early as possible, so that people could get over it and
into the real text.  That device really works here, and by the end of
the film, what you have seen is a story about life, love and
relationships.  An inability to commit to a relationship is hardly
confined to gays; or, as they have always said, "This film is not about
homosexuality -- it's about loneliness."
