Title
Review for Love Potion No. 9 (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Modern science, contrary to the thousands years of
idealistic philosophy, romantic poetry and fiction, claims
that the love is nothing more than consequence of certain
biochemical processes in human body. Interestingly enough,
this rather un-romantic notion was the premise for romantic
comedy. The name of that comedy was LOVE POTION NO. 9, and
it was written and directed by Dale Launer in 1991.
The protagonist of this film is Paul Matthews (played by
Tate Donovan), nerdy scientist who works in biochemical lab
together with his equally nerdy female partner Diane Farrow
(played by Sandra Bullock). Matthews doesn't have much luck
in his dealings with opposite sex, so the friends tell him
to visit Madame Ruth (played by Anne Croft), old Gypsy
fortune-teller specialised for helping people with romantic
problems. Madame Ruth is ready to improve young scientist's
by offering him "Love Potion No. 8", elixir with powerful
aphrodisiac qualities. Matthews takes it, despite warnings
about some interesting side effects, but real problems arise
when the potion gets in the hand of his partner. Both of
their lives will be turned upside down until they realise
that they are made for each other.
Ancient pop songs seem like a rather strange inspiration for
the films, and it isn't hard to imagine such films being
equally unimpressive as those inspired by video games. LOVE
POTION NO. 9, based on the "golden oldie" performed by The
Clovers, justifies that skepticism. Dale Launer's humour is
not very effective, even bellow the standards of 1980s teen
comedies, and the actors don't seem to put much effort in
their work. There is perhaps one good scene in the entire
film, but the most interesting thing about it is seeing what
popular actresses like Sandra Bullock had to do before
reaching Hollywood Olympus. However, even the Bullock fans
would do themselves a favour if they skip this one and rent
FIRE OVER AMAZON instead.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
