Title
Review for Peau douce, La (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Sara L Terrell
Warning: The review below contains spoilers.  Consider yourself forewarned.
    Truffaut's "La Peau douce" is a simple story of adultery and revenge,
but that simple story leaves plenty of room for rampant emotion.  Pierre
Lachenay (Desailly) is a successful publisher who is married happily, if
somewhat dully to Franca (Bendetti).  They have a young daughter, Sabine,
whom Pierre dotes on, calling her "ma poupee" (my doll).  On a business
trip, Pierre meets air hostess Nicole (Dorleac).  They happen to be staying
at the same hotel, and they end up having a passionate one night stand.
Upon his return to Paris, Pierre is hesitant to call Nicole, but finally he
gives in to his desires and they embark upon an affair.  Pierre and Franca
are growing apart because of Pierre's growing absence from the home.  Franca
accuses him of having an affair, but Pierre denies it, blaming his absence
on a need for time alone.  The relationship is so strained however, that
they decide to separate.  Pierre asks Nicole to marry him, but she refuses
and breaks off their affair.  Meanwhile, Franca finds proof of the affair,
and not knowing that it is over, walks into a cafe and shoots Pierre.
    In watching "La Peau douce" it is easy to see Truffaut's fascination
with Hitchcock, and the idea of unattainable happiness.  Nicole is not the
typical Hitchcockian blonde fire and ice, but she contains that element of
tease that was so prevalent in Hitchcock's heroines.  She entices Pierre to
adultery and then eventually dumps him.  She is not a seductress, though.
The characters of Pierre and Nicole are presented as mutually falling in
love, and indeed, we, the viewers are there rooting them on.  For a while,
it seems as though Pierre and Nicole might end up happy, but that idea is
destroyed quickly in the last 20 minutes of the film.
    The film is well crafted and very watchable.  The simplicity of the
story is accentuated by Pierre's turmoil.  He loves Nicole, but he genuinely
loves his wife and daughter as well and it is that dilemma which fuels the
film.  If Pierre's wife was a repulsive character, we might find it easy to
give all our sympathy to Pierre and Nicole.  But, the fact that Pierre's
wife is a seemingly nice person leaves us unsure of where to place our
loyalty.
    There is a particularly well-written score by Georges Delerue that
manages to convey both the simplicity of falling in love and the complexity
of love that is forbidden.  There is also some fine acting in the film,
particularly by Francoise Dorleac.  She manages to capture in Nicole a
dichotomy of naivite and wisdom.  She is largely unknown to American
audiences due to her death at age 25 in an auto accident in 1968.  Judging
by her career up to that point, had she lived, it is likely that she would
have become a star of international proportions.
    If there is any major fault to be found it is with the character of
Franca.  Nelly Bendetti portrays Franca convincingly, but she simply isn't
given enough development.  We know enough about her to understand why she
reacts violently in the end, but not enough to understand why she goes to
the extreme of shooting Pierre.  Given the amount of development devoted to
her character, when she began loading the gun, I was actually expecting her
to kill Nicole.
    "La Peau douce" was not well received at Cannes , where it was regarded
as somewhat of a comedown for Truffaut and was overshadowed by Jacques
Demy's "Les Parapluies de Cherbourg" (which starred Dorleac's younger
sister, Catherine Deneuve).  That is indeed unfortunate because, in my
opinion, it is one of Truffaut's finest features. and deserves a place of
worthiness in the cinema.
