Title
Review for From the Journals of Jean Seberg (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
A brilliant, witty mock documentary of Jean Seberg, that puts words in
her mouth that she might have approved of, but did not actually say,
these are Mark Rappaport's words. Proving once again, that she is being
exploited, though in a benevolent way, by a film that rails against her
exploitation. She was exploited by the director who discovered this
17-year-old in a nationwide star search for an unknown to play the juicy
part in his SAINT JOAN, that is, the irrepressible Otto Preminger, the
charming party guest, the publicity hound, and the tyrannical director
for women; and her second husband, Romaine Gary, who poked fun at her
political views and humiliated her in his films. There was also the
brief affair with the future star, Clint Eastwood, which meant nothing
to him and everything to her; and the F.B.I. under J. Edgar Hoover,
spreading malicious rumors about her, falsely saying she was pregnant
with a black child, trying everything possible to ruin her career and
life.
Mary Beth Hurt is a perfect Jean Seberg, looking and sounding like her,
exhibiting the easy way she talked, reflecting her small-town Midwestern
Iowa roots. This journal (a journal that she never kept) takes us
through her innocent years up to her suicide in 1979, when she was 40,
and was resolved in the knowledge that she couldn't be the somebody that
she wasn't.
Rappaport interestingly explores the early film life of Vanessa Redgrave
and Jane Fonda, who started out the same time she did and were roughly
the same age, and were exploited as much as she was, but who survived to
find their own identity and stardom. The difference between their
success and her failure, he points out, is that these stars had a
distinguished family name to see them through. This film is as much
about them as it is about her, covering the film industry with the
knowledge that, "it is called showbiz," he says, "not showart."
Her involvement with the Black Panthers shows that her motivation was to
be of help to the downtrodden, to get the kids a better education and
food in their belly, thinking that maybe violence was some kind of
answer to the poverty and injustice she saw in the black community.
By this time, her life had taken a downward turn, she was heavily into
drinking and taking drugs, her judgment was certainly questionable.
Preminger, the egotist he was, answered the critics who panned her
acting ability in Saint Joan, by giving her another starring part in one
of his films, realizing that they did it with such glee, partly because
they wanted him to fall on his face. But he wouldn't admit he was wrong
and immediately cast her in his next film, BONJOUR TRISTESSE. She played
the younger woman, in love with an older man. This is the film that the
French critic and soon to be New Wave cinema icon, Jean-Luc-Godard, saw
her in, and took her to Paris to play in the critically acclaimed
BREATHLESS. She was to appear in many films afterward, but her best role
might have been in a film few people saw or cared about, LILITH. Where
she holds her own with such future stars and scene stealers as Peter
Fonda and Warren Beatty.
This film challenges our credibility, it offers a fascinating look at
the world of make believe and the politics of the times, telling us
secrets that may or may not be true. It also enlightens us that Seberg's
stare into the camera was basically a no-no for an actor to do at that
time, but is now acceptable, making her a trend setter. In the
voice-over, he says that "she felt the camera was stealing her soul."
This is a clever film, immensely satisfying and enjoyable; and,
fortunately, the director casts Jean in a favorable light, she seems to
deserve that.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 4/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:37
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Profanity, violence, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
     Part biography, part social autopsy, and part movie criticism, FROM 
THE JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG is a fascinating perspective of the life and 
films of the star of JOAN OF ARC, BONJOUR TRISTESSE, LILLITH, and PAINT 
YOUR WAGON.  From director Michael Rappaport, who previously brought the 
equally-inventive ROCK HUDSON'S HOME MOVIES to the screen, FROM THE 
JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG gives a posthumous (Seberg committed suicide in 
1979), speculative interpretation of what the actress might have said 
about her career.  Played by Mary Beth Hurt (who grew up in 
Marshalltown, Iowa, Seberg's home town), Rappaport's vision of Seberg 
speaks with a barbed tongue that spares no one -- not Otto Preminger, 
Jean Luc Godard, Jane Fonda, Vanessa Redgrave, or any of her three 
husbands.
     "Most of my movies were mediocre, but I was in one or two great 
ones," confides Seberg at the beginning of this odyssey.  It's a concise 
judgment of a career that has been forgotten by almost all but the most 
ardent film-goers.  Seberg burst on the movie scene in 1957, when, at 
the age of 17, she beat out 3000 contenders for the title role in Otto 
Preminger's epic biopic, JOAN OF ARC.  The movie was, to put it mildly, 
a disappointment, due in large part to Seberg's horrible miscasting.  
Her career was almost over at the beginning, but Preminger used her in 
his next film, BONJOUR TRISTESSE, an examination of a daughter's 
obsessive love for her father (David Niven).  Few people saw the movie, 
but among those who did was Jean Luc Godard, who instantly wanted Seberg 
for 1959's BREATHLESS.  Suddenly, she was a celebrated actress.
     BREATHLESS and 1964's LILLITH, the chronicle of a woman's slow and 
sure descent into madness, represented the heights of Seberg's uneven 
career.  After those films, she appeared in a number of awful-to-
middling pictures, often as a nymphomaniac.  Some of her most degrading 
work was done for her second husband, director Romain Gary (including 
1968's BIRDS IN PERU), who apparently believed that "all women are 
whores and all men are sons of whores."  Several years later, in 1969, 
Seberg appeared opposite Clint Eastwood (with whom she had a brief 
affair) in the failed musical PAINT YOUR WAGON.  Her final American 
film, and the one seen by more people than anything else she did, was 
1970's AIRPORT.  Her swansong screen appearance in 1976 was in a 
nondescript role in a virtually-forgotten picture called THE WILD DUCK.  
Three years later, with her personal and professional life in shambles, 
she took an overdose of sleeping pills.
     FROM THE JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG draws parallels between Seberg, 
Jane Fonda, and Vanessa Redgrave.  All were political activists -- Fonda 
against Vietnam, Redgrave for the PLO, and Seberg for the Black Panthers 
(an affiliation for which she was hounded by J. Edgar Hoover and the 
FBI).  All were connected, in one way or another, by their husbands, 
lovers, or previous directors.  At times, this parallelism seems forced, 
but it leads to a number of interesting observations about Fonda and 
Redgrave.
     Despite generous heapings of gossip and indisputable fact, the most 
interesting aspect of JEAN SEBERG may be the film criticism.  Rappaport 
thoroughly dissects at least five of Seberg's films (JOAN OF ARC, 
BONJOUR TRISTESSE, BREATHLESS, LILLITH, and BIRDS IN PERU), offering 
commentary of the depth and insight that is typically found in only the 
most exhaustive critical essays.  Rappaport also offers an opinion of 
what made Seberg unique -- according to him, she was the first actor to 
stare blankly back at the camera.  
     JEAN SEBERG's social viewpoint is indisputably cynical.  With a 
deceptively-bland expression, Mary Beth Hurt delivers scathing line 
after line, contemptuous of everything from the roles of women in film 
(either mad, oversexed, objectified, or some combination of all three) 
to the influence that Clint Eastwood's screen personae had on Presidents 
Reagan and Bush.  It's a vivid, feminist perspective that strikes more 
than a few raw nerves because of its acuteness.
     Jean Seberg's career began with her being burned at the stake 
(literally and figuratively) in JOAN OF ARC.  It ended when the FBI's 
relentless persecution, coupled with various personal problems, pushed 
her to suicide.  FROM THE JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG examines the public 
life bookended by those events.  There are some aspects of Seberg's 
career that perhaps deserved more screen time, and certain tangents 
(such as one focusing on Fonda) that could have been reduced or 
eliminated.  On the whole, however, this may be 1996's most unique 
motion picture to date, and is certainly one of the most innovative 
pseudo-biographies ever to reach the screen.
