Title
Review for Associate, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Whoopi Goldberg, Dianne Wiest, Tim Daly, Bebe Neuwirth, 
      Eli Wallach, Lainie Kazan, Austin Pendleton, George Martin 
Director: Donald Petrie
Producers: Frederic Golchan, Patrick Markey, Adam Leipzip
Screenplay: Nick Thiel based on the film L'ASSOCIE, adapted from the 
      novel EL SOCIO by Jenaro Prieto
Cinematography: Alex Nepomniascy
Music: Christopher Tyng
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     For motion pictures that feature gender changes or cross dressing, 
the chief pleasure is usually watching an actor or actress trying to 
play someone of the opposite sex.  This is true whether it's Tony Curtis 
and Jack Lemmon in SOME LIKE IT HOT, Dustin Hoffman in TOOTSIE, Robin 
Williams in MRS. DOUBTFIRE, or Nathan Lane in THE BIRDCAGE.  And it's 
there that THE ASSOCIATE disappoints, because, despite all the hype 
about Whoopi Goldberg playing a caucasian male, this heavily made-up, 
masculine alter-ego is given less than ten minutes of total screen time, 
with the first appearance not occurring until the film is two-thirds 
over.  
      The notable absence of Goldberg's Robert Cutty would have been 
forgivable had the rest of the movie been on a higher level than the one 
achieved by this trite, familiar presentation.  Unfortunately, the 
banality of the material, coupled with the almost complete absence of 
worthwhile humor, makes THE ASSOCIATE seem like a half-hearted rip-off 
of TOOTSIE where the big moment of revelation takes far, far too long to 
occur.  
     THE ASSOCIATE comes complete with a message that's unlikely to 
surprise anyone:  racism and sexism are prevalent in the business world, 
and, no matter how talented a person may be, unless they're a white 
male, they are unlikely to receive a fair shake.  Or, as one of the 
characters succinctly puts it, "The women's movement didn't make it down 
to Wall Street."  And, while the film gets in a few pointed jabs at the 
"old boys' network" that does most of the high financial wheeling and 
dealing, Nick Thiel's script is content with a facile resolution that 
betrays the film's central theme.  Suddenly, everyone previously 
reluctant is thrilled to be represented by a black woman.
     Whoopi Goldberg plays Laurel Ayres, a financial analyst whose 
promotion at Manchester Investments is usurped by her unscrupulous 
partner, Frank Peterson (Tim Daly).  When she realizes that her sex and 
race make her future prospects bleak, Laurel quits, intent upon starting 
her own firm.  After putting up an apartment building as collateral for 
a bank loan, she opens Laurel Ayres Investments, but finds it impossible 
to lure clients away from Manchester.  Then, a former co-worker, Sally 
Dugan (Dianne Wiest), puts her in touch with a big business tycoon, 
Donald Fallon (Eli Wallach), who's willing to read one of her proposals.  
When Fallon finds out that Laurel is a woman, however, he balks, until 
she reassures him that she has a male partner.  The imaginary man's 
name:  Robert Cutty.
     Soon, Cutty is the talk of Wall Street, as "his" brilliant moves 
make Laurel's clients happy -- not to mention rich -- people.  Of 
course, since there isn't really a Cutty, Laurel has to keep putting 
people off when they want to meet him in the flesh.  One of the most 
difficult to dissuade is the seductive Camille (Bebe Neuwirth), a woman 
given to wearing sexy negligee under her business suit.  And, when the 
SEC takes an interest in Laurel's partner, she is forced to take drastic 
action, and, via a top-notch makeup job (that actually looks rather 
cheesy), transform herself into the mysterious Cutty.
     On the acting side, Goldberg is Goldberg, albeit oddly restrained, 
as if director Donald Petrie didn't want her to be especially funny.  
Dianne Wiest is charming, but this is far from her best recent 
performance.  Eli Wallach and Bebe Neuwirth are both fun despite being 
stuck playing stereotypes, and Lainie Kazan has THE ASSOCIATE's plum 
role -- a tabloid gossip columnist.  Unfortunately, Tim Daly is horribly 
miscast as the duplicitous Frank.  Daly's boring performance conveys as 
much menace as a slice of white bread.
     THE ASSOCIATE can boast exactly two funny moments -- a smooch that 
provokes over-the-top homophobic reactions and a literal example of 
bathroom humor.  The lack of laughter is damaging, because this material 
isn't sufficiently plausible or entertaining to hold an audience's 
interest without the particular brand of outrageous comedy that Goldberg 
is known for.  THE ASSOCIATE works fine as a bland, feel-good, big 
screen sit com, but there's nothing here to get excited about.  This is 
mediocre filler in a fall release schedule that is otherwise full of 
promise.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: Donald Petrie
Written by: Jenaro Prieto (novel El Socio) Nick Thiel
Cast: Whoopi Goldberg (Laurel Ayres), Dianne Wiest ( Sally Doogan), Eli
Wallach (Fallon), Timothy Daly (Frank), Bebe Neuwirth (Camille Austin
Pendleton)
Produced by: Buena Vista Pictures / Hollywood Pictures / Interscope
Communications / PolyGram
Rating : ***
Run Time: 113 Minutes
For a movie that aims to dispel the prejudicial stereotypes of sexism, THE
ASSOCIATE may succeed in some aspects, but it ends up falling into a
patterned plot and perpetuating other forms of sexism.
What is the role of a woman in the ruthlessly competitive and
testorone-tilted world of Wall Street? She could be a secretary and get
called "sweetie," or she could do all the work and let her male partner take
all the credit. After all, if business deals are to be closed in strip bars,
a woman can hardly expect any respect. Perhaps she should get breast
enlargements. At the very least, she would then be able to get some
attention, proceeding then to sleep her way to the top. Through it all, she
must never show her temper, for it would surely be interpreted as
pre-menstrual syndrome. Such a starkly stereotupical but realistic portrait
of corporate culture is portrayed in THE ASSOCIATE.
It seems as if the only way a woman can break down the
barriers errected by the Wall Street Boys' Club is to
become a man, which is precisely what Whoopi Goldberg's character, Laurel
Ayres, does. As a financial analyst who fails to get the recognition she
deservesbecause of her gender and race, she creates and subsequently dons
the persona of the fictitious Robert Cutty. Using her intelligence and
business savvy behind the persona of this imaginary White, Caucasian
male,she achives exceptional success. her partner in crime is fellow
secretary Sally, played engagingly by two-time Academy Award winning Dianne
Wiest. However, hilarious fixes arise when Cutty's fabricated persona
becomes the target of the insatiable media, makes deals with Laurel's
devious competitor (portrayed with wicked gleefulness by Tim Daly), gets
subpoenaed for fraud, and even "fathers" a child.
Whoopi Goldberg's androgynous appeal, comic talent and intelligence lend
realism and humour to the character of Laurel. As an African-American woman
overcoming discrimination and beating the odds, we champion her cause and
what she represents. However, Goldberg's portrayal fails to illicit sympathy
and audience-identification. As with THE COLOR PURPLE, her steely edge and
street-smarts make her unbelievable as a marginalized and exploited figure.
Furthermore, even as it continues to be a ver real and pressing issue today,
the storline of Black Woman versus White Man seems cliched when dealth with
in comedy, especially since the possibility was raised back in the sixties
of God being a Black Woman. In addition, the disguise strategy recalls films
like MRS DOUBTFIRE and THE NUTTY PROFESSOR, and makes the plot's unfolding
highly predictable.
Finally, even as the movie shatters female stereotypes, it perpetuates male
ones. The mend o not develop beyond being cariacatures of the manipulative
businessman, the fumbling nerd genius and the sensitive new-age man. As such
there is an imbalance in the treatment of issues of prejudice. Directed by
Donald Petrie, known for such hit comedies as MYSTIC PIZZA and GRUMPY OLD
MEN, THE ASSOCIATE merely retells, albeit with the slightest dash of humour,
a well-known tale of sexism in today's society.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Christopher Null
     There's a few legendary scripts among screenwriting circles --
scripts that people would *love* to rip off, if they could figure out
how:  WITNESS, CHINATOWN, NETWORK.  And then there's TOOTSIE, the queen
mother of comedy scripts, that gets ripped off all the time.
     THE ASSOCIATE is boilerplate TOOTSIE, lifting the entire plot
structure from Dorothy's television world and dropping it on Wall
Street, where Whoopi Goldberg finds herself forced to impersonate a man
(named Cutty after Cutty Sark scotch) in order to be taken seriously.
     If you want to know all about it, just rent TOOTSIE, and you'll
meet the principals of THE ASSOCIATE -- the confident (Dianne Wiest),
the would-be-if-I-weren't-the-same-sex lover (Bebe Neuwirth), the rival
(Tim Daly), and the wacky gang who fall for the trick.  And you'll see
familiar scenes -- Cutty is almost exposed, Cutty evades woman on the
prowl, Cutty's big finish.
     Whatever.  If THE ASSOCIATE were a *lot* funnier this might be
forgivable, accent on might.  As it is, THE ASSOCIATE is a relatively
juvenile hit-and-miss affair that makes sexism look like it's just wacky
hijinks.  And more demerits for using stupid, not-remotely-realistic
technology as a plot device.
     Thank God the cast is good, with the exception of a miscast Daly
(as a cutthroat Wall Street guy?).  Dianne Wiest is awfully appealing in
a Mrs. Claus sort-of way, and let me say right now that I see Bebe
Neuwirth (you know, Frasier Crane's stodgy ex-wife) in a *completely*
different light.  And Goldberg... is Goldberg.  If you like her, in
general, you'll probably like her here, too.
     Well, this is already more ink than this film deserves.  Three
stars on its merits; docked a half for blatant shamelessness.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
