Title
Review for Driving Miss Daisy (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Good but disappointing story (after its
     reputation) of a cantankerous, aging Southern woman and the
     chauffeur hired for her over her protests.  Good performances
     but the mechanics of the play that should make us care for
     these characters and convince us that two decades are really
     passing are strangely absent.  Rating: low +2.
     Daisy Werthan is at war with the world and the world does not even
notice it.  At 72 she is still desperately holding on to her dignity, but
she is having increasing problems interfacing with the world.  Her response
is to lash out at anyone around and then go back to her lonely, insular
world.  As the film opens she is preparing to drive herself somewhere, only
to end up wrecking her car instead.  Her son decides it is time to hire
someone to do her driving for her, but she wants no part of the plan.  Her
son hires Hoke Colburn for the job, but Daisy refuses to give him anything
to do, at least at first.  DRIVING MISS DAISY covers in all too short a span
of minutes the next two decades of so of the relationship of Daisy and Hoke.
We see both reacting to the prejudice around them against each's group:
racism against Hoke's race, anti-Semitism against Daisy's religion.  Hoke
tries to be sympathetic.  Daisy does not try as hard.  Most of her impulses
are selfish.
     DRIVING MISS DAISY seems to be a sentimental favorite for Oscar
nominations this year, but in some ways it is a disappointment.  The film's
screenplay is by Alfred Uhry, based on his Broadway play and it is perhaps
his writing that gives the film both its best aspects and its greatest
flaws.  In the course of the film it is obvious why Daisy, portrayed by
Jessica Tandy, is so unpleasant.  But the unpleasantness is so rarely
relieved that understanding why she is the way she is is not enough.  It
perhaps is realistic that Daisy is so rarely likable, but it is dramatically
unsatisfying.  Perhaps she is more than one-dimensional, but she is less
than three.  Perhaps the story is really more Hoke's story, but here too the
writing is lacking.  Morgan Freeman does as much with a smaller supporting
role in GLORY as he does with Hoke in this film.  Perhaps at the beginning
he is a little more countrified and later he is a little more dignified, but
he too seems pretty much fixed in time.  Time is shown to pass very
awkwardly in DRIVING MISS DAISY.  There is a change of props, a graying in
the makeup, but we are told of rather than feel the passage of time.  By
comparison, in a film like SAME TIME, NEXT YEAR (also adapted from a
Broadway play), the passage of time is keenly felt, and in that film the
characters do change and are not so fixed in time.
     This is not to say that the film does not have its tender moments, but
every time Daisy shows some consideration for Hoke, they seem dramatically
to be saying it is a major victory, and frankly it just is not satisfying
enough.  Freeman turns in as good a performance as the story allows him.  So
does Tandy.  Aykroyd turns in his best performance ever as Boolie, Daisy's
son, but none of these performances makes for a character one really wants
to know, not even Freeman's.  There just is not enough to turn this from a
good film into a truly memorable one.  My rating is a low +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Brian Koller
"Driving Miss Daisy" is a historical drama that tells 
the story of an elderly jewish woman (Jessica Tandy) 
and her black chauffeur (Morgan Freeman).
The film met tremendous success at the Academy Awards, 
winning Best Picture and Best Actress (Tandy) while the 
two male leads received nominations (Freeman and Dan Akroyd, 
who in a supporting role plays Tandy's practical businessman 
son).
The story begins in the 1940s.  Tandy is about seventy,
and wrecks her new car backing out of the driveway.  Now
uninsurable, Akroyd hires Freeman to be her chauffeur
and companion.  This leads to a power struggle between
Tandy and Freeman, as she refuses to use her hired hand,
and tries to keep her independence.  Freeman shows massive
patience and finally overcomes Tandy's blustering.  Freeman
should have won the Oscar instead, as his character must
ride the line between deference and defiance, and he does
it well.  Tandy plays the testy but vulnerable Miss Daisy 
well, but it is an easier role.
Racism is a background subject throughout the film.  Tandy
stubbornly resists treating Freeman as a friend and equal.
She also makes several catty remarks about Christians.
The audience is supposed to consider these remarks humorous,
but the major difference between her remarks and those of
the bigoted policeman is that she is not in a position of power.
Tandy and Freeman do not noticeable age as the first twenty
years pass.  It is sometimes difficult to tell which decade
a scene is taking place in.  Another minor problem I had:
Tandy asks Freeman to attend a Martin Luther King dinner only
at the last minute.  Freeman's character shows his stubborness
by refusing the invitation.  You'd think he'd swallow his
pride and attend the dinner.  When would he get another chance,
and it would be no humilation to attend.
Still, there are many scenes with depth in "Driving Miss Daisy",
such as Tandy teaching the illiterate Freeman the connection 
between letters and words, and Freeman drawing the line with
Tandy, telling her that he will park the car to "make water",
despite her objections.  The script is very good.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Randy Parker
        DRIVING MISS DAISY takes its sweet time to tell a small, intimate
story.  It's a quiet film, a slow film, a deliberate film.  But if you're
patient with it, the movie offers innumerable rewards, such as a pair of
self-assured performances by Morgan Freeman and Jessica Tandy.
        DRIVING MISS DAISY is based on Alfred Uhry's Pulitzer-prize winning
play of the same name, which first opened in New York four years ago.  The
play has garnered international acclaim with productions in Chicago, Los
Angeles, London, Vienna, Norway, and the Soviet Union.  Uhry himself wrote
the screenplay for the film adaptation of DRIVING MISS DAISY; he also
penned the wonderful sleeper, MYSTIC PIZZA.
        The film, like the play, is set in Atlanta, Georgia, and it
revolves around two people in their twilight years: a cranky, 70-something
Jewish widow who feels guilty about her wealth and a 60-something black man
who becomes her chauffeur.  The movie relies on character, rather than
plot, to propel the action.  In fact, the movie has no discernible plot in
the traditional sense; it doesn't present a linear story in which all the
scenes flow together.  Rather, DRIVING MISS DAISY is made up of the routine
activities of everyday life: shopping, listening to the radio, visiting the
cemetery, eating fried chicken, and so on.  The film also incorporates into
the story line actual events in Atlanta's history, including the 1958
bombing of The Temple (the city's oldest Jewish congregation) and a 1965
ceremony honoring the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
        The story begins in 1948 with Daisy (Tandy) crashing and wrecking
her Packard as she pulls out of her driveway.  The insurance company
cancels her insurance, and her son, Boolie, decides to hire her a
chauffeur.  Freeman, reprising his role from the play, plays the chauffeur,
Hoke.  The film chronicles the warm friendship that slowly but surely
blossoms between the chauffeur and his reluctant passenger.  DRIVING MISS
DAISY is a movie about human nature, aging, prejudice, and a great many
other things, but more than anything it's about a relationship: one that
spans 25 years, 4 cars, the advent of civil rights, and one gravely
important 33 cent can of salmon.
        Daisy is strong-willed and set in her ways, and, from the outset,
she is utterly opposed to the idea of having a chauffeur.  Initially, she
treats Hoke with contempt, refusing to let him drive her anywhere.  Once
she does get in the car, Daisy is the ultimate back-seat driver.  To make
matters worse, she is extremely self-conscious about what others might
think if they were to see her being escorted around town by a hired hand.
Eventually, however, Daisy is worn down by Hoke's good-natured charm and
infectious cheer; she softens and opens up to him.
        Tandy plays the part of Daisy exceedingly well, but unfortunately
this feisty, cantankerous character is just a smidgen too commonplace.
We've seen this woman countless times before in other incarnations, from ON
GOLDEN POND to COCOON.  Nevertheless, Tandy manages to put enough of a
personal stamp on the familiar character to make it her own.
        Freeman, as Hoke, on the other hand, gives the more distinctive of
the two performances.  There is something profoundly moving about the way
Hoke maintains his pride and dignity in a society which forbids him from
using public rest rooms because of his skin color.  Hoke is uneducated and
illiterate, but Freeman always suggests that there is something more to
this man, an inner strength beneath the simpleton exterior.
        Both Freeman and Tandy seem to be in their element, in full command
of their natural charisma.  They flirt with the camera and dominate scenes
without overtly calling attention to themselves.  They bring a light touch
to their humorous banter and to the movie's gentle humor.  At the same
time, Tandy and Freeman provide more than a few moments of truly poignant
drama.
        In his first dramatic role, Dan Aykroyd is surprisingly chubby and
unexpectedly effective as Boolie, Tandy's loving and patient son.  Drama
seems to agree with Aykroyd; taking a break from comedy seems like a good
move for the actor, especially when you consider the wretched comedies he
has made recently (GHOSTBUSTERS II, THE GREAT OUTDOORS, MY STEPMOTHER IS AN
ALIEN).  The only other significant characters in the film are Daisy's
housekeeper, Idella, marvelously played by Esther Rolle ("Good Times"), and
Boolie's pretentious wife, played by Patti LuPone.
        Under the direction of Bruce Beresford (CRIMES OF THE HEART, TENDER
MERCIES), DRIVING MISS DAISY seems a bit stagey now and again.  But
fortunately, Beresford never forgets he's shooting a movie, and
accordingly, he offers plenty of striking cinematic touches, such as
gorgeous shots of flowers, trees, and tomatoes.
        In adapting DRIVING MISS DAISY from the stage to the screen, the
filmmakers have achieved a delicate subtlety.  Uhry understands that what
his characters do not say can be just as important as what they do say.
Beresford wisely exercises restraint in the film's dramatic moments.  The
movie tugs at your heart, but it never goes for the jugular.  The only sap
in DRIVING MISS DAISY is in the trees.

Author
Rogers Cadenhead
     I just saw DRIVING MISS DAISY this week, and I enjoyed the film because it
was made by people who know how to keep quiet.  The American cinema today is
filled with brash, boisterous films where shootouts are common and
confrontations are as dramatic and polarized as the hero-villain relationship
in LETHAL WEAPON II: The black cop faced South African stooges and the stooges
also just happened to be the guys who killed the white cop's beloved wife.  Can
there be a more cut-and-dried (black-and-white) case of justifiable provocation
than that?  Blow 'em up real good, Murtaugh!  Riggs!  Hooray!
     In DAISY, the biggest confrontations of the whole film involve a can of
salmon and an insidiously phrased sentence by a cop.  The salmon was supposed
to be Daisy's evidence that Hoke, her black chauffeur, was a thief.  The
sentence, "What kind of name is Werthan?"  showed the true face of racism and
anti-Semitism.  It isn't -- at least not for the vast majority -- bovine men in
hoods with burning torches and rope.  It is people in power who use their hate
to oppress people in seemingly negligible ways because they know they can get
away with it.  The cops saw a "nigger and an old Jew woman" and decided they
were suspicious.  And they have a right to check out suspicious people.
     That scene with the two policeman sunk into my gut, and that sinking was a
surprise to me.  Nothing in MISSISSIPPI BURNING was quite as painful, even
though it was a painful film about a painful time.  But DAISY hurt more because
it was more real.
     When filmmakers (and excellent performers) can strip away the excesses of
drama and show bits of unmasked reality like that, it is an achievement.
Jessica Tandy (Daisy) and the film deserved their accolades.  (On a
not-entirely-unrelated note, DO THE RIGHT THING was unjustly snubbed -- Spike
Lee is the most real filmmaker to  come along in years.  He has more to say
about black America as a segment and part of the whole than any legion of
sensitive white liberals in the entertainment business).
