Title
Review for Universal Soldier (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Frank Maloney
     The following are not reviews per se, but rather brief notices "for
the record" of three films I have seen recently, none of which appears
to deserve a more extended discussion by this reviewer:
     COOL WORLD is an animated-live action film directed by Ralph Bakshi
and stars Kim Bassinger, Gabriel Byrne, and Brad Pitt.  If cool means
unemotional or uninvolved, then this film is well named.  To say that
the most interesting performance by the live actors was by Kim Basinger
ought to be give you some idea of one of the film's problems.
Basinger's Holli Would is a monster of ego and libido, but at least she
wants to do something.  Gabriel Byrne, who is quite a creditable actor
normally, has no idea was to do with this part as the ex-con cartoonist
who tunes into the Cool World; he is wooden and silly with his wide-eyed
stares and dropped-jaw expression that tides him over in lieu of acting.
Brad Pitt, who made a mark for himself in THELMA & LOUISE, makes a mess
of his role as the morality cop.  It is absolutely the worst interface
I've ever seen between a live actor and a cartoon.  A few of the
backgrounds are interesting and the last ten minutes is inventive and
funny, but it is overall a film to be avoided by all but the most
die-hard followers of animation.  For the rest of us, it is mostly ugly,
repetitive, juvenile, and overblown, and if you say it's a satire of
Hollywood I say "So what?" because it doesn't work.
     UNIVERSAL SOLDIER is a film directed by Roland Emmerich, from a
script by Richard Rothstein, Christopher Leitch, and Dean Devlin.  It
stars Jean-Claude Van Damme, Dolph Lundgren, Ally Walker, with Jerry
Orbach; it is rated R, for violence, nudity, and language.  This is an
unconvincing and unbelievable kick-ass science fantasy that is relieved
by Van Damme's rather cute imitation Schwarzenegger, by J-C's nude
scene, and most importantly by Ally Walker as the cocky TV reporter who
gets swept up by the deadly and extended contest between J-C and
Lundgren, the maniac who can't be killed; Walker is far and away the
most interesting aspect of this uninteresting movies.  The major premise
of the film is obviously bogus that the rest of the film becomes
immediately pointless, unless extreme violence is its own reward.
Walker is funny, J-C is sort of funny, Lundgren is impossible.  If you
say that Emmerich the German director achieves an near parody of the
James Cameron rollercoaster style, I say "So what?"; parody needs a
point of view.  I turned my face a few times, but otherwise I just was
marking time and getting away for a couple of hours from an especially
hot Sunday in Seattle.  Not recommended at any price, except to the most
rabid fans of Van Damme.
     HONEY, I BLEW UP THE KID, directed by Randal Kleiser, from a story
by Garry Goodrow, stars Rick Moranis, Marcia Strassman, and Robert
Oliveri and is rated PG.  This sequel to the sweet and inventive HONEY,
I SHRUNK THE KIDS still has Rick Moranis, who is always fun to watch,
but otherwise is a pointless and exploitative effort to cash in on the
success of the original.  Tell me it's a parody of the 50s obsession
with giant mutants, especially THE AMAZING COLOSSAL MAN, and I'll say
"So what?"; it has nothing to say about these films or the period they
grew out of.  This film adds nothing to the f/x vocabulary and in fact
the special effects are pretty clumsy and obvious.  Part of the problem
is that tiny is fascinating but gigantic is merely dangerous.  The best
moments are when Moranis, the gifted ex-tempore comic actor, has to
ad-lib around the undirectable twins that play Adam, the ultimate in the
terrible twos, especially the scene when Moranis proposes a lullaby and
the kid wants another tune; it is obvious (and has been confirmed in a
feature story) that the scene was improvised because the kid didn't want
to hear the song the script called for, and as such it is tender,
charming, direct, and natural.  Something most of this terrible sequel
is not.
     The film is being shown with a charming Disney short about a
discarded rockinghorse that tries to lure its child away from his video
game.  Part computer animation, it is brief but completely winning.
Almost repays the cost of the matinee ticket.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
   - Victor Halpern created the zombie film with the 1932 WHITE ZOMBIE.  He
     pretty much lucked out.  The film is poverty-row all the way.  It has
     cheap sets, low production values, and bad acting.  But some of its
     images are undeniably very effective and it manages the feel of a
     nightmare.  Like CARNIVAL OF SOULS, the film just clicks somehow.  But
     was it luck or skill?  Four years later he made his second zombie film
     and it sank like a stone.  The idea just did not have appeal.  REVOLT
     OF THE ZOMBIES was about bringing dead soldiers back to life as zombies
     so they could be the ultimate fighting soldiers.  So UNIVERSAL SOLDIER
     is the second film that idea has sunk.  Well, admittedly, it is other
     problems that sink UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, but it is interesting that this
     idea was used before.
   - Van Damme is Belgian.  He has a Flemish accent, sort of guttural and
     Germanic.  Maybe I am not that good with accents.  But I can tell you
     his accent is neither Cajun nor Creole.  His parents in the film
     certainly don't have accents like his.  So what gives?  How did he end
     up with this accent?  Maybe we'll be hearing that Arnold Schwarzenegger
     has been cast as Sergeant Rock!
   - I guess Van Damme is now officially Carolco Action Figure(tm).  Carolco
     seems to cut these guys out with cookie cutters.  They seem to be
     martial artists with foreign accents, and the way some people
     habitually smoke after sex, they pun after killing people.  I think
     they got the idea from James Bond films.
   - Nice photography of Hoover/Boulder Dam.  Also it is impressive to see
     someone running down the side.  To me that is more impressive than all
     the acrobatic kicking which mercifully is saved until the final reel.
   - Why does the opening sequence remind me of PLATOON?
   - I guess when you die you forget how to eat, you forget many of your
     polysyllabic words, and you pick up a funny accent.  You learn not to
     worry about your friends getting shot as long as they don't smoke and
     they remember to buckle up.  The after-life must be a lot weirder than
     anyone imagined.

Author
The Phantom
     If you watch any television at all, you have by now likely seen
over a dozen commercials for this summer's latest action/exploitation
film, UNIVERSAL SOLDIER.  The commercials look good -- great stunts --
and they sound good -- with T2's soundtrack in the background, no less
-- and they even manage to show us brief glimpses of Dolph Lundgren
doing something other than standing in one place looking like he's
waiting for someone to change his batteries.  But yet something doesn't
seem quite right, does it?  Something -- talent?  inspiration?
originality?  -- seems to be missing, and even the studio's advertising
department seems to know it, given the strange come-on we get in at
least some of the commercials: that UNIVERSAL SOLDIER is from the same
studios that brought us TOTAL RECALL and T2.
     Telling the Phantom that a film is "from the studios that brought
you TOTAL RECALL and TERMINATOR 2" is like telling a gourmet that a
restaurant is "on the same block as The Four Seasons"; it's an
interesting fact, but good neighbors do not a good dining experience
make -- it's what's in the kitchen that counts.
     The latest from Tri-Star and Carolco is intended to be a quickie
ripoff of other, better films, one of which -- TERMINATOR 2 -- was in
fact distributed and backed by this studio and production company last
year.  In this, UNIVERSAL SOLDIER succeeds: it is, indeed, from the
people who once brought us a much better film, and it is, indeed, a
quickie ripoff of at least part of that film.  Ads usually don't lie,
try as they might, though sometimes they do assume that no phan of Dolph
Lundgren or Jean-Claude Van Damme could possibly be smart enough to see
through this transparent and slightly pathetic ruse.  (The Phantom is no
particular phan of either, though he did enjoy BLOODSPORT some years
ago.  And of course, he is by now well versed in decoding the deceptive
advertising surrounding most Hollywood product; he would also like to
note that the Phantom's law of print advertising has once again proven
correct: the print ads for UNIVERSAL SOLDIER do indeed look as hastily
prepared and as ill-conceived as the film itself.)
     Changing metaphors for a moment, if action films were parts of a
city, then T2 would be the Empire State Building; UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, on
the other hand, is more on the scale of the little newsstand located
across the street.  So why the slide from the observation deck of
big-budget American action film perfection to the sub-basement of the
teeming, direct-to-video hordes?  The most likely reason is that Carolco
isn't in off the ledge of near-bankruptcy just yet, and money is still
tight; perhaps it will be talked back in by the studio suicide squad
(still distraught from Orion's recent plunge to the sidewalk of
insolvency some weeks ago), but it's likely to be out on that ledge for
some time, listening to the cries of "Jump!", "Jump!"  and watching
battalions of lawyers scurrying this way and that (looking very much
like ants) thirty floors below.  While we wait to see if Carolco leaves
an over-leveraged dent in the sidewalk and joins Cannon, DEG and Vestron
in that great independent studio in the sky, we can be sure that there
will be no more $100 million Schwarzenegger epics for quite some time --
at least not "from the studios that brought you TOTAL RECALL and
TERMINATOR 2."
     Instead we get UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, complete with the top two
Schwarzenegger wannabes, each with a less intelligible accent and each
with less acting ability, but neither with enough box office clout to
command a Scharwzenegger-sized percentage of the gross.  Add to the mix
a sure-fire plot (or rather, pieces of two different sure-fire plots); a
director whose film is going direct-to-theater for the first time in his
rather short career; pump up the audience's expectations with some
clever advertising and bits and pieces of T2's score lifted from the
cutting room floor; and you've got product that can't possibly miss --
provided you spend nearly as much on advertising as you do on the rest
of the production.  It's going to be 4 weeks and out for UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER, so timing is all.  Get it in the theaters as BATMAN is cresting
and as LETHAL 3 is waning, but before the major studios have time to
gear up for their August releases, and you're assured of at least making
back your production costs before the film hits video and foreign
distribution in six months; the rest is gravy.
     (THE LAST BOY SCOUT used this same strategy last summer, to similar
effect.  We B-movie phans will take our death and destruction whenever
and wherever we can get it, even if it means that we have to watch Bruce
Willis remind us once again of how difficult it is to make a good action
film.)
     Of course, there's nothing wrong with a film being a quickie ripoff
-- after all, some of the best action and horror films of all time have
been nothing more than low-budget first-attempts by talented but unknown
directors.  John Carpenter, George Miller, Joel and Ethan Coen, and John
McNaughton may be well-known and -respected these days, but it wasn't so
long ago that they were all struggling young filmmakers with a passion
for the offbeat.  Their drop-dead first films show how much can be
accomplished without Hollywood backing, distribution, or financing.
     There is, however, something wrong with UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, and it
has nothing to do with financing, though it does have something to do
with Hollywood: UNIVERSAL SOLDIER is terminally dumb.  And when it's not
dumb, it's outright silly, which is even worse.  B-movie phans know that
things can be nonsensical in a horror or action film; things can be
obscure; things can even be dumbfounding.  What they can't be is any
dumber or sillier than they have to be -- or if they are, then the films
have to be so skillfully made that the audience never notices.
     Well, in UNIVERSAL SOLDIER we notice; and that's the problem in a
nutshell (if one can call 1000 words -- and counting -- a nutshell):
we're never able to sufficiently suspend our disbelief and really get
into the film.  As a result, all we can do is notice Van Damme's
incredibly bad acting (or incredibly good acting, assuming that his
intention was to impersonate a bridge support), the non-existent rapport
between him and Lundgren, and the general air of insufficient funds that
surrounds the production.  They do send a semi off a cliff, and they do
blow up a gas station, but other than that there's little to
differentiate UNIVERSAL SOLDIER from any of a number of bad
direct-to-video action flicks.
     And that's a real shame, since the premise seemed so full of
possibilities.  The basic idea behind UNIVERSAL SOLDIER is that the
government has saved the bodies of dead soldiers from the Vietnam war
era and developed a serum which both keeps the bodies in peak condition
and turns the soldiers' minds into complete blanks.  (Given the need to
cast such a film, the choice of Van Damme and Lundgren should be
obvious.)  After being injected with the magic serum, the soldiers can
perform super-human acts, such as swimming at high speed up to a dam
without getting their clothes wet; pushing a car at 30 miles per hour
down a desert road without getting covered with dust; jumping through
supporting walls in a motel without causing the entire structure to
collapse; and repeatedly getting in and out of a ridiculous-looking semi
that looks to have been left over from a TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES
episode.  (Though Van Damme and Lundgren are as interchangeable as any
two of the turtles -- we don't even get different color bandannas to
tell them apart -- Shredder was nowhere in sight.  Thoughts of hitting
rock bottom and being in the sewer did cross the Phantom's mind more
than once, however.)
     The problem is that the serum doesn't work well enough, and
occasional thoughts and brief moments of real acting ability appear in
both Lundgren and Van Damme as each relives his final minutes of mortal
combat in a very domestic-looking Vietnamese village.  (Lundgren is the
crazy, evil, bad sergeant who has definite Mai Lai tendencies; Van Damme
is the innocent farm boy who tries to save one of the villagers.)  These
brief moments are stolen shamelessly from the much better film ROBOCOP,
though instead of humanizing the Universal Soldiers they exist only to
provide a pretext for Lundgren to go completely berserk and start
hunting down Van Damme at all costs.  At this point, the filmmakers
jettison most of the science fiction aspect of the film and reduce it to
a typical -- and tedious -- "superhuman good guy vs. superhuman bad
guy" flick.  There is never any sense of the place of this technology in
future society, as there was in ROBOCOP or TOTAL RECALL; instead, it's
used as a gimmick and as a prop, and it is in general dispensed with at
the earliest possible opportunity.
     Before this happens, however, another problem surfaces -- one that
should probably have been considered more carefully before it was tossed
into UNIVERSAL SOLDIER'S script.  It seems that too much activity causes
the soldiers to overheat, and in the case of Van Damme, to suffer from
Michael Douglas Syndrome: the uncontrollable urge to show the audience
your naked rear end.  Fortunately, a quick restorative nap in the
freezer section of the Evil Scientist's Semi of Doom or, alternatively,
burying yourself under bags of ice from free and convenient gas station
and motel ice dispensers helps to cool things off.  Thus, the Universal
Soldiers can never be separated from either the Evil Semi of Doom or a
roadside motel for too long, and thus do the filmmakers inflict the
first of many incidents of extreme dumbness on their hapless audience.
The sight of this big, black Mayflower-looking van of Doom -- the Van
Damme Van -- lumbering along the empty highways in hot pursuit of
Jean-Claude and his reporter girlfriend -- did the Phantom mention the
Turtles a while back?  -- was enough to start the Phantom choking with
laughter.  (Phans of the classic disaster spoof THE BIG BUS will know
exactly why the Phantom was giggling in his popcorn; fortunately for the
filmmakers, most of the film's target audience will be about a decade
too young to remember that paragon of silliness.)
     UNIVERSAL SOLDIER might have been a good cat and mouse film (like
THE HITCHER) had it stayed away from the Evil Scientist shenanigans and
left the Van of Doom in the garage; it could have been a decent ROBOCOP
or MANIAC COP ripoff had it lost Van Damme altogether and concentrated
on the havoc a run-amok Universal Dolph might cause; but alas, UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER incorporates both too little and too much of these ideas into a
badly blended stew of action and science fiction.  ALIEN 3 stumbled
earlier this year in much the same way, and it now stands as one of the
most ill-conceived action/horror sequels of all time.  UNIVERSAL SOLDIER
is not, at least, a sequel to anything, and given the lukewarm audience
reaction as the closing credits rolled, the chances that UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER 2 will be made are -- fortunately -- vanishingly slim.
     Some months ago the Phantom panned BASIC INSTINCT as an overwrought
and extremely silly naked lesbian ice-pick killer flick; however, at
least BASIC INSTINCT was competently made.  Verhoeven may have a
singularly repellent vision, but at least he *has* a vision, and one
that shows clearly in his films.  UNIVERSAL SOLDIER has the look of a
film that sprang not from someone's imagination but rather from a
corporate board room, with more attention given to an accountant's
ledger than to the film's near-illiterate script.  That's the real
problem with UNIVERSAL SOLDIER: more than the general air of
penny-pinching that surrounds the film; more than the complete inability
of either Lundgren or Van Damme to act -- even in the most rudimentary
sense as mindless, brainwashed automatons; more than the loopy Evil Van
of Doom; the film suffers from a real lack of vision -- a distressing
lack of the kind of energy needed to keep any action film moving and to
keep B-movie audiences interested.
     UNIVERSAL SOLDIER makes one forget why one thought that LETHAL 3
had any problems at all; in fact, the Phantom plans to see Mel and
friends one more time this summer, if only to see how it should be done.
Even though it's far from perfect, LETHAL 3 is simply in a different
class than UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, and between it, BATMAN and Clint
Eastwood's very good-looking western coming next month, only die-hard
Van Damme phans will want to go out of their way to see UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER, a film that -- sadly -- doesn't even deserve to be in the same
sentence as the words "die hard".

Author
Dale Shin
     I saw the previews and I was psyched to see it, so I did.  Like all
the movies I've seen this summer, I expected too much and got
disappointed from the real thing.  
     Jean Claude and Dolph are soldiers in Vietnam.  They kill each
other because of Van Damme's "Casualties of War" morality and Dolph's
"Apocalypse Now" freakiness.  Resurrected as Universal Soldiers, they
are badder than Navy Seals, the Green Berets rolled into one.  Certain
similar situations they face on their missions arouse some strange sense
of familiarity in Van Damme.  Ultimately he breaks out and all of a
sudden becomes a weird mix of human-robot, robot-human.  A nosy
reporter's life is threatened so Van Damme takes off with her to protect
her and slowly Dolph starts to revert back to his heart of darkness,
which means he must chase down Van Damme and kill him.  
     There are some funny moments in the film and some okay acting.  The
fight scenes are okay as all fight scenes always look staged.  The
technical side of the story as in details of their robotness etc., is
okay although not substantial enough to seem truly credible.  Much of
Van Damme and Dolph's behaviors have holes in it.  At one point they
seem to be totally human again, but the next minute they are restrained
by their robotness.  And they are rather quick to all of a sudden to get
their memory back.  
     This is an okay movie.  The composition, effects, etc.  and its
weaknesses don't make it worth it to see on a big screen for six
dollars, so wait for video.
