Title
Review for Unbreakable (2000)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Dennis Schwartz

UNBREAKABLE (director/writer: M. Night Shyamalan; cinematographer:
Eduardo Serra; editor: Dylan Tichenor; cast: Bruce Willis (David Dunn),
Samuel L. Jackson (Elijah Price), Robin Wright Penn (Audrey Dunn),
Spencer Treat Clark (Jeremy Dunn), Charlayne Woodard (Elijah's mother),
Eamonn Walker (Dr. Mathison), Leslie Stefanson (Kelly), Johnny Hiram
Jamison (teenage Elijah); Runtime: 107; Touchstone Pictures; 2000)
M. Night Shyamalan (The Sixth Sense), the young and successful
director-writer of "Unbreakable," once again continues his ongoing love
affair he is having with his home city of Philadelphia by again setting
the film there. He also brings his love for comic book super-heroes into
the plot, as this commercial film explores the world of opposites, of a
super-hero vs. an arch-villain, delving into those who see the world
upside down, and of an ordinary man discovering who he is and finding
what purpose he has in life. The payoff in the film comes in a slick
surprise ending, as now has become the custom of the director and is
what the audience expects.
Night has honed his skills from his previous films by showing an
improvement in technique and filmmaking style, while continuing his
penchant for making films with box-office pop. Though there is a certain
disdainful emptiness in this film, as there was in his others, but this
film sustains itself with the keen performances by the understated one
Bruce Willis gives and the punctiliously perverse one Samuel L. Jackson
gives, as the film is able to amble along at its leisurely pace,
building on character development and the unique relationship the two
stars develop, until the mystery story takes hold in the last twenty
minutes and puts the exclamation point on the far-fetched tale it was
weaving.
This subdued action film is unlike other action-hero films, as the
action is not the thing here. What counts the most, is what secret the
film is covering up and why. It is especially delightful for those who
like puzzlers and think they can gather enough clues to take a stab at
guessing the outcome. Even though Night has matured as a director, this
surprise ending is not as engaging as the one he came up with in the
blockbuster The Sixth Sense, which caught audiences completely
off-guard. But this film is a more mature work and has fuller
characterizations. So the former has arguably a better ending, but this
one is a better realized overall film.
The basic plot is simple. David Dunn (Willis) is a security guard for
the university stadium and is returning to Philly from New York, where
he applied for another job. He seems nervous on the train, taking off
his wedding band before a pretty woman (Stefanson) sits next to him. He
strikes up a polite but flirtatious conversation with her, but he seems
to make her edgy and she changes seats to get away from him. As his face
changes expressions, we can sense something tragic is about to happen.
That event is the train crash, and when he wakes up in the hospital, he
learns that all of the passengers and crew aboard were killed and that
he was miraculously the only survivor, and amazingly comes out of the
crash without a scratch.
David is mysteriously contacted by Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson), an
art dealer in comic books, who is an advent follower of the super-hero
stories ever since his mother introduced him to comics so that she can
lure him outside to play with the other kids. Because he was born with a
genetic defect, he is crippled and suffers from having extremely fragile
bones, and was teased by kids for always falling and getting hurt. They
hurtfully called him "Mr. Glass," a name that still conceals the anger
he has inside him for being born physically defective.
Elijah believes that David may be the 'unbreakable' person he is looking
for, someone to give hope for this mediocre age we live in, as he
believes the super-hero myth is as true as if it was history -- which is
asking a lot for an adult audience to swallow, but...that's Hollywood!
He fantastically believes that David, who thinks of himself only as an
ordinary man, might be unbreakable and possessed with the ability to see
things others can't, that he was born with the ability and need to
protect others. And if he has a weakness, it might be water, as even
Superman had a weakness from kryptonite. His reasoning supposes -- "If
there is someone like me in the world, shouldn't there be someone at the
other end of the spectrum?" The only question he asks of David to prove
his point, is if he ever remembers getting sick. David thinks Elijah is
daffy, but soon strange things begin to happen that make him slowly
realize there might be something true about what Elijah is saying.
David's life is contrasted with Elijah's.
David fell in love with his future wife Audrey (Wright) and even gave up
his love for football because she hates any form of violence and decided
he rather be with her than play football. He did this after he was in a
car accident with her and really didn't get hurt, even repressing his
memory to believe he did get hurt, using that hurt as his excuse for
giving up the sport so she wouldn't feel guilty. He now lives with her
and their young, impressionable son (Clark), though his relationship
with her has become strained because there is a certain lack of
fulfillment about his life that he feels everyday when he awakens and
there is an insecurity that has taken place in the love between them.
David is someone who seems to be carrying around with him a sad burden,
which is manifest in an empathy he has with others that is very intense.
He is so bottled-up, that he is not able to adequately communicate with
either his wife or his son.
Elijah is his opposite. He is a crippled black man who grew up in the
slums with a nurturing mother and through comic books found a way to
success by using his knowledge and arrogant personality to become an
established comic book art gallery owner. His personality is as
flamboyant as the costumes he dons, attire which makes him look like he
could be one of Liberace's dandy acquaintances at a Halloween party.
Elijah sees his role as the mentor who will awaken David to the
potential he has and therefore make the comic book world he lives in
seem more tangible and reaffirm that his sickly birth wasn't a mistake.
The major stumbling block, to this otherwise involving film, is the let
down in the third act. The action in it seemed obligatory and not really
germane to the story, as an anonymous psycho serial killer is introduced
to prove that David has the super-powers of the comic book hero. This
encounter, of him stopping the violent psychopath killer never worked
right, as it seemed flat and arbitrary, spoiling but not ruining the
overall achievement of the film.
What this unconventional mainstream film did right for itself, was to
provide a modern type of super-hero for an audience that thrives on
escapist films that can fill them with some hope that there's a savior
out there in the fight between good and evil (something Hollywood films
could always be counted on to provide the public with). It is a film
that is confident enough of its ability to tell its story that it
doesn't have to rely on special effects. And, perhaps, as an homage to
Hitchcock or maybe it's a case of egomania, Night once again appears in
his own film. I don't think I'm giving anything away when I let you know
he was in a throwaway part, as the one Bruce Willis hassled at the
stadium because he suspected him of being a drug dealer.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
M. Night Shyamalan's "Unbreakable" is an ambitious effort - to deconstruct the myth that people may have special superhuman powers - but it fails to rise beyond that very notion. And yet, as evidenced by Shaymalan's previous effort, "The Sixth Sense," he has an uncanny ability to draw the audience in with precious directorial tools - atmosphere and subtle, introspective performances. 
Bruce Willis, who also starred in "Sixth Sense," is a security guard named David Dunn who has just survived a catastrophic train crash. It is so catastrophic that everyone on board the train dies except for David. He does not have a single wound! How can this be? His wife (Robin Wright-Penn) does not recall a single day in their 12 year marriage where he ever got sick, much less suffered an injury. His idolizing son (Spencer Treat Clark) is worried about his father, arguing that he may have special powers to the point where he wants to show off his father's athletic ability to other kids. I mean, who on earth could survive such a train crash with nary a scratch? 
Enter the cryptic Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson), a comic-book gallery owner who has a medical condition where the bones in his body are practically brittle - he was born with broken arms and legs and walks around with a purple cape and a glass cane! He looks like a comic book action hero! Price is interested in David's case, and assumes that David must have superhuman powers. After all, David is able to...oh, I would not dream of revealing much more than that. 
"Unbreakable" is the psychological version of "X-Men," a  supposedly analytical study of one man's amazing ability to survive tragic accidents that should otherwise leave him for dead. The problem is that Willis hardly engages us. He seems to walk around as if in a trance, virtually catatonic to the point of being a zombie. Wouldn't Willis's character, David, at least wonder why he survived the crash? And why his life seems indifferent considering there is the potential of a divorce from his wife? How about the scene where his son threatens to kill him with a gun? Wouldn't David feel any emotion about his curious condition and how it may be affecting others? The problem is that his wife seems to be in a bit of a daze herself over their marriage.
The nature of David's condition brings up all kinds of philosophical questions. I thought writer-director Shyamalan might invite us to ponder the answers but he refuses to. Once David discovers his gifts and abilities, the film shifts into a thriller-of-sorts where the madness of the world and its inhabitants shakes, rattles and rolls David. Unlike the underrated "Fearless" that dealt with how one comes to grip with surviving a tragedy, "Unbreakable" merely turns into a cartoonish version of itself, expunging all drama and tension for the sake of some minor thrills. The surprise ending is not so much a surprise as it is a hindrance, and we are thus left with more questions than answers. That is not necessarily a hindrance in itself (I do love unsolved puzzles) but here it is the result of an underwritten screenplay.
I will say that M. Night Shyamalan has a gift of his own - he knows how to appropriate the right kind of atmosphere and mood. There are superbly visceral moments of fear and dread, such as the scene where David walks among the families of the dead passengers who are perplexed at his survival, the train station scenes where David observes every person walking near him, and a precious moment between David and his son where words are silently exchanged. 
There is a lot to admire in the choice of actors. Leaving out Willis's zombie state, I loved the electric presence of Samuel L. Jackson - a truly unbreakable actor who is irresistible to watch. Robin Wright-Penn does not have much to do in a relatively thankless role but there is some compassion and humanity in her character. Spencer Treat Clark is no Haley Joel Osment but he does have some affecting scenes of his own. 
"Unbreakable" is often fascinating and haunting but its central lead character walks through the film in such a daze that you wish someone would break him. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by M Night Shyamalan, from his screenplay. Starring Bruce Willis,
Samuel L Jackson, Robin Wright Penn. Running time: 120 minutes. Rated PG
for mature theme by the MFCB. Reviewed on November 29th, 2000.
After the success of "The Blair Witch Project", there was likely no bigger
box office story in 1999 than "The Sixth Sense". Opening quietly in
mid-August, writer/director M Night Shyamalan's film gathered enormous
momentum and went on to become one of the ten highest-grossing films of
all time. It made Shyamalan and co-star Haley Joel Osment household names,
and coined one of the year's most popular catchphrases ("I see dead
people").
A year later, Shyamalan's highly-anticipated follow-up effort has arrived
in theatres. Like "The Sixth Sense", "Unbreakable" stars Bruce Willis in a
movie which contrasts the supernatural with the everyday. But unlike its
predecessor -- which was, fundamentally, a ghost story -- "Unbreakable" is
not easily categorised. Its paranormal elements are more subdued than in
"The Sixth Sense", and Shyamalan maintains an unusually moderate -- even
solemn -- tone throughout.
This may disappoint those expecting just another atmospheric thrill
ride: "Unbreakable"'s deliberate and erudite style makes for a very
different cinematic experience. Even more so than "The Sixth Sense", it
demands careful scrutiny to bring it together in the viewer's mind. Both
films tease with twist endings, but whereas "The Sixth Sense"'s was
cathartic, "Unbreakable"'s is devastating. Indeed, "Unbreakable" is
ultimately not as satisfying nor as entertaining as "The Sixth Sense". But
it is nonetheless very good in its own way, and stands out as one of the
most daringly different major releases this year.
Willis plays David Dunn, a security guard whose relationship with wife
Audrey (Robin Wright Penn) and doting son Joseph (Spencer Treat Clark) is
deeply troubled. David's world is thrown into turmoil one day when the
train he is riding goes off the rails. David is the sole survivor of the
tragedy -- and, more eerily still, he bears no injuries whatsoever. Soon,
he starts receiving strange notes: "How many days of your life have you
been sick?"
The messenger is be Elijah Price (Samuel L Jackson), a comic book gallery
owner who suffers from a rare bone disease. Price's skeletal structure is
extremely brittle -- even at birth,  both his arms and legs were broken.
He believes that, if someone so susceptible to harm as himself can come
into being, there must therefore exist a person who embodies the reverse
-- who is impervious to damage. After years of searching, Elijah has
finally found David, who he believes is this unbreakable man.
If "Unbreakable" could be pigeonholed into a category, it would be the
super-hero genre. In the lingo of graphic novels, "Unbreakable"
constitutes an "origin story", telling how the hero learns about his 
powers and decides to put them to good use. But this is a very perfunctory
description of a film which is, more importantly, a super-hero story
transposed onto the real world. Whereas most movies of the genre (such as
this year's "X-Men") tend toward flashy, colourful, frenetic narratives,
"Unbreakable" dares to ask what would happen if a "super-hero" actually
did come into being. The basic axioms of the origin story are all here,
but Shyamalan has subverted them delightfully. While the "realistic
super-hero story" is not a new concept on the printed page, it is rare to
see it examined in such depth on the silver screen.
Shyamalan handles his material well, but not perfectly. Although the
almost sepulchral mood of "Unbreakable" is clearly intentional, Shyamalan
is not always successful in maintaining viewer interest. There are times
when the sombre timbre which pervades the movie goes beyond servicing the
carefully-constructed atmosphere, and causes "Unbreakable" to appear
simply slow and boring. But, more often than not, Shyamalan's scripting
and direction are sufficiently adept that he can establish such an unusual
tone and still keep the story rolling.
Unfortunately, in doing so, he virtually reenacts the entire structure of
"The Sixth Sense". Like that picture, "Unbreakable" opens with a
flashback; features a vital dynamic between Willis and a young boy, who
investigate occult phenomena; and slowly unveils the true nature of the
protagonist's powers. The picture then takes a detour into a heretofore
untapped subplot to establish the character's new status quo, before
shocking us with a surprise ending. Certainly, Shyamalan can be forgiven
to a certain extent because he has at least managed to envelop this common
foundation in a wholly new and different plot. But his adherence to a
recycled formula is disappointing all the same.
As in "The Sixth Sense", Willis shows that he possesses genuine acting
ability, and has done well to escape the action-movie grind in which he
was once trapped. His performance here is perhaps even more remarkable
because his character's personality is much like "Unbreakable"'s overall
tenor: subdued, elusive, revealed in small touches rather than grand
gestures. This makes it difficult for the audience to establish a rapport
with David, but Willis largely bridges that gap.
Jackson is given much more colour as Elijah, and he makes the best of it
with a wonderfully eccentric performance. Price is the sort of character
one can neither fully warm to, nor entirely reject, and Jackson trades
expertly on this uncertainty. Although his role is less substantial than
Osment's in "The Sixth Sense", Clark does a good job in the no less 
pivotal role of Joseph, continuing to demonstrate that Shyamalan has a
good eye for competent young performers. Similarly, Penn does excellent
work in her secondary but vital part. It is through his relationship with
Audrey that David's basic humanity and realism are established; without
it, "Unbreakable" would have a much more difficult time rising above
its four-colour roots.
Note that this should not be taken as an offhand dismissal of comic books;
on the contrary, some of the past century's great works have borne word
balloons and a six-panel layout. The graphic novel has made great strides
in the past twenty-five years in particular: consider everything from
Moore and Gibbons' "Watchmen" to Busiek and Ross' "Marvels". "Unbreakable"
finally finds a way to effectively translate that evolution to the big
screen.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Unbreakable.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
JONATHAN F RICHARDS
Written and Directed by M. Night Shyamalan
Make no mistake about it. As sure as his middle name is Night, M. Night 
Shyamalan has a taste for the dark side. When he grabbed our attention 
last year it was with an absorbing story called The Sixth Sense about a 
little boy who saw dead people, and Bruce Willis turned out to be one of 
them. This time it's Bruce Willis who sees the dead people. He's David 
Dunne, the only survivor of a train that jumps the rails at high speed; 
everyone around him is killed, and he walks away without a scratch.
The train wreck puts him in the news, and he's contacted by an eccentric 
comic book collector named Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson). Elijah is 
the opposite of David - his bones snap like fine china. In school he was 
so brittle the kids called him Mr. Glass, and he got so bitter he 
wouldn't go outside to play till his mother bribed him with comic books.
Comic books changed Elijah's life and gave him purpose. As an adult he 
runs a rare comic gallery, selling first editions and original art, and 
when he hears about David's miraculous survival of the train wreck he 
becomes convinced that David may be an indestructible man with 
extraordinary powers. "These are mediocre times", he tells David; the 
world is primed for an action messiah, a man uniquely equipped to do 
battle for good and foil the forces of evil. In other words, a 
superhero.
David's initially skeptical, and who can blame him, but the more he 
tests Elijah's crazy theory the saner it begins to look. He's never been 
sick a day in his life. Never been hurt, except one time as a boy when 
he nearly drowned. Not only that, but he turns out to have "super" 
powers. He even has his superhero's weakness, his own kryptonite.
He may be unbreakable physically, but he's pretty fragile emotionally, 
and his domestic life is on the verge of falling apart. His wife Audrey 
(Robin Wright Penn) sleeps in the guest room, and his son Joseph 
(Spencer Treat Clark) is pathologically attached to his old man, 
especially when the kid starts buying into Elijah's theory that his 
dad's a superhero.
Shyamalan writes a fascinating premise and an elegant story, but his 
weakness comes out in the telling. His characters ask and tell each 
other things that are justified only as exposition. He's hooked on 
atmosphere, using blue filters so regularly he might as well be shooting 
underwater, and he has Willis moving most of the time in what amounts to 
a virtual catatonic trance. You can understand David's stunned slowness 
in the aftermath of the train wreck, but it goes on, scene after scene, 
until you want to reach up through the screen and slap him out of it. As 
the movie pours on the water imagery, David himself seems to be moving 
underwater, and while it may feel dramatic as hell from his side of the 
screen, it soon becomes irritating from ours.
It's a shame, because so many fine elements are there. The story is 
original, a lot of the imagery is powerful, clues are scattered with the 
same intriguing cleverness that made The Sixth Sense such a satisfying 
puzzler. There are scenes of marvelous subtlety, such as one in which 
Elijah explains to a prospective buyer in his gallery the iconic 
complexities of a beautiful piece of original superhero comic art. There 
are some terrific performances, particularly Jackson, with his bent body 
and large head cocked at a painful angle, eyes set deep in shadowy 
darkness that reflects the anger and anguish of a tortured soul. Also 
impressive is Robin Wright Penn as the wife in a marriage that has gone 
south for no clear reason other than her husband's comatose personality, 
who seizes on the miracle of his miraculous survival as a chance to fan 
the fading embers back to life. Willis has the physicality for a comic 
book hero, with his square jaw and bulging muscles, but the studied 
lifelessness of his performance robs the character of the dynamism it 
needs. As he moves away from his action movie phase, he's becoming 
almost unbearable sensitive, relating wistfully to little boys and 
simplifying his range of expression down to one. His appealing cocky 
swagger has died hard, with a vengeance
Unbreakable has a strong core story, but it rambles at the edges. When 
it gets into the climactic sequence, with Willis plunging into his 
destiny hooded like Death or the Unabomber as he rights wrongs and 
defends the weak and distressed, it seriously loses its grip.
Shyamalan, who makes a Hitchcockian appearance as a suspected drug 
dealer, is fond of surprise endings, and he serves up a doozy here. He 
uses a lot of upside-down imagery throughout the film - comic book 
covers shown upside down, television watched upside down, a sign 
dangling - and he means to turn us upside down as well. It's an 
ingenious comic book twist, but the movie cries out for an infusion of a 
little comic book energy as well.

Author
Laura Clifford
David Dunn (Bruce Willis) survives disasters unscathed while Elijah
Price (Samuel L. Jackson) has a disease that causes his bones to break at
the merest provocation.  These two men are opposites in more ways than
that in "The Sixth Sense" writer/director M. Night Shyamalan's "Unbreakable."
A little bit "The Sixth Sense," a dash of "Fearless," and some "Batman"
cooks up to M. Night Shyamalan's "The Sixth Sense" followup, "Unbreakable."
While this outing may not hit the populist nerve of his last, it's
more mythological and complex and should become more well regarded after
repeated viewings.
David Dunn is returning from a job interview in NY when
a pretty girl (Leslie Stefanson, "The General's Daughter") sits next to
him.  He twists off his wedding ring and begins his play, but ends up 
driving her away.  Then he notices the train is going way too fast.  Cut
to a young boy (Spencer Treat Clark, "Gladiator") watching TV from upside
down on a couch - a disastrous train wreck has just occurred outside of
Philadelphia.  
A doctor in ER questions David while in the foreground we see blood 
spread across the midsection of the only other (short-lived) survivor.
131 people have died and David Dunn has not a scratch.  He's at a low
point that's not just expicable by survivor's guilt, however.  His
marriage appears to be over - he was planning to move to New York alone
if he got that security job.  
Things take an odd turn after the memorial service for the victims, 
when he finds a note on his windshield embossed with 'Limited Edition' 
and a message inquiring if he's ever been sick.  He traces the note to 
Elijah Price, a comic book art gallery owner with 
osteogensis imperfecta, a condition that causes his bones to break easily 
(we've already seen him born with broken arms and legs in a flashback, as 
well as a child whose mother has to coax him to the playground with gifts 
of collectible comic books).
Elijah suggests that they're polar opposites and that David is the
real life embodiment of the superheroes written about from the time
of the Egyptians through modern comics, a real protector of men.  Elijah
shows up at the local football stadium where David works as a security
guard (a protector).  David begins an entry frisk to cull out a suspected
weapons carrier, who does indeed leave the line.  David 'sees bad people,'
and Elijah's words, even though David rejects them, are intensifying his
talent.  His son Joseph so wants to believe them that he pushes dad's
workout until he's lifting 350 lbs.  Audrey and David write off Elijah
as a lunatic, yet begin to heal their marriage.  But Elijah continues to
push.
Shyamalan has loaded his screenplay with myths (good vs. evil),
symbols (watch those color schemes (Mardi Gras colors - purple represents
justice, green faith, and gold power), his usual spirtuality and character 
perspectives (upside down and reflected).  There's also another
twist ending, that, like his  last film, make you want to go back and watch 
it again to fill in the blanks.  He has weightier implications here, 
particularly regarding Joseph, who is paralled with Elijah in many ways.  He 
even includes some in jokes ('They say this one has a surprise ending,' 
Elijah's mother tells him, 'They called me Mr. Glass," says the shatterable 
Elijah).
Bruce Willis again delivers a quiet, restrained performance as Dunn.  He's
good, if not as interesting as his "Sixth Sense" character, yet not
surprisingly, is at his best when playing against his young costar, Clark.
Samuel L. Jackson is more intriguing as the positively Dr. Strangelovian
Elijah (the hair, the gloves, the wheelchair!).  His intensity is mystifying
but compelling.  Again Shyamalan gets a solid performance out of a three-name
child actor, although Clark isn't in Osment's league.  Robin Wright Penn
is in reactive whisper mode.  Charlayne Woodard ("The Crucible") is
sympathetic, dynamic and strong as Elijah's mother, aging thirty years
through the course of the film.
The film is well shot and editted, deliverying terrific sound (you'll
cringe when Elijah falls down subway stairs, breaking bones along the
way, or when Shyamalan delivers one of his jolting sound shock moments)
by sound designer Richard King.  Cinematographer Eduardo Serra ("The
Hairdresser's Husband") uses interesting angles and long takes to bring
Shyamalan's vision to fruition.
While "Unbreakable" doesn't quite hit one out of the park the way "The
Sixth Sense" did, it's clearly the work of a young master that gives its
audience something to mull over long after they leave the theater.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When a guy is sad day after day like Bruce Willis's
character in "Unbreakable," you could suggest Prozac--which
would not get to the root of the problem--or you can explore
with him The Big Question: "Who are you?"  By this we don't
mean the "who are you" as in "The 6th Day," which features
an Adam Gibson wondering whether he is really Adam
Gibson or just the man's clone.  We mean this in the sense
of "what are you here for?" or more specifically, "Considering
the genes you inherited and the upbringing you received,
what should you do with you life to make yourself happy?" 
David Dunn (Bruce Willis) hasn't the foggiest idea.  
   In M. Night Shamalyan's "Unbreakable," which the 30-year-
old director began writing even as his "The Sixth Sense" was
being introduced, David is in bad shape.  His marriage is on
the rocks, his lovely and intelligent wife Audrey (Robin Wright
Penn) sleeping in a separate room to the dismay of their
precocious son Joseph (Spencer Treat Clark).  
  What can he do? Now, I suppose we all hope that some
day, some Big Event will occur that will brush away the
cobwebs of our lives, some transcendental experience that
will cause us to begin anew with a fresh awareness of what
our lives are all about.  Sadly, this never happens to most of
us.  But while the underachieving David Dunn--a college grad
who has settled for the job of university-based security
guard--is riding the rails back to his Philadelphia home, the
fast-moving train bolts from the tracks leaving no
survivors--except him.  What's more, he hasn't a single
scratch on his body.  This puzzles some people, who wonder
whether David has been given some remarkable powers like,
oh, Superman or Captain Marvel or Batman, and indeed we
are soon thrust into the milieu of comic books when David
meets Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson).  Price, who sells
expensive comic book covers and has a deep reverence for
the uncorrupted art of illustration, is fascinated by David
because they are so physically different.  Price, victim of
scores of broken bones dating back even to his embyonic
state, believes that the unbreakable David is his polar
opposite and quickly becomes Bhavagan to David's Arjuna.
   "Unbreakable" is unmistakably a Night Shyamalan film,
based in part on the young director's own life.  Coming from
a family that includes twelve doctors, Shyamalan graduated
from college with honors and received scholarships to
medical school.  Despite his environment, Shyamalan knew
who he was, and doctor he wasn't.  Obsessed with making
films, he shucked family pressure, relinquishing the
hypodermic and prescription pad for the director's chair. 
"Unbreakable" is inspired by his own life, which Shyamalan
translates into art, contrasting a guy who knows exactly who
he is with someone who is spiritually lost.  As the comic book
connoisseur is at first shrugged off by the melancholy security
guard, then embraced only to be rebuffed once again by
Dunn, we in the audience are kept suspended, sometimes
even wondering: What's going on?  Where is this story
heading?   While many of us were intrigued by "The Sixth
Sense," which had a tighter story line and a
knock-your-socks-off outcome that eluded us until we
were slammed back in our seats by The Big Payoff,
"Unbreakable" by contrast seems jagged, unedited, rough-
around-the-edges while the characters plod ever so slowly
through their paces.  The movie has the foggy look so
fashionable in the films of Ingmar Bergman such as "The
Seventh Seal," even some domestic scenes that could have
come from the Swedish director's "Scenes from a Marriage"--
the sorts of vistas that could tip a film from art into
pretension, as Woody Allen showed us in his satiric
"Shadows and Fog."  
   Not that there's anything wrong with slow and
misty...Recent offerings such as Terence Davies' "The House
of Mirth" based on an Edith Wharton story and Jane
Campion's "The Portrait of Lady," from the Henry James
novel, lumber on, bleak and dreary.  But what is monotonous
on the surface is redeemed by sparkling dialogue, heaped
with wit and satiric power.  The banal talk in "Unbreakable"
cannot sustain the weight of Shyamalan's movie, making this
one a disappointing follow-up to his superior work of last
year.
   What's more, while we can understand what David saw in
the beautiful Audrey, we may have difficulty comprehending
what a centered, intelligent woman who delivers sparkling
psychological insights to her patients while on the job as a
physical therapist sees in David Dunn.  Willis and Penn
simply don't feel like a couple, not even when they try to
renew their relationship by having a date in a swank
Philadelphia drinking emporium. 
   Samuel L. Jackson turns in a razor-sharp performance,
even when trapped in a wheelchair, large pins sticking out of
his legs.  He does make us wonder throughout just what his
interest is in the disconsolate security guard, since he does
not come off like Will Smith's god-like Bagger Vance in the
Redford movie.  "Unbreakable" could appeal to comic-book
fans, though the picture does not have the qualities of an
animation at all, but fans of Willis and Jackson may well be
disappointed by its foggy, pretentiousness texture.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     With the long-awaited release of M. Night Shyamalan's Unbreakable,
the moviegoing world has one question on its mind: will it be
unexpectedly great like his last film The Sixth Sense, or will it
unexpectedly suck eggs like his first film Wide Awake?
     Sadly, the answer is neither, though an overexcited populace
spoon-fed on a year's worth of hype is likely to lean toward the latter
owing to severe disappointment.  It's hard to blame them.
     This time out we're back to gloomy Philadelphia in a story about
one David Dunne (Bruce Willis), a security guard who wakes up after a
catastrophic train wreck to discover he is the sole survivor of the
crash, with nary a scratch on his body.  The next day David finds a
cryptic note on his windshield, leading him to the Biblically-inspired
Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson), a comic book dealer with a fragile
bone disease that has crippled him.  Elijah tries to convince David that
he is possessed of superhuman strength and is, as the title suggests,
"unbreakable."
     David pooh-poohs the idea, but slowly he begins to accept the
possibility that, yes, he can't be hurt, but he can lose his hair.  Will
Bruce become our first major superhero with male pattern baldness?
     At this point, Unbreakable had me (and likely everyone else)
wondering if I was in the right movie.  From the trailers and the
advance press, wasn't this supposed to be some kind of metaphysical
exploration of the meaning of life and death, about how a man learned
some secret of the universe that's eluded us for all these years,
perhaps, all due to a fluke train crash?  What the hell, we ask, is all
this superhero crap?
     Putting the story aside for a moment, Unbreakable is extremely
competent in the hands of its crew, coming together on a slow burn as
bit by bit of the story is revealed, just like in The Sixth Sense. 
Sure, it's a little overindulgent, as every other scene is photographed
upside-down, reflected in a TV, or some other such trickery, but it
keeps you interested in watching (and the superhero zaniness may incline
you otherwise).
     And just as you're about to get sucked in, there goes Jackson,
being forced as if at knifepoint to utter lines like, "It's like
kryptonite," with total seriousness.  The mind begins to reel.  The
movie begins to suffer.  And even a now-trademark M. Night Big Plot
Twist At The End won't change your mind.  (Overheard from one Disney
publicist during the screening: "It's one of those movies that grows on
you."  We'll see.)
     Ultimately, Unbreakable is an extremely charming and well-produced
film about something that's so silly and unbelievable it makes you
wonder why people went to all the trouble to put it together.  But
ironically, Unbreakable could have worked extremely well as a real
superhero movie.  Say you change the title to The Protector and make it
the story of a regular guy who suddenly finds out he's a superhero, and
get rid of all the overwrought train crashes and such.
     Or better yet, make it a movie called Unbreakable, and it's about a
guy who learns the meaning of life and death... some secret of the
universe that's eluded us for all these years.
Director: M. Night Shyamalan
Producer: Barry Mendel, Sam Mercer, M. Night Shyamalan
Writer: M. Night Shyamalan
Starring: Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright, Spencer Treat
Clark
http://studio.go.com/movies/unbreakable/intro.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
John Sylva
Last year, M. Night Shyamalan's The Sixth Sense took the country by surprise 
when its twist ending shocked audiences across the nation, introduced us to
the exceptional talent of the young Haley Joel Osment, received 6 Academy
Award nominations, and went on to become one of the highest grossing films of
all time.  Since the announcement of Shyamalan's follow up to Sense,
Unbreakable, the country has been asking the questions-"Will Shyamalan
deliver again?  Will he be able to top The Sixth Sense?  Can he create an
ending more shocking than Sense's?"  The answer to all three of these
questions can now be told: The answer is yes-and with flying colors.  A
chilling masterpiece of the unexpected and the supernatural, Unbreakable,
unlike Sense, will divide critics and audiences alike, but its imagination
and ambition is what propels it past the quality level of The Sixth Sense. 
Bruce Willis (who also starred in Sense) is wonderfully subtle as David
Dunne, who, after miraculously being the lone survivor in a train crash,
begins coming to strange realizations after a strange note is left on his
windshield;  He cannot recall a time when he was sick nor injured - somewhat
strange for a grown man, eh?  Dunne searches for the identity behind the
eerie note he received, and is lead to Limited Edition, a comic-book art
gallery, owned by the mysterious Elijah Price (an afro-sporting Samuel L.
Jackson).  Price offers an unrealistic, far-fetched explanation for Dunne
surviving the crash and never being sick: David Dunne is unbreakable, his
bones do not break.  His cells react to bacteria and sickness in a different
way than anyone else.  Price on the other hand, is on the opposite end of the
spectrum.  Ever since birth, Price's bones have broken effortlessly.  Price
relates these two characteristics to that of comic book characters, as Dunne
is just first discovering his "trademark", or his special powers as a
super-hero.
Shyamalan knows audiences are coming into Unbreakable expecting a
conventional tale of the supernatural;  He knows audiences want a twist
ending that will leave them breathless;  He knows audiences want a film that
will send them back into the theater several hours later to re-watch the
film's twists which are reflected in the ending.  And what does he do with
this knowledge?  He, quite frankly, slams it in the viewer's face and laughs
at you for it.  Unbreakable will undoubtedly leave audiences disappointed,
leaving them asking "What was that all about?" and most likely stating what a
"rip-off" it is.  Shyamalan knows this.  Shyamalan has not made Unbreakable
for the mainstream audiences, he has made it for his personal satisfaction, a
tribute to comic books.  He has made a film that proves a film's advertising
campaign does not necessarily reflect the film's true intentions or theme. 
And ultimately, he has made a film that tells the audience to not walk into
his films with any expectations whatsoever, or he will, as seen with
Unbreakable, slam them in your face.  (And then laugh at you for it.)
Certainly not a rehash of The Sixth Sense, Unbreakable succeeds in a way like
no other film this year has for one reason:  It does not care how the
mainstream will react to it.  Shyamalan crafts Unbreakable in a way that the
viewer is truly unclear of what they're watching-is this a supernatural
thriller with a twist ending, or is it a comic-book adventure tale?  The
answer is not revealed until the film's final revelation, which will leave
some with smiles spread wide across their faces, and will leave others
scoffing in disbelief and disgust.  But either way the ball bounces,
Unbreakable is still a daring, unconventional piece of cinematic art.  When
the credits began to roll, I could only think about one thing: The sequel. 
THE BOTTOM LINE: Unbreakable is a uniquely poetic and haunting film that
proves M. Night Shyamalan is truly unbreakable.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     M. Night Shyamalan seems to have one style of cinematography.
He keeps his scenes dark with heavy photographic filters.
Frequently the viewer has to work to make out the image that he is
seeing.  Some of his scenes seem carved out of darkness.  His
writing does much the same.  One needs patience to make out exactly
what he is showing the viewer.  When one finds out what UNBREAKABLE
is really about, it becomes a sly if somewhat dry joke--a view of
the familiar shown in unfamiliar terms making it almost
unrecognizable.
     The story begins following two plot lines.  One involves a baby
born in a Philadelphia hospital with two broken arms and two broken
legs.  It seems that Elijah Price (played as an adult by Samuel
Jackson) was born with a genetic deficiency that makes his bones
very easy to break.  Elijah becomes a dealer in comic book art who
is fixated on the possibility that there might be some people at the
other end of his spectrum who would be almost impossible to harm.
Another plotline involves a man who is the lone survivor of a tragic
railroad accident that killed hundreds of people.  David Dunne
(played by Bruce Willis) is something of a misfit.  His marriage to
Megan Dunne (Robin Wright) is falling apart and he really does not
have much to say to her.  But somebody has something to say to
David.  An anonymous note on his windshield asks him if he has ever
been sick a day in his life.  Come to think of it, has he?  For most
people it would be an easy question to answer, but David cannot
really remember ever being sick.  This makes him anxious to find
this person who seems to know him better than he knows himself.  And
this person seems to think he is unbreakable.
     The great mystery is not whether David can be hurt or not, a
pin could tell that in a few seconds, but where is Shyamalan going
with this buildup and will it be worth it when he gets there?  I
suppose I was delighted that one of two or three possibilities I was
expecting turned out to be the one that was true.  This is a story
that could be told with a lot of fun, but Shyamalan keeps the
proceedings grim and emotions muted to avoid tipping his hand too
soon.  The photography is very much as used in Film Noir and some of
his images are borrowed from comic book art.  One shot is filmed
between the backs of two seats on a train.  To give the feel of
comic book panels the camera moves back and forth to frame one face
and then the other between the seats.  Frequently the camera angles
are strange and disorienting, more than once turning objects
entirely upside-down.  The people we see are cold with their
emotions kept tightly bottled.  The plot unfolds very slowly and
deliberately.  There is one chase in the film and there we are less
concerned at the outcome than we are with whether the character will
hurt himself.
     As he did with THE SIXTH SENSE Bruce Willis gives a careful,
measured performance.  His marriage with the Robin Wright character
seems to have died of the cold because each bottles up any emotions.
It is difficult for the viewer to empathize with either.  Almost all
the emotion in the film is shown by Samuel Jackson and then it is
over abstractions.  He is, for example, angered when a valuable
patron turns out to be buying comic art not for himself but for his
four-year-old son.
     The surprises in this film are more complex than in THE SIXTH
SENSE, but they will be appreciated by a narrower audience.  I would
give this film a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
UNBREAKABLE (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 115 minutes
Genre: Thriller
Seen at: Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.areyouunbreakable.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0217869
Written by: M. Night Shyamalan
Directed by: M. Night Shyamalan
Cast: Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright Penn,
Spencer Treat Clark, Charlayn Woodward
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsunbreakable.html
I once watched a movie called GHOST STORY, one that I don't quite
remember except that I was definitely spooked by it.  GHOST STORY stayed
with me, I think, because it reminded me way back then of the vast
difference between your common slash'n'gash horror flick, and
asuspenseful, character-driven and plot-rich, thriller
M. Night Shyamalan, late of THE SIXTH SENSE, reminded me again with his
new thriller, UNBREAKABLE.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Security guard David Dunne (Bruce Willis) is a man living a broken life.
Detached from his wife Audrey (Robin Wright Penn), seen as something he
doesn't believe himself to be by his son Joseph (Spencer Treat Clark),
and unsatisfied with his life in Philadelphia in general, David makes
plans on moving to New York to start afresh.  His plans change, however,
when the train that he's a passenger on, derails - and not only is he
the sole survivor, he also escapes the accident completely untouched.
*Physically* untouched, that is.
Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson) too is, quite literally, a broken man.
Elijah suffers from a birth defect that makes his bones brittle.  When
neighborhood kids bully him into becoming a hermit in his own home, his
mother (Charlayn Woodward) challenges him to not make the decision to be
afraid, saying that she would give him a special gift each time he
conquers his fears.  From that, Elijah takes comfort in the world of
comic books, especially those dealing with mythical, super-heroic
characters.
David's life becomes connected to Elijah's in ways David never imagined
- and he finds himself believing the unbelievable.
The Upshot:
This movie belonged to three people: stars Bruce Willis and Samuel L.
Jackson, and writer/director M. Night Shyamalan.
Willis reprises the sensibility toward his character that he had in last
year's THE SIXTH SENSE, again playing a quiet, confused, world-weary
character who had something bubbling just below the surface, waiting to
be ferreted out by...something.  Jackson, effusive and commanding as
always, provides just that something as the brittle Elijah.  The
physical manifestations of these characters - David as the strong and
silent type, Elijah as a man as fragile as glass - belie their true
nature; and in his portrayal of Elijah's inner self, Jackson,
especially, certainly lives up to his powerhouse acting reputation.
The conviction with which Jackson can make a man's knees wobble when
said man dare try to buy a "comic" for his 4-year-old son, is perfectly
matched here with the palpable feeling of anxiety we see behind Willis'
character David's eyes when David has to face up to the fact that, yes,
he might indeed be more than he appears - even to himself.  Willis and
Jackson make a dynamic duo, and they made every scene they were in -
separate or together - something to keep your attention riveted closely
to, so as not to miss a single bit.
But M. Night Shyamalan's handiwork was clearly all over UNBREAKABLE.
Set-up shots of David and the object of his flirtation in the train,
framed images of him next to the stairway in his house, the buildup to
the crash that you could *feel* as a vibration rumbling beneath the mood
music's crescendo, were reminiscent of THE SIXTH SENSE without being
derivative of it.  In this sense, Shyamalan was as much a star of this
show, as Willis or Jackson [hopefully not giving too much away - in more
ways than one].
Robin Wright Penn was adequate as David's estranged wife Audrey, though
she and Spencer Treat Clark as their son Joseph, shared quite a
thrilling scene when Joseph, believing his father to be invincible,
decides to test just how invincible good old dad might be.  I was very
surprised to note that the audience I was in, *laughed* during this taut
scene.
I'm trying to figure out whether that laughter only served to mask our
stress and its subsequent relief.  I *know* our stunned silence, and
near-refusal to leave at the end, was a good indication of the confusion
most of the viewing audience felt at that last scene.  After all the
minutes spent enjoying being twisted and turned in this direction and
that, the final scene felt "off", as if the movie wasn't completely
done.  That, combined with an ill-advised (and, unless I miss my guess,
tacked-on) tag line, brought me right out of the moment.  It took a few
minutes of sitting still and analyzing what I'd seen in the 113 moments
prior, to get me past the somewhat stunning disappointment of feeling I
was just talked down-to, as if Shyamalan didn't think the audience would
Get It in the end.
But don't let me spook you: the 113 moments prior were well worth it.
If nothing else, UNBREAKABLE will make you think about what you've just
watched.  And, in my book, any time a movie makes you pause to Consider,
that's most def A Good Thing.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
M. Night Shyamalan, first with THE SIXTH SENSE and now with UNBREAKABLE,
is fast proving to be the kind of writer/director whose stories bite you
right in the ass.  Thing about bites, though, is that they usually leave
you not quite satisfied.  Almost filling, but just shy of a full meal,
UNBREAKABLE is nonetheless a helluva tale spun by a master craftsman.
UNBREAKABLE (rating: greenlight):
I can't wait to see what ghost story Shyamalan has in score for us next.

Author
Susan Granger
 On paper, it looked great. Bruce Willis, the star, and
M. Night Shyamalan, the creator, of "The Sixth Sense" teaming up for
another supernatural thriller. On the screen, however, it's
unintelligible and undeniably underwhelming. Bruce Willis is a
Philadelphia football stadium security guard who is the sole survivor
of a train wreck that killed 131 people. Why? he wonders. That
question is shared by Elijah, a mysterious comic book entrepreneur who
suffers from a brittle bone disease, played by Samuel L. Jackson - in
an unkempt Afro - who poses not only a bizarre explanation but also
theorizes a purpose for the rest of Willis's life. "I believe comic
books are our last link to a form of history," he notes. Could,
perhaps, Willis be a modern-day superhero? Willis's wide-eyed 12
year-old son (Spencer Treat Clark, trying hard to be Haley Joel
Osment) is easily convinced but not his estranged wife (a surprisingly
haggard-looking Robin Wright Penn) who claims, "I don't want violence
in my life." As for Willis, he's just not sure of anything except that
he's sad and that his world is crumbling around him - like the slow,
stalemated story which has plot loopholes large enough to drive a city
bus through. During the dark, creepy, climactic chase, where does
Willis, the wet, caped crusader, get dumped on a dreary, damp, rainy
night? Underwater - and we've already been told that water is like his
Kryptonite. "Do you know what the scariest thing is?" Jackson
concludes during what passes for a twist ending. "To not know your
place in the world. Now we know who you are and we know who I am." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Unbreakable" is an uncertain
3. Ostensibly about heroes and villains, basically, it's unadulterated
poppycock. Unfathomable is more like it.

Author
Robin Clifford
David Dunn (Bruce Willis) is on a commuter train heading home for
Philadelphia after a none-too-successful security job interview in New York
City. He flirts with and is rejected by a pretty young woman and sinks into
his own doldrums. Just before arriving in Philly, the train goes out of
control, jumps the track and all 131 passengers and crew are killed -
except for David, who survives the wreck with nary a scratch. A mysterious,
handicapped man, Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson), who tells David that he
is a very special person, a man who may be invincible, soon approaches him.
The bemused David begins to delve into his apparent indestructibility and
makes some shocking discoveries in director/writer M. Night Shyamalan's
"Unbreakable."
Helmer Shyamalan faces a tough battle with his follow up to the incredibly
successful sophomore effort, "The Sixth Sense." (That film was the second
largest grossing film in 1999, overshadowed only by "The Phantom Menace.")
The director/writer wasted no time in creating a new mystery thriller that
invites the viewer to pay close attention to the details of the story while
still delivering a finale with a revelation that shocks. But, please, don't
expect the stunning, unexpected ending of "The Sixth Sense." Shyamalan's
follow on film effectively avoids a slump by weaving a different mystical
tale.
David has survived the horrors of the train wreck with absolutely no damage
to his body, but his mind is another thing. There is a part of David that
he has never come to grips with and it has impacted his life in negative
ways, including a failing marriage to Audrey (Robin Wright Pen). His only
ray of hope is his son, Joseph (Spencer Treat Clark), who idolizes his dad.
One day soon after the crash, David finds a note on his car that asks the
question, "How many days have you been sick?" There is nothing else except
for a company logo on the card. Dunn tracks down the company to find a very
strange individual as the owner.
Elijah has suffered a lifelong affliction, osteogenesis imperfecta; a
debilitating disease that makes his bones as frail as twigs. He has lived a
careful, reclusive life and still suffered 54 breaks of his bones since he
was a child. Elijah became, as a boy, with his mother's (Charlayne Woodard)
help, an aficionado of action comic books and has delved into duality
inherent in the hero/villain themes of the genre. He built a business based
on the art of his beloved comic books and became obsessed with finding his
dual, his opposite, in life. Elijah's thinking is that there must be
someone to counter his own breakability. Is David the man he seeks?
Other heinous disasters have also taken place, recently, besides David's
train wreck. Of the three life-snuffing accidents, David is the only one to
survive - without a mark on him. Elijah makes David think back over his
life and those things that may have harmed him. As Dunn digs into his past,
he finds that events did not really play as they seemed and that his
childhood "injuries" never happened. His is, truly, unbreakable. The
question now becomes, what is David's purpose on Earth? The fragile Elijah,
whose bones quite literally can break like glass, shows David that he has
the ability to "see" wrongdoers and their deeds. This newfound "sight"
gives David the chance to save a couple of children from a brutal death,
proving to his son that he is a hero. Is he Elijah's comic book hero?
I won't talk anymore about the story so I don't give anything away. This is
a mystery story and the viewer should be allowed the chance to figure it
out. The good news is, though not as shocking a work as "The Sixth Sense,"
"Unbreakable" is an intelligent, well-executed mystical tale. Prepare
yourself for rampant symbolism (and, unfortunately, at least one, extended
product placement that I found annoying). The two-sides-of-the-same-coin
relationship between David and Elijah also has elements of student and
master. David is the bewildered, invulnerable hero figure to Elijah's
flawed, but brilliant, advisor. But, yes, there is more. The comic book art
as a binding device is interesting, especially for action comic fans, but
it left me cold. I think an understanding of the graphic novel art form, as
the director obviously has, will make you appreciate the film's intent a
little more.
Technically, "Unbreakable" is solid. Photography by Eduardo Serra is key to
the look of the film, capturing the moody, off-kilter, otherworldliness
that Shyamalan strives to create. Production designer Larry Fulton, who did
such subtle work on "The Sixth Sense," gets a chance at a more stylized
locale in the world of Elijah Price. The starkly contrasted
chrome-and-glass look combines beautifully with the costuming, from another
Shyamalan collaborator, Joanna Johnston. (See Laura's review at
www.reelingreviews.com/unbreakable.htm for a unique perspective on the
film's costume/makeup.) The film carries a vaguely sinister look throughout
that helps keep the story intact.
Screenwriter Shyamalan needs to get out more. His script is intelligent,
yes, but also self-indulgent. He is having fun with the mystery, the look
and the colors of the film and the film abounds with little in-jokes that
the observant viewer will see and enjoy. He is an honest writer that does
not go for the cheap shot to titillate the audience. I would like to see
the helmer work with other filmmakers and spread his creative wings more.
Unfortunately for the actors, this is a story-intensive flick that requires
the filmgoer to pay attention to the plot threads. As such, the thespians
are required to live within their characters rather than develop them.
Willis is conflicted as David Dunn and works hard to understand his real
gift, though there is little emotion allowed to bubble through - except in
one scene where Joseph tests David's new-found and incredible body
strength. Samuel L. Jackson always brings his all, but, even he is
overshadowed by the Gumby-hairdo and slick costume of Elijah. Clark does
fine as the incredulous son, Joseph. He and Willis play well with each
other, though the boy is not a Haley Joel Osment. Robin Wright Penn, as
David's troubled wife Audrey, does well in the tough role of understanding
wife.
"Unbreakable" should have a ready-made audience and do well at the
box-office as the only "serious" film out right now. It will draw an after
life on video and DVD for the fans who want to pick it apart and look for
all the little nuances in the story. Enjoy the show. I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Chad Polenz
I used to be a comic book geek. I loved comics so much as a kid that I 
actively pursued a career in comic book art... but that didn't pan out. If 
you had ever used the words "comics" and "stupid" in the same breath within 
my earshot I would have rebutted you for every irrational generalization you 
had made. Some people get hostile over social issues like racism and abortion 
- trying to convince the world comics weren't just for kids and are the 
missing link in the worlds of literature and art was my cause. 
I'll bet M. Night Shymalan feels the same way. His film "Unbreakable" is as 
close as a Hollywood will probably ever get to making a "comic book movie." 
Forget those campy Batman flicks and other special effects extravaganzas we 
get every summer, this is what would happen if a man really had super powers. 
The first rule of comics is that the origin is the nucleus of the characters. 
For some reason when it comes to superheroes we tend to be more interested in 
where they came from rather than when they beat the villains. Pick up any 
comic book price guide and you'll see that the first appearance  and/or 
origin of a character is worth FAR much more than the death or defeat of 
their arch nemesis. "Unbreakable" is basically one long origin story of the 
hero, not an action-packed "quest for justice" machine. We've had movies 
about that stuff for years, but when's the last time someone took the time to 
examine how the hero came to be a hero? 
Bruce Willis stars as David Dunn, a security guard at a college in 
Philadelphia who's on the verge of divorce with his wife and tries to keep a 
relationship with his 10-year-old son. As the film opens we see him on a 
train, he slips off his wedding band to flirt with an attractive woman who's 
just taken a seat next to him. Next we cut to his son watching a TV news 
report of a huge train wreck and he realizes his dad was on the train. We 
then cut to a hospital emergency room where David is being looked at by a 
doctor and receives word that he's the only survivor of that train wreck and 
he doesn't have a scratch on him. How is that possible? David has no idea and 
the doctors aren't like those typical movie doctors who want to keep him in 
the hospital to do experiments on him to find out what's so special about 
him. David simply walks away and goes back to living his life as if nothing 
had happened. 
David's introductory scenes are intercut with a completely different 
storyline about an African-American boy named Elijah who's been cursed with a 
rare genetic disorder that makes his bones very frail and his body easily 
susceptible to injury. His mother loves him deeply and wants him to still be 
able to interact with society so she gets him to cross the street to a 
playground where Elijah opens a present to find a comic book. 
In the present day he's the same age as David and owns and operates an art 
gallery made up exclusively of original comic-related art. We see him showing 
a piece to a customer describing the picture in the kind of detail that 
mueseum curators and art history teachers would use to discuss a Picasso or a 
Van Gough. Samuel L. Jackson co-stars as the adult Elijah in one of his best 
performances ever. He's deadly serious about comics being an artform to be 
appreciated and studied as any other and Jackson's words, especially as 
penned by Shymalan are quite moving. He's one of those characters whose 
intellect and deep philosophies make him seem dastardly. He points out small 
bits of truth and details others overlook, but other than having an unhealthy 
love for comics there's nothing physically threatening to him. 
David and Elijah meet and discuss the possibility that David might be some 
kind of super mortal. Elijah's theory is that if everything in the universe 
is balanced there must be someone out there who's the exact opposite of him 
and that person could be the real-life superhero humanity has been searching 
for ever since fairytales have been told. 
There's not much point of further elaborating on the plot. What makes 
"Unbreakable" so fascinating is how it tells its story of personal discovery. 
This is a character-driven story, therefore explosions and chases aren't 
necessary. Shymalan's direction is one of the most original methods I've ever 
seen, something so powerful and well-composed it rivals Stanley Kubrick and 
Alfred Hitchcock. This film is a visual feast for those who are looking c
losely. He makes great use of steadicam shots as well as crane shots and just 
plain old generic two-shots. Shymalan keeps the mix fresh, constantly 
experimenting and has such a great screenplay to accompany it that the 
slow-motion overly-dramatic sequences don't come off as trite and cheesy. His 
dialogue is also EXTREMELY low-key, mellow and passive. I'm sure that will 
put off many viewers but I found it to be a great mood enhancer, plus it is 
consistent. There's no bubbly cartoony lovable characters here, even the 
10-year-old son is an introvert - he's not running all over the place or 
playing video games, he honestly wants to take care of his father. Most child 
characters in a setting like this would brag about their father's super 
abilities and try to turn them into a comic book superhero, instead, Joseph 
just lives in awe of what his dad can do and obeys his orders. 
I remember the exact moment I realized this film was excellent. It comes just 
as the second act transitions into the third and it's clear to both us and 
David he is a super man of sorts, but what can and will he do with his 
"powers"? I asked myself, "How is this going to end?" and I had absolutely no 
idea. There's no nasty evil supervillain with magic powers for David to fight 
against, so how will the story climax? I was shocked when I realized I 
couldn't even guess at the answer and I was so psyched to find out. 
When you've got a movie with metaphysical philosophies and themes about the 
battle between good and evil it's probably going to end in a fantastic 
triumph. This film does just that as our hero maximizes the use of his powers 
to find out what he's needed to do. All heroes have one achille's heel and 
this story exploits that notion too, building terrific suspense with a real 
feeling that justice has been served. 
And that's not even the actual ending which will blow your mind. 
Take it from someone who's seen more than his share of movies and read more 
than his share of comics, "Unbreakable" is one of the most original and 
enjoyable works of fiction to come along in years. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-2F0A-4B0B31B0-3A5A2A2A-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: 
http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Unbreakable (2000)
Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright Penn, Charlayne Woodard,
Spencer Treat Clark, James Handy, Eamonn Walker, Elizabeth Lawrence,
Leslie Stefanson, M. Night Shyamalan. Score by James Newton Howard.
Written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan. 107 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Last year, writer-director M. Night Shyamalan unveiled "The Sixth
Sense," a thoughtful, low-key thriller that became one of the biggest
hits of all time. In my initial notes for the film, I addressed the slow
pace of the story, scribbling "there's a thin line between deliberate
and plodding." After being flattened in the closing moments by
Shyamalan's now-legendary plot twist, I saw the movie again and decided
that, for the most part, the pacing was necessary for the payoff of the
story to work so well.
A year later, Shyamalan returns with "Unbreakable," another somber
mystery. Comparisons with "The Sixth Sense" are unavoidable, as both
films star Bruce Willis and feature compelling trailers promising an
exploration of otherworldly matters coupled with a surprise ending.
Sadly, "Unbreakable" lacks the punch of its predecessor, hampered by a
weak plot, anemic supporting characters and a needlessly abrupt wrap up.
As for pacing, forget "deliberate." "Plodding" is definitely the
operative word this time around.
The story begins in 1961 Philadelphia, with the birth of Elijah Price,
who enters the world with broken arms and legs. We learn that the child
suffers from Osteogenesis Imperfecta, a condition that renders bones
extremely brittle.
Cut to the present, as security guard David Dunn (Willis) heads home by
train following an out of town job interview. The camera acts as peeping
tom, gliding behind seats to catch David slipping off his wedding ring
and flirting with an attractive fellow passenger. When the young woman
moves away, he puts the ring back on and stares out the window, only to
notice that the train is going much too fast.
Later, David emerges from the examination area at a local emergency room
to find everyone staring at him. A physician explains that, of the 132
people onboard the train, David is the sole survivor of a nightmarish
derailment and he doesn't have a scratch on him.
Moved by the experience, David and his wife Audrey (Robin Wright Penn)
agree to try and fix their strained relationship. Otherwise, life
returns to normal for the ex-football star, until he receives a note
reading, "How many days of your life have you been sick?" A bit of
investigation leads David to the author of the note, Elijah Price
(Samuel L. Jackson). The crippled man, a dealer in comic book art, moves
cautiously with a cane while projecting a skewed air of elegance.
Because of his disability, Elijah (nicknamed Mr. Glass) is obsessed with
the concept of strength, and he has a theory about David.
That's as much as can be revealed without spoiling the story.
Unfortunately, Shyamalan spoils the story on his own.
"The Sixth Sense" was able to twist and turn because the plot was rock
solid. Not so in "Unbreakable," which must rely on atmosphere and
coincidence to support its flimsy storyline. Actually, there is very
little story at all. What happens in the 107 minute running time would
serve as the first half of most movies. But Shyamalan drags moments out,
determined to establish and maintain an operatic tone. At times he
succeeds, and those grand hushed segments are a welcome change from the
noise and clutter of most films. But too often, he slides into tedium
and pretension.
And he simply didn't think through his own concept. In the course of the
film, David realizes that he possesses two highly unusual traits, which
begs the question: How in the world could a man go through his life
without noticing these things about himself?
I wanted to be swept away by "Unbreakable," but just couldn't make the
leap. Regardless of one's belief system (or lack thereof), life after
death fascinates most people, and "The Sixth Sense" drew on that allure.
But the supernatural concept in "Unbreakable" merely reflects adolescent
fantasizing. The idea doesn't resonate, and as a result, the
presentation style comes off as ponderous and overblown (the film is
reminiscent of a typical origin story from Marvel Comics, the sort of
thing that might be titled "And Thus a Hero Is Born").
Where "The Sixth Sense" gave us a number of fully realized characters,
"Unbreakable" offers two people and several rough sketches. Robin Wright
Penn has little to do except look pallid, while Spencer Treat Clark is
sympathetic, but generic as David and Audrey's son. Charlayne Woodard
sparkles as Elijah's mother, but only turns up for a few seconds.
In one of the lead parts, Bruce Willis suitably underplays his role,
projecting the unspoken frustration of a man who aches because he has
not lived up to his potential. But the real star of the show is Samuel
L. Jackson, who, with wild eyes and an unkempt Afro, casts a
mesmerizing, vaguely threatening presence. Jackson skillfully creates a
character that at once seems like a visionary and a crackpot, only to
betrayed by the screenplay.
"Unbreakable" concludes with a revelation and then just stops, with a
few on-screen sentences telling us what happened next. Imagine watching
Darth Vader intone, "Luke, I am your father," only to have the film
freeze at that point, with the words LUKE WENT ON TO GREATNESS, WHILE
DARTH VADER COMMITTED MANY MORE VILE DEEDS, REDEEMING HIMSELF ONLY
MOMENTS BEFORE HIS DEATH pasted over their faces and you'll know what to
expect.
M. Night Shyamalan is a talented writer and director. Hopefully, he'll
spend a little more time on the script before making his next AND THEN
THE REVIEW ENDED.

Author
Homer Yen
Imagine that Santa has left for your child a
beautifully wrapped toy on Christmas Day.  While Santa
knows that it's one of those high-tech mechanical
dogs, several layers of wrapping paper are used to
help hide its secret.  As the little one tears away at
the paper, what was first a formless mass is now
starting to take shape.  The child's eyes glow with
anticipation as the truth nears.  Finally, the payoff
arrives, and the little tyke lets forth a wide smile
knowing that it was all worth the effort.
This is the sensation that you might feel as you watch
"Unbreakable," an engrossing tale about an ordinary
man who experiences extraordinary events.  But why
does this happen?  The answer, wrapped in mystery, is
something that needs to be unraveled, uncovered and
understood.
"Why are you looking at me like that," asks the
bewildered David Dunn (Bruce Willis).  He's visibly
confused as he peers around the hospital's emergency
room where he has been recently taken after another
one of those extraordinary events.  The doctor answers
slowly, with a soft-spoken voice that connotes mixed
feelings of curiosity and wonderment.  "Your train
derailed," he begins to tell him.  "And to answer your
question, there are two reasons why I'm looking at you
this way."  It seems that Dunn is the only survivor of
a horrific (off-screen) train crash in which 131 other
lives were lost.  Moreover, there wasn't a scratch on
his entire body.  Although most of the train cars were
badly mangled, Dunn escaped unscathed.
This event raises many questions.  Is he just lucky? 
Perhaps he's blessed.  Maybe it's something more.  But
whatever the mystical reason may be for his good
fortune, it's an answer that begs to be revealed.  As
our hero begins his search for meaning, the audience
eagerly and anxiously follows him every step of the
way.  The only thing that he does know, however, is
that a stranger named Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson)
seems to know a lot about him.  Elijah asks Dunn if
he's ever been hurt, the last time he got sick, and
his reason for choosing his career.  Most of all, he
asks Dunn to reassess his life in order to understand
the truth.
>From the Oscar-nominated talent that gave us "The
Sixth Sense," writer/director M. Night Shyamalan,
"Unbreakable" is a hauntingly good yarn.  What makes
this film atypical of most other films is its inspired
belief in itself and its adroitness in taking us into
an alternative universe.  It's almost like watching
reality shift in front of our eyes as Dunn and the
audience are challenged to negotiate through this
labyrinth layered with hints and revelations.  This
transformation happens slowly, however, so don't
expect a quick-paced film.  Meanwhile, dialogue is
spoken in a hushed tone that causes the audience to
strain to hear what they are saying.  I was fascinated
and found it gripping, but this might be maddening for
others.  Ultimately, like the doctor that examines
Dunn in the emergency room after that train wreck,
you'll likely feel that same sense of curiosity and
wonderment.


Author
Brian Matherly
Cast: Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright Penn, Spencer Treat
Clark 
Written and Directed by: M. Night Shyamalan 
Running Time: 122 minutes 
Bruce Willis and Sixth Sense director M. Night Shyamalan re-team to tell
the story of David Dunne (Willis), a stadium security guard who has been
having some problems at home that are affecting his relationship with
his wife and child.  On a return trip from New York where he was trying
to get a job, Dunne is in a horrible train accident that he is the only
survivor of.  To make things even stranger, Dunne has also escaped the
accident completely unscathed.  
A comic book art dealer named Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson), who was
born with a degenerative bone disease that causes his bones to be so
brittle that they break constantly, has been seeking out someone like
Dunne his entire life.  Price felt that there had to be someone exactly
the opposite of him... someone whose bones would be so strong that they
would never break.  Price contacts Dunne and convinces him to come down
to his gallery for a talk where he suggests that Dunne could quite
possibly be something akin to a superhero from the comic books Price
used to read when he was a child.  Dunne doesn't believe him at first,
but Price assists him in discovering his "powers" and helps him hone his
craft until he discovers what his true calling really is. 
Writer/director M. Night Shyamalan had a tough act to follow with his
sleeper hit The Sixth Sense.  How exactly does one follow up on one of
the biggest and most popular thrillers in recent years?  For Shyamalan,
the answer must have come as easy to him as nuclear physics does to
kindergartners.  Does this new film measure up to his breakthrough box
office smash, though?  The answer to that question is not a very easy
one, either. 
As far as pacing goes, The Sixth Sense seemed almost interminable.  It
wasn't until the surprise ending was revealed that I realized the film
was actually intentionally (and perfectly) paced in order to give the
audience ample time to re-connect all of the information they had seen
once the climax had been reached.  For Unbreakable, Shyamalan gave the
film a much more satisfying pace which, in many ways, blows away the
film that had come before.  The story moves along at a steady pace and
Shyamalan's direction is excellent, with the camera almost constantly
moving.  There are tons of great shots in the film, not least of which
is a conversation that opens the film between Willis' character and
another train passenger.  The shot seems as though it were filmed like
we were watching the two talk from between the train seats and the
camera steadily glides back and forth between the two actors as they
speak. 
Also very impressive is the film's score by James Newton Howard (who
also scored Shyamalan's Sixth Sense and the similar film Stir of Echoes,
as well as this year's Dinosaur).  Several of the scenes are driven by a
very catchy beat and help to increase the tempo of the film.  One of the
best examples of this is a scene in which Dunne goes into a train
station to "exercise" his powers.  The music, in combination with the
stellar visuals, really go a long way towards making this an incredible
movie.  If there was any one soundtrack I would make a must purchase
this year, this one would be it. 
The film also boasts some great performances, including a precocious
child actor trying to vie for the Oscar throne left vacant by Haley Joel
Osment.  Willis turns in a great performance as the sad sack Dunne, who
just can't seem to figure out why he's been depressed for the last few
years.  His character almost seems pathetic when we first meet him, but
he eventually grows into his own under Elijah's tutelage.  Jackson is
one of the better actors of our time, and here he turns in yet another
great performance as the ever injured Elijah.  Though his hairstyle is
absurd, Jackson seems to infuse such a great deal of pain into his role
that the mortar board hairdo can easily be overlooked.  Robin Wright
Penn's role seems slightly underwritten, but she still manages to get
across the intense hurt of her character's need for love from her
husband and her desire to make things work again.  Spencer Treat Clark,
as the Dunne's young son Jeremy, shows that Shyamalan still has a knack
for picking young actors, and he turns in one of the most competent
performances in the film.  Out of all the characters, Jeremy's is
perhaps the most emotional, and Clark does a great job with the role. 
Where the film does lose points though, is during its "surprise"
ending.  Shyamalan has said in interviews that he was going to do an
ending that blew away the one presented by The Sixth Sense, but I found
myself saying "that was it?!" when Unbreakable revealed its own ending. 
It's not that the ending is bad, it's just that the ending doesn't quite
have the emotional punch that the other film's did.  Plus, it almost
seems like it sets itself up for sequels (and I won't reveal the ending
here, but you'll understand what I mean when you see it). 
Essentially, what all of this means is that Shyamalan has made another
good film with Unbreakable.  The only real problem is that the ending
doesn't quite fill the shadow left by its predecessor.  As long as it
isn't held to the standard that Sixth Sense set (which it ultimately
will be), it should be a remarkably well liked film.  One thing seems
clear, though.  Shyamalan definitely has an affinity for comic books
that he would like to share with the world and many comic book fans will
also delight the vision he presents in this film. 
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Michael Dequina
_Unbreakable_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
Following the phenomenal--and completely out-of-nowhere--success of
_The_Sixth_Sense_, it would have been easy for writer-director M. Night
Shyamalan to follow that act with another eerie tale of the supernatural.
 All early indicators, in particular Disney's publicity campaign, paint
_Unbreakable_ as exactly that: a creepy thriller "from the director of
_The_Sixth_Sense_."  _Unbreakable_ is indeed "creepy," but not in the way
moviegoers are expecting (and, perhaps, desiring); the film gradually
evolves from one thing into another animal entirely, its true nature
slowly but surely "creeping" to the fore.  What _Unbreakable_ becomes is
certain to divide the opinions of audiences and critics alike, but that's
exactly what makes it a much more fascinating film than its predecessor.
That said, _Unbreakable_ shares many qualities with Shyamalan's last
film.  Star Bruce Willis is back, this time playing David Dunn, an
everyman Philadelphia security guard.  Unexplained cosmic phenomena are
again involved, here David's miraculous survival of a devastating train
wreck and the fact that he emerges from the accident completely
unharmed--which piques the interest of Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson),
an art dealer suffering from a crippling bone disorder.  What unfolds
from here occurs at the same languid pace that for me was a major factor
in _The_Sixth_Sense_'s ruin.
But in the case of _Unbreakable_, the slowness works more in its favor. 
In _Sense_, the deliberate pacing underscored how nothing really happens
from the "I see dead people" confession (which already takes about an
hour to get to) to the pull-the-rug-out twist ending.  Here, the crawl is
a mirror of the rate at which David comes into his own--a progression
which is itself reflective of how Shyamalan takes his time to fully
reveal what exactly he's trying to accomplish with this film.
All I will say about Shyamalan's ultimate aim is that it is could not be
more radically different from expectations--so far off, in fact, that the
film will undoubtedly leave many viewers with quizzical looks and a
feeling of grave disappointment.  But once the film is removed from those
preconceived notions, the element of surprise proves to be
_Unbreakable_'s greatest virtue, not to mention a quality richer and more
elegantly pulled off than it was in _Sense_.  In that film, the shock
came in a quick, last-minute burst that jolted everything that preceded
it into a new perspective.  Here, the film's final turn is the
culmination of what had been a movie-long build; the exhilarating final
"click" in a puzzle whose pieces had been working their way--with
ever-increasing speed--toward alignment.
Crucial to the persuasiveness of _Unbreakable_'s story are the grounded
performances.  Willis is in the same lower gear that distinguished his
_Sense_ work, and he nicely disappears into the character and his
uncertainties.  Jackson's role offers a little more latitude, but his
portrayal is firmly rooted in reality despite Elijah's rather unique
hairdo (which proves to be an effective touch by the film's end).  Robin
Wright Penn and Spencer Treat Clark are fine as David's wife and son,
respectively, but they are saddled with the weaker parts of the story. 
Wright Penn's subplot--the Dunns' rocky marriage--could be written off as
being unnecessary, but it is actually integral in creating a believably
real world in which some rather fantastical occurrences take place.
And that, right there, is likely to be the common complaint about
_Unbreakable_--that it's unbelievable.  Of course, that gripe is
completely absurd, given that most audiences will be going in
anticipating a just-as--if not more--unreal horror show of sorts.  Having
already concocted a ghost story that was less about scary apparitions
than it was about people, Shyamalan makes a lateral move with
_Unbreakable_, attempting to bring that same down-to-earth human element
to a different type of surreal-by-definition genre.  One's ability to see
just how well he has pulled off this even more unconventional task simply
depends on one's willingness to accept the new rules Shyamalan adopts for
this film.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Christian Pyle
Last year, writer/director Night Shyamalan rocketed from obscurity to the 
A-list with "The Sixth Sense," which won both critical and popular acclaim.  
This year, he hopes that lightning will strike twice by serving up another 
supernatural drama, "Unbreakable."  Bruce Willis is back, and there's a 
little boy and a twist ending, too.  However, the current pic just doesn't 
work.
You wouldn't know it from the trailers, but "Unbreakable" is a superhero 
movie.  It begins with a set of stats about comic-book collecting.  (It turns 
out that the average collector will devote an entire year of his life to 
reading comics; I wonder what he wasted the other sixty-nine years on.)  
Comics come up in the movie in the person of Elijah Price (Samuel L. 
Jackson), who suffers from osteogenesis imperfecta, a disease that causes him 
to have brittle bones.  Because he's spent most of his life recuperating from 
injuries, Elijah had a lot of time to read comics.  He owns an art gallery 
devoted to original art by comic-book artists and has an unusual theory:  
superheroes live and work among us.  Elijah figures that if he can have a 
disease that makes his body easily broken, then there must be others who are 
unbreakable.  
Security guard David Dunn (Bruce Willis) is unbreakable.  At the beginning of 
the movie, David is the sole survivor of a terrible train wreck.  Over a 
hundred people are killed, but David walks away without a scratch.  Based on 
this, Elijah believes that David is the fulfillment of his theory.  David has 
problems of his own; he's breaking up with his wife Megan (Robin Wright Penn) 
and trying to maintain a relationship with his son Jeremy (Spencer Treat 
Clark).  So, David resists the idea that he's Superman, until he discovers 
unusual abilities he never knew he had.
Everyone tries very hard to make this movie fly.  Shyamalan pervades every 
scene with the same subtle creepiness that enriched "The Sixth Sense."  His 
direction shows the same meticulous attention to color, and his script endows 
the fragile premise with as much realism as he can muster.  Willis gives his 
best performance in awhile.  While I found him unconvincing as a shrink in 
"Sixth Sense," Willis shines as dull-witted characters who are out of their 
depth (as in "12 Monkeys" and "Pulp Fiction").  David is such a character.  
(When Elijah inquires if David has ever been sick, David has to ask his boss 
and his wife to find out that he hasn't.)   Jackson is slick and charismatic 
with an undercurrent of menace.  Penn is down-to-earth and genuine.  Clark is 
sweet and likeable.
However, despite the admirable efforts of the director and his cast, 
"Unbreakable" just can't make its plot work.  A major part of the problem is 
the somber attitude with which Shyamalan approaches his subject.  Superheroes 
can be a lot of fun, but a sober tone robs the concept of its joy and wonder. 
 The movie's website includes a lot of information on real-life unbreakable 
people, so I assume that Shyamalan shares the theory he puts in Elijah's 
mouth.  Willis recently said that "Unbreakable" was the first chapter in a 
trilogy.  Hope the next two have a sense of humor.
Bottom line:  Unbreakable performances, brittle premise.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
UNBREAKABLE is the highly anticipated film that again unites THE SIXTH 
SENSE writer/director M. Night Shyamalan and actor Bruce Willis. The kid 
this time, however, is not Haley Joel Osment but 12-year-old Spencer 
Treat Clark (GLADIATOR).  Superbly crafted and strongly acted, the movie 
feels much like its predecessor.  While it's well worth seeing, it has 
to be labeled as a disappointment.  
Whereas THE SIXTH SENSE was a great film without the ending twist, 
UNBREAKABLE relies on its "surprise" ending to close the deal with its 
audience.  The ending is interesting but feels too much like a cheap 
plot trick.  It's also a lot easier to guess than THE SIXTH SENSE's 
shocking conclusion.  
The director's control is amazing.  Taking significant risk, he sets a 
pace so slow and methodical that he banks on the audience's good graces 
to stay with him.  He never loses you, but, in less capable hands, the 
movie could have turned into a major seat fidgeter.  Still, as you sit 
there in suspense, you're likely to find that the movie is drawing to an 
end before it ever seems to have properly achieved lift off.  It's a 
great ride in a sleek jet that spends all the time taxiing around the 
runway.
As the story opens, we are given a host of statistics about comic books, 
culminating in the conclusion that the average comic book enthusiast 
spends the equivalent of one entire year of his or her life reading 
comics.  It's a strange way to get started, but it lays the groundwork 
for the rest of the plot.
When we first meet David Dunne (Willis), he is a sad and lonely guy 
traveling on a train.  Willis's emotive performance lets us share in 
David's pain before we have even a hint as to what it could be.  A 
balding, middle-age security guard at a football stadium, David is the 
paragon of physical health, having never been sick since, well, no one 
is quite sure.  Emotionally, however, he is a wreck, complaining that he 
wakes up incredibly sad every morning.  His marriage with his wife Megan 
(Robin Wright Penn) is ending, and they are in the  final boarding 
stages of a separation.
The train crashes, killing everyone except David, who doesn't have a 
scratch on him.  This leaves him even more dazed and confused than 
normal.
In a parallel story that is quickly joined to the other, Samuel L. 
Jackson, as Elijah Price, plays a man whose bones are so brittle that 
the kids call him Mr. Glass.  Elijah, who was literally born with broken 
bones, is as fragile as David is indestructible.  Oh yes, David is a 
comic illustrations art dealer, but only to serious adult collectors.
Filmed by Eduardo Serra in extremely dark, morose shades of gray and 
scored by James Newton Howard with ominous, foreboding music, the 
intense picture projects a strong impression on the viewers.  Long 
sections of the movie are so silent that I was embarrassed just quietly 
turning the pages in my notebook.   
UNBREAKABLE takes you on a mesmerizing journey that you don't want to 
miss.  But don't be surprised if it leaves you less than satisfied.  I 
will not say anything more about it lest I accidentally give something 
away.  This is important since, absent the anticipation of the story's 
resolution, the movie loses most of its punch.
UNBREAKABLE runs 1:47.  It is rated PG-13 for mature themes, some 
disturbing violent content and a sexual reference and would be 
acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
Hmmm. Well, I absolutely loved "The Sixth Sense." In fact, I did back flips
over that film. But M. Night Shyamalan's newest effort, "Unbreakable" failed
to ignite that same enthusiasm.
This is still an interesting film complete with scenes to marvel over
sharing screen time with the not-so-great moments. Generally speaking, too
much time is spent in the set up and not enough on the punch.
I've said before of "The Sixth Sense" that I didn't need the ending kicker
twist - I still would have loved that film. Not so of "Unbreakable" which
titillates unevenly like glitter in a murky stream. The opening shot between
seats is clever, but becomes tiresome. In fact, the whole first act could
have used a shot in the arm. Willis, Penn and Woodward are strong,
believable and likable. But, I've seen Jackson give better performances
(though the actor playing the younger Jackson does a fine job).
I particularly enjoyed the meaty sequence just prior to the end; more of the
like was needed as lead-ins to it. Perhaps they were written, but cut for
time. Too bad, cuts in the first act would have made for a better film.
Overall, the finished product is lumpy - a way-cool idea that is no doubt
way-difficult to translate to film. Shyamalan makes a respectable attempt in
"Unbreakable," but lands shy of the excellence he'd achieved in his earlier
work
Unbreakable. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright Penn, Charlayne
Woodward, Spencer Treat Clark.
Written and Directed by M. Night Shyamalan
Produced at Touchstone.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
You gotta hand it to M. Night Shyamalan. The man practically came out of
nowhere and suddenly he's written and directed two of the most memorable
movies of the past two years. First SIXTH SENSE, which blew everyone away
with its ending and its unbelievable box-office success, and now this movie,
whose trailer is easily the best teaser for any movie that I've seen over
the past year. It's mysterious, it's intriguing and it makes you want to see
the movie. Excellent! And with that in mind, I will be writing this review
knowing full well that nobody wants any of the film ruined for them, so I
assure you that I will not be including any spoilers about the movie's plot
in this critique. I just love a good mystery and sure wouldn't want to ruin
it for anyone else.
PLOT:
Set in Philadelphia, this film stars two diametrically opposed men. One man
is black and has a disease which makes his bones very easy to break. The
other man is white and seems to be unbreakable. He is the only survivor of a
train wreck and can't seem to figure out why. The first man helps the second
man come to some kind of understanding about his situation.
CRITIQUE:
M. Night Shyamalan continues to impress. Here's yet another original
creation of his that manages to successfully slap together a unique mystery,
interesting characters, real life situations to which we could all relate
and a touch of the paranormal. I love this guy! I hope he keeps it up
because more movies like this is what we need. Of course, much like any
other great film, this one is not for everybody. The film does have quite
the slow pace, might come off as repetitive to some people and also manages
to parallel THE SIXTH SENSE in various ways. But for me, I was
hooked-lined-and-sinkered from its first two scenes, which much like the
film's teaser trailer, just made me sit up and say, "What's up with that?
Intriguing...now tell me more." The sequences in question basically set up
the foundation of the two main characters in this film, and let me tell you,
they grabbed me and that was that. I couldn't wait to find out why they were
the way that they were, and what it all meant. But Shyamalan draws the film
out slowly. He already seems to have developed a great eye for the camera,
setting up angles just right, enough to give us a taste of the scene, but
not the whole bite. There are also little hints dropped here and there, red
herrings and a Hitchcockian score providing just enough background to allow
for a gradual development of the richer points in the script. Like
Hitchcock, Shyamalan also seems to be finding himself a small part in his
own films. Here, he shows up as a suspicious "drug dealer" at a sports
stadium.
But don't expect a horror with this film. That's not what it is. It's not a
thriller either. No major "thrill" scenes in this movie. In fact, it isn't
until the last twenty minutes that the film's leisurely pace is disturbed by
some invigorating energy. I would consider this picture to be more like a
good ol' fashioned mystery a la Twilight Zone. Set in an ordinary
environment with believable characters, this film manages to creep us out
with elements which just don't seem to make sense in our reality. Of course,
much like any other good story, this film would not be a complete success
unless we connected to the characters on the screen, and in this movie, I
did. In fact, we could all relate to what Bruce's character is essentially
going through. He doesn't understand his place in the world. He is confused.
He is not sure why he is what he is. What is his destiny? We've all felt
like him at some point or another in our lives and you learn to recognize
that in his character early on.
Bruce downplayed his character as much as he did the one in THE SIXTH SENSE
(almost seemed like the same guy but in a different circumstance), while Sam
Jackson was surprisingly restrained as the bizarre dude with the love of
comic books. And as for the ending...don't worry I won't be giving anything
away here, but suffice it to say that unlike THE SIXTH SENSE, a movie which
I believed was taken to another level with that slap-in-your-face
conclusion, this film's finish felt much more like a "Hmmmmm, yeah okay,
that makes sense" kind of thing. Of course, some might scoff at the ending,
but that all depends on whether or not you were "into" the film as it moved
along. It certainly didn't make or break the movie for me, and I doubt it
will blow anyone else away either. This film is not about the ending
necessarily. It is about the journey, a journey that is deliberately
unhurried, melancholic and intriguing. My guess is that anyone who was
greatly interested in this film by its teaser, will more than likely be
impressed with this film's brilliant manner of storytelling. It looks like
Shyamalan is here to stay. Of course, once the movie is over, and this seems
to be developing into a very cool Shyamalan tradition, you will undoubtedly
feel the need to discuss the film with others. It's engaging, it's
mysterious, perhaps even unbelievable to the more cynical in our society,
but ultimately the film is an excellent demonstration of what a great
director, a solid script, a deeper, meaningful message and well crafted
characters can bring to a theatrical presentation as such. For me, the film
worked on various levels and I hope that many others like it just as much.
That's it and I hope I didn't spoil anything for you...that's half the fun!

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by M. Night Shyamalan.
Cast: Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Spencer Treat Clark, Robin Wright 
Penn, Charlayne Woodard, Leslie Stefanson, Eamonn Walker, James Handy, 
Elizabeth Lawrence.
2000 - 107 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 24, 2000.
Writer-director M. Night Shyamalan shot to fame in the summer of 1999 with 
the release of his highly effective "The Sixth Sense," which, due to having 
one of the most extraordinary twist endings in film history, gradually became 
one of the top-grossing motion pictures of all time. "The Sixth Sense" was 
such a powerful stunner, in fact, that it possibly helped and hurt 
Shyamalan's future directing efforts. The film's success proved that he was a 
fresh and exciting new filmmaker, but also put a very large feat over his 
head in attempting to top its predecessor. 
Everyone who sees M. Night Shyamalan's latest endeavor, "Unbreakable," will 
unfairly be comparing it to "The Sixth Sense," which is a shame. In its own 
way, "Unbreakable" is as just as much a one-of-a-kind film, if not quite as 
air-tight in every aspect. Both movies are similar in many stylistic ways, 
and it will always be clear who is at the helm here for anyone whose seen 
"The Sixth Sense." Both movies are moody and foreboding, and their 
intentionally gloomy cinematography stands as a symbol of where the 
characters stand in their lives. There is even a subplot in both concerning 
marital discord. The similarities stop here, as "Unbreakable" is a completely 
different type of movie, with separate goals in mind, and a gratifying payoff 
that isn't quite as shocking as the one in "The Sixth Sense," but every bit 
as necessary in completing Shyamalan's complete intentions.
David Dunne (Bruce Willis) is a Franklin Field security guard in Philadelphia 
who is traveling home from a job interview in New York by train. Following a 
failed attempt to strike up a fling with a pretty fellow passenger (Leslie 
Stefanson), the train is involved in a tragic freak accident leaving 131 
passengers dead, and one survivor: David. Even more mysterious is the fact 
that David is not only alive, but escaped completely unscathed of even a 
minor cut or bruise. Returning home to his young son (Spencer Treat Clark) 
and a lifeless marriage to his wife, Audrey (Robin Wright Penn), David takes 
up where he left off with his job as security guard, but grows intrigued when 
he receives a note on the window shield of his car asking how many days he 
has been sick in his life.
The writer of the note turns out to be comic book art dealer Elijah Price 
(Samuel L. Jackson), who was born with a rare disease leaving his bones 
terribly brittle and particularly apt to injury. When David finally realizes 
that he has never grown ill before, nor has he ever been injured (save for a 
near-drowning as a child), he is aided by Elijah in progressively setting 
into action the true reason why he survived the train crash, and more 
precisely, why he was put on the earth.
It's no secret to say that "Unbreakable" is sort of like a reality-based 
superhero movie, since this plot development is hinted at even before the 
first frame of film and comes into play fifteen minutes in. What is so 
special about the picture, however, is in the way that it follows this story 
thread throughout, unfolding with a deliberate pace that remains intriguing 
due to its great amount of detail and character nuances. To give away any 
more of the movie than has already been mentioned would be criminal, as much 
of the film's satisfaction evolves from not knowing where the story is 
leading.
While the relatively slow pace of "The Sixth Sense" helped to make the 
frightening sequences all the more startling and the ending all the more 
meaningful, the occasionally lethargic tone of "Unbreakable" proves 
problematic. Although never boring or tedious, the movie is nearly devoid of 
anything resembling happiness or humor. The characters remain in depressingly 
downbeat lives free of any sort of joy, and it is difficult to grow close to 
anyone because of this approach. We care about their welfare, even as we wish 
they would show a little more human emotion aside from overwhelming sadness. 
It is Shyamalan's one downfall, but should be noted.
Ever since wisely realizing his career was at a standstill with his endless 
action movie roles, Bruce Willis has found a much-needed resurgence in his 
career, and rightfully so. Willis is very good as the confused protagonist, 
and his low-key performance does nothing but help to convey a character 
filled with insecurities and flaws, who isn't quite sure how to mend the 
damage he has done in his life, particularly with his rocky marriage. Samuel 
L. Jackson, as the elusively kind Elijah, brings added flavor to his role of 
a man who turned to comic books as a child as a way of dealing with his 
health problems.
The supporting cast have less-meaty roles, but some are just as memorable. 
Robin Wright Penn poignantly presents Audrey as a physical therapist who 
spends her time helping others when its her own life that needs the most 
mending. She longs to recapture the spark in her relationship with David, as 
sees his surviving of the crash as a strong sign that the time to do such a 
thing is now. As David and Audrey's pre-teen son, Spencer Treat Clark has got 
the whole brooding-kid act down flat, but doesn't have enough to work with to 
make him entirely sympathetic. And Charlayne Woodard, as Elijah's loving 
mother, projects nothing but sweetness and caring in a movie that is 
otherwise absent of such adjectives.
"Unbreakable" is a mostly spellbinding drama that may not be the spectacular 
achievement of Shyamalan's last film, but why does it--or should it--have to 
be? There is no doubt that he knows exactly how to write and direct 
thought-provoking pieces of work, and he has only confirmed this here. In the 
end, the movie finds the one vital missing link that puts everything that has 
come before into perspective. The conclusion is unpredictable and a little 
surprising, but it's necessary, rather than a simple plot device to one-up 
"The Sixth Sense." Ultimately, "Unbreakable" is a truly impressive rumination 
about the importance of finding meaning in every person's life, and not 
letting that purpose put to waste. 
    - Copyright 2000 by Dustin Putman
      Http://www.young-hollywood.com
      Http://www.atnzone.com
      Reviews by Dustin 
Putman - Http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman 

Author
Scott Renshaw
UNBREAKABLE
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright Penn, Spencer
Treat Clark, Charlayne Woodard.
Screenplay:  M. Night Shyamalan.
Producers:  Barry Mendel and Sam Mercer and M. Night Shyamalan.
Director:  M. Night Shyamalan.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, violence, profanity)
Running Time:  107 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
[WARNING: The following review contains elements that may be considered
plot spoilers. Those who wish to see the film without any knowledge of
plot developments beyond those contained in its trailers should not read
this review.]
     M. Night Shyamalan's UNBREAKABLE easily qualifies as the strangest,
most subdued and most unconventional super-hero movie ever made. It will
probably be considered something of a plot spoiler simply to make such a
declaration, since Shyamalan and Touchstone Pictures have made such a
concerted effort to build a mystery around what exactly UNBREAKABLE is
about. But there you have it: It's a super-hero movie. A moody,
character-driven super-hero movie. With no costumes or action figures. No
explosions. And no crash-cut editing. It's a super-hero movie as directed
by M. Night Shyamalan, the anti-Joel Shumacher.
     This much you probably already know from trailers and commercials:
Bruce Willis plays David Dunn, a Philadelphia security guard who is the
only survivor of a catastrophic train wreck. Not only is he the only
survivor, he emerges from the crash without a single scratch or broken
bone. Ah, but there's more: Soon David is contacted by Elijah Price
(Samuel L. Jackson), an art dealer with a fascination for comic books and
a congenital disease resulting in extremely fragile bones. Elijah believes
that David may be something more than extremely lucky to have survived the
train crash. David may be impervious to physical harm; he may be destined
to use his physical gifts to protect others. In short, he may be a
super-hero. David, of course, thinks Elijah is crazy ... until evidence
begins building that he's not.
     In many ways, UNBREAKABLE's story is the quintessential modern
super-hero story. David is an Everyman Superman, reluctant to believe in
his destiny; Elijah is the mentor who tries to convince him to harness his
abilities. What Shyamalan does is wrap the archetypal mythology in
psychology and family drama. We quickly discover that David is unhappily
married to his wife Audrey (Robin Wright Penn), and has difficulty
connecting with his son Joseph (Spencer Treat Clark). He harbors
long-suppressed unhappiness over the life he may have given up for his
family, unhappiness Willis generally conveys through the raspy whisper he
uses in his Serious Dramatic Actor mode. Willis, Jackson, Penn and Clark
all play fully-developed characters, which makes UNBREAKABLE a rare enough
film in that it's genuinely concerned not just with situations, but with
people responding to situations.
     And yet it's still indisputably, undeniably a super-hero movie,
though unlike any super-hero movie you've ever seen before. Shyamalan's
style is unusal for a director in any genre, one that favors long,
unbroken takes over quick cuts and reversals. That style contributed
greatly to the powerful aura of mystery in Shyamalan's THE SIXTH SENSE,
and it contributes here to a sense of greater consequence than you'd
expect from a tale of a super-powered man learning how to fight evil. The
moment in which David and Joseph jointly discover David's unusual strength
is played with a light sense of humor and a truly under-stated sense of
awe; David's climactic encounter with a villain is shot in a way that
makes heroic triumph surprisingly ugly. As visually gifted as Shyamalan is
as a filmmaker -- perhaps even showy in his way -- UNBREAKABLE never lets
a special effect or a camera trick take over this narrative.
     UNBREAKABLE takes a couple of unfortunate wrong turns during its
third act. One involves David's initial adversary, a fairly garden-variety
nameless psycho. The other involves a late plot development that's not
nearly as organic to the story as THE SIXTH SENSE's already-legendary
twist. It feels almost obligatory, as though Shyamalan were under the
impression that it's what the audience expects from him now. That seems an
unlikely prospect, though, considering how blithely he goes about blowing
up every expectation you've ever had about a super-hero movie. UNBREAKABLE
is a compelling, fundamentally sound story that feels more and more daring
until its late stumbles. It's too bad that the final moments are so weak,
because it might leave viewers doubting its other impressive
accomplishments. This is a film that emerges from its own internal
conflicts ultimately triumphant -- just like a strange, subdued,
unconventional super-hero movie should.
