Title
Review for Beyond the Time Barrier (1960)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dennis Schwartz
BEYOND THE TIME BARRIER (director: Edgar Ulmer; cast: Robert Clarke,
Darlene Tompkins, Arianne Arden, Vladimir Sokoloff, 1959)
A cheapo Ulmer production, what else would you expect from him! The
cardboard sets and flat acting and primitive story line reminded me of
the 50s Captain Video TV program I got a kick out of watching as a kid.
Here, a test pilot (Clarke) goes beyond the fifth dimension in 1960 and
lands in this subterannean place called the Citadel, the year he lands,
is 2024. He is promptly taken prisoner and finds out that only 2 of the
inhabitants can speak: the supreme master and the captain (there are 3
others who can speak, but who are being held as prisoners, they came
here in 1971, after the cosmic plague). Everyone else is a deaf mute and
sterile (I guess, that was one way Ulmer got around the uninspiring
acting). The lovely mute (Darlene), is the only one who is not sterile,
she is the supreme master's grand-daughter, and she is also the only one
there who can read minds.
The plague was caused by A-bomb dust from too many experiments
destroying the cosmic screen that is needed to filter out the cosmic
rays from our atmosphere. It is interesting to note, that scientists in
1998, claim that the physical aspects of such tests are not now needed
because certain computers are now built with enough memory in them so
that they can simulate an actual nuclear test.
Ulmer throws out enough ideas for me to buy into this thin story and to
overlook the cheesy production values and all the loose ends of the
story that he never tied together. But, hey, if a Hollywood director
worked on his shoestring budget and got what he gets from his films, as
far as quality and artiness, it would be a miracle. So what if this film
is not on par with 2001! After all, this is an Ulmer movie, and we love
him and the contributions he has made to films over his long career,
with classics such as DETOUR, RUTHLESS,THE BLACK CAT, and MURDER IS MY
BEAT. This is a guy whose biggest grossing film (a million and half
dollars) was an educational training film on venereal disease, that was
banned because of its explicit sexual content.
With the cosmic plague, people by the 1970s tried to escape from our
atmosphere. They became damaged goods; being deaf mutes, sterile, and,
in some species (the mutants), they were also violent. The mutants
became the enemies of those in the Citadel, and many of them were
captured when they attacked the Citadel and were, thusly, placed in the
pits. The fate of all mankind was doomed. The only hope was for Clarke
to take his rocket ship back to earth. This he accomplishes with the
help of Darlene, and, I might add, with no thanks to his brilliant
fellow prisoners, those darn foreign scientist, and no thanks to those
nonbelieving Citadelians.
Anyway, how Ulmer wrapped up the film is fantastic, as the camera zooms
in on the test pilot who returned to warn the earthlings of the
impending danger looming in the near-future, and we see him lying in a
hospital bed, his face considerably aged, as he tells his story to
skeptical military and state department officials, and he offers them a
ring from the land he just visited as further physical proof that he was
there in that time period, plus he gives them the names of the
scientists he met and how they must be stopped from doing the evil
experiments they will soon do that will contribute to the world
catastrophe.
The question we are left with is, will these dignitaries believe him. So
it seems, the more that things change, the more they remain the same, as
we ask ourselves... Can we ever completely trust our leaders? Do they
possess sound judgment to lead?
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
