Title
Review for St. Elmo's Fire (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joel Schumacher.
Cast: Andrew McCarthy, Ally Sheedy, Judd Nelson, Mare Winningham, Rob 
Lowe, Emilio Estevez, Demi Moore, Andie McDowell, Martin Balsam, Jenny 
Wright, Joyce Van Patten, Jon Cutler, Blake Clark, Anna Maria Horsford, 
Martin Laurance.
1985 - 110 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 1, 1998.
"St. Elmo's Fire" has often been compared to as a cross between, "The 
Breakfast Club," and, "The Big Chill," but there is one noticably large 
difference. While those two films were about relatively mature, 
intelligent people, "St. Elmo's Fire," features seven characters that 
are, for the most part, obnoxious and bratty. I guess that's why the 
cast of this movie was routinely labeled, "The Brat Pack."
As already noted, "St. Elmo's Fire," follows seven close friends in 
Georgetown, following graduation from college. Alec (Judd Nelson), who 
has become an assistant of a senator, desperately wants to marry his 
live-in girlfriend, Leslie (All Sheedy), even though he can't help but 
constantly cheat on her. Kevin (Andrew McCarthy), a cynical, 
chain-smoking writer, is totally against love, and secretly holds a 
secret affection for a certain someone. Wendy (Mare Winningham), the 
virgin of the group, still lives with her overbearing parents, and 
against the wishes of her parents, loves Billy (Rob Lowe), a rebellious 
guy who is already married and has a child. Jules (Demi Moore) is the 
wild one, a secretary who says she is sleeping with her boss, and starts 
to have a cocaine problem. And Kirby (Emilio Estevez) holds an almost 
obsessive love for a slightly older pre-med student (Andie McDowell). 
"St. Elmo's Fire," is one of those coming-of-age movies, where the 
characters are simply trying to come to terms with growing up, but it is 
far from being one of the better films in that genre. The main problem 
with the film is that the screenplay, by Joel Schumacher and Carl 
Kurlander, is very dumbed-down. Aside from maybe Mare Winningham and 
Emilio Estevez, the other five main characters are so annoying and 
self-involved that serious things occur in certain scenes, and yet the 
characters still remain only concerned with themselves. Sure, some 
people are like that in real life, but this film paints all young adults 
as basically immature little children.
Far more successful are some of the supporting characters, who are so 
much more smartly written that I longed for the film to have the 
secondary people switch places with the main characters. By far, the 
most successful subplot involves Estevez's deep love for Andie 
MacDowell, who gives the film's best, most natural performance. Their 
penultimate sequence together, set at a snowy cabin, is so full of 
magic, excitement, and spontaneity that it just goes to show how 
misguided the rest of the film really is. Also interesting in a 
supporting role is Anna Maria Horsford, as a prostitute who meets 
McCarthy. The film could have really made something of those few scenes 
involving them together, but it fails to do anything with it. 
Other subplots are either ill-advised, anti-climactic, or both. For 
example, the whole story involving the love triangle between Nelson, 
Sheedy, and McCarthy is beyond juvenile. And the film sets up Moore's 
drug problem, but it is never dealt with, and nothing is ever really 
solved or discussed.
"St. Elmo's Fire," is one of those films that feature a great deal of 
capable actors trapped within the confines of a stupid screenplay. 
Something could have certainly been done with this material, but again, 
the characters and situations are written at what seems to be a 
grade-school level, and therefore, everything collapses under its own 
weight. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Dustin Putman's
Film Haven >
