Title
Review for Tian yu (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Brian Takeshita
In the late '60's and early '70's, the Chinese government embarked
upon a program intended to close the differences between people from
the city and people from the country.  In typical communist fashion,
the program involved forcing high school age boys and girls away from
their families in the urban areas and out into the rural areas where
they learned trades such as farming and animal husbandry.  Joan Chen's
XIU XIU is about the experiences of one such young girl.
Xiu Xiu is a girl who seems eager to take on new challenges.  Although
she knows she will leave her family and boyfriend behind to learn the
ways of the countryside, Xiu Xiu would rather look forward to her
destination rather than fret over what she will miss.  Trucked away
from the city, Xiu Xiu is initially placed in a commune with plenty of
girls her own age, and actually enjoys the new experiences such as
horseback riding and outdoor movie shows on Saturday nights.  Her
enthusiasm and independence is evidenced when she stands up to a
loud-mouthed young man in the middle of a crowd of others.  However,
for all her spunk, Xiu Xiu is still basically an untainted young girl,
and just as her exposure to another way of life strips her of her
ignorance of the country, so do her experiences there strip her of her
innocence.
The administrator for the program headquarters decides that Xiu Xiu
will leave the commune and learn horse herding from Lao Jin (Lopsang),
a nomad who was supposedly castrated while taken prisoner during the
Tibetan war.  Upon her arrival at Lao Jin's campsite, Xiu Xiu is
appalled that they must share a single tent that affords little
privacy, but soon learns that Lao Jin is a most benign fellow in spite
of his gruff exterior.  Chen's screenplay, based upon a novel by
Geling Yan, is fairly sparse with dialog, yet manages to establish a
believable and meaningful relationship between Xiu Xiu and Lao Jin in
a relatively short amount of time.  Later, when Xiu Xiu learns that
there are a limited number of permits allowing return to the city, we
can nearly empathize with her plight and tangibly notice the film's
mood change from one of discovery to one of descent.  I must attribute
much of the credit to Chen's surprisingly impressive directorial
talent (this is her first time behind the camera), and to the
abilities of the actors, who are able to convey a lot of emotion
without saying a word.
Another non-verbal mode of communication is employed by Chen in
showing the passage of time.  I really enjoyed the way Chen chooses to
give us cues such as the increasing length of Xiu Xiu's hair and the
diminishing supply of toilet paper that her mother packed for her at
the beginning of her journey.  I appreciated the fact that Chen trusts
that her audience will have the visual acuity to notice these
semi-subtle clues.
XIU XIU is wonderfully rich in symbolism and complexity, and I must
admit it took me a full day after viewing this film for some of the
more hidden statements to surface in my mind.  The transformation of
Xiu Xiu as a person is handled delicately and competently, so there is
a lot to look for in terms of deeper meaning.  Take, for example, the
way influential government workers come to visit Xiu Xiu in the
countryside, preying upon a girl who is so desperate to get back to
the city that she will do anything.  The first arrives via ox and
cart, the next by motorcycle, and the one after that by jeep, each a
progressively closer symbol of urban lifestyle.  With each visitor,
then, Xiu Xiu gets closer to home, but also gets closer to what is the
opposite of nature and the innocence that it represents.
However, XIU XIU is more than just a film about the loss of innocence.
It is also a political statement aimed at the corrupt and hypocritical
Chinese government.  The very nature of the film's subject matter
speaks volumes of Chen and Yan's attitude toward a system which
allowed the abandonment of many of its young citizens to unfamiliar
lands and lifestyles.  Notice how Xiu Xiu's predicament is created
because there are fewer permits to return to the city than there are
girls who have been moved out, and the only way out of this situation
is to submit to the unscrupulous employees of the system which begat
the problem in the first place.  XIU XIU was actually banned in China
due to sexual and political content, but I believe the reasoning had
more to do with how the government is portrayed than anything of a
sexual nature.
One of the drawbacks to this film is the inclusion of a narration at
the beginning and end by the boyfriend Xiu Xiu left behind.  Although
it works as set-up for the film, it's intrusiveness at the end spoils
a climax up to which the film had worked so diligently.  Some of the
camerawork during exciting scenes is also a little too frenetic for my
tastes, but I've seen more of the same in examples of Chinese cinema,
so perhaps it's just a style of which I'm not fully appreciative.
Additionally, I had a problem with some of the music, most notably a
recurring thematic melody which I found grating rather than haunting.
Overall, however, XIU XIU is a film worth seeing, and quite an
accomplishment as Joan Chen's directorial debut.  Just be sure to pay
attention, and you'll have something to think about for a few days
afterward.

Author
Murali Krishnan
(This film was released under the English title "Xiu Xiu: The
Sent-Down Girl".)
The Chinese Cultural Revolution was a period when government policies
were instituted to achieve idealistic reforms, but which sometimes
brought devastating consequences. One such policy was the program to
send city youth to the countryside to learn skills from the rural
craftspeople. Although the goal was to provide an alternate education
for a base of workers who would strengthen the republic, these
"sent-down" youth might find themselves isolated in the countryside in
a struggle with bureaucracy to try to get back to the city and their
families. This is the backdrop for this film, a tale of innocence lost
and a symbolic presentation of how simple human corruption can topple
tenuously constructed idealism.
Xiu Xiu (Lu Lu) is a Chinese girl living in the city. She is young and
inexperienced, and thus embraces the government policy of service that
ask young people to become educated in the countryside. She expects to
serve her country and return to her family when her service is
completed. Her assignment takes her to a powdered milk factory in the
remote reaches of Tibet, but she is quickly reassigned to learn horse
herding, with the goal of creating a young womens' cavalry.
The initial setup is given by a voice over narration from a childhood
friend of Xiu Xiu. Its past-tense reference gives a sense of
forboding, making it apparent that tragedy will befall the characters.
In the halcyon days of youth, Xiu Xiu is a lively girl who aspires to
serve her country, but it also represents the spirit of naivete with
which people clung to in this chapter of Chinese communism. It was
thought that simple devotion and organized hard work were the only
necessities in building the nation, but ignored was the fact that
simple human weakness will introduce corruption and exploitation.
Her apprenticeship is with Lao Jin (Lopsang), a Tibetan man who is an
expert rider. Although it might be initially seem inappropriate to
leave a young girl alone on the steppes with a man, it happens that
Lao Jin has an emasculating battle injury that renders him unable to
have a sexual relationship. This in conjunction with a spotless
service record enables the authorities to allow Xiu Xiu to be left
alone in a single tent with Lao Jin. Although he may be considered
less that a full man by the locals who know him, Lao Jin is an
effectual and fearless horseman. He stoically goes about his duties as
a master of his element. He is a powerful, capable man who controls
his own destiny, which stands in stark contrast to Xiu Xiu.
Xiu Xiu is not happy with her situation. Although the high plains are
a beautiful place, with piercing starlit nights, and vast open
expanses, it is a difficult place to live. For a girl raised in the
city, it is difficult to live such a bare existence, where even taking
a bath is a luxury. Xiu Xiu dutifully performs her assignments in the
hopes of eventually returning home to her family. However, as the days
drag on, she gets no word about the completion of her assignment, and
she begins to wonder if she has been abandoned and forgotten by the
authorities.
One day a trader comes by Xiu Xiu. He hints to her that he is well
connected back at headquarters, and that peddling influence could help
Xiu Xiu get a transfer back to the city. Although she is young and
naive, Xiu Xiu may have been able to see the trader's ulterior motives
if she was not gripped with the overwhelming desire to leave Tibet.
She begins an affair with him, mostly to gain an influential friend,
but partly because loneliness has made him attractive to her. All
attraction is shattered when other men slowly begin arriving at the
tent; all of them bragging about the influence they wield at
headquarters. The depth of Xiu Xiu's desperation causes her to have
relationships with all the men, in an attempt to curry favors. She
becomes blind to the fact that the more she gives in to them, the less
likely it actually is that they would want to have her transferred.
Although Lao Jin has grown to care for Xiu Xiu, he cannot help but be
repulsed by what she has let herself become. His skills and mastery of
the countryside kept them alive and well, but he is powerless to stop
the exploitation of Xiu Xiu, because it is a choice she has made. This
reflects situations when corrupt government policies bring misery, and
good people can only watch powerlessly and pity the victims.
The two acting performances are effective, with a standout performance
by Lopsang. The story is gripping, but occasionally exceeds into
melodrama. The film was banned in China for its sexual and political
content, but it does not criticize the intentions of government
policies, only the nearsightedness and ability for corruption.
Highly recommended. This film is a wrenching tale that typifies some
of the blind policies of the Cultural Revolution. It is filled with
inspiring cinematography, where the rugged plains symbolically reflect
the human soul, which can both contain beauty and treachery.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

XIU XIU: THE SENT DOWN GIRL (Xiu Xiu he ta de nan ren) (director/writer:
Joan Chen; screenwriter: based on the novella "Tian Yu" by Ms. Yan
Ge-ling; cinematographer: Lu Yue; editor: Ruby Yang; cast: Lu Lu (Xiu
Xiu), Lopsang (Lao Jin), Gao Jie (Mother), Li Qianqian (Sister), Lu Yue
(Father), Qiao Qian (Chen Li), Luoyong Wang (Narrator), 1998-China)
A powerfully haunting film, that should leave one with some deep
emotional pains over its human drama or turn one completely off by its
obvious political intentions. It is an outstanding debut directorial
effort by the Chinese-born actress Joan Chen (The Last Emperor), who
filmed this political expose fable in China, near the Tibetan border on
the steppes, without the official permission of the Chinese government.
This is a banned film in China and one that they will be unlikely to be
showing there for quite awhile, as its negative reactions to Mao's
Cultural Revolution from 1967-1976, is a blanket indictment against
China's attempt at mass indoctrination. The film shows this cultural
experiment to be rife with incompetency, corruption, bureaucratic
irresponsibility, and poor planning.
The Revolution was an attempt at reeducating the bourgeois masses in the
city by means of removing over seven million students from their city
families and placing them in the country's rural provinces for mostly
agricultural and factory training. Those with family connections to
party officials or who paid off the right officials were not taken.
The film tells its tale as a coming-of-age story about a naive
15-year-old Chengdu city girl, Wen Xiu (Lu Lu); Xiu Xiu is her nickname.
The story is set in 1975, during China's Cultural Revolution, when she
is removed from her poor but loving family consisting of a mother and
father and younger sister (her father is a tailor and makes her
clothes). She is assigned to hard labor and after a year of outstanding
service, she is transferred for no apparent reason, for a six months
term to live on the remote plains of Tibet with Lao Jin (Lopsang), a
middle-aged Tibetan master horse trainer and herder, where she is to be
prepared to ride with the Educated Youth in the elite Iron Girls'
Cavalry. It is later on learned that this group doesn't exist anymore.
The film shows her going through no training, as the herder is gone all
day and she seems to be mostly looking through the kaleidoscope a young
potential boyfriend gave her back in Chengdu as a parting gift.
The unusual relationship between the spirited Xiu Xiu and Lao Jin, who
was emasculated in a tribal war and therefore is deemed safe for her to
live with, is the heart and soul of the film. He is a Tibetan nomad, not
much of a talker, more of an animal lover than a people person, someone
quite used to being alone, and quite able to survive in the wilderness,
which makes him an unusual choice as a teacher. For him, one place is
like another, so it makes no difference that he is in so barren a
region.
He takes his task to heart and watches out for her as best he can while
secretly he develops an affection for her, as he watches her change from
a homesick and modest young girl to someone who is absolutely tormented
to be where she is, feeling imprisoned living in this raggedy tent in
the great outdoors, doing something this educated girl has no use for.
It is sheer madness the way this program is administered and carried
out, whereas no one comes for her when her time is up and there is no
one there to tell her anything. That she panics, thinking she will be
left here for good, is understandable. The film shows by comparing her
mood swings to the natural surroundings, the vast and changing sky, how
small she feels, how it has sunk into her how far apart she is from the
things she loves to do and how much she misses her warm family. In one
scene, it shows her getting dressed up in her best blouse and scarf for
the officials to come and get her after her six months were up, as she
counted off the days, but no one comes. By contrast, it is shown how
comfortable Lao Jin is here. After all, he didn't have to relocate to a
city.
The film is narrated in an incredulous voice by a young man, Luoyong
Wang, the one who longed to be her boyfriend and who is hopeful that she
will return, but not hopeful that he will hear from her again. He is not
sent away because he has family connections.
The power of the film is that it plays out an unsettling relationship
between the innocent virgin Xiu Xiu, who at first is too bashful to
undress before the older man, and then, out of desperation, she meets a
number of men who pretend to have influence at the local communist
headquarters and they mislead her into believing that they will use that
influence to get her back to Chengdu. She has sex with them and thinks
she is using them as a necessary means to help herself. She also gets to
act like a bitch, flaunting her sex in front of the embarrassed herder,
who, at one point, calls her a whore. She has spoiled the pure
relationship she had with Lao Jin, who is only trying to find a way to
help her out of her desperate situation, but is too socially deficient
to know how to help. It is a most interesting performance by this
16-year-old actress, Lu Lu, which gets the audience feeling sorry for
her, but at the same time, feeling annoyed that she acts so badly
against the saintly herder.
Equally effective is Lopsang as Lao Jin, someone who is crippled by his
sexual inability to perform and can't protect the girl from her sexual
predators, even though he wanted to. His acting is seen through the hurt
on his face and the gestures he makes that reflect how he is both
paternal to her and burning with desire for her. But he is ineffective
in dealing with people, as long ago he has given up making relations and
carrying on small talk. By the end of the film, he realizes that he
can't save the girl and his pained heart is apparent. It is a uniquely
masterful performance, that seldom gets translated on the screen in such
a true way as it does here.
The flaw in the film, comes with its bleak ending, that seemed to be
contrived and used as a means of getting more sympathy out of the
audience than it needed to. It took away from the impact of this strange
relationship, that had been mesmerizing and touching in a very real way.
It returned the film to the heavy-handed symbolic message it had
succeeded in avoiding through the telling of its energetic human drama.
The beautiful camera shots of the landscape and the poetry of the girl's
loss of innocence, were undermined to a certain degree by how this
allegory unfolded. Xiu Xiu's story is sad one, but one wonders if it was
really so overwhelming as it is portrayed here. Nevertheless, this was a
substantial film, that had its heart in the right place and offers a
story that is of a superior quality. Overall, a splendid effort is
achieved.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Towards the end of the Chinese Cultural Revolution, there was a program to
send "Educated Youth" into the countryside.  Lasting almost a decade, this
cultural indoctrination was, one assumes, supposed to purge any remaining
remnants of bourgeois thought from these intellectuals.  (This same class
supplied the bulk of the protestors in the famous 1989 Tiananmen Square
tragedy.)
XIU XIU: THE SENT DOWN GIRL (TIAN YU), which tells the story of one such
educated youth, is actress Joan Chen's directorial debut.  The threadbare
script by Chen and Geling Yan is based on Yan's novel.  When the camera has
nothing else to do, it points itself to the sky giving us so many cloud
sequences that the picture could just as aptly be titled THE CLOUDS.
The movie starts off promisingly.  An educated girl named Xiu Xiu, who
appears to be somewhere in age between an older teenager and a young adult,
is sent to become a horse herder in a remote village.  The lovely Chinese
actress Lu Lu plays Xiu Xiu with an assured grace and a delicate style.  In
several scenes of heartfelt dialog the mother (Jie Gao) gives Xiu Xiu advice
and goods to take with her.  Noting the raw and inferior quality of toilet
paper Xiu Xiu is likely to encounter, her mother has traded her sugar
rations for a large supply of good quality toilet paper.  (This "good" paper
looks as rough as cheap paper towels in an American restroom.)
When we cut to the Educated Youths a year later, they are about to gather
under a tent to watch propaganda movies in which brave youths fight and sing
for the glory of Communism.
At this point we expect the depiction of Xiu Xiu's life to show it to be
harsh and inhospitable.  Instead Xiu Xiu looks more like a middle class girl
on an extended camping trip.  Chen stages scenes for maximum gloss and has
Xiu Xiu made up to look glamorous.  This works at cross proposes to what one
assumes is Chen's intent.
A typical workday for Xiu Xiu finds her lying on her back in a lush field of
colorful wildflowers.  Dressed in middle-class raiment and looking like a
million dollars, she idles away her time looking through her kaleidoscope.
Xiu Xiu lives in the middle of nowhere in a tent with Lao Jin (Lopsang), a
gentle man who had "his manhood cut off" when he was held prisoner by
Tibetan rebels.  Their warm, platonic relationship will be tested when she
brings a string of petty bureaucrats into the tent in an attempt to sleep
her way back home.
The widely acclaimed TO LIVE, which covers much of the same ground, makes
the tragic scenes as genuine as the joyful ones.  Chen coats the traumatic
moments with the same slick veneer she uses on the lighter ones, thus muting
any effect they have on the audiences.
The film's actors give everything asked and more.  And cinematographer Yue
Lu makes the film too gorgeous for its own good.  If you don't watch
yourself, you'll be wishing they had inducted you.  Chen makes living out
under the wide and starry sky look pretty appealing.
When you leave, you'll undoubtedly think of the beautiful and tranquil Xiu
Xiu with wildflowers dancing all around her.  That will likely be the memory
that remains, not her tragic moments.
XIU XIU: THE SENT DOWN GIRL runs 1:39.  The film is in Mandarin with English
subtitles.  It is rated R for strong sexual content and some profanity and
would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jonathan F Richards
MOVIES     Jonathan Richards, Santa Fe Reporter
     In 1975, during that Chinese orgy of ideological puritanism known as
the Cultural Revolution, young people from the cities were sent to the
sticks to purge themselves of the stench of urban sophistication and learn
good peasant values.  The teenage Joan Chen escaped ruralization by being
accepted at the state acting school, and went on to a distinguished
international career ("The Last Emperor", "Twin Peaks", etc.)
     In her directorial debut, Chen revisists those days with the powerful
there-but-for-the-grace-of-God tale of Xiu Xiu (Lu Lu), a teenager from
Chengdu who is farmed out for a six-month apprenticeship to a horse herder,
on some vague and woolly-headed plan that has something to do with the
starting of a women's cavalry.  Her assigned mentor, a rugged older man
named Lao Jin (Lopsang), lives alone in a hide tent in the middle of a vast
empty range near the Tibetan border.  
     Though they share close quarters, Lao Jin is no sexual threat.  He was
castrated while the captive of enemy tribesmen.  In any case, his
temperament is gentle and protective.  He does all the work, while Xiu Xiu
sulks and puts on airs.  She doesn't seem to learn a thing, but when her
time should be up she becomes concerned when nobody comes to fetch her
home.  Eventually a peddlar shows up who tells her that the youth program's
over, and everyone's scrambling for a permit to go home.  For a roll in the
hay, he might be able to pull a few strings....
     The performances by the two principals are compelling.  Lu Lu builds a
character whose attitude is not always appealing, but whose helpless,
battered naiveté touches your heart.  Xiu Xiu's loss of innocence, which
accelerates through a series of callers with cynical promises of help as
word spreads of an easy lay in the wilderness, is made the more poignant by
her continued cluelessness.  Lao Jin's impotence extends to his inability
to interfere; he can only withdraw in disapproving sadness as the stream of
visitors passes through, and be ready to tenderly pick up the pieces. 
Lopsang makes him a figure of crippled dignity and wounded depth.     
     There is a rugged, almost nightmarish beauty to Chen's vision of this
forgotten outpost, where the eye sweeps from horizon to horizon unrelieved
by anything but the encroaching menace of storm clouds.  Chen shot most of
her footage on location without a permit from the Chinese authorities, who
would not have granted one and will not allow the film to be shown in
China.  Though it suffers at times from the monotony of its situation and
the adolescent petulance of its heroine, "Xiu Xiu" is a trenchant
indictment of a system in which ideology goes to bed with bureaucracy and
the progeny are abandoned to indifference.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"Xiu Xiu", the astonishing debut film from Chinese actress Joan Chen,
has been banned in its native country because of "inappropriate"
political and sexual content. This ban is expected, since Chen's film
is so bold and provocative, and because its target is the corrupt
Chinese government. The beautiful Lu Lu stars as Xiu Xiu(no more
confusion), a young girl who is "sent down" out of her city in a
program called Educated Youth. The Chinese government believes that
this is a way to keep lower-class families out of their cities. Xiu
Xiu ends up as an apprentice to an older man named Lao Jin, learning
how to herd horses. She is told that after six months she will be able
to return to her home. But as those months pass, she learns that the
only way to have any chance of returning is to let the men at
headquarters have sex with her. This leads to a tragic, cathartic
outcome which reflects the sad truth. Xiu Xiu learns that her fate is
indeed in her hands. The scenes involving Lao Jin and Xiu Xiu are done
with a subtle grace requiring little dialogue. Although "Xiu Xiu"
clocks in at 99 minutes, it is indeed an epic; a tale of fate,
corruption and heartbreak.  The performances are excellent, and Joan
Chen shows depth far surpassing any other first filmmaker I've seen in
ages. The film's heartbreaking score adds to the drama, but "Xiu Xiu"
would be fine even without it. Daring and breathtaking, "Xiu Xiu" is
one of the year's very best offerings.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   On the surface, "Xiu Xiu" emulates a fable, a legend,
though in fact the novella "Tian Yu" on which the film is
based was inspired by the experiences of a woman known by
the writer, Yan Geling.  Look just a bit below the surface and
you'll find that this story--which centers almost exclusively on
the relationship of two people from different cultures and
generations--is one of the most scathing indictments of
Chinese Communism yet filmed.  Taking place during the
waning days of the Cultural Revolution (1967-1976), the tale
illustrates that even during this period of the most intensely
communistic strivings of the People's Republic, your future
could well be determined by money, family influence, and
connections in the right places.  Wherever Communism has
taken root, the people have received far greatest promises
than any government could realize.  By bringing this concept
down to a simple tale that focuses on a 15-year-old girl who
comes of age during a period of particular upheaval in
contemporary China, Shanghai-born director Joan Chen
effectively dramatizes the lies and depravity endemic to that
country's political system.
   The story is narrated by a passionate admirer of the
principal character (Luoyong Wang), who is sadly taking
leave of his young girl friend Wenxiu, nicknamed Xiu Xiu (Lu
Lu).  An innocent resident of the city of Chengdu, she has
been promised a job as a leader of the prestigious girls' Iron
Cavalry, an appointment which would presumably be
awarded after a one year's training program at hard labor
followed by a six months' assignment to a remote region
bordering Tibet.  At the Spartan training camp, the only
entertainment for the youthful participants is an occasional
black-and-white propaganda movie, concluding with a song in
which the entire audience joins.  To Xiu Xiu's surprise, she is
ultimately sent down to a barren, isolated land to work the
horses with a twenty-year veteran horse herder, Lao Jin
(Lopsang), known far and wide as a man who had been
castrated during a Tibetan uprising and who therefore poses
no threat of improper conduct with the girl.  
   At the conclusion of the six months' assignment--during
which time she has become fond of the much older man who
treats her gently and who has obviously been taken by her
innocent charms--she is eager to return to the bustling
Chengdu, but no such luck.  Nobody comes to pick her up
and give her the documents she needs to live there. Instead,
a number of individuals pass through, claiming the ability to
help her get the residence permits in return for her sexual
favors.  She quickly loses her innocence and her modesty,
while the unhappy Lopsang is impotent to come to her aid. 
ULtimately Lopsang, the only person outside her own family
to care for her, grants her the peace she so earnestly seeks.
   Because "Xiu Xiu" is brutally critical of the Communist
system, we can be sure the film will not be shown in her own
country.  Filmed by Ms. Chen without a permit, its crew
worked in remote regions of Tibet, regularly moving to avoid
the authorities.  The movie was shipped out where the work
was honored in Taipei by sweeping seven Golden Horse
(Oscar) awards, including best picture, director, actor,
actress, screenplay, song and music.  Selected in the U.S.
for festivals at Fort Lauderdale, Telluride, San Francisco and
Hawaii, "Xiu Xiu" effectively satirizes utopian regimes by
highlighting a girl who is innocent, optimistic and trusting until
the system turns the despairing young person into a whore. 
In the title role, the seventeen-year-old Lu Lu projects
unsullied naivete, her first-rate performance impressively
converting her into a desperately unhappy, exploited woman. 
Director Chen is so adept at her job that she is able to show
the seething that influences every muscle of the impotent Lao
Jin's body while simultaneously depicting the playful
chemistry that sheaths a genuine chemistry between these
two people.  Ironically, an American can expect to pay $6,000
to tour the very regions highlighted by Yue Lu's dramatic
photography, an area so stifling to the film's principal
character that she would sooner die than endure another
month.
