Title
Review for Mo him wong (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Sunga
DR. WAI IN THE SCRIPTURE WITH NO WORDS (1996)
Chinese, with English subtitles
Directed by: Ching Siu-Tung (Cheng Xiaodong) most famous for the CHINESE
GHOST STORY movies
Starring: 
Jet Li Lian-Jie, Rosamund Kwan Chi-Lam, Takeshi Kaneshiro (Gum Sing-Mo),
Charlie Yeung Choi-Nei, Billy Chow, Johnny Kong, Law Kar-Ying, Ngai Sing
Written by: Sandy Shaw (Siu Lai-King), Szeto Cheuk-Han, Ah Lun (Lam
Wai-Lun)
Ingredients: Indiana Jones-type hero, serial adventure, Nazi-ish
caricature villains, torch lit temple, race to find wooden box
containing untold power
Synopsis: 
In this action comedy, Jet Li is Chow Si-kit, a down-and-out serial
writer whose beautiful wife Monica (Rosamund Kwan) is on the verge of
divorcing him. Si-kit is supposed to be writing the next few chapters of
THE ADVENTURE KING, starring the adventures of Dr. Wai, an Indiana Jones
style adventurer - - but he's too depressed and he's out of ideas, and
the deadline for finishing the last seven of 100 episodes is fast coming
up.
This clever plot twist allows the movie to become two stories at once.
On the one hand, Si-kit the writer and his two young assistants (Takeshi
Kaneshiro, cute Charlie Yeung) find that their suggestion box for ideas
is empty and has run out of idea slips. They tangle with Si-kit's wife
Monica, who can't seem to decide whether to love Si-kit or leave him.
On the other hand, in the serial adventure, Dr. Wai and his assistants
tangle with the dangerous Cammy, Dr. Wai's love interest who can't
decide whether to be evil or to be good in a storyline about locating a
mysterious empty box and reuniting it with a scroll called 'the
scripture with no words.'
Opinion:
This is a very entertaining movie that has an independent, zany feel to
it - - with lots of potential situation comedy. The plot takes several
funny twists and turns because Si-kit, the assistants, and Monica try to
one-up each other as they get a hold of each episode, and write the next
episode in a way that favors their character while the others are not
looking.
Another source of comedy was the over-the-top style of adventure. For
example, in one scene, Dr. Wai tosses two hulking sumo wrestlers up in
the air like volleyballs, then gets on his back, and kicks them (one
with each foot), and the wrestlers go sailing through the air about 40
feet down a warehouse. As the wrestlers are still sailing horizontally,
Dr. Wai gets up, runs after them, and then takes them each by one arm
and throws them a further 20 feet. 
I loved the script to this movie, but I think the adventure scenes are
played a little too stiffly. For example, the wild and unbelievably
exaggerated scenes which were meant to spoof RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK are
played here mostly straightfaced or serious, whereas a little
tongue-in-cheek twinkle of the eye or a Jackie Chan/ Harrison Ford grin
and some big music would have added more smiles.
