Title
Review for Giardino dei Finzi-Contini, Il (1970)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Lino Capolicchio, Dominique Sanda, Helmut Berger, Romolo Valli,
      Fabio Testi
Director: Vittorio De Sica
Producers: Gianni Hecht Lucari and Arthur Cohn
Screenplay: Vittorio Bonicelli and Ugo Pirro based on the novel by 
      Giorgio Bassani
Cinematography: Ennio Guarnieri
Music: Manuel De Sica
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In Italian with subtitles
     THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS, one of the last offerings from 
legendary director Vittorio De Sica (THE BICYCLE THIEF), was an 
international sensation during its original 1971 run.  Winner of the 
Best Foreign Language Film Academy Award and dozens of other accolades, 
FINZI-CONTINIS was recognized as one of the most important imports of 
the early '70s.  Now, for its twenty-fifth anniversary, Sony Pictures 
Classics has remastered the original monaural soundtrack into Dolby 
Stereo, and the film has been cleaned-up and re-issued in a limited 
release.
     FINZI-CONTINIS, a story of anti-Semitism with a different twist, 
opens in Ferrara, Italy during 1938.  Mussolini's brand of Fascism 
already holds the country in a firm grip, and sanctions against the Jews 
are increasing.  Although many believe that the anti-Semitic excesses of 
Nazi Germany will not be repeated in Italy, Jewish freedoms are being 
systematically curtailed to the point where many consider themselves to 
be no better than "third-class citizens."  A recent declaration makes it 
illegal for Jews to marry non-Jews, attend public schools, have a phone 
listing, join the armed forces, or hire Aryan servants.  
     The Finzi-Continis are a powerful, wealthy Jewish family who live a 
cloistered existence on an enclosed, palatial estate in Ferrara.  They 
are by far the most influential people in the region, and, for at least 
a while, their position keeps them relatively safe from the growing tide 
of prejudice.  Mico (Dominique Sanda) and Antonio (Helmut Berger), the 
two adult Finzi-Contini children, have tennis parties for their Jewish 
friends, all of whom have been expelled from the local tennis club.  One 
of the most frequent visitors to these parties is Giorgio Bassani (Lino 
Capolicchio), a middle-class friend of the family.  But, while Giorgio 
is fond of all of the Finzi-Continis, he has a special place in his 
heart for Mico.  Unfortunately for him, his love is not returned.
     THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS, a lyrical, almost-poetic motion 
picture, illustrates the false belief held by some privileged Jewish 
citizens that, if they isolated themselves from the ugliness of the 
political climate, they might be spared its ravages.  Closing one's eyes 
doesn't make the threat any less immediate -- a lesson that the entire 
world learned through World War II.  
     From the beginning, it's clear that Mico's feelings for Giorgio are 
not as shallow as she sometimes pretends.  But she has woven a web of 
denial around herself.  For her, the future, represented by the world 
outside the estate, is fraught with danger and uncertainty, and she 
rejects it.  However, the past, as symbolized by the lands within the 
garden's walls, remains an avenue of peace and safety.  Mico maintains a 
relationship with Giorgio because he recalls childhood memories; to view 
him as a lover would require that she abandon the past for the future, 
which she is unwilling to do.  So she stays on the estate, hiding from 
reality and confounding Giorgio with her rejection of his advances.
     THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS holds its audience at arm's 
length.  As a result, Giorgio's romantic plight, which occupies 
considerable screen time, has a limited emotional impact.  Since we 
never really get close to him, aspects of the movie are less compelling 
than they might otherwise have been.  The film's often-detached 
perspective allows us to focus more clearly on presentation and issues, 
but at the expense of caring about the characters.
     Dominique Sanda, the icy blond beauty who went on to star in 
Bernardo Bertolucci's THE CONFORMIST, leaves a strong impression as 
Mico, whose variable personality (which shifts from coldness to carefree 
vitality) camouflages her fear.  Lino Capolicchio is somewhat less 
successful as Giorgio -- his character never seems complete.  Other cast 
members include Helmut Berger as Mico's homosexual brother, Antonio; 
Romeo Valli as Giorgio's father, who wants to believe that Italian 
Fascism isn't as extreme as the German version; and Fabio Testi as 
Giorgio's friend, Bruno.
     The clearest message delivered by THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS 
is that, no matter how important wealth, prestige, and education are, 
they are no defense against mindless, irrational bigotry.  Although De 
Sica wasn't a Fascist, he lived in Italy during this period and wanted 
to make the film "out of [a sense of] conscience."  And, while THE 
GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS isn't one of the most wrenching Holocaust 
tales, it is one of the most unusual, and highlights another facet of a 
monumental tragedy that features an endless number of faces and angles.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     This is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the widely praised THE
GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS.  Director Vittorio De Sica won the 1971
Academy Award for Best Foreign Film for his depiction of fascism and
romance in Italy.
     If you think you've seen this material covered before in
innumerable other films, you haven't.  THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS
looks at both of its subjects from overlooked perspectives.
     For the anniversary, Sony Pictures Classics is releasing to the
theaters a beautifully restored print with a new Dolby Stereo sound
track.  In the press kit they gave me, they cite twenty-six
international awards the film won at the time.  I could not find a
single problem with the print unlike some other recent restorations I
have seen.  Since the images are central to this film's effectiveness,
the restoration is an important part of what I hope will be a
successful rerun.
     Simply stated, THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS is a dream.  Not a
dream in any conventional sense, but a dream nevertheless.  It is set
in Italy just before and during the start of World War II.  The
aristocratic Jewish families in the story live in a dream world
believing fascism will leave their plush existence untouched.
     The young Jewish people in the story are full of illusions about
romantic love.  This causes them almost as much pain as their denial of
the consequences of fascism.  The whole texture of the film is
ethereal, and the lush cinematography by Ennio Guarnieri uses a soft
haze to enhance the mood.
     Based on the autobiographical novel by Giorgio Bassani, the story
starts in 1938 when Mussolini's racial laws are beginning to take
force.  Like similar ones of his Nazi brethren, his laws start to clamp
down on the rights of people of Jewish lineage.  The proscribed list
includes no servants, no phone listings, no library privileges, no
public schools, and no obituaries.  And it goes on and on.
     As the show opens, however, the law's harshness seems irrelevant
to our protagonists.  Biking through spectacular scenery, a group of
affluent college students is the embodiment of serenity.  Their solid
white tennis clothing shines in the slightly overexposed images.
Backed by the green of the forest about them, they appear as deities.
     As they make small talk at their tennis club, they are as innocent
as forest nymphs.  Their superrich existence must be forever secure.
The luxurious sets by Giancarlo Bartolini Salimbeni and Mario Chiari
show their castles and large homes to be magnificently appointed.
     Giorgio (Lino Capolicchio) talks to his father about the troubles
starting to affect them.  His father (Romolo Valli) begins to worry
that even though he is a Fascist member in good standing, he may not be
able to escape the evil net that is engulfing others.
     A second aspect of the story starts with the blossoming of a
romance between Giorgio and his now grown up childhood sweetheart Micol
Finzi-Contini (the gorgeous Dominique Sanda).  Micol is a member of a
Jewish family even richer than his own.
     After a sudden rainstorm, they find themselves alone.  Her blouse
has become see-through, and naturally, his heart turns to love.
"Children are always prisoners of grownups," she remarks about how she
has now broken the shackles of her parent's control.  He figures that
this is his opening, but it is not to be.  She is an ice goddess to
him, which drives him crazy.  The scene, which happens in a carriage,
is a forerunner to the one in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE (1993).
     Like the Christmas glass ball with the idyllic snow crusted
cottage inside, their world is picture perfect.  The troubles around it
continue as nothing more than mirages to them.  Surprisingly, most of
the show takes place before there are any major fissures in the ball.
Certainly the rich and respected Prof. Ermanno Finzi-Contini (Camillo
Angelini-Rota) and his family are safe from the tyranny on the streets.
Indeed, when Giorgio begins to be shunned, the Finzi-Contini retain
most of their privileges, and Micol continues playing tennis with her
Aryan friends.
     Even as the whole world begins to collapse, it is no one's fault.
As the director of the library explains to Giorgio when he tosses him
out, it is not up to him.  He is just following the rules somebody else
devised.
     This is not a perfect show.  For one, by today's standards it
seems curiously dated at times.  For another, there are some hard to
believe sequences.
     Micol says she views Giorgio like her brother Alberto (Helmut
Berger) and has no interest in having any romantic attachment to him.
Where does she say this?  She has her servant bring Giorgio to her bed
when she is lying in her nightgown and partially under the covers.  She
is stunning in this setting.  This incongruity perplexes Giorgio and
me.  His reaction is probably what mine would have been.
     The music by Bill Conti (THE RIGHT STUFF) and Manuel De Sica is
worth the effort put into its restoration.  It takes the audience on a
journey from romantic to bittersweet to tragic and finally, to hopeless
sad.
     In MACBETH Malcolm says, "nothing in his life became him like the
leaving it."  So it is with the wealthy Jews in the movie.  They line
up politely to go to their slaughter with all the sophistication of
their upbringing.  A simple and beautiful, but completely tragic
ending.
     THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS runs just 1:34.  It is in Italian
with English subtitles.  In 1970, the picture was rated R, but today it
would get a PG-13.  There is no sex, bad language, or violence.  There
is only two brief scenes of partial female nudity.  This year's THE
NUTTY PROFESSOR got a PG-13, and this show is a hundred times tamer.
This film would be fine for kids say ten and up.  I strongly recommend
the movie to you and give it *** 1/2.  To be honest, if I had not
considered when the film was made, I would have given it a half star
less.  Perhaps some of its approaches do seem dated, but the show is
full of simple truths and great beauty.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS (IL GIARDINO DEI FINZI-CONTINI) (Italy,
1970) . *** 3/4  Directed by Vittorio De Sica. Written by Cesare Zavattini,
Vittorio Bonicelli, Ugo Pirro, Giorgio Bassani, from Bassani's
semi-autobiographical novel. Photography, Ennio Guarnieri. Editing, Adriana
Novelli. Art direction, Giancarlo Bartolini Salimbeni. Sets, Franco
D'andria. Music, Manuel De Sica. Cast: Dominique Sanda (Micol), Lino
Capolicchio (Giorgio), Helmut Berger (Alberto), Fabio Testi  (Malnate),
Rmolo Valli  (Giorgo's father), et al. A Sony Classics release. In Italian
with subtitles. 95 min. (Rated R --but this is an old, unbelievably severe
rating)
The best film around these days may well be the 27-year old "The Garden of
the Finzi-Continis,"  re-released in a beautifully restored print, with
updated sound. It was made by Vittorio De Sica, one of a handful of masters
of neorealism, the Italian "movement" (in subjects and style) that appeared
during World War II and widened incalculably the scope of film.
"The Garden of the Finzi-Continis"" won the Best Foreign Film Oscar in 1971
and a slew of other honors. It was said to be De Sica's comeback, but he
had really never gone away. There was and still is a general misconception
that De Sica's star waned after 1953.
There have been so many misapprehensions and hasty judgments about De Sica
that a short evaluation is in order.
De Sica started his career as a stage performer. He soon became very
popular. He then became also a film actor. From the early 1930s on he was
idolized in Italy by the public and the critics. As in the Fascist period
the once-great Italian cinema had declined enormously, it is safe to say
that De Sica's presence salvaged a big percentage of the 20 or so films he
appeared in during the Mussolini era. Some years ago, a retrospective of
Italian movies of that era at the Pesaro Festival  proved beyond question
the importance of De Sica as an actor.
He began directing films in 1939, with good results right away, notably
"The Children Are Watching Us" (1942). Soon his lifelong collaborator was
Cesare Zavattini. Arguably the best of Italian scriptwriters, he worked on
practically all of De Sica's movies. In 1946 began the director's golden
neorealist period, with classics like "Shoeshine,"" Bicycle Thieves,""
Miracle in Milan, and "Umberto D."
Between 1953 and 1963 he directed eight films and a very good episode in
the omnibus "Boccaccio 70."  "Indiscretion of an American Wife" (Stazione
Termini) (1953) has its virtues but was hampered by the tug between the
director and the producer, and its original release print cut down to 63
minutes. Next, De Sica showed that he had a talent for comedy in the
excellent "The Gold of Naples." "The Roof" is a touching return to
neorealism. "The Last Judgment," unknown in the US and little-known
elsewhere, is very good. The realistic, gripping "Two Women" is a superb
drama which won Sophia Loren an Oscar. Two more features, "Anna from
Brooklyn" and "Il Boom," hardly  circulated in the States, if at all. And I
cannot remember clearly "The Condemned of Altona" to give an opinion.
Then came in 1964 the very colorful, funny yet touching "Marriage Italian
Style" with Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni. It won a 1964 Oscar
nomination for Loren, and (oddly, in 1965) the nomination for Best Foreign
Film, while De Sica's "Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow," also with
Loren-Mastroianni, won the 1964 Oscar  for Best Foreign Film.
Even those movies that, for some viewers, seemed  beneath what they
expected of De Sica, have more than a few flashes of brilliance. This was
confirmed a few years back during a major  De Sica retrospective at my
favorite film festival, in La Rochelle (France). (La Rochelle has
repeatedly opened our eyes to other "auteurs," whether unknowm,
little-known , neglected or misunderstood.)
After his Oscar triumphs, De Sica, driven by his need of money, made six
(or parts thereof) commercial films in so many years. Three of them, "A
Young World," "The Witches" may be unknown in America.  "After the Fox" and
"Woman Times Seven," are underrated. The very commercial "A Place for
Lovers" (Mastroianni and Faye Dunaway " and "Sunflower" (Mastroianni-Loren)
are admittedly duds.
A second comeback followed with "The Garden of the Finzi-Continis." Finally
came his last three works, one good, two excellent, all of a serious nature
"A Brief Vacation," "We'll Name Him Andrea" (1972) --sadly not seen in
America--and "The Voyage" (1973).
Throughout his life De Sica continued to play in several films. Most were
by others. Some he directed himself but he hardly appeared in any of his
top works. By my count he was in at least 74 movies, probably more. Both
his accepting roles and directing some pictures stemmed from his perpetual
need of money. He was a compulsive gambler who kept losing fortunes. In the
early 1970s I once sat not far from him in a casino. It was a sad sight.
"The Garden" chronicles the years 1938-1943 fitfully and with some clear
flashbacks (but has none of the customary dating of World War II's
developments), around a wealthy, cultivated and aristocratic Jewish family
in Ferrara. Their large, walled-in estate and mansion, open to friends and
family, become a gilded ghetto when Mussolini  starts his anti-Semitic
decrees. At first it's like an avoidance reaction: stay apart and things
may improve. This is not stupidity. Jews in other countries were clinging
to similar hopes. After all, in places like Germany or Italy so many of
them were totally assimilated and respected that it was inconceivable that
patriotic people (many had fought bravely for their country in the Great
War ) would be treated savagely.
But the measures get nastier: exclusion from clubs, no military service for
Jews, no phone directory listings, no obituaries in papers, no non-Jewish
servants, no going to schools or public libraries and other places, etc.
And World War II is looming. Says main character Giorgio, a son in another
Jewish family: "The war will be even harder for us -- the Negroes."
Giorgio's parents are well-to-do Ferrarans. His father is a proud Fascist
--until he sees the light. For ten years, Giorgio and the Finzi-Contini
daughter Micol, have been best friends. Now grown-up, Giorgio has an
unrequited passion for the girl. She would like to keep the camaraderie but
love is out of the question. Is there another man? Does cool, elusive,
self-possessed Micol have an incestuous relationship (whether in thought or
in deed) with her beloved, terminally  ill brother Alberto? Is he
homosexual? Is it by chance that Micol is reading Jean Cocteau ("he is
chic") who deals with both gayness and incest?
The film weaves with skill and pertinence its various elements, reactions,
personal relations. Discrimination is mostly dealt with in a low-key
fashion, without the shown or verbally described physical brutality of most
Holocaust pictures. There are questions and ambivalences yet the whole
remains lucid. A major role held by Malnate -- Giorgio's best male friend,
a Communist and a non-Jew -- adds veracity and complexity to the story.
The Fascists' anti-Semitic measures may not have been anything like the
Nazi ones, and were disapproved by a large number of Italians, but they did
exist. There was no deportation of the magnitude in other countries. For
example, in Thessaloniki, the second largest city in Greece, were
concentrated most of the Jews of the country,  in a community of at least
60,000. During the Occupation of Greece in World War II, the Nazis deported
all of Thessaloniki's Jews to death camps from which an infinitesimally
small  fraction returned. (Of the few thousands of other Jews living
elsewhere in Greece, some, warned by the Thessaloniki disaster, managed to
hide. Still, many others were sent to death camps).
But then, the horror of persecution both is and is not a matter of numbers.
The focus on the Finzi-Continis makes it come terribly alive. Even if the
people in authority, as they herd off the victims, keep saying "Prego"
(Please).
Without symbolic obviousness, the film contrasts intelligently changes of
seasons, the beauty of nature, young people or old buildings, with the
ugliness of the events. Ferrara is not a studio set but the real city. The
performers are, in neo-realist fashion, mostly non-professionals except for
the headliners: Austrian-born Helmut Berger; the first-rate Lino
Capolicchio and Romolo Valli;  and Parisian Dominique Sanda. She had
already made her mark in three films : by Robert Bresson, Maximilian Schell
and especially in Bernardo Bertolucci's "The Conformist."  The latter plus
"The Garden" made her a major star.
This is a film without audience manipulation or pulling of heart-strings.
The actors are surprisingly "un-Italian" by not engaging into big, overt
emotions, not to mention that wonderful Italian theatricality that would
have been out of place here. There are no heroes. We watch the protagonists
with their strengths and weaknesses in an almost cerebral fashion as we do
the senior, dignified Finns-Contini members. Yet emotion gradually builds
up, climaxing with the final off-screen singing of a heart-breaking
Kaddish, the Prayer for the Dead.
