Title
Review for Set It Off (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SET IT OFF is a warmed over THELMA AND LOUISE story full of
cliched racial stereotypes.  The whites discriminate and oppress while
the blacks drink heavily, smoke dope, and rob banks.  Both groups are
highly proficient in killing each other.
     Takashi Bufford and Kate Lanier's manipulative script tries to
make you care for the hard working members from the projects, but it
overstates its case so badly that it loses most of its credibility.
SET IT OFF is a high energy show featuring lots of automatic weapons
and flying bullets.  The action rarely lags, and you need only wait
short intervals before another scene will do something to try to shock
you.
     Frankie (Vivica Fox from INDEPENDENCE DAY) is a recently promoted
teller at a bank.  As the show opens, her cheery day takes a turn for
the worse when Darnell, an acquaintance from the projects, comes to her
station.  She tells him that she is surprised he has enough money to
have a bank account.
     Darnell and his friends are there to rob the bank.  The heist goes
bad and people on both sides have their blood splatter all over each
other.  After the hailstorm of bullets subside, Darnell and company
make their exit.
     Darnell runs square into rule number one when robbing banks.  If
you rob a bank, do not have initials carved into your hairdo.  Cops
like hints like that.  Remember, those little video cameras aren't
there for nothing.
     "What's the proper procedure for dealing with this situation?"
asks Detective Strode (John C. McGinley) about what Frankie should have
done in the stickup.  Blood splattered Frankie does not pass this
kangaroo court in her boss's office after the robbery so he fires her
on the spot.  This is one of many contrived and unbelievable sequences.
Never does she think about complaining about her rights or threatening
to sue.
     Frankie takes a night job as a janitor along with her friends, a
tough lesbian named Cleo (Queen Latifah), a single mom named Tisean
(Kimberly Elise), and a woman named Stony (Jada Pinkett from THE NUTTY
PROFESSOR) who has a kid brother having problems getting into UCLA.
The women work in a huge and lavish office building full of chrome and
glass which is the exact opposite of the environment where they live.
They pick up the photos on the desks and ridicule the workers there as
having it so much easier that they do.  One woman in the picture, for
example, they say clearly doesn't wash any dishes.
     These woman have problems with everyone.  Their manager at
Luther's Janitorial Service promised them under the table money but
reneges on the deal rationalizing it with, "There are three people in
this world I don't mess with: the I., the R., and the S."  After this,
one of them goes back to the projects to rent her body to raise cash.
     One day, on top of a roof while drinking from open bottles and
smoking dope, they concoct their big scheme.  "If crackhead Darnell can
rob a bank, we can."  From there, the film takes fairly standard twists
and turns.  It includes scenes of police circling the wrong black man
and viciously mowing him down with automatic weapons.  The part is
lifted straight out of the ending sequence of BONNIE AND CYLDE.
     SET IT OFF has potential.  These women have real problems, but
director F. Gary Gray goes for exploitation so much that the audience
is left with only the action to enjoy.  I suppose people who like
hating cops or one of the ethnic groups in the show might also gain
some vicarious pleasure since everyone is shown in a bad light.  In a
time when the country should be trying to come together, I found this
picture to be a celebration of our divisions.  Sad.
     SET IT OFF runs a full 2:00 for no good reason.  It is rated R for
very graphic violence, bad language, sex, and drug usage.  I would just
as soon no one saw the picture, but if teenagers go, they should be
quite mature.  I did not like the film and do not recommend it.  I give
this mean spirited film a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 11/6/96 (wide)
Running Length: 2:00
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Jada Pinkett, Queen Latifa, Vivica Fox, Kimberly Elise, 
      John C. McGinley, Blair Underwood
Director: F. Gary Gray
Producers: Dale Pollock and Oren Koules
Screenplay: Takashi Bufford and Kate Lanier
Cinematography: Marc Reshovsky
Music: Christopher Young
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema 
     SET IT OFF, which chronicles the attempts of four young black women 
to take control of their lives, may sound like it's treading a similar 
path to the one blazed by last year's tepid WAITING TO EXHALE, but 
nothing could be farther from the truth.  In the first place, although 
SET IT OFF contains some dramatic elements, it is, first and foremost, 
an action/caper film.  Secondly, all things considered, this is a much 
better picture.
     If SET IT OFF owes a debt to recent films, it's more to DEAD 
PRESIDENTS and THELMA AND LOUISE than to WAITING TO EXHALE.  The concept 
of four black action heroines makes for a welcome change in a genre that 
is dominated by:  (a) rugged white males with a perpetual five o'clock 
shadow, (b) rugged white males who speak English with an accent, and (c) 
rugged white males with the acting ability of a fence post.  There's a 
freshness and energy in the way director F. Gary Gray attacks this 
familiar material that keeps SET IT OFF entertaining, even during its 
weakest moments.
     The film doesn't get off to a promising start.  The first half-
hour, which details the various characters' motives for becoming 
involved in a bank robbery, is unevenly scripted.  There are a few too 
many contrivances and coincidences.  Once the setup is complete, 
however, things shift into high gear.  The remainder of the film, which 
includes several high-adrenaline action sequences and some slower, more 
dramatic moments, is smoothly-crafted.  There are occasional missteps, 
such as an out-of-place GODFATHER parody, but, in general, SET IT OFF 
manages to rise above these.
     Jada Pinkett (THE NUTTY PROFESSOR) is one of the crop of fine young 
actresses working today, and she deservedly gets more screen time than 
her co-stars.  As Stony, she's the most sympathetic of the quartet, and 
the only one who comes close to having a well-rounded personality.  The 
film opens with her prostituting herself to get the money for her 
younger brother's college tuition.  Shortly thereafter, he is dead, the 
victim of an accidental police shooting.  Stony is devastated, and her 
anger at the system makes her vulnerable to the seductive lure of easy 
money through a bank robbery.
     Her accomplices in crime are her best friends.  The four women, who 
have always been there to support one another, share not only a common 
history but the dream of one day escaping from the projects where they 
have lived their entire lives.  The plan's mastermind is Frankie (Vivica 
Fox), an ex-bank employee who was fired when she reacted improperly 
during a hold-up.  Tisean (Kimberly Elise) needs the money to keep her 
young son from becoming a ward of the State.  And Cleo (Queen Latifa) 
wants in on the action so she can live the high life and buy nice 
clothes for her lesbian girlfriend.  Together, after being kicked in the 
face once too often by society, these four don wigs, borrow some guns, 
walk into the South Los Angeles Bank, and take $12,000 in cash.
     Pinkett is backed by a solid cast, and the chemistry between the 
performers helps us believe that there's a real friendship going on.  
Rap artist-turned-actress Queen Latifa brings a toughness to her role 
that recalls blaxploitation star Pam Grier.  Vivica Fox shows a 
significantly harder edge than she did in this summer's blockbuster, 
INDEPENDENCE DAY.  Newcomer Kimberly Elise is good at making her lower 
lip tremble.  Also appearing are Blair Underwood as a banker who becomes 
romantically involved with Stony, and John C. McGinley as a surprisingly 
non-stereotypical L.A. police detective.
     What sets this movie apart from the innumerable other entries into 
the action/caper genre is its social perspective.  SET IT OFF doesn't 
preach, but you'd have to be blind not to recognize that there's a 
message here about the kind of desperation that can result from the 
familiar cycle of poverty, sexism, and racism.  And, although the 
marketing for SET IT OFF is geared primarily towards African Americans, 
you don't have to be black to appreciate this effective, in-your-face 
style of film making.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
