Title
Review for Aspen Extreme (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     T. J. Burke (Paul Gross) is a failed writer whose life is going
nowhere.  Together with his best friend Dexter (Peter Berg), he heads
off to Aspen, Colorado to become a ski instructor.  T. J. soon learns,
however, that with the glamor comes a price.  He meets the ultra-rich
Bryce (Finola Hughes), who's willing to give him just about anything
money can buy--if he throws over his true love (Teri Polo) and moves in
with her.  Meanwhile, Dexter becomes involved with Aspen's seedy
underbelly, dealing drugs, drinking, and snorting cocaine.
     Without a doubt, the most impressive thing about ASPEN EXTREME is
its cinematography.  Photographed by Stephen Fierberg and Robert Primes,
this movie is a prime example of how to make good use of a camera,
moving with the skiers as they fly down slopes and sail over
embankments, twisting and turning to highlight the action without
confusing or obscuring it.  The numerous "scenery shots" (filmed in
British Columbia rather than Aspen, where the mountains are more
imposing) are picturesque and breathtaking.  ASPEN EXTREME is almost
worth the price of admission just to see such photography.
     That would be the only reason to see the movie, however.  It does
not possess an abundance of redeeming qualities.  Writer/director
Patrick Hasburgh, a ski buff, is unable to put together a convincing
story with real characters.  He knows his stuff on the slopes, but this
is a film that tries unsuccessfully to be a lot more.  For this, his
first effort, he might have had some success trying for a comedy instead
of a drama.
     Aside from being fragmented (it's difficult to tell how much time
has passed at any given point during the film--the seasons change, but
it's unclear how quickly), the plot is flat and unoriginal.  Various
formulas, some of which don't make sense in the context of the
movie--are spliced together without concern for whether they make for
reasonable entertainment.  The drug-dealer subplot is especially
out-of-place.  And, of course, there's a skiing competition to be won.
     Probably the biggest failing of ASPEN EXTREME is its characters.
Movies that try to be dramatically effective need three-dimensional
characters.  This picture has a stock, made-to-order population.  They
can't grow, because there's nothing for them to grow into.  The only way
we know they've changed by the end is because there are lines of
dialogue that tell us this.
     Perhaps experienced actors would have helped, but I doubt it.
Although none of the principles are great performers, they're likable
and energetic, making up for range with enthusiasm.  While that the lack
of talent might hurt a better movie, it actually helps to lighten the
load of ASPEN EXTREME.
     In the end, ASPEN EXTREME is a predictable, pointless melodrama--a
kind of TOP GUN in the snow.  Ski enthusiasts might be tempted to see
the film based on subject matter alone, but, unless they're
undiscriminating about the quality of their movies, I would caution
against it.  Even as vicarious entertainment, ASPEN EXTREME is feeble.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
