Title
Review for Bowfinger (1999)
Number of Reviews
34

Author
Nick Lyons
Bowfinger Review
Starring: Steve Martin, Heather Graham, Eddie Murphy
  Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy are generally known as comic geniuses, but each
have had their hits and misses. During the 90's however, there has been more
misses. Thankfully, that streak has been broken, and it's just happened in the
nick of time.
  In this funny comedy, Bowfinger (Steve Martin) is a lousy director who's only
goal is to make the film "Chubby Rain". The only way it can be distributed
however is if Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) is cast. With a budget of only $2000
there is no way  he is going to be able to cast Kit. So he rounds up a film
crew, and cleverly films the actors going up to Kit whenever they see him.
Unfortunately Kit disappears, so they cast a look alike named Jeff (also played
by Eddie Murphy) to help finish Kit's scenes. This is where the film starts
flowing. It's so outrageously funny the way Bowfinger will literally do
anything to get this film done, even if it means breaking the law, stealing
etc. It really shows how starved some directors are to make a film, at any
cost.
  The whole idea itself is very witty. The type of film Bowfinger was creating
was so ridiculous, it could have passed for an Ed Wood film.  It really shows
how desperate people are for entertainment. Actually in a way, Bowfinger was
like the Ed Wood films. He would steal props, beg on his hands and knees for
the script to get a go-ahead etc. The film's humor though, can't match Ed
Wood's. Bowfinger was witty , and wasn't particulary concerned with anything
besides humor, but even some of the humor was rather amateurish at times. It
was as if the script was desperate for any type of laugh. Ed Wood however was
based on a true story, and that made it all the more stylish and amusing.
  The film started out generally slow, but when Kit's brother appeared, the
film picked up pace. The guy was so nerdy and clueless, you coudln't help but
like him. Without his character, the film would have suffered, because Kit had
too many moronic things revolving around him. The whole Mind Head thing fell
flat, and was not needed. Steve Martin gave a nice enthusiastic performance.
What better actor could create an obsessed director striving for his film to be
finished? Heather Graham was a waste. All she did was sleep around to get her
way, but she was mainly there to look nice, and that's what she did.
  Despite some of it's tiresome humor, the film really gets the general message
across, and for that, it is inspiring. Young directors will appreciate the
film's power, because I'm sure many, like Bowfinger are going through the same
experience, minus
the comedic situations. 

Author
Christopher Null
     It's round two for Heather Graham.  Will she make it in comedy?  Or
will she drag the genre down in flames?  Unlike her earlier attempt at
yucking it up just a few months ago in AUSTIN POWERS 2, Graham is
actually pretty good here, as are all the principals.  Imagine my
surprise when, ultimately, BOWFINGER just doesn't gel the way a good
comedy should, although it certainly has some merit.
     The problem isn't the premise: Never-has-been, aging filmmaker
Bobby Bowfinger (Martin) is so desperate to make a movie, he decides to
film impromptu scenes with major, but paranoid, star Kit Ramsey (Murphy,
basically playing himself).  Wackiness ensues when the scenes (a sci-fi
action film) get crazier and crazier.  Sounds like a good plot to me.
     It's not the stars.  The idea of Martin and Murphy together has had
me salivating for this film all summer.  Supporting stars like Graham,
Stamp (as a Scientology-esque guru), and Baranski all hold up their
parts of the picture well, and Murphy's second role as a nerdy Ramsey
lookalike is the best part of the movie.
     It's not the pacing.  BOWFINGER jumps along from scene to scene and
never gets boring.  And on technical merits, the film is a success.
     The problem, I think, lies in the comedy.  Try as it might,
BOWFINGER just never manages to be hysterically funny.  A few bright
spots aside, BOWFINGER's jokes almost universally fall flat, with missed
comic opportunities buzzing by at every turn.  I really wanted to love
this picture, but compared to POWERS or AMERICAN PIE, this isn't a
brilliant flick.
     I think the fault lies with director Frank Oz (best known as the
voice of Yoda), none of whose credits (including IN & OUT) have
impressed me very much.  Oz obviously wanted to craft an adult comedy
here, but ended up making a PG-13 film that tries to appeal to all
tastes.  It's no surprise that it doesn't really click with adults or
kids.
     On a personal note, Eddie Murphy Productions was *this close* to
buying a script I wrote last year.  Who was my contact at the company?
Eddie Murphy's brother.  Think about that... after you see the movie.
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Homer Yen
Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin) is perhaps the perfect example of the
little guy in Hollywood that is so desperate to see his name up in
lights.  He's a small-time director (very small) who has yet to taste
the sweet nectar of show biz success.   His surroundings and his
lifestyle are meager.   He drives a beat-up van, wears outdated plaid
jackets, and dilutes already-cheap wine with water to make it last
longer.  Yet, despite a long string of failures, his ambition remains
undeniably strong.  He convinces himself that success is just around
the corner.  He promises his friends that they'll all have their shot
at stardom.  He dreams about the day when shiny Federal Express trucks
will come to his door delivering hot, new scripts from the big studios.
Not surprisingly, many of Bowfinger's friends are also waiting for that
rare chance to make it in Hollywood.   His Iranian accountant longs to
be a scriptwriter.  His friend, Dave, continues to do odd favors for
him because Bowfinger is as close as he'll ever get to fame.  And his
leading lady has been promised time and time again to wait just a
little bit longer until the right project comes along.  Finally, the
chance to put them on the map happens.  The project is called `Chubby
Rain', a sci-fi drama about aliens in raindrops, penned by his very own
accountant.  His friends are all too eager to be a part of this
project.  Anybody else that may be needed to operate the equipment will
be cheaply 'recruited'.  Bowfinger is on a tight budget, and the most
they can afford are illegal aliens fleeing across the Rio Grande.  He
also hires Daisy (Heather Graham), a girl with big dreams and a
willingness to sleep her way to the top.  The funny thing is that when
she signs on for this film, she had no idea just how near the bottom
she actually was.   
Writer Steve Martin clearly understands the inner desire that many
people have to become Hollywood players, the sacrifices that they are
willing to make, and the hopes that they desperately try to keep alive.
 It's almost bizarre as to just how much they want to make `Chubby
Rain' work.  But Martin also understands that fame can make stars
eccentric.  Take Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy).  He's the world's hottest
action star, and is needed to make this film work.  But Ramsey is very
manic, always telling himself to keep it together as he receives
counseling from a new age cult called the Mind Heads.  Kit is too busy,
too stressed, or too weird to take part in such a small project.
Bowfinger comes up with a terrific idea.  He tells his cast and crew
that Kit is an eccentric actor and doesn't want to meet any of them. 
His cast believes him because they are desperate to believe him.  In
the meantime, they set up secret cameras and shoot elaborate scenes. 
Actors walk up to Kit (not knowing that Kit is really not part of the
movie), Kit reacts with absurd paranoia (he can't understand why people
are approaching him and talking about aliens), and Bowfinger's amazing
juggling act may actually work! 
This is one of Martin's strongest effort in recent years.  `Bowfinger'
is good-natured and intelligent.  And considering the growing trend of
ribald comedies, this is a breath of fresh air.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"We're trying to make a movie here, not a film," explains Bobby
Bowfinger (Steve Martin), head of Bowfinger International Pictures.
Bobby, whose recent films include THE YUGO STORY, is a no nonsense
filmmaker.  In possession now of a great script by his accountant and
part-time receptionist, Bobby has only one problem.  In order to turn
the script -- CHUBBY RAIN, about aliens falling to earth in fat
raindrops -- into a "go picture," he just needs famous action hero Kit
Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) to star in it.
Superstar Kit doesn't give small-potatoes producer Bobby the time of
day, forcing Bobby to improvise.  He will resort to guerilla filmmaking
techniques and shoot Kit's scenes from hidden cameras.  Kit will never
know he's in the movie, and most of CHUBBY RAIN's cast and crew don't
know that Kit doesn't know.  ("Did you know that Tom Cruise had no idea
he was in that vampire movie until two years later?" Bobby tells his
cameraman.)
The inventive and resourceful Bobby has an answer for every problem.
Need some lighting for a shot?  Just have a guy on the street hold a
reflective "Work for Food" sign and use the sun to illuminate Kit's
face.
Frank Oz, who gave us the riotously funny IN AND OUT (one of the best
movies of 1997), directs BOWFINGER with near perfection.  As they did in
DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS, Oz and Martin form a great team.  Together with
Murphy and a scene-stealing Heather Graham (AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO
SHAGGED ME), the cast and crew of BOWFINGER are as wonderful as those in
CHUBBY RAIN are humorously appalling.
Steve Martin's script is a classic bit of comedic writing with a long
list of memorable lines.  The most amazing part of the script is that it
gets laughs the old-fashioned way without benefit of flatulence jokes,
bathroom humor or bodily fluids.
The movie deliciously skewers Tinseltown.  Bobby reveals such secrets as
the fact that every movie costs exactly $2,184 -- which is what he has
saved away.  Everything above that sum is overhead in the forms of gross
points, mark-ups, etc.  With this sum he hires "the best damn crew we
can afford," which means they go to the border and collect some free
illegal aliens.
In the story's best subplot, Daisy (Graham) plays a would-be starlet
from the Midwest who's given herself one week to hit it big in
movieland.  She's a fast learner.  "I may be from Ohio," she explains.
"But, I'm not from Ohio."  She realizes quickly the tried and true
method for a young actress to advance her career overnight -- figuring
out the right people to sleep with.  Daisy's so bright and fast, that
she flits from partner to partner, rapidly moving up the food chain.
Graham, with her pixyish grin and her girl-next-door sexuality is the
perfect choice for the role.  She takes what could be a slightly sleazy
part and turns it into a sweet and charming one instead.  "Who cares if
when I reach my sexual peak, you'll be 70," Daisy tells Bobby with
sincere conviction as they frolic in bed.
Murphy shows an acting dexterity and a risk-taking openness that's
impressive.  As Kit, he dares to be unsure of himself and completely
paranoid.  As Jiff, a shy guy who would be happy to work his way up to
gofer, Murphy, with bad teeth and braces, plays a second part.  When
they can't find Kit for a while, Jiff is hired to film some of Kit's
scenes.  Jiff blushes or cries, not as an act, but because he's
embarrassed or scared.
In Jiff's interview, Bobby probes whether Jiff would be willing to alter
his appearance in order to look like Kit.  "Would you be willing to cut
your hair?" Bobby probes.  "Yes, but it's usually better if someone else
does it," Jiff replies sincerely, missing the point of the question
entirely.  He does have movie experience; he says that he's a frequent
renter at Blockbuster.
Another subplot pokes fun at stars' fascination with Scientology, called
Mind Head in the movie and led by an ethereal Terry Stricter (Terence
Stamp, Chancellor Valorum from STAR WARS: EPISODE I).  As CHUBBY RAIN's
actors keep coming up to him talking about aliens, Kit becomes neurotic
and unbalanced.  Kit flees to his guru, Terry, who peppers him with
aphorisms.  Kit should mean "Keep It Together," Kit repeats to himself
with little confidence.  After volumes of useless pop advice, Terry
eventually realizes what's happening to Kit.  "It seems the paranoid
sometimes are actually being followed," Terry concludes.
As the movie advances towards a climax worthy of CHARIOTS OF FIRE, the
energetic pacing reaches fever pitch.  In a sort of epilogue, we get to
glimpse Bobby's next movie, which is so outrageously bad that an
uncontrollable fit of laughter is the most likely response.  BOWFINGER
and both of the movies within it are thoroughly satisfying.  Even if
they charged you for all three, it would be worth the triple admission
price.
BOWFINGER runs 1:37.  It is rated PG-13 for sex-related material and
language and would be fine for kids 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, thought the movie was hilarious and gave it a
full ****.  His favorite part was the high-spirited ending.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
BOWFINGER (M).  
(Universal/UIP)
Director: Frank Oz
Stars: Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski, 
Jamie Kennedy, Terence Stamp, Robert Downey jr, Barry Newman,
Adam Alexi-Malle, Kohl Sudduth
Running time: 96 minutes.
A sprightly and wickedly funny spoof on Hollywood, low budget
film making, ambition, and the egocentric behaviour of stars,
Bowfinger heralds an overdue return to form for Steve Martin.  This
often manic comic's career has languished in a series of largely
unfunny, laboured comedies that only hint at his capabilities.
Arguably his funniest comedy since Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, Bowfinger
reunites Martin with director Frank Oz, who seems able to get the best
out of him.  Martin also wrote the script for this manic comedy, which
further proves that his best films are often those he pens for himself
(Roxanne, Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid, etc).
Martin plays Bobby Bowfinger, a disillusioned and desperate
film maker on the periphery of the Hollywood scene.  He finds his last
chance to make a name for himself when he stumbles upon the script for
a schlock sci-fi action flick he believes will propel him to the big
time.  However, the only way to get the film approved by the town's
money men (including a nicely smarmy Robert Downey jr) is to cast Kit
Ramsey, the world's biggest action star and current box office
champion.  Unfortunately, the increasingly erratic and paranoid Ramsey
(Eddie Murphy) wants nothing to do with the film.
Bowfinger hatches a crazy scheme to covertly shoot his
no-budget movie around an unaware Ramsey, and assembles a crew of
hangers-on and wannabes.  He follows the actor around, and has his
actors approach Ramsey and deliver their lines.  All of which
bewilders the paranoid star, and provides for some spectacularly funny
encounters.  But then the spooked Ramsey inexplicably disappears,
leaving Bowfinger and his amateurish crew to find a lookalike
replacement to continue the project.
Murphy and Martin play off each other beautifully in the
scenes they share, and one wonders why they've never worked together
before.  The role of Bowfinger is the sort of likeable rogue and
genial con artist that Martin plays so well, although here he gives
his pitiful desperation a comic edge that is endearing.  Murphy plays
a dual role here, appearing both as the suave, if slightly unbalanced
Ramsey, and also as his mild mannered, dentally challenged brother,
but his performance features many of his familiar mannerisms.
Heather Graham (Boogie Nights, etc) is superb as the ambitious
ingenue who ruthlessly sleeps her way to the top.  Christine Baranski
is marvellously droll as the faded actress who thinks this movie is
her last chance at stardom and is determined to make every moment on
screen count.  With films like What About Bob? to his credit, Oz is a
dab hand at comedy, and he maintains a frantic pace throughout.
However, there are a few moments that fall flat and don't work all
that well.  Oz and Martin have resisted the temptation to fill the
screen with celebrity cameos, which would have pushed the film in a
different direction, and made it uncomfortably close to yet another
Player-like satire.
Ultimately, Bowfinger is an enjoyable enough comedy that provides 
plenty of laughs.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Bowfinger
Rated  [PG-13], 97 minutes
Starring Eddie Murphy and Steve Martin;
Heather Graham, Christine Baranski, Terrence Stamp
Screenplay by Steve Martin
Directed by Frank Oz
website: http://www.bowfinger.com
IN SHORT: A delirious and insanely funny Eddie Murphy-Steve Martin
flick.
Cranky wishes he had bought popcorn futures when he had the chance 'cuz
we're on such a run of fast paced fun flicks that I'm having serious
trouble maintaining this Cranky veneer. What makes it even worse is
that, very close to the beginning of Bowfinger which, unlike Holy Man,
is an Eddie Murphy movie, the number one action star in the entire
BF-Universe, Kit Ramsey turns full figure to the camera and proclaims
"We're trying to make a movie here, not a film!"
And how many Fall Oscar wannabe Seasons have come and gone with poor old
Cranky trying to explain the difference? For once, we get a movie that
sets out purely to entertain strictly on the simplest level. By whacking
the funnybone with all the strength it can muster. And not a single
vomit joke or instance of gratuitous nudity in any of the whacks. Good
old fashioned funny stuff.
This may be one of those times when I get more than my fair share of the
jokes, having worked both sides of the film production fence. Simply,
anyone who sees enough movies to have a general image of what
"Hollywood" is like won't have any trouble following this saber-sharp
satire of what the have-nots in Hollywood will do to become part of the
in-crowd, that crowd being the respected (however temporary) A-list
producers.
Let's begin with Robert "Bobby" Bowfinger (Steve Martin), sole
proprietor of Bowfinger International, a run down hacienda somewhere in
the lesser neighborhoods of LA. Bowfinger, known for his commercial work
and extraordinary documentary "The Yugo Story" is down to his last
nickel when he discovers the script that he thinks will turn his dregs
of a life into gold. It's called Chubby Rain, featuring an invasion of
aliens so tiny they ride raindrops. Thus, chubby. The problem is, the
only way to get it made is to have a heavy duty producer behind you.
Someone like Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey Jr.) who will support the
project only if a name-brand star signs for the title role. Someone like
Kit Ramsey (Murphy) a paranoid racist superstar, firmly in the clutches
of a support organization called Mind Head (which is not like
Scientology at all. My lawyers say I should say that so I don't get
sued) whose upper member wear standard grey suits (n.l.s.a.a.) and who
use a brain-meter to monitor their members actions and emotions
(n.l.s.a.a.). Bowfinger comes up with the idea that, as long as they get
it in one take and shoot covertly, they can walk up to the star and do
their stuff and bingo! A film.
Let's talk about the cast, 'cuz to say much more about the story would
mean revealing the jokes and though there are many, many of them, they
just build up upon each other until entrepreneur comes into conflict
with the grey suited ruler of Mind Head, Terry Stricter (Terence Stamp).
I won't spoil it. There's Carol (Christine Baranski), who passes up a
small way-Off-Broadway part to do her finest work, a la Norma Desmond.
Daisy (Heather Graham), fresh off the bus from Ohio, but a sexual
manipulator par excellence. Scream star Jamie Kennedy is Bowfinger's
right hand cameraman and newcomer Adam Alexi-Malle is the accountant
turned screenwriter, who gets to show off all the top-dollar (well,
maybe top half-dollar) special effects. Finally, there's Jiff (also
Eddie Murphy) a soft-brained lookalike who does all the hard parts and
makes runs to the local Starbucks. With stolen equipment and the
cheapest crew possible, Bowfinger manages to undercut the legendary
Troma Films by producing his epic on a staggering budget of $2814.
Eddie Murphy does his best work when he plays more than one character.
Here, doing only a pair he delivers his sharpest work since Dr. Dolittle
1. Steve Martin, also responsible for the script, continues to prove
that the less crazy he gets, the funnier he gets. And director Frank Oz
continues to prove that he's got a substantial talent, even when his
hand isn't up a Muppet's butt.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Bowfinger, he would have paid...
At the bottom of Bowfinger, is the simple fact that this pathetic little
man does what he does because he's made promises to his friends that he
will not break. It could have been exploited for a big "Aw" but it
wasn't. Thanks, Frank. All the characters fit some kind of stereotype;
all are 2 1/2 dimensional, but that's more than fine for a killer
popcorn flick.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark and Copyright Š 1999 by Chuck
Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. On the web at http://www.crankycritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Bowfinger (1999)
Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski, Jamie 
Kennedy, Adam Alexi-Malle, Kohl Sudduth, Barry Newman, Robert Downey 
Jr., Terence Stamp. Written by Steve Martin. Directed by Frank Oz. 
100 minutes
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests 
to pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Two key moments in the fizzy and funny comedy "Bowfinger" are 
particularly welcome. In one, Steve Martin's character discovers that 
his new girlfriend is sleeping with someone else. The other comes 
when several cast members realize that Martin's character has 
deceived them on a grand scale. In most movies, both situations would 
lead to dramatic confrontations and bitter words, but in "Bowfinger," 
the transgressions are dismissed with a line or two, because this 
production is concerned with laughs, not melodrama. 
In general, I have little tolerance for Hollywood movies about 
Hollywood movies. More often than not, such films are lazy, with a 
paucity of wit and an overabundance of lame in-jokes and snide, 
cartoonish portrayals of industry archetypes ("Hijacking Hollywood" 
and "Burn Hollywood Burn: An Alan Smithee Film" are two particularly 
dreadful recent examples). Thankfully, "Bowfinger" is more 
imaginative, and considerably funnier, than most films of this genre. 
Steve Martin stars as Bobby Bowfinger, a wannabe movie mogul who runs 
Bowfinger International out of his living room. Although his biggest 
credit to date is "The Yugo Story," Bowfinger has big dreams. He 
wants to produce and direct "Chubby Rain," a sci-fi opus written by 
his accountant about microscopic aliens who invade Earth by riding to 
the surface of our planet in raindrops. Bowfinger has a bankroll to 
back up his vision; since childhood, he has set aside a dollar a week 
and now has a whopping budget of $2,184 to bring his film to life. 
After a studio executive (Robert Downey Jr., in his last role before 
being sent to the Big House by a judge fed up with his chronic drug 
relapses) facetiously says he will green-light the movie if Bowfinger 
can secure the talents of action superstar Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy), 
the low-rent filmmaker manages to pitch his concept to Ramsey, only 
to be tossed out of the star's limo. Undeterred, Bowfinger comes up 
with a new angle. Using hidden cameras, he will shoot his actors as 
they approach Ramsey in public places, spout their lines and 
disappear before security can nab them. Then he'll incorporate the 
footage into the rest of his bargain basement movie and, faster than 
you can say "Plan 9 From Outer Space," it's "Chubby Rain" starring 
Kit Ramsey!
Of course, things do not go according to plan. The pampered, 
temperamental Ramsey turns out to be a raving paranoid (among other 
quirks, he is so obsessed with racism that he uses a computer to 
count the "Ks" in a screenplay, then presents the total as "proof" 
that the script is riddled with hidden references to the KKK). Thrown 
into a panic by the repeated appearances of Bowfinger's cast ("these 
strangers keep coming up to me, speaking in some strange white people 
code!"), he goes into hiding at MindHead, a quasi-religious cult 
center whose members wear pyramids on their heads), leaving "Chubby 
Rain" in a lurch. Never one to give up, Bowfinger hires Jiff (also 
Murphy), a good-natured goofball and Kit Ramsey look-a-like, to allow 
filming to continue. Jiff, who aspires to be a delivery boy, quickly 
finds himself in the middle of the madness, as Bowfinger struggles to 
complete his masterpiece no matter what. 
The whole idea is silly as hell, which is a big part of the charm of 
"Bowfinger." The film plays like a feature-length series of "Saturday 
Night Live" sketches, except that the majority of these are actually 
funny. The ensemble cast, reminiscent of legendary bad director Ed 
Wood and his entourage, works well together, with Christine Baranski 
(the best thing about the old sitcom "Cybil") stealing scenes with 
her outrageously arched eyebrows, vampish strutting and over-the-top 
line readings. 
But it's Eddie Murphy who holds the production together with two 
dandy performances. He is absolutely convincing as spoiled superstar 
Kit (referencing personal history, perhaps?) and delightful as the 
innocent Jiff. After restarting his stalled career with "The Nutty 
Professor" and "Dr. Dolittle," it's gratifying to see Murphy shine 
without special effects.
Steve Martin wrote the film and his take on Tinseltown is interesting.
 The sole truly sympathetic character in the entire cast is Jiff, who 
also happens to be the only outsider to the scene. One female cast 
member spends most of the movie sleeping her way up the Hollywood 
food chain, finally ditching Bowfinger and all the other males for a 
romance with a powerful woman. Steve Martin once dated Anne Heche, 
who had a number of relationships with high-profile actors before 
settling down with Ellen DeGeneres. Coincidence?  
Despite its many clever bits (wait until you see how the camera crew 
is recruited) little of "Bowfinger" lingered in my memory after I 
left the theater. Frivolous, wispy and quite disposable, this is 
cinematic cotton candy, which is not necessarily a bad thing. Sure, 
cotton candy is insubstantial, but it tastes good for the few moments 
it's there and so does "Bowfinger."  

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Steve Martin is at his best when his character is trying to sell something
not really worth buying. See his silver-tongued evangelist in Leap of Faith,
a character both reprehensible and sympathetic, the endearing used car
salesman. Eddie Murphy's at his best when allowed to do variations on his
always-one-step-ahead -of-you-and talking-twice-as-fast Axel Foley. In
Bowfinger--written by Steve Martin--both of these actors get to be at their
best: Steve Martin as the title-character--Hollywood outsider/ occasional
filmmaker Bowfinger--and Eddie Murphy as Kit Ramsey, eccentric action star.
And, importantly, they get to be at their best in their own scenes. As with
Dinero and Pacino in Heat, Bowfinger and Kit Ramsey are hardly ever
on-screen together, meaning heavyweights Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy don't
get in each other's way, which gives each whatever creative room they might
need.
Too, though, there's Eddie Murphy's other character, Jiff, the lookalike
stand-in Bowfinger recruits when Kit Ramsey refuses to star in Bowfinger's
picture "Chubby Rain." Jiff isn't a variation on Axel Foley. More a
variation on the Jerry Lewis-type character Eddie Murphy's been playing of
late. Because Jiff isn't Eddie Murphy at his best with Jiff, he and Steve
Martin's Bowfinger can be on-screen together. There's even room for Heather
Graham, Christine Baranski, Jamie Kennedy, Terrence Stamp (not in his The
Hunger persona) some walk-throughs by Robert Downey Jr, etc.
Holding them all together too is a near-brilliant writing job: the premise
of Bowfinger is that if Kit Ramsey won't be in Chubby Rain willingly, then
he'll be in it unwillingly--or, unwittingly, via Bowfinger's cast
approaching him on the street and running lines, all of this surreptitiously
caught on film. If left at this, Bowfinger would be merely clever, but then
Steve Martin takes it one step further, makes Kit Ramsey's 'alien' paranoia
dramatically dovetail with the script for Chubby Rain, which in turn makes
kit Ramsey more and more dependent upon his 'therapist' at MindHead (a
thinly veiled Scientology), which is exactly the kind of domino-action a
comedy needs.
And then there's Frank Oz directing, doing everything right, working in
probably 80% of the exposition without dialogue, as in the Rockford Files
opening, where, by the time the camera gets to Bowfinger, we already know
him and his type: that, because he's existed at the fringe, never succeeded,
he thus deserves to succeed. Bowfinger is, after all, a Cinderella-story, a
structure familiar enough to us that Steve Martin can get a little fantastic
with it and not lose us altogether.
However familiar, though, the structure and the writing can't quite hide the
occasionally inconsistent humor, the absurdist moments when someone made the
decision to go for the compulsive laugh when this isn't a movie about the
compulsive laugh. It's more akin to Rushmoore, or, talking Steve Martin, LA
Story. Also painfully apparent is how unnecessary Jiff is to the development
of Bowfinger. Yes, a clown character was needed there, but there's no reason
for Eddie Murphy to play two roles for it. Granted, it looked good in the
trailer, it worked in the first Austin Powers and it was what Dead Ringers
was all about, but more often than not, one actor with two roles is either a
glitzy hindrance or overcorrection for a weak story. And Steve Martin didn't
write a weak story here, meaning Jiff just slows things down, or, provides
the plausible excuse for the plot to lurch forward when it really had enough
momentum that it was going to lurch regardless. Other than that, though,
Bowfinger is about as close to flawless as it gets, right down to the
spoof-ending (every martial arts movie), which, while eerily reminiscent of
a similar scene in Half-Baked, is, like everything else in Bowfinger,
somehow just a little better.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Tim Chandler
Directed by: Frank Oz
Written by: Steve Martin
Starring: Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine
Baranski, Terence Stamp, Jamie Kennedy
Produced by: Brian Grazer
An unknown producer makes a movie with action star Kit Ramsey, only
Kit doesn't know he is in the film.
    Bowfinger, the new comedy written by and starring Steve Martin and
directed by Frank Oz takes on several Hollywood institutions, and has
a whole lot of fun along the way. An incredibly clever concept coupled
with the best acting the leads have done in years make this one of the
smartest comedies of 1999; this is saying quite a bit in the year of
Election, Drop Dead Gorgeous, American Pie and South Park: Bigger,
Longer & Uncut. The cast has a lot of fun and their energy is
transplanted on to us, the audience.
    Steve Martin is Bobby Bowfinger, a broke jobless producer who
wants desperately to one day make it big. His accountant and part time
receptionist Afrim hands him a screenplay for an alien action film
titled Chubby Rain (chubby because the aliens hide in the rain
drops). He loves it, assembles his team of usual two-bit actors and
hatches a plan to lure in bigtime director Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey
Jr.), which promptly fails. Once action star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy)
also turns him down, he comes up wit the plan on which Bowfinger
hinges; shoot Kit Ramsey in the film without him knowing it.
    There is a parallel that can likely be made between Bobby
Bowfinger's excitement at coming up with his brilliant if implausible
idea, and Steve Martin's deciding to write the story. You can almost
see the glint that must surely have shone in Mr. Martin's eye when the
concept struck him. What if someone covertly filmed a big star, threw
actors at him to film spontaneous scenes and made a movie without the
actor ever knowing he or she was in it? The same glint strikes
Bowfinger as his assistant stalks Ramsey, tracking his every
move. This is Steve Martin's ode to Hollywood and all of its flaws,
hitting star power, Scientology (with a corporation called MindHead
run by Terrence Stamp) and even his former flame Anne Heche and her
coming out with Ellen DeGeneres.
    The humour moves between slapstick physical gags and biting
satire, mostly working. Innumerable scenes caused the audience to
laugh uproariously at my screening, often blocking out parts of the
dialogue. Scenes involving Bowfinger's dog Betsy, a busy highway,
cheap special effects gags and a movie star who is absolutely clueless
from start to finish combine to make a damn funny movie. Eddie Murphy
is the perfect choice to play Kit Ramsey (though originally the part
was written for a white star, it was largely revamped for Murphy, with
great results). Much as Julia Roberts had no problem acting the part
of a spoiled Hollywood star in Notting Hill, Murphy slips into
Ramsey's flamboyant world with ease.  It is his best role in years,
and continues his tradition of playing multiple characters as he also
plays Kit's brother Jiff. Jiff is the most un-Eddie Murphy-ish
character he has ever played, and Murphy gets almost too silly with
it. Heather Graham is funnier than in Austin Powers 2, her previous
comedic effort, yet still seems wooden at times. Christine Baranski is
more relaxed as Carol, Bowfinger's regular actress and Jamie Kennedy
is solid as Bowfinger's assistant.
    To appreciate this film, you have to lose yourself in the
possibilities of the concept. Forget for the duration that it is
highly implausible that such a scam could ever be pulled off. Forget
the fact that you've seen Eddie Murphy play multiple characters
before, and forget the fact that some of the physical humour that
Frank Oz stages doesn't quite work. Just lose yourself in the fun, in
the glee with which Bowfinger stalks Kit Ramsey and films him in a
lame sci-fi alien movie. Think about how silly Scientology seems when
it is parodied by MindHead, about the hilarious way in which Bowfinger
hires a film crew, and about how well-trained Betsy the dog is. This
is a highly intelligent comedy and a bit of a comeback for both Steve
Martin and Eddie Murphy. You'll feel good and giddy after seeing
Bowfinger. Trust me.
check out more reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/bwfng.html
or e-mail me at timbit@canada.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"Bowfinger" is one of those comedies that is supposed to entertain at
Hollywood's expense. Albert Brooks' recent "The Muse", made by the
independent October Films, did entertain at Hollywood's
expense. "Bowfinger", however, is made by Universal, a major movie
studio; so exactly how incisive was Steve Martin's script allowed to
be? Judging from my viewing of the film, not at all.
Bobby Bowfinger(Steve Martin) is more than down on his luck. His
company, Bowfinger International Pictures, is run out of a torn-up
little house, and hasn't made a film in what seems like years. But,
when a former secretary submits an original screenplay about aliens,
entitled "Chubby Rain", Bowfinger calls it dramatic genius and sets
out to make a film.
When he pitches it to a big studio exec.(Robert Downey Jr.), he reads
the first and last pages of the script and tells Bowfinger that if he
can get action star Kit Ramsey(Eddie Murphy) to sign on, then it's a
"go" picture. When Ramsey turns him down outright, Bowfinger comes up
with an idea; he wants to film Ramsey's scenes without him knowing it,
by having the actors go up to him, say their lines, and watch his
reaction. It turns out that Ramsey is having delusional problems
anyway.
Bowfinger then holds auditions for the acting roles, and Daisy(Heather
Graham), a young woman from Ohio who arrived with dreams of being a
star, gets the main female role. Daisy is not quite as naive as she
looks, knowing that sleeping around in Hollywood can get you almost
anything. But Bowfinger's real find is Jiff(also Eddie Murphy), a
dimwitted burger-flipper who happens to look exactly like Kit
Ramsey. From there, "Bowfinger" is the story of a group of misfits
trying to make a Hollywood "guerrilla" film.
However, "Bowfinger" is not nearly as clever or funny as it set out to
be.  Being a Hollywood film, it never really takes a stance on today's
Hollywood and never turns into what I'd call a satire. Most of Steve
Martin's script isn't clever, but rather dumb humor. Just as Bowfinger
pretends to be a big-time director, "Bowfinger" pretends to be
original and fresh.
The acting, though, is above-average. Heather Graham finds a good
comedic role in her caricature of a scene-whore, and Eddie Murphy is
great in both roles; especially as Jiff(he has done the dual role
thing before, in "The Nutty Professor"). Murphy has been skewing away
from children's movies this year, which seems to be a start on the
right track for him. Frank Oz's direction could have been tighter, but
this is essentially Martin's film to make or break.
"Bowfinger" is not totally unfunny; it's more of a hit-and-miss comedy
that misses a bit too much. If you would like a no-holds-barred satire
of Hollywood(that is still quite subtle) I suggest you check out "The
Muse". It has the wit, heart, and vigor that "Bowfinger" is sorely
lacking.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski,
Adam Alexi-Malle. Rated PG-13.
Steve Martin is one of the most versatile actors in the business; he is
also one of the funniest comics, one of the few capable of making the
viewer believe any situation, no matter how farfetched. That much I knew
before Bowfinger. What I didn't know, and was pleasantly surprised to
learn, is that he is also a marvelous screenwriter. Mind you, this is
not Martin's first stab at scripting his own movie, but with the
possible exception of L.A. Story, it's his first real achievement in the
field (The Man With Two Brains, anyone? No? How 'bout A Simple Twist of
Fate?), a satirical yet good-natured, broad yet riotously funny spoof of
the movie business.
Martin is Bobby Bowfinger, a man with lifelong, so far unrealized dreams
of making a movie, who has kept his actress friend from taking many
promising opportunities with his hopes of making a Hollywood picture.
His accountant buddy writes a script for an action movie, "Chubby Rain".
Bowfinger brings the script to a big shot Hollywood producer. The
producer likes it and agrees to sponsor and release the movie under one
condition: Bowfinger must get Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy), the biggest
action star around, to sign up for the project.
Ramsey says no but Bowfinger is not ready to give up on his lifelong
dream so easily. He decides to make the movie with Ramsey anyway:
without him knowing it. The problem is that Bowfinger's own performers
(a young, ambitious, sleazy wanna-be actress (Heather Graham) and a
self-proclaimed thespian (Christine Baranski)) both believe that they
are actually acting with Kit as opposed to coming up to him on the
street (in the parking lot, at a restaraunt, etc.), shouting lines and
having him run away in fear and confusion. Bowfinger tells them that
Ramsey's acting style dictates that he never socially interact with his
co-stars.
Sooner than later, a frightened Kit Ramsey starts hiding out and Bobby
must find an alternative method of starring the coveted actor in "Chubby
Rain". He holds auditions for Kit look-alikes (a requirement: a nice
ass, because Kit Ramsey, much like real-life Ewan McGregor, has a
running streak of showing his derrier on screen) and finds a near-twin.
Jiff (Murphy again) is exactly like Kit in everyway save the braces, the
stupid laugh and outgoing personality.
Bowfinger may not be the best satire of Hollywood ever but it's up there
with gems like The Player. It's also one of the best films of 1999.
Steve Martin's writing is sharp, witty and dead-on. Bowfinger, as a
whole, is a very, very funny movie but even during the the times when
the jokes take a break it's still entertaining because unlike a lot of
otherwise funny comedies it has a legitimate plot and characters we can
care about. Not even Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me could claim
that.
There is not a trace of anger in Bowfinger despite the fact that it is
rightfully classified as a satire. It exaggerates and it makes fun but
it's never mean or mocking. In fact, if I was asked for one word to most
aptly describe Bowfinger my answer would be "affectionate". Much like
the Austin Powers movies, here is a spoof that has no animosity towards
its subject. And that can make for good viewing.
In addition to his glorious script, Steve Martin's performance is
likewise on the ball; frantic, energetic, appealing and hilarious. He
put thought and love into his acting here and it shows: his Bobby
Bowfinger is one of the most likable -- and human -- screen characters I
have seen in a Hollywood movie. As for his similarly big-name co-star,
for the first time in years and possibly for the first time since he
became popular, Eddie Murphy contents himself with a supporting
performance. Indeed, he has only about half of the screentime that
Martin was allotted. Still, Murphy makes his presence felt. For the time
that he is on screen, he is as funny as ever. Eddie Murphy may be taking
the back seat on this one but damned if he isn't a good back seat
driver.
Bowfinger is entertaining, smart and unpretentious. It never claims to
be a meditation on the state of the film business but it is an effective
satire; a good-natured, funny and enjoyable combination of wildly
talented comics and a killer script.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Bowfinger can only be compared (since I do love comparing two films with some
of the same plot sequences) with the recent The Muse, which also took a fun
look at the thing that we call Hollywood. But this comedy seems a little duller
than The Muse was, it's more of a spoof on all of those B-movies you see in
that dusty corner of the neighborhood video store.
Bobby Bowfinger (Martin) is a movie producer, he works out of a dump that he
calls Bowfinger International Pictures in the cheap section of Hollywood. When
a member of his troupe of actors comes up with a wonderful action script, (it's
called Chubby Rain, and it's about aliens that come down to Earth to fry us all
to a crisp in the rain, thus making it chubby) but no movie executive will
produce it unless big time action star Kit Ramsey (Murphy) is attached.
So the entire crew just goes up to Kit and says their lines about aliens and
such. This works out perfectly because Kit is paranoid that aliens are coming
to take over the Earth, when they finally drive him over the edge (and into a
mental hospital) they must find someone that looks like him to play the part of
Kit.
Finally, a summer comedy has something that all of the other ones lacked, a
good script. Martin has come up with some of the funniest plot sequences and
one-liners that I've seen in a long time. Topping it off is Heather Graham, she
knows exactly how to get around in Hollywood, and her character makes a
surprise twist in the end. Performances are all great, especially Murphy, Kit
Ramsey talks a mile a minute (much in the same way of Chris Tucker) and it's
really fun to watch what he does with the role. Also making a wonderful turn in
Christine Baranski as a theater veteran that thinks she's a top notch actress.
So if you want to laugh, go see Bowfinger, which gets *** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains some language and passionate make out scenes.
Good Age 12 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Walter Frith
1982 was an interesting year that in one way or another, affects the events
surrounding 'Bowfinger'.  One quirky story involved the estate of the late
great Peter Sellers suing those involved with the making of 'Trail of the
Pink Panther'.  The movie was a series of out takes based on old footage
featuring Sellers as Inspector Clouseau from other 'Pink Panther' movies all
strung together with new footage containing other actors to look like a new
adventure based on the Inspector Clouseau legacy.  Since Sellers died in
1980, it looked as if they were trying to make a movie without having to
give any compensation to Sellers himself.  It was also a year where Steve
Martin made 'Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid'.  That film showed Martin
interacting with footage from other movies, for example, those with Humphrey
Bogart to make it look like the old footage and new footage combined made
for a coherent film.  It was also the year that Eddie Murphy made his motion
picture debut in '48 hrs.' which launched a successful movie career for him
It was also the year that Frank Oz made his directing debut with the film
'The Dark Crystal'.
Steve Martin likes to lampoon the film industry and make light of its image
and the culture surrounding it.  His 1991 triumph 'L.A. Story' put the L.A.
lifestyle in the proper perspective and he played a slasher film director in
Lawrence Kasdan's 1991 mediocrity 'Grand Canyon'.  For me, Martin's best
role was opposite Michael Caine in 1988's 'Dirty Rotten Scoundrels' where
Martin played a bumbling con man who gets more than he bargained for when he
learns to master his art form at the hands of a more experienced thief
played by Caine.
Together for the first time are Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy in
'Bowfinger'.  Surprisingly, Martin plays his part in the film completely
straight.  Murphy is the talent that makes the film work because he plays
two characters that have more in common with each other than it first
appears.
Martin is Bowfinger, a no talent film maker, sort of an Ed Wood of the 90's
who wants to make that one great motion picture.  A member of his staff
writes a completely campy film about aliens called 'Chubby Rain' that
Bowfinger believes will be brilliant.  He cons his way into the company of a
hot shot studio executive (Robert Downey Jr.,) who, after a brief encounter
with 'Bowfinger', tells him he has his deal for a picture if he can land the
biggest action star in Hollywood named Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy).  After
Trying to lure Kit into the project personally, Bowfinger fails to get his
star but has a back up plan.  He tells his staff who have struggled with him
for years (played by actors Christine Baranski, Adam Alexi-Malle and Jaime
Kennedy) that he did land the deal but confides in only one of them that he
failed and decides to photograph the real Kit Ramsey in secret from far away
distances without the star's knowledge and uses many excuses to make his
staff believe that Ramsey is working on the project voluntarily.  Also in
the mix is a young actress (Heather Graham), just off the bus from Ohio with
dreams of making it big as an actress in Hollywood.
Murphy's character of Kit Ramsey is hilarious.  He's the sort of star who is
jealous of other action heroes and complains that he doesn't get the same
treatment as the biggest stars who are his peers.  He treats outsiders like
dirt, is close to his entourage and suffers from paranoia and sees a pseudo
therapist (Terence Stamp) for his problems.  Ramsey's paranoia is all based
on misunderstanding.  Thrown into the story for all of this is a Kit Ramsey
look alike (also played by Murphy), whose character has a great twist that
may make Martin's plan work after all.
'Bowfinger' is directed by Frank Oz ('In and Out', 'What About Bob?', 'Dirty
Rotten Scoundrels', 'Little Shop of Horrors') and Oz structures his film
like a cleverly played game of desperation.  He makes light of it all and
the film never uses a heavy hand in any of its scenes to make the chemistry
between its stars work.  Oz also likes to make his movies work like puppet
shows.  He manages to get the most deadpan looks from his actors and often
confines many of his scenes to the same locations.  There is also a deft
amount of silliness (at times too much) that accompanies his stories in
their sub text.  Oz's work with Jim Henson's Muppet franchise gave him these
light hearted qualities that work well with live action characters and the
human actors who play them.
'Bowfinger' has a perfect running length of 97 minutes and is a true triumph
for Martin as the film's author.  He manages to come up with an entertaining
story filled with witty gags and a fair amount of originality and Eddie
Murphy shows that at the age of 38, he can still act in a very immature
manner and still look like a seasoned veteran of all sorts of comedy as he
displays many layers of his past work this time around.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Although Steve Martin's 'Bowfinger' is essentially a one-joke movie, it is 
very funny.  Wait a minute, maybe I should call 'Bowfinger' a film and not a 
movie
Slapstick and wit have always marked Martin's stuff.  Some of the most 
hilarious scenes in 'Roxanne' , his best movie, come from C. D.'s physical 
humor, when he defeats bullies with a tennis racket, for instance; but he 
also defeats a bully in a bar with barbs!  Steve Martin is, after all, an 
accomplished playwright.  Wasn't that a Chicago style manual we glimpsed on 
C.D.'s shelf, as he waited for Chris to come over?
'Bowfinger' gives us more of the same heady and ridiculous stuff.  One 
minute Bowfinger is tying his dog's hind  feet together, the next he's 
talking his way out of a big-time ticket by enlisting the cop and his car in 
the movie being shot.  This Bowfinger guy is charming because he's a con-man 
with a vision, a smart-ass who's sincere and dedicated to the art form he's 
been preparing for all his life.
Bowfinger is an extremely small-time producer and director.  In the opening 
scene we see snapshots and posters decorating Bowfinger's deteriorating 
house:  community theater productions and publicity stills.  What excites 
the man now is a script written in two weeks by his accountant.  It's a 
story about aliens that fall to Earth in precipitation, and it's called 
'Chubby Rain'.  There's little chance it will actually be made, except that 
Bowfinger cajoles a bunch of buddies - amateur actors, an accountant and a 
shady parking attendant - into devoting some time to the project.  When a 
producer (Robert Downey Jr.) says that he will buy 'Rain' if it stars Kit 
Ramsey, Bowfinger has his mission.  But how will he ever convince this 
action-movie superstar to star in 'Chubby'?
Ramsey is played by Eddie Murphy, and it's a superb performance.  Murphy 
plasters the character with paranoia, exaggerated fits of neuroses blended 
with the egotism of a Hollywood icon.  What fits into his condition 
perfectly is Bowfinger's outlandish idea:  his actors approach Kit Ramsey 
anywhere he happens to be, and spout their lines at him. Of course this 
subterfuge ignites Ramsey's mental imbalance with hilarious results.   
Terrified of aliens and conspiracies, Ramsey flees to his rich, gray-suited 
guru (Terence Stamp), who runs a cult called 'MindHead'.  The members of 
this organization, by the way, wear pyramidal hats and act overly calm.  
What Martin jabs at here is MindHead's apparent control over Ramsey's life;  
the suave big cheese offers Kit any services he might need to "keep it 
together," to resist the alien obsession and the urge to show "Mr. Weinie" 
to the Laker girls.  We wonder how much of Ramsey's astronomical income goes 
to the white-haired pseudo-psychologist.
By now Murphy's used to playing multiple roles, and in 'Bowfinger' he also 
portrays Kit's brother Jiff, a look-alike whose personality differs 
drastically.  His Jiff is a grinning milquetoast who sports glasses and 
braces on his teeth - a truly conventional but thoroughly funny nerd.  Why 
the need for a double for Kit?  Well, the celebrity has gone to MindHead's 
secret retreat for cases like his heavy-duty meltdown.  Because Jiff is so 
gullible, Bowfinger and his crew have him dash across an L.A. freeway, and 
he makes it, twice!  In a piece full of various takes on the motion-picture 
industry, it's Murphy who garners the best lines and scenes in 'Bowfinger'.
Steve Martin is the mind behind it all, and for most of the movie the joke 
works.  In one scene we watch Ramsey's big Mercedes chased by an old black 
Riviera, an "alien" (Jiff in a tin-foil costume!) as both cars speed in 
reverse until a police cruiser puts a stop to it.  But there are too many 
scenes that rely on the premise of Ramsey's shocked and frantic reactions to 
these filmmaker-stalkers.  As an actor, Martin is outshone only by Murphy.  
We sense Martin's long experience, timing, and subtle brilliance in every 
scene he's in.
A sublplot that does not work fully involves Heather Graham as Daisy, a 
blonde from Ohio who gets off a bus in Hollywood and asks, "Where do I go to 
be a star"?  Martin's idea of having this ingenue sleep with anyone who 
might kickstart her career is funny, but Graham seems to lack the 
calculation needed for more laughs; her sluttishness is too nonchalant.  
Christine Baranski as Carol, a stupendous over-actor, carries her role 
over-the-top.  The audience guffawed every time Carol jumped out and spewed 
her nonsense at Kit Ramsey.  I should also mention Adam Alexi-Malle as the 
accountant-turned-screenwriter Afrim.  This man is pudgy and droll and 
expert at what he does.  You will, I guarantee, lose it when Afrim does his 
bit as the cop!  Finally, Bowfinger's dog Betsy is a big help in one scene 
in particular, when the director needs the sound of high heels (which are 
attached to the pooch's front paws!) in a scene in which Kit is being 
followed through a parking garage.
I look forward to any Steve Martin offering, and 'Bowfinger' once again 
shows the intelligence and risk-taking that are now trademarks of his 
comedy.  If it's different, it's funny, Martin realizes, and this movie is 
different than most of the comedies released in the nineties.  It's smart, 
it's silly, and best of all, it will get three or four belly laughs out of 
you.


Author
Jamey Hughton
Bowfinger is a good movie about the making of a very bad one. The
screenplay, written by co-star Steve Martin, skewers everything in
Hollywood from cheesy science-fiction movies to chop-socky fight
sequences, and all in a crafty and accomplished manner. Anyone who knows
of, or has had any association with movie-making should thoroughly enjoy
this clever comedy for it's entire duration.
The central premise behind the film is an inspired and promising one.
Bobby Bowfinger (Martin), a cheapskate and small-time Hollywood
producer, has always dreamed of making a successful motion picture but
has never attained the proper tools to do so. A new script, an alien
invasion story entitled Chubby Rain, has caught Bowfinger's eye. After
confronting a big-name producer named Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey Jr.)
in a restaurant, an agreement is made to finance the movie. But first,
Bowfinger must get renowned action star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) to
sign in on the project. Kit turns the offer down immediately, but
Bowfinger still has the intent to shoot the film. After emptying out his
life savings, the hapless producer tells the remaining cast and crew
that Ramsey is involved, and then prepares to film the movie without the
star's knowledge.
The actors confront Ramsey on the street, saying their lines as hidden
cameras peek through bushes to capture the footage. The unknowing star,
who is terrified of aliens and being abducted, is brought to believe
there is actually pod people after him. When the conditions become even
more treacherous, Bowfinger is forced to hire a Kit Ramsey look-alike
named Jiff (also Murphy), a sweet-natured dork who runs for coffee
in-between shooting vital scenes. These include attempting a suicide run
across an 8-lane freeway, and one of the `hot' scenes involving
supporting actress Daisy (Heather Graham) removing her blouse.
Bowfinger takes it's sweet time getting started, but when the plot
switches into high gear, great things happen. Certain scenes are so
precisely executed, perfectly framing moments that are absolutely
fall-down funny. No, hilarious. Standouts include the chase through a
parking garage in which Ramsey, who's supposed to be being followed,
keeps checking behind him to investigate a strange tapping noise (it's
actually Bowfinger's dog in high heels). And just try not to laugh in
the climactic kung-fu sequence, featuring Jiff in an excerpt from
another Bowfinger classic entitled Fake Purse Ninjas. While the entire
97-minutes of Bowfinger isn't always on target, individual scenes may
have you rolling in the aisles.
Masterful comedy director Frank Oz (Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, In and
Out), who has never made a bad movie, ensures a quality final product
and is aided immensely by Martin's sharp-edged script. However, the real
on-screen star is Eddie Murphy. This is the actor's finest work since
his breakthrough into the Hollywood market in the early 80's. Murphy
excels at every corner, not only succeeding with presenting believable
paranoia in the eyes of Kit Ramsey, but in creating a likable buffoon in
Jiff as well. These three talented comic minds have squeezed every
morsel of potential out of this premise, and the reward is a virtually
guaranteed helping of hearty laughs.
Steve Martin generates the power behind Bowfinger, but Murphy fuels it.
This is a summer-time comedy that, unlike something such as American Pie
and South Park, doesn't break any rules. But it's still just as
uproarious, or perhaps even more side-splitting than anything we've seen
this season. The supporting cast, including Christine Baranski as a
work-loving actress and Jamie Kennedy as the cameraman, all perform well
within their limits. The only presence that demands real attention when
placed next to Martin or Murphy is the beautiful Heather Graham, as the
young film star who has plans to sleep her way to the top. Graham,
attempting to further her stardom after appearing as the new Powers'
girl in AP2, displays a cheerful but naive persona that nicely
corresponds with the wackiness of the screenplay.
I wouldn't be caught dead buying a ticket for Chubby Rain, but watching
how it all came about is certainly entertaining enough.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Bowfinger (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Steve Martin, Eddie
Murphy, Heather Graham and Christine Baranski. Written by Martin. Directed
by Frank Oz.
 We movie critics usually are an impassive lot. We sit at screening after
screening, detached, perhaps jotting a note or two. In public, we hardly
ever react to what is being shown - be it good or bad.
 The latest is "Bowfinger," a hilarious comedy about the magic of movie making.
Bowfinger could be the grandson - or distant cousin - to Tim Burton's "Ed
Wood." Both overflow with an affectionate, loopy love of filmmaking. Both
forego cynicism and condescension about the process.
 "Bowfinger" also hits the Marx. While lacking the anarchy of an outing
with Groucho, Chico and Harpo, Bowfinger - at 97 minutes - is reminiscent
of the frenetic pace of the early Marx Bros. films such as "Horse Feathers"
and "Duck Soup."
 "Bowfinger" offers more laughs than any other film this year. It is
express-train comedy, written by and starring Steve Martin.
 Martin plays Bobby Bowfinger, a producer-director on the edge of the
industry, whose shanty office is a ramshackle dump miles from the glitter
and glamour of Hollywood.
 Bowfinger is desperate to hit the big time and feels that "Chubby Rain," a
science fiction action flick written by his accountant, Afrim, is his
ticket. The only hitch is he doesn't have a big-name star.
 No problem. Gathering his motley crew of filmmakers, he sets out to trick
the biggest action star in the business, Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy), and,
without his knowledge, make him the star of his ultra-low budget flick.
 Bowfinger does this by having people spy on Ramsey and fashioning his
scenes around the locales at which Ramsey is scheduled to appear.
 It's hijinks hilarity as the already-paranoid Ramsey - he turned down a
script because it contained about 1,400 K's, which, when divided by three,
equals about 445 KKKs - is driven to higher heights of paranoia by these
strange people, some of whom act like aliens, who continually accost him.
 To fill in the long shots, Bowfinger hires Jiff, a not-too-bright, but
earnest young man without much acting ability whose only attribute is a
resemblance to Kit Ramsey. The reason for that resemblance is made clear
later in the movie.
 Martin's script hardly allows you time to catch your breath between
laughs. Scenes continually top each other.
 For instance, Bowfinger says he's going to get the best crew available,
and the camera cuts to his van picking up a group of illegal aliens coming
across the border. The joke is topped at the end of the movie when these
men - who could not speak English nor who knew one end of a clapboard from
another - all have cell phones and are talking industry lingo.
 The strong supporting cast also is responsible for much of "Bowfinger's"
jocularity.
 Heather Graham is Daisy, a wannabe starlet who will do anything to get
more screen time in Bowfinger's movie. She is smarter than she lets on, at
one point telling one of her paramours, "I may be from Ohio, but I'm not
from Ohio." She knows the score and who to score with to get her way.
 The always-reliable Christine Baranski plays Carol, the over-the-hill
diva, for all she's worth. She dominates most of her scenes with a comic
abandon.
 Murphy is the funniest he has been in years. Forget "Dr. Dolittle" and
"The Nutty Professor." This is the Eddie Murphy of "Trading Places," of the
first "48 HRS." As Kit, he's a profane, spoiled, motor-mouthed nutcase. As
Jiff, he's vulnerable, sweet and shy. And Murphy draws a clear demarcation
between the two.
 Martin is in top form. Not since "All of Me" has he shined so brightly in
a comedic role. His Bobby Bowfinger is a quick-thinking con artist whose
only goal is to complete his dream movie. To do so, he will lie, cheat,
connive, steal. If Groucho Marx were to play a down-and-out movie
producer, he would be Bobby Bowfinger.
 "Bowfinger" is a 97-minute laugh-a-thon. Your sides will hurt when the
film fades out. It is a comedy event not to be missed.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
John Sylva
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Bowfinger, a Frank Oz film, stars two of today's Kings of Comedy, Eddie Murphy
and Steve Martin.  Murphy has been in a slump lately, as his last three films,
Life, Holy Man, and Dr. Doliitle, have come no where near where Murphy's
comedic talents were in 1996's The Nutty Professor.  Martin has been in a
comedic slump, as his last two mainstream comedies, The Out of Towners, and
Sgt. Bilko, are nowhere near as funny as Martin is in 1979's The Jerk, or his
Saturday Night Live performances.  Both actors are trying to redeem themselves
here with Bowfinger, but although their performances are hilarious, Bowfinger,
for the most part, fails to do so.
Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin), founder and owner of Bowfinger International
Films, is pushing 50, and still hasn't gotten his big break in the film
business.  After his accountant, Afrim (Adam Alexi-Malle), feeds him a
screenplay, entitled "Chubby Rain," in which aliens come down to earth in
raindrops, Bowfinger is determined to get Hollywood's top action star, Kit
Ramsey (Eddie Murphy), in the lead role.  After Kit declines any involvement
with the film, Bowfinger, with cast, including Daisy (Heather Graham), an
Ohioan who came to Hollywood to pursue acting, Carol (Christine Baranski), who
is still trying to get her big acting break, crew members Dave (Jamie Kennedy),
and a few Mexicans that he rallied up, decide to film around Kit, having his
actors walk up to him, rehearse their lines, and hope to get the right lines
back out.
Love the setup- Too bad the Steve Martin screenplay can't sustain the
cleverness it starts out with.  As Bowfinger is just getting started, while the
cast and crew follow Kit around constantly, the film is at its best, bringing
strong laughs, and snappy dialogue- but this is where everything tumbles
downhill. Bowfinger realizes that he can't get Kit for the closeups, so
therefore hires a look a like, Jiff (also Eddie Murphy).  Jiff is a nice,
innocent guy, whose only experience in the film business is renting actively at
Blockbuster and attending the cinema.
Eddie Murphy works well in both roles, but the film doesn't have room for both.
 The film, at a short running time of 95 minutes, could work better if only
Jiff or Kit were the main focus, but the limited plot isn't strong enough for
both story lines.  If the main focus was filming Kit the entire time, without
him knowing it, Bowfinger could have been one of this year's funniest films. 
It's not that the character of Jiff isn't funny, it's that the two storylines
running against each other are uneven, and don't particularly work.  Now, maybe
if Jiff was there from the start, Bowfinger could have worked better, but once
Jiff enters the picture, the screenplay, and film, becomes a total mess. 
Martin's screenplay works at times, as it pokes fun at Hollywood producers and
the entire Hollywood style.  Yet at other times, the screenplay has its major
difficulties, as it continuously throws lame jokes at you.  For example- Daisy
is supposed to spoof Hollywood actresses, and their disposable boyfriends, but
soon after weare informed of Daisy's sleazy ways, the character becomes
obnoxious, as jokes of Daisy's fall flat.
Bowfinger never seems to take off, as the entire film seems to hit the same
notes, repeatedly.  The only times we get variation from these notes is when
Christine Baranski is present, whose character in Bowfinger is completely
clueless as to why she can't meet Kit Ramsey, and in Chubby Rain is a knife
wielding alien who gives the film's best lines.  Baranski overdoes all of her
Chubby Rain lines, with extreme exaggerations in her voice, making for the
funniest character of the film.  Baranski is the standout here in Bowfinger, as
she turns the character that is given only two dimensions by the screenplay,
and forces it to three.
Heather Graham attempts comedy again here, after giving an applaudable
performance in Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, and succeeds once again. 
Although the screenplay gives her an annoying character to work with, Heather
Graham makes the most of the it, and she delivers some big laughs as acting in
Chubby Rain, but when she isn't, she is simply a background image. 
Eddie Murphy is stuck in another mediocre movie, but in this one, Murphy gives
an over the top, hands down hilarious performance.  Bowfinger isn't the usual
Eddie Murphy material, as Steve Martin is the main focus, but Murphy does his
share to add to the mediocrity of the film.  It's not fair to call Steve Martin
and Eddie Murphy a comedic duo, for the two barely have any screen time
together, but both give funny, credible performance as their developed
characters.
The screenplay uses many characters as Daisy does boyfriends, one after
another, for basically no reason.  Jamie Kennedy's talent goes to waste, as he
is used simply used to locate Kit at all times, or to obtain camera equipment. 
If the screenplay is going to bring characters like Kennedy's Dave in, it could
at least give personality/character development.  In another example, the
entire cheap/Mexican crew idea brings laughs at first, but did the film have to
carry them along the entire way?
Some of the gags in Bowfinger work, as the dog walking in high heels in an
empty parking lot, scaring Kit senseless, comes to mind, but many of the jokes
that have potential to be funny are dragged out, as we are supposed to be
laughing hilariously, but only a small grin may appear across your face.  Frank
Oz and Steve Martin have a good idea going for them, and a great cast, but
Bowfinger succeeds about as much as Bobby Bowfinger and crew do while trying to
film Kit Ramsey- Only somewhat.
The Bottom Line- Eddie Murphy and Steve Martin continue their slump of mediocre
films- But at least this one carries a few big laughs. 

Author
John Carroll
   Steve Martin was hilarious on "Saturday Night Live".  Eddie Murphy was
hilarious on "Saturday Night Live".  Therefore, we know both of these men can
be hilarious.  Yes, I know, I am the master of the obvious.  Anyway, we know
these men have potential.  However, it seems their movie careers are always a
bit shaky.  For every Dr. Dolittle, Eddie Murphy follows up with a
Holy Man.  But, Bowfinger is a great follow-up.  It capitalizes
on the strengths of each actor and makes for an all out funny film.
   Now, most of you have read my review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who
Shagged Me.  In my opinion, it is the best comedy of the summer.  I gave it
four stars out of a possible four stars.  My review of Bowfinger is
three and a half stars out of a possible four star rating.  Just to reiterate
my Powers review, I do not necessarily mean that this is an epic film. 
Bowfinger, like The Spy Who Shagged Me, is a comedy.  It does not
need Oscar-caliber acting, only a clever script and believable acting.  Now on
with my review.
   Bowfinger is hilarious.  If you have any idea of the movie industry,
you will be laughing throughout the film.  It combines a clever script with
knockout humor.  No matter what kind of comedy you prefer, you will either be
laughing out loud or just chuckling to yourself.  Either way, Bowfinger
is a very funny and enjoyable experience.
   Steve Martin wrote the script and stars in Bowfinger.  He plays Bobby
Bowfinger, a struggling filmmaker who tries to act the posh life of a Hollywood
movie man.  However, he fails miserably.  He thinks he strikes gold when his
accountant gives him a script entitled, Chubby Rain.  Right from the
get-go, the movie makes fun of the typical Hollywood blockbuster.  It moves on
with Bobby Bowfinger trying to give the script to a studio.  He finds a studio
executive, played by Robert Downey Jr., who thinks it is a joke and will only
make the film if Bobby can get Kit Ramsey, the hottest star in Hollywood, to
take the lead role in Chubby Rain.  So, Bowfinger tries to get Ramsey by
trying to act "ghetto" and fails miserably.  But, Bowfinger cannot let his cast
down, so he tells them Ramsey accepted the role.  What is his plan?  To get his
actors to run up to Ramsey and say their lines without Ramsey knowing.  Let's
just say comedy ensues.
   Steve Martin is great in this film.  Not only does he mock Hollywood, but
also he creates clever jokes and funny one-liners that do not necessarily spoof
the movie industry.  This makes it a unique film because it does not rely on
spoof jokes to carry it through all ninety-six minutes.
   Eddie Murphy is back with a vengeance in Bowfinger.  He does double
duty as Kit Ramsey and Jiff, Ramsey's look alike and brother.  He plays both
roles superbly, with a sharp contrast.  Kit Ramsey is a black superstar, and
despite his success, he is a paranoid man who thinks aliens are after him and
that "The Man" is holding him down.  Jiff, on the other hand, is the lovable
loser who gets laughs with his dopey comedy.  Murphy plays both roles with wit
and charm.  His Jiff character falls short at the end, but his role as Kit is
terrific.  This film probably would have been a bust if not for Murphy.  We
believe that Murphy believes aliens are after him, which makes the film even
funnier.
   The supporting cast is great, as well.  They do not get in the way that
much, and feed off the humor of Martin and Murphy.  Christine Baranski plays a
diva, and is funny despite a lack of screen time.  Jamie Kennedy plays Martin's
right hand man, and does it with flair.  He does not go over the edge and just
sets up Martin's humor.  The only member of the supporting cast who does not do
that well is Heather Graham.  She starts off as a wishful actress, leaving Ohio
for Hollywood and asking, "Where do I become an actress?" once she gets off the
bus.  But, she then becomes some sleeping around actress who just wants more
lines.  The transition is hardly believable, and keeps Bowfinger from becoming
an even better comedy.
   Overall, Bowfinger is a must-see.  Besides, Austin Powers: The Spy
Who Shagged Me, Bowfinger is the best comedy of the year.  It is
witty, clever and most of all, unique.  It does not rely on spoof jokes, but
clever jokes as well.  And it is aided by the sharp and hilarious performances
by Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy.  You will not see Murphy and Martin at the
Academy Awards, but you will see them entertaining audiences for the last few
weeks of the summer.
Four Stars out of Four Stars
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Michael Dequina
_Bowfinger_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
Universal's ad campaign for _Bowfinger_ would lead one to believe that
the film rides solely on one (admittedly inspired) gimmick: Unable to
land action superstar Kit Ramsey to headline his no-budget extravaganza,
aspiring movie producer-director Bobby Bowfinger instead casts a geeky
lookalike.  However, that's only a small fraction of what's on
writer-star Steve Martin's savvy satirical mind, which takes stinging
potshots on a wide variety of targets under the Hollywood sun in one
efficiently funny package.
It takes a while for Bobby (Martin) to get so desperate as to hire a
dead ringer for Kit (Eddie Murphy), but his initial scheme is just as, if
not more, pathetic.  Knowing that the key to making his sci-fi cheapie
_Chubby_Rain_ a success would be the involvement of the elusive and
self-centered Kit, he shoots his unwitting "star" in secret, assembling a
performance out of footage shot while he is in public places (such as
restaurants and parking sructures) and reacting to his "co-stars," who
approach him out of the blue.  The reaction usually elicited is one of
confusion and fear--which, as it happens, are the primary emotions of his
"character," who is supposed to be witness to an alien invasion.
While the shooting-on-the-sly premise is funny--particularly Murphy's
work as the oblivious and bewildered Kit--_Bowfinger_ really takes off
with the introduction of the softspoken Jiff (also played by Murphy), who
is hired as a Kit substitute when the real deal goes on a retreat to
replenish his rapidly diminishing sanity.  Much like how the film is
given new life, Murphy is similarly energized in the character of Jiff. 
He has always been at his best when he tosses his vanity aside and
disappears completely into a role, as he did so memorably in
_The_Nutty_Professor_, and he similarly wrings laughs and elicits a fair
amount of sympathy as the good-natured, if slow of mind, Jiff.
Low-budget guerilla filmmaking and egotistical stars are Martin and
director Frank Oz's main targets in the film, but they nimbly use their
supporting players to attack other Tinseltown staples.  Daisy (Heather
Graham) is both the wide-eyed innocent who thinks a bus ticket from Ohio
is also an instant one to stardom as well as the predatory young actress
on the make.  On the other end of the spectrum is Carol (Christine
Baranski), an aging stage diva who itches for a taste of recaptured
glory.  Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey Jr.) is your typically greasy studio
exec, and _Chubby_Rain_'s script happens to be written not by a career
screenwriter but an accountant (Adam Alexi-Malle) with big-time Hollywood
aspirations.  There's also a thinly-veiled knock on Scientology.  With
such a wide range of targets, Martin and Oz give all their peripheral
players their moments to shine, with the one notable exception being
Jamie Kennedy, whose natural live-wire instincts (see the _Scream_ films)
are unfortunately held in check in the limited background role of Dave,
the studio gofer who "borrows" the equipment to film Mr. Bowfinger's
opus.
_Bowfinger_ does take its time to build a head of steam, but in an age
where movies often begin well before precipitously falling apart, the
fact that it is a film that actually gets better as it goes along makes
it something of a rarity.  Also rare is the enjoyment in finding a
seemingly no-brainer comedy that reveals itself to not only have a brain,
but a sharp one at that.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz

 BOWFINGER (director: Frank Oz; screenwriter: Steve Martin;
 cinematographer: Ueli Steiger; editor: Richard Pearson; cast: Steve
 Martin (Bobby Bowfinger), Eddie Murphy (Kitt Ramsey, Jiff Ramsey),
 Heather Graham (Daisy), Christine Baranski (Carol), Jamie Kennedy
 (Dave), Barry Newman (Kit's Agent), Terence Stamp (Mind Head leader,
 Terry Stricter), Robert Downey Jr. (Jerry Renfro), Adam Alexi-Malle
 (Afrim), Kohl Sudduth (Slater); Runtime: 96; Universal/Imagine
 Entertainment; 1999)
A funny spoof on Hollywood, scripted by and starring Steve Martin.
Martin is Bobby Bowfinger, a down-and-out producer/director with no film
credits under his belt, who is a ruthless schemer, looking for any means
to make his way into films. He is currently hustling by teaching acting
lessons for an exhorbitant charge. When his dimwitted accountant and
part-time receptionist Afrim (Adam Alexi-Malle) writes a screenplay in
12 days, entitled "Chubby Rain," an alien action flick about aliens who
come down in raindrops making them look chubby, Bowfinger is ecstatic
that he's found at last the script he has always been looking for.
He gathers his 'wannabe in films' misfits together and promises them
that if he gets the film financed, they will play a part in it. He tells
them that he has a power lunch with Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey Jr.)
about the script. He's a top-producer and vintage car buff. When he sits
at the restaurant table next to Renfro, he pretends to be having a cell
phone conversion with a big-shot Hollywood producer to attract Renfro's
attention. The phone he has is obviously not a cell phone, as a cord is
dangling from it. He overhears Renfro mention to his luncheon companion
how hot the action star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) is and that by getting
him in a film, there is a guarantee of financial backing. He then
returns home to falsely tell his production team that Ramsey is in, and
the film has been financed by Hollywood. He plans to use the $2,184 he
saved since a child for such a rainy day, to finance the film on his
own. The only one he tells the truth to is his camera man Dave
(Kennedy), who works as an attendant in the parking lot for the stars
and thereby knows where they are while he watches their cars.
Bowfinger's ingenuous plan is to film wherever Ramsey happens to be,
putting him into the film without his knowledge, by hiding the crew and
the camera.
"We've got to get a crew, and I want the best damn crew we can afford!"
Bowfinger tells Dave, as he collects 4 illegal immigrants at the Mexican
border in Dave's van, who are being chased by the border patrol. They
have to learn from scratch what to do, as Bowfinger starts by teaching
them how to clap a slate before the camera rolls.
He delivers the script he wants Kit to do outside his mansion and gets
into his limo by pretending to also be a member of the Mind Head group,
a meeting that Kit is going to, but he is unceremoniously tossed out of
the limo when his lie is discovered.
At Mind Head, the members wear white pyramid hats at their meeting. It's
a religious cult (similar to Scientology) headed by the sage-like guru
Terence Stamp, and where Kit is told how to deal with his immediate
problems of lusting after the Laker cheerleaders and how to handle his
serious psychotic and paranoia problems by Stamp's coolly calculated
therapeutic counseling. He has given Kit three rules to live by: "There
are no aliens," "There is no giant foot trying to squash me," and "I
feel like I might ignite, but probably I won't." He is further told,
K...I...T stands for 'Keep it Together,' which means keep Mr. Weenie in
the pants.
Christine Baranski is Carol, the curious would-be actress who wonders
why she never meets Kit on the set since it's traditional to do so.
Bowfinger assures her that this is the way Kit likes to work, it's
'cinema nouveau.' She will scare Kit by approaching him in a restaurant,
telling him about aliens. He will later relate to Stamp that she must
have spoken to him in some secret white man's language.
Slater (Sudduth) is the male star playing an alien and helps Bowfinger
hold an audition for  applicants trying out for a part Bowfinger charges
$25 just to try out for, a part for which newly arrived wannabe actress
from Ohio, Daisy (Heather Graham), gets even though she can't act. The
ingenue then proceeds to scheme her way into getting a bigger part as
the film goes along, by sleeping with those who could advance her
career.
Murphy, in a dual role, plays Kit's almost lookalike brother Jiff
(except he has a constant dopey grin, wears braces, and wears thick
nerd-like glasses). Jiff is happy to be hired as a double for Kit, as he
just wants to be part of the picture and be recognized for his own
talent, even if it's as an errand boy. In one hilarious scene, he's
asked to cross a dangerous freeway as Kit's double, as Bowfinger tells
him that the drivers know what they are doing--they're stunt drivers.
This movie about making a movie has the Hollywood phony la-la scene down
pat and under Frank Oz's sharp direction, the film gets all the laughs
it can from its very funny satirical premise. Martin and Murphy were
never funnier, and the supporting cast adds just the right ingredients
to the comedy presentation. Even though most of the film does work, some
of the comedy routines became tiresome as the film progressed but not
enough to spoil the lighthearted fun.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
Eddie Murphy's newfangled success post-"Nutty Professor" has not exactly been
inspiring. Missing from his last few films was the wisecracking Eddie from
"Beverly Hills Cop" and "48 HRS." who made us smile with his every maneuver -
gargantuan laugh, wide grin, and a rapid-fire exchange of dialogue like a
charged-up comic ready to make you howl over with laughter at every expense.
"Coming to America" and "The Nutty Professor" were among his finest
achievements, and among some of his best acting roles to date. Add his latest
film "Bowfinger" to the crop - an often wicked comedy where his sure-handed
personality shines thanks to a solidly good script by writer-actor Steve
Martin. 
Bobby Bowfinger is the name of a low-level producer/director (Steve Martin)
with big dreams of making a motion-picture with current action star, the
paranoid Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy). Problem is Kit turns him down, and now
Bowfinger comes up with an inspired plan, he will make a film by secretly
filming Kit. He has cameras hidden in bushes outside Kit's mansion, and films
Kit having lunch at trendy restaurants by having his actors sneak up to him and
deliver the lines. Essentially, wherever Kit goes, Bowfinger will be there
making him the unaware star of his film. The catch is that no one in his crew
is aware that Kit has not actually been cast.
Apparently, Bowfinger saved over $1500 since his childhood to make his dream
project called "Chubby Rain," which has a ludicrous storyline dealing with
aliens hiding in drops of water. The screenplay is written by Afrim (Adam
Alexi-Malle), a "damn good writer, as well as an accountant and part-time
receptionist," assures Bowfinger. 
In terms of casting, Bowfinger has an experienced drama queen, Carol (Christine
Baranski), who's been waiting an entire year for this opportunity, and wants to
meet Kit. He's also got Daisy from Ohio (Heather Graham) who walks into his
bungalow/office with aspirations to be a star. At first rejected, then accepted
for her great kissing scenes, she finds herself sleeping to the top of this
low-level group to get more scenes written with Kit. 
Enter another actor who tries out for a part, Jiff Ramsey (also played by
Murphy), a goofy, bespectacled man who not only passes for Kit's double but is
also Kit's real-life brother. "I am an active renter at Blockbuster," says Jiff
during his audition, who assures Bowfinger that he has had accidents cutting
his own hair.
There are two hilarious scenes that had me doubled over with laughter. One is a
parking lot scene where an unseen dog wearing heels scares Kit while walking to
his car. Another equally funny scene is when Jiff runs across a Los Angeles
freeway while evading all traffic and yelling "Hail to God!" 
"Bowfinger" does fall short of expectations even with its ingenious premise, a
semi-cross between "The Truman Show" and "Living in Oblivion." Steve Martin
fails to push the film itself further with comic bang...there are often more
whimpers than genuine laughs. He is still a hell of a writer, but he holds back
too often. Some scenes as directed by Frank Oz are too flat and lack the pizazz
that they need - a chase after Kit while hiding a camera in a tree planted on
Bowfinger's truck leaves a lot to be desired. 
If nothing else, most of the actors deliver juicy performances. Eddie Murphy
has two great roles - one as the nervous superstar who tries "to keep it
together" at a Scientology-type cult led by Terence Stamp as its calm,
spiritual leader, and the other as the dim-witted, naive Jiff who for the first
time in his life feels accepted. Murphy plays these roles with aplomb, and
proves that with a good script, he can flow with comic ease and be funny as
hell. His smiles and winks are priceless.
Steve Martin is, as always, good old Steve - and here he plays the ruthless and
scheming con artist as all desperate first-time directors usually are. He'll do
anything he can to make his film, even to the point of stealing Daisy's Ohio
credit cards. Morality is never an issue when making a production - desperation
is. 
The one actor who fails to deliver is Heather Graham as the ingenue Daisy. As
in "Austin Powers 2," Graham is lifeless and oblivious - she seems to show
little in the way of comic flair or energy. A sad state of affairs from a
dramatic actress with a powerful range as she proved to have in "Boogie Nights"
and "Drugstore Cowboy." Comedy does not seem to be her forte.
"Bowfinger" is uneven and does not have the breeze or whiz of director Frank
Oz's other efforts, such as "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels," but it is full of
surprises and contains moments of inspired lunacy. Martin and Murphy make a
great team for the world of comedy - let's hope they reunite in the future.    
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Bill Chambers
BOWFINGER *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bowfinger@filmfreakcentral.net)
(For screen, DVD, and reviews, plus cool contests, visit:
Film Freak Central - http://filmfreakcentral.net
Bring a date.)
Steve Martin took an extended vacation from all facets of moviemaking
a few years back; he spent this time writing essays and short stories
for "The New Yorker," several of which wound up in his hilarious
hardback compilation, Pure Drivel (1998). Much of the book spares
tinseltown from mockery, although he does riff on the racist comments
made by Marlon Brando during a Larry King interview, in a fine chapter
called "In Search of the Wily Filipino." Now, as writer and star of
Bowfinger, he offers the masses plenty of good reasons not to pursue a
career in the cinema, perhaps finally venting the frustrations
('everything being made now is crap') that led to his brief retirement
from Hollywood.
Martin stars as Bobby Bowfinger, a Roger Corman-wannabe on the cusp of
fifty and desperate for some success as a producer, quality of the
projects be damned. His accountant (Adam Alexi-Malle) proposes a movie
called "Chubby Rain," about aliens who travel to Earth in raindrops
slightly fatter than regular raindrops. Bowfinger latches onto the
idea immediately, and convinces his troupe of actor friends to appear
in the film, based on the lie that America's top box office draw, Kit
Ramsey (Murphy), has agreed to star.
Ramsey, of course, wants nothing to do with such low-grade material,
so Bowfinger, on the thinking that action stars need to run, not
speak, decides to photograph the superstar surreptitiously. He sends
his cast members (who aren't in on it, either; they are told Ramsey
hates the sight of cameras and fraternizing with his co-stars) to
Ramsey's table at restaurants, asks them to follow him in parking
lots, etc., spouting script dialogue, all the while shooting the
outcome from a great distance. The paranoid Ramsey flees the scene
nearly every time.
Ramsey is a member of Mind Head, a cultish self-help organization
apparently dedicated to recruiting celebrities. (As if that's not
familiar enough, Mind Head guru Terry Stricter (Terence Stamp) has
been dressed and combed to resemble L. Ron Hubbard, founder of
Scientology.) When he goes to Mind Head with tales of caucasian
strangers appearing from nowhere to babble "white code" in his face,
they fear the nervous breakdown of an important client and rush him
off to a retreat, requiring Bowfinger to find a stand-in.
Murphy will probably win more fans as Jiff, Ramsey's adorable,
ignoramus double, than as Kit, but it is his portrayal of the latter
that took courage. Always surrounded by an entourage, suffering from a
racial inferiority complex, Murphy plays right into the tabloid image
of himself. Furthermore, consider the enemies he'll make of popular
Scientologists. Pacing Stricter's neutral-coloured office as if on an
amphetamine binge and stripped of his bigshot veneer, Ramsey is asked
to shout inane personal affirmations repeatedly. Murphy's scenes with
Stamp are exactly what I imagine of a John Travolta "clearing."
Not that Murphy is entirely responsible for this schtick; Bowfinger is
Steve Martin's invention. His script is surprisingly clever as satire,
given that the pseudo-religion is a sitting duck, as is the entire Los
Angeles film industry. (The Griffin Mill-types take quite a beating,
in the form of Robert Downey Jr. as bigwig Jerry Renfro.) Martin's
decision to tell the story from a bottom feeder's point of view is
what keeps it fresh and innovative-never have we seen on screen a
group of people struggle this hard to complete a motion picture. As
expected, there are laughs only to be had insiders or buffs, such as
Martin's crew of Mexican border-jumpers, who gain unexpected
appreciation for the classics from reading "Cahiers Du Cinema," or
Martin's nonsensical explanation to Dave, his loyal cinematographer
(Jamie Kennedy), that every movie, in the end, has a budget of
two-thousand dollars (!). Most of Bowfinger is universally funny,
however; I defy any viewer to keep a straight face when Christine
Baranski, one of our brightest comediennes, is on screen.
Bowfinger's main flaw is a plot twist that has an insubstantial
aftermath. We're also asked to believe that a few simple close-ups of
Kit Ramsey would redeem "Chubby Rain," Z-grade entertainment that
would make Ed Wood blush. (This aspect of Bowfinger has much in common
with the ludicrous Oscar sequence in Oz's last directorial effort, the
poorly conceived In & Out.) These are significant enough weaknesses
that they distracted from my enjoyment of the piece.
As I mentioned at the start of this review, Bowfinger offers solid
reasons not to do what Heather Graham's character Daisy does: hop a
bus to Hollywood in search of stardom. That said, it offers one
fantastic reason to get on that bus: the sense of community between
filmmakers who gel is awesome. Martin gets sentimental by story's end
as he did in L.A. Story, and how could he not? For those who can hack
it, the movies might be the greatest business in the world.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Movie people love making movies about movie people -- they validate
film-making as the most fascinating of all pursuits, even as they allow
Tinseltown to tweak its own inflated image.  It's a wonderful mystery of
the film industry that so much self-absorption and self-loathing can
co-exist without some sort of matter/anti-matter explosion.  Too often,
though, the tweak doesn't take.  Steven Seagal playing himself in MY GIANT
was unconvincing as a pompous, difficult star playing a pompous, difficult
star; BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN was as brainless and misguided as the films it
intended to satirize.  For every THE PLAYER, there are half a dozen
attempts at insider humor too self-congratulatory to tap into what's truly
goofy about Hollywood.
     Steve Martin is one of the guys who gets it, and in BOWFINGER he
finds an unlikely partner in Eddie Murphy.  Martin plays Bobby Bowfinger,
a never-was producer convinced that he's finally found a project that will
launch him into the big time.  The science-fiction/action project needs
only one thing to guarantee studio support:  the participation of Kit
Ramsey (Murphy), action star extraordinaire.  Ramsey has no interest in
the project, but Bowfinger has a creative solution.  He plans to send his
cast and crew wherever Ramsey happens to be, throwing him into the film
without his knowledge.  Little does Bowfinger know that the strange things
happening around Kit are sending the already-edgy celebrity into a
full-fledged paranoia.
     Martin, who also wrote the script, has previously demonstrated his
fondness for skewering Los Angeles (L.A. STORY) and classic cinema (DEAD
MEN DON'T WEAR PLAID); he even played a soulless studio suit himself in
GRAND CANYON.  The key is that he knows how to do it with affection,
finding the absurdity in film culture and conventions while still
recognizing their magical appeal.  In a sense, BOWFINGER is a broad,
contemporary re-working of ED WOOD, the story of a guy so determined to
make his mark that he'll go to bizarre lengths to do it.  Martin the actor
lets go of his recent flustered Everyman persona to find a guy willing to
look ridiculous to be a player.  Martin the writer, meanwhile, takes broad
aim at every possible industry target -- producers with short attention
spans, action films, the casting couch, Scientology (thinly disguised as
an organization called Mindhead), even former girlfriend Anne Heche.
While some of the barbs are caustic, they all come back to a group of
people trying to make magic ... even if the magic is an alien adventure
called "Chubby Rain."
     The scattershot approach to Hollywood satire should have fallen flat,
and on occasion it does feel somewhat forced.  Director Frank Oz certainly
deserves some credit for his deft touch, but the real anchor of BOWFINGER
is Eddie Murphy.  Unlike Seagal, Murphy appears genuinely willing to poke
fun at his history as holy terror.  His Kit Ramsey is a borderline
psychotic, surrounded by yes-men who validate his demented conspiracy
theories and a Mindhead guru (Terrence Stamp) who gets rich off of them.
It's a wild, wired performance, complemented by his second role as Jiff,
the geeky Kit Ramsey look-alike Bowfinger hires as a stand-in.  Jiff not
only lets Murphy subtly satirize his fondness for playing multiple roles;
he provides a sympathetic face for an innocent's sense of wonder at the
world of the movies.  Murphy should always be this loose and entertaining.
     BOWFINGER isn't a perfect comedy, at times pushing its thin premise
farther than it can sustain.  Heather Graham's secretly Machiavellian
ingenue grows a bit tiresome, and the Mindhead gags often feel timid and
blunted.  When the set pieces work, however -- Jiff's terrified journey
across a freeway, or an attempt to spook Kit in a parking garage, or
gathering a "crew" at the Mexican border -- they're wonderfully funny
stuff.  It's also a movie about movies that doesn't get caught up in its
own hipness.  When Steve Martin wants you to laugh at something about
Hollywood, you know it's out of authentic whimsy, not a movie star's
hypocritical attempt to cozy up to the laypeople.  As a result, BOWFINGER
feels relaxed and honest, a satire with enough wisdom to recognize there's
still something delightful about being a film-maker.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Are you in the mood to laugh? 'Cause you gotta be when you see this spoof of the movie industry in which Steve Martin plays Robert "Bobby" Bowfinger, a down-and-out director who's crazy about a script, "Chubby Rain," about tiny aliens who ride raindrops down to Earth. Problem is: the only way to get the movie made is to get a bankable A-list star - which he cannot afford. Illustrating his frustration, there's a hilarious scene in which Robert Downey Jr. is a prominent producer, "a player," whom he spots at a restaurant. So Bowfinger decides to stalk TinselTown's hottest actor, Kit Ramsey - that's Eddie Murphy, and surreptitiously capture him on celluloid, editing the surreptitious footage into his low-budget ($2,814) movie. The angry, already paranoid Ramsey goes nuts when he finds himself interacting with Christine Baranski and other actors from "Rain" who accost him, reciting their lines. Seeking tranquillity, Ramsey retreats to a posh haven called MindHead, run by!
 manipulative Terence Stamp. Is this a riff on certain stars' devotion to Scientology? When he was writing the screenplay, Steve Martin originally envisioned a wimpy, spiritual actor, "a Keanu Reeves type," but adapted him into a black action star with Murphy's help.  Directed by Frank Oz, Martin's elegant goofiness blends with Murphy's hip cynicism and the result is a deliriously outrageous combination. Plus, Murphy plays another role as his nerdy stunt double/errandboy. And, if you think Heather Graham's ambitious ingenue-who-runs-off-with-a-lesbian role resembles Anne Heche, you're not alone. Martin dated Heche for several years before she jilted him for Ellen DeGeneres. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bowfinger" is an amusing, inventive, entertaining 8. It's a funny, funny satire that skewers Hollywood.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski, and
Jamie Kennedy
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 In a review of Clue I restated the well-known fact that Hollywood is
unpredictable.  Clue was a good example, but Bowfinger is a perfect one.  As
much as Hollywood doesn't like to admit it, it's a highly touchy group.
Movies that are politically risky are ignored.  Movies that question the
system are feared.  This, by the way, explains Oscar snubs for movies like
The Truman Show, Chasing Amy, Mother Night, Lolita, Smoke Signals, and
countless others.
 As touchy as Hollywood is, it can always surprise with the capability to do
something completely bizarre and unexpected.  Case in point: Bowfinger.
Yeah, it's childish.   Yeah, the jokes are cheap.  But guess what's the nip
of the jokes... Hollywood itself.
 Not since Get Shorty has Hollywood dared to take itself out and beat itself
up.  Its a universal constant that no one wants to admit that they are
hypocrites (the particular breed of person that makes up most of the true
power in Hollywood), and movies like Bowfinger expose the hypocrisy of
Hollywood in a very public way.
 Bowfinger centers around Robert Bowfinger (Steve Martin), failed movie
producer who decides to give it one last go after reading the script for a
movie "Chubby Rain", a highly B-movie science fiction yarn that gets its
title from the fact that the rain becomes chubby as the aliens fall to Earth
encased in it.  Bowfinger decides that he needs superstar Kit Ramsey (Eddie
Murphy) in the film in order to make it work, and, when Kit doesn't want to
be in it, Bowfinger decides to film him without his knowledge.
 He enlists a failed stage actress Carol (Christine Baranski), a crew
composed of illegal immigrants (the funniest moment in the movie comes as
INS does a roost of a field while people are motioned into a van to work on
the movie), an actress from Ohio who knows what you really need to do to get
ahead in Tinsel Town (best described in the single line acceptance speech
for an Emmy winning Oscar telecast "I'm sorry I didn't have to sleep around
to get this part") played by the always fun to watch Heather Graham and a
wannabe cinematographer named Dave (Jamie Kennedy).
 The sad thing about Bowfinger is that, for all of its hard work and
perseverance of making fun of moviemaking, the people in it have such an
obvious allure towards the industry that they ultimately fail at their goal.
There is no incredible sense that you are laughing at Hollywood in general.
You just laugh at Bobby Bowfinger et al.
 It seems particularly ironic, though; that a film that had such perfect
potential for skewering the Hollywood system was ultimately trapped by it.
That, in being both anti-Hollywood and Hollywood at the same time, it comes
out with only good one liners and gags.  And, as we all know, good
one-liners do not a movie make.
 Another particular irony is that, as Bobby Bowfinger is so often the but of
the movie's jokes, Steve Martin seems to be the but of the joke of the
movie.  He seems to not be able to go beyond being a charicature.  Daisy
(Heather Graham) does go beyond her character, but not enough to make up for
the lack of personality that Bobby Bowfinger has.
 Oh well.  These things happen too often and too well.  Such ends up being
the fate of people brave enough to be working against the industry that they
have worked with for so many years.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie quizzes, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Eddie Murphy is back and I for one am glad for it! Who can blame the guy for
straying towards a couple of kiddie flicks that garnered him millions in
cash ($17M for DR. DOLITTLE), while slowly losing his real fan base of
people who grew up with him on TV's "Saturday Night Live", and his earlier
"funny" movies? I certainly did. But with his two superb performances in
this film, and the wonderfully original script written by Steve Martin, it
doesn't look like I need to worry so much anymore...at least...for now.
PLOT:
Down-and-out producer of films, Bobby Bowfinger, has a good script written
by his Indian accountant, and he wants one of the biggest Hollywood stars,
Kit Ramsey, to star in it. When Kit turns him down flat, Mr. Bowfinger
decides to shoot the movie anyway, by secretly following Kit around with
cameras, and shooting his scenes without his knowledge.
CRITIQUE:
A very entertaining and inventive script tagged alongside some fresh and
revived performances by Eddie Murphy and Steve Martin, turn this film into
an enjoyable time at the cinema. This movie is based on a very funny
premise, features plenty of laughs, great acting and a fun soundtrack. I had
recently given up on Eddie Murphy and his capacity to make me laugh in his
latest pictures, but boy was I wrong, as this humorous film quite clearly
indicates. Murphy apparently improvised some of his lines in this film, and
he is just a wonder to behold. He is perfect as the over-the-top paranoid
superstar Kit Ramsey, and just as hilarious in his other role as Jiff, the
nerdy looking loser who is hired to shoot Ramsey's wide shots. The rest of
the cast is also diverse and a joy to watch, with writer Martin holding them
all together with his absolutely patheticly charming character.
The one reason I didn't score this film any higher than I did was because
the premise of the film is essentially the whole film. There isn't much more
to it than that, and despite never being bored, I did find myself wanting a
few more surprises than I ultimately received. That being said, I am happy
to report that the chuckles did not cease spewing out of my mouth during
this film's entire run, with many potshots at Hollywood types sprinkled
throughout, and a surprisingly sweet ending. Certainly the most original
summer comedy of this hum-drum season, with the prime return to form of
Eddie Murphy, an inventive and Tinseltown-skewering script by Steve Martin,
and an overall fun time at the movies.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The part of the stalked actor, Kit Ramsey, was originally written for a
white actor, but with Murphy's help, Steve Martin rewrote the script, and
turned his neurotic thespian into an action star, who is an angry black man
with a doozy of a conspiracy complex.
Steve Martin dated actress Anne Heche for two years before she turned into a
lesbian and began dating comedienne Ellen DeGeneres.
Up 'til now, actress Heather Graham has dated director Stephen Hopkins,
actors Elias Koteas, James Woods, and is currently snuggled up to
actor/director Edward Burns.
The Eddie Murphy "running across the freeway scene with zooming cars flying
by" was actually not as scary as it looked in the film, since many of the
speeding autos were actually added later in digital mode. Despite that, the
scene still took months to be approved by leery L.A. highway officials.
Eddie's real-life middle name is Regan.
Now despite brewing up the idea for this film about 10 years ago, according
to Steve Martin, the script for BOWFINGER grew our of his recent playwriting
success with "Picasso at the Lapin Agile". It is only after he had written
"Picasso", that he thought about writing a screenplay in that same spirit,
where he would not care or think about anybody ever seeing it. I don't think
he has to worry about that with this film!
Director Frank Oz is also known throughout the universe as the eternal voice
of "Yoda" in the STAR WARS movies. His full name is Frank Oznowicz.
Actor Jamie Kennedy, who plays Dave the movie-camera-stealing friend of
Bowfinger in this film, may be remember by some of you from his quirky roles
in the two SCREAM movies.
Robert Downey Jr. is a very good actor with serious drug problems (but I
guess that isn't really a "little known fact", eh? :)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Frank Oz.
Cast: Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski, Jamie 
Kennedy, Adam Alexi-Malle, Terence Stamp, Robert Downey Jr.
1999 - 97 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed August 16, 1999.
Writer-actor Steve Martin has a genuine love for the art of cinema and 
filmmaking in general. How did I come to this conclusion? Easy. Because no 
one could have possibly written the new comedy, "Bowfinger," without having 
an overwhelming fondness for movies, as the main character is the 49-year-old 
struggling novice director, Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin), a man whose 
inspiration was no doubt Edward D. Wood, Jr., the '50s and '60s filmmaker who 
had a passion for his craft, but made what some widely consider the worst 
films ever made, most notably "Plan 9 From Outer Space" and "Glen or Glenda." 
With his stock acting troupe that includes a Mexican screenwriter (Adam 
Alexi-Malle) and Carol (Christine Baranski), his loyal sole actress, Bobby 
Bowfinger has been attempting to get a film greenlit in Hollywood for years 
now, even having set up his own production company (without any productions 
to its name, thus far), Bowfinger International Pictures. One day, a light is 
sparked in Bobby when his writer hands him a sci-fi script entitled, "Chubby 
Rain," about aliens that fall to Earth within raindrops. Cleverly running 
into distinguished film producer Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey Jr.), Renfro 
lets Bobby know after reading the first and last pages that he will have a 
"go" picture if he can get popular movie star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) to 
agree to topline the project. After a disasterous encounter with him at his 
mansion, Bobby, in ultra desperation, devises a plan to still make "Chubby 
Rain" with Kit: he will get his assistant (Jamie Kennedy) to stake out Kit's 
every move, hide a video camera out of sight, and instruct the rest of his 
actors, playing aliens, to walk up to him, say their lines, and let Kit react 
to the scene as if it is real--because for Kit, of course, it is real, and he 
soon becomes convinced that people are actually out to get him. To Bobby's 
surprise, this unconventional, decidedly illegal, method of filmmaking starts 
off very well, but when Kit finally goes into hiding, it is up to the team to 
find someone to be Kit's stand-in, which he finds in Jiff, a nerdy, 
braces-wearing McDonald's employee.
As the premise for a big-studio comedy, "Bowfinger" is dynamite in the story 
department. Reminiscent in some ways to Tim Burton's 1994 film, "Ed Wood," 
"Bowfinger" is fascinating throughout due to its meticulous, intriguing look 
at moviemaking. The way that Bobby Bowfinger gets his actors to interact with 
an unknowing Kit Ramsey is ingenious, and cause for many big laughs, while 
director Frank Oz (1991's "What About Bob?" and 1997's "In & Out") is just 
the right man for the job, a talent who is almost a sure-thing when it comes 
to making a feature comedy.
Unfortunately, aside from its sheer inventiveness, which helps to make the 
picture worth seeing for this reason alone, "Bowfinger" is fairly shallow 
when handling its many characters. As the at-first-innocent Daisy who comes 
to L.A. to be a star and decides to sleep with everyone she comes into 
contact with to get a boost in the biz, Heather Graham is wonderfully giddy 
and high-spirited, and her performance is an improvement on a comedic level 
from her ho-hum appearance in this summer's earlier, "Austin Powers: The Spy 
Who Shagged Me." What is so disappointing about Daisy, however, is that her 
character would have been more funny and likable had she not metamorphosized 
virtually overnight from a ditzy, innocent country girl (she makes her first 
appearance by getting off a bus, walking into an audition for Bowfinger, and 
earnestly asking, "Is this where you come to be a star?") into a promiscuous 
actress who goes through men (and women) like she goes through packets of 
ketchup. In perhaps the film's best performance and a more substantially 
large role than she usually plays, Christine Baranski is top-notch and 
hilariously wacky as an astoundingly over-the-top actress who, in "Chubby 
Rain," plays the role of a knife-wielding alien who repeatedly screams, 
"Bastard!" every time she sees Kit. As for Jamie Kennedy (1996's "Scream" and 
1997's "Scream 2"), as Bowfinger's camera operator and assistant, he is 
almost just as wasted as he has been in every film following his stint in 
that popular horror series.
All of the talk I had heard going into "Bowfinger" was about Eddie Murphy's 
standout duel roles as Kit Ramsey and Jiff, but that is where the film's most 
major flaw lies. Although Murphy appears throughout the film and is engaging 
with what he is given, he plays the two roles only half of the time, 
therefore making both Kit and Jiff one-dimensonal supporting characters. Once 
Jiff enters into the film midway through, Kit mostly disappears, and nothing 
is really done with Murphy's second personality, aside from using him in one 
of the comedic centerpieces, in which he has to run across a roaring, busy 
freeway. Regardless of the hype, it is Steve Martin who is the star of the 
picture, and his Bobby Bowfinger feels tailor-made for the actor (no shock 
there, since Martin wrote the screenplay). The problem is, for a comedy, 
Martin isn't particularly funny either, but mostly "the straight man" for 
which everyone else plays off of. 
And so lies the outcome of "Bowfinger," which is that the film is far more 
successful in its examination of pedestrian moviemaking, and gains most of 
its laughs from this aspect, rather than in the mostly forgettable 
characters. For example, one of the highlights of the picture is a sequence 
set in a parking deck in which Kit keeps hearing a second pair of footsteps 
every time he walks. I won't give away the comic payoff, but it is a laugh 
riot the way that the scene is milked for all its worth, as well as in its 
perfect comic timing. Too many problems detract from "Bowfinger" to make it 
be considered a "great" comedy, but it is a good one, not to mention the most 
entertaining movie about movies that I've seen in a few years (at the very 
least, better than the disasterous 1998 bomb, "Burn Hollywood Burn: An Alan 
Smithee Film"). For its amount of laughs, however, it places below the likes 
of this summer's "American Pie," "Drop Dead Gorgeous," and "Dick," well above 
that of "Austin Powers" and "Mystery Men," and about equal to "Big Daddy." 
Not at all a bad place to stand in a comedy-crowded summer season.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman. 
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
David N. Butterworth
        The posters that adorn the walls of Bowfinger International
Pictures aren't the kind that would inspire many aspiring actors to shell
out $25.00 just to audition.  When these very walls pronounce "The Yugo
Story" (yes, the sassy little EEC compact) as the studio's top grosser, you
have to wonder what kind of a two-bit, third-rate production company this
really is.
        Well, it's the raison d'ętre of Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin), a
two-bit, third-rate movie director.
        Bobby, not surprisingly, has had some difficulty competing with the
Paramounts and the Universals until the day he reads a script that knocks
his socks off.  The treatment, not your typical alien invasion picture, is
written by Bobby's accountant/receptionist following Bobby's encouraging
"if you're as good with words as you are with numbers, well...  I don't
need to finish that sentence."  In "Chubby Rain" (quite the best film title
within a film since "Love and Death on Long Island"'s "Hotpants College
II"), Bobby smells a hit.
        Speed-dialing virtually everyone he knows, Bobby pulls his
downtrodden, pessimistic employees together for a ten o'clock meeting,
promising that this is finally It.  If Bobby is good at anything it's the
small-time scam, and he manages to swindle a respected Hollywood producer,
briefly played by Robert Downey, Jr., into proclaiming "Chubby Rain" a "go
picture," except for one minor caveat: the film must headline action
superstar Kit Ramsey.
        Bowfinger's subsequent efforts to sign Kit don't prosper, setting
the master manipulator's wheels in motion again.  How about this for film
nouveau: shoot the entire movie without the star's knowledge or consent,
but with all the bit players harassing the unsuspecting Ramsey at every
possible opportunity.
        As conceived and written by Martin, that turns out to be an
absolute humdinger of a premise.
        Some might gripe that Martin has almost written himself out of the
picture, but that's a tribute to him and his craft, and it's partly why
"Bowfinger" works; there's no bologna in the shoes here.  Similarly, Eddie
Murphy (who plays Kit Ramsey and his braces-wearing, errand-running dingbat
lookalike Jiff) is near-on sensational in a demanding dual role, yet he
doesn't steal the film either.  After all these years, Martin and Murphy
still have what it takes.
        On the minus side, Heather Graham ("Austin Powers: The Spy Who
Shagged Me") impresses in the early going as a just-off-the-bus Ohio hick
looking for fame and fortune in Tinseltown, but she quickly loses her charm
by forcing the issue.  Rollergirl was clearly a fluke; since her prominent
rise to stardom in "Boogie Nights," Graham has been very disappointing.
        While there are some perfectly inspired bits in "Bowfinger" (e.g.,
the scene in which they recruit the best film crew they can afford), some
scenes fall completely flat (e.g., Daisy's "hot chemistry" scene with
Jiff).  It's not clear whether the blame falls upon screenwriter Martin or
director Frank Oz (working here with the comedian for the fourth time), but
it makes for some uneven cinema.  In the long run, however, these
imbalances do little to harm "Bowfinger," a film that fans of Steve Martin,
Eddie Murphy, and skillfully written and performed comedy should enjoy.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham
Synopsis: 
In this comedy small-time moviemaker Bowfinger (Steve Martin) dreams of
creating his first movie but is locked out by the big entertainment
monopolies. One day Bowfinger is 49 years old and still hasn't accomplished
his dream, so he pulls out his live savings, grabs a B-movie script about
aliens taking over the world, assembles a no-pay crew of misfits, dreamers,
and illegal immigrants and takes the plunge. 
When paranoid big-name action star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) refuses to do
the film, Bowfinger hits upon a novel solution: to film Ramsey without his
knowing it and use a geeky double named Jiff (also played by Eddie Murphy)
to act the rest of the scenes. Will Bowfinger's alien film CHUBBY RAIN ever
make it out of production? 
Opinion:
Amazing. What a great week for movies! Whether you see THE IRON GIANT,
DICK, DEEP BLUE SEA, THE SIXTH SENSE or BOWFINGER you can't lose. They're
all good.
Steve Martin is known by his fans as a comedian, but in this one Martin
plays the straight man while the comedy is left to Murphy and jibes at the
Hollywood moviemaking system. It works. Murphy is hilarious both as
paranoid star Kit Ramsey, who thinks he's seeing aliens in the corners of
his eyes, and as Jiff, the dimwitted video renter who must try to appear
like an action hero. 
Heather Graham does a realistic job portraying an actress who can't act.
Federal Express, and Starbucks also make noticeable appearances. 
BOWFINGER is funny. Whimsical, yes, but get ready to chuckle your socks off
and smile for a good 90 minutes. 
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Christian Pyle
Hack director Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin) wants to break into feature films.
 Armed with the script for "Chubby Rain," an alien invasion action pic (the
rain is chubby because  the aliens invade disguised as raindrops), Bowfinger
gets a promise from a major producer (Robert Downey Jr. in a small role) that
"Chubby" is a go if Bowfinger can cast the hottest action star in America, Kit
Ramsey (Eddie Murphy).  Kit gives him the boot, of course, so Bowfinger hits
upon a scheme to have Kit star without knowing it.  His crew will follow the
guy around, and the other actors will simply walk up to Kit and say their
lines.  A factor in their favor:  Kit is a loon with paranoid fears that aliens
are trying to steal his gonads, an obsession with exposing himself to the Laker
Girls, and a complete devotion to the Mindhead (read: Scientology) cult.
Bowfinger's merry band includes Christine Baranski as a wannabe actress,
Heather Graham as a starlet trying to sleep her way to the top, Jamie Kennedy
as a stagehand who can steal all the gear they need from the studio, and Eddie
Murphy (again) as a dweeb whose dream is to run errands for people.  Less
familiar faces include an accountant turned screenwriter (Adam Alexi-Malle), a
dense but attractive young actor (Kohl Sudduth), and a crew of illegal aliens
who gradually become film buffs.
Martin's script delivers plenty of laughs but little substance.  There's none
of the insider satire that we saw in his "L. A. Story."  Except for the stab at
Scientology, Hollywood comes through "Bowfinger" unscathed.  Bowfinger is a
latter-day Ed Wood and deserves to be marginalized.  Outside of Kit, the few
successful Hollywood types in the movie are sane, shrewd people.  
The script also depends on several big coincidences to hold its bizarre plot
together.  If Kit Ramsey didn't happen to be a paranoid nutcase, he would have
just had Bowfinger and company arrested.
Despite those flaws, I laughed a lot while watching this movie.  Martin is, as
always, sly and skillful at both verbal and visual humor, and "Bowfinger" marks
a return to form for Murphy, who hasn't been this funny since the '80s.  As
Kit, he loudly rapid-fires bizarre theories (catch phrases are a racist
conspiracy, Teddy Kennedy is black); as Jiff, body double and aspiring errand
boy, he's shy and easily embarrassed.  Jiff is also easily fooled, making him a
perfect pawn for the scheming Bowfinger.  In the movie's funniest scene,
Bowfinger convinces Jiff to run across a busy highway, saying that all the cars
are driven by "stunt drivers."
Bottom line:  "Bowfinger" is a fluffy diversion with two master comedians at
the top of their game.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Ross Anthony
Bob Bowfinger (Steve Martin) is an aging Hollywood producer wannabe who, in
desperation, makes a cheesy alien movie that he believes is the next
"Independence Day." Action mega-star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) is cast to
play the hero; however, since Ramsey won't even glance at the script,
Bowfinger has to film him a la paparazzi (hence the word desperation).
Director Bowfinger cons the rest of his cast into believing that Ramsey
prefers to be filmed this way, "It's an action piece! We just need shots of
him running away from the Aliens!"
Murphy's second role in the picture is that of a nerd whose two great
talents are running errands and looking like Kit Ramsey. Murphy's portrayal
of this character is both charming and funny.
The script (also written by Steve Martin) is pretty funny, but it's not
especially funny. Although it does sport two especially riotous moments. The
first hilarious bit pits Murphy (as the nerd) against highway traffic (as
in, he's got to run across eight lanes of speeding vehicles). Bowfinger
assures him that the drivers are all stunt men. The second moment is the
last scene of the film -- sort of tacked on after the climax and resolution
(a bonus second ending); wherein, Martin and Murphy play geriatric ninja and
ninja dork respectively in Taiwan. Save for the highway scene, this ninja
sequence packs nearly the same yuck value as the rest of the film.
The picture could have benefited by characters that weren't just ridiculous,
but also endearing. Further, though the ending technically works, other more
interesting conclusions could have been employed. (Click here for Ross
Anthony revision notes.)
Silly and fun, but short on heart; "Bowfinger," a film about a film entitled
"Chubby Rain," proves slightly above average.
Starring Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski.
Directed by Frank Oz. Written by Steve Martin.
Produced by Brian Grazer at Universal.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Our institutions are flawed.  For moviegoers, that's a
good thing.  If the establishment were perfect, what would we
do for laugh-out-loud screen parodies?  During the
past 12 months we've had a take-off on beauty contests,
("Drop Dead Gorgeous" which turned ugly when it attacked
vulnerable, handicapped people), a send-up of horror movies
("Lake Placid," a thoroughly amusing shark-fest that
underscored the failure of the lame-scripted "Deep Blue Sea"
that followed it), and of karate films (Jackie Chan in "Rush
Hour," as the uncomfortable partner of a motormouth cop). 
The best subject for parody, though, is the movie industry
itself, an enterprise which has been criticized for being
concerned only with money, for dumbing down its subject
matter to bring in the lowest common denominator to the
theaters, and for swamping the multiplexes to such an extent
that a personal film has a difficult time indeed finding a
constituency.  Who better to satirize the studios than one of
the largest studios itself?  
   Universal's "Bowfinger" uses two of the trade's sharpest
comics to turn out a howlingly funny lampoon of big studio
domination.  The film focuses on a producer-director of a
small outfit ironically called Bowfinger International run by
Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin), who hopes to make a movie
with his budget of $2,184, saved by putting $1 a week into a
kitty from the time he was ten years old.  Unfortunately the
actor he wants would probably not consider even looking at a
script for ten times that figure.  This does not stop the title
character, who comes across with a bold idea: superstar Kit
Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) will star in his film without even
knowing that he's in the movie.  How Bowfinger follows the
luminary around the streets of Hollywood, capturing him on
celluloid without the man's awareness. is the concept that
delivers the almost non-stop guffaws and chuckles.
   An original screenplay by Steve Martin himself,
"Bowfinger" is directed by Frank Oz (known to the younger
set as puppet-performer Yoda in "The Empire Strikes Back"
and to hip college kids and others for directing the wonderful
musical parody "Little Shop of Horrors").  The movie opens
as Bowfinger is about to get his phone service cut off for non-
payment.  But Bobby is nothing if not determined, inspired
and disciplined.  Bent on making a low-budget sci-fi entry
about an alien takeover of the Earth entitled "Chubby Rain,"
he enlists his loyal team of actors.  Carol (Christine Baranski)
is well-suited for her nouveau-riche revenge-character role
and screenwriter Afrim (Adam Alexi-Malle) has turned up a
script that Bowfinger considers a masterpiece.  With a
would-be cameraman, he rounds up a crew of Mexicans who
are one step ahead of Immigration and sets out to capture Kit
on his hidden camera.  Kit is the perfect person to play a
man terrified by aliens as he is has a paranoid personality
and is being treated by Terri Stricter (Terence Stamp) at a
luxurious, California-style est-type enterprise called
MindHead.  
  While the comedy hangs together quite well, "Bowfinger"
accommodates a series of fast-moving skits, each of which is
able to stand alone as a Saturday-Nite Live type of
entertainment.  The best minutes in the movie come as
Bowfinger locates the restaurant table occupied by hot-shot
producer Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey, Jr.) and tries
unsuccessfully to get his backing of the film by taking an
adjacent table and speaking loudly on his cell phone,
allegedly to Kit Ramsey--whom Renfro has been unable to
contact.  Heather Graham does wonderful work as Daisy, an
Ohio naif who travels to Hollywood seeking work as an
actress and learns very quickly which people she has to bed
to get a leading role.  Eddie Murphy and Steve Martin make
sparks together with Murphy in the dual role of Kit Ramsey
and Kit's developmentally disabled brother--who declares that
he not only aspires to the job of errand runner but holds that
"running errands would be a boost to my career."  
   The company introduces us to amusing side characters in
brief roles such as one young, untalented woman who turns
up for an audition but is found by Bowfinger to have "the
personality of a zip code in Kansas."  Betsy the dog, who has
been well-trained in obedience, does her part to further terrify
the already paranoid Kit by following him through an indoor
parking garage wearing high-heeled shoes.  Each time Kit
turns quickly around to see the source of the clackety clack,
he observes nothing at all, furnishing him a wide-eyed look of
terror.
   Having spoofed schlock alien films unmercifully and, in a
concluding scene taking aim at Hong Kong martial arts fare,
"Bowfinger" accomplishes its task of mocking the entire
industry of profit-hungry big studios in a movie that will
probably take in sacks of money for the big studio that's
releasing it.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) The situation is a little too wacky for BOWFINGER to be a
great, lasting comedy, but it is funny.
Steve Martin plays Bobby Bowfinger, a (very) small-time director trying
to complete one last picture before he turns 50. His accountant Afrim
(Adam Alexi-Malle) has written a great script, so now all he needs is
funding and a big-name star. 
Martin's Bowfinger would be a great director. That's not to say he could
make a good movie, but he has all the schmoozing techniques down pat.
When he needs help from above, he can dress to impress (including
ponytail, cell phone, and convertible, all "borrowed.") When he needs
help from below, he calls people, tells them what to do, then hangs up
before they can say no.
Martin uses his schooze to "run into" a big producer (Robert Downey,
Jr.), and even manages to get some conditional funding. All he has to do
is sign the biggest action star in Hollywood, Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy),
to his picture and Renfro (Downey) will pay for it.
Bowfinger's next stop is the Ramsey mansion, where Kit won't give him
the time of day. Things look hopeful after Bowfinger lies about being in
"Mind Head," a psychological/religious organization that Ramsey puts his
faith in, but as soon as Bowfinger pulls out the script, he's out the
door.
Kit Ramsey is extremely paranoid, and Murphy is really not that fun to
watch in the role. He plays the part perfectly for this movie, but he's
got a nervous tension that's not as likeable or entertaining as the
other characters in BOWFINGER. It's unfortunate because it changes the
timbre of the movie when he's on screen.
Bowfinger realizes Ramsey will never agree to be in the movie. He tries
to break the news to his crew, but doesn't have the heart. Instead he
tells them that he's going to make the movie WITH Kit Ramsey, as
planned. And he is, too, only Ramsey won't know about it. He's going to
stalk Ramsey from afar, and have the actors walk up to him and say their
lines.
He hires a lookalike (Jiff, also played by Eddie Murphy) to do
reverse-angle shots, and action sequences that they can't stage with
Ramsey. Murphy's Jiff -- a dumb, goofy lug whose career aspiration is to
be an errand boy -- is much more fun to watch.
Rounding out Bowfinger's cast and crew are an aging actress (Christine
Baranski) who has worked hard without making it big -- she hopes this
movie will be the one; his cinematographer who has the means to "borrow"
professional equipment from a studio; his leading lady, fresh off the
bus from Ohio (Heather Graham), who sleeps her way to the top of the
little production, but somehow never cheapens herself by doing it, and
four undifferentiated Mexicans Bowfinger nabs crossing the border, who
throw themselves into their new vocation and start learning about
lenses, f-stops and "Cahiers du Cinema." 
BOWFINGER has been getting a lot of praise, most of it deserved. But
it's not a perfect movie, and there are lots of uneven spells. The jokes
are used one or two times too many, and as short as it is (98 minutes),
it's a little too long.
But it's still a funny movie, and credit should go to the great cast.
Everyone really did a good job overacting, each person trying to upstage
everyone else. They were having fun, and it showed.
Best of all, though is Steve Martin in another role that's just perfect
for him. He's energetic, optimistic, enthusiastic, and just a little
naďve. His philosophy seems to be "damn the laws, we're shooting a
MOVIE!"
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski, Jamie
Kennedy, Robert Downey Jr., and Terrence Stamp. 
The last Steve Martin film I saw, The Spanish Prisoner, was a very different
approach for the comic actor. As a millionaire leading a massive conspiracy in
order to rob "a process" from a clueless businessman, Martin's character did it
all for money. In his most recent movie, Bowfinger, Martin plays yet another
con man except this time he does it to succeed in the film industry. He wants
to direct a successful picture that will force people to remember his name,
that will make him more popular at the parties, and, most importantly, that
will cause Fed Ex to deliver important business packages to his front door.
Playing the title role, Martin is once again the good guy; the one we cheer for
to complete his low budget action movie. This con man is very likeable for some
reason, even though he is doing the same exact thing as the malicious Jimmy Del
from The Spanish Prisoner. Maybe the message is that, in Hollywood, to win over
the trust and friendship of others, you have to be a little evil. 
Bowfinger is a very clever comedy with great performances from its two stars.
Martin, who also wrote the screenplay, is perfect as a jerk with a conscience
and Eddie Murphy does his best "Peter Sellers" in two different, but equally
hilarious, roles; one as a big time move star and the other as his nerdy,
Burger King employee brother. The story follows aging and failing
director/producer Bobby Bowfinger as he makes one last attempt to become a
respected member of his field by creating a B-action movie called Chubby Rain.
In order to attract actors and crew members, Bowfinger promises them that hot
shot actor Kit Ramsey will star in the movie. The only problem is that Kit
refuses to be in it. But this won't stop the aggressive Bowfinger. He is so
determined to complete his film that he decides to put Kit in it without even
telling him. He has his actors approach Kit on the streets of Los Angeles in
character with a hidden camera filming the footage. Will Bowfinger be able to
make his film? Or will Kit Ramsey discover what exactly is going on?
Bowfinger is a very cartoon-like movie that pokes fun at Hollywood and its
famous residents while simultaneously holding a very solid story line. The only
area where the film really lacks is the cameo department. This is the kind of
movie that cameos are all about, it is always funny to see
actors/directors/producers making fun of themselves or co-workers especially in
a playful movie such as this. Besides the very repetitive and superflous
ending, Bowfinger is a joy to watch.  If you take a movie like this seriously
then you will never enjoy it. If you accept the incredulous plot and the
extreme caricatures of real entertainment figures, the movie is great fun. 
