Title
Review for Neel Kamal (1947)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Amin Meghani
     When Ganga (Madhubala), a (supposedly) low-caste untouchable,
first sets eyes on Madhusudhan (RK), a handsome sculptor, she knows
he's the only man in the world for her.  It takes quite a bit of
convincing, however, to bring Madhusudhan to see things her way.
Societal mores in those days forbade inter-caste marriages (sound
familiar?), and Madhusudhan is painfully aware of cruel future
rebuttals were he to succumb to Ganga's love.  Instead, he allows
himself to be swayed by Rani Saheba's (Ara) attentions.  By the time
the principals discover that Ganga is of noble birth, it is too late.
Or is it? Ganga has claimed Madhusudhan for her own and emerges
triumphant in her seeming defeat.
     I have not seen Madhubala in too many films, but I have noted on
occasion her remarkable resemblance to Marilyn Monroe.  In NEEL KAMAL,
though, she is barely on the verge of adulthood and the transformation
to the riveting beauty of later years is not yet evident.  It is
impossible not to be affected by her childish enthusiasm, her pure and
simple beauty, and her unswaying, unadulterated love for Madhusudhan
that triumphs in the end against all odds.  I have not been moved by so
poignant a performance (in recent memory).  RK's suavity and magnetic
screen presence speak volumes of the dazzling star he was (destined) to
become.
     Kidar Sharma, one of the fathers of modern (post WWII) Indian
cinema, displays his thorough command of the medium.  As the merest
trifling example of his genius: there are a couple of (early) powerful
scenes involving bloodshed; however, these do not glorify violence, but
rather are designed to effectively convey a genuine sense of grief and
bereavement for those innocents killed needlessly.  To this end, these
scenes are superbly filmed and succeed admirably in their objective.
     Stars of the 40s and 50s have often recalled fondly the stern,
no-nonsense nature of the great Kidar Sharma.  I can't help but wish he
were alive today, so that he could roll up his sleeves and teach
today's so-called directors what it takes to make a real film.  And if
they refuse to learn, why he could easily take them across his knee and
administer 10 to 12 of the juiciest...Singapori ishtyle!!
     I will always remember NEEL KAMAL as the movie in which I fell in
love (and I suspect I'm neither the first nor the last in this
endeavor) with that rarest of lotuses: a beautiful girl called
Madhubala.
