Title
Review for Birth of a Nation, The (1915)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Birth of a Nation" is considered to be the
first great silent film, the one film that transformed
cinema from mere entertainment to an art form.  In
an era when even feature films were under an hour
in length, the 190 minute running time was unheard
of.  Most films were one or two reel shorts, and
were base comedies, romances or action films.  The
ambition, scope and political messages of "The Birth
of a Nation" created a sensation, and the film grossed
$18 million, far more than any film of its era.
It is necessary to consider the film's strong political
messages before its quality can be analyzed.  Obviously,
"The Birth of a Nation" is racist.  Black men, portrayed by
white men in blackface, are generally depicted as beasts:
lawless, abusive and lusting after white women.  Director
D.W. Griffith tries to balance this characterization by
blaming this behaviour on white "scalawag" carpetbaggers,
and by having a few "good" black characters.  These "good"
blacks are former slaves still loyal to their former
white masters.  The Ku Klux Klan, a murderous, racist
vigilante organization, are presented as heroes
for restoring "order" and white minority rule.
Scenes suggesting that blacks should be shipped to
Liberia were deleted from the film after protests.
The film was released in 1915, during a time when WWI
was raging in Europe, and the U.S. was attempting to
stay out of it.  Many of the dialogue cards for
"The Birth of a Nation" deplore war and its waste.
Woodrow Wilson was President at the time, and excerpts
from a racist history book that he had written are
quoted in the film.
Abraham Lincoln is depicted heroically in the film.
This is curious given the pro-South, anti-war, Jim Crow
sympathies of the film.  Griffith's first talkie would
be "Abraham Lincoln", a warm tribute to the Civil War
President.  Lincoln's assassination is blamed for
the excesses of reconstruction.
"The Birth of a Nation" is mostly the story of two
families.  Not content to stick to the plot, Griffith
inserts scenes presenting historical moments, such
as Grant's surrender and Lincoln's assassination.
Griffith takes pains to re-create the architecture
of Ford Theater and the Appomattox Courthouse (and is
proud to tell us so), which is ironic given his
polemic interpretation of American history.
"The Birth of a Nation" is typically described as
a flawed but great film.  While the film undeniably
has great historical importance, this is not relevant
to its grade, which should be based only on its
quality.  From a critical standpoint, "The Birth
of a Nation" has many problems.
The characters are simplistic.  Besides the depiction
of blacks, the three main female characters are
lovely simpletons, the subject of lust from blacks
and heroic rescue from whites.  The white male
heroes are a stereotype of chivalry and bravery.
We are left with reconstructionist congressman
Austin Stoneman (Ralph Lewis) as the only character
with some depth.
The action scenes are many.  There are Civil War battles,
lynchings, black mobs, and Ku Klux Klan rescue missions.
Admittedly, these scenes add excitement to the film,
but they are sometimes muddled and sometimes lack
credibility due to the extreme characterizations.
One scene has a white man taking on, and defeating,
a dozen black men.
"The Birth of a Nation" remains an historically important
film, but it is not a great film.  Its major theme,
the effect of the Civil War and reconstruction on
wealthy white Southern families, is much better realized
a generation later in "Gone With a Wind".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
