Title
Review for Hilary and Jackie (1998)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
James Sanford
With its story of a brilliant musician destroyed in her prime, "Hilary
and Jackie" has already drawn comparisons to "Shine," the 1995 hit
based on the life of pianist David Helfgott. But "Hilary" is a more
accomplished and demanding film, one that doesn't find a convenient
villain (like the didactic dad Armin Muller-Stahl played in "Shine")
to pin cellist Jacqueline Du Pre's troubles on.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Du Pre was celebrated for her extraordinarily
passionate playing and her often unruly style, marked by flying hair
and grandoise gestures, or "over-emphatic body movements," as one of
her early judges calls them. Emily Watson's depictions of Jackie's
performances here may remind you of the way Tori Amos appears to make
love to her keyboard in concert.  In both cases, the player and the
instrument seem to become one.
Of course, what went on off-stage was considerably more disturbing to
see. Raised in a family of music-lovers, sisters Jackie and Hilary
(Rachel Griffiths) were both pushed from an early age to
becomeconsummate musicians, although the less outgoing Hilary - a
flutist whom the film argues may have had more innate talent than her
sister - eventually crumbled in the spotlight and became a wife and
mother.
The teen-age Jackie was quickly sucked into a whirlwind of touring and
personal appearances around the world, much to her own amazement and
bewilderment; "one day I was playing, and the next I was booked up for
two years," she says. Jackie sought some sort of an anchor to help
stabilize her while the people around her seemed too caught up in
trumpeting her latest triumphs to pay attention to her needs.
"Hilary and Jackie" is told from the sides of both siblings, although
it's not one of those films in which we're shown the exact same
incidents from two different viewpoints. Instead, the "Hilary" portion
illuminates what Jackie's increasingly erratic behavior looked like to
theoutside world while the "Jackie" segment clues us in on the private
hell Jackie was going through as she tried to deal with increasing
hatred of her craft and the slow deterioration of her body. For
Jackie, who is reminded frequently by the people around her that her
whole life is her music, there's nothing to cling to when she realizes
she may not have much longer to play.
Watson, who proved in "Breaking the Waves" that she may well be
today's foremost chronicler of quiet madness, is arresting, but
Griffiths' far less flamboyant figure is every bit as
impressive. Hilary may not have Jackie's jet-set friends or splendid
London apartment, but she does have a charming, attentive husband
(David Morrissey, also excellent) Jackie hungers for, and Griffiths
subtly conveys Hilary's uneasy sense of serenity.
In trying to ease Jackie's stress, Hilary allows herself to be talked
into doing something she doesn't want to do and the results are messy
and lasting. Though Jackie's decline is sad indeed, Frank
Cottrell-Boyce's enormously insightful screenplay makes the case that
an even greater tragedy was the separation of two extremely close
sisters who were drawn apart by circumstances far beyond their
control.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Anaud Tucker.
Cast: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, James Frain, David Morrissey, 
Charles Dance, Auriol Evans, Keely Flanders, Celia Imrie, Rupert 
Penry-Jones, Bill Paterson. 
1998 - 121 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sex).
Reviewed December 15, 1998.
By Dustin Putman Dustin
Putman's Film Reviews>
One of the most powerful images in Anaud Tucker's "Hilary and Jackie," 
is of Jackie de Pre (Emily Watson) sitting in her living room all alone, 
shaking violently, a sufferer of multiple sclerosis. Heartbreaking 
moments like this, mixed with observant scenes involving cello playing, 
is what caused, "Hilary and Jackie," to be such a natural and human 
drama.
The film, based on the autobiography by Hilary de Pre, entitled, A 
Genius in the Family, spans four decades, from the 1950's to the 1980's, 
as it follows two close-knit sisters, Hilary (Rachel Griffiths) and 
Jackie, who, during childhood, were masterful at playing the flute and 
cello, and won many competitions. As they grew up, however, they took 
different paths. Hilary, realizing how inferior she was to her younger 
sister at playing, gave up the flute and married Daniel Barenboim (James 
Frain), moving to the secluded countryside of England. Meanwhile, 
Jackie, who knows she cannot live without her sister, goes into a deep 
depression, nearly giving up the cello, and just as she began performing 
again, was ultimately diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.
"Hilary and Jackie," follows a rather basic, ordinary storyline, and 
although some of it could be telegraphed in advance, other sections of 
the picture genuinely surprised me. Also throwing conventional 
storytelling to the winds, a la Quentin Tarantino, the film follows 
Hilary through a large portion of her life, and then circles back, 
following Jackie's point-of-view during the same time frame. Although 
there was no real purpose to choose such a style, the film, I think, 
grew because of this. By showing Hilary's perspective, and then 
Jackie's, there are many revelations in the characters, and we are able 
to understand more deeply what Jackie, confused and lonely, was going 
through.
After giving one of the breakthrough performances of the decade in 
1996's brilliant, "Breaking the Waves," Emily Watson has created another 
thorough, exact character, and yet Jackie is quite different from her 
"Waves" character, Bess. When she grows more and more helpless from the 
disease, the film became occasionally too heart-rending to sit through, 
but director Anaud Tucker should be applauded for not looking away from 
multiple sclerosis. He courageously chose, instead, to look the illness 
straight in its face, in all of its tragedy and sadness. Rachel 
Griffiths, as Hilary, is every bit the perfect match for Watson, and one 
particular scene involving her during the conclusion was particularly 
moving. 
The other performances in the film were not quite as good, or memorable, 
because they were all mostly underwritten. This flaw did not much affect 
my feelings for the film, however, because this is a story about two 
sisters, not about their various husbands and family, although we do get 
a look into their childhoods. Played superbly as children by Keely 
Flanders and Auriol Evans, the early scenes were especially effective 
because of the sense we got, in which, as Jackie surpassed Hilary in her 
talent of an instrument, her parents sort of pushed Hilary to the side, 
as if she wasn't as important.
It isn't really giving anything away to say that Jackie du Pre, 
unfortunately, died at the age of 42 in 1987, due to her illness. 
"Hilary and Jackie," is a glorious, seemingly accurate tribute to this 
obvious talent, who has widely been considered the greatest musical 
prodigy of the 20th-century. The fact that her life was unfairly cut 
short seems like a crime, since she was an overall good person who 
happened to have a lot of internal and emotional conflicts throughout 
her life. The final scene, set at an unidentified, dreamy beach, and 
involving the two sisters as children, returned to the set-up of the 
opening sequence, and not only was the cinematography by David Johnson 
gorgeous to look at, but the implications of what is said in the scene 
was a thought-provoking and poignant way to conclude the ode to Jackie 
du Pre's life. 

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
'Hilary and Jackie' is a film very full of ideas, a film whose every 
shot is fascinating to watch.  There are enough ideas to fill a 
discussion twice as long as the 121- minute running time.  And best of 
all, it's a film that takes risks and turns out mostly successful.
One of the many genres 'Hilary and Jackie' fits is biography;  
specifically, it's the biography of the noted English cellist Jacqueline 
du Pre (Emily Watson), a story that also traces the life of Jackie's 
sister Hilary (Rachel Griffiths).  It begins with the sisters on a 
girlhood lark at the beach, chasing each other across dunes in a 
make-believe world that surfaces later in the film.  We learn soon that 
it is Hilary du Pre who is the child prodigy, a flautist who performs in 
Leopold Mozart's 'Toy Symphony' over the BBC.  Rather pushy Mother 
(Celia Imrie) browbeats the younger Jackie into practicing more: "If you 
want to stay together, you have to be as good as each other."  In a 
smooth telescoping of time, we observe 'Jacks' working on her fingering 
during breakfast, during lessons at school - until at a competition she 
wins best strings soloist to match Hilary's best woodwinds soloist, an 
achievement that ignites a first spark of jealousy in Hilary.  Keely 
Flanders and Auriol Evans do stupendous work as the young Hilary and 
Jackie.  Both are very expressive and natural before the camera.  Only 
one area of Evans' performance called my attention, and that was her 
vibrato.  Apparently most of the cast were occupied constantly with 
music lessons, but when Evans and, later, Watson, work with the cello, 
there are hints of phoniness.  It's an easy element to overlook, 
however, as you have to love a film gutsy enough to show actors' hands 
while they play!
Before long, we see Griffiths and Watson in the title roles.  
Ironically, Jackie is far ahead of her sister in musical prowess, and as 
Hilary stays at home to begin a romance with Kiffer Finzi (David 
Morrissey), Jackie embarks on a tour of Europe.  The conflict created by 
this situation is one of the more conventional aspects of the film.  The 
more 'domestic' one loves her husband and adorable children, while the 
more artistic - and unstable - one marries another artist and continues 
to hop from city to city.  It's not a weakness, though, as the story 
takes an almost mythical spin when Jackie, exhausted by years of her 
whirlwind lifestyle, visits her sister and her family in the English 
countryside.  When Jackie makes an unthinkable request of her sister and 
brother-in-law, we glimpse the first signs of an illness that invades 
Jackie's personal life and threatens her very ability to play the cello.
At one point the film ceases being a typical biopic and takes a chance 
with an unusual narrative device, the word 'Hilary' appearing on a black 
screen.  In the following segment we witness events from Hilary's point 
of view, tracing her failure at a flute exam, her relationship with 
Kiffer, and her oddly close attachment to her sister.  Later 'Jackie' 
appears on the screen.  To locate us, the director, Anand Tucker, 
briefly repeats a few scenes, but now focuses on Jackie's worldview, a 
narrow one damaged by a lonesome concert schedule in world capitals.  
(What surprised me is that no one traveled with one so young;  Jackie in 
the film languishes at her own receptions, places her cello outside in 
the rain, she is so wearied of playing it.)  But the two-edged 
storytelling compliments the twin imagery used in other places.  It's 
really what causes the narrative to resonate, to build a momentum that 
not only sustains our interest but engages our sympathy.  Jackie's 
depression is lessened somewhat by her marriage to Argentinian-born 
pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim (James Frain).  But her condition 
seems bearable only when she is with Hilary.
There are moments that seem derivative of 'Shine,' especially when the 
motion slows and Jackie fails to negotiate her bowings, the sound going 
screechy and dissonant.  But the comparisons stop here.  Jacqueline du 
Pre's malady is certainly very different from David Helfgott's.  What's 
gripping is people's reactions to each performer.  I would give 'Hilary 
and Jackie' the edge in overall quality, though it seems that it will 
not attain the level of hype that surrounded 'Shine' two years ago.
David Johnson's photography adds much to the dramatic tension. We see 
everything from a classy circling of the young Jackie, frantically 
dancing with her body in an early show of her flamboyant style, to the 
thick, watery world perceived by Jackie in the later stages of her 
disease.  Interiors are also portrayed particularly well, many shots 
showing the wide foyers of music academies.
Emily Watson is a delight to watch.  Like Jacqueline du Pre herself, 
Watson seems to have a maturity beyond her years - she's a precocious 
actress.  Because of the facility with which she depicts complex 
emotional and psychological extremes, her performance deserves 
recognition;  it should pull down many nominations.  As her sister, 
Rachel Griffiths also creates a sympathetic role, her face at once 
natural and intense.  When we witness her cradling Jackie, we are moved 
equally by deep love and the story's inertia - moving inexorably to a 
realistic conclusion.
Frank Cottrell Boyce has written a screenplay that is smart and 
fast-moving.  He and Tucker apparently informed the du Pres (Hilary and 
brother Piers penned a book about their sister) that they wished to 
dramatize Jackie's story in an uncharacteristically expressive manner.  
They have succeeded.  Of course we have to remember the license used by 
the storytellers here, especially when the plot comes full circle and 
takes a decidedly expressionistic direction.  Bravo for the takers of 
risks!
I recommend 'Hilary and Jackie' to any music lover, but also to lovers 
of untraditional plotting, and moviegoers who derive pleasure from heady 
conversation over ice cream when the movie's done.  It's a bold step by 
filmmaker Anand Tucker, and a tribute to Jackie du Pre, a good soul who 
loved music.


Author
Brandon Stahl
The rivalry between the two was subtle, well paced, and went through
years of the characters lives without leaving the audience feeling
cheated on who they characters were becoming. I left feeling like I
knew a great deal about the people involved - perhaps the ultimate
success of a film biography. As a side note, it's unfortunate that
Griffiths received somewhat of a second billing in the movie. She was
the stronger performer - playing the role that didn't demand the
attention or the eccentricities of Watson's character. Her performance
was vital to the film's success, grounded Hilary and Jackie in
sensibility and as a way for the audience to connect to the
characters.

Author
Christopher Null
     It's getting to the point where I've just seen enough movies about
crazy musicians and whacked-out siblings. HILARY AND JACKIE gives us
both(!), so if you haven't had your fill of these two genres, here's a
chance to knock both out at once.
     The true story of the Du Pre sisters, we get to see them grow up
and become famous musicians. Hilary (Griffiths) ends up opting out of
the limelight to raise kids and chickens in the country. Jackie (Watson)
goes all-out in her quest to be a solo cellist, and of course, she goes
totally bonkers before too long.
     The film meanders along, mainly following Jackie's psychosis and
later, her development of multiple sclerosis, from which she died at the
age of 42. The film is made in a bizarre style - the kids grow up
together, then the movie focuses on Hilary's life, then it backtracks
and tells us what happened to Jackie during the same period of time.
Obviously an attempt to (a) be clever, and (b) break away from typical
story structure, HILARY AND JACKIE ends up failing at the former, more
important, task. The movie ends up being repetitious and, frankly,
annoying by the time it's over.
     Still, Watson's performance and the ambition of the picture can't
be denied. The music sounds great in surround sound (I screened it on
video), and the cinematography is quite lush. Too bad it all doesn't
come together very well.
http://www.octoberfilms.com/hilary-jackie/
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
HILARY AND JACKIE
Cast: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, James Frain, David Morrissey,
Charles Dance, Celia Imrie, Auriol Evans, Keeley Flanders
Director: Anand Tucker
Screenplay: Frank Cottrell Boyce, based on "A Genius in the Family" by
Hilary and Piers du Pré
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and a half stars
Hilary and Jackie is a moving and poignant tale of the love between two
sisters.  Emily Watson and Australian Rachel Griffiths portray Hilary
and Jacqueline du Pré with stunning precision, in two of the best female
performances you're likely to see this year.  It would be easy to say
that Watson and Griffiths are the reason why this drama works so well,
but that would be without crediting the screenplay that was adapted from
the true story "A Genius in the Family" (written by Hilary and Piers du
Pré).  The script is solidly directed by Anand Tucker, who is obviously
interested in the way music is conceived and manipulated - and,
eventually, the way music leads to one woman's dissatisfaction with
life.
Jacqueline "Jackie" du Pré (Watson) is a cellist prodigy.  As young
girls, Jackie and her sister Hilary (Griffiths) - a flutist - would win
countless junior tournaments, and there was a vaguely unhealthy
competitive spirit between them.  As adults, they have chosen very
different lifestyles: Hilary has given up the flute to a simple life of
marriage and family, whereas Jackie is a wildly successful cellist who
tours all over the world.  Jackie finds out the hard way that sometimes
the simplest values are the best, and as she continues her constant
search for happiness, she hinders the happiness of those who love her.
Jackie is a complicated character, and it is often hard to know what
leads her to commit purely selfish actions.  Feeling lonely, Jackie
tells Hilary she wants to have sex with her husband.  "She just needs to
feel loved," Hilary explains to him, with more than a hint of doubt in
her voice.  Jackie's plights through stardom and self-destruction (the
two come hand in hand, it seems) are believable thanks to Watson, who
knows how to make a dramatic part work.   Rachel Griffiths also shines -
perhaps even a little more so - in a subtler performance, which is an
impressive mix of happiness amongst gentle but profound sorrow.
For the first thirty or so minutes of Hilary and Jackie, I was
completely captivated.  The performances from young girls Auriol Evans
and Keeley Flanders are incredible - their parts demand a mature
approach that is rare with kids this age.  After the film's lengthy
prologue finishes, Hilary and Jackie is divided into two main parts, one
for each sister.   This enables the story to be told from two
perspectives, although conveying the narrative in this way doesn't
always work.  Hilary's story, although less spectacular, I found much
more interesting, so its frustrating when she is absent from the screen
during long slabs of time.  Sometimes the narrative is also
unnecessarily confusing and, call me fussy, but the film's final reel is
silly - I'm not quite sure what Tucker was trying to tell us with it.
Still, Hilary and Jackie is an involving drama.  The classical music
soars, the cinematography is lush - it is a pleasing experience.  But
more than that, this is a film that is charged by emotion and a central
relationship built on love and devotion (although that's not always
immediately evident).  Emily Watson and Rachel Griffiths play off each
other beautifully, and are gracefully, powerfully the two best reasons
to see Hilary and Jackie.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Anand Tucker
Cast: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, James Frain, David Morrissey,
Charles Dance, Celia Imrie
Screenplay: Frank Cottrell Boyce 
Producers: Nicolas Kent, Andrew Paterson
Runtime: 120 min.
US Distribution: October Films
Rated R: language, sexuality, disturbing images
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Hilary and Jackie is about two musician sisters and their lives
together.  As a child, Hilary du Pre (Keeley Flanders) is a phenomenal
flautist who overshadows her cellist sister, Jackie (Auriol Evans).  The
girls love each other very much, but Jackie doesn't like the competition
aspect of their lives, forced upon them by their mother (Celia Imrie). 
So, she quickly masters her instrument, making it clear to everyone that
she is a musical genius.  Soon, Jackie is the focus of everyone around
her.
Inevitably, the girls grow into young women; Jackie (played by Emily
Watson as an adult) is now performing solo recitals, but Hilary (Rachel
Griffiths) is struggling with her flute lessons.  From that point, the
film shows us the next twenty years from the perspective of both women. 
We first see Hilary's life, in which she meets and falls in love with
Kiffer Finzi (David Morrissey).  The last third of the film is told
through Jackie's eyes, and we see her rise into stardom and her decline
into multiple sclerosis.
Hilary and Jackie is one of the most masterful films of 1998.  Not
since The Truman Show have I seen a film that so flawlessly integrates
skillful acting, lush cinematography, and a wonderful story into a
satisfying, moving motion picture that will resonate in memory long
after the credits roll.  But it's not just an exercise in good film
making -- Hilary and Jackie has a beautiful emotional core that shows us
a fascinating relationship between two extremely interesting women.  
The first element that most moviegoers are likely to notice is the
scenery and cinematography.  The film was directed by Anand Tucker, a
man who clearly understands that the image on screen needs to be as
powerful as the contents of the story.  Along with David Johnson's
superb cinematography, Tucker has made a film of immense visual wealth. 
The colors are vibrant and vigorous; later in the film, when Hilary is
living in the countryside, the way Johnson photographs the huge,
sprawling fields and rolling hills of wildflowers is truly
breathtaking.  Also notable are the scenes in which Jackie performs the
cello -- the passion that emanates through the instrument bursts out of
the screen, making every such scene an exciting, visceral experience.
Of course, much of the excitement comes from Emily Watson's
performance.  Here is a woman who has made three films, and in those
three films has proven a range of acting that most experienced actresses
will never show.  Her first starring role, in Breaking the Waves, earned
her an Oscar nomination, and I sincerely hope that she earns the same
honor for Hilary and Jackie.  I don't know if Watson can really play the
cello, but she does a perfect job of pretending in the scenes that
require her to perform.  But what I really admire about Watson -- and
about the entire film, for that matter -- is her emotional honesty.  I
got lost in her performance, lost in the fact that I was watching
someone act.  
Rachel Griffiths shows just as much skill as Watson does, even though
she doesn't have quite as much material to work with.  The film is based
on the book A Genius in the Family, written by Hilary and Piers du Pre
(it's all based on a true story, just in case you didn't know); the
picture could have easily focused on Jackie, and made the relationship a
side note in the story.  I'm glad that screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce
chose not to do this, though, since the relationship between Jackie and
Hilary is what makes the film so fascinating:  even through all the
competition, the two women never stop loving each other.  It's one of
the most layered, moving relationships to emerge from any film this
year.  In a year in which so many films have regurgitated themes and
images that we've all seen countless times before, the people behind
Hilary and Jackie have brought us a visually and emotionally profound
film -- a piece of cinematic art that I will never forget.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HILARY AND JACKIE (director: Anand Tucker; cast: Emily Watson
(Jacqueline du Pré), Rachel Griffiths (Hilary), David Morrissey (Kiffer
Finzi), James Fraim (Daniel Barenboim), Charles Dance (father), Celia
Imrie (mother), Keely Flanders and Auriol Evans (the du Pre sisters as
youngsters), 1998)
This intelligent and emotionally moving film, is based on the true-life
story, as recorded in the autobiography, "A Genius in the Family,"
written by one of the musical prodigy English sisters, Hilary (Rachel),
the flautist in the Du Pre family. Jackie (Emily) is the younger sister,
the one who reaches fame as a virtuoso cellist, especially known for her
interpretations of Elgar's compositions. The crux of the film is about
their sisterly relationship, their competition with each other and their
need for each other, as they were growing up in the 1950s. The
differences between them, that eventually has them living disparate
lives, becomes the dramatic focal point of the film, with Jackie growing
up to become the great musician who marries another celebrated musician,
Daniel Barenboim (James), but who is very unhappy for reasons that are
very complex and not easily answered but thoroughly explored in the
film, leaving the audience to be the judge of what might have gone
wrong, while Hilary finds bliss in domesticity, giving up music to live
in the country and raise chickens and children with her vibrant husband,
Kiffer (David).
The cast is superb. Emily Watson, in the very difficult and trying role
of a petulant genius, searching for answers about herself, plagued by
self-doubt that borders on madness and the need for close ties to home,
is brilliantly portrayed, as she reveals Jackie's compelling character,
showing her supple musical know-how and her erotic sexual liberation and
her binding commitment to what she wants to pursue and, towards the end
of her life, a spunky grit to deal with her debilitating illness of
multiple sclerosis that will take her life in 1987 when she is just
42-years-old, in a most unmerciful way.
It is rare that a film has such a meaty part for one woman to
play...this film has two such parts. The other female lead, is admirably
played by Rachel, as she is solid in her role as the first prodigy child
to shine brightly, and as the jealous one when she realizes her sister
has caught up with her talent wise and will soon surpass her. We can
read her mind as she grapples with her inability to grow as a musician,
and when Kiffer aggressively pursues her and weds her, giving her the
self-esteem she has always wanted, she will cease to be a professional
musician.
The girls never seemed taken with a genuine love of music except as it
suited their talents. Their strivings for success was at first a reason
to be coddled by their ambitious stage mother (Celia), then it became a
chance for the sisters to remain close, each sharing the spotlight, and
then something mysterious happened, perhaps a twist of fate, that
allowed Hilary to fall off the pedestal, while the once weaker
performer, Jackie, took her practice to heart just to keep up with her
older sister, who now becomes recognized by the world for her musical
talent. The stage father (Dance) has a rather interesting role, as the
moralist in the family, who is a bit of a stodgy kind of anti-semite
(mom,too), whose bemused character might be summed up as he is
reflecting on his daughter's marriage to Barenboim and conversion to the
Jewish religion, "She can't be Jewish, she is blond."
The film begins innocently on a deserted English beach, where the
sisters played by Keely
Flanders and Auriol Evans, happily frolic on the sand, meeting a strange
ghost-like woman, who tells Jackie in a whisper, "everything will be all
right." This ominous tone, sets a haunting mood for the film, that will
quickly move away from these seemingly happy days of their youth and
take them to their adulthood, where distance will separate them, in a
way that they could never have believed possible from their early
upbringing.
The well-crafted screenplay by Frank Cottrell Boyce, is ably directed by
Tucker, who is directing his first feature film. The only fault I found
with his direction, is that I thought it was unnecessary to have
duplicate scenes of what Hilary and Jackie experienced, that is, we
didn't have to see it from each one's point of view. I thought the film
would have been better served if the action was continuous, the going
back over the same scenes from a different point of view really killed
the pace of the film, slowing it down too much. The sisterly
relationship was so powerful and subtle, that when Jackie runs away from
Barenboim for no apparent reason and winds up at Hilary's remote country
house and suggests to Hilary that she allow her devoted husband to
service her, we are caught up in the intrigues of a very trying sibling
rivalry, that questions sensibility and one's mores, all the while
testing the sister's very genuine affection for each other.
This is a film that glows with confidence, sparked by a maturity of
material, that tries to unravel
some of the mysteries in life that make one wonder about certain
decisions made that can impact one's entire life. The film worked so
well because of the contrasts between the two female stars, they
prevented the film from burying itself in a pit of sadness and, also, it
was deftly handled by the director's ability to keep the movie light,
not to make Jackie's situation into a downer... And the music helped, it
was simply marvelous.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Bill Chambers
HILARY AND JACKIE *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers ( wchamber@netcom.ca )
(Happy New Year! from Film Freak Central -
http://filmfreakcentral.net )
starring Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, David Morrissey, Jim Frain
screenplay by Frank Cottrell Boyce
directed by Anand Tucker
1998 may go down as the year of the Disease Movie. This month alone,
Susan Sarandon gets cancer in Stepmom,  and half the cast of Patch
Adams has leukemia by the time the closing credits roll. Last fall,
Meryl Streep contracted cancer in One True Thing. Hilary and Jackie
also co-stars a disease: multiple sclerosis, which attacks cellist
Jacqueline Du Pré in her prime. But the film is very much unlike the
sanctimonious, movie-of-the-week affliction melodramas currently
scoring at the box office. Death, you see, is anything but romantic;
it doesn't happen on cue; and it does not transform a person into a
saint. Hilary and Jackie acknowledges these cold, hard facts.
Hilary and Jackie Du Pré are sisters growing up in 1950s Sussex
County, England. Both are encouraged by their  overbearing mother to
practice music, but Hilary is the favoured daughter, having appeared
on local television with her flute. Jackie becomes obsessed with
achieving her sister's level of achievement, and practices her cello
night and day. Eventually, she actually ties with Hilary at a local
talent competition. Fame and fortune seek Jackie out; while Jackie
tours Europe, Hilary finds a mate in an amateur conducter named Kiffer
Finzi (Morrissey), much to Jackie's chagrin.
Hilary, as the filmmakers would have it, is entirely selfless,
abandoning her instrument at a young age so as not to interfere with
Jackie's desire for success. Jackie, on the other hand, is a
monster-despite the fact that she has a mate of her own (Frain, as
famed pianist Daniel Barenboim), she demands sexual favours from
Hilary's husband; Hilary allows Jackie to take advantage of her
generosity.
The story is divided into two halves: "Hilary" follows Hilary from
childhood to domesticity. In scene after scene, she lets Jackie walk
all over her out of an inherent sisterly devotion, then cowers away to
a corner to cry silently about it. Griffiths, who played Jude's
conniving first wife in Jude, demonstrates great range as the nice'
sister, a woman who essentially gives up whatever makes her feel
special out of guilt. The movie wisely avoids pitting her against
Jackie in a big shouting match-much of her pain remains unresolved at
the finish. The "Jackie" half essentially tells the "Hilary" story
from the opposite viewpoint; some, but not all, of Jackie's callous
actions are justified in this section. (For example: In "Hilary," the
Du Pré family are disappointed to open a package from travelling
Jackie that contains only her laundry, while in "Jackie," it is
explained that Jackie has no access to a washing facility, and sends
her clothes home in desperation.) Jackie resents Hilary for her
decidedly unhectic lifestyle; her cello is a crutch, something she
can't abandon. (Indeed, she tries to, but neither a night of harsh
weather nor an attempt to leave it behind in a cab end the
relationship Jackie has with her instrument. It is as resilient as
Hilary.) That resentment does not pass as the disease begins to ravage
her body, and this is the movie's strong point. When Jackie makes a
cruel joke regarding Kiffer's infidelity-while lying in a hospital
bed-we can see the heartbreak in Hilary's eyes.
Watson's performance is certainly impressive (though her
unidentifiable accent sometimes distracts), but we should not overlook
Boyce's relentless screenplay, which allows Jackie to remain immature
and rapacious. (That Jacqueline Du Pré is a bona fide historical
figure sort of makes daring Hilary and Jackie this year's Raging Bull:
at the heart of the film is a fascinating jerk.) Boyce's script is not
impeccable. Though more unified than his last produced work, Welcome
To Sarajevo, his beach-set bookends don't pay off, and the male
characters-particularly the third Du Pré sibling, their brother-are
vaguely drawn.
Tucker's fluid camera and candy-coloured interiors tend to gloss over
the story's flaws. (Tucker has little flair for subtlety-the film has
been assembled in such a way that you're always aware of what will
become a motif the first time it appears on screen, such as Jackie's
tendency to "raspberry.") Understand that I'm strongly recommending 
Hilary and Jackie on the basis of its central performances and its
frequently courageous writing. The real disease that Jackie suffers
from, the movie posits, is envy. The competitive spirit attacks Du Pré
like a cancer at a young age, and a terminal illness simultaneously
punishes her for it (her battle with MS lasted sixteen years) and
liberates her from its grip.

Author
Susan Granger
No, it's not that Hilary and it's not that Jackie - and not
about First Ladies with philandering husbands. Instead, Anand Tucker's
interesting, insightful film revolves around the Du Pre sisters, child
prodigies with remarkable musical abilities. Hilary's the quiet, older
sister, a flutist, and Jackie's, the willful, flamboyant cellist. They
grew up, inseparable, in rural England during the '50s. Their early
years revolve around musical competition, but soon Jacqueline Du Pre
becomes famous, spending her life on tour, while Hilary opts for
marriage and family, raising chickens in the country.  Their
relationship, however, doesn't grow any healthier.  Quixotic Jackie
delights in "surprising" Hilary by appearing on her doorstep, and - on
one bizarre occasion - asks to "share" her husband, played by brash
David Morissey.  Jackie's own husband, Argentine musician Daniel
Barenboim, hardly figures into the equation. Tragedy strikes when - at
the peak of her career - Jackie develops multiple sclerosis from
 which she dies at the age of 42 in 1987.  The key strengths of the film 
are the performances. As Jackie, Emily Watson ("Breaking the Waves") is vivacious to the point of maniacal, providing a stark contrast with Rachel Griffiths' stability as Hilary. The real Jackie was evidently a histrionic performer: selfish, spiteful, and sexually voracious. The key weakness is Frank Cotterell Boyce's unwieldy screenplay, based on "A Genius in the Family," Hilary Du Pre's autobiography. It's weighed down with narration and repetitive detail, like a soap opera which, annoyingly, repeats the story line often enough so that, if you missed an episode or two, you can catch up immediately. Not unexpectedly, Jacqueline Du Pre's friends are condemning the film, particularly cellist Julian Lloyd Webber, brother of Andrew, who asserts: "What they've done to her memory is scandalous!" On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hilary and Jackie" is a stylish, intense 7. This sibling rivalry is far from harmonious.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October Films
 Director:  Anand Tucker
 Writer:  Frank Cottrell Boyce
 Cast: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, James Frain, David
Morrissey, Charles Dance, Celia Imrie, Rupert Penry-Jones,
Bill Paterson, Auriol Evans, Keeley Flanders, Nyree Dawn
Porter, Vernon Dobtcheff
   On the way out of a critics' screening of "Hilary & Jackie,"
a fellow reviewer remarked to me, "That sure was well done,
but it was a downer....I would hardly call it a date movie." 
"No," I replied, "But it's a chick flick."  Well, now, to call
October Films' "Hilary & Jackie" a chick flick may be valid,
but it would rank with the most reductive declarations anyone
could possibly make.  It's a complex study of one of the
century's most famous and accomplished cellists, one that
necessarily leaves out much detail but adds some discreet
fictionalizations for dramatic effect.  The downer to which my
colleague referred, musician Jacqueline Du Pre's death after
a heroic sixteen years' long struggle with multiple sclerosis,
adds quite a tragic dimension.  Shunning the deadly format
that a biopic could take, Frank Cottrell Boyce's screenplay
directed with a high regard for emotional truth by Anand
Tucker focuses on the complicated relationship between Ms.
Du Pre and her sister, Hilary, from the time that Hilary and
Jackie were five years old and living in England's Sussex
County.
   Anyone who has grown up an only child can only imagine
the many difficulties and rewards of having brothers and
sisters.  During their early years, the Du Pre girls ran through
the expected gamut of emotions, each envious in the turn of
the other, each desiring something of the attention that the
other is receiving at any given moment.  But the core feeling
is one of joy, shown in the very opening scene as the two
little girls run and giggle across a beach, pretending that it is
the Kalahari Desert, the entire movie framed by a
communication which Jackie receives from a mysterious
stranger facing the breaking waves.  Director Tucker shows
the Du Pre world as one which was in many ways
conventional, living in a large house and enjoying domestic
comforts.  But the two girls are obviously influenced heavily
by their mother, who composes music for them; Hilary playing
it on her flute while her sister joins her in duets on her cello. 
The competition between the sibs is predictable, as first
Hilary, then Jackie, is lauded for their accomplishments at
such a young age.
   The story proceeds chronologically, as Jackie comes from
behind to exceed her sister's abilities and to give a major
concert recital at the age of sixteen.  At one point, Tucker
divides the movie into two segments, one called "Hilary," the
other "Jackie" in a well-conceived attempt to show the effects
of each musician's separate experiences on their relationship. 
While the typical educated viewer might assume that Jackie
got the better deal--aware that Jacqueline Du Pre went on to
world-wide fame with her instrument while her sister faded
into a conventional nature--life has a way of confounding
expectations.  While Hilary drops plans to become a
professional flutist, Jackie embarks on a whirlwind tour of
European capitals such as Vienna, Moscow, Berlin and
Madrid. Unhappily, she has become alienated and depressed
by being compelled to travel far from home and desires so
much to become an ordinary person like Hilary that at one
point she makes an unconscionable demand on her sister--
which in a review should not be given away.
   "Hilary and Jackie" is freighted with darling touches such as
the older Mrs. Du Pre's reaction upon hearing that Jackie is
love with concert leader and pianist Daniel Barenboim. 
Thinking with a sigh of relief that the name is German, she
looks positively dejected when informed that the great man is
Jewish: "Oh, dear," she responds, though she and her
husband happily make the trip to Jerusalem to attend their
daughter's wedding.  Jackie has converted to Judaism to the
disbelief of her father: "She CAN'T be Jewish...her hair is
blond!"
   Emily Watson as Jacqueline Du Pre and Rachel Griffiths as
her sister Hilary are wonderful together, with Ms. Griffiths
providing the necessary support to give Emily Watson a go
for an Academy Award as best actress.  Ms. Watson, who
first dazzled American audiences with her role in the Danish
movie, "Breaking the Waves," is out to break the hearts of
the audience, first by her deep unhappiness with her travels
and her need to maintain her status as a world-class
musician; then far more by the dreaded neurological disorder
that sees her initially unable to manipulate her hands and
ultimately, bedridden, shaking uncontrollably and unable to
express a single thought.  James Frain's role as Daniel
Barenboim is not likely to do much for his reputation, as Mr.
Boyce's screenplay portrays him fathering a child in Paris
while his wife is home in England, wheelchair-bound and
suffering from intense loneliness.  
   Since Ms. Watson is known to be an accomplished cellist,
she has no problem pretending that it is she, and not the
actual recordings of Ms. Du Pre, who is filling the screen with
glorious albeit an insufficient amount of music.  As a biopic,
"Hilary and Jackie" may be conventional by the standards of
a Ken Russell, but Anand Tucker's choices work splendidly
to flesh out an unusual relationship between one of the
century's great musicians and the less talented sister whose
life she so envied.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, David Morrissey, James Frain.
Screenplay: Frank Cottrell Boyce, based on the memoir "A Genius in the
Family" by Hilary and Piers Du Pre.
Producers: Andy Paterson and Nicholas Kent.
Director: Anand Tucker.
1. Horror of horrors, husband sharing! This just does not fall into my
category of happy movie watching, and there isn't even a good reason
(maybe IVF?) for the request (prove that you love me). My response would
be let's go out to lunch', but loaning my life partner to a sibling for
a sexscapade, is not the answer to loneliness. These sisters, as you
could probably imagine are closer than the average, if one gets away
with asking and then granting such a request. However, the husband is
also to blame for agreeing to it in the first place.
2. Let's not get way laid by this issue, because there is more to this
movie besides sharing husbands. That is  sibling rivalry. Yes, and in
this case, the younger sister Jackie goes to great lengths (learning the
chelo) to outdo her older sister Hilary (who plays the flute). Jackie
does eventually outshine Hilary by becoming an international artist,
whilst Hilary fades into the obscurity of family life and love. Which
would you choose? Fame and fortune or settle for the ordinary and being
truly loved for what you are? Most people would probably answer both,
but in many cases one is sacrificed for the other.
3. Spot on acting for both Rachel Griffiths and Emily Watson who bring
to life two sisters who made a promise one summer's day on the beach,
that somehow, in the time of need, they would always be there for one
another, even in death.

Author
Greg King
HILARY AND JACKIE (M).  
(Intermedia Films/Film Four/Village Roadshow)
Director: Anand Tucker
Stars: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, Celia Imrie, James Frain, Charles 
Dance, David Morrissey, Bill 
Paterson, Rupert Penry-Jones, Auriol Evans, Keeley Flanders, Nyree Dawn 
Porter
Running time: 120 minutes.
The tortured life of gifted but flawed musicians has provided
some rich material for film makers over the years.  Former documentary
director Anand Tucker's stylish and touching film depicting the life
of tragically doomed world renowned cellist Jacqueline Du Pre is
nearer to the moving realism of Scott Hicks' brilliant Shine than it
is to the excesses of Ken Russell's tasteless and exuberant biopics
(Mahler, The Music Lovers, etc).
Hilary And Jackie looks at the complex relationship between
Jacqueline, who eventually succumbed to multiple sclerosis, and her
older sister Hilary, an acclaimed flautist whose career never really
took off to the same extent.  This earnest film is a telling
exploration of sibling rivalry, the sense of competition between
artists, the weight of living up to expectations, and the toll that it
inevitably takes.
As youngsters, the two girls were driven to succeed by their
pushy mother (Celia Imrie).  Hilary was the early achiever in the
family, but when Jackie's prowess with the cello thrust her into the
limelight their respective fortunes and careers took very different
paths.  Hilary (Aussie actress Rachel Griffiths) eventually married
and settled down in a remote farmhouse to raise a family, while Jackie
(played by Emily Watson, from Breaking The Waves, etc) embarked on a
mammoth European tour that took a huge physical and emotional toll.
Drawing largely upon Hilary Du Pre's own memoir about her
sister, British writer Frank Cottrell Boyce (Butterfly Kiss, etc)
brings the characters to life in an intelligent and detailed script
that avoids the usual clichés of the biopic.  The narrative traces
the different fortunes of the two sisters, and some key emotional
events are seen from two perspectives.  Hilary And Jackie spans some
thirty years, moving from the post war austerity of 1950's England
through to the 1980's, although Tucker doesn't overload the film with
conscious period references or tiresome details.  Tucker (best known
for The Vampire's Life, his documentary about author Anne Rice) makes
his feature debut with Hilary And Jackie, and he brings a sense of
gritty realism to the material.  David Johnson's camera constantly
prowls around the stage, bringing life and a sense of energy to
otherwise static scenes.  Tucker draws a pair of superb performances
from his two actresses.  Griffiths delivers a more restrained
performance, but she captures the sense of frustration and failure
experience by Hilary, who feels slighted that she is often overlooked
and remains in the shadow of her sister's achievements.  Watson has
the meatier role as the sexually precocious, selfish and intense
Jackie.  She has to deal with depression and debilitating illness, and
she delivers a powerful and draining performance that elicits
begrudging sympathy for this doomed figure.  Both should have good
reason to feel a little miffed that they were beaten at the Oscars by
a couple of lightweight performances from Shakespeare In Love.
James Frain (recently seen in Elizabeth, etc) delivers a solid
performance as Daniel Barenboim, the Argentinian pianist who married
Jackie.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 22, 1999
Starring: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, David Morrissey, James Frain,
Charles Dance, Celia Imrie
Directed by: Anand Tucker
Distributed by: October Films
MPAA Rating: R (language, sexuality)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/hilary.htm 
Not since 1996's SHINE, which starred Geoffrey Rush as pianist David
Helfgott, has a movie so defiantly laid bare the lives of world-class
musicians. In fact, if one were to watch these films together, it would
almost certainly stand as a convincing argument that a life of music
naturally leads to all varieties of social ills. Yet HILARY AND JACKIE,
the sophomore effort from director Anand Tucker, has something more to
say -- it softly but strongly explores the complex relationships of
sibling rivalry and love in a very compelling tale. 
Emily Watson and Rachel Griffiths are the leads in this tale, playing
the sisters Du Pré. Both musicians from childhood, Hilary (Griffiths) is
renowned flutist while Jacqueline (Watson) is easily as skilled on the
cello. The two comepete for and win many honors as children and as young
women, both together and seperate. Their careers as musicians surpass
and then bow to one another's, and although their lives take very
different paths -- Hilary settles down to marriage and a family while
Rachel skips across the globe on a world concert tour -- they are bound
together by their deep family love. 
The performances of Watson and Griffiths are excellent in style and
substance. They contrast each other wonderfully, and while Watson's
portrayal of Jackie Du Pré is at times eccentric and perhaps
unsympathetic, both characters are charged with emotion. The Frank
Cottrell Boyce script, which is based on the book by Hilary and Piers Du
Pré, brings a great deal of depth to these characters as well. 
The script is also to be commended for its well-polished dual nature.
Cottrell Boyce adopts a style which one might expect to see in a mystery
thriller (which was in fact the case with David Koepp and Robert Towne's
script for MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE) and skillfully molds it to the story of
two rising musicians on different courses to fame. The latter parts of
his script are controversial to say the least, and the rather depressing
ending takes the wind out of an envigorating story. Some will leave this
movie feeling disenfranchised. Nevertheless, HILARY AND JACKIE is a
movie that reaches an upper echelon of contemporary cinema through solid
fundamentals and is a decent watch all around. 

Author
Jamie Peck
HILARY AND JACKIE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
That'd be Emily Watson, whose staggeringly brilliant work as the tragic 
Jackie is pretty much everything Academy voters look for in a Best 
Actress candidate. However, the Hilary du Pré character, played by 
Rachel Griffiths ("My Best Friend's Wedding"), doesn't get top title 
mention for nothing, and it'd be a shame if her subtle - but every bit 
as moving - acting was overshadowed by Watson's far showier role. The 
jury's currently out on whether or not that will happen, but already 
assured is that these lovely ladies put power and presence into a 
true-life tale filled with the kind of emotion and human drama that 
requires such treatment to really hit its heartbreaking story home. 
"Hilary and Jackie" sets up a tale of pseudo-sibling rivalry in 1950s 
England, when the du Pré sisters were young girls (nicely embodied by 
Keely Flanders and Auriol Evans, respectively) and it appeared Hilary, a 
natural on the flute, would become their family's claim to fame. But 
when Jackie reveals herself to be a cello prodigy after watching 
Hilary's gift garner much attention, their futures are altered forever; 
the former puts away her dreams for a fulfilling domesticity while the 
latter spirals into madness brought on by her musical success. For the 
second time in her life, Jackie begins to long for what Hilary 
possesses: sheer, stable normalcy with a loving husband (David 
Morrissey) and kids. 
This story is told in halves - first from Hilary's point-of-view and 
then Jackie's - a gimmick that seems initially frustrating but pays off 
beautifully in the concluding hour, when viewers are allowed to finally 
see most of the puzzling past events from both sides of the coin. There 
are a few underexplained forays into the deeper, more questionable 
branches of their relationship, especially some bed-hopping business 
after Jackie asks Hilary to help fulfill a shocking favor, but even in 
the film's weak moments, Watson and Griffiths (one or the other is 
nearly in every frame) deserve and demand attention. Simply put, these 
women work wonders. 
Also remarkable is how debut director Anand Tucker avoids the pitfalls 
of this type of picture by slathering his potentially devastating canvas 
with restraint - "Hilary and Jackie" never stoops so low as to indulge 
in blatant manipulation or false emotion. Screenwriter Frank Cotterell 
Boyce ("Welcome to Sarajevo"), who based his work on real-life Hilary 
and brother Piers' memoir "A Genius in the Family," might skimp on 
certain details that better the bond between Hilary and Jackie, but 
makes up for his shortcomings by concocting scenes that will hang in the 
memory for a long time. One such rendering is a haunting beach-set coda 
that perfectly emphasizes how unforgettable certain pieces of this movie 
are.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Cuddled up together under the covers in bed, the now grown sisters share
an another in a lifelong series of intimate, little chats. With a
flashlight for illumination and champagne for celebration, the close
siblings share in sister Jackie's musical triumph. The incredible
actress Emily Watson plays famous cellist, Jacqueline Du Pré, and Rachel
Griffiths plays her much less renowned flautist sister, Hilary Du Pré in
the stunning picture, HILARY AND JACKIE.
Written by Frank Cottrell Boyce and directed by Anand Tucker, the film
is based on the memoir by Hilary and her brother Piers. (Piers, played
by Rupert Penry-Jones, appears sporadically in the film but is
essentially ignored.)
The movie is consciously structured like a musical piece. After a brief
introduction when the two sisters were young, we move into the body of
the movie. First we have their adult life told from Hilary's
perspective, and then the same events are chronicled from what might
have been Jackie's perspective. The story ends in a furious movement in
which Jackie is struck down with Multiple Sclerosis at the peak of her
career. A wonderfully inviting movie is transformed into an
astonishingly moving one in this fatal, last act.
As the movie opens, a grade-school-aged Hilary has the musical skills
that her younger sister Jackie envies. With hard work and natural
talent, Jackie soon eclipses her sister, who forever after is doomed to
live in her shadow, relegated to being known as Jacqueline Du Pré's
sister.
Both of the sisters suffer from what a musical teacher calls a "lack of
deportment" when playing. This physical enthusiasm will turn into one of
Jackie's trademarks and endear her to her fans. Watson, who is perfect
for the role in so many ways, takes to the cello with abandon as if she
were born with the instrument in her cradle. Griffiths is excellent too
in displaying, with her silent looks, the frustration of coping with a
strong willed and famous sister.
The movie bursts with luxurious concertos and rich sonatas, some shown
in concert but most played innocuously and melodiously in the film's
background. (This isn't a concert movie. All of the stage performances
combined account for little more than a quarter of an hour of the film's
running time.)
Jackie was a controversial figure. A product of the 1960's free love
era, Jackie questions why marriage is necessary, given the advent of
widely available contraceptives. Her most controversial stand comes from
a request she makes to her sister after Hilary gets married. Since they
agreed to always share everything, she'd like Hilary to let her share in
conjugal relations -- she wants to have sex with Hilary's husband,
Kiffer Finzi (David Morrissey). And we're not talking about a one-night
fling.
The story argues convincingly that its two views of Jackie (one
narcissistic and uncaring and the other lost and depressed but
unfailingly loving) are equally valid. The incident of the dirty laundry
best illustrates this paradox. While off on one of her long, foreign
tours, Jackie finally communicates with her family by sending them a
package from Moscow. When they open it, there is no card or letter
inside, only her dirty laundry. This seemingly obvious act of cruelty
takes on a different meaning when we finally get Jackie's explanation.
Jackie does eventually marry, choosing the Leonardo DiCaprio of the
music world of the time, the celebrated conductor Daniel Barenboim
(James Frain). The television news reports describe them as "the Arthur
and Guenevere of the musical Camelot."
As Jackie's shooting star goes straight up, Hilary and her husband head
for a remote, old farm to raise kids and chickens.
Meanwhile, back at star central, Jackie wishes she had a simple life
like her sister. "Don't you wish sometimes that you couldn't play,"
Jackie presciently asks her husband. "That you could just be ordinary."
Barenboim loves the adulation and has trouble understanding the needs of
his conflicted wife. (Poor Jackie gets so upset that at one point, while
alone in a hotel room, she even mistreats her cello, leaving it out on
the snowy balcony.)
Watson, who specializes in performances of complex and confounded
characters, as she did in her Oscar nominated role in BREAKING THE
WAVES, delivers another Oscar characterization as Jacqueline Du Pré.
Mesmerizing throughout, her work will reduce you to repeated tears by
the end.
Jackie's life is perfectly bracketed in the movie. Her first and last
public performance with an orchestra has her playing the same
instrument, and it's not the cello. Brilliantly staged and marvelously
acted, HILARY AND JACKIE is a triumph that deserves the same roaring
applause from motion picture audiences that Jackie received from her
musical ones.
HILARY AND JACKIE runs 2:01. It is rated R for profanity and sexuality
and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Hilary_and_Jackie_ (R) **** (out of ****)
Hilary (Rachel Griffiths) and Jacqueline (Emily Watson) du Pre are a
sisterly pair of child musical prodigies: Hilary on the flute and
Jacqueline on the cello.  As an adult, Hilary gives up music to live a
normal life; Jackie, on the other hand, embarks on a wildly successful
career as a concert cellist, winning over worldwide audiences with her
flamboyant brand of skill and showmanship.  The divergent trajectories of
their lives (and not in the way one would expect) and the resulting
emotional and physical fallout threatens the sisters' strong bond.
According to the press notes, the fact-based _Hilary_and_Jackie_ was
"written and produced as a tribute to Jackie," and, as such, the focus
lies squarely on Jackie--and how could it not, with the extraordinary
Watson in the role.  For me, she is the woman to beat for best actress of
the year delivering a stunning performance that captures the entire
spectrum of her personality: from sweetness to bitterness, from madness
to illness.
But the film is not called _Hilary_and_Jackie_ for nothing, and not just
because Griffiths does some terrific--and sure to be underrated--work as
the more stable sister.  In an ingenious storytelling tactic, director
Anand Tucker and screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce split the story in
three sections, giving clear definition to both sisters.  "Hilary and
Jackie" details their youth together up until a crucial point where they
are separated.  "Hilary" focuses on Hilary's quiet life and her
ever-shifting feelings about Jackie, who periodically reappears. 
Finally, there's "Jackie," which picks up at the first section's cutoff
point and assumes Jackie's perspective.  As we see her turbulent life
unfold, her character is given greater dimension, providing vivid reasons
for some of Jackie's more erratic behavior in the "Hilary" section (some
events from which are retold from Jackie's perspective here).  The result
is an uncommonly well-rounded portrait of a tormented genius, and a
supremely affecting story of real people, only slightly marred by a bit
of arbitrary surrealism at the end (which, coincidentally, also
marred--moreso--Watson's breakthrough film, 1996's _Breaking_the_Waves_).


Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Anand Tucker
Writer: Frank Cotrell Boyce (based on the novel "A Genius in the Family"
by Hilary Du Pré and Piers Du Pré)
Starring: Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, David Morissey, James Frain,
Charles Dance, Celia Imrie, Rupert Penry-Jones, Bill Patterson, Auriol
Evans, Keely Flanders
Maybe the most important thing about this movie is that it's not handled
like the Hallmark Hall of Fame Movie of the Month, because it very well
could have been a manipulative tearjerker, broadcasted on ABC on a
Monday Night, starring Kelly Martin and Yasmeen Bleeth, respectively.
Because it's not handled like the greatest story ever told is precisely
why it's so great.  Underneath the to-die-for cinematography, the
brilliant acting, and incessantly wonderful direction is a film of
modesty, not sure whether or not this story is totally great but with
the balls to run with it, tell it in a certain original way.  It doesn't
merely go from plot point to plot point.  It goes from character to
character.  It obsesses itself with the depth and the style of it all,
and makes the story of a world-reknowned cellist who contracts MS and
dies prematurely into the story of two sisters, both musicians, who have
a totally unique relationship.
It's that their relationship is the center of the story that makes this
film transcend any cornball, shamelessly tired tearjerker qualities it
could have had and makes this, unlike "Patch Adams," effortlessly
emotional and real.  In short, this movie is just awesome.  It merely
tells its story really well, and that's something that just has to be
commended these days, when most stories are botched because they're not
told by great storytellers.  Director Anand Tucker tells this story
well.  He overdramaticizes everything, but still keeps it real.
The film tells the story of Hilary and Jacqueline Du Pré (Rachel
Griffiths and Emily Watson, respectively), two sisters who are first
seen in childhood (played by Auriol Evans and Keely Flanders,
respectively) as the very best of friends.  They are also both
musicians, Hilary a flutist and Jackie a cellist, and when it all
begins, both are considered child prodigies, but Hilary is seen as the
better of the two.  Jackie, a bit jealous, works and works at her
playing skills, and soon the tables are turned.  When they both hit
adulthood, Hilary strives for a comeback, while her sister is playing in
famous halls around the world, but instead of fame, captures the heart
of a hapless, joyful conductor, Kiffer Finzi (David Morissey, in a
semi-star-making turn).  They marry, after a short courtship, and move
to a lovely country house, making Jackie incredibly jealous since her
cello playing becomes a symbol of her current life: when she plays, she
has the eyes of the world, but when she stops, she's alone.  She enters
into a shallow relationship with an equally famous pianist, Daniel
Barenboim (James Frain), in hopes that she may overcloud her sister, but
she eventually begins to lose it, and runs away to Hilary's country
home, where she hopes to gain admittance by Hilary to sleep with her
husband, since no one she sleeps with gives her any pleasure.
It's all terribly melodramtic, as you can see, and by the time Jackie
has contracted MS (in a brilliantly edited scene that surpasses the
breakdown scene in the semi-smiliar "Shine" in technical and emotional
devastation), it would have been the time that I could easily call the
sign for melodramatic overload if it hadn't been handled in such a way.
The key thing here is that it's not about her gradual death and slip
into insanity but rather that it's about her tumultuous relationship
with her sister, which, I might add, is perfectly realized.  Their
relationship is the most down-to-earth complex entity of the year: they
love eachother more than anyone else in the entire world, but they're
also completely jealous of one another.  When a young Jackie surpasses
her playing abilities, she tries in vain to make a comeback but can't,
and almost seems to marry to get back at Jackie for her success.  When
Jackie lands on top and sees her sister marry a wonderful man, she is
jealous of her lifestyle to the most extensive brinks that I've ever
seen in a film (only two sisters who truly love eachother would dare
share the same man).  And the whole time, their love for eachother is
never doubted or even tested.
Another thing I really liked is Emily Watson's performance.  I usually
make it a note to never overpraise an actor for playing either a
drunkard or a lunatic or someone with a mortal disease (or any
combination of the three).  My reasoning for this is that it's a fucking
easy job.  The worst case for this very year may be Thandie Newton in
"Beloved": sure, she's good, but what's so tough about playing a woman
who stumbles around, slurs her words together, and acts like a three
year old inside a 20-year old's body?  Hell, I could play that if I had
a pair of breasts.  In that same exact movie, though, is a performance
by Kimberly Elise where she has to be the rock that holds the family
together as her mother slowly goes insane, her brothers run off never to
be seen again, and her mother's lover is scared off.  She has to
actually deal with real emotions, something much harder than mere
stumbling about.  But the Academy of Arts and Sciences loves loves loves
overpraising performances like Newtons.  If you don't believe me, look
at Jack Nicholson's performance in "As Good As It Gets": great
performance, but easy job.
This isn't so for Watson, though, because her insanity comes from real
emotions, not just a plot point.  And thanks to the opening sequence,
where we see her and Hilary as kids, we understand the motives behind
all her actions, and by the time she actually contracts MS and begins to
loose her sanity and her life, we've already understood that this is the
last straw for a woman plagued with terrible neuroses.  Rachel
Griffiths, who would have otherwise been the understudy to Watson's
protagonist, actually matches Watson step-for-step, because as Watson
grows insane, and demands unspeakable things from her, Griffiths holds
her own, and has to deal with what she is able to give her sister who
needs emotional help from her.  Griffiths, an otherwise unknown actress
(and Watson being famous from "Breaking the Waves" and "The Boxer"), is
absolutely brilliant, just as absolutely brilliant as Watson is, and if
the Academy and all the other Critics groups, who've already deemed
Watson's performance the best of the year, glance over hers because
she's the one who doesn't get to go insane (read: she gets the boring
role), then the scream of hysteria you hear will be from me.  After all,
Griffiths has the thankless job of keeping things real - the Tom Cruise
role in "Rainman" (the one who should have gotten Oscar consideration
and not Hoffman).  She does, and if anyone deserves accolades from the
Academy this year, it's Griffiths.
Together, the two actresses work extremely well, though, and both have
to go through deep emotional hell, the likes of which haven't been seen
this year.  If it hadn't been for an otherwise not-totally-great final
section that deals way too much with Jackie and not enough with Hilary
(when the two had gotten equal treatment for the entirety), I'd say this
is one of the top ten best films of the year.  It's so close to
perfection, in its structure, its treatment of its subject, and its
beautiful technical specifications (cinematography nomination, without a
shred of doubt in my mind, and maybe film editing), that it's nearly a
shame that it's not the flawless gem that it should be.  But, hey, as it
is, I can hardly complain.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Frank Cottrell-Boyce, adapted from a book by Hilary and
Piers du Pre
Ingredients: sisters, cello, psychological problems
Starring: Rachel Griffiths, Emily Watson
Synopsis:
Hilary (Rachel Griffiths) and Jackie (Emily Watson) are two musical
sisters, but HILARY AND JACKIE is mostly about Jackie because it is
based on the real life of extraordinary cellist Jacqueline du Pre. In
the story, cello genius Jackie has mental problems. On the one hand she
maintains an intensely jealous psychological rivalry against her sister
Hilary. On the other hand, Jackie shares an overpowering bond of
sisterly love with Hilary. This leads to bizarre escapades such as
Jackie's trying to share Hilary's husband, and trying to destroy a
priceless cello by freezing it in cold weather. Will everything turn out
all right for the troubled cellist?
Opinion:
There are two ways to take this story. On the one hand, if you walk into
the film blind, the cinematic style is troublesome. The plot wanders
unfocused until an emotional ending puts up a syrupy "that's life"
theme. On the other hand, if you're a big cello fan, interested in the
material, and are familiar with the story of the brilliant Jacqueline du
Pre, then you could become intrigued by the enigmatic, factual element
of du Pre's tragic life. Emily Watson gives a solid performance as the
beloved cellist.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Bob Bloom
"Hilary and Jackie" (1998) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Emily Watson and
Rachel Griffiths.
 Realizing this is a generalization, the question still needs to be posed:
Why is it that these bio-pics about artistic people seem to be so
overwrought and punctuated by multiple exclamation points?
 Case in point, "Hilary and Jackie," the story of the English cellist
Jacqueline du Pre and her sister, Hilary, a talented flutist who chose
marriage and family over a concert career.
 The movie, while covering the life of the two women, never really allows
its audience any intimacy with its subjects.
 We know only the surface details. Jackie, driven early in life by her
sister's musical expertise, works to surpass her. It is Jackie who gains
fame as one of the world's top cellist while Hilary is content to live in
the country with her husband, Kiffer.
 What "Hilary and Jackie" lacks is focus and heart. Focus, because the
screenplay, adapted by Frank Cottrell Boyce from the book "A Genius in the
Family" by Hilary and her brother, Piers Du Pre, cannot get a firm grasp on
Jackie.
 Her artistic temperment is well displayed. She is self-centered - while on
tour, she ships her dirty laundry home to be washed; mercurial - she goes
from moments of giddiness to fits of depression and moments of cruelty; and
conflicted - she loves the accolades and perks of fame, yet she envies
Hilary's simple country life.
 The problem is that no discernible reason is given for Jackie's actions.
It must be taken on faith that it is merely her inherent nature. She is
driven by genius. Why? Because we are told so.
 The most controversial aspect of the movie - as it reportedly was in the
book - was the time Jackie quit touring to live with Hilary and "share" her
husband. Jackie, who was married to pianist-conductor Daniel Berenboim,
deserts him and just drops in on Hilary and her family and blithfully
disrupts their lives.
 At least the movie refuses to allow Hilary to become a victim. She is
culpable, allowing her forceful sister to have her way, even letting her
sleep with her beloved Kiffer. Hilary indulges Jackie's outrageous
behavior. Yet, again, no apparent explanation is forthcoming, except that
Hilary is afraid of losing her sister.
 In a normal family relationship, Jackie's behavior would get her tossed
with a good riddance for emphasis. But Hilary consistently hides behinds
Jackie's "genius" as her excuse for her non-intervention.
 As Jackie, Emily Watson, who was so stunning in "Breaking the Waves,"  is
all mannerisms and motion. She doesn't inhabit Jackie so much as possess
her, like the devil possessed Linda Blair in "The Exorcist." Any moment you
expect her to vomit up pea soup. Affecting a nearly incomprehensible
accent, Watson shows us Jackie's artistic madness, but cannot show us what
ignites it.
 Even later, when Jackie is ravaged with multiple sclerosis, Watson's
performance seems just that - acting. You never get the feeling that she
actually inhabits Jackie. She may have copied the outer trappings, but she
has failed to reach the soul of the artist.
 Griffiths Hilary has a much more difficult time. Not as flamboyant as
Jackie, her task is nearly thankless. She must balance that thin line
between martyr and victim. You shake your head in disbelief while she
allows Jackie to use her husband and walk all over her, yet you also admire
her resilience and determination to hold her family - and her life -
together.
 Griffiths' is the spine of the film. Her Hilary, despite all her flaws, is
the stronger of the sisters.
 "Hilary and Jackie" is a movie with faults. Director Anand Tucker's
decision to show some of the same sequences from the perspective of both
Hilary and Jackie seems a bit pretentious and unnecessary.
 However, "Hilary and Jackie" does have some fine moments. One, especially,
is the scene early on when the young Hilary realizes that Jackie has
surpassed her in talent and has become the star of the family. It is
heartbreaking in its honesty and reality.
 Sequences such as those make this movie worth seeing. The music is good,
as well, but it is not what drives this movie. Relationships and the
complexities of family is at the core of "Hilary and Jackie."
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Scott Renshaw
HILARY AND JACKIE
(October)
Starring:  Emily Watson, Rachel Griffiths, David Morrissey, James Frain.
Screenplay:  Frank Cottrell Boyce, based on the memoir "A Genius in the
Family" by Hilary and Piers Du Pre.
Producers:  Andy Paterson and Nicholas Kent.
Director:  Anand Tucker.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     From its opening minutes, HILARY AND JACKIE promises intriguing spins
on a couple of time-worn dramatic set-ups:  the competitive siblings, and
the tortured artistic genius.  We first meet our sister protagonists as
children in 1950s England -- Hilary Du Pre (Keely Flanders) soaring on the
flute while Jacqueline (Auriol Evans) saws flatly on her cello.  It is
Hilary whose talent lands her on a BBC broadcast, earning her adulation
from her parents and others which spurs Jackie to a ferocious commitment
to improving her own musical skills.  Soon it is Jackie whose performances
are receiving standing ovations, the adult Jackie (Emily Watson) who rises
to international aclaim while Hilary (Rachel Griffiths) slips into
comfortable domesticity with her husband Kiffer (David Morrissey).
     Director Anand Tucker's adaptation of Hilary's memoir (co-written
with brother Piers) introduces some provocative questions regarding how
and why a prodigy becomes an artist.  Jackie's success surpasses Hilary's
not through superior inate talent, it is suggested, but through superior
effort, exemplifying the 99% perspiration in that aphorism about what
makes genius.  The film also introduces a wild card in the form of the
dance and movement classes both girls take, lessons which seem to
contribute to Jackie's uniquely passionate style but hinder Hilary's
efforts to excel at her own instrument.  The tension between the sisters
is set in what happens after their apparent childhood destinies flip-flop:
how Hilary abandons music altogether, and how Jackie comes to feel trapped
by her own success.
     If Tucker and screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce had explored the
siblings' relationship as effectively as they explore their respective
careers, HILARY AND JACKIE might have been a brilliant film.  As it
stands, it's a pretty good one which offers wildly disparate insight into
its two main characters.  At one point in the first hour, a title card
with the single word "Hilary" launches us into one sister's world when
Jackie's success first divides them.  This leaves us with Hilary, whose
interior life is left something of a mystery to us as she chooses marriage
and family over music.  There's a spark of curiosity as Jackie makes an
incredible request of her sister, but we never get a clear enough sense of
why Hilary grants that request.  The author chooses to remain enigmatic
herself, allowing the spotlight to shift entirely to Jackie in this story
with the same questionable selflessness she chose in life.
    There's hope that their relationship will become clearer when the
"Jackie" section begins, but that's not the case.  Instead, the story
begins a fascinating look at Jackie's love-hate relationship with her
music, which she feels is the only reason anyone loves her.  Emily Watson
gets a showy role as the artist who struggles with her own identity and,
eventually, with multiple sclerosis.  It's a great performance as a great
character, yet it's disappointing that we watch her interact with her
cello nearly as much as she interacts with Hilary.  Though Jackie's sense
of isolation is the theme of the film's second half, it doesn't allow us
to understand what these two women were to each other.  HILARY AND JACKIE
is a revelation when it allows us to see what people surrender for art, as
well as why people surrender their art.  As a family affair, it's more
labor than genius.

Author
James Sanford
With its story of a brilliant musician destroyed in her prime, "Hilary
and Jackie" has already drawn comparisons to "Shine," the 1995 hit
based on the life of pianist David Helfgott. But "Hilary" is a more
accomplished and demanding film, one that doesn't find a convenient
villain (like the didactic dad Armin Muller-Stahl played in "Shine")
to pin cellist Jacqueline Du Pre's troubles on.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Du Pre was celebrated for her extraordinarily
passionate playing and her often unruly style, marked by flying hair
and grandoise gestures, or "over-emphatic body movements," as one of
her early judges calls them. Emily Watson's depictions of Jackie's
performances here may remind you of the way Tori Amos appears to make
love to her keyboard in concert.  In both cases, the player and the
instrument seem to become one.
Of course, what went on off-stage was considerably more disturbing to
see. Raised in a family of music-lovers, sisters Jackie and Hilary
(Rachel Griffiths) were both pushed from an early age to
becomeconsummate musicians, although the less outgoing Hilary - a
flutist whom the film argues may have had more innate talent than her
sister - eventually crumbled in the spotlight and became a wife and
mother.
The teen-age Jackie was quickly sucked into a whirlwind of touring and
personal appearances around the world, much to her own amazement and
bewilderment; "one day I was playing, and the next I was booked up for
two years," she says. Jackie sought some sort of an anchor to help
stabilize her while the people around her seemed too caught up in
trumpeting her latest triumphs to pay attention to her needs.
"Hilary and Jackie" is told from the sides of both siblings, although
it's not one of those films in which we're shown the exact same
incidents from two different viewpoints. Instead, the "Hilary" portion
illuminates what Jackie's increasingly erratic behavior looked like to
theoutside world while the "Jackie" segment clues us in on the private
hell Jackie was going through as she tried to deal with increasing
hatred of her craft and the slow deterioration of her body. For
Jackie, who is reminded frequently by the people around her that her
whole life is her music, there's nothing to cling to when she realizes
she may not have much longer to play.
Watson, who proved in "Breaking the Waves" that she may well be
today's foremost chronicler of quiet madness, is arresting, but
Griffiths' far less flamboyant figure is every bit as
impressive. Hilary may not have Jackie's jet-set friends or splendid
London apartment, but she does have a charming, attentive husband
(David Morrissey, also excellent) Jackie hungers for, and Griffiths
subtly conveys Hilary's uneasy sense of serenity.
In trying to ease Jackie's stress, Hilary allows herself to be talked
into doing something she doesn't want to do and the results are messy
and lasting. Though Jackie's decline is sad indeed, Frank
Cottrell-Boyce's enormously insightful screenplay makes the case that
an even greater tragedy was the separation of two extremely close
sisters who were drawn apart by circumstances far beyond their
control.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     From those who would make great music the gods extract a heavy
toll.  How many times have we seen this in film?  We have seen this in
films from A SONG TO REMEMBER to AMADEUS, SHINE, and this season's
HILARY AND JACKIE.  But the latter actually may be closer to a RICH AND
FAMOUS or a BEACHES in plotting.  It give us the lives of two women,
lifelong friends (in this case sisters) and follows one through fame
and fortune and the other through the simple life, concluding at the
end that celebrity is not worth its price.  And it tells this story, as
SULLIVAN'S TRAVELS would say, "with a little bit of sex." If this was
the first film we had ever seen on these themes it would get full
marks.  But there have been surprisingly many similar stories.  The
film is supposed to be the true story of Hilary and cello master
Jacqueline Du Pre, but a heavy set of disclaimers in the closing
credits suggest that it may not be even that.
     The film opens with the two as children with a mother (Celia
Imrie) who endows both with love and a sense of wonder for music.  We
see her transcribing and leaving them by their beds overnight new
melodies for them to discover and excitedly play in the morning.
Hilary is older and more accomplished on the flute. Jacqueline can
barely get a decent melody out of her cello.  Hilary gets attention for
her flute skills, little Jackie feels left out and determines to catch
up with her sister.  So her abilities have to develop at a faster rate
and they continue to do so.  Soon the two are recognized as award-
winning musical prodigies, though now it is Hilary who is jealous of
the attention paid to Jacqueline.  Both girls learned from their mother
the supposed bad habit of putting too much body expression into their
playing.  To them playing is almost a little bit of dance.  Jacqueline
gets a good teacher who is tolerant of the body language.  Hilary's
teacher is an ogre who is intolerant of her having so much fun with her
playing.  The teacher ruins the joy of her playing.  The film splits in
two paths.  First it tells the story of Hilary, the quiet young woman
with a famous sister.  While Jacqueline travels the world with apparent
disdain for her family, Hilary wistfully follows her sister's career.
She meets a man, falls in love, and then has her sister re-enters her
life, a different and disturbed person.  The film then returns to the
splitting and tells the story of Jacqueline Du Pre and why she is so
unhappy with her fame and remains envious of Hilary.
     It has been suggested that this film puts the Du Pre parents and
Jacqueline's husband, Daniel Barenboim, in a bad light.  It is true
that there is something unfavorable about each of them at some point in
the film.  The Du Pre parents are not shown to be perfect, but then
what parents are?  Certainly Mrs. Du Pre is the source of the genius of
her daughters.  Her husband is a bit obtuse at times, but not
destructively.  A little more of the film's criticism is reserved for
Barenboim as Jacqueline's husband, but on balance he seems to be a more
devoted and more reasonable spouse than Jacqueline was.  There is
little that Daniel does to Jacqueline that Jacqueline has not done to
Daniel first.
     Jacqueline Du Pre is played by Emily Watson of BREAKING THE WAVES,
whose two big films have been about sexually disturbed women.  Both
films have allowed her to play women who are confused and a little
opaque.  It is hard to say if this is really good acting or not since
the women she plays are so unusual. There are far more ways to be
something out of the ordinary than to be commonplace.  Rachel Griffiths
as Hilary may have had the more difficult role, having to seem normal
but playing off her strange sister.
     HILARY AND JACKIE is more melodrama than serious drama.  It is not
exactly what would have been expected from the positive reaction this
film has been getting.  But even melodrama can be done well and as such
films go, this is one of the better ones.  Some of the music is
superlative.  I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Walter Frith
'Hilary and Jackie' is the stuff that sibling rivalries are made of.
Pleasant ones that is.  As one of the most human stories of 1998, the
film has the classic detail of what is supposed to happen while
preparing a film script to go before the cameras.  Director Anand Tucker
has pictured the entire structure of the film inside his head perfectly
and has elevated it to the screen with a unique and even structure that
tells an old fashioned tale with the highest of culture.  And, like
1996's 'Shine', Tucker makes the film about family even though it will
be mistaken by many to be about music, which is its secondary theme.
No technical aspect of a motion picture is more important than the use
of its music soundtrack.  I remember some years ago at the Oscar
ceremonies that a clip was shown from several motion pictures without
their music background and the audience laughed at how preposterous it
was and then broke into applause when the same scenes were shown with
their music included, showing a stark contrast that allowed people to
breath a sigh of relief at just how important music is to a film.
'Hilary and Jackie' has a beautiful classical score that overwhelms the
audience with genuine emotion and makes it even more memorable than it
would be with a lesser emphasis on musical harmony.
Jaqueline du Pré (Emily Watson) is a cellist and her sister Hilary
(Rachel Griffiths) plays the flute.  From the time they were children,
their parents instilled in them a sense of musical pride and guided them
through their studies to the level of professionals when they were still
in their teens.  Based on a true story set primarily in the 60's and
70's, the film has exquisite cinematography that sings a harmonic tune
all its own.
The two women marry early in life and and while Hilary is clearly the
more mature of the two, talent is surely abound in all forms of human
personality.  The true line that tests the theory of genius being formed
on the brink of the human mind gone mad, the film touches on this fact
without becoming heavy handed and the film proclaims that sometimes one
needs family around them when all other forms of personal contact seem
meaningless.
Children are forthcoming in their marriages and as the film progresses,
the story throws itself deeper and deeper into the ocean in personal
relationships that never seems tiresome or too intrusive but rather a
theme that many can relate to.
Emily Watson made her film debut in 1996's 'Breaking the Waves' and
received an Oscar nomination for it.  This film (her 5th in three years)
will almost certainly bring her her second nomination and she is even
more powerful in this movie than in 'Breaking the Waves'.  Her portrayal
of Jaqueline du Pré in 'Hilary and Jackie' is complex, showing her
genius for playing the cello while growing to despise playing it later
in life.  But this fact is never quite put across in a convincing manner
and that isn't a negative reflection on the film.  It simply means that
Jaqueline du Pré, I believe, really wanted to play but was afraid of
success and how her life might change while mastering her craft.
Without giving too much away for those unfamiliar with how this true
story ends, let's just say that after viewing this film, you will not
only have a deeper appreciation of music and film, but these things will
seem small when seeing just how large the human heart can be.
