Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Michael Dequina
U.S. Marshals (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
Sequels to popular action films are difficult to pull off as they are, and
the odds are further stacked against them when (1) the original hero is
nowhere to be found, and (2) the original was embraced by critics.  This
fact--and the failure of last year's tangentially related, critically
lambasted sequel to Speed--makes the effectiveness of U.S. Marshals all the
more surprising.  An ostensible sequel to the Best Picture-nominated The
Fugitive, the new film spins off Dr. Richard Kimble's determined pursuer,
federal cop Samuel Gerard, in an entertaining adventure that could very
well lead to a successful franchise.
Tommy Lee Jones, who won the Best Supporting Actor Academy Award for his
performance in The Fugitive, once again plays Gerard, reinhabiting the role
with the same infectious gusto and zeal he brought to the original.  Once
again, Gerard, this time reluctantly teamed with government special agent
Royce (Robert Downey Jr.), is chasing after a fugitive, an assassin (Wesley
Snipes) known at various points as either Mark Roberts, Mark Warren, or
Mark Sheridan.  Sheridan (as which I will refer to him) had been imprisoned
for the murder of two government agents, and, with the help of his dutiful
girlfriend Marie (Irene Jacob), he attempts to elude the ever-focused
Gerard and--yes--clear his name.
Director Stuart Baird and screenwriter John Pogue follows The Fugitive's
rough outline fairly closely, and a couple of scenes are direct analogues
to ones in the original.  In a spectacular scene, Sheridan makes his escape
after a plane crash, much like the original film's signature train wreck;
and one memorably outlandish stunt echoes Kimble's daring leap from a dam.
As a whole, though, the new film does not nearly measure up to the
original.  Snipes, as usual, is charismatic and plays his role well, but
his character is not as fascinating and complex as Harrison Ford's Kimble.
Sheridan has none of the emotional baggage that shaded Kimble; he simply
wants, as he calls it, "righteousness."  Kimble, on the other hand, was
continually racked with guilt over his wife's death.  The emotional angle
between Sheridan and Marie is a big zero; Snipes and Jacob muster little
chemistry, but that is due in part to the fact that they do not share too
many scenes.
On its own terms, though, the diverting U.S. Marshals makes for a
promising "pilot" for a potential Gerard series.  Jones is obviously
energized by the more physical role Gerard plays in this installment, and
while his pacing is not as tightly wound as that of Andrew Davis, the
original's helmer, Baird crafts some suspenseful and exciting chase scenes
without resorting to gratuitous bloodshed.  A few climactic plot
developments are a bit contrived, but Baird and the able cast glide through
them with enough panache that they are not a problem.  Slick, well-made,
and fun--The Fugitive was all this and much more, but even without that
something extra, U.S. Marshals gets the job done.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting Michael on November 21, 1997

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients:
Fugitive federal agent, ace U.S. Marshal and his competent team, plot to
sell government secrets
Starring: 
Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Irene Jacob, Robert Downey Jr.
Synopsis: 
In this sequel to THE FUGITIVE the great U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard (Tommy
Lee Jones) meets his match when he and his team of deputies are assigned
to catch a dangerous fugitive federal agent named Mark Sheridan (Wesley
Snipes), who is suspected of killing two federal agents and selling
American government secrets.
Marshal Gerard immediately gets suspicious when he notices that, for a
ruthless killer on the lam, how come Sheridan keeps going out of his way
not to hurt anybody? And why have the Feds assigned a suspicious federal
agent (Robert Downey Jr.) to keep tabs on Gerard's team and trail the
marshals wherever they go? 
Will Gerard catch Sheridan? Will Sheridan be able to evade the cops?
Will everyone finally figure out what's really going on?
Opinion:
This is a passable chase movie, following the formula of THE FUGITIVE.
There's a great plane crash in the beginning (it was an overturned bus
in THE FUGITIVE), and a spectacular scene where Sheridan is chased by
the Marshals to the top of a tall nursing home (it was the top of a tall
dam in THE FUGITIVE) and must make a breathtaking escape. Gerard and
Sheridan have a good fist fight as well.
The dialogue is sharp, and even side characters such as the airplane
pilot are well acted. The chases are exciting, and the special effects
are good. I especially loved Sheridan's daring escape from the top of
the nursing home.
There are some glitches in the story. For example Sheridan's girlfriend
Marie (Irene Jacobs) goes to a locker at Chicago's O'Hare  Airport,
removes a dark, important-looking bag and sneaks it to Sheridan, but the
bag's mysterious contents are never revealed. Another time, a captured
crook implies that someone higher up is behind the selling of government
secrets, but he refuses to reveal who the mastermind is. And we still
aren't sure if the real mastermind is caught by the movie's end.
Finally, U.S. MARSHALS would have a sharper dramatic edge to it if - -
as in THE FUGITIVE - - the plot allowed us to know right away that some
grave injustice were about to be done.
These nagging details take away from an otherwise entertaining movie,
but you know what they say about sequels.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If you drop in a few minutes late to THE FUGITIVE, PART II,
actually titled U.S. MARSHALS, don't be surprised if it looks like CON
AIR, PART II.  But you don't want to be tardy to U.S. MARSHALS since
you'll miss the opportunity to laugh at the movie's most ridiculous
scene -- Tommy Lee Jones dressed up in a big, yellow chicken suit as
his disguise in the picture's opening bust.
     Tommy Lee Jones as Chief Deputy Marshal Samuel Gerard and his crew
are back to track down another fugitive.  Acting with so much
camaraderie that they seem more like a sports team than law enforcement
officers, they possess enough adrenaline and drive to follow criminals
all over the globe, or at least the United States.
     Whereas last time we had a combination bus and train wreck, this
time it takes a spectacular air disaster to free Sam's future prey.
Acting against type, Wesley Snipes plays a resourceful prisoner named
Sheridan, who killed two U.S. secret agents from an organization called
the DSS.
     EXECUTIVE DECISIONS's director Stuart Baird demonstrates ample
skill in staging the action sequences for maximum effect.  Equally
notable is his restraint in not over using them to move the storyline
along.  Although the fast-paced show contain some great special
effects, the simpler ones are even better.  The story reaches maximum
tension in a tightly choreographed sequence in which Sam's team walk
along trailing a series of bagmen on busy Manhattan sidewalks.  This
scene also best shows off editor Terry Rawlings's talents in dazzling
but never confusing the audience.
     Andrzej Bartkowiak's cinematography deserves special mention.
Never have the majestic skyscrapers of Chicago and Manhattan looked
lovelier as they glisten in the sunlight.
     In the movie's weaker department, writer John Pogue's script needs
cleaning up.  Some characters, most notably Sam's boss, played without
genuine emotion by Kate Nelligan, merely clutter up the narrative
without adding value.  Another wasted role is that of Sheridan's
girlfriend, who serves absolutely no purpose at all.  (Well, her
character's job does generate the movie's most blatant product
promotion.)
     In contrast, Robert Downey Jr. gives one of his best performances
in some time as John Royce, a DSS agent, whom Sam is forced to add to
his team for the big hunt.  John, with his big, shiny, nickel-plated
handgun, his undertaker blue suit and his ubiquitous notebook computer,
looks so out of place that the contrast between Sam and him becomes the
movie's ongoing visual joke.  The negative chemistry between Sam and
John provides some of the show's best tension and humor.  Downey's
acting is especially remarkable for its steely passion and total focus.
Although Downey's character is not a comical one, he gets as many good
one-liners as does Jones in his leading role.
     The story takes the time to show the crew's fatigue after days
without sleep.  But the script does suffer the problem of most of
today's thrillers, delivering highly predictable and equally
unnecessary twists at the end.  A more straightforward chase picture
would have been better.  And why, oh why does the lead always feel a
need to go mano a mano with the killer?  Hold that backup.  He's got to
go after him alone.
     U.S. MARSHALS runs 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and
language and would be fine for kids around ten and up.

Author
Homer Yen
As a psuedo-sequel to 1993's The Fugitive, we can see many elements in
this film that parallels its predecessor.  Tommy Lee Jones returns to
recap his role as the alpha-male US Marshal, Samuel Gerard.  He leads
his band of deputies through the most dangerous of situations, but
with his keen guidance, the group emerges unscathed and is successful
in capturing their quarry.  There is also an innocent man (Mark
Sheridan played by Welsey Snipes) claiming to have been falsely
accused who, after a slam-bang sequence, manages to escape while being
transported from one prison to another.  He then spends the rest of
the movie trying to prove his innocence while alluding capture.  But
also true to most sequels, this movie hardly compares to its original.
The main difference is that The Fugitive was adept at balancing a
rivalry that pitted a law enforcement machine against a humble man who
endeared us with his heart and deep sense of pathos.  Harrison Ford's
character really didn't have a chance of alluding the law, but we
wished deeply that he could in order to right what was wrong, and
miraculously, he did find a way to escape.   "Marshals", however, is
more of a traditional, action-oriented offering whose focus is on
Tommy Lee Jones.  His Gerard character is a natural leader, and with
his gravelly voice, he incessantly barks out orders to his team.
Never taking a moment's rest ("When can we get some sleep," asks his
deputy.  "Next month," he yells back.), he sternly imposes his
authority over those under his command, looking very impressive as he
handles the chaos that sweeps around him.  
Choas emerges for him in two forms.  One is that of Sheridan.  As an
escaped convict, Gerard must bring him in.  But Sheridan is extremely
resourceful and thanks to his mysterious background, he manages to
allude Gerard at every turn.  The other element that distracts Gerard
is a new team member assigned to him by the government (Agent John
Royce played by Robert Downey Jr.).  While Gerard prefers the
familiarity of his team, Royce has some special skills better suited
to capturing Sheridan.
Despite all this talent, "US Marshals" doesn't achieve any new
tension-filled heights.  While Sheridan is supposedly innocent,
Snipes, though likeable, can't quite evoke any sympathy for his
plight.  Snipes seems more comfortable as the aggressor rather than
the victim.  If you look deep into his eyes, he looks like a man that
would rather shoot you in the head rather than into your bulletproof
vest.  Downey's character, while an effective agent, doesn't really
add anything to the mix except to offer a mild surprise at the end.
And the story is needlessly complicated.  Because of Sheridan's
mysterious background, we are introduced to subplots that include a
government mole, spying, and the real reason why Sheridan is wanted.
But there are some nice sequences and an incredible escape when Snipes
traps himself atop a tall apartment building surrounded below by
police.  Meanwhile, Jones is right on the money, maintaining focus and
letting us enjoy his thought process when he takes the lead.  Overall,
this is a film that barely gives us enough to sustain our interest.
But what little we get is well-executed, and it's greatest plus is
that we get a lot of Tommy Lee Jones.  But without him, "US Marshals"
wouldn't be nearly as effective.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        For three and a half years, I've been saying, "What's the big deal
about The Fugitive?"  I never really knew.  Now that I've seen U.S.
Marshals, I think I finally understand.  I can't fathom why the
Kopelsons chose this complicated, convoluted, and often strikingly
uninteresting script to carry the sequel to one of 1994's biggest
films.  This is a long film, and it doesn't need to be.  There are a lot
of characters, and there don't have to be.  On top of all this, the
basic framework for U.S. Marshals is basically identical to that of The
Fugitive, which takes the film dangerously close to the level of
"rip-off" rather than "sequel."
        One of the seventeen main characters is Sheridan, played by Wesley
Snipes.  He is a tow truck driver, but only in the beginning.  Later, he
is arrested and charged with the murder of two secret agents.  So, he
gets stuck on a plane.  Conveniently, U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee
Jones) is also on that plane, but because of another prisoner that he
captured in the obligatory introduction-action sequence (the one that
shows us our hero doing his best).  
        The plane crashes.  Sheridan escapes.  Gerard is allowed to say his
line from the first film:  "We've got a fugitive!"  This is about thirty
minutes into the story.  Sequences shortly after this take place in a
swamp, and there are moments when Sheridan takes people hostage while
Gerard has him at gun point and could just shoot him in the face without
harming anyone.  
        We learn of new characters.  Robert Downey, Jr. plays agent John Royce
who is forced into Gerard's team despite Gerard's protest.  This leads
to an involvement with Royce's employers, who turn out to be somehow
related to Sheridan, and this opens up a subplot involving a murderous
Chinese diplomat.  Oh, and let's not forget the other U.S. Marshals, for
whom the film is named:  Joe Pantoliano, whom I like, reprises his role
from the first film; there are, in actuality, about five Marshals in the
film, and all of them are given too much screen time for me to have not
remembered their names just one day later.
        Sheridan has a girlfriend, Marie.  Marie is played by the wonderful
Irene Jacob.  I'm not sure why the character is in the film, though, and
Jacob's considerable talent is wasted (though she does make her scenes
easy on the eyes).  
        U.S. Marshals didn't strike me as a goofy movie as I watched it, but I
think of it that way in retrospect.  The story is silly and complicated
for no reason.  It's not even very plausible.  Not only that, but the
makers don't trust the audience:  when Gerard makes an important
revelation towards the end of the film, we are force-fed a flashback of
an earlier scene in the film that provides information needed to solve
the puzzle.  
        The action sequences are good.  I liked the scenes taking place in a
home for old folks, and that sequence culminates with a leap, from a
roof onto a train, that is truly spectacular (although you can see that
in the preview).  I also liked the acting.  Jones is charismatic and
continues in the manner than got him an Oscar for the same role in the
earlier film.  Snipes makes a good hero, although our sympathy is torn
because his character is too complicated for easy audience involvement. 
The other Marshals are all nice, and the bad guys are adequately bad,
but everything here tastes a little too familiar.
        Harrison Ford is basically what makes The Fugitive a good movie.  He
played a nice, normal guy (I even remember his character's name, and I
haven't seen the film in years) with whom everyone can identify.  We
really wanted to see him succeed.  But Sheridan is a special forces
agent--there is really no suspense in his situation, and almost no
payoff in the conclusion.  And, by the end of the film, director Stuart
Baird has truly lost sight of what the film is--and should--be about: 
Gerard chases Sheridan.
        This isn't a terrible or even extremely mediocre film.  As a strict
action film, this one has good acting and nice set-pieces.  But what
about the story?  What about the involving characters that made the
original film a satisfying and entertaining picture?  That's what got
lost in this sequel.  U.S. Marshals has too much plot on which it must
focus, and ends up flailing wildly and not really getting anywhere.

Author
Marty Mapes
My first reaction to U.S. MARSHALS was that there was nothing original,
nothing that broke from the action movie formula, in the entire film.
I was wrong, but not by much. 
The movie is a sequel to THE FUGITIVE, the above-average thriller starring
Tommy Lee Jones and Harrison Ford. Actually, it's more of a remake than a
sequel. This time, Sam Gerard (Jones) is on the trail of Mark Sheridan
(Wesley Snipes). Sheridan, like Ford's character in THE FUGITIVE, is falsely
accused, arrested, convicted, and put on a prison transport that crashes.
Sheridan is able to escape, and Marshal Sam Gerard is called off his current
assignment to catch him. 
I felt bad for Jones being caught in such a mediocre film after he won an
Oscar for the same role (he won Best Supporting Actor in 1993 for THE
FUGITIVE). In fact, the first time we see Jones on screen he is dressed in a
chicken suit. It was beneath his dignity. When he first read the script he
should have turned it down cold. 
But because Jones took the role, the movie was somewhat salvaged. Jones'
portrayal of Sam's almost neurotic relentlessness added an interesting angle
to the movie. Also, the pacing was surprisingly good, considering that the
movie was so predictable. No sequence lingered too long before the hunt
moved to a new setting or took a new turn. And the supporting cast of
marshals (particularly Joe Pantoliano and LaTanya Richardson) was good. The
dialog and banter among them was lively and natural; it felt like they
actually worked together, as a unit, every day. 
But the movie also had big problems in the script and in the direction. 
The movie was too unoriginal and predictable to be much fun. It looks
different from its predecessor, but the differences are purely superficial.
The structure and outcome borrow heavily from the first, and the whole movie
has the feel of a slapped-together, uninspired sequel. 
And other than Jones', none of the characters were very well developed.
Snipes' character was contrived to be similar to Harrison Ford's in the
original, constraining his acting options. Robert Downey Jr. had a
two-dimensional part as an unwelcome outsider assigned to work on Sam's
close-knit team. And Iréne Jacob's talents were wasted as Sheridan's
girlfriend, a part that was clearly written for the sole purpose of getting
a beautiful model into the movie. 
With U.S. MARSHALS, Baird and the film's seven producers built an expensive
mansion on a swampy patch of land in Greeley, Colorado: they spent a lot of
money on a bad script written from a story that's only mildly interesting,
regardless of the quality of its telling. 
Skip this one unless you're a Jones fan, and even then, wait for video.
Shouldn't be too much longer now.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
George Wilcox
        The best way to approach "U.S. Marshals" is the same way I go
into the NBC Tower as an audience member for the Jenny Jones Show. (Is
she still on?) Just check your brain at the door, and try to enjoy the
ride.
        It might be a difficult concept to accept for "U.S. Marshals,"
the sequel to "The Fugitive," the hugely popular and 1993
Oscar-nominated film. The expectations are high, but the payoff is
low. The bottom line is that screenwriter John Pogue and former
editor-turned-director Stuart Baird have dropped the ball. This is not
like "The Fugitive" sequel you would have expected to see. Expecting
another tense drama, mano a mano, between Tommy Lee Jones'
Oscar-winning role as Deputy Sam "The Big Dog" Gerard and an A-list
star on the run, Pogue and Baird have delivered a confusing,
directionless film featuring a boring array of government bureaucrats
and spies. Ho hum.
        The producers seem to have forgotten what made the first film
such a success. The only thing we ask for is a testosterone-pumping
thriller as Gerard and Fugitive X butt heads. Instead, "U.S. Marshals"
is light on action, heavy on the international intrigue. The movie
feels like Pogue originally wrote a separate "Fugitive"-type of story,
and then inserted Gerard's grunts and groans to suit Jones' character.
        Gerard's crew, including Joe Pantoliano as Cosmo, is back, but
they only help chase the bad guy and actually have little input into
solving the case. Fugitive X this time out is Wesley Snipes as Mark
Warren, who in a matter of minutes goes from being mild-mannered
Chicago tow truck driver to extradicted federal prisoner falsely
accused of a double homicide in New York City. The drop-dead gorgeous
Irene Jacob plays his girlfriend, Marie, but Jacob is totally wasted
in the role.
        Soon after, Mark is aboard ConAir, gets attacked by a fellow
prisoner and then escapes after a high-budget, effects-laden airplane
crash, much like the bus crash in the original film.
        Mark goes by many last names and that's because he's not just
any tow truck driver speeding down Halsted Street. He's a covert
government assassin.
        This is where asking too many questions becomes a dangerous
thing. How did a smart guy like Mark get involved in a political mess
about South Koreans-Chinese and U.N. officials? How does a secret
agent-tow truck driver meet a Starbucks server and why should we care
about them? And my favorite, just where does Mark think he's going
once he's accomplished his mission in New York?
        The second half of the film takes place in New York City, but
don't believe it. It's still hometown Chicago in disguise, including a
shootout at the Graceland Cemetery (supposedly Queens) over by
Wrigleyville.
         Halfway through the movie Gerard is way out of his
jurisdiction, but that doesn't seem to matter. He already has the
evidence that prooves Mark is innocent, but he might as well chase
after him anyway.
        This needlessly complicated plot began to remind me of
"Mission:Impossible." Sometimes the chase is more important than the
reason for the chase.
        Pre-convict Robert Downey Jr. steps in as a government special
agent assigned to help Gerard with the case. It's never fully
explained what Downey does. In one scene, he identifies himself with
the DSS. That must be the Department of Stupid Spies. This film leaves
you with a lot of uncertainty about the intelligence of our
intelligence agencies.
        Maybe "U.S. Marshals" was doomed from the beginning with
Pogue's convoluted script. His only previous effort was as an
uncredited co-writer to the equally confusing "Eraser" with Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
        Director Baird ("Executive Decision"), who edited impressive
and unimpressive action films like "Demolition Man," "Die Hard 2," and
the first two "Lethal Weapons," keeps the film well-paced, but fails
to find the heart of the story. The sorrowful part for blockbuster
hit-less Warner Bros. is that Baird's "U.S. Marshals" may have killed
a potential film franchise. After four "Batmans" and the fourth
"Lethal Weapon" on the way, it is apparent the Brothers Warner could
use an injection of new blood. Of course, that's assuming Kevin
Costner's "The Postman Rings Twice" ever get green-lighted.
        Rating: Two stars

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critic's Association' at:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
What made 1993's 'The Fugitive' so compelling was that it managed to
avoid becoming just another routine action picture with a clever script
which a lot of writers worked on, among them David Giler, Walter Hill,
Robert Mark Kamen, David Newman, Jeb Stuart and David N. Twohy.  It had
an average director (Andrew Davis) who managed to pull a rabbit out of
his director's hat by doing extremely good work but he didn't get an
Oscar nomination while the film, for Best Picture, did.  The film did
earn Tommy Lee Jones an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor as a determined
U.S. marshall who absolutely will not quit until he gets his man and
Harrison Ford was unjustifiably misunderstood and snubbed for a Best
Actor nomination as Jones' intended quarry, and Ford turned in a
performance which had little dialogue but plenty of method, sublime and
reaction acting which I suppose explains why the Academy asked him to
present the Best Picture award at that given year's ceremonies.
Director Stuart Baird ('Executive Decision') is at the helm of 'U.S.
Marshals' which can't quite avoid being a diluted remake of 'The
Fugitive', as the plot is restricted once again to the pursuit of one
man and the exposure of a frame-up.  You don't get films more studio
oriented than this but this unnecessary movie is not a total wipeout,
despite being an effort to cash-in on the original, as it does have some
eye catching stunts, action and a pleasant pace at times but the movie
is extremely uneven.
Tommy Lee Jones is back as the U.S. marshall and this time his adventure
leads him to the pursuit of an escaped prisoner (Wesley Snipes) who is
framed for two murders involving international and domestic espionage
and Jones' entire team of assistants from the first film are back to
assist him.
We had a bus crash and train wreck account for the mayhem which led to
escaped prisoners in 'The Fugitive' and this time it's a plane crash and
its drowning wreckage that is the culprit.  Harrison Ford jumps off of
the edge of a water dam tunnel and now Snipes avoids being captured by
Jones by swinging on a wire from the top of a building in New York and
landing squarely on top of a high speed subway car and Snipes salutes
his predator as the train speeds away and Jones can only watch.
I had an accurate picture of the plot this time, regardless of its
shortcomings, but I was struck by the quantity of unnecessary characters
written in for no good measure.  There is Snipes' girlfriend (Irene
Jacob) who amounts to nothing more than a sympathetic beauty.  There's
Kate Nelligan, a U.S. marshal who barks orders and pushes a pencil
behind her bureaucratic desk who isn't really in the field of action and
just happens to be Jones' boss (it should be the other way around) and
then there's Robert Downey Jr., an agent assisting Jones' and his team
who is suspiciously low-key but never effective after being exposed for
what he is.  I ended up saying "Why are these people here for no other
reason except to be annoying?"
In wake of its recent trend of flops, Warner Bros. is celebrating its
75th anniversary this year which they are marketing heavily and while
studio execs who are green lighting projects and making movies that
matter but don't generate great box office such as 'L.A. Confidential',
it would be nice to see a film from them that didn't have to be a quick
cash grab and all studios should have the integrity to occasionally say
no to a sequel just for the sake of money.  Just ask the creators of
'E.T.'
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith:
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Fred M. Hung
I should have known what to expect when I saw the director, Stuart
Baird, whose last work was Executive Decision, a mildly entertaining but
mostly formulaic and uneven Die Hard in air.  In US Marshals, Sam Gerard
is again on the hunt for Sheridan, a former Marine, Special Forces. 
Robert Downey, Jr., DSS Special Agent John Royce, is a new addition to
the team.  
The first Fugitive was a remake of the old TV series, and no one had
more doubts than I about its effectiveness.  Yet the sheer unrelenting
pace and amazingly strong characters made the film so much more than the
sum of its parts.  Tommy Lee Jones was riveting, full of energy resolve,
and professionalism.  Many will complain that US Marshals suffers
because it lacks Harrison Ford, but Ford's performance, though solid,
was not particularly out of his narrow range.  In fact, you can supplant
Ford's President from Air Force One with Dr. Richard Kimble and one
could scarcely tell the difference.  What made Fugitive truly great was
the combination of Tommy Lee Jones' Sam Gerard, a noble Wyatt Earp who,
though chasing our hero Harrison Ford, is difficult to dismiss, and
impossible to hate.  
US Marshals is disappointing, but not in the material, in the editing. 
In a film class I took back in college, we were taught that editing
creates continuity, and thus makes the story of the film.  The blame,
therefore, must fall on Baird.  In fact, all the elements of a good film
are present in US Marshals, action, plots and subplots, bad guys, and
noble good guys.  Unfortunately, nothing successfully gels these
components.  Even Jerry Goldsmith, whose musical scores are usually
quite engrossing, produces a nondescript and absolutely nonemotive
effort.  At times I even wondered whether they had forgotten to add a
score.  
Like Executive Decision, US Marshals suffers from moments of intensity,
to great lulls in rhythm.  The plane crash where Snipe's Sheridan
escapes is preceded by a very tepid formal where Gerard's superior
orders him to take vacation.   In addition, The supporting cast blends
too easily in the background to be noticeable.  The chemistry between
Sam Gerard and his men in the Fugitive created levity in the moments
when they interacted.  In the US Marshals Baird attempts to mimic these
moments, but they too seem forced. 
While certainly disappointing, US Marshals is not a horrible film, but
audience expectation is so much greater.  I can think about a dozen
directors, namely Michael Bay, Tony Scott, John McTiernan, and certainly
Andrew Davis (although Chain Reaction was pretty lackluster) that could
have made more of this solid cast.  What a waste of talent.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
It's easy to dismiss U.S. Marshals.  It's nothing more than a sequel to
The Fugitive, a far superior film.  Wesley Snipes, while passable as
fugitive Mark Sheridan, is no Harrison Ford.  The supporting cast blends
into the scenery as though they were wearing camoflauge.  The plot is
paper-thin, and the movie's big surprise is obvious from the first reel.
You can make all of these criticisms, and you would be quite right and
justified to make them.  No matter.  For all its flaws -- and it has
many -- U.S. Marshals has Tommy Lee Jones as Deputy U.S. Marshal Sam
Gerard, and that's all it needs to be a success.
I say that because U.S. Marshals -- even though it recycles Gerard's
character from The Fugitve -- is not that movie's spiritual heir.  U.S.
Marshals is actually looking past The Fugitive, all the way into the dim
reaches of time, to the days when Inspector Harry Callahan still walked
the foggy streets of San Francisco.  This, my friends, is a Dirty Harry
picture.  And if anyone out there is qualified to fill Clint Eastwood's
brogans as this generation's police action hero, it's Jones.  Jones has
the same killer stare, the same charisma, the same dry sense of humor as
Eastwood did in his prime.
And like Eastwood, Jones can carry a movie all by his lonesome, as he
has to here.  Jones got a richly-deserved Oscar for his turn as Gerard
in The Fugitive, and his acting is the same quality here, even if the
film isn't.  He's not given any of the memorable lines of dialogue he
had in the last movie ("My, my, my.  What. A. Mess," or "Think me up a
chocolate donut with some of them sprinkles," or even "I don't care!")
but it doesn't matter.  Even in a ludicrous chicken suit in the movie's
opening scenes, he's got a magnetic screen presence that saves U.S.
Marshals from being hideously bad.
I'm not going to recapitulate the plot here because there isn't one,
it's just Jones chasing Snipes.  The action sequences aren't especially
well-done, and they're shot full of cliches where they make any sense at
all.  (One wonders, for example, how the shackled prisoners on the
"Con-Air" type transport are supposed to get their chained hands up far
enough to reach the oxygen masks that fall as the plane crashes.)  The
relationship between Jones and his team isn't as interesting as you
might have thought from the first movie -- but even at that, it's more
interesting than the relationship between Snipes and his girlfriend,
French actress Irene Jacob.
This is a very bad movie with one great performance that redeems it.  My
advice is to disconnect your brain, forget there ever was a movie called
The Fugitive, get some popcorn and enjoy the movie for what it is.  U.S.
Marshals may or may not make your day, but all of us punks have to feel
lucky that Tommy Lee Jones works as hard as he does.  (When does MIB2
come out again?)
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 6, 1998
Starring: Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Robert Downey Jr., Kate
Nelligan, Tom Wood, Joe Pantoliano, LaTanya Richardson
Directed by: Stuart Baird
Distributed by: Warner Bros.
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (some scenes of violence, brief language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/usmarshals.htm
A friend said something like this to me after seeing this movie: "If THE
FUGITIVE was the story from the fugitive's point of view, then U.S.
MARSHALS is the story from the cop's point of view." Makes sense,
doesn't it? And yet so many people, including myself, went into this
movie expecting U.S. MARSHALS to convey the same edge-of-your-seat
suspense as did its quasi-predecessor, the 1993 blockbuster THE
FUGITIVE. Although Tommy Lee Jones reprises his Academy Award-winning
role in respectable fashion, a lot of the elements which made THE
FUGITIVE such an enjoyable movie have not been brought back. With little
or no suspense, no engaging plot, no truly likeable characters, and most
of all, no Harrison Ford, what does U.S. MARSHALS have going for it? 
There are reasons that this movie is worth seeing. Tommy Lee Jones, as
U.S. Deputy Marshal Sam Gerard, and his crack team of criminal-chasers,
were engaging characters - albeit not ones that you hold close to your
heart. Gerard's team, in particular, was the lone source of lighthearted
dialogue. Their constant banter, which usually takes place behind or
around the stony-faced Gerard, was what helped the audience bear with
the cumbersome plot. Wesley Snipes, playing Mark Sheridan, the man that
Gerard has to chase down, in no way replaces Harrison Ford's character
of Dr. Kimble. Robert Downey Jr., who co-stars as an intelligence spook
named John Royce, is nothing but a plot facet: his character is
necessary for the new, complex plot to hold together but on the whole is
unnecessary for the theme. 
The plot which encompasses these characters tells as follows: Marshal
Gerard and team set the ball rolling by taking down a household of
redneck arms hustlers. A tough breed, they require some extra
restraining, and in the siege, Gerard hits one of the criminals over the
head with a shotgun. The redneck threatens to sue, and so Gerard's boss
(Kate Nelligan) has Gerard go to Washington, DC, to do a public
relations bit for the Marshal Service. Unfortunately, she's got him
flying to DC on a prison transport plane with several other marshals
and, among others, Mark Sheridan. Everything is fine until an attempt on
Sheridan's life is made by another prisoner and the plane goes down in
the ensuing chaos. Sheridan escapes, and Gerard calls his team in for
another fugitive situation. This time, though, John Royce, a domestic
intelligence agent, is assigned to the case because of the special
nature of criminal that Sheridan is. 
The plot has amazing possibilities, and it comes close to grasping some
of those, but it never really realizes its full potential. The way that
Director Stuart Baird tells the story is a decidedly sub-par affair, for
the tale comes out clumsy and unintriguing. During the 133-minute
running time, there are only a handful of scenes which have any real
watchability for action or suspense or both, others do nothing but
rehash ground that THE FUGITIVE has firmly trod over. This could have
been a much better movie, and although it's worth seeing, the decision
is primarily viewer merit.
FINAL AWARD FOR "U.S. MARSHALS": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
Steve Kong
Some say the ultimate flattery is in imitation.  With movies, though, I say
stay away from sequels -- even if they are quasi-sequels like US Marshals.
US Marshals is a semi-sequel to the 1993 blockbuster thriller "The
Fugitive" which starred Harrison Ford.  Tommy Lee Jones had a big
supporting role that turned him up an Oscar.  In US Marshals we move the
focus from the escapee to the hunter: US Marshal Sam Gerard.
In The Fugitive we were introduced to Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee Jones) who was
a simple but very intelligent man.  It was Gerald's striving for hard work
-- from both himself and his team -- that made for such an exciting movie.
Tommy Lee Jones revives his portrayal of Gerard for US Marshals.  This time
he's chasing another escaped fugitive.  But, this time there's no real
thrill to the chase.
US Marshals opens with a completely contrived action sequence that
accomplishes nothing.  The film opens with Jones in a big bright yellow
chicken suit, staking out a really bad guy.  How do we know the guy is
really bad?
He wears black leather, dirty jeans, has tattoos, earrings, and his woman
has real big hair.  A fight breaks out, the bad guy is caught, and Gerard
and his team celebrate.  We then switch over to a tow-truck operator
(Wesley Snipes) who has an unfortunate accident, gets arrested, gets bailed
out by his girlfriend (Irene Jacob), and then gets arrested again.
We find out that Snipes's character is suspected of murdering two
government agents in "cold blood." He vehemently denies it and says that
it's a simple case of mistaken identity.  Oh sure, we're supposed to
believe that. 
Snipes is really a super-operative for a deeply covert government agency
called the DSS, named Sheridan.  We find out that Sheridan is really a
highly trained killing Marine -- heck, who in a Hollywood flick isn't? --
and he is a hot commodity with the DSS now.
Sheridan is being transported to jail by plane.  By coincidence, Gerard is
on the same plane.  A failed assassination attempt on Sheridan's life
results in a plane crash and that is where only one prisoner escapes;  you
guessed right, Sheridan escapes.  And if you guessed that Gerard is on the
chase, well, you guess right again.
The setup for the film, up until the plane crash, takes a horrendous thirty
or so minutes.  Most of those thirty minutes were wasted  and strange,
useless padding.  I was relieved to see the action picking up after the
plane crash but was disappointed by the slow pace  which followed.
When the chase starts, Gerald's team gets an unwanted addition: a DSS agent
named Royce (Robert Downey Jr.)  As with all predictable movies, we all
know why Royce is really on the team and what his overall status in the
movie will turn out to be.
US Marshals is a movie about waste.  Wasted time for the more than two-hour
running time and an endless cascade of needless scenes.  Wasted talent for
casting good actors like Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Robert Downey Jr.,
Irene Jacob and Joe Pantoliano in such mediocre roles.  And a wasted sequel
for having a script that is not original but simply makes minor changes to
the original film and passes it off as a new film.
US Marshals is tries very hard to be The Fugitive Part II, with action
sequences that come close to mirroring sequences in The Fugitive -- the
plane crash for the train crash, the leap of a building to a train for the
leap of a dam -- and a story line that tries to be the same.  What is
missing in US Marshals is two things: the steady hand of a good director
and the steady pen of a good writer.
When I heard that Stuart Baird was at the helm of this film, directing, I
had a sick queasy feeling in my stomach.  I know as a film critic I should
go into films with an open mind, but I'm human.  Baird, who did some
wonderful editing with films like Superman, the first two Lethal Weapons,
and Die Hard 2, became a director with Executive Decision.  It was a
generic and bland action film.  I feared that Baird would also turn US
Marshals into the same type of generic and bland flavor of film, and my
fears were all proven correct.  I really don't understand why the pacing of
US Marshals was so awful.  It was slow and the action sequences were badly
put together.  The slow pace makes for too much time for the audience to
think of the silliness of the plot.  The bad editing and filming of the
action sequences fail to create the much-needed adrenaline rush for an
action film.  Throw in a dash of unneeded government conspiracies and we
have the making of a dud action film.
The script is unintelligent and confusing.  Writer John Pogue puts together
a script that is unnecessarily talky and reinvents the characters as
forgetful puppets.  Gerard finds out halfway through the film that Sheridan
didn't commit the crimes but still goes on chasing after Sheridan.  Why?
US Marshals could have been better.   The main failing of the film is that
the audience is never emotionally attached to Sheridan.  In The Fugitive we
were with Harrison Ford's character all the way.  We felt for the guy and
we wanted him to prevail.  When the focus of the film switches from the
pursued to the pursuer we lose this connection.  And with the premise of
the film being that Sheridan is innocent, we don't want Gerard to catch
him, so there is no connection whatsoever.
Snipes is reduced to portraying a guy on the run.  Every time he has screen
time he is running.  Jones is reduced to a standard-fare action hero.
Every time he has screen time he is chasing.  Had US Marshals been a bit
tighter in the story line and the editing, this would have been fine.  But,
the fact remains that US Marshals tries to be a thriller without thrilling.
It was funny for me to see Snipes and Downey on screen together again --
especially in a hospital.  The last time they were together onscreen was in
One Night Stand.
Some sequels work out well (Empire Strikes Back, Scream 2) and some don't.
US Marshals falls into the latter category.  With a silly script and an
amateur director, time is wasted along with talent.  Yes, there are some
slick stunts in US Marshals and there are some exciting portions, but the
time you spend to get to them is not justified.  Skip US Marshals at the
theatres.  It's a shame that this sequel was made.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Tommy Lee Jones (Sam Gerard), Wesley Snipes (various character
names), Joe Pantoliano (Cosmo Renfro), Robert Downey Jr. (John Royce),
Irčne Jacob (Marie), Tom Wood (Noah Newman), Daniel Roebuck (Biggs),
Kate Nelligan (Walsh)
Directed by: Stuart Baird, Written by: John Pogue
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, gore, and strong language
I'll lay out the basics first.  Sam Gerard, the Chief Deputy U.S.
Marshal from THE FUGITIVE (1993), and his team of crack deputies, are
back.  Another man has fled from the clutches of the state, and Gerard
must chase this new fugitive down.  But what's the story this time?  Why
is he running?  Did he do what he was accused?  If not, who did?  Who's
doing the cover-up?  Why?  And so on.  All the stuff you love from your
traditional action/suspense/mystery flicks, but with better characters
(especially Jones' Oscar-winning Gerard role) and better action
set-pieces, pushing it into the above-average fun-film range.  Plus,
it's a Warner Bros. film, and everyone knows that ever since about 1994,
it's been a red-letter day any time that Warner has actually released a
good film.  '97 was their best run in a while, what with CONTACT,
ROSEWOOD, and L.A. CONFIDENTIAL.  Maybe things will look up for them
this year.
Now then... I've never felt the need to adress what other critics have
thought of a movie before, but this time, I'm afraid I must.  It's just
that this time, I've read a number of reviews with differing opinions,
but many of them made various statements that left me with one vital
question: What movie did these people see?  I'm not talking about
disagreeing with their opinions.  I'm talking things that seem to be
factual, and yet, also just seem... well, wrong.  
I guess some of these could be taken as opinions.  Regardless, I have no
idea where anyone could get these impressions.  I'll just ramble them
off for you, to give you an impression of what I'm getting at here.
The following statements, made by a number of unrelated, anonymous film
critics, appear to be nothing short of, well, FALSE:
1) U.S. MARSHALS is nothing more than a copy of the THE FUGITIVE.
3) Tommy Lee Jones doesn't even seem to playing the same character in
U.S. MARSHALS as he was in THE FUGITIVE.
4) Sam Gerard's opening raid serves no purpose whatsoever to the movie.
5) After discovering things about the fugitive he is chasing, Sam Gerard
appears to forget them repeatedly later on.  He still chases Snipes even
after he finds the truth about the character.
6) Wesley Snipes' character plays little importance to the story.
7) Wesley Snipes' character doesn't try very hard to clear his name.
8) Every detail of the plot is solved within one hour, leaving nothing
more to do than to catch Snipes.
9) None of these characters ever seem to be in any real danger at any
point in the film.
10) Certain plot points are left hanging at the story's end.
Now, stand back, while I turn each of these claims into a smoking pile
of rubble.  Incidentally, I apologize to any critics that feel offended
by reading this review, but I am accusing no one person of wrong-doing.
1) So let's see, there's another fugitive running from the law, and Sam
Gerard has to catch him, and that makes it a copy?  Is it so
unbelievable that a U.S. Marshal might have to chase more than one
fugitive in his lifetime?  I think not.  I mean, what else was copied
here?  Okay, both fugitives escape via a vehicle crash.  That's one plot
point.  What else?  Don't use that lame "a man jumped from a high place
in both films" excuse.  A man jumped from a high place in DIE HARD
(1988) and BATMAN & ROBIN (1997), too, but THE FUGITIVE sure as hell
isn't a DIE HARD clone, BATMAN & ROBIN is by no means a FUGITIVE clone,
and so, clearly, since nothing other than a fugitive and a crash is
taken from the first movie, neither is U.S. MARSHALS just a clone of THE
FUGITIVE.  
2) Even though the fact that it's not a copy has already been adressed,
let's take a look at this.  Okay.  Let's talk about the James Bond
series.  It's up to 18 films at this point.  They all have Bond saying
"Bond, James Bond."  Bond always sleeps with beautiful women.  Bond
always uses interesting gadgets.  Bond always dresses suavely.  Bond
always defeats the villian in the end.  Bond always makes cheesy puns. 
The fact that TOMORROW NEVER DIES (1997) copies these elements from the
other 17 films doesn't make it horrible automatically.  In fact, it
received mostly favorable reviews.  But, gasp!  How can that be!  It's
such a copy, it must be horrible!  After all, U.S. MARSHALS isn't
anywhere near as copied from its first film as TOMORROW NEVER DIES was
from its first *17*, and so U.S. MARSHALS is already bad for having
copied a fugitive and a crash, right?  Sure.  Right.  Whatever.
3) You were in the bathroom throughout the entire movie, weren't you?  I
mean... I can't barely fight this one, because it's too obvious that
this is the same guy.  Struggling to get the job done above all else
short of taking care of his teammates.  Barking orders powerfully even
while taking a moment to smile good-naturedly and joke with his
colleagues.  Hey, this is Sam Gerard.  The one we loved in THE
FUGITIVE.  Of course, it's no longer an Oscar-worthy performance,
because it's not original anymore.  We've been here before.  But still,
it's a strong character, it's the same character, and wow, Tommy Lee can
carry a movie.  With some help of course, but we'll get to that later.
4) It's nice to have it established who Sam is for those who didn't see
THE FUGITIVE (this film DOES work as a stand-alone, incidentally), but
that's not the real reason this needs to be here.  It's nice to get
reaquianted with the faces of his team that we might not remember... but
that's not the reason we need this here either.  We need this here so
that Sam has a good reason to get on that plane.  If not for this scene,
everyone and their brother would be screaming "Contrived!  Stupid!" when
Sam climbs onboard that flight.  Now he has a reason.  Aren't you glad
the filmmakers took the time to make it NOT contrived?
5) Yeah, stop chasing a man who fled from police and knows the real
story behind all the weirdness that's going on.  That'd be real smart. 
Sure.
6) Huh?!  He's the fugitive that Gerard chases!  He has nearly as much
screen time as Jones does!  He's the reason there's a plot here!  
7) So you really DIDN'T see this movie.  You know, you really shouldn't
write reviews unless you see the movie first.  I don't want to list
spoilers here, but since every scene Snipes is in involves him using
every method he has to track down the whole story behind his situation,
I wonder, where was the person that made this comment?
8) God, this is just too wrong.  Not only is the whole not resolved
until the final FIVE MINUTES, but you couldn't even possibly predict
every detail of the plot until the moment that it's all laid out before
you.  
9) Yeah, that would explain the characters who are shot, or the others
who are seriously injured, during the course of the action.  That's not
a danger, obviously.  
10) When the whole "conspiracy," along with the people/person behind it,
is taken care of, and Snipes' character's fate is resolved, what more
were you expecting? 
Sorry about the ranting.  I apologize again.  But don't worry about it. 
Just go out and see U.S. MARSHALS.  I mean, aren't you getting sick of
seeing TITANIC (1997) now?  You've been 47 times!  For the love of God! 
Just go check out U.S. MARSHALS, and have fun.  It may not be near the
excellence of THE FUGITIVE (thanks largely to less emotional involvment
and no Harrison Ford), but you'll have a good time.

Author
Jamie Peck
U.S. MARSHALS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
As the unstoppable, cocksure Chief Deputy U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard, Tommy Lee 
Jones reprises the his role from the first movie. This time around, Gerard and 
his team of tagalongs (including Joe Pantoliano and Latanya Richardson) are on 
the trail of a completely different fugitive -- a mysterious ex-Marine Special 
Forces and -CIA operative named Sheridan (Wesley Snipes), on the run after 
somebody frames him for the murders of two Secret Service attaches who were 
trying to crack a Chinese spy ring within the United Nations. Also on Gerard's 
side as he trails Sheridan from the muddy banks of the Ohio River to the chaotic 
streets of New York City is smug, smart Federal Agent John Royce (Robert Downey, 
Jr.). Gerard doesn't completely trust Royce, and possibly for good reason. 
Many of "U.S. Marshals"' problems lie within the character of Sheridan -- even 
Snipes' noble demeanor can't hide the fact that he's horribly developed. We 
cared about Harrison Ford's "Fugitive" everyman because we believed in and 
identified with him. Ford had to use instinct, medical know-how and even blind 
luck to uncover the conspiracy against him; he was, quite simply, no action 
hero. Snipes, on the other hand, is -- thanks to his assassin background, he's a 
fighter, a weapons expert and a pro with surveillance equipment. It's just no 
fun rooting for him. That gives a lot of the later action sequences an empty, 
lifeless feel, however well-staged they may be. Compared to "The Fugitive"'s 
richly satisfying four-course dinner, "U.S. Marshals" is half-eaten, day-old, 
microwaved leftovers. 
At least Jones' Gerard is still fascinating. His presence deems the film 
watchable even in its many weak passages. Take, for example, the completely 
unnecessary opening sequence that only serves as a way to get cat and mouse 
acquainted down the road. Here, Gerard and company, hidden under various 
disguises, stakeout the home of a wanted criminal who, when caught, will be put 
on the same prisoner transport plane as Sheridan. It's useless stuff that could 
have made the two-and-a-quarter hours "Marshals" tighter by being cut, but Jones 
is a droll delight to watch in any situation. And that prisoner transport plane 
ride, by the way, is the movie's best visceral asset. Director Stuart Baird 
knows a thing or two about in-flight tension -- his 1996 thriller "Executive 
Decision" was an unjustly underrated sweat-popper. 
One of the smaller crimes "U.S. Marshals" commits is casting luminous French 
actress Irene Jacob ("Red") in a throwaway role as Sheridan's Starbucks waitress 
girlfriend, but misusing time and talent is something the movie does best. To 
its middling credit, "U.S. Marshals" provides a few decent bangs for the buck, 
an occasionally witty one-liner and a chance for Jones to strut his 
Oscar-winning stuff all over again, but that's about it. A lot of the film is 
spent watching boring people do boring things -- it's too dull to be much fun. 
Don't go expecting another "Fugitive" or you'll find that "U.S. Marshals" is 
decidedly unarresting. 

Author
Matthew Brissette
I do not know what to make of U.S Marshalls. I find myself in the unique
position of hating having loved it. On one side , it's a pretty intense
, pulse pounding movie. Unfortunately , it's many faults prevent us from
really enjoying a potential coronary from all the ecxitement. Case in
point , the image of Wesley Snipes swinging from a building and towards
a moving train while a helpless Tommy Lee Jones looks on is firmly stuck
in our memory. After all , when you've seen the commercial twelve dozen
times , it is kind of hard to forget. In fact , i could have kept my
eyes closed during the whole thing and still i would have known every
little detail of what was going on.
I know what you are thinking , that i am going to rant about how
horrible the trailers and adds for this movie are. Wrong. However , i
simply must know one very simple thing : since the train that Wesley
lands on is going at , oh , ten miles per hour and that from Tommy Lee
's point of view he can keep track of the train for about , oh , 6-7
minutes and that our hero has his trusty radio at his side , a tool he
can use to communicate with the , OH , twenty police cars beneath
him...please , puh-leeze tell me why our hero just watches the fugitive
make a hasty (snicker ) getaway when he has all the tools needed to
catch him???
No matter how bad that sounds , i do not want you to get the impression
that this is a bad movie , far from it. It's just one of "those" movies.
The kind where you do not feel the need to bitch about it on the way
home but you have this nagging suspicion that it something is missing.
What could it be?
The acting , perhaps? Let's examine this aspect of the flick.
I am now even more certain that Tommy Lee Jones is god. Or at least ,
the voice of god. I am quite certain that when i step through the pearly
gates , Tommy Lee Jones will be there to greet me , dressed in a white
robe and glowing like a christmas tree. Or maybe , with that tough but
grampa like voice , he'll say "Welcome to heaven , young man." Because
for some reason , he cannot help but call everybody in the movie either
"kid" or "young man". 
While he will not be winning an oscar this time , his performance is the
movie's strongest point. You know this man has presence when he orders
Snipes to turn around and you can barely stop yourself from obeying.
Speaking of Snipes , an usually very energetic actor , i'm affraid to
report that he is no Harrison Ford. ( Well , who is?) Or , for that
matter , he is no Richard Kimble , the fugitive from the first movie.
At least Mr. Kimble was smart. Our boy Snipes makes several rooky
fugitive mistakes. What kind of moron on the run (now there's a good
title for a sitcom : Morons on the run ) makes contact with his
girlfriend , the same woman who paid his hospital bill a couple of days
ago. "Gee whiz , those pesky marshalls probably forgot to tap my girl's
phone , heck , they probably will not go through all the trouble of
following her day and night just in case she tries to meet with me , no
sirree!" Despite these massive flaws , several impressive stunts ,
action  sequences and a good score redeem , to some small degree , the
movie. I'm glad i saw U.S Marshalls , i liked U.S Marshalls but it will
not be the first movie i rent the week it comes out on video. 
Rating : 2 and half stars out of 4 for Tommy Lee Jones in a chicken
costume ( don't ask ) , several "holy shit i cannot believe how kool
that was" , Tommy Lee Jones in full bad ass mode and one very " saw that
one coming a mile away" ending.

Author
me@alanine.ram.org
One of my favourite kinds of movies are the ones in which the hero is
wrongly accused and has to fight a powerful adversary to clear his/her
name. What makes these movies work is the way in which innocence is
established, given the seemingly overwhelming odds. In other words,
the hero must win in the end, but it can't be too easily done, for
that would undermine the credibility of the plot.  /U.S. Marshals/
definitely pulls off this plot device convincingly, just as its
predecessor, /The Fugitive/, did.
In both movies, Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee Jones), is a Deputy
U. S. Marshal who is on the trail of an escaped suspect.  This time,
it is Mark Roberts/Sheridan (Wesley Snipes), who is falsely accused of
murdering two agents of the State Department in cold blood.  Sheridan
is a former Special Forces Marine, ex-CIA operative who knows all the
tricks of Gerard's trade, and that makes him more credible than the
character of Richard Kimble (played by Harrison Ford) in /The
Fugitive/.  Gerard is assisted in his hunt for Sheridan by his team of
Marshals as well as John Royce (Robert Downey Jr.), a Stage Department
agent whose friends were the ones "murdered in cold blood" by
Sheridan. From the beginning we know that Royce is up to no good,
especially given the simmering hostility between himself and Gerard.
At first Gerard is led to believe that Sheridan is just another
run-of-the-mill murderer.  But he soon learns that Sheridan was a
"kite", an agent of the U.S. Government in a position to perform jobs
(read: dirty work) where the government can disavow responsibility if
things go wrong.  Gerard also learns that Sheridan killed the two
State Department agents in self-defense.  As the story progresses,
more things don't add up. When Gerard sees one of his agents die,
allegedly shot by Sheridan, he becomes irrational and, forgetting his
brewing doubts, goes after Sheridan with a vengeance.
As I said above, in such movies, clearing one's name shouldn't come
easily, and in this case it definitely doesn't. Sheridan never really
manages to succeed in his attempt (people who can tell the truth are
killed off one by one--which in itself makes for quite a bit of
suspense).  Gerard does finally put two and two together and baits the
real criminal into revealing himself, thereby exonerating Sheridan.
The performances by the three main characters, Jones, Snipes, and
Downey are excellent in terms of action-movie fare even though there
is little character development.  The script is witty at times and the
action sequences are quite spectacular. The movie is being promoted as
a sequel to /The Fugitive/, but it is not a sequel as much as a rehash
of the original (read: clone).  Still, /U.S. Marshals/ is worth
watching on the big screen and I highly recommend it.


Author
Matthew Brissette
I do not know what to make of U.S Marshalls. I find myself in the unique
position of hating having loved it. On one side , it's a pretty intense
, pulse pounding movie. Unfortunately , it's many faults prevent us from
really enjoying a potential coronary from all the ecxitement. Case in
point , the image of Wesley Snipes swinging from a building and towards
a moving train while a helpless Tommy Lee Jones looks on is firmly stuck
in our memory. After all , when you've seen the commercial twelve dozen
times , it is kind of hard to forget. In fact , i could have kept my
eyes closed during the whole thing and still i would have known every
little detail of what was going on.
I know what you are thinking , that i am going to rant about how
horrible the trailers and adds for this movie are. Wrong. However , i
simply must know one very simple thing : since the train that Wesley
lands on is going at , oh , ten miles per hour and that from Tommy Lee
's point of view he can keep track of the train for about , oh , 6-7
minutes and that our hero has his trusty radio at his side , a tool he
can use to communicate with the , OH , twenty police cars beneath
him...please , puh-leeze tell me why our hero just watches the fugitive
make a hasty (snicker ) getaway when he has all the tools needed to
catch him???
No matter how bad that sounds , i do not want you to get the impression
that this is a bad movie , far from it. It's just one of "those" movies.
The kind where you do not feel the need to bitch about it on the way
home but you have this nagging suspicion that something is missing. What
could it be?
The acting , perhaps? Let's examine this aspect of the flick.
I am now even more certain that Tommy Lee Jones is god. Or at least ,
the voice of god. I am quite certain that when i step through the pearly
gates , Tommy Lee Jones will be there to greet me , dressed in a white
robe and glowing like a christmas tree. Or maybe , with that tough but
grampa like voice , he'll say "Welcome to heaven , young man." Because
for some reason , he cannot help but call everybody in the movie either
"kid" or "young man". 
While he will not be winning an oscar this time , his performance is the
movie's strongest point. You know this man has presence when he orders
Snipes to turn around and you can barely stop yourself from obeying.
Speaking of Snipes , an usually very energetic actor , i'm affraid to
report that he is no Harrison Ford. ( Well , who is?) Or , for that
matter , he is no Richard Kimble , the fugitive from the first movie.
At least Mr. Kimble was smart. Our boy Snipes makes several rooky
fugitive mistakes. What kind of moron on the run (now there's a good
title for a sitcom : Morons on the run ) makes contact with his
girlfriend , the same woman who paid his hospital bill a couple of days
ago. "Gee whiz , those pesky marshalls probably forgot to tap my girl's
phone , heck , they probably will not go through all the trouble of
following her day and night just in case she tries to meet with me , no
sirree!" 
Despite these massive flaws , several impressive stunts , action 
sequences and a good score redeem , to some small degree , the movie.
I'm glad i saw U.S Marshalls , i liked U.S Marshalls but it will not be
the first movie i rent the week it comes out on video. 
Rating : 2 and half stars out of 4 for Tommy Lee Jones in a chicken
costume ( don't ask ) , several "holy shit i cannot believe how kool
that was" , Tommy Lee Jones in full bad ass mode and one very " saw that
one coming a mile away" ending.

Author
Pierce Dalton
 I would even say that I liked it better than The Fugitive, the 1993 Harrison
Ford vehicle for which Marshals is a sequel, or spin-off, of, so to speak.
 Tommy Lee Jones stars again as U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard, the ruthless,
unstoppable cop who tracked down and help find innocent Dr. Richard Kimble
(Ford) the first time out.
 Here, he is back in top form, tracking down another fugitive, played by Wesley
Snipes.  He is framed (?) for the homicide of two FBI agents in New York,
transfered in a plane for convicts, but escapes after the plane is forced to
make an emergancy landing in an exciting crash sequence that tops, even, the
bus crash in Fugitive.
 Marshals is a very well-made thriller.  Director Stuart Baird has captured the
style and essence of Andrew Davis (who directed the original), and, I think,
added his own extra special hand.
 There is a literally edge-of-your-seat scene at a cemetery, during a funeral,
which has an assassin on the roof top of the church shooting as our hero Jones
as he trys to flee for his live.
 U.S. Marshals is brainy fun, and visually spectacular.  And seeing Jones in a
giant chicken costume is worth admission alone.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Robert Downey Jr., Joe Pantoliano,
Kate Nelligan, Irene Jacob
Written by: John Pogue
Directed by: Stuart Baird
Running Time: 133 minutes
Stuart Baird, director of the vastly underrated Executive Decision,
directs the sequel to 1993's The Fugitive. Tommy Lee Jones returns as
Lt. Sam Gerard (and his entire supporting cast returns as well) to
chase another innocent fugitive, played by Wesley Snipes. Snipes plays
an ex-government agent who has been set-up for murder by corrupt
government agents (ooo, shocking) and once again Gerard must chase
after him.
U.S. Marshals is nowhere near as good as The Fugitive thanks to it's
overused and predictable story. I mean, a government conspiracy? You
mean there may be some corruption in government?? Also, all attempts
to outdo the first film fall completely flat. For example, the train
wreck and waterfall jump from the first film are superior in every way
to the plane crash and building jump in this one. And despite the fact
that we're told that Snipes is innocent, his character just isn't very
compelling. Several times he is attempting to kill members of Gerard's
team, including Gerard himself. Harrison Ford's character was never
shooting at anyone. We're supposed to like this guy, and he's trying
to kill the other people we're supposed to like as well.
The film certainly isn't dull, but you've seen all of it before. The
direction is good and the acting is fine, it's just the story that
fails.  Also, the dialogue between Gerard and his team, which seemed
so credible in the first film, seems so forced and phony here. If
anything, U.S. Marshals will remain memorable to me thanks to Tommy
Lee Jones' initial appearance, dressed as a giant chicken. It's
definitely a sight to see, and the whole scene is just about worth the
price of admission. [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
De HTML-versie:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/24.html
Wie heeft "The Fugitive" nou niet gezien? Die weergaloze actiefilm, met
Harrison Ford en Tommy Lee Jones in de hoofdrollen, was een kaskraker en
Tommy Lee Jones kreeg de Oscar voor beste mannelijke bijrol. Zulke
successen schreeuwen natuurlijk om een vervolg. En die is er nu, in de
vorm van "U.S. Marshals". Ford doet niet meer mee, maar Wesley Snipes
neemt gelukkkig z'n plaats in als vluchteling. 
Mark Roberts (Wesley Snipes) en Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee Jones) lijken op
het eerste gezicht niets met elkaar te maken te hebben. Totdat Roberts,
werkzaam als bestuurder van een sleepwagen, door een ongeluk in het
ziekenhuis belandt en ze daar achterkomen dat hij schuldig is aan
diefstal en een dubbele moord op twee agenten in New York. Roberts
ontkent heftig, maar wordt ondanks dat al snel in de boeien geslagen. 
Na een succesvolle arrestatie wordt Gerard in een politievliegtuig
gezet, die de gevangenen naar een gevangenis in Missouri zal brengen.
Roberts, die ook in het vliegtuig zit, wordt het doelwit van een
gewapende medegevangene. Die mist hem echter en schiet per ongeluk een
gat in het vliegtuig. Het vliegtuig stort neer en Roberts weet na de
crash te ontsnappen. Gerard voelt het al aankomen: er is weer een
vluchteling. 
Na wat speurwerk komt Gerard erachter dat Roberts in het echt Mark
Sheridan heet, die vroeger voor de CIA werkte. Sheridan wordt ervan
verdacht twee DSS-agenten neergeschoten te hebben tijdens het verkopen
van geheime documenten aan China. Gerard krijgt de hulp van DSS-agent
John Royce (Robert Downey Jr.), die de dood van z'n vrienden wil wreken.
De lange zoektocht kan beginnen. 
Laat ik maar met de deur in huis vallen: "U.S. Marshals" is lang niet zo
goed als "The Fugitive". Deze film mist de vakkundige regie van Andrew
Davis en het goed geschreven verhaal van deel I. Maar dat betekent niet
dat je "U.S. Marshals" mag missen. De film barst namelijk van de
explosies, auto-achtervolgingen, vliegtuigongelukken en veel spannende
situaties. Erg vermakelijk dus. Ook laten Jones en Snipes zich van hun
beste kant zien. Redenen genoeg om naar deze film te gaan. 
Ga dus naar de bioscoop. Koop een bioscoopkaartje voor "U.S. Marshals".
Haal wat popcorn en cola. Loop naar de zaal toe. Ga daar achterover in
een stoel zitten, zet je verstand op nul en kijken maar. Dé manier om
deze film te bekijken. Ik geef toe, het is hersenloos vermaak. Maar het
is wel erg leuk hersenloos vermaak. 
- "Scream 2" *****
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/23.html
- "Great Expectations" **
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/22.html
- "John Grisham's The Rainmaker" ****
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/21.html
- "Fallen" ***
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/20.html
- "Sphere" ***
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/19.html
- "The Devil's Advocate" ****
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/18.html
- "Mouse Hunt" ***
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/17.html
- "The Jackal" **
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/16.html
- "Desperate Measures" *
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/15.html
- "Money Talks" **
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/14.html

Author
David Wilcock
The sequel to The Fugitive (1993), U.S Marshals is an average thriller using
it's association with The Fugitive just so it can make a few extra bucks.
Tommy Lee Jones returns to his role as Chief Deputy Samuel Gerard, the
grizzly cop who was after Harrison Ford in The Fugitive. This time, he's
after fugitive Mark Sheridan (Snipes) who the police think killed two FBI
agents, but of course he's been set up, and when the police  plane escort he
(and Gerard) are riding crashes, he makes a run for it, Gerard not so hot on
his tail. What follows is about 2 hours of action, brought to us by the
director of Executive Decision (1995), another film curiously involving a
plane.
When comparing  this movie to The Fugitive, the prequel is far superior. But
even on it's own, U.S Marshals is a pretty lousy movie. While the original
was reasonably intelligent, and had a fugitive to root for, the audience
feels strangely distanced from Snipes fugitive, mainly because we know so
little about him until way into the film's overlong running time. While The
Fugitive gave a little time to develop Harrison Fords character, U.S
Marshals is straight in there, pulling it's trump card (the place crash)
almost immediately. To be honest, I couldn't care less if Snipe's character
got captured or not. Snipes performance is average, and his character gets
surprisingly little screen time (considering he is the fugitive) for reasons
I'll explain later. Tommy Lee Jones is as fine as ever, although his role is
hardly a challenge. The sense of deja vu was overwhelming. I know it's the
same role from The Fugitive, but there is seemingly no attempt to develop
his character from the last film. There's a few 'nudge nudge' references
from the first film, but apart from that, nothing. Nobody even mentions
Harrison Ford in this movie. Downey Jnr is OK as FBI agent John Royce who's
roped into the chase, and sexy french actress Irene Jacob wanders in and out
of the movie as Snipes wife. Nobody looks as if their having a good time,
and all the performers are on autopilot. The supporting cast are O.K, but
when it comes to performances, U.S Marshals falls flat on it's face.
It doesn't fare any better plot-wise, either. The film starts off with
Gerard trying to capture Snipes, but then veers off into terrorists
territory. As said above, the film is an normal, average terrorist thriller,
seen a million times before, but is using The Fugitive reputation to make it
sound more professional. If this film wasn't the 'sequel' to The Fugitive,
this would probably go straight to video, or not even been made at all,
because it's so average. And because of the film's plot changing it's
course, Snipes is almost forgotten apart, and hardly features in the movie.
Stuart Baird, the director, is all right, but there's no particular scene
that stands out. It's director is the usual action movie style. Even the
plane crash is sorely lacking in tension. The special effects are nice,
especially the plane crash, and there's a good (if very loud) soundtrack by
veteran composer Jerry Goldsmith.
But in the end, U.S Marshals suffers from an overwhelmingly lack of
excitement. Sure, it's loud and dumb, but in the end U.S Marshals just ain't
fun. Bored performers and a lackluster plot and script, do not make a good
action movie.
OVERALL RATING=  ** OUT OF  *****
REVIEW BY DAVID WILCOCK
WEB SPACE PROVIDED BY GEOCITIES
 DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via your E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!

Author
Matt Williams
Whatever happened to the art of the sequel?  OK, I know that, with a few
exceptions, sequels have rarely been as good as their predecessors.  But
at least sequels used to be sequels.  These days, you're more likely to
get a simple, pale remake of the original.  Look at Home Alone 3, Blues
Brothers 2000, or Scream 2 for a few recent examples.  Or even more
currently, look at U.S. Marshals.
U.S. Marshals is a sequel (or, as the publicists are calling it, a
"spin-off") of The Fugitive.  Tommy Lee Jones is back in his Academy
Award winning role as U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard.  This time around, he's
on the trail of a fugitive who has escaped in a spectacular
transportation accident. The fugitive goes on the run to prove his
innocence while the methodical Gerard and his crackerjack team of agents
proceed to track him down. Sound familiar?  U.S. Marshals even goes as
to duplicate The Fugitive's signature surrender-or-jump to certain death
action scene.
But this time, instead of Harrison Ford, the fugitive is Wesley Snipes.
Instead of an emotionally involving crime, as we were given in The
Fugitive, Snipes is embroiled in a rather dry government conspiracy. All
of this adds up to a dry and pasty recreation of the original.
On the plus side, the film brings back Gerard's enjoyable team,
including Joe Pantoliano and Tom Wood.  In addition, his seasoned crew
is joined by a shady government agent of questionable ability, John
Royce (Robert Downey Jr.).
When it's not busy being overly derivative, U.S. Marshals does contain
several serviceable action sequences.  However, for the most part, they
lack an emotional core.  Hence, they're never as gripping or thrilling
as they try to be.
On the acting side, Jones is good, but doesn't add anything new to his
role of Sam Gerard.  Snipes suffers in comparison to Harrison Ford, but
on his own, he does a decent, if not outstanding job.  A talented
supporting cast, though, this time is misused.  The film adds two
unnecessary characters:  Kate Nelligan as Sam Gerard's boss, and Irene
Jacob as Wesley Snipes' girlfriend.  They're given little to do, and
reek heavily of filler.
Director Stuart Baird, who did an excellent job with his debut film,
Executive Decision, can't help but have his work be overshadowed by the
strong sense of deja vu that permeates this film.  The film's action
sequences are well handled, but the transitions are a bit jumpy and
confusing.
Rather than simply rehash The Fugitive, why not follow the title's cue
and put the focus on Sam Gerard and his band of merry men. The film
would have been much more interesting, and invited much less comparison
with its superior predecessor, if it had struck off into new territory,
rather than revisiting the wrongfully accused fugitive angle.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
U.S. Marshals (1998)
Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Robert Downey Jr., Joe Pantoliano, Tom 
Wood, Lorenzo Clemons, Ray Toler, LaTanya Richardson, Kate Nelligan, 
Irene Jacob. Directed by Stuart Baird. 133 minutes
Rated PG-13, 2 stars (out of 5 stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Advertisements for "U.S. Marshals" present the film as a sort-of sequel 
to "The Fugitive." Don't be fooled. "The Fugitive," while no masterpiece, 
was a taunt enough thriller, with a tight script and strong 
characterizations from Harrison Ford and Tommy Lee Jones. "U.S. Marshals,
" on the other hand, is just another slam-bang chase movie, with lots of 
flashy action set pieces strung together with a script direct from Cliché 
Central.
Tommy Lee Jones reprises his Oscar winning role as tough-as-nails, always-
gets-his-man Chief Deputy Marshal Sam Gerard. As in the first movie, 
Gerard and his plucky crew spend a couple of hours playing tag with an 
innocent man accused of murder. This time, former CIA operative Mark 
Sheridan (Wesley Snipes) is "It," racing about trying to prove that he 
was set up. Added to the mix is John Royce (Robert Downey Jr.,) a 
government agent assigned to "help" Gerard in his pursuit. That's about 
all there is to the plot. Basically, everyone chases each other from one 
action sequence to the next, while Jerry Goldsmith's yammering score 
underlines the tension we're supposed to feel. 
Tommy Lee Jones is a tremendous actor and Sam Gerard is a fascinating 
character, but "U.S. Marshal's" screenplay gives him nowhere to go 
dramatically and 133 tedious minutes to get there. In "The Fugitive," 
Harrison Ford's Richard Kimble, a doctor falsely convicted of murdering 
his wife, is thrown into a nightmarish situation and must rely on his 
wits to try and save himself. It's fascinating watching the interplay 
between Ford's desperate Everyman and Jones' relentless Gerard. 
Compare that to Snipes' bland character here. Mark Sheridan was a secret 
agent. Avoiding capture was part of his job description, for Christ's 
sake, which lets a lot of air out of the dramatic balloon. Snipes doesn't 
help matters much, giving a flat, mechanical performance without a hint 
of nuance. It's hard to feel empathy for Snipes and difficult to be 
engaged by the spectacle of two professionals chasing each other around 
the country.
John Pogue's anemic script tries to build up Gerard's character by 
reminding us again and again that we're watching one tough bastard who 
will stop at nothing to snag his quarry. "Looks like Sam has used up 
eight of his nine lives," offers one of his crew. "Your reputation has 
preceded you," a Federal agent admires. When asked "Is this guy crazy?" a 
teammate replies "No, but he's a carrier." 
Gerard appears quite comfortable with his newly bestowed superhero status.
 He struts around in front of dazzled locals, loudly exchanging strained 
banter with his rag-tag crew. In the first film, Gerard and company were 
a crack team. Here, they come off as smug and self-satisfied as the 
Ghostbusters in their prime. Of course, from the opening scene, which 
goes for an easy laugh by having Gerard race about in a chicken suit, 
it's obvious that Pogue has no intention of maintaining the character's 
integrity.
Women don't fare well in the film, either. Irene Jacob is wasted as 
Sheridan's vacuous girlfriend, serving no function other than to provide 
Starbucks with a whale of a product placement. Kate Nelligan pops in 
occassionally as Gerard's boss. It's obvious most of her scenes were left 
on the cutting room floor when she abruptly tells Gerard, "I love you, 
but that doesn't mean I won't fire you," leaving viewers to scratch their 
heads and go, "What? Who? Where?"
Structurally, the film is just a faded Xerox of "The Fugitive." Richard 
Kimble escaped from a spectacular train wreck. Mark Sheridan escapes from 
a spectacular plane crash (in a scene ripped off from "Con Air".) Kimble 
makes a spectacular leap off the edge of a dam. Sheridan makes a 
spectacular bungee leap off a building and onto a moving train. Sure, the 
crashes and stunts are nifty, but they aren't nifty enough to make up for 
cardboard characters and a plot straight out of "Rocky and Bullwinkle."
The film leaves more than a few nagging questions. Is there anyone in 
this story who isn't a master at picking locks? Are the filmmakers just 
fans of Buddy Guy's Legends nightclub and the Broadway hit "Rent," or did 
they have to pay for their product placements too? And most of all, why 
in the world does Gerard keep chasing Sheridan when he's clearly figured 
out that the guy has been framed? 
Maybe he suffered memory loss, a delayed reaction from becoming 
overheated spending all those hours in a chicken suit. Or maybe he's just 
preoccupied, wondering how anyone could take a character as distinctive 
as Sam Gerard and stick him in a movie as half-assed as "U.S. Marshals." 

Author
Ryan Davis
"I didn't kill my wife!" Dr. Richard Kimble shouts to his pursuer Marshal
Sam Gerard, who responds "I don't care!", right before Richard jumps from a
pipe into a river hundreds of feet below. This is a classic scene from a
great movie, 1993's The Fugitive. Now five years later the sequel to that
blockbuster movie comes to theaters, does it measure up to its predecessor?
 In short: NO. 
The plot follows the original all too well. Here we have a innocent man,
Mark Sheridan(Wesley Snipes), who escapes from prison in a plane crash,
luckily left unguarded by the fearless Sam Gerard(Tommy Lee Jones). Since
Sam has a lot of experience in man hunts, he is put in charge of the chase,
with one small addition to his team, Special Agent John Royce(Robert Downey
Jr.). Along the way Sam discovers Mark's innocence and attempts to unravel
a government conspiracy.
The movie's plot is almost laughable, a ex-government agent framed for two
murders? Yea that's realism for you.   Robery Downey Jr. and Wesley Snipes'
performances were conventional and uninteresting. If the movie had
attempted to do something different, like a character study on Sam Gerard
it would have been a lot better. The Fugitive had a nice buffer between the
crime and the escape, we got to know Richard Kimble before he was being
pursued, we didn't know Mark when he escaped so the audience had no feeling
for him. Don't bother seeing this film, just re-watch the original, more
entertaining film. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
    Some articles about U.S. MARSHALS have been referring to it as a
"sequel" to 1993's THE FUGITIVE; others have employed the more generous
term "follow-up."  But let's cut to the chase here...U.S. MARSHALS is a
spin-off.  In THE FUGITIVE, U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee Jones) was
a supporting character in his businesslike pursuit of innocent afoot Dr.
Richard Kimble (Harrison Ford), providing counterpoint to the central
story of Kimble's efforts to find his wife's killer and clear his name.
Five years and a Supporting Actor Oscar later, Jones' Gerard has been
deemed worthy of his own showcase while pursuing another accused murderer
who maintains his innocence, former government agent Mark Sheridan (Wesley
Snipes).  Accompanied by his loyal team of fellow marshals and a
mysterious tag-along Fed named Royce (Robert Downey Jr.), Gerard begins a
man-hunt from the Midwest to Manhattan.
     Before the word "spin-off" and its accompanying visions of "The
Ropers" and "Joanie Loves Chachi" sends you into screaming early-80s
flashbacks, it should be clear that there are far worse supporting
characters around whom to build a story, and far worse actors.  Jones
slips back into Gerard's no-excuses professionalism without missing a
beat, barking orders or wearing a big chicken costume with equal levels of
commitment if that's what it takes to get the job done.  It's not that
Gerard doesn't work at all as a lead character; it's just that he worked
so much better as a supporting character.  Placing Gerard onboard during
the plane crash where Sheridan escapes feels like a forced attempt to turn
him into a super-cop, while motivating him with vengeance late in the film
diminishes a character who's plenty motivated by pride in his work.
Fiddling and fussing with Gerard ignores what was most interesting about
him in THE FUGITIVE:  his simple, uncomplicated, un-tormented intelligence
and resolve as a law enforcement agent.
     Still, he holds up his end of the chase far better than his
adversary.  THE FUGITIVE won over audiences by creating a rooting interest
in Kimble, an Everyman trying to get his life back.  Well, Sheridan is no
Everyman -- he's "former Special Forces, former Black Ops" (and these
days, what action film character worth his salt isn't?).  That should make
him a more challenging assignment for Gerard, except Sheridan never seems
to be thinking hard enough or working hard enough to clear his name.
Every time he turns up in U.S. MARSHALS, it's like the camera has just
stumbled upon him, even as he hopes to just stumble upon whoever set him
up.  With energy diverted to making Gerard a more "well-rounded"
character, Wesley Snipes is left to wander around the film like a
half-forgotten plot device.
     Director Stuart Baird, who created a solid but unspectacular action
effort in EXECUTIVE DECISION, has done a similar job crafting the action
in U.S. MARSHALS.  With the exception of the big spectacular plane crash
to match THE FUGITIVE's big spectacular train crash, he rarely goes out of
his way to top his predecessor; the action simply moves along competently
despite a few sluggish editing choices.  Overall, however, U.S. MARSHALS
just isn't a very smart film.  Grainy flashbacks assume no one in the
audience can remember back half an hour, characters are careless when it's
convenient for them to be and a convoluted tangle of international
espionage keeps distracting the audience from the mano-a-mano which should
drive the story.  Actually, THE FUGITIVE had a few similar problems, but
it got you so involved in the characters that those problems were easy to
overlook.  U.S. MARSHALS is a generic vehicle patterned after a successful
parent, one which doesn't use the characters the way they could be used
best.  That, my friends, is a spin-off.  And one less like "Frasier" than
it is like "AfterM*A*S*H."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Robert Downey Jr., Joe Pantoliano,
Tom Wood, Lorenzo Clemons, Ray Toler, LaTanya Richardson, Kate Nelligan,
Irene Jacob
Director: Stuart Baird
Producers: Anne Kopelson, Arnold Kopelson
Screenplay: John Pogue
My general impression of U.S. Marshals was, Oh no, not again'. Not that
this is an overtly bad film, its just very second rate and mediocre when
compared to its predecessor, THE FUGITIVE. How can one not compare it to
the well-crafted, 1993 thriller, starring Harrison Ford? Let's face it,
our new fugitive, Wesley Snipes, ex-federal agent, who is framed for
trading secrets to the Chinese Government, doesn't carry the same
charisma or crowd appeal as the perpetually, likeable Ford.
Part of the problem lies with the fact that the audience does not quite
identify or empathise with our present fugitive, Mark Sheridan (Snipes).
He kills two federal agents in self-defence  so what? Who cares? Secret
service agents get killed for a living. Whilst in the case of Dr Richard
Kimble (Harrison Ford)  his wife was brutally murdered and he was
framed for the crime. Now people, as a general rule, get quite upset
when personal items like wives and family members get slaughtered.
Besides not spending enough time, developing our fugitive's plight, too
much time is focussed on the Deputy Marshall Samuel Gerard (Tommy Lee
Jones) and his group of uninteresting, deputy buffoons. Basically, Lee
Jones gets to show what a real Jock' his character can be.  Whilst his
deputies mope about, like a bunch of non-professional idiots sipping
coffee, cracking unfunny-smart-arse-jokes and occasionally getting
themselves killed. Most humorous of all is a spaced-out, tired-looking
Robert Downey Jr, who perhaps would have fared better off the set, and
in the comfort zone of rehab instead.
There are some memorable scenes, like Snipes swinging of a high rise
with cable in hand and then escaping on top of a train. But these tense
moments are far and few in between, and perhaps they shouldn't have
bothered to bring back U.S. MARSHALS, if it was only to let the fugitive
get away again.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tommy Lee Jones, Wesley Snipes, Robert Downey Jr., Joe Pantoliano, 
      Tom Wood, Lorenzo Clemons, Ray Toler, LaTanya Richardson, 
      Kate Nelligan, Irene Jacob
Director: Stuart Baird
Producers: Anne Kopelson, Arnold Kopelson
Screenplay: John Pogue
Cinematography: Andrzej Bartkowiak
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     To me, the idea of a sequel to THE FUGITIVE always seemed like a 
bad idea.  True, Sam Girard (Tommy Lee Jones) was a more interesting 
character than Richard Kimball (Harrison Ford), but could he carry a 
movie on his own?  Sadly, we'll never really know, because the Girard of 
U.S. MARSHALS bears only a token resemblance to the character who 
doggedly pursued Kimball in THE FUGITIVE.  As re-invented here, Girard 
is a generic action hero; most of the quirks that made him interesting 
(and that earned Jones an Oscar) are absent.  With a few minor re-
writes, John McClane from the DIE HARD movies could have been plugged 
into this role.
     The script tries to recapture the energy of THE FUGITIVE by re-
cycling various plot elements.  As in the original, Girard is pursuing 
an innocent man, and he suspects that there's more to the case than 
meets the eye.  There's a big accident that allows the prisoner to go 
free (this time, it involves a plane and the side of a mountain, not a 
bus and a train), a subsequent manhunt, and several lengthy chase 
sequences.  For a little variety, the conspiracy in U.S. MARSHALS 
implicates officials of the U.S. government, not a one-armed man and 
doctors.
     This time around, the wrongly-accused man is a suspected murderer 
named Sheridan (Wesley Snipes).  Supposedly, he killed two federal 
agents, but someone wants him dead before his case ends up in court.  A 
murder attempt on the airplane transporting him to prison goes wrong, 
and the plane crash lands.  During the ensuing confusion, Sheridan gets 
away.  Soon, U.S. Marshal Sam Girard and his faithful team are on the 
job, setting up roadblocks and closing off the perimeter.  The Feds, 
wanting to be kept informed of the manhunt's progress, force Girard to 
add another member to his team -- slick, self-confident John Royce 
(Robert Downey Jr.).  And the chase is on.
     Unfortunately, it's not just one chase -- it's one after another 
after another.  The repetitiveness quickly grows tiresome, and the movie 
ends up lasting at least thirty minutes too long.  The bloated running 
length has nothing to do with extra time needed to unravel the 
needlessly convoluted plot.  It simply offers an opportunity for the 
characters to do a lot more running around before the final, inevitable 
confrontation between Girard, Sheridan, and a traitor (whose identity, 
despite being easy to guess, shall remain unrevealed here).
     Tommy Lee Jones, who turned in a delicious performance as Girard in 
THE FUGITIVE, is (like the screenplay) on auto-pilot here.  He's a 52 
year old action hero who runs, climbs, shoots, and swims, all without 
getting a hair out of place.  Snipes' Sheridan appears to have undergone 
a personality extraction -- there's nothing deeper than the bare-bones 
"innocent guy on the run."  Most of the supporting characters are 
equally faceless, with the exception of Joe Pantoliano's Cosmo, who acts 
like he drinks too much coffee.  Swiss actress Irene Jacob, the dark-
haired beauty from Kieslowski's RED, represents the classic case of 
talent being wasted.  She plays Sheridan's girlfriend.
     While I enjoyed THE FUGITIVE, I wasn't the film's biggest booster.  
I thought the coincidence-laden plot was poorly constructed.  But the 
action sequences were often nail-biters, the lead characters were well-
developed, and the dialogue was intelligent.  U.S. MARSHALS exhibits 
many of THE FUGITIVE's faults with few of its strengths.  As a result, 
this movie is a routine exercise in stunt choreography, with more 
valleys than peaks, and not enough tension to keep the viewer engaged 
for the full 143-minute length.  U.S. MARSHALS is workmanlike, and that 
makes it, at best, a marginal choice for theatrical viewing.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."
