Title
Review for Batman & Mr. Freeze: SubZero (1998) (V)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z Rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, no MPAA rating, 67 minutes [1 hour, 7 minutes]
Starring: Michael Ansara (voice of Mr. Freeze/Dr. Victor Fries), Loren Lester 
(voice of Robin/Dick Grayson), Mary Kay Bergman (voice of Barbara 
Gordon/Batgirl), Kevin Conroy (voice of Batman/Bruce Wayne); written by Boyd 
Kirkland, Randy Rogel; produced and directed by Boyd Kirkland; based on the 
television series `Batman: The Animated Series' and characters appearing in 
DC comic books; Batman created by Bob Kane
Seen June 1, 1999 on home video (rented)
[critic's note: this film was not produced with the intention of a theatrical 
release and therefore went straight to home video, although it may have been 
show on television.]
        Anyone who knows something about the modern comic book industry knows 
that no other single character has had more comic series and specials than 
Batman. Unfortunately, as is the case with a lot of mass production, the 
quality can't always be pinnacle and the result is often gratuitous, weak 
meaningless stories told because they can be, which `Batman & Mr. Freeze: 
SubZero' is the equivalent of in terms of an animated motion picture. It's a 
product produced just because it could be and the lack of effort is clear.
        There really isn't too much to say about the film because there's 
hardly anything to it. It's a direct-to-video movie obviously intended for 
parents to buy their children, but it's also based on a television series 
which is most certainly not your average kid's cartoon. The show is as dark 
as an Alex Proyas film with an equal amount of artistic styling and very 
smart teleplays. But this movie has very little to do with the series itself 
and at times feels like the producers threw together a bunch of unused clips 
and added in a few new scenes to tie them all together.
        In fact, the movie is so dependent upon the fact it's a spin-off from 
the show, it doesn't take the time to define any back story which is why it 
never succeeds for all the reason the show does.
        It starts off simple enough, we're shown a man living in the arctic 
with an Eskimo boy and his cryogenically frozen wife. For the 
Batman-ignorant, his name is Victor Fries (Ansara), a/k/a `Mr. Freeze' - one 
of Batman's supervillains whose power is based on ultra coldness, and he has 
a cool gun that can spray ice for hundreds of feet at anything (that gun 
never seems to run out of ammo, and they never explain how it's powered 
either). His secluded home is accidentally invaded by a submarine crew which 
also destroys the casing of his frozen wife, Nora, who suffers from a rare 
blood disorder. Freeze winds up in Gotham City and forces Dr. Gregory Belson 
(voiced by George Dzundza) into helping her. The doctor is a shady character 
with a serious credit problem and helps out Freeze because he is told he'll 
be rewarded soundly.
        The real problem ensues when it turns out that the only available 
match of the rare blood type and necessary organs is Barbara Gordon 
(Bergman), the daughter of James Gordon (voiced by Bob Hastings) - Gotham's 
Police Commissioner. Also for the Batman-uninformed, Barbara Gordon just 
happens to be Batgirl and the girlfriend of Dick Grayson (Lester) - a/k/a 
Robin.
        It's not too difficult to tell where this story's going to go and 
what the net result of mixing all the appropriate characters in such a 
convenient plot will be. Superhero stories rely on these kind of coincidences 
on top of coincidences both for story and for comedy, but neither of those is 
resulted here. Instead, it's just a lot of scenes of Mr. Freeze trying to 
capture Barbara Gordon, then Mr. Freeze arguing with the doctor, then Batman 
(Conroy) and Robin trying to locate Mr. Freeze's secret lair while Babs makes 
several unsuccessful escape attempts.
        The film has a very cyclical feeling. To say it's predictable is an 
understatement. And given the fact it's only a 67-minute-long movie doesn't 
help much either.
        There's just so much more room for expansion here. Why not delve into 
Mr. Freeze's history a little for those who aren't familiar? Maybe we could 
feel a little sympathy for him because he certainly does seem to be concerned 
about his wife who is nothing more than a popsicle the entire film. Why not 
play up the connection between Freeze and Dr. Belson a little more? Why would 
such a supposedly respectful doctor be such a goon? And why not actually 
stick to the title and show Batman [for more than just the ending]? The comic 
books and the cartoon program have gone to extreme lengths to show that 
Batman is not just a guy who punches out the bad guys, but that he's an 
extremely intelligent detective who more often than not relies on brain over 
brawn. To show him as only the typical superhero who goes against all the 
odds and performs the fantastic stunts is fine to placate to children, but I 
don't think children would be too excited watching him do his thing since the 
story is so thin and light. A climax after only 20-odd minutes of actually 
storytelling is quite boring.
        I hate to rag on `Batman & Mr. Freeze: SubZero,' because it's not 
meant to be taken very seriously, at least not by anyone over age 10. It just 
doesn't seem like something the people behind the show would come up with 
considering all the material they have to work with. They do succeed in one 
aspect by making the film absolutely beautiful to look at, but with such 
resources available at their disposal, why not at least make something worth 
watching more than once?
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring the voices of: Kevin Conroy (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Michael
Ansara (Mr. Freeze), Loren Lester (Dick Grayson/Robin), Mary Kay Bergman
[well, I'm... fairly sure it was her] (Barbara Gordon/Batgirl), George
Dzunda (Dr. Robert Belson), Efrem Zimbalist Jr. (Alfred Pennyworth), Bob
Hastings (Commissioner Gordon)
Not Rated (but it's probably a PG, just like the last animated Batman
film was)
That having been said, let it be known that possibly the greatest
interpretation of Batman to hit tv or movie screens IS the animated Bat
that first appeared in the fall of 1992 on Fox.  It quickly became a
prime time series before hitting the big time - an animated theatrical
release film.  That was BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM (1993).  Clearly,
it was and still is the best Batman film to yet hit theaters.  The plot
was intelligent, the action loud and exciting, the voice-acting perfect,
and the score beautiful.  
As of this year, on TV, Batman has moved his animated adventures to the
WB network.  Characters have grown, and, most noticably, design styles
for many of the characters have changed - mostly for the worse.  As a
result, for both those who watch the series, and those casual Bat-fans
who have only seen the first animated film, this second animated feature
(which has gone straight to video), BATMAN & MR. FREEZE: SUBZERO, is
like reuniting with an old friend.  The film tells a story that takes
place before the current season of the show and after the final season
on Fox, so the character designs the like are all in line with those of
the earlier part of the series.  Only better animated than usually seen
on the show.  This is a level of animation slightly under that seen in
BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM but still slightly higher than that seen on
the tv series.  One thing this movie does have other MASK OF THE
PHANTASM is more use of computer animation.  There's a CG submarine,
Batwing, and highway scene for your viewing pleasure, and all of them
look very nice.
Of course, animation comes secondary to plot.  Plot, action, dialogue,
and of course, acting are what drive a film.  Well, on the old Batman
scale, SUBZERO is not quite as good as PHANTASM was, and maybe not even
as good as the first two Tim Burton live-action films, though that could
be debated.  It's certainly much better than the last two Joel
Schumacher films - and it's truer to the characters than any of the live
action films to date.  The plot goes that Mr. Freeze's wife, Nora Fries,
still in cryo-sleep, has her stasis tube broken open in an accident. 
Now Freeze knows that the only thing that can save her is an organ
transplant.  He enlists the help of Dr. Belson, and, when no deceased
donors of Nora's rare blood type are found, Freeze decides that he will
use a live donor - which of course, will kill said donor.  There's 18
live donors of Nora's blood type in Gotham.  And one of them is Barbara
Gordon.
Luckily, Barbara only appears in Batgirl garb for about one minute near
the beginning of the movie, and stays out of costume for the rest while
Batman and Robin try to save her - and she tries to save herself.  The
whole thing is better animated than most of the non-Disney stuff you see
(Well, those big-time other-studio releases like ANASTASIA [1997] not
withstanding, I guess) and has that same simple-yet-beautiful character
design of the Max Fleischer Superman cartoons from the days of yore. 
All the characters are well-done.  Of course Batman is cool, but wow, so
are Robin and Barbara.  Now THAT'S a feat.  Belson is interesting, and
Mr. Freeze is cold and emotionless, as he should be, thanks to Ansara (I
promise he's not at all jokey, like Schwarzenegger), and overall, I
assure you, this is a much better experience than that Schumacher piece
of crap BATMAN & ROBIN (1997) that had many of the same characters.  
In all, though it runs a too-short 67 minutes, and yes, it has
appearances by Batgirl and Robin (come on, you *know* that Robin isn't
always a bad character), this is still definitely worth a rent... and if
you're a big Batfan... it's worth a purchase.  Watch it, then rewind,
and enjoy it again.
Hey WB... you want a good Batman film to add to your live-action
franchise?  WHY NOT PUT PAUL DINI AND BRUCE TIMM IN CHARGE?!
