Title
Review for Love Dream (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Italians love to make shlock films.  And if they aren't about the mythical
heroes like Hercules, or the Amazons, they are about the extremes of
fantasy.  In the fifties and sixties, it was this European country who
embraced the work of Ray Harryhousen, specially the Sinbad series, because
many of these stories are related to their romantic past history and tales.
This film is a bit different from those stories, but follows the same
principles of the myths.  A young man, has lost his friend, a fellow member
of his band who was apparently instrumental in helping him create the hit
songs he had written, and this loss has pretty much caused him to retire
from the music world, in an attempt to either
find himself, or to find his own piece of mind.
And he has plenty of time to be by himself, and the beach area where he
lives.  And one day, he has a notion that he sees something just off the
beach and he swims to get it.  He brings up a vase and takes it home.  It
turns out that a genie, a very pretty woman, has lived in it for a long
time.  He has always dreamed of a special woman, and all of a sudden she is
here.  She has a magical touch, and he likes that.  Their relationship
develops, and she makes her accidental mistakes by granting him his wishes
without realizing those are not what  he is looking for.  One is to build a
palace on the beach, which will destroy the natural wonder of the place....
And in time, she helps him face his lost friend, and his quitting the  music
business, but in the process he also finds that he is losing the genie that
loves him, but to whom he can no longer respond.  And the rejection is a bit
of a fall for the genie, who now has lost her vase ( stolen by the man
trying to get him back into the music business ) and is dying.  They get the
vase back and the genie gets back in it. The vase is returned into the
ocean.  And the young musician is now alone again, and almost drowned, left
in the beach.  And lo and behold, there is a jogger who passes by, and helps
him, and she looks exactly like  the genie, except that this time she is
real.  End of story.
While this film will never garner much attention as a very good one, there
are some very nice touches here.  It must have been written by a musician,
for the music is continuously shown, and an integral part of the film.  The
songs are the mind of this man.
The film has a bit of the SPLASH in it, but is different.  It features
Christopher Lambert in his younger days, probably before the HIGHLANDER
series of work which made him well known.  While it is obvious that this
is not a major production, it at least has enough in it to make it a very
nice, small film, the type you find in the fantasy sections of your video
store, but you never heard of it.
WORTH A LOOK when you just want to will the time away.
Romantic film in all of its aspects.
The music is not great, but it is nice.
