Title
Review for True Romance (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chad Polenz
True Romance
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1993, R, 116 minutes [1 hour, 56 minutes]
[crime/satire]
starring: Christian Slater (Clarence Worley), Patricia Arquette (Alabama
Worley), Dennis Hopper (Clifford Worley), Michael Rapaport (Dick Richie),
produced by Bill Unger, Steve Perry, Samuel Hadida, written by Quentin
Tarantino, directed by Tony Scott.
The appeal of "True Romance" is that it has no appeal. Its offbeat nature
gives the film its hook, but the motions it goes through often become
overwhelming.
We meet Clarence (Slater), who isn't your typical movie hero because he's...
well... a dork. He works in a comic book store, watches kung-fu movies, and
talks to Elvis in his fantasies. When he meets a woman named Alabama
(Arquette) at a kung-fu triple feature, the two really hit it off. It's
interesting to watch these two people who are so different seem so right
together. When Clarence finds out is a hooker, he's doesn't get mad because
he had such a good time with her. Although there seems to be detail here, we
really don't get to know the characters that well. The story is told in a
manner that makes for many inferences and seems a little distant. 
Somehow the two fall in love and get married. But Clarence is obsessed; he
convinces himself he must get "revenge" on Alabama's pimp, but for what
reason? And so the film starts to become standard in plot, but not so in
script. For example, when Clarence confronts Alabama's pimp a scene of
fantastic violence ensues, but he doesn't win. In fact, the nasty villains
"kick him while he's down" by making fun of his driver's license! 
The real adventure begins as Clarence and Alabama head out to Hollywood
hoping to sell $5 million in cocaine that Clarence accidentally stole when
fleeing the scene. Soon a complicated and strange string of events start to
unfold involving Clarence and Alabama's cross-country trip to Hollywood not
knowing the mob is on their tail. More gratuitous violence ensues, and
eventually the film's attempt at being a serious crime story seems like just
too much to swallow.
Clarence meets his friend Dick Richie (Rapaport) and they set up a deal to
sell the coke. This enables the film to incorporate some good Hollywood
satire, but what we get here isn't so much satire as it is just surrealism.
Yes, it is funny at times, but it's hard to tell what's important in terms of
plot, not to mention the fact the characters aren't very likable, thus it's
hard to care about where the story is going. The situation comes to a head
when three different parties all end up in the same room, guns blazing,
fighting over the cocaine. Guess who survives?
"True Romance" could have been a better film had it not been bogged down by
its weird satire. The absence of a hook is the hook, but that doesn't
necessarily make for superb filmmaking. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPol
enz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
After admiring "Pulp Fiction" as the classic, revisionist pulp noir story that it was, I looked back at "Reservoir Dogs," which I had initially panned, and found it to be profane but also blackly comical and superbly tantalizing. Having said that, I still find "True Romance" to be hackneyed at best, a production written by Tarantino and directed with a bulldozer by Tony Scott. This is yet another example of a parable about crooked, one-dimensional drug dealers, pimps and cops but done with nary the style or witty dialogue that later became a trademark of Tarantino's after "Pulp Fiction." 
"True Romance" stars Christian Slater as greasy-haired Clarence, a comic-book, kung-fu aficionado who one day meets a sweet-tempered hooker (played by the fabulous Patricia Arquette). When Clarence falls in love with her (after making love in his comic-book store), he decides to take her away from her Rastafarian-wannabe pimp (played by Gary Oldman), and all ends in a killing spree that leaves these two unlikely lovers on the run. The cops and the mob are now after this "Bonnie and Clyde" twosome now that they inadvertently stole a briefcase of cocaine worth a half-million dollars and killed Oldman's pimp. 
"True Romance" is well-directed by Tony Scott ("Top Gun"), but the whole affair rings as hollow, meaningless and stupid. I do not object to four-letter words but Tarantino uses them without the punch and jab of truth as he has shown later on - these lowlifes just merely curse their heads off. The violence is overdone and far too cartoonish with the exception of one harrowing scene - the vicious, bloody beating of Arquette - that is as realistic and titillating as they come. This one scene shows the promise that Tarantino had in mind. 
There are some fun character bits by Brad Pitt as a dopehead, Michael Rapaport as an actor who claims to have worked on the set of "T.J. Hooker," and the respectable work of reliable pros like Tom Sizemore and James Gandolfini. The best scene in "True Romance" is between Actor's Studio pros Dennis Hopper and Christopher Walken. Hopper plays Clarence's father, an ex-cop, who is about to die at the hands of Walken's mob chieftain. Hopper explains the ancestral lineage of Italian gangsters that goes as far back as the blacks in Africa, and it is such a tense, electrifying scene that it remains a classic of its own in true Tarantino fashion. 
"True Romance" has some fine moments, but its overall effect is numbing and cold-blooded to the core. As well-made as it may be, it manages to leave out the humanity that was so central to Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction" and "Jackie Brown." Not a boring film overall but never truly enticing either.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jery@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Christian Slater, Patricia Arquette, Gary Oldman,
        Dennis Hopper, Michael Rapaport, Bronson Pinchot, Brad Pitt,
        Christopher Walken, Val Kilmer.
Screenplay:  Quentin Tarrantino.
Director:  Tony Scott.
     What do you say about a movie when you thought it was filled with
great scenes, but that they didn't add up to a great movie?  That is
the problem I have after seeing TRUE ROMANCE, the new film from
screenwriter Quentin Tarrantino (RESERVOIR DOGS) and director Tony
Scott (BEVERLY HILLS COP 2, THE LAST BOY SCOUT).  As one might expect
from that pairing, this is no tea party; it's a violent, high energy
thrill ride filled with quirk characters usually engaged in shooting,
getting shot at, beating the hell out of someone, or getting the hell
beat out of them.  The pacing is frantic, and the character interplay
generally engaging.  Perhaps the problem is that when it's all over,
I'm not quite sure whether there was a point beyond a lot of sound and
fury signifying nothing.
     Clarence Worley (Christian Slater) is a Detroit comic book store
clerk with a fondness for Elvis Presley and martial arts movies.  While
taking in a triple-feature of the latter on his birthday, Clarence
meets Alabama (Patricia Arquette), a sweet young thing who turns out to
be a call girl hired by his boss.  However, it turns out to be more
than just business as the two get married the next morning.  When
Clarence visits Alabama's pimp (Gary Oldman) to pick up her things, he
ends up instead with a suitcase full of uncut cocaine.  The newlyweds
take off for California, a collection of none-too-pleased Mafiosi hard
at their heels.
     The first half-hour of TRUE ROMANCE, focusing on Clarence and
Alabama's whirlwind courtship, is perhaps its most coherent.  The story
is focused on two characters, and we have a chance to get to know
something about them.  As Clarence, Slater is cool and charismatic;
Arquette is appealing in a sketchy role (Tarrantino seems to need some
work writing women).  From there, the story launches into a collection
of vignettes, many of which pack a solid punch.  Dennis Hopper and
Christopher Walken share a tense, dynamic scene as Clarence's father
and a dapper mobster trying to discover Clarence's whereabouts,
respectively.  Bronson Pinchot has some standout moments as a Hollywood
sycophant with a particularly weak stomach.  Scene after scene was
either hilarious or gripping or both, but I felt distracted by the
sheer number of supporting characters who appeared then disappeared all
in a matter of minutes.  It's an odd sort of compliment which becomes
complaint:  I didn't get enough of almost every character.  The cast
list is filled with "names," but Michael Rapaport as Clarence's
struggling actor buddy has more screen time than most of them.  Much as
it did for me in THE PLAYER, though to a lesser degree, the star
counting just got in the way.
     The story is fairly simple; what makes the film stand out is
Tarrantino's marvelous ear for dialogue.  There's not a cliche'd line
to be found, and it makes the characters vibrant and alive.
Unfortunately, Tony Scott doesn't do the script the justice it
deserves.  I readily admit that I consider Scott a hack as a director.
He seems to have only two gears, monster close-up or rapid edit fight
scene, and he has cinematographer Jeffrey Kimball filter every shot
through a veil of smoke.  With the intensity of Tarrantino's material,
a subtler touch is required.  I give Scott credit for a nifty
roller-coaster sequence, but apart from that the monotony of the
direction wore on me.  He even cannibalizes his own silhouette sex
scene from TOP GUN.  I expected to hear "Take My Breath Away" at any
moment.
     When it comes right down to it, I was entertained by TRUE
ROMANCE.  Tarrantino knows how to deliver action and sharply drawn
characters which keep the viewer engaged.  I should also make special
mention of Hans Zimmer's infectious Calypso-tinged percussion score,
which lent a heightened sense of the surreal.  For me, however, this
was a textbook case of the whole not equaling the sum of the parts.
There was no real emotional linchpin, like Mr.  Orange in RESERVOIR
DOGS, to engage me beyond the purely visceral, and I can only care
about a movie so far if I didn't care about any of the characters.
     Like the roller-coaster in the film, TRUE ROMANCE offers on
philosophical truths, just a neck-snapping, gut churning white knuckler
of a time.  If that's what you're looking for, that's what you'll
find.  And then some.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
2:01, Action/Comedy, 1993
MPAA rating: R (female nudity, graphic violence, explicit         
                language, adult situations)
Rating: five (on a scale of zero to five)
Director: Tony Scott
Cast: Christian Slater, Patricia Arquette, Dennis Hopper, Gary Oldman,
      Brad Pitt, Val Kilmer, Christopher Walken, Bronson Pinchot,
      Samuel L. Jackson, Saul Rubinek, Conchata Ferrell, Paul Bates,
      Tom Sizemore, Chris Penn, (and Ed Lauter        uncredited?)
     Christian Slater has no life, so his boss hires call girl Patricia
Arquette to give him him a good time on his birthday.  Slater and
Arquette fall in love and get married.  Slater goes to rub out
Arquette's pimp Gary Oldman and ends up with a few million dollars of
cocaine.  They try to get rid of the cocaine while the people to whom
the cocaine belongs try to get rid of Slater and Arquette.
     TRUE ROMANCE is the newest film out by writer Quentin Tarantino
(RESERVOIR DOGS).  It is full of comedy and more bloody corpses than I
can count on my hands and feet, so how can you go wrong with this
film?  The answer is you can't!  This is one hell of a good film.  TRUE
ROMANCE is the best film that I have seen so far this year, and is one
of the best films that I have ever seen.  I highly recommend that you
go out and see this film, preferably while it is in the theaters.  It
is a must see movie that is definitely worth full ticket price.  If you
hadn't gathered, this is not a sicky sweet date movie like BENNY AND
JOON.
     This film is excellently written.  The film moves along quickly
and never gets boring.  The two hours that TRUE ROMANCE runs seem like
they get over immediately and leave the viewer asking for more, wishing
the film wasn't over yet, possibly even compelled to get a ticket for
the next showing.  This film is an excellent combination of brutal
violence and comedy, that should please fans of both.  The plot is well
done and not filled with Hollywood cliches.  Tarantino seems to be a
very promising Hollywood writer who could initiate a change in
Hollywood movie standards.
     The characters, for the most part, are very well developed and do
not leave the impressions of just being light particles being projected
through a piece of celluloid and hitting a giant silver screen in a
darkened room.  Instead they come alive on the screen and leave the
viewer with the impression that they could actually exist somewhere at
this current time.  There are a few characters that don't get developed
very well, such as those of Gary Oldman and Samuel L. Jackson, but
since those characters are only minor and aren't around much, it
doesn't do great harm to TRUE ROMANCE.  Other minor characters though,
like Dennis Hopper's, are well developed even though they don't play a
major role in the film.  Some characters, like Brad Pitt's, are just
around for comic relief.
     The acting in this film is well done.  Christian Slater (UNTAMED
HEART, PUMP UP THE VOLUME), who seems to always do a good job with his
role, is in particularly high form here.  His character is believable
at all points through the film.  Patricia Arquette (A NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET 3: THE DREAM WARRIORS, PRETTY SMART) also does a great job in
carrying this film.  I think that this is her best acting work to
date.  Dennis Hopper (RIVER'S EDGE, SUPER MARIO BROS.) does a very good
job with his character making it look realistic for the short time he
is on screen.  Gary Oldman (BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA, ROSENCRANTZ AND
GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD), who did such a good job in DRACULA, is not in
top form here, which is unfortunate because he could have done a great
job with that character.  Brad Pitt (JOHNNY SUEDE, COOL WORLD) is
excellent.  His character isn't an overly dramatic or important one,
but Pitt has fun with it anyway.  Christopher Walken (BATMAN RETURNS, A
VIEW TO A KILL) does an excellent evil slimeball.  He makes his
character look ruthless and very dark.  Bronson Pinchot (BLAME IT ON
THE BELLBOY, "The Trouble with Larry"), surprisingly, did a great job
with his character.  I didn't expect him to be good in this film
considering the kind of character he has played in the past, but he
pleasantly surprised me and brought much to the scenes he is in.  Tom
Sizemore and Chris Penn (RESERVOIR DOGS, LEATHER JACKETS) are great as
a team of cops and react well off of each other.
     Some of the imagery in the film is extremely well thought out and
filmed very well.  One of those is the love scene between Christian
Slater and Patricia Arquette.  Minimal nudity was seen and a filtered
blue light was the lighting of choice.  The end result is instead of a
scene that looked like it was just put in for mindless titillation it
showed that it had a purpose for showing how the romance between Slater
and Arquette started.
*If you haven't seen the film you probably shouldn't be reading this*
     Another scene that I thought was the highlight of the film
visually was the climactic shoot out in the hotel room with Slater and
company, the police, and the evil drug goons.  The way the bodies were
falling into the flying feathers stuck me as a really beautiful sight.
The parts of this scene where Arquette was crawling to Slater through
the feathers and the black cop was slowly buried by the feathers as he
died were extremely well done.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Christian Slater, Patricia Arquette, Dennis Hopper, 
           Christopher Walken, Saul Rubinek, Bronson Pinchot
Director:  Tony Scott
Producers:  Bill Unger, Steve Perry, and Samuel Hadida
Screenplay:  Quentin Tarantino
Music:  Hans Zimmer
Released by Warner Brothers
     It's dangerous to live in Quentin Tarantino's world, as Clarence
Worley (Christian Slater) discovers in the explosive TRUE ROMANCE.
When Clarence, a loner with a love of low-budget Kung Fu movies, meets
Alabama Whitman (Patricia Arquette), a callgirl, it's love at first
sight.  After a heady night spent in each other's arms and out on a
billboard making true confessions, the two decide to get married.
After that, at the advise of an Elvis (Val Kilmer) who inhabits his
mind, Clarence decides to go to Alabama's pimp (Gary Oldman) and tell
him that she's through working.  What ensues is a vicious gunfight that
leaves two people dead and Clarence with a suitcase of high-value
cocaine that everybody--including mob boss Vincenzo Coccoti
(Christopher Walken)--want to get their hands on.
     There's good news and bad news about TRUE ROMANCE.  The good news
is that it's written by Quentin Tarantino, the man who made a stunning
splash as the writer/director of last year's RESERVOIR DOGS.  The bad
news is that it isn't directed by him.  At the helm instead is Tony
Scott, the man who foisted TOP GUN and BEVERLY HILLS COP II on us.
     Like RESERVOIR DOGS, TRUE ROMANCE is filled with witty dialogue;
sharp, macabre humor; and more bullets and blood than one would think
likely for the running time.  Tarantino's script is loaded with energy
and brimming with power.  This film is a wild, wild ride whose slower
moments are still punctuated by one-liners that only one other
screenwriter (David Mamet) seems capable of penning.
     Director Scott tries his hardest to turn this film into a typical
Hollywood picture suitable for mass consumption.  His style lacks
punch--he goes for the safe, pretty shots that can be found in almost
any action film.  It makes one wonder how different this movie might
have been had Tarantino helmed it--his methods, which borrow heavily
from John Woo and Martin Scorcese, are stark and crisp, and probably
would have complemented the script nicely.
     The story, however, is too good to be seriously damaged by
pedestrian direction.  However deeply Scott was involved in the
production of this film, his role clearly didn't extend to messing with
what Tarantino had written.  Those who have seen RESERVOIR DOGS will
recognize the similarities, which include a hilarious opening
conversation (TRUE ROMANCE's is about Elvis where RESERVOIR DOGS' is
about Madonna's "Like a Virgin") and a multi-sided, drawn-guns
showdown.
     My favorite scene is a confrontation between mob don Christopher
Walken and Clarence's father (Dennis Hopper).  Sparks, as well as any
number of racial epithets, fly during this visceral and violent
tete-a-tete, which includes some of Tarantino's best dialogue and
Scott's most proficient direction.  Walken has never been more
sardonically menacing, and Hopper somehow manages to give an impression
of restraint.  In a word, this four-minute gem is astounding.
     For the most part, the characters are well-written and
nicely-developed.  My lone quibble is that the romance between Clarence
and Alabama seemed forced.  Necessary though it is to the plot, it's
rushed through too quickly, and I had a hard time accepting how
desperately in love these two are supposed to be.  While their romantic
chemistry is in doubt, they make great partners when it comes to crime,
bloodshed, and being on the run.
     Christian Slater and Patricia Arquette (whose appearance is
unbelievably different from that of her last part, in ETHAN FROME) are
perfect for these roles, knowing exactly how to put the right amount of
energy into Clarence and Alabama without turning them into
caricatures.  The supporting players are equally good, including
Bronson Pinchot as a boot-licking actor who appears to have been
included more for comic relief than anything else.  Those looking for
another link to RESERVOIR DOGS (however slim) will find Chris Penn in
the cast.
     In many ways, TRUE ROMANCE is an assault on the senses.  It works
best in a big theater with an impressive sound system.  Hans Zimmer's
score is on overdrive, and the soundtrack blares rock-and-roll.
Somehow, TRUE ROMANCE on video isn't going to be nearly the same
experience.
     The cautionary warning given for RESERVOIR DOGS applies: those
who are disturbed by extreme violence and profanity should stay away.
There is no single scene in TRUE ROMANCE as gut-wrenching as the
torture in RESERVOIR DOGS, but there are plenty of bullets and lots of
blood.  The film is graphic in everything it does, and those who prefer
sedate motion pictures will not find this one a pleasant experience.
     Tarantino is a hot prospect now, which is good for anyone who
enjoys this kind of intense, intelligent, and unapologetically violent
thriller.  Films such as TRUE ROMANCE don't come along very
often--movies unafraid of slipping the bonds of convention in the name
of giving the audience something new and exhilarating.  For those who
aren't bothered by blood and bad language, this is a motion picture to
add to 1993's "must see" list.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Z_RIDGEJE@CCSVAX.SFASU.EDU
     The road picture is just about the ultimate medium for action
movies.  I mean, where else do you get the chance to visit so many
different places and meet so many different kinds of people?  Of
course, along for the ride should be at least two interesting people
with whom we, the audience, can do all that and leave the theater in
one piece--and perhaps be entertained in the process.  Such is the
case with TRUE ROMANCE.
     The film opens in a bar, where we first meet Clarence.  He is near
drunk, talking to no one in particular about his idol (yeah, you guessed
it ... Elvis).  He goes to a movie theater to watch some kung fu flick,
and it is then that we meet the other protagonist of the
piece--Alabama.
     It's love at first sight.  They talk in a diner, visit his
workplace, and then--before you can say the S word--they're at his
apartment doing the nasty under a light blue hue.  Afterwards, Alabama
tells him that she's been a prostitute for three days.  "I'm completely
monogamous.  When I'm with a man, I'm with *him* and nobody else," she
tells a confused Clarence.  Obviously, her job didn't work out.  And to
make things worse, she's in love with Clarence now.  Guess what
happens.
     Clarence and Alabama get hitched.  After that, Clarence feels it
his duty to retrieve his wife's suitcase of clothing.  So, he goes to
the residence of Alabama's pimp, Drexel (played by Gary Oldman).  He
ends up killing the pimp, grabs the suitcase and runs.  He and Alabama
later open the case, and find it filled with cocaine.  "Those aren't my
clothes," Alabama laughs.  But Clarence doesn't find the situation so
funny.  What are they gonna do?  They do what any two normal kids on
the run from the mob and the police and drug dealers would do--they
attempt to sell the stuff.  Things don't turn out so great.
     Like I said before, I like road movies.  And this *is* a road
movie if nothing more.  But there's a lot more.  As far as
characterization and plot go, this film has it's head in the right
direction.  Too bad it fails t make Clarence or Alabama interesting
people.  Sure, we care about both of them.  But they're really just one
note harped and harped and harped til we get a headache.  The
characters that *are* worth your time are the supporting players:  Gary
Oldman goes way over the top in his role; Christopher Walken has the
best cameo; Dennis Hopper does his usual thing as Clarence's dad, who
is reluctant to help his son; and Brad Pitt is quite funny as a totally
stoned beach bum who couldn't care less about the world.  The
soundtrack is kickin', the direction and production values as slick as
they come, and the writing by RESERVOIR DOGS dude Quentin Tarantino
combines just about every action film cliche in the book.
     There is testosterone pumping at all times throughout the film,
and there is also a message.  Violence is wrong, but it happens and we
just have to deal with it.  There also exists a theme of what would two
immature kids do in a situation like the one that Clarence and Alabama
are in.  I'm not sure if TRUE ROMANCE gets all its messages across
clearly, but they *are* there--just dig deep.  Take your time with
this movie, and have a wild ride too.  Enjoy.
CRITICAL RATING:  ***(1/2)
RATED R, for Violence and Profanity like you wouldn't believe

Author
Steve Kong
"True Romance" is one of those films that I love because of style over 
substance. The writing is excellent and the direction is excellent. The 
story is average and the ending abysmal, but the path in which "True 
Romance" takes from start to that ending is astonishing.
"True Romance" follows a couple, Clarence (Christian Slater) and Alabama 
(Patricia Arquette). Clarence is a strange fellow who works in a comic book 
store and enjoys "classic" kung-fu movies. Alabama is a call girl who has a 
large sense of innocence  Clarence is only her fourth client.
Now, since this is a script written by Quentin Tarantino you can expect 
lots of violence, sharp lines, and plot-twist that you wouldn't see from a 
mile away. So, let me drop some actor names and characters on you and see 
if you can put them together, as to not spoil the film for you. There's 
Gary Oldman playing a mean pimp, Val Kilmer plays a famous dead rock star, 
Samuel L. Jackson makes a quick stop, Dennis Hopper is a father, Bradd Pitt 
is a lazy bum roommate, James Gandolfini is one scary mobster, and 
Christopher Walken is, well, Christopher Walken. Now, there are some really 
interesting elements in the film too. Elvis, a suitcase of cocaine, guns, 
lots of guns, a bag of money, and well an eye-patch. Can you make head from 
tail of those things? You'll see how they all fit together when you see 
"True Romance".
Tarantino's script for the movie is absolutely brilliant in the sense that 
it has some of the best dialogue around. And all of it is memorable. The 
story though is a bit bland and the ending, well, it's quite reminiscent of 
Tarantino's "Reservoir Dogs" (not to mention director, Tony Scott's recent 
"Enemy of the State".) But this is not to say that the movie is 
unwatchable. Watching "True Romance" is more about watching interesting 
character speak interesting lines. It is also about watching the style of 
direction that Tony Scott puts into the film.
Scott, whose films include "Top Gun", "Days of Thunder", "Crimson Tide", 
and "Enemy of the State" shows off his visual flair with "True Romance". 
Every scene is meticulously setup and polished and it is very evident with 
what is seen. Though Scott is a brilliant filmmaker in these polished 
sequences, the one thing he cannot shoot are shootouts. Looking at the 
shootouts in "True Romance" and "Enemy of the State" he seems to capture 
the chaos of a shootout, but he does not put it in a way that is easy to 
follow. The camera wiggles and flies, bodies fly, there are loud sounds, 
but it's all a blurry mess.
The two leads in the film do well. Slater, who I don't think is an action 
star, does well with his part as a slightly crazed Clarence. He has that 
subtle look of innocence that is easily mixed with a dark psyche. Arquette 
is great as Alabama, who like Clarence looks innocent and acts that way 
too, but has a hidden dark side that escapes in the film. Both create a 
superb chemistry onscreen. What was surprising were the large names in the 
supporting roles. As mentioned before, you can see that there are many big 
names in this film and they play rather smaller supporting roles. This 
leads to a film that is rich in good performances. Worth mentioning is 
James Gandolfini ("The Sopranos") who is absolutely terrifying as a mobster.
If you watch True Romance for the characters, the great dialogue, and 
visual style you'll not be disappointed. If you want a good story, you'll 
be a little disappointed. Don't Miss True Romance. This a film with words 
to remember.
