Title
Review for Gojira ni-sen mireniamu (1999)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
John Beachem
The big green guy is back, and he starts off with a bang. Godzilla is 
terrorizing a small bay community while a group of Godzilla trackers follows 
him. The group consists of Yuji Shinoda (Takehiro Murata), a scientist who 
has been studying Godzilla for years; his daughter, Io (Mayu Suzuki), who 
appears to be an expert with electrical equipment; and a reporter, Yuki 
Ichinose (Naomi Nishida). Meanwhile, a meteor has been discovered by Dr. 
Shiro Miyazaki (Shiro Sano), an old friend of Yuji. It turns out that the 
meteor is actually an alien spacecraft. The local government, led by Yuji's 
long time enemy, Mitsuo Katagiri (Hiroshi Abe), orders it and Godzilla 
destroyed. Yuji has other plans for Godzilla, since he has determined that 
the lizard's healing factor can be harnessed and used to revolutionize 
modern medicine. Nevertheless, Katagiri wants the lizard destroyed, and he 
sets out to do just that. However, before Katagiri can carry out his 
dastardly plan, the alien's plans are learned by Yuji. The plan is to 
destroy the earth, and Godzilla is needed to do that (it's never exactly 
explained why). So what does the alien do? Why it changes into possibly the 
goofiest looking alien creature ever and takes on Godzilla, mano-a-mano.
Ah nostalgia, how it can cause us to do foolish things. Is there any reason 
other than because you're feeling nostalgic that you'd go to see a movie 
like "Godzilla 2000"? It can't be because you're looking for great special 
effects, acting, plot, dialogue, or cinematography, because that's not what 
Godzilla movies are about. Godzilla movies are about, uh, guys in big rubber 
suits destroying Tokyo. Hmm, that sounds mildly ridiculous doesn't it? Maybe 
so, but that's exactly what you expect out of a Godzilla movie. You want to 
see the big green lizard smash up Tokyo for awhile until a big, climactic 
showdown with another monster. If that's not what you want to see, what in 
the world are you doing reading this review? So, now that we've gotten all 
that out of the way, you're probably wondering how "Godzilla 2000" holds up 
as compared to the multitude of past Godzilla flicks. Well, it's rather a 
hit and miss situation I'm afraid. You see, all the requisite props for a 
Godzilla movie are present. We've got tanks and helicopters and strange new 
weapons to hurl at the big guy even though we know they're not going to do a 
bit of good; we've got the strange new threat that only Godzilla can defeat; 
and we've got the good scientist who knows this but no one in the military 
will listen to him. Unfortunately, we've got one more thing that past 
Godzilla flicks haven't had. We've got lots and lots of inane, scientific 
ramblings to fill up time that could be better spent watching the lizard 
blow things up.
Normally I devote this section of the review to a critique of the acting in 
a film, but, well, this is Godzilla. "Godzilla 2000", as you all should 
know, is not a movie which can be criticized in any way for acting for two 
reasons: one, the dubbing is so bad you can't tell if the actors are doing 
well or not; and two, Godzilla movies aren't about real actors, they're 
about extras who run around in panic while things explode all around them. 
So instead I'm going to devote this paragraph to the ways in which this 
newest Godzilla movie is different from the ones in the past. First of all, 
the dubbing seems to have actually gotten worse. At least before the actors' 
mouths would be moving while the inane dialogue spilled forth. Second, the 
filming actually looks a bit more professional this time around, at least at 
the start of the film. Never fear though, I think they used up the entire 
budget in the first twenty minutes or so, and the film's look more closely 
matches that of the original films by the end. Third, there's a lot more 
swearing in this Godzilla film than I remember in past ones, but that could 
just be my memory playing tricks on me (it's been known to do that 99% of 
the time). Last is the fact that in the past the humans have always hurled 
all their weapons at Godzilla, he's gotten really angry, and all the human 
weapons have been destroyed. In this version, the humans' weapons don't even 
slow the big guy down. He doesn't bother destroying any of them because he 
couldn't seem to care less that they're there. Maybe his skin gets tougher 
with age.
In case you didn't notice, the plot to this Godzilla film sounds a little 
bit complicated. That's because this one is so full of scientific baloney 
they forgot to give people what they really wanted. We still get great, 
classic lines like: "That thing's tied down with electromagnetic cables, 
it's not going anywhere." When you know the monster's going to break out 
right after those words are spoken. Yet the rest of the film is filled with 
talk about Godzilla's regeneration abilities, and how old the meteor is, and 
all sorts of other things the audience couldn't care less about. The big 
showdown at the end is enjoyable enough; but the rest of the film is just 
talk, and I could tell everyone was getting more than a little antsy. Having 
suffered through such classics as "Godzilla vs. Megalon", I have a pretty 
good idea what kind of Godzilla movie true fans of the franchise like, and 
"Godzilla 2000" doesn't quite meet the standard. Despite improved special 
effects (his atomic breath looks much cooler now), both the quality and 
length of the Godzilla fights have gone down. We get no more than five 
minutes of Godzilla smashing buildings and power lines; and his fight with 
the alien, while entertaining, doesn't come close to his battle with, say, 
Mothra.
Sadly enough, a movie as cheesy as this one has a better soundtrack than 
most mainstream Hollywood productions. It's really nothing more than a mix 
of different classical pieces thrown together, but it's used wisely and it's 
usually appropriate to the scene being played (I hope Hollywood producers 
are taking notes). One last thing I had to note, something which simply 
cracked me up, was the vanishing scenery. For example, in one scene we have 
a four-wheeler driving over a large pile of dirt to get into a tunnel. When 
Godzilla forces the group to drive out of the tunnel in reverse, the pile of 
dirt has vanished. This happens in numerous scenes, if you look hard enough, 
but that was the most blatant example. I'd recommend this latest entry into 
the franchise to those who were disappointed by the American version from 
1998 (What do you mean that's everyone?) and want to see the big guy back in 
a rubber suit, like god intended. Just make sure your expectations are nice 
and low before going in. "Godzilla 2000" runs a decent 90 minutes, and I 
give it three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Pete Croatto
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Pete Croatto.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1e402d313516b33788256940005d200c?OpenDocument
I have a confession. Even though I am a movie junkie-I saw Eye of the
Beholder and yet I still watch movies-I've never seen any of the
original Godzillas. (Note that Godzilla 2000 is not a sequel to the U.S.
Godzilla released in 1998; it's the American release of a 1999 Godzilla
flick called Gojira ni-sen mireniamu.)
So, part of me was excited as I drove to the local multiplex to see
Godzilla 2000-the latest entry in an almost 50-year old franchise. This
was a long-awaited treat. I was expecting a goofy good time, complete
with bad dubbing, science fair level sets and a ludicrous plot line.
The last thing I expected was for the movie to be so…boring. I can only
imagine what the theatre full of kids I saw this with felt.
You do get all of the "so bad they're good" traits so normally
associated with the franchise. But you have to sit through a snoozer
plot that has the organization of a Rorschach blot. It's a deal I wasn't
willing to accept.
Hiroshi Kashiwabara and Waturu Mimura's script crams in way too many
details, and in many cases, fails to follow up on them. The maneuver is
not only disconcerting, but gives the movie a permanent logy, weighty
feel.
Godzilla starts off destroying power plants and then just stops. Was it
a whim? A bold political statement? I don't know. Its foe, an ancient
meteor that looks like Prudential's logo, doesn't just fight the Beast
from the Far East. No, it's got to have life-saving powers, a plot to
erase "the data" from Japan, a desire to clone and the ability to become
a spaceship and then some kind of tentacled space creature.
There's a battle between the head of the Godzilla Prediction Unit
(Takehiro Murata) and a slimy government official (Hiroshi Abe) over the
handling of Godzilla, and personal issues. And then there's the plucky
news photographer and blah, blah, blah. It's like watching Magnolia all
over again-except without the good writing, keen sociological insight
and Aimee Mann songs.
What a waste. When the talking and the plot points stop hurtling at you,
Godzilla 2000 does the job-it's entertaining and goes down easy. The
action scenes are cheesy in their grandeur though a little sluggish. The
dubbing is nice and awful, with Murata sounding like he's in constant
need of a cough drop.
As for the dialogue, one line summarizes the goofiness factor: "Did
anyone see that flying rock go by?" This movie also marked the first
time since The Three Stooges that I've heard the word "imbecile" used in
casual conversation.
Though the summer movie season is drying up and Godzilla 2000 has its
moments, I wouldn't take kids to see it. They'll probably end up asking
more questions than Charlie Rose.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated: PG for some language and menacing action/violence.
Starring: Takehiro Murata, Naomi Nishida, Mayu Suzuki, Hiroshi Abe, Shirô 
Sano.
When you walk into the movie theatre to see "Godzilla 2000" please do not 
expect to see "American Beauty" or "Gone with the Wind", and do not expect to 
see a re-hash of the 1998 Hollywood bomb "Godzilla". Nope this is the real 
thing, Godzilla in all his man-in-rubber-suit, bad mouth doesn't movie at the 
same rate as voice does dubbing, over the top acting, bad dialogue, cheesy 
effects and big time entertainment. That is what a Godzilla movie is made of, 
and "Godzilla 2000" is just that!
In a continuation of the typical Godzilla story, Yuji Shinodo (Takehiro 
Murata) and his daughter Io (Mayu Suzuki) of the Godzilla Prediction Network 
are once again on the run for Godzilla, trying to find him, watch and study 
him. With the help of a stubborn reporter Yuki Ichinose (Naomi Nishida) who 
is mostly along to take pictures, they must stop a madman Mitsuo Katagiri 
(Hiroshi Abe) from trying to kill Godzilla for destroying the city over all 
these years. Since they really do not understand who Godzilla is, they take 
the usual approach: Don't understand it, Kill it. The GPN team must try to 
stop him from doing this, while a strange rock is found underwater and ends 
up being an alien spaceship from millions of years ago, to which is bent on 
destroying Japan. Now it is time for Godzilla to do his job, and destroy this 
monster before its too late.
Surprisingly enough "Godzilla 2000" is a huge entertainment piece, that I 
really had fun with. I laughed at the cheesy part of the film, and believe me 
it's all there. You cannot help but like these kind of movies. They are the 
so bad it's good type movie, with the overacting, odd dialogue and bad 
dubbing. One thing that I wasn't expecting was the special effects, which 
were surprisingly good for this type of low-budget movie which is set to 
become a camp classic. First up the acting is horrible, but its pretty bad, 
typical for this kind of movie, but the lead stars keep it afloat and give us 
something to chuckle at. 
Godzilla himself is so cool looking, and even at one point I could see the 
hole in the head on the roof of his mouth where a light bulb was to light up 
his eyes. He strides around the city destroying everything in site. Burning, 
crashing, stepping on, hitting, whatever he can do he definitely does it. So 
of course one cannot help but compare this movie to the 1998 big Hollywood 
Bomb "Godzilla". Even though the 98 version wasn't a horrible movie, it was 
far from being good. You just can't americanize a Godzilla movie, it's just 
not possible. There's no bad dubbing, or special effects, everything is in 
place and it really just doesn't fit in.
So on one of those MST3K type of scales "Godzilla 2000" is a great film to 
watch with a group of friends, or when your in the mood to watch just an 
entertaining movie. So go ahead to your local movie theatre, pay the cheap 
matinee price and see "Godzilla 2000" believe me, it will be one of the 
funnest times you've had at the movies this year. Great fun.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Takao Okawara's GODZILLA 2000, Godzilla may have met his match in 
something that looks like a flying piece of fossilized dino dung in the 
shape of the Millennium Falcon.  But since this is the 23rd Japanese 
film about Godzilla, the smart money is on Godzilla to win again.
When we first see Godzilla in his millennium edition, he is on his usual 
power trip, knocking over electrical lines left and right.  After 
noshing on metal delicacies like ships and bridges, he is ready to fight 
all comers.  The Japanese army has developed a special metal piercing 
missile that they figure is certain to take down their old nemesis, but 
the bombs aren't even strong enough to give the thick-skinned monster a 
case of heartburn.
Yes sirree, after being bored with Roland Emmerich's GODZILLA, prepared 
with zillions of dollars' worth of computer generated images, we are 
back to basics with this Japanese version of a guy in a rubber suit.  
The English dubbing is so unsynchronized that it appears that they 
intended it to mismatch as another way to generate laughs.  
When our two mega-villains square off in the obligatory, ending battle 
to the death, their weapons of choice are classic.  Against Godzilla's 
dinosaur breath, his competition resorts to the evil eye.  
The biggest problem with GODZILLA 2000 is that it is just not cheesy 
enough.  And we waste a lot of time waiting for Godzilla to get back on 
stage.  How many breaks does a man in a rubber suit need?
Although the humans in the story mainly hang around gawking or shooting 
at the monster, sometimes their hokey dialog does add some zest to the 
story's campy ambiance.  "Are you sure you've still got film in the 
camera?" asks scientist Yuji Shinoda (Takehiro Murata) to his female 
companion, as they are hot on Godzilla's trail.  "Oh, bite me!" she 
shoots back.  
The problem with GODZILLA 2000 is that, like wasabi, a little goes a 
long way.  Thirty minutes would have been plenty for me.
GODZILLA 2000 runs 1:30.  It is rated PG for monster violence and mild 
language and would be fine for most kids.  Children under 5 might be 
frightened by the silly looking monsters, but none of the kids in our 
audience appeared to be the least bit upset.
My son Jeffrey and his friend Nickolas, both 11, gave the movie ***.  
They thought it was funny, and both liked the space ship best. They did 
wish that some of Godzilla's old rivals would have made an appearance.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "GODZILLA 2000" (Toho Films/Tri-Star Pictures)
Good grief! Another Godzilla movie? The legendary lizard is
back in this low-tech, sci-fi fantasy from Japan's Toho studio - one
that seems better suited to the video screen than a theatrical
release. Actually, it's the 24th Godzilla picture - and much like the
rest. Directed by Takao Okawara, the story follows Godzilla as he
leaves his underwater home off Japan's coast, destroys a submarine and
seaside restaurant, and heads for a nuclear power plant. A sympathetic
scientist and his daughter, along with an eager reporter, want to
study Godzilla - forming a Godzilla Prediction Network - but the
military, as usual, has other explosive plans and Tokyo gets trampled
in the process. The twist this time comes from a shape-shifting,
radio-active, 6,000 year-old flying rock from outer space, an alien
Orga, who tries to gobble the fire-breathing Godzilla.  No effort has
been made to try to synchronize the silly Japanese dialogue with the
cheesy, dubbed-over Americanized English, and the results can only be
called ludicrous. "Ah, the damn teriyaki is cold again!" says a diner
when the big, green lizard lands near a noodle shop. "Great Caesar's
ghost!" exclaims another character. There's also little attempt to
disguise the actor who's wearing a cleated rubber suit.  Originally
conceived as a cautionary tale, "Godzilla, King of the Monsters" made
its debut in 1954 and, fittingly, the current Godzilla's size has been
scaled down from 328 feet (1991-1995 versions) to a mere 170 feet,
closer to the original concept of 168 feet, as detailed in the earlier
incarnations. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Godzilla 2000"
is a tedious 2 - for die-hard fans only - because "Maybe because
Godzilla is inside each one of us."

Author
Jon Popick
Don't worry.  Just because a film comes from Japan and has the numbers
`2000' in its title, it doesn't necessarily mean it will be as bad as
Pokémon 2000.  And just because a film has the word `Godzilla' in its
title, it doesn't necessarily mean it will be as bad as the 1998
travesty that shared the same name.
Well, maybe you should worry after all.  Godzilla 2000 certainly can't
be considered a good film by any stretch of the imagination.  Made in
Japan and poorly dubbed in English, the picture is neither cheesy enough
to make you laugh at it, nor good enough for you to enjoy it as a
conventional action flick.  The plot is laughable and the film features
a closing line so ridiculous you'll have to hear it to believe it.
In Godzilla 2000, the giant lizard is still as nasty as he wants to be,
emerging from the ocean to use large ships as chew-toys and to stomp
electrical transformers into oblivion.  When he heads toward a huge
nuclear power plant, the people in the Godzilla Prediction Network raise
their cumulative eyebrow, thinking that the lizard may have some wacky
ulterior motive in his seemingly random attacks.
The GPN continually butts heads with a governmental agency called the
Crisis Control Initiative.  While the GPN wants to study the giant
beast, the CCI is hell-bent on destroying him.  Of course, their petty
differences are put on the back burner when a mysterious underwater rock
turns out to be a sixty-billion-year-old spaceship that has apparently
been waiting to drain the Earth of its precious computer data.  Hmmm…I
guess that makes sense.  Aliens saw dinosaurs roaming around during our
Cretaceous Period, and figured the planet would someday host a
technologically advanced civilization.  They must have seen those kids
from Land of the Lost and thought evolution would be a much quicker
process.
There are a lot of silly moments in Godzilla 2000, and I hope that at
least some of them were intentional.  Dubbing foreign films in English
usually results in bad translations which end up being inadvertently
hysterical, but only one made me laugh here.  A guy in a restaurant
complains that the teriyaki is cold, but doesn't care `as long as the
beer is cold.'  Then he downs a glass of a clear liquid that is
obviously not beer.
When something like this is the standout moment of a film, skipping the
multiplex might be a good idea.
1:42 – PG for violence and adult language

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Looking back, it seems as though I was a little kind to Roland Emmerich's
version of GODZILLA (6/10) a few years back. I apparently really liked the
special effects, despite them being wrapped in a garbage stench of a plot
and characters, and stamped it with a "barely recommendable" nametag. I
don't know, I might've been drunk when I wrote that review :). But if you
look at this film, many of the same issues apply, with the major difference
being that this film is so over-the-top cheesy that it actually provides for
a sizeable amount of entertainment. So if you don't expect HAMLET and campy
flicks are your bag, this one should fill it up real nice.
PLOT:
Big giant green monster named Godzilla comes out of the Tokyo waters at
sundown to pummel down all that is in his path. Scientists and government
officials attempt to stop it. But what's this? An alien flying saucer is
discovered underwater and it seems to want Godzilla for something too. Slap
them all together, and get ready for a big showdown featuring bumbling
scientists, Godzilla and nasty aliens.
CRITIQUE:
Can a movie packed with cheesy acting, cheesy dialogue, cheesy effects and a
cheesy plot actually = a good movie? Yup! In this case, this is just that
kind of movie! Cheese with plenty of mustard, relish and a deep appreciation
for films that are really bad. But don't get me wrong, the film isn't all
that horrible. In fact, many of the special effects in this film are
actually quite good, especially during the film's first 10 minutes. The plot
is also goofy but definitely more original than the lame "let's lay some
eggs" plot from Emmerich's GODZILLA, and the action scenes deliver plenty of
cool sequences. So will you enjoy this movie if you go in thinking that it
will be good? I doubt it. The whole point of a film like this is that you
know that it is "bad", but you end up laughing and enjoying it anyway. Well,
at least I did.
The only reason that I didn't score it higher is because even as a good
"bad" movie, it lacked somewhat. There were way too many scenes of Godzilla
slowly making his way through the city...and I mean reaaaaal slow! Step it
up, slowpoke, you're a fiery beast!! The film also lost me about halfway
through when they decided to leave Godzilla in the background for a while
and concentrate more on this whole side-plot involving a dude getting
trapped in a building which is just about to blow up. You don't really need
that kind of thing here. Slowed the film down somewhat. But it was all good
when the big green rubber-looking monster came growling out of the water and
kickin' that major Tokyo ass. Who wouldn't enjoy two giant rubber dolls
trading swings and fire rays?! I know I did. Overall, this is NOT the kind
of film that "regular" movie-goers will likely enjoy. It's a film for people
who like making fun of the bad dubbing, watching over-the-top actors deliver
bad lines and obvious sets. Overall, I would say that it's a fun ride...but
only if you've chosen to be on that ride. Know what I mean?
PS: The best/worst, and I mean BEST line in this whole movie comes from a
scientist near the end of the film, who gives us his reasoning behind
Godzilla's humanistic qualities. You will ROLL in the aisles!! "it's because
there's a little Godzilla in..."

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
GODZILLA 2000 (aka "Gojira ni-sen mireniamu"; 1999)
Rated PG; running time 108 minutes
Genre: Science-Fantasy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0188640
Official site: http://www.sony.com/godzilla2000/ (U.S. version)
Written by: Hiroshi Kashiwabara, Wataru Mimura
Directed by: Takao Okawara
Cast: Tsutomu Kitagawa, Takehiro Murata, Hiroshi Abe, Naomi Nishida,
Mayu Suzuki, Shiro Sano
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsgodzilla2k.html
Don't get me wrong - I love me some straight-up comedy, and thus, looked
forward to seeing THE ORIGINAL KINGS OF COMEDY this weekend - but
there's nothing that takes me back to The Day like The Big Lizard.  Man,
I remember all those campy GODZILLA flicks as a kid, watching them on
"Bill Kennedy's Sunday Movie" on channel 50 in Detroit just before my
sisters and I had to go to Sunday School.  It was a good memory, damn
near besmirched by Hollywood's special effects (and lack of soul) in its
lame Matthew Broderick-starring remake a couple years back.  When I
heard that Japan's Toho Studios had done their own GODZILLA update last
year, I couldn't wait to see the Real, True Lizard in all his
badly-dubbed glory.  My only question was, would he hold up to a G2K
treatment?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Worrying about the plot of a GODZILLA movie is like trying to understand
the dialogue in a porno flick, but if you insist...
In an obvious continuation of previous Japanese GODZILLA movies, the
Godzilla Prediction Mobile team of Yuji Shinoda (Takehiro Murata) and
his young daughter Io (Mayu Suzuki), along with Roving Reporter Yuki
Ichinose (Naomi Nishida), want to study the city-stompin' - but
otherwise cute (in an ugly sort of way) - giant lizard known as Godzilla
(Tsutomu Kitagawa, under that rubber suit).  But not the Evil Folk of
the Crisis Control Intelligence agency [CCI, eh?  Hmmm...].  Where the
GPM wants to study Godzilla to learn ways to harness his power for Good,
the CCI agents - director Mitsuo Katagiri (Hiroshi Abe) and his
sidekick, Shiro Mayazaki (Shiro Sano) - take the American Approach: if
you don't understand it, destroy it.
The twist in this, the 23rd movie in the GODZILLA series, comes from a
mysterious big rock the CCI finds underwater and investigates as a
"possible alternate fuel source".  When they try to bring the big rock
up to the surface, they find it may not be what it appears to be at
first glance.  And since Godzilla can wreak only so much local havoc,
and he needs an ObAlien to fight against these days...well, you get the
idea.
The Upshot:
The point above - about GODZILLA 2000 being a continuation of previous
flicks - is an important one because it starts out, seemingly, where
those previous versions left off.  The existence of Godzilla Prediction
Mobile Unit is supposed to make perfect sense to the audience, because
we are given only a minimal background on it.  Or any of the characters,
for that matter - including Godzilla, who just shows up at the beginning
of the movie, tearin' stuff up, which the movie's citizens take in
stride, as if it happened all the time.
Indeed, I didn't get what was going on in the movie until about the
halfway point; up to then, GODZILLA 2000 was just a bunch of disjointed
scenes that I figured would gel into an understandable story, sooner or
later.  Not that this was a problem for me; part of the fun of watching
a GODZILLA flick, after all, is laughing at the dubbing, the cheesy
music and special effects, the campy overacting, and most of all, the
patented Godzilla screech and fireball.
All of which the audience got, in spades.  Well, mostly.  Almost all of
those classic elements were firmly in place, and even updated with a
'90s sensibility.  The music and special effects were still cheesy
(check out the underwater scenes), and the acting just as stoically
intense, even when saying lines like "Hey, did you see that flying rock
go by?", or staging a Three Stooges-like slapstick scene (that only
nominally worked).  One noticeable "improvement" that didn't work for
me, however, was the special effects fireball.  This new version, in a
word, sucked.  It looked as if Godzilla's mouth was unnaturally set on
fire every time it happened, and I longed for Godzilla's old firerings.
An update that did work well, though, was the use of current computers
by some the character; I got a kick out of seeing Apple iMacs and G3s in
the background, though I have to wonder about Compaqs being used as
Serious Scientific Equipment [she said, waiting for the ObComplaints
from Compaq lovers].  The whole product placement issue - there were
advertiser stickers seemingly everywhere - had me wondering whether this
was standard fare in Japanese movies these days.  And whether U.S.
studios are looking to follow this trend.
Fun, too, was the dubbed dialogue, and the patchwork editing.  I don't
know what was better: watching the GPM team driving at first far behind,
then parallel to Godzilla, a la Twister, only to pull up miles in front
of him, driving toward him, in the very next jumpcut - or hearing a
English dub of a Japanese character telling someone, "Bite me!".
If this were any other movie, I'd spend time Obsessing about how
Godzilla magically tears only so much stuff up, then stops for the
night, as if a referee blew a Time Out whistle (or for that matter, what
Godzilla does in between movies).  But asking for logic in a GODZILLA
movie is like wondering whether world wide rasslin' is real.  You have
to either accept what you see as part of the thrill of the show, or
totally wash your hands of it.
Its minor flaws aside, the goofy GODZILLA 2000 is a fun, mindless way to
spend an hour or two in the theater; you have to hang up your Disbelief
Issues at the door, but other than that, it's an easy ride.  But I think
Yuji got it wrong: I think what he meant to say is, "there's a little
bit of all of *us* in Godzilla"...
Bammer's Bottom Line:
All the Camp, none of the Matthew Broderick.  Thank you, Toho Studios,
for taking me back down Memory Lane.
GODZILLA 2000 (rating: greenlight):
You Haven't Lived until you hear and see a Japanese film in which the
line "kwit yer bitchin'" is dubbed.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     What can I say?  For the sort of viewer who enjoys seeing two
men in rubber monster suits battle over a city that looks like
cardboard boxes, this might be the film for you.  I liked it.
Godzilla got to me at an early age and I am too old to become
objective about Godzilla films now.  As I said in the capsule, there
is not a lot done really well in this film, but it is a lot of fun
for people who like Godzilla films.  There is a certain thrill of
anticipation in seeing the Toho Films banner at the beginning.  Even
the best are crudely made and often a little incoherent, but they
are also a good time.  Non-fans can be assured that they will not be
much impressed by GODZILLA 2000 and can tune out of this review at
this point.
     Plot?  Well, truth be known, there is not a whole lot of plot.
Scientist Yuji Shinoda left the employ of the Japanese government
and formed the minuscule Godzilla Prediction Network, a startup that
predicts where and when Godzilla will show up and strike next.  Yuji
does the science and Yuji's ten-year-old daughter does the financial
work.  They are joined on a Godzilla hunt by Yuki Ichinose, a
photojournalist looking for a story.  Together they discover that
finding Godzilla can be a big mistake.
     At the same time some scientists have found an odd rock, 600
feet across, in the ocean of Japan.  Because it shows some
intriguing abnormalities they decide to bring the rock to the
surface where it can be studied, lifting it with floats.  Oddly the
rock seems more enthusiastic about reaching the surface than can be
explained as it rises up past the floats.  It then hangs over the
water and waits for sunshine to activate it.  It seems under the
stone shell is an alien craft that has been waiting 60 million years
to come back to life so it can complete its mission.  It would be
telling to say what its mission is, except that logical or not,
there will of course be another monster for Godzilla to fight.  (And
of course it will be just roughly Godzilla's height.  Godzilla never
has any fifty-foot monsters to fight.)
     Word on the street has been that the new film is intended to
come right after the original Godzilla film in its own new series.
That was true of the film we call GODZILLA '85, which did spawn its
own separate series of Godzilla films in the 1980s and 1990s.  (To
save confusion I will use American titles.)  That second series
repeated many of the same mistakes that the first series did, but it
was aimed at a higher level.  The rumor has been that like GODZILLA
'85 (and of course the film we call GIGANTIS, THE FIRE MONSTER),
GODZILLA 2000 is a direct successor to the original GODZILLA, KING
OF THE MONSTERS.  However, a cursory look at the film tells us this
is simply not true.  Godzilla died in the first film and all other
films are supposed to feature a second very similar Godzilla beast.
Yet in GODZILLA 2000, attacks by Godzilla are taken to be a periodic
phenomenon.  There is even a Godzilla Prediction Network.  At the
end of the film there is a comment about all of Godzilla's attacks
in the past have taught lessons.  None of this would make sense if
only the events of the first film and this one had taken place.  The
second series apparently ended with the death of the second Godzilla
and his replacement by his son, just reaching maturity.  Logically
it would make sense to say that the new Godzilla is really the son
from the second series.  But so much logic is probably more than the
series can reasonably be expected to bear.
     Godzilla is like James Bond.  His looks change but the
character himself is timeless.  His face had a very lumpy appearance
and buck teeth in the earliest film and then became more dinosaur-
like for KING KONG VRS. GODZILLA.  As the series became more
childish and aimed at younger children his features became rounder
and less frightening.  In the second series he looked a lot better
and consistent from to film, but just a bit rubbery.  His looks
never changed.  For GODZILLA 2000 again his looks have been modified
to please the younger set.  This time, however, it is a younger set
brought up on NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET and FRIDAY THE 13TH.  The new
Godzilla has sharper teeth with four canines regularly spaced on
each side.  His back fins are more jagged, sharp, and vicious-
looking.  It looks like they crossed the traditional Godzilla with a
punk rocker.
     Toho Studios from the beginning did excellent work with labor-
intensive special effects.  But not every effects problem could be
solved with inexpensive labor.  Visually their films were always
very nice, but their special effects were not always very
convincing.  As time went by their visual effects got better.  This
film really represents a big jump in the quality of their effects.
There are many very nice images.  And what attracts people to a
Godzilla film has got to be the visuals.  It certainly is not the
writing.  Toho films can usually be counted on for nicely composed
scenes with good use of color.  Where possible in the new film
Godzilla is shown from a low angle to accentuate the height.  A low
angle camera was used in the first film and then abandoned for most
of the first series.  It was used sparingly in the second series.
Here again the camera creates an illusion of great size by shooting
upward, in fact he looks larger than he ever has before.  Several
new compositions of shots give this film a look that is unique for
the series.  For those who like to just stare in awe of the size the
mega-saurian, this is the film.
     The writing however, is not the best of the series and has some
strange touches.  There are some half-hearted attempts at humor that
seem thrown in as an after-thought.  There is one short sequence of
slapstick comedy, in this case almost literally slapstick, and it
seems like it belonged in another movie.  There are some allusions
to JURASSIC PARK, DR. STRANGELOVE, and perhaps a few other films.
(By the way, the film scene someone is watching on TV when we can
hear only the dialog is Morris Ankrum being interrogated by aliens
in EARTH VS. THE FLYING SAUCERS.  I wonder what film was used in the
Japanese-language version.)  I have never been quite able to make
out if the writing in these films is out of kilter or if it just
works better in Japanese.  But the final scene, like the writing in
several of the situations, just does not work.  It almost seems to
be rooting for Godzilla as he destroys Tokyo.
     The musical score by Takayuki Hattori is a little too polished
and Western for a Godzilla film.  Godzilla films usually have
Japanese military marches and brash brassy music.  Much of that feel
is missing here.  The film is released by Tristar who hopefully have
learned to leave Godzilla films to the experts after their own
attempt to make a Godzilla film ended up with something of a
monstrosity.  (Though rumor has it that their own attempt to make a
Godzilla film failed in large part because of constraints placed on
them by Toho executives.)
     Even for Godzilla fans, this could have been a better film.  It
is only mid-range in the quality of films in the second series.
Still as he approaches fifty years old, it is good to know the big
guy still looks good on the silver screen and in some ways better
than ever before.  I rate this GODZILLA 2000 a 6 on the 0 to 10
scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  It will be interesting
to see if its sequels will get an American theatrical release.
