Title
Review for Whispers in the Dark (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1992. Director/Screenplay - Christopher Crowe, Producers - Martin & 
Michael S. Bregman, Photography - Michael Chapman, Music - Thomas 
Newman, Special Effects - Connie Brink Sr, Makeup - Neal Martz, 
Production Design - John Jay Moore. Production Company - Paramount.
Annabella Sciorra (Dr Ann Hecker), Jamey Sheridan (Douglas McDowell), 
Anthony La Paglia (Detective Larry Morgenstern), Alan Alda (Dr Leo 
Green), John Leguizamo (Johnny C.), Deborah Unger (Eve Abergray), Jill 
Clayburgh (Sarah Green)
Plot: Therapist Ann Hecker meets Douglas McDowell in the elevator of her 
office building and becomes involved with him. But then she discovers he 
may be involved with one of her patients, the volatile Eve Abergray. But 
then after Eve finds them together and swears vengeance, she is found 
murdered in her apartment. As the police investigate, Ann hides behind 
patient confidentiality, uncertain whether Douglas or others around her 
are the murderer.
Christopher Crowe is a director/writer who has kicked around the 
thriller genre for more than a decade now, turning out scripts for films 
like `Nightmares' (1983), `The Last of the Mohicans' (1992) and `Fear' 
(1996) without having made any significant name for himself. Crowe made 
his feature debut with `Saigon' aka `Off Limits' (1988), an interesting 
attempt to combine film noir and the mid-1980s vogue for Vietnam War 
redemption films. But at least on the basis of 'Whispers in the Dark' 
Crowe should have achieved considerably more of a name than he has so 
far. `Whispers' is really quite an impressive thriller - indeed it reads 
like a much better version of the same year's failed psycho-therapy 
thriller `Final Analysis' (which ended up doing all the business while 
the superior 'Whispers' was seen by few). Crowe holds one right from his 
opening which is constructed as a romance. Here the softness of Crowe's 
touch and the deftness of his writing immediately absorbs one in the 
film. Crowe then propels one through a sharply plotted series of rug 
pulling twists - the revelation that patient Unger's fantasy man is the 
same one Sciorra is seeing; detective La Paglia's games with Sciorra as 
to how much he knows all along; and the whole dance of doubt as to 
whether love interest Sheridan is or isn't the killer. Crowe also 
manages to quite believably and without contrivation turn most of the 
principal cast into suspects. The end revelation of the killer's 
identity is a considerable surprise - one where the cast member in 
question plays notably against type. And above all, unlike `Final 
Analysis', Crowe never lets any of the twists occur in contravention of 
logic or plausibility. One wishes Mr Crowe would get the opportunity to 
make more films.

