Title
Review for Plein soleil (1960)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David N. Butterworth
Miramax Zoe pictures in collaboration with film preservationist Martin
Scorsese have chosen to re-release distinguised French director Rene
Clement's 1960 suspenser PLEIN SOLEIL (loosely translated as PURPLE NOON)
at a time when deliberate, carefully-crafted movies are uncommon.
PURPLE NOON does not boast the multi-million dollar budgets of some of this
summer's wide-eyed extravaganzas but it does boast the Tom Cruise of its
day in Alain Delon, almost perfectly handsome with his dark hair, straight
nose, firm chin, and soulful, expressive eyes.
Looks are important here because although PURPLE NOON is a singularly
thrill-less thriller, it is lovely to look at.
Based on Patricia Highsmith's "The Talented Mr. Ripley," the plot of PURPLE
NOON is deceptively simple: Tom covets everything of his playboy friend
Philippe--his money, his yacht, and his girlfriend--that he plans to murder
him and assume his identity.
Tom Ripley (Delon) has been promised $5,000 by a wealthy American, Mr.
Greenleaf, for the safe return of his errant son Philippe (played by
Maurice Ronet), currently savoring the good life in Italy.  Along for the
ride is Philippe's fiancee, Marge (Marie Laforet), for whom Phillipe's
impressive sloop is named.
Although the first part of the film takes place aboard Philippe's sailboat,
the film does not create the sexual tension of similar loony-on-board
psychodramas, such as DEAD CALM or Polanski's KNIFE IN THE WATER.  Instead,
Clement's film builds slowly, intensifying the brooding relationship
between the two men, with Laforet's role reduced to little more than cabin
crew.  Delon and Ronet are an imposing screen pair, and they handle
themselves well in a movie that, although not nail-bitingly suspenseful or
even very clever, is a textbook exercise in subtle malevolence.
But the real star of the film is cinematographer Henry Decae, whose use of
saturated color and monster close-ups make PURPLE NOON a visual treat.
Decae bathes the actors in color: the often shirtless Ronet is positively
bronze, as if he's been glazed by the Mediterranean sun; Delon is lovingly
photographed with the same kind of respect as one might give, say, Ingrid
Bergman; and the pouty, very French Laforet shimmers in her stripey tees
and tricolor deck garb.
In addition to the beautiful people, Decae also captures the complementary
hues of the surrounding topography; the pastel-painted haunts of Rome,
Taormina, and Mongibello, with their red clay roofs, bright shutters, and
ornate marble tiles.  Likewise, the interiors of these dwellings are
asplash with a splendid variety of tints and shades.
And, of course, there's the blue, blue sea.
Rene Clement is often credited with providing inspiration for the French
New Wave and this film confirms that assertion.  Buoyed along by a vibrant
Nino Rota score, stunning photography and solid lead performances, PURPLE
NOON is worth a look any time of day.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PURPLE NOON (PLEIN SOLEIL) (France, 1960) *** Directed by Rene Clement.
Written by  Rene Clement and Paul Gegauff from the novel "The Talented Mr.
Ripley" by Patricia Highsmith. Photography, Henri  Decae. Art design, Paul
Bertrand. Opening credits, Maurice Binder. Choreography, Jean Guelis.
Music, Nino Rota. Produced by Raymond Hakin and Robert Hakim. Cast: Alain
Delon (Tom Ripley),Maurice Ronet(Philippe Greenleaf),Marie Laforet
(Marge),Elvire Popesco(Mme. Popova), Erno Crisa (Inspector Riccordi), Frank
Latimore(O'Brien), Billy Kearns(Freddy),Ave Ninchi(Signora Gianna),Viviane
Chantel( Belgian woman). In French with subtitles.116 min. PG-13.  25 and
33 yrs old
The French title means Full Sun, which admittedly wouldn't sound too good
in English. But at least "Full" has more implications than "Purple" which
baffles me. The reference is to the strong summer sun of Italy, which at
one point burns badly the back of one of the main characters (he recovers
overnight!) and, in general, like a full moon, makes people do unusual and
extreme things.
Essentially this is a two-and--half characters yarn. The two are Tom Ripley
and Philippe (sic) Greenleaf. The half is Marge, Philippe's girlfriend who
has no real personality -- or a last name, for that matter. The script is
faithfully based on "TheTalented Mr.Ripley," a novel by Patricia Highsmith
whose books were also adapted for Hitchcock's "Strangers on a Train"
(1951). Her "Ripley's Game" became the Wim Wenders movie "The American
Friend" (1977) in which Dennis Hopper plays Tom Ripley.(I cannot connect
the two cine-Ripleys with each another).
Tom is played by Alain Delon, then 25 and well on his way to becoming a
heartthrob and a mega-star. That same year(1960), he was Rocco in  "Rocco
and His Brothers," and in 1963, he had the second big part in "The
Leopard." Both films are classics by Luchino Visconti.
Philippe is played by Maurice Ronet, then 33. He was another hearthrob
whose career was shorter than Delon's. He made fewer movies and died in
1983.
The copy now playing in the US is a reissue whose colors are good in some
scenes, a bit faded in others. The photography and the compositions are
excellent, thanks to master cinematographer Henri Decae and no doubt
because director Clement had himself worked behind the camera.
Production values are very good. Nino Rota's music is unlike the splendidly
Italian, familiar scores he wrote for Italian movies (including many
Fellinis) and for all the "Godfather" films. It is interestingly "modern"
and jolting, with small incursions into Italianate passages.
We meet Philippe and Tom in a Rome cafe on the chic Via Veneto. They seem
to be best friends, look beautifully sun-tanned and fit (the actors' age
difference is hardly noticeable), yet there's something about their
relationship that is peculiar. Itmakes the viewer uncomfortable, as in the
way Philippe uses Tom as an errand boy, or the cavalier fashion with which
they speak about women or treat them.There is much to mine here for a
feminist analysis.
Philippe wonders what gift he can give Marge. "A book on  [painter] Fra
Angelico" says Tom. "But she is writing one." "So, all she's got to do is
to copy" retorts Tom, and he is sent to get the book. Both suggestion and
action are entirely in the spirit of the movie.
(In this sequence, when an acquaintance stops by, his barely
glimpsed,silent companion is,I am sure, the uncredited, Austrian-born movie
actress Romy Schneider. She had already been in many pictures, many of them
German-speaking, but did not become an international star and the darling
of the European public until the early 60s).
The men sound and behave like kinky playboys on the loose within a Dolce
Vita society. Philippe is the rich son of a wealthy American who has
offered penniless Tom $5,000 if he can deliver Philippe back to San
Francisco. The "boys" do much joking about this, followed by callousness
--indeed cruelty--as the men buy a white cane off a blind man, play tricks
on an easy-to-conquer lady, then drop her. Menacing, unhealthy undertones
are ever present.
When we meet Marge we also see the angels in the book on Fra Angelico.
Sharp eyes might notice the hint that the two male "friends" are devils who
play cat-and-mouse games with each other.Tom seems to covet Marge,
Philippe knows it. Entering his own bedroom, and finding Tom trying out his
clothes and imitating his voice, he rebukes him nastily. Tom, on the other
hand, bit by bit lets us understand that he would like to take Philippe's
place, girl, bank account and all--even to impersonate him.
The trio go on a trip on Philippe's sailboat "Marge." There, everyone lies
to everyone else. A current of crypto-homosexual tensions may be sensed.
Philippe first mistreatsTom, then, in one of his moods, he throws Marge's
manuscript in the sea. She leaves the boat. End of Part One.
In Part Two many much happens to keep you in merciless suspense. Violence
escalates along with major complications, unexpected developments,
changes,disguises,role-playing and surprises.
At no time do we feel any sympathy for any of the main characters. But then
morality is not our concern, while the thriller side of the film is, in
beautiful, warm Italy, skillfully treated with clinical coldness.
The thriller is strong and good, in part because of the time devoted to
building up the characters. That they remain ciphers to the end is no
defect.
Where the minuses come in is in the absence of leavening humor. The film
shares this characteristic with many Continental thrillers that have not
learned the advantage of using humor, as Alfred Hitchcock did.
Clement, however, chose, matched and directed his two male protagonists
very well. They both have a pretty-boy physique that only semi-masks their
potential for nastiness. (This is a trait of both Ronet and Delon in
several of their other movies). But for American audiences to accept them
as Americans requires more faith than is possible.
One flaw may affect only those viewers who like matters to be logical. The
plot has several improbabilities a well as much vagueness about time and
space, such as several instant, credibility-taxing changes of abodes.Yet
since the tempo is minutely calculated to keep picking up speed until it
reaches breathlessness, much of the audience is kept too busy to spot the
holes in the story.
Director Rene Clement died in March 1996. His obituary in the New York
Times rightly mentions his Oscar-winning, 1952 "Forbidden Games" as the
film that Clement will be mostly remembered for. It is about a little girl
orphaned when the Germans were invading France in World War II and strafing
fleeing civilians on country roads. The French critics would agree but also
call it a tie with "The Battle of the Rails," which dealt in documentary
fashion with the same war and railway workers sabotaging German trains
during the Occupation. The French would rate "Purple Noon" right after
those two.
Other than the above, among Clement's two dozen movies, few had an
unconditionally positive critical reception."Gervaise," "The Damned," "The
Walls of Malapaga" and " Monsieur Ripois" came closest. He also made the
too ambitious and too loose-jointed "Is Paris Burning?" with a huge number
of international stars.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Alain Delon, Marie Laforet, Maurice Ronet, Bill Kearns, Erno Crisa
Director: Rene Clement
Producers: Robert and Raymond Hakim
Screenplay: Rene Clement and Paul Gegauff based on the novel 
      THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY by Patricia Highsmith
Cinematography: Henri Decae
Music: Nino Rota
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Zoe
In French with English subtitles
     It's interesting to note that two of the best films I've seen 
theatrically in 1996 weren't made this year.  In fact, they weren't even 
made this decade.  The first, Martin Scorsese's classic, TAXI DRIVER, is 
celebrating its twentieth anniversary.  The second, Rene Clement's 
PURPLE NOON, is now age thirty-six.  Championed by Scorsese, this re-
release was handled by Miramax Films, which has brought back to the 
screen one of the greatest suspense thrillers ever to be filmed.  
     PURPLE NOON is an autopsy of a near-perfect crime, and a compelling 
look at the man who commits it.  Played by a twenty-something Alain 
Delon, Tom Ripley is, at first glance, an unlikely criminal.  Apparently 
insecure, he spends his time bumming around Italy, trailing after 
playboy Phillippe Greenleaf (Maurice Ronet) and his beautiful fiancee, 
Marge (Marie Laforet).  Tom has been commissioned by Phillippe's father 
to bring the wayward son back home to San Francisco.  The fee for the 
job is $5000, but, once Tom becomes involved in Phillippe's life, its 
seductive leisure entices him away from his original goal -- or so it 
seems.
     This is all really setup, because the meat of the story reveals 
that Tom is, in fact, an amoral killer, willing to do just about 
anything to get what he wants.  And, while there's a prize for each 
crime, it's not the money that interests Tom.  Rather, he enjoys toying 
with his victims and the police by seeing just how far he can go without 
being caught.  His schemes become progressively more complex, involving 
switched identities, forged signatures, and more than one body.  Tom is 
without remorse; the only emotion he displays is satisfaction at the 
success of his latest caper.
     The plot, which is a wonderfully twisty affair filled with 
ingenious turns, is a delight to watch as it unfolds.  On more than one 
occasion, Tom intentionally places himself in a precarious situation, 
and one fascination of PURPLE NOON is figuring out how he's going to 
extricate himself.  Nothing about this movie is pedantic or predictable; 
it's two hours of pure suspense that puts many of the recent so-called 
"thrillers" to shame.  It's a masterful effort by director Clement, and, 
considering the nature of the main character, it's not hard to 
understand why Scorsese would lend his name to the re-release (much as 
he did for BELLE DU JOUR).
     One of PURPLE NOON's most obvious assets is Delon's acting.  Tom is 
fascinating because Delon makes him so.  This isn't a run-of-the-mill 
villain; he's a complex character with a well thought-out reason for 
everything he does.  He may be a psychopath, but there's a quality about 
him that engrosses and seduces us even as his actions cause repulsion.  
And, because the movie centers on Tom, there are times when we find 
ourselves hoping that his schemes will work, if only for the pleasure of 
seeing what he will do next.
     In addition to Delon's fine performance, PURPLE NOON is 
characterized by expert camerawork and crisp direction.  Clement 
understands how to sustain tension without drawing it out too far.  The 
film is exactly the right length, as are each of the individual scenes.  
Cinematographer Henri Decae has composed each of his shots carefully, 
including a masterful series of closeups of Delon's eyes that reveal the 
sinister intelligence behind the apparently-guileless exterior.
     With TWISTERs and INDEPENDENCE DAYs packing theaters and grabbing 
headlines, it's easy to bemoan the current state of cinema.  So far, 
1996 has not been a particularly good year for movies.  For evidence, 
consider that this, the most suspenseful entry of the year (to date), 
first hit screens over three decades ago.  But, regardless of its 
history, PURPLE NOON is currently available, albeit only in selected 
venues (and probably not in those multiplexes where INDEPENDENCE DAY has 
captured four screens).  There's nothing so engrossing as watching a 
truly intelligent thriller, and that makes this film a rare treat.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Christopher Null
     Thirty-six years after its release, PURPLE NOON is back as part of
Martin Scorsese's revival of underseen foreign classics.
     This time out it's Rene Clement's mystery-drama about wealthy jerk
Phillippe, his adoring (but poor) best friend Tom (Alain Delon), and the
redhead (Marge) they both adore (Marie Laforet).  Caught up in the greed
and envy that comes along with wealth like Phillippe's, Tom hatches a plot
to rid the world of Phillippe and take over his life.  Fine, well, the only
suprising thing about this is how quickly he succeeds at the plan (after
about 30 minutes) -- at which point, the movie becomes one of Tom hatching
part 2 of the plan... and the movie starts to get interesting.
     Tom soon finds his plan to be not quite as well-laid as previously
thought, and it becomes trickier and trickier for him to evade discovery.
Carrying on two lives (Phillippe's and his own), is not for the weak-willed.
     While PURPLE NOON lacks the edge-of-your-seat suspense that modern
thrillers have, it still packs a wallop into its spare story.  But more
importantly, the film is such an oddball example of the genre, we find
ourselves wanting Tom to get away with the crime, despite its heinous
nature.  Very odd indeed.
     My main problems with PURPLE NOON are its tedious narrative and lack
of production values.  Its 1960's sensibilities, crummy music, poor film
stock, and aquatic settings make the film look more like a lost episode of
"Hawaii Five-O" than a great thriller.  Also, the sheer number of "false
endings" (at least three), reek of amateurism.  The subtitles could also
use some work.
     Overall, I enjoyed the film, although it tends to drag in places and
lacks the force of something like BELLE DE JOUR, which Scorsese re-released
in 1995.  Delon and Laforet are/were both fine actors, and Clement's
direction is passable.  Then again, considering the state of the medium 36
years ago, I'm sure he was doing an excellent job.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
