Title
Review for God Said 'Ha!' (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
David N. Butterworth
Were Julia Sweeney not such a gifted comedienne, listening to her 
uncompromising account of her brother Michael's struggle with lymphatic 
cancer would be unbearable.
Over the course of some nine stressful months, Sweeney attended to her 
ailing sibling in her small Los Angeles bungalow along with her 
distraught parents, who shared the same cramped living space for the 
duration of their son's losing battle with the disease.
Shortly before her brother's death, Sweeney herself was diagnosed with 
a rare form of cervical cancer that, among other things, required the 
"Saturday Night Live" alumnus to undergo a hysterectomy.
This poignant chapter in Sweeney's life forms the basis of "God Said, 
'Ha!'," a one-woman monologue originally devised as a stage show by the 
woman best known to "Saturday Night Live" fans as the androgynous Pat.  
First a theatrical production, then a book, then a CD, "God Said, 'Ha!'" 
finally arrives in its latest and, as promised by its creator, final 
form, a major motion picture.
"Major" might be a bit of a stretch, since this 87-minute version is, 
at least cinematically, a fairly static and uninspired filming of 
Sweeney's two-hour, one-woman show--imagine what someone like Jonathan 
Demme could have done with this material.  But it's the version that 
writer/director Sweeney considers to be the best, and it's certainly the 
version that gives us the best seats in the house to the whole 
heart-wrenching experience.
The set is simple and non-threatening: a sofa and matching armchair, 
separated by a small table, form a comfortable, L-shaped haven.  Sweeney 
is dressed conservatively in a dark brown suit.  She stands for the most 
part, choosing to sit on occasion.  Sometimes she stands to the left, 
backed by a plush velvet curtain.  Sometimes the lighting paints the 
backdrop behind the couch a variety of mood-enhancing hues--yellow, 
blue, orange.
The simplicity of the setting, coupled with Sweeney's restrained 
physical delivery, focuses our attentions on her words, on the story she 
has chosen to tell.
With humor that ranges from sublime to ridiculous, Sweeney parodies her 
eccentric mother (complete with voices) and her National Public 
Radio-obsessed father.  Yet in the film's most moving moment, she offers 
up her genuine belief that family, no matter how bizarre, will do just 
about anything for those they love.
Early in the film I felt a little seasick from the constantly moving 
camera and wished, just for a moment, it would let up.  Some close-ups 
are out of focus, and Sweeney elects, on more than one occasion, to 
allow the camera crew into the frame.  Also, she has difficulty making 
transitions from each punchline to the next story thread, but the more I 
got into the piece, the less distracting these minor deficiencies 
became.
"God Said, 'Ha!'" is an uplifting record of a courageous woman who used 
the gift of laughter to transcend an incredibly difficult time in her 
life.  With this film, Julia Sweeney appears to have stared God himself 
in the face and said, with nothing less than triumph in her voice, "Ha 
yourself!"
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Mac VerStandig
Sharp, witty and charming, God Said Ha! is a pleasure to watch. The film 
strikes a particularly refreshing cord with its down-to-earth, realistic 
subject matter: A woman who finds herself in the prime of her life, then 
encounters a change so awful, so upsetting, and so unfair; that she discovers 
humor beneath all the misery that surrounds her.  
Julia Sweeney is 30-something years old, recently divorced, and ready to 
leave New York City. She saves up some cash, buys herself the ultimate 
bachelor-pad outside of Los Angeles, and prepares for the first day of the 
rest of her life. Just when she thinks that nothing could get in her way, 
everything does.
Julia's brother becomes ill with cancer and soon requires constant attention. 
Not only does he move in with her, but both her parents do as well. She finds 
herself sneaking around like a teenager, returning to the ways of her 
childhood. (Like having to say "Noodles with the red topping" since "Pasta 
with marinara sauce" is too formal.)
The film is based on a play written by Sweeney, which had a successful run on 
the west coast. She is the only person on stage, except for a brief 
appearance by Quentin Tarantino at the end. There is no real set other than a 
few scattered pieces of furniture. 
It would be a misconception to assume that since Sweeney is a Saturday Night 
Live alumni, and did appear in two rather unfortunate SNL films (It's Pat and 
Stuart Saves his Family), that this movie is of a like  nature. She seems to 
have fully shed all the mediocre aspects of Lorne Michael's films, and found 
her own style. Not only do all the jokes work well, but the cheesy and often 
embarrassing aspects of  the aforementioned titles are absent. 
God Said Ha! is a wonderful movie. Whether it be the jokes about disappearing 
ovaries, or the touching stories of a terminally ill man; this film is well 
worth a look.          

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: This is a one-woman show.  Julia Sweeney (who played the
androgynous Pat on Saturday Night Live) relives the humor and horror of
having her brother and parents move in with her just before her brother
was diagnosed with lymph cancer.  Not all of the humor works and some
of the telling style seems a little artificial.  But most seems sincere
and is frequently moving.  Rating: 6 (0 to 10), 1 (-4 to +4)
   - Sweeney got a divorce and a house by herself when her brother was
     diagnosed to be in the last phase of lymph cancer.  He moves in
     with her and so do her parents.  This would have been a trying
     time in anybody's life.  Her humor concerns jokes made about her
     parents, her brother, her attempts to date, and generally how her
     life was going.  Some moments are very funny, some touching, some
     not quite on the mark.
   - Performance in the style of Spaulding Gray's SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA
     and MONSTER IN A BOX.
   - The show seems sort of artificial in some ways.  After a
     particularly trying moment the lights change and she turns her
     back to the audience and gets a glass of water.  It is as if the
     emotion has all been orchestrated.  Of course this is really a
     performance of a stage play that she had enacted hundreds of times
     before this version was filmed.  It has to have a different
     emotional impact once it has been performed on the stage for
     years.  Still parts do still pack a wallop.
   - One wonders how much the stories have been embellished.
   - Balancing her love life and her parents living in while taking
     care of her brother.
   - Certainly some of the hardest moments she will face in her life.
   - Sweeney does have a nice self-assured style.

Author
Ross Anthony
The picture opens with Julia Sweeny (of Saturday Night Live fame) in a set
designed to look like her living room. She moves from couch to window,
beginning a monologue that I thought would serve well as a pleasant
introduction to the film. I was mistaken, the monologue is the film. But,
don't take that negatively. Julia conducts a fine one woman show.
Julia satires the comic and tragic stories of her family. Focusing mostly on
their struggle with a family member's fight against cancer; the Sweeny group
comically attempts to tolerate living under the same roof during this
"temporary" trying time. Sweeny's directness about the topic is likely to
knot up your esophagus -- so bring plenty of lozenges and tissues. Such
seriousness accentuates her ironic sense of humor, bringing chuckles through
your tears with lines like, "How do you hide a hysterectomy?" along with
tangenting silliness, "My sister lives in Japan with Yamamoto, her sweet
potato farmer boyfriend that we've affectionately nicknamed 'Yam'."
Technical knitpickings: the camera never leaves the stage, though it seldom
stops dollying around its subject. At times that's nauseating. Then, at dire
revelations, the camera not only stops, but cuts to a close-up. I'm sure the
intention was to emphasize Julia's sobering news, but it ends up clubbing
you over the head instead of letting the news resonate on it's own. Lastly,
aside from the warm sofa, the costume and set appeared to be lacking any
coordination (a serious oversight for a film that never leaves it's subject
or room.)
Though still worthwhile on film, I suspect "God Said Ha!" must have been
more powerful live on stage (its roots). Moreover, you will likely find this
picture as therapeutic as a support group, should you or a family member be
stricken with a cancer. Ontological professionals might consider purchasing
a copy of the tape as a useful reference piece for their clients.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Although it is a bit easier in a stage play than a movie, few people can
single-handedly carry an almost hour and a half production with a single
unbroken monologue.  The brilliant orator Spalding Gray can do it, as he
did in SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA and other movies.  His rapid-fire delivery
and his fascinating material mesmerizes his audiences even if his
overabundant exhilaration can exhaust them.
GOD SAID 'HA!,' written and directed by and starring Julia Sweeney, is a
one person play that was filmed in front of a live audience and is being
released to movie theaters.  The live audience supplies the equivalent
of an annoying television laugh track.  As Julie talks non-stop, the
studio audience guffaws at her every phrase.  You begin to feel guilty
for not laughing on cue, and you find yourself subconsciously looking
around the movie theater for one of those obnoxious, neon "Laugh!" signs
found in some old television studios.
Julia Sweeney, while a completely likeable and utterly confident
actress, is no Spalding Gray.  Her delivery and her script can hold a
viewer's attention only for the length of an extended television comedy
sketch (she's a veteran of the "Saturday Night Live" TV show).  A little
of her routine goes a long way.
Julie tells an apparently true story about the time after her happy
divorce when her dying brother and her parents came to live with her.
With minimal stage props and with two relatively fixed camera angles,
she looks the camera in the eye and tells her story through a series of
vignettes.  Wandering slowly around the stage, she speaks in one of two
monotonic voices, her own and one mimicking her parents.
Her only slightly quirky brand of humor does produce several smiles
albeit few laughs.  She tells, for example, about the time that she
wanted to be rebellious while her parents were staying with her.  She
decided to smoke a cigarette and get the latest book by the Pope, with
whom she always disagrees.  Another time she talks about the
50,000-piece puzzle of Sarajevo that her father got for a 50-cent
donation to PBS and how it had taken over her dining room table.
Her best pieces concern sex.  She tells a sweet and funny little tale
about a boyfriend coming to visit.  Feeling like a Catholic schoolgirl
again, she played footsie with him under the table and generally hid her
sexual escapades with him from her parents.  She had forgotten how
exciting forbidden sex can be.
Trying to move a play to the screen without making any changes is almost
always a bad idea.  The mediums are different and require different
approaches.  Although there are the exceptional performers like Spalding
Gray who can pull this off, it is a feat better not attempted.  Julia
Sweeney gives it her best shot but only sporadically succeeds.
GOD SAID 'HA!' runs 1:26.  It is rated PG-13 for mature themes and some
drug references and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
