Title
Review for Lorenzo's Oil (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
Some films are excellent from the start, and it is a matter of trying to see
if it can hold up to the tremendous task of copying the human spirit in all
its glory.  Despite the reviews, which claimed a very poor accent by Nick
Nolte's character, this film is really as strong and beautiful example of
what the art form can really do, but often does not
because too many producers are in it for the money, too much so, rather than
celebrate the beauty of the human spirit, in its many forms.
A young man, is found to have a debilitating disease ( ALD/MYELEN ) of the
brain, which eventually eats up the young person's body, one inch  at a
time. And at the time it was inconceivable that anyone would really want to
do anything about it, specially the medical establishment.  The Agostos, do
not take that lightly, and try anything, with a few hints and help from a
doctor who happens to be a bit of a skeptic of his own
colleagues, and the parents battle does not end, until there is something
which seems to work, to stop the terrible disease from continue on its
destructive path.  And after fighting the medical establishment, including a
few nurses who don't give a damn, and do not think the young man will ever
make it, they finally find, amidst many studies, and papers, and information
a few things which might help the child.  And they proceed to try these
things, until something works.  The first one being the most critical, the
build up of fatty acids, which destroys many nerve cells.
Eventually they find someone who will co-operate, and a stodgy old foggie
who is patient enough to get the necessary syrup, which they believe will
help.  And an Italian company decides it is worth  sending it around.  After
this effort, the parents have now to gain over the association which only
believes in the pain and the suffering ( I have seen the ADA do the same for
their menders ) in order to get more attention by the medical establishment,
who up until now have not been too helpful, with the exception of the good
Greek doctor, who is afraid to commit to a therapy, but does give
suggestions as to how it should be applied, and eventually defends the
family who has done such incredible research, and accomplished what many
medical teams could not.
The Agostos, have managed to get their closest friends, the wife's sister
 calls herself a test rat ) and a neighbour whose son is also just acquired
the disease, a genetic disorder carried by the mother.
At the meeting of the sad feelings society, one of the mothers starts the
revolution which the Agostos need, which is their involvement in publicizing
the success of the radical medicines, with ample proof that it is working.
The young man Lorenzo is still alive today, and the nerve cells are
rebuilding very slowly.
George Miller has written this film, in a style that is similar to at least
one of his efforts, THE ROAD WARRIOR.  The film oversees several years in
the process, and the chapter format seems to work very well here.  In bits
and pieces that together bring the film to a triumphant conclusion, though
the battle is not won as yet, but could at any time.
Susan Sarandon, as the wife is superb, and worthy of her nomination for an
Oscar.  While Nick Nolte is also very good, his style is  very nice, though
at times a bit difficult to understand, but then, so are many foreigners,
and so what?.
Beautifully directed, and lovingly treated, this film is a must see for many
viewers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Susan Sarandon, Peter Ustinov,
           Zack O'Malley Greenburg
Director:  George Miller
Producer:  Doug Mitchell and George Miller
Screenplay:  George Miller and Nick Enright
Music:  Supervised by Christine Woodruff
Released by Universal
     LORENZO'S OIL is based on the true story of Augusto Odone (Nick
Nolte) and his wife Michaela (Susan Sarandon) as they fight to save the
life and sanity of their son Lorenzo (Zack O'Malley Greenburg).
Lorenzo, diagnosed in early 1984 as a victim of ALD, an incurable
degeneration of the brain, is beyond the help of conventional medicine.
His parents, unwilling to give up the struggle even after participating
in several failed therapies, begin their own investigation of the
disease.  LORENZO'S OIL follows the triumphs and tragedies of this
search.
     The film is unique in that it avoids the most obvious trap--that
of becoming a melodramatic, tear-jerking soap opera.  Instead of
focusing primarily on a family being torn apart by guilt and pain,
LORENZO'S OIL follows Augusto and Michaela's attempts to understand
their son's disease and discover a method of treatment.
     The search is fascinating, a unique odyssey of discovery.  Even
though it delves into medical terminology that few laymen will grasp,
simple metaphors, such as those of a kitchen sink and a chain of paper
clips, are used to explain clearly and concisely the causes and effects
of ALD.  Comprehension is necessary to the success of the film, and
LORENZO'S OIL overcomes with little difficulty what might seem a
troublesome barrier.
     The script is written for the thinking movie-goer.  Someone who
sits back and passively absorbs what is shown on the screen is likely to
become bored.  However, for the viewer willing to invest energy in
understanding what LORENZO'S OIL has to offer, a captivating experience
awaits.  We are drawn into the search and its revelations.
     LORENZO'S OIL is at its weakest when it steers away from the
investigation to present "character moments."  Most of these scenes are
of the hit-and-miss variety, some working while others fail to convince.
The only example of overacting in the film comes in one of these moments
when Nolte's Augusto slides down a flight of stairs, howling in agony.
His pain is telegraphed with all the subtlety of a jackhammer.
Fortunately, the overall success of the film is only peripherally
affected by these instances.
     The characters of Augusto and Michaela are developed successfully
through the search scenes.  Lorenzo is less of a person than a plot
element (we know little more about him than that he is a good-natured
boy who has come down with a rare, debilitating disease), and most of
the other men and women populating the film are as well-rounded as the
story demands.  The actors are competent in their roles.  Sarandon and
Nolte have both given more emotive, effective performances in the past,
and Nolte's ridiculous Italian accent is hard to get used to (perhaps a
little cinematic license should have been used to eliminate it).  Only
Zack O'Malley Greenburg stands out.  Equal credit must be shared between
him and director George Miller for creating such a heartfelt and
believable performance.  For an adult, acting of this caliber would be
noteworthy; for a child, it is astounding.
     Much of LORENZO'S OIL is based on true events, but there are at
least a few moments when Hollywood intrudes, creating occasional leaps
of exultation that are contrived (such as what happens when the results
of Lorenzo's Oil are revealed to a group of ALD parents).  Fortunately,
the director/writer team of George Miller and Nick Enright have curbed
excesses in this area.
     Pacing is uneven, due mainly to the mix of the "character moments"
with the overall story.  The film is a little longer than it needs to
be, but not greatly to the movie's detriment.  LORENZO'S OIL is a
well-crafted motion picture.  It is not a tear-jerker, preferring to
stir emotion through its characters and the realization of their
situation rather than through audience manipulation.  Above all,
however, it is a film about the victory of hope through perseverance--
and one that brings its viewers along to observe each battle.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  How did two parents with no medical
     background find a cure for the previously terminal disease
     that afflicted their son?  You actually will understand, step
     by step in this true story part intellectual puzzle, part
     political statement about the medical community, part story
     of a family medical tragedy.  We need more films like this.
     Rating: +3 (-4 to +4).
     A friend heard I was going to see LORENZO'S OIL and said we should be
sure to take handkerchiefs.  He had seen one LORENZO'S OIL.  My wife saw the
film as a political tract against the medical establishment.  She saw a
different LORENZO'S OIL.  The film I saw was neither of those two movies.  I
saw a film that was the logical successor to THE STORY OF LOUIS PASTEUR and
particularly DR. EHRLICH'S MAGIC BULLET.  It is the story of people who
start with a scientific puzzle that is also a tragic problem.  And step by
step, with the tragedy eating at them, they solve the problem.  And though
it is about a complex medical problem, the solution process is always
comprehensible, so much so that at one point I found myself whispering to my
wife the solution to a piece of the puzzle that the characters had not yet
figured out.  Here I am learning about a disease I'd never heard of when I
saw down and I wanted to shout a medical hypothesis at the screen.  (I was
right, too, except what I called a "constructor" they called an "enzyme.")
Anyway, that is the film I saw and I had a great time!
     This is a true story as enthralling as any from Paul de Kruif's MICROBE
HUNTERS or Berton Roueche's accounts of medical detective work.  Augusto
Odone (played by Nick Nolte) and his wife Michaela (played by Susan
Sarandon) are perplexed when their five-year-old son Lorenzo (played by Zack
O'Malley Greenburg) starts throwing fits of anger and losing his
coordination.  Eventually the boy is diagnosed as having an invariably fatal
disease, adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD).  Because the disease is so rare, the
medical community had funding for only limited research.  Less effort seemed
to be expended in research than in helping parents cope with the medical
crisis.  So Augusto and Michaela, neither with a medical background, set out
to do their own research and, remarkably, found their own cure.  (Not really
a unique story, however.  When the nuclear physicist Leo Szilard developed a
terminal case of bladder cancer, he turned his attention from physics to
medicine and discovered his own cure.  This was a case of "physicist, heal
thyself."  Of course, Odone was not even a scientist.  He was a banker.)
     Susan Sarandon does a very good job of conveying the anxiety of a
mother trying desperately to save her child and coping with a senseless
guilt because genetically ALD is passed by the mother.  Nick Nolte has
problems with the Italian accent, but otherwise is quite good.  Peter
Ustinov is, as always, a pleasure to watch, in a role not quite fair to the
medical community.  George Miller, best know for the "Mad Max" films,
directed and co-wrote the screenplay.  As a physician himself, he can
explain the medical aspects in nice, clear, simple terms.  His direction is,
however, a bit heavy on religious imagery and in gratuitous overhead shots.
     This is a film written for an intelligent audience, and intelligent
audiences should find it very rewarding.  My rating is +3 on the -4 to +4
scale.
