Title
Review for Tacones lejanos (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
The Spanish have a knack for the surrealistic, and really weird sometimes.
The story is about a fading 'star' actress that retreats at midlife to
Mexico ( very common ) in order to keep her career going.  And her daughter
stays behind.  Several years later, she returns to Spain, and gets all kinds
of attention ( publicity ) by the press.
The daughter married her former lover and producer.  And the mother
rekindles her affair with him as well.  And the whole thing gets tangled up
so badly that one wonders what is going to happen next.
Amidst all this, there is a cross dresser who does the night club circuit by
singing several songs by the famous actress.  And this person has a very
special mark, by which he is known.
There are many traces of Luis Bunuel in this film.  The story appears to be
a real mess until it cleverly gets tied up.  And even several characters are
hanging in thin air, because they don't know what is going on.  And of
course the DEUX EX MACHINA works very well, and cleans up the whole
thing.......ohh well.
It's a funny film at various moments, and it is at times really poor,
reminding me of some really bad soap operas found on the Mexican stations.
This film by Pedro Aldomovar is a good film and it has its bits of fun.  And
it is kind of fun not knowing what is going to happen.
It's worth seeing when you are curious about something else which you have
not seen.   The Spanish surrealism, and political in jokes may leave you
cold, but they are funny.  Typical Spanish offering.  You can't make out
weather it is serious or just fun.

Author
Frank Maloney
     HIGH HEELS is a film by Pedro Almodovar.  The film stars Victoria
Abril, Marisa Paredes, Ana Lizaran, Miguel Bose, and Feodor Atkine.  In
Spanish with English subtitles.  Rated R for brief nudity, profanity,
and "adult themes."
     HIGH HEELS is minor effort by a major director, another of his
satirical melodramas, but without his usual compelling coherence.  The
initial promise is of something off-beat, complex, psychological rich,
stylish and stylized.  Alas, Almodovar failed quite to live up to this
promise.  The end result is a vague, cluttered whodunit, with too many
side stories and characters that are mostly beside the point.
     The point is, after all, the relationship between the legendary pop
diva Becky Del Paramo (Marisa Paredes) and her grown daughter Rebecca
(Victoria Abril, last seen in TIE ME UP, TIE ME DOWN), a TV news anchor.
Becky hasn't seen Rebecca for 15 years when she returns to Madrid to
mount a new show.  The two women share more than a blood relationship --
they are destructively competitive of each.  In symbol of their
belligerent and similarity, Becky wears Armani and Rebecca Chanel.
     The two principal women are excellent actors and their characters
are presented in some depth and sympathy.  Unfortunately, Almodovar
chooses to more often tell us who they are, rather than show us.
Ultimately, the women in WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN are
more complete, more sympathetic, and a whole lot funnier.  Instead,
although HIGH HEELS has its moments and its lines of dark and ingenious
wit, it wants to be tearjerker, but fails to earn the right.  As for the
major male characters, one is a oversexed, another is sexy, but mostly
they are the usual drones in the Almodovar hive.
     As a piece of design, HIGH HEELS comes up to the usual high
standard of Almodovar films.  Likewise, the photography is tropically
color-saturated, with sensitive use of natural light.
     In general, I would not recommend HIGH HEELS as an introduction to
Almodovar.  See either (or both of the other films mentioned above, or
LAW OF DESIRE, if you want to know what the excitement is about.  If you
already know and dote on Almodovar, as I do, then you will want to see
HIGH HEELS, despite its limitations.  In that case, I suggest you seek
out a cheap matinee.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HIGH HEELS (TACONES LEJANOS, Spain, 1991) *** 1/2 Cast:
Victoria Abril, Marisa Paredes, Miguel Bose', Feodor Atkine,
Bibi Andersen, Rocio Munoz. Directed and written by Pedro
Almodovar. Produced by Augustin Almodovar. Photography,
Alfredo Mayo. Editing, Pepe Salcedo. Music, Ryuichi Sakamoto.
Spanish with subtitles. A Miramax release. 112 minutes. Rated
R. (Adult situations). Art Theater.
Enfant means "child" in French. Why then do we still call
enfant terrible certain revolutionary or shocking artists when
they're no longer young? Think of Salvador Dali, Pablo Picasso
and Jean Cocteau, or closer to our time, England's Ken Russell
(b. 1927). Is it because those people's work, lifestyles and
self-promotion had an eduring youthfulness? Whatever the
reasons, enfant terrible sounds right with some names though
not with others. I suppose the criteria are like those of the
judge who could not define pornography but knew it when he saw
it.
Pedro Almodovar (b. 1951) is the enfant terrible of modern
Spanish cinema with his odd, anarchic, lurid movies, his mix
of melodrama, camp humor,provocation and sexuality. Openly
gay, Almodovar must be the filmmaker of detente, since, with
equal bounciness, he deals with all sexual persuasions.
"High Heels" revolves around the kind of parent-child
relationship that has been such Hollywoodian fodder since
Nickelodeon days. Becky Del Paramo (Paredes)is a self-centered
pop star of stage and screen, married to a lout. Her daughter
from a previous marriage, Rebecca (Abril) feels neglected, but
loves Mama and loathes her stepfather. When the latter
dictatorially orders her to stay in the kitchen (those were
Franco days), the precocious Rebecca, then 12, causes,
undetected, a fatal car accident. But she gains nothing. Her
widowed mother, the career-oriented Becky, takes off on a
world tour and forgets about her child.
After a 15-year absence, aging but still sought-after, the
Lauren Bacall-ish Becky (note the diminutive of the name)
comes home to Madrid, and, incidentally, to the Rosanna
Arquette-ish Rebecca (note the "adult" name).
Now 27, Rebecca is a TV news anchor, ill-married to the
station owner Manuel (Atkine), who used to be her mother's
lover. We're in an an ocean of Freudisms, complexes, conscious
and unconscious revenges.
Rebecca, in an outrageously inventive Almodovarian stroke, has
been seeking a maternal presence of sorts by attending the
shows of her best friend, Femme Lethal (Bose), a female
impersonator of Becky in her prime.
What follows is too complicated to detail and too juicy to
reveal. Almodovar's imagination, febrile and fertile -- to the
point of gaminess sometimes -- is for sure as wild and woolly
as David Lynch's ( "Blue Velvet" , "Wild at Heart").It is in
the general tradition of the German melodramas of Rainer
Werner Fassbinder--but with Spanish zip instead of Teutonic
dourness--and along the lines of movies made by Fassbinder's
model, Hollywood master soapsmith Douglas Sirk--but without
Sirk's slickness.
Almodovar takes additional nutrients from the overflow of
Hollywood lore, on-screen and off, like the murder of Lana
Turner's lover, Johnny Stompanato by Turner's own daughter. He
adds to those a postmodernistic irreverence, not without
resemblance to Robert Altman's "The Player" or the films by
the Coen Brothers.
Sex permeates the movie. There is, early on, a memorable,
unexpected, funny, and acrobatically erotic scene between
Rebecca and Femme Lethal. It comes right after a scene of
parody twice removed, in which a trio of Lethal's devotees
mime right along his/her own imitation of Becky.Shades of "The
Rocky Horror Picture Show" !
Then the movie becomes a tongue-in-cheek thriller, a
serio-comic film noir, but with garish, poster-like colors
instead of the genre's dark moods and photography. It contains
odd encounters and red herrings. It features kooky supporting
characters, like an exceptionally nice judge and his bedridden
(though healthy) mother who collects scrapbooks of
(significantly) Brigitte Bardot, Mother Teresa, and Becky Del
Paramo. Or like a statuesque prisoner who leads a lesbian
ballet a la "West Side Story" in the courtyard of a women's
prison. There are also references, both throw-away and eager,
to Igmar Bergman's mother-daughter movie "Autumn Sonata."
As it proceeds, the plot becomes a dedalus of twists , with,
often, holes the size of the Prado Museum, but these matter
little given Almodovar's effervescence. Gradually, the earlier
proportions of humor and satire to melodrama are reversed. But
even during this shifting of gears from black humor to
sentiment, the comic aspects never go away. Whenever the
public might identify with the characters and their pathos,
Almodovar throws in preposterously amusing details that
eliminate all possible mawkishness.
Some of those turns are Bunuel-cruel but rather subtle, as
when Becky, delivering on stage a song dedicated to her
daughter, reveals, in her low-cut gown, a back wrinkled by
age. Others bits are surrealistically funny, like the mother,
at film's end, telling her child : " You must find another way
to deal with men." In context, this is a howl within a
naughty, entertaining movie fantasy. 
The English title is not as apt as the Spanish one, "Tacones
Lejanos" ("Distant Heels"), a reference to the yearnings of
Becky as a child when she used to watch, from the basement
window of her janitor parents, the elegant heels of affluence
on the street above.
