Title
Review for American Buffalo (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
     David Mamet is one of the most brilliant of today's playwrights
and screenwriters.  His scripts for the movies include VANYA ON 42ND
STREET, HOFFA, HOMICIDE, THINGS CHANGE, THE UNTOUCHABLES, THE VERDICT,
and THE POSTMAN ALWAYS RINGS TWICE.  There are also several plays of
his for which he wrote the movie scripts including OLEANNA, ABOUT LAST
NIGHT, GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS, and HOUSE OF GAMES.  The last two films are
incredible tours de force and put him at the top of my list for writers
worth looking for.  His scripts are highly intelligent with every line
worth pondering, and his characters engage each other with constant
verbal ripostes.
     One of his classic and early plays, AMERICAN BUFFALO, has not been
made into a movie until now.  Producer Gregory Mosher got playwright
and one time director Michael Corrente (FEDERAL HILL) to direct
AMERICAN BUFFALO.  They wanted Dustin Hoffman to play the lead in this
three man play, but at first he turned them down.  As Hoffman tells the
story in the press kit, "Michael told me he felt there were three great
male roles in the American Theater: Stanley in 'A Streetcar Named
Desire;' Willy Loman in 'Death of a Salesman;' and Teach in AMERICAN
BUFFALO. ...  I recalled that twenty years ago I heard from another
crazy Italian filmmaker about a cab driver in New York, and I didn't
pay much attention to it."  He finally took the role of Teach, the
small time gambler, crook, and general lowlife.
     As Hoffman's costar, they got Dennis Franz from the TV series
"NYPD Blues" to play the junk store owner and fellow crook Donny.  In
the only other role in the film they cast Sean Nelson (FRESH) as the
wannabe burglar Bobby.
     Most of Mamet's plays that are made into movies do not feel like
plays, but AMERICAN BUFFALO has all of the claustrophobia of a play.
All of the action takes place in or just outside Donny's junk shop cum
antique store.
     Teach tells us that, "If I had kept everything my old man threw
out, I'd be a wealthy man today."  Well, Donny's store seems to be
where all the stuff from our childhood went, but he isn't making much
money so he spends his waking hours gambling with Teach and his other
friends and trying to figure out ways to rise cash through petty
thievery.
     As Donny relates to Teach, a man came into his shop and paid $90
for a Buffalo nickel that Donny thought was worthless.  Eventually,
Donny becomes convinced that this guy is a big time coin dealer who
must have a fortune in coins in his house.  Donny decides to pin his
hopes on his young and inexperienced protege Bobby as the person to
break in and steal the loot.
     Teach is aghast at this decision since he wants to be cut in on
the action.  Outraged, he argues with Donny, "All I'm saying is don't
confuse business with pleasure."  He goes on to say that, "Loyalty is
fine, but this is business."
     Most of the show has the two would be rich con men arguing about
how the crime will be pulled off.  Typical of these is the discussion
about where the theoretical coins are hidden.  Most of their logic is
full of wild and changing suppositions, but they squabble with great
ferocity.
     Teach is the cynical philosopher of play.  As their plans and
friendship begins to disintegrate in front of their eyes, he muses
that, "The world is lies.  There is no friendship."  He says, "We live
like the cavemen."  In one of his summations toward the end, he
declares, "I go out there everyday.  There is nothing out there."
     All of the people give fine performances.  Hoffman says of his
character that, "On the surface, Teach is an ineffective, petty
criminal, but what is intriguing is the unexpected vulnerability and
complexity he reveals."  Here is where I begin to have problems with
the film and where I find it one of my least favorite, albeit still
excellent, works of Mamet's.
     The Teach character as written by Mamet and played by Hoffman is
certainly intense, but not especially complex.  In fact, the main
failing of the film is that too often it becomes tedious and little
more than a mechanism for delivering some admittedly fine lines.
     Whereas all of Mamet's other work are highly involving, this one
is too distant and self-indulgent.  I do think it is an excellent
movie, but for someone who has delivered so much better, I left the
screening feeling disappointed.  I had expected more.
     AMERICAN BUFFALO runs just 1:28.  It is rated R for frequent bad
language.  The language was natural for the characters and never used
to shock so I had no problem with it.  The film should be fine for any
teenager.  Flaws and all, the film is excellent, and I recommend it and
give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     "The dialogue."  "Yeah?"  "The dialogue."  "What about the dialogue?"
"Nothing, I'm just talking."  "I know you're talking, but what the ****
are you saying?"
     Just this:  because it is so easy to get caught up in David Mamet's
distinctive brand of rat-a-tat, profanity-laden dialogue, it is even
easier not to notice that he may be one of America's most deeply humanist
playwrights.  OLEANNA, for all its incendiary subject matter, had its
foundations in a frustration over societal impediments to communication;
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS showed the business world hammering people into the
ground.  The twenty year old AMERICAN BUFFALO was one of Mamet's first
plays, and it retains the ferocity of youth in its film incarnation, a
set-bound but affecting study of trust and the lack thereof.
     Dennis Franz plays Don Dubrow, the owner of a second-hand store and a
man with an axe to grind.  It seems that a customer in his shop bought a
buffalo nickel for a price Don later learned was a steal, and the deal has
left him burning.  With the help of a neighborhood kid named Bobby (Sean
Nelson), Don intends to steal the nickel back from the customer -- along
with other rare coins -- and sell them to another collector.  It is a
simple enough plan, until Walter "Teach" Cole (Dustin Hoffman), one of
Don's poker buddies, learns about it.  Teach is not sure Bobby is up to
the task; in fact, he's not convinced Bobby won't run off with the entire
haul.  Gradually, Teach persuades Don to let him in on the score, setting
in motion a chain of events which will show just how much honor there can
be among thieves.
     It is a challenge to make a play work on the screen, particularly if
the play is as dialogue-heavy as a David Mamet play, and director Michael
Corrente (FEDERAL HILL) seems content to follow the lead of film versions
of OLEANNA and GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS by refusing to "open up" the action.
AMERICAN BUFFALO takes place almost entirely in one location -- Don's
store -- and there are times when the production begins to feel very
cramped and oppressive.  That actually works in favor of Mamet's vision,
however, as this one small shop becomes a microcosm for an urban America
where suspicion has become the defining quality, inhabitants retreating
into locked, gun-protected rooms because someone out there is ready to do
them harm.  It is a bleak tale filmed in bleak tones, but Corrente retains
a necessary urgency.
     He also has two sensational lead actors and one up-and-comer to play
the key roles, and they make AMERICAN BUFFALO even more compelling.
Corrente lured Hoffman into playing Teach by arguing that it was one of
"three great male roles in American theater" (the others being A STREETCAR
NAMED DESIRE's Stanley Kowalski and another role Hoffman has played, Willy
Loman of DEATH OF A SALESMAN), and while that may be arguable, Teach is a
dynamic, pathetic fulcrum for Mamet's story.  He is a small-timer so
convinced that everyone is out to rob him of his small place in the world
that he sees threats, offenses and conspiracies everywhere, and he acts as
a carrier of paranoia, infecting those around him.  Hoffman brings to the
role the dissolute swagger of Ratso Rizzo, and while that makes the
characterization familiar, it doesn't make it any less intriguing.  Dennis
Franz does superb under-stated work as Don, a man trying to believe that
there are some things he can trust,, but the ease with which he is swayed
by Teach betrays how similar the two men are.  There is a slight weak link
in Sean Nelson, who made an electrifying debut in 1994's FRESH but appears
to have grown more self-conscious; he clearly never quite gets a handle on
Mamet-speak.  Still, when the three actors share the climactic final
scene, they refuse to surrender your attention.
     Mamet is very much an acquired taste, and the taste of BUFFALO will
be unappetizing to many.  As a film, AMERICAN BUFFALO is not spectacular,
but it brings a great play to a wider audience, and that alone makes it
noteworthy.  Those who might find it too pessimistic should think of it
instead as a plea for a society where we can trust again, as Mamet's
raging attack on a world where civilization hangs by a thread and where
friendship isn't worth a nickel.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Dustin Hoffman, Dennis Franz, Sean Nelson
Director: Michael Corrente
Producer: Gregory Mosher
Screenplay: David Mamet based on his play
Cinematography: Richard Crudo
Music: Thomas Newman
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     It opens with images of a late-night poker game:  cards, chips, 
sweaty palms, concerned faces, and a woman's fingernails.  Then, as 
night turns to day, the camera moves into the streets of New York, and, 
with the first bit of dialogue, we know we've slipped into the world of 
David Mamet.  No one else writes lines quite like him:  profane, 
staccato, and ending when you think there's more coming. This isn't just 
a Mamet-scripted movie, either.  It's a Mamet-scripted movie based on a 
Mamet play.  Like GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS and OLEANNA, it's clear that 
AMERICAN BUFFALO started life on the stage.
     Mamet doesn't write for the ordinary movie-goer, which is why 
AMERICAN BUFFALO has received such limited distribution, irrespective of 
Dustin Hoffman's presence.  The writer is an acquired taste.  Although 
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS won much critical praise, popular opinion was less 
kind.  And views on OLEANNA were so widely divergent that, when the film 
came out, it was difficult to find two people with exactly the same 
impression.  Whether you like him or hate him, though, Mamet usually 
provokes a strong reaction.
     AMERICAN BUFFALO starts out torturously slowly, with lots of 
cryptic dialogue about not confusing business with pleasure, a "broken 
toaster", and some kind of "job" that a couple of down-on-their-luck 
guys are preparing to pull.  Those men are Don (Dennis Franz), the owner 
of a New York junk shop, and Teach (Dustin Hoffman), a '90s version of 
MIDNIGHT COWBOY's Ratso Rizzo.  The third character in the story is a 
teenage boy named Bobby (Sean Nelson) -- a kid without any apparent 
home, who views Don as a father-figure.  He wants to help in the 
upcoming job, but the two adults are reluctant to get him involved.
     It's an understatement to say that the film improves after the 
unpromising opening.  As we become more comfortable with the erratic 
rhythm of Mamet's dialogue, the plot starts to emerge.  Don and Teach 
are planning to rob some rich guy's coin collection (the title, AMERICAN 
BUFFALO, refers to the pre-Jefferson nickel), but they don't have a plan 
or a clear sense of what they're doing.  Fundamentally, they're both 
losers.  Teach, a take-things-as-they-come person, wants to get down to 
the action.  Don, a more careful man, wants everything planned out in 
advance.  This conflict leads to a fascinating scene where the two men, 
sitting in the back of Teach's car, discuss the psychology of home safes 
-- why people have them, what combinations they use for the locks, and 
where they hide the piece of paper they write the combination on.
     Like a well-written musical composition, AMERICAN BUFFALO builds to 
a crescendo.  The climax, which features a three-way confrontation 
between Teach, Don, and Bobby, and raises the specter that one or more 
might be double-dealing and committing a betrayal, is explosive.  The 
sense of paranoid claustrophobia makes the tension almost unbearable.  
    Director Michael Corrente, who debuted with the derivative gangster 
film, FEDERAL HILL, does justice to Mamet's script.  He elects not to 
open up the story, but still manages to remind us that the dying city of 
New York lies just beyond the junk shop's doors.  And, after the 
uncertain first third, Corrente builds a grim, edgy mood that never 
abates.  When the rain and thunder start outside, their fury is nothing 
compared to the storm building around the characters.
     Dustin Hoffman plays Teach with caged energy.  He's all mannerisms 
and nervous tics -- the waiting is unbearable; he wants to act.  He's 
the consummate failure who never gives up hoping for that one big score.  
It should come as no surprise that Al Pacino played the part on stage.  
But, by harkening back to MIDNIGHT COWBOY and resurrecting aspects of 
the long-dormant Ratso Rizzo, Hoffman makes this role his own.   It's 
the kind of towering performance that, if it came in a bigger film, 
would start talk of an Oscar nomination.
     Dennis Franz, an Emmy winner for NYPD BLUE, holds his own opposite 
Hoffman.  His Don is the picture of a man wracked by uncertainty.  
Should he do the job or not?  Should he bring in a third man?  Should he 
trust Bobby?  Should he trust Teach?  Does he need the money badly 
enough to put up with all this aggravation?  Meanwhile, Sean Nelson, who 
first appeared in FRESH, brings an enigmatic mixture of hardness and 
innocence to his portrayal of Bobby, keeping us unsure, until the end, 
of the character's motives.  Unfortunately, he doesn't quite have the 
screen presence to stand toe-to-toe with his experienced co-stars.
     In the final analysis, AMERICAN BUFFALO is an intense, but flawed, 
piece of drama.  The ending winds the tension so tautly that everything 
feels ready to snap, but, to reach that point, it's necessary to plod 
through a murky beginning.  Mamet's play may be twenty years old, but 
the themes of loyalty, betrayal, and ruthlessness are as applicable to 
the current social and economic environment as they were in the '70s.   
And that's a compelling reason why, if you don't mind the initial 
discomfort, it's worth staying for the entire film.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dave Cowen
The last two films by David Mamet, GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS and OLEANNA, have both
had titles that seem to have little to do with the plot at hand, but are 
instead obscure or cunning references.  That's why, upon watching AMERICAN 
BUFFALO, I was very surprised to see that most of the movie's plot and events
are given away by the title.  The word buffalo doesn't just have meaning 
as a noun, but also a more obscure meaning as a verb, to loosely describe 
the process of trying to butt one's way into a situation to keep a person from
acheiving their goals or desires.
The three central characters of AMERICAN BUFFALO, Don (Dennis Franz), Teach 
(Dustin Hoffman) and Bobby (Sean Nelson) play havok with each other's lives
in the fashion outlined above.  Don owns an antique shop that seems to have
quite a bit of stock but little that is saleable.  Teach seems down and out,
griping about a relationship and spending his day at Don's.  Bobby is a young
boy who hangs out at Don's shop to make some cash.  The three form allegiances
between each other which change rapidly: Don could be defending the actions 
of Bobby one minute, and then scorning him the other... with Teach switching
from being critical to being supportive of the young boy in the same amount
of time.  The film takes a slice of one day in the life of these three, as a 
plan to steal an American buffalo nickel develops, sours, and does each of 
the three a lot more harm to each of them than good. 
Of the three actors who make up AMERICAN BUFFALO, only Dennis Franz seems 
comfortable with Mamet's fragmented, repetitive dialogue.  Franz plays Don
with conviction, and the viewer is able to understand his motivations when
aligning himself either with or against the Teach and Bobby characters. 
Dustin Hoffman overplays Teach to a ridiculous degree, often giving Mamet's
dialogue a kind of oratory bravado that destroys the rhythm of the text,
and Sean Nelson seems confused not only as to the motivations of the 
character of Bobby, but also as to the rythym of the dialogue.
Despite the surprisingly poor acting, AMERICAN BUFFALO is still of value.
Mamet's plays are fun-house mirrors of real-life confrontations, distorting 
the way we speak and the way we act into hyper, inarticulate overblown 
battles of misunderstanding: the way men struggle to desperately keep control 
of a situation they're in is exaggerated in a Mamet script but ultimately 
based in reality.  The character of Teach speaks with a sense of dogma, as if 
everthing he says is absolutely correct even when the logic is frayed, 
and Bobby comes off as threatening or confusing even when he's acting with
the best of intentions, traits which serve to mean more in a confrontation 
than facts or evidence.  Mamet's stories are the perfect glimpse into 
seemingly petty arguments which develop into life or death struggles -- 
similar to the worst of the arguments that occur in real life -- and the 
consequences of the way that men and women deliberately mislead each other to 
gain control of power, or wealth, or money.  It's a pity that AMERICAN BUFFALO 
wasn't able to explore these issues without a brand of acting which buffalos 
the message of the film as much as the three characters buffalo each other.
-- 
signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david     h t t p : / /w w w . f i s c h e . c o m
(esch@fische.com) ------------------------------------------------------

Author
Steve Rybin
Directed by Michael Corrente.  Starring Dustin Hoffman, Dennis Franz, 
Sean Nelson.  Rated R.
"I'm not here to smother you in theory," says Dustin Hoffman's character 
in "American Buffalo".  Don't believe a word of it.  Teach, played well 
by Hoffman, does nothing but theorize.  Dennis Franz plays Teach's friend,
 an owner of a part-junk, part-antique store who has been scammed out of 
some money in the sale of a rare buffalo nickel.  Don wants the nickel 
back, and maybe something else on the side; a kid named Bobby 
(resourcefully played by Nelson) often hangs around his shop, asking for 
money, and he wants part of the plan too.  Teach wants to cut Bobby out 
of the plan.  In fact, Teach seems to want to run the whole show.  Why?  
Maybe because he has nothing better to do.
"American Buffalo", written by David Mamet (based on his stageplay), is 
well-directed by Michael Corrente, but what's most noticeable is the 
three strong performances in the film.  Hoffman, Franz, and Nelson work 
well together.  The role of Teach was one many actors in Hollywood wanted 
- simply because it provides them with a LOT of dialogue - and colorful 
dialogue at that.  The "F" word is used quite frequently throughout, and 
it's used mostly as a defensive tool for the characters.  Their 
volcabularly is not large.  They use profanity as a crutch.  Technically, 
these people are lowlifes; men who once had dreams, but who must now 
settle for simpler goals.  Overall, this is an interesting character 
study, although it probably plays better on stage than on film.
Visit "Another Shmuck on the Internet Reviewing Movies"
http://pages.prodigy.com/oldman/shmuck.html
