Title
Review for Prisoner of Zenda, The (1937)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Of at least five filmings of the Anthony Hope novel, this 
1937 version is the most famous and -- I'm sure -- the best. Ronald 
Colman (not to be confused with sci-fi schlock director Roger 
Corman), one of those great old-time actors with a distinctive 
Shakespearean voice, plays a dual role as the King of Ruritania 
and traveling Britishman Rudolf Rassendyll, a fisherman with an 
uncanny resemblance to the king.
        Indeed, it is the resemblance that gets him into the king's 
castle for a private party the night before the coronation, when the 
alcoholic king drinks a cup of drugged wine. It's all part of an 
insidious plan by the king's evil brother Michael and his 
henchman Rupert of Hentzau (Douglas Fairbanks, another great 
old-time actor) to gain control of the throne. When the king's aides 
realize this, they call on commoner Rudolph to impersonate the 
king. (Almost sixty years later, a guy named Dave would be in a 
similar situation.)
        So Rudolph attends the coronation and meets Princess 
Flavin (Madeleine Carroll), who may or not be marrying the king. 
He, of course, instantly falls in love with her and she with him, 
noticing how incredibly different he has become (what a difference 
today makes). This causes the usual romantic complications, 
leading Rudolph to ask the immortal question, "Would you love 
me if I weren't king?" before an all-knowing aide whisks him 
away.
        This great old-time drama continues, with Michael and 
Rupert kidnapping the king and Rudolph going in to rescue him. 
Even in the 30's movies had those overblown climax scenes, THE 
PRISONER OF ZENDA's featuring a swordfight, several shootouts 
and even an army on horseback. The movie is almost entirely 
entertaining even today, with only a few romantic melodrama 
scenes with the obligatory string score in the background 
seeming laughable today, probably more laughable than the 
1979 comedy version of THE PRISONER OF ZENDA starring 
David Niven.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
