Title
Review for Eight Days a Week (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Michael Davis.
Cast: Josh Schaeffer, Keri Russell, R.D. Robb, Mark L. Taylor, Johnny Green, 
Catherine Hicks, Gabrielle Boni.
1999 - 93 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Capsule Review, August 23, 1999.
"Eight Days a Week," a barely-released teen comedy made in 1997 and now on 
video everywhere, has one major selling point, and that is Keri Russell, star 
of TV's "Felicity." Without her, the film would probably still be tucked away 
into obscurity, and it's easy to see why. In the far-fetched story of an 
unpopular teenage boy (Josh Schaeffer) who decides to live right outside the 
home of his true love (Keri Russell) all summer until he wins her heart, the 
film is painfully obvious and opts to usually be silly rather than honest. 
Only a few of the more quiet scenes shine through, hinting at a dramatic 
turnaround that could possibly save the movie, but the exploitative, 
thoroughly unsatisfying ending only serves to unmask the absolute shallowness 
of not only the film, but the director, as well.
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Tim Chandler
Rating: [Image][Image][Image][Image]
Directed by: Michael Davis
Written by: Michael Davis
Starring: Joshua Schaefer, Keri Russell, R.D. Robb
Produced by: Martin Cutler, Michael Davis, Gary Preisler
A young man decides to spend an entire summer camped out on the lawn of
the girl with whom he is in love.
    The lengths that people will go for love are well-documented in
film. The most recent example is Life Is Beautiful, the Roberto Benigni
cryfest that won the hearts of millions of people last year. In it,
Benigni goes to outrageous lengths to hide the horrors of the Holocaust
from his young son. In Eight Days A Week, Peter (Schaefer) decides to
show his love for Erica (Russell), the girl across the street, by
spending an entire summer camped out on her lawn (the idea is passed
onto him by his grandfather). As the weeks pass by, Josh reads several
books about sex, watches the neighbours movements, and ponders how best
to stand up to Erica's bully boyfriend Nick.
    This is not a great film. It is painfully obvious to any viewer with
a brain that Josh will win over Erica in the end. He is simply too
perfect and nice of a character not to. It is also obvious that Erica's
wooing won't happen overnight, and that the filmmakers are going to make
Josh and his buddy Matt have a lot of silly conversations about sex,
masturbation and any pop reference they can think of. The script's style
could be called Clerks-lite. Matt is so similar in style, looks and
demeanour that he could easily be the brother of Jay from Clerks; I kept
expecting Jay's partner Silent Bob to show up.
    This film likely would never have made it to the video store were it
not for the current success of its star Keri Russell in her teen angst
TV hit Felicity. Russell really has little to do here except look good
(if slightly anorexic) in a wet T-shirt and hold the occasionally
moonlit chat with Josh about random things such as the best James Bond
actor (Brosnan in my book). Her part, like every other part in the film,
is poorly written and undeveloped. Josh may observe many things from his
grassy vantage point, but he is the same nerdy, chatty guy by the end
that he is in the beginning.
    Writer/director Michael Davis has chosen a very hard film style to
make here: a talky film where the scene never changes. The example that
cones instantly to mind is My Dinner With Andre. The entire film is set
at a table during dinner, essentially one long conversation. The film,
for filmgoers who don't require explosions and ka-booms every second
scene, is an intelligent, witty delight. Eight Days A Week, however, is
a bore. The camera almost never leaves Josh's side as he either sits,
lays down on, or stands on Erica's lawn. Since the dialogue is dull and
unfunny, you get very tired of hearing Josh speak. Frankly, by the time
josh and Erica finally kissed (as you know they eventually do) I was
relieved, since it meant the film was probably over. Only die-hard Keri
Russell fans should attempt to watch this amateur piece of work.
email me at timbit@canada.com
and check out my other reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html
