Title
Review for New Rose Hotel (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
Although I am a big fan of labyrinthian, inconclusive puzzles, I was completely
confounded by Abel Ferrara's barely released bore "New Rose Hotel," a silly,
counterproductive no-brainer that barely makes a lick of sense. A thrilling
start is undone by an artless camouflage over its thin premise. 
Based on a short story by William Gibson ("Necromancer") that was published in
Omni magazine a few years back, the film stars Christopher Walken as Fox and
Willem Dafoe as X, two industrial spies who specialize in industrial espionage.
Their newest target is a millionaire geneticist named Hiroshi whose research
has yielded some outstanding breakthroughs in the field. This new
groundbreaking project, known as AMAAS, has something to do with the defection
of research scientists from one Japanese mega corporation to another, and I am
assuming that Fox and X are trying to prevent this defection from happening. So
they hire a prostitute named Sandii (Asia Argento) to seduce Hiroshi and, in
short, deviate his attention from his work and his family. The only problem is
that X is in love with Sandii, especially when they play act their roles where
X pretends to be Hiroshi. X teaches Sandii how to make love to Hiroshi, and so
on. Naturally, X threatens the whole operation and Fox, for one reason or
another, feels compelled to make Hiroshi's life insufferable, even after the
seduction works. 
In another director's hands, such as Peter Greenaway or David Lynch, this might
have been at least an extraordinarily visual film, showing parallels between
digital video technology and alternate realities where one can't decipher what
is real and what is not (hence, there are numerous grainy video shots of
Hiroshi's activities, though we never actually see the central seduction). But
under the gritty ruling hand of Abel Ferrara, this is dreary filmmaking, often
badly photographed to the point where we can't fathom what is happening on
screen (especially the noirish club scenes). Ferrara is at his best showing the
streets of New York where he deals with soulful, spiritual protagonists
questioning their spiritual existence as in "Bad Lieutenant" (his finest film)
and "The Addiction." Here, he is left languishing with nary a script or a theme
- it is all style with no substance. And to make matters worse, the final
half-hour is a virtual recap of the first forty minutes, thereby reinforcing
the preceding events from Dafoe's recollection. But it tells us...nothing, and
there are simply no revelations or clues. 
To be fair, I enjoyed Walken's performance as always, walking with a cane and
ruminating on his thoughts regarding Hiroshi and his research. I even like his
brief tap dances and flirtations with Sandii. There are also some choice cameos
by Gretchen Mol and Anabella Sciorra. But these minute virtues hardly make for
a suitable recommendation to this endlessly repetitive film. It is a trip to
nowheresville, where nothing of consequence or significance occurs. Do not
visit this hotel.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NEW ROSE HOTEL (director/writer: Abel Ferrara; screenwriter:Christ
Zois/based on the short story by William Gibson; cinematographer: Ken
Kelsch; cast: Willem Dafoe (X), Christopher Walken (Fox), Asia Argento
(Sandi), Yoshitaka Amano (Hiroshi), Annabella Sciorra (Madame Rosa),
John Lurie (Man in bar conversing), Ryuichi Sakamoto (Hiroshi's
Executive), Gretchen Mol (Hiroshi's Wife), 1998)
Decadence rules the day for Abel Ferrara's offbeat soft-porn look at how
the modern world has come up with a new criminal type-the international
corporate raider. The problem with the film, as an original and
diverting story as it is, is that it is also too confusing to follow and
suffers from a sense that it is too "hip" for its own good. But even as
the film failed to add up to being as good as it could have been, it was
still entertaining and visually engaging.
Willem Dafoe as X and a gimpy legged Christopher Walken as Fox, play two
corporate raiders who hatch this fantastic plot to steal a Japanese
geneticist, who is involved with mutating a virus that could cure the
common cold, Hiroshi (Yoshitaka Amano-a designer of video games). He is
married to a German woman (Mol) and has everything in the world that he
could possibly want. But Fox views him as a fish out of water, someone
who doesn't fit in with those corporate scientist-types, someone who is
always on the edge, which means that he has the guts to do the
unexpected, to break down clichés from the past.
The plan, which Fox calls elegant for its simplicity, is to get the
scientist over on their side through one of the two things he has the
hots for: sex. Though he is getting his share of nooky, the corporate
raiders sense that he doesn't show passion about it, he is missing
something in his life which they will provide him. That something is an
Italian prostitute named Sandi (Asia Argento-the daughter of the Italian
cult horror director). She will be given a million dollars for her part
by the two raiders and all she has to do is fall in love with him and
make him fall in love with her so that he leaves his wife and science
position to go with her and start life anew. Needless to say, Sandi has
the body parts to fit the part she is playing.
The film is meant for one to get lost in its kinky sexual encounters, in
its opium dream sequence, in its half-baked aphorisms constantly pouring
out of Fox's secretive mind, and for one to be enamored by a web of
corporate espionage ventures that takes the viewer into sleek offices
and down dark noir passages, across unknown cities, as it makes the most
casual conversation between the parties seem couched in double-meaning-
while in reality, everyone seems to be on video surveillance.
Fox and X, plan to sell Hiroshi to a rival corporation for $100 million
dollars, though Fox, as the leader, continually says he is not in it for
the money- but, "That knowledge is virtue. The unexamined life is not
worth living."
I began to enjoy the film more for its style, which is the only way to
view it. It was shot in such exacting detail, its colorful sets becoming
a feast for the eyes that were ready to experience visions not seen in
other sci-fi films, it also allowed for a certain pleasure to be induced
from overhearing the odd conversations that were inane but fun to listen
to. Fox's haiku is a good example of the meaningful nonsense the film
conveyed, as he recites to X the poem he just wrote:
Intrigue becomes part of the picture, as things work out too well for
the two raiders, as Hiroshi leaves his wife and goes with Sandi to
Marakesh, in a science lab specially built for him. But something
mysterious soon happens and the last 20 minutes of the film repeats what
happened so far, but adding new details and a different way of looking
at it. The murky ending will not be pleasing to most viewers, as they
try to make sense of what is happening.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
