Title
Review for They Live (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     These days you have two kinds of filmmakers.  You have your original
filmmakers who tell new stories and make new films.  Then you have
filmmakers who recombine elements of successful movies.  This kind sprinkles
science fiction ideas into a police action film and gets something like
ALIEN NATION or DEEP SPACE.  One filmmaker you can usually depend on being
mostly original is John Carpenter.  He may add some prefabricated filler but
at least his films are stories you have not seen on film before.  This time
around Carpenter has adapted a comic book version of the popular science
fiction story "Eight O'Clock in the Morning" by Ray Nelson, beefed up its
political message, added a lot of not very imaginative padding, and turned a
fast-paced story into a snail's-paced 93-minute movie.
     The story is that of John Nada (called George Nada in the short story),
who gets a pair of sunglasses that allows him to see what is REALLY going
on.  (In the short story Nada is awakened too far from an hypnotic state.)
And what is going on?  We are all being shepherded by aliens who to most
people pass for human.  All our literature and advertising and television
gives us nothing but subliminal messages like "Buy," "Obey," "Stay asleep,"
"No imagination," "Marry and reproduce," and "No independent thought."  With
the sunglasses the world is black and white but you can see what is really
going on.  (Hmmmm!  Could this be a comment on colorization?)
     The real problem with THEY LIVE is that Carpenter has taken his five-
page story and added little to it but padding.  Most of the padding is
action scenes which undiscerning audiences have come to accept as a
substitute for plot.  If the filmmaker has people shooting each other,
breaking windows, having fist fights, and in general keeping images flicking
on the screen, audiences do not care that the story is stopped stock still
and is not advancing one whit.  This film is packed with very long stretches
of mindless action, including a seemingly endless fist fight.  And
mindlessness in the media is very apropos for the plot of THEY LIVE, though
at one point in the film Carpenter explicitly lists himself and George
Romero as being part of the solution rather than part of the problem.
     In spite of the fact that there was only about thirty minutes worth of
story here, it is a good story and for its sake I would rate this a +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
Sources of "Eight O'Clock in the Morning" by Ray Nelson:
MAGAZINE OF FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION, November, 1963
BEST OF THE MAGAZINE OF FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION #13, ed. by Avram Davidson
THE OTHERS, ed. by Terry Carr
TALES OF TERROR FROM OUTER SPACE, ed. by R. Chetwynd-Hayes
YEAR'S BEST SCIENCE FICTION #9, ed. by Judith Merril

Author
Shane Burridge
At last, a movie for those of us who wanted those X-Ray glasses we saw 
advertised in comics when we were kids.  Forgotten by all but John 
Carpenter devotees, this SF-horror flick is worth checking out.  
Ex-wrestler 'Rowdy' Roddy Piper plays a drifter who hooks up with a 
bunch of shanty-town dwellers.  Inadvertently he becomes aware of an 
alien conspiracy which has been in effect on Earth for years.  Produced 
while Carpenter's career seemed to be in a lull, this is nevertheless 
one of his most enjoyable outings; a snappy-paced romp that stays 
offbeat until its closing frames.  What's probably most appealing about 
THEY LIVE is that it confines its global-conspiracy storyline to a 
radius of a few miles and a timespan of a few days.  Carpenter, taking a 
cue from his own favorite SF films of the 50s, realizes that he doesn't 
need to play it big - further proof that his best work is with 
restricted budgets.  Consequently, the most memorable moments are the 
simplest: Piper taking a slow walk down the block, newly aware that it 
is replete with aliens; Piper and work buddy Keith David stubbornly 
duking it out in an alley; Piper being struck by a woman he has taken 
hostage.  
Film is based on a (very) short story by Ray Nelson but also borrows 
from the Devourers in Fritz Leiber's Lankhmar stories, positing aliens 
not as intergalactic warlords or rapacious monsters, but as the ultimate 
force in asset stripping and insider trading.  In this scenario, Earth 
will be destroyed economically.  The twist is that most of the 
population are unknowingly contributing to its downfall.  Carpenter 
throws in references to various forms of mass inculcation: subliminal 
persuasion, Communism (which the human rebels are branded in order to 
turn the public against them), propaganda, evangelism (the rebels 
broadcast from a church, and one of them is a street preacher), and most 
pointedly, consumerism.  With this in mind, the invaders are credited as 
ghouls in the end titles - those who would feed off the dead.  It points 
the direction of the film's satire: that media-induced conformity has 
left us so drained of individuality/vitality that we have let ourselves 
become ripe for the harvesting (Since Carpenter has already worked with 
aliens, vampires, and ghosts, THEY LIVE could be seen as his 'zombie' 
picture). 
As with all Carpenter's films, this one is great to look at - he prefers 
to take his horror out of the shadows and into the hyper-real with 
sharp, clear photography and sparkling color.  Again, Carpenter 
contributes a businesslike, pulsating score (a touch bluesy this time 
around), and tosses in a minor trademark by having the characters 
watching an old horror movie on television.  Film has some shocks and 
violence but is mostly great fun - it's no coincidence that Carpenter 
counts it among his own favorites.

