Title
Review for Sour Grapes (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures/ Castle Rock Entertainment
 Director:  Larry David
 Writer:  Larry David
 Cast: Steven Weber, Craig Bierko, Karen Sillas, Robyn
Peterman, Matt Keeslar, Viola Harris, Orland Jones
   It's a good thing that film critics have widely different
opinions on what they see. Otherwise you'd have a severe
downsizing in the industry--perhaps one national critic for the
275+ studios films introduced each year--and we wouldn't
want to eliminate the enterprise, would we?  Sometimes,
though, it seems that reviewers see different works altogether. 
Time Out New York magazine critic Andrew Johnston calls
"Sour Grapes" "very very funny," while Roger Ebert of the
Chicago Sun-Times says that it's "a comedy about things that
aren't funny." Whom to trust?
   In this case the Johnston-Ebert schism can be resolved by
splitting the difference.  The movie is neither very very funny
nor humorless.  In a way, it's like "The Odd Couple II" in that
you might find yourself rolling with laughter, then wondering
how you could do that for such cornball material.  Each movie
has something the other lacks, however.  "The Odd Couple II"
has crackerjack actors as the two leads; their gags are timed
perfectly.  But the material is older than they are. "Sour
Grapes" is deficient in pacing--sometimes the performers
seem to stop to wait for a laugh or perhaps even to
contemplate whether what they say really is as ludicrous as
it's supposed to be.  But the material is freshly crass.  "Sour
Grapes" is chock full of sick jokes, making light of heart
attacks, accidental castration, aneurysms, racial pigeonholing,
and especially of political correctness.  The gags come at you
thick and fast, delivered by two guys who are cousins, who
are friends, but whose temperaments are far enough apart to
create the central tension of the story.
   Evan (Steve Weber) is a successful New York brain
surgeon, considered one of the top men in the field.  His
cousin Richie (Craig Bierko) is a designer of sneakers.  Evan
is handsome and dates a WASP girl, Joan (Karen Sillas)
while Richie's flamboyant and goes with a gum-chewing little
bombshell, Millie (Jennifer Leigh Warren).  When the two
couples go to Atlantic City for a weekend of gambling, both
lose heavily until Richie, down to his last quarter, bums
Evan's last two coins to play the 75-cent slot machine.  When
Richie hits the jackpot (three grapes in a row), he wins the
grand price of $436,000.  Offering Evan a $1000 check he is
astounded when Evan counters with a demand for half the
money--"technically two-thirds"--because the winning grapes
came through on Evan's money.  After all, if you invest money
in a stock that skyrockets, you're entitled to the gains, aren't
you?  Though a little time is spent splitting hairs--for example,
were the two quarters a loan or an stake--"Sour Grapes" is
not concerned with matters technical or with proceeding on
unflawed logic.  The movie is a burlesque on the nature of
greed, a favorite topic of writers at least since Ben Jonson
penned the classic tale of acquisitiveness, "Volpone," and
how such cupidity can undo the best of friendships and lead
to a loss of close relationships.
   Some of the humor is on a level of vulgarity that might
make Howard Stern wince.  Because Evan and Richie have
staked out rival claims to the money, both advance through
the movie with anxiety leading to embarrassing
circumstances.  To relax, the double-jointed Richie is more
than ever devoted to his hobby of performing oral sex on
himself.  For his part, Evan performs surgery on an infected
testicle of a TV entertainer, Danny Pepper (Matt Keeslar),
cuts out the wrong one, and leaves the poor man fully
castrated with disastrous effects on his voice and thereby his
successful career.  (This running gag is perhaps the only one
that doesn't work, not so much because it's crude, but
because Keeslar is too outrageous to be believed or
sympathized with and because it is overly extended.)
   Viola Harris does a comic turn as Richie's Jewish mother,
who dotes on this son who takes such good care of her--until,
that is, the overindulged lad decides to have her killed for
reasons which are clear as you watch the movie.  The story
finds use for a Runyonesque group of homeless people, one
who acts in an embarrassing Stepin Fetchit mode, and in yet
another putdown of political correctness hones in on an
elderly couple who hesitate long and hard before telling a
black cop that the criminal being sought is also African-
American.
   We can't fail to mention that Larry David, the writer-director,
is co-creator of the fabulously successful Seinfeld series, a
rich man indeed who left TV to make movies like this one. His
straight-man, Steven Weber, looks strikingly like that TV
series' title character.   "Sour Grapes" may be strictly a strictly
debut accomplishment, though a solid one at that, but wait
until David really hits his stride and knocks out a series of
triumphs in the years to come.  Rated R.  Running Time: 92
minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
David Nusair
Starring Stephen Weber, Craig Bierko
"Sour Grapes", newly released on video, is Larry David's directorial 
debut.  Larry David, for those of you not in the know, is the co-creator 
of Seinfeld and also the man responsible for writing many of the most 
classic episodes of that sitcom, including the infamous "Contest" episode.  
Knowing that, one would expect that "Sour Grapes" would reach new heights 
in hilarity.  Well, this does not exactly happen, but it is one of the 
funnier movies of the year.
The film stars Stephen Weber (from Wings) and Craig Bierko as cousins; 
one is a doctor, the other is a designer of running shoes.  Along with 
their respective girlfriends, they spontaneously decide to head to 
Atlantic City for a night of gambling and quote hotel sex.  Needless 
to say, they both find themselves broke quite quickly.  Just before 
giving up, they decide to spend their last few quarters on the slots.  
At the machines, their luck is equally bad, until one of them hits the 
big jackpot and wins 400 thousand dollars.  There's only one problem.  
He won with two quarters the other lent him.  The rest of the film has 
the two cousins fighting over the money, with often wacky, sitcom-like 
results.
I hope my cynical tone doesn't give you the impression that I disliked 
the film.  Quite the opposite, actually.  While not consistently funny, 
it's never boring.  The films strong suit is it's actors, particularly 
Stephen Weber and Craig Bierko as the fuedin' cousins.  They're so 
gleefully over-the-top, you can't help but laugh at their nutty antics.  
Weber, in particular, was a surprise.  After hitting it big with Wings, 
he didn't really seem to do anything.  "Sour Grapes" essentially returns 
him to his area of expertise, sitcoms.  The movie plays like an overlong 
pilot for a sitcom.  Don't get me wrong, that's not a bad thing.  
Especially when someone as talented as Larry David is involved.
As a person who was quite dismayed when Seinfeld went off the air earlier 
this year, I had quite high expectations for this movie.  Seinfeld has 
been the only sitcom that has ever made me laugh as consistently as it 
did, and most of the funniest episodes were in fact written by David.  
And seeing as though David is credited as the sole writer for Sour 
Grapes, one would expect that the joke to laugh ratio would be quite high.  
While there are several moments I found myself laughing outloud, there are 
too many instances in which the plot gets in the way.  David keeps 
throwing in more and more ludicrious hoops for his characters to jump 
through, and I got a little tired of it after a while.  I would have 
liked it if he could have done what made his show so famous, and made the 
movie mostly about "nothing".  David's strong suit is his dialogue, so 
he should have included more dialogue-driven scenes, and less gimmicky 
plot devices.
Those familiar with David's work on Seinfeld will likely have a good time 
spotting the similarities between the two.  For one thing, David includes 
classical music into a number of scenes, including the very same piece 
that was heard in Seinfeld's "Barber" episode.  Also, a prominent 
character in the film is Beirko's domineering, exaggeratingly Jewish 
mother, which is very similiar to George's mother on Seinfeld.
"Sour Grapes" may not be the funniest movie of the year, that honor goes 
to the vastly underrated "BASEketball", but it's always entertaining, and 
in the end, isn't that really all that matters?

Author
Ben Hoffman
  Without a doubt the most hilarious film in many a year.   And why
not?   Written and directed by one of the funniest, most talented
persons in the business, Larry David, who co-created, wrote, directed
and produced many of the SEINFELD shows, has come up with a farce to
end all farces.   How would you like a belly laugh every 30 seconds?
This film is where you will find that.
  A simple story.  No point in complicating things as the comic moments
all come naturally as well as fast and furiously.    This is one film
you do not want to see end.
  Evan (Steven Weber) is a brain surgeon.   His cousin Richie (Craig
Bierko) is a designer of soles for sneakers.   The two cousins and
their girl friends Joan (Karen Sillas) and Roberta (Robyn Peterman)
take off for a gambling spree in Atlantic City.  As the evening is
about to come to an end with all having lost all but a few coins, the
two men sit at adjoining slot machines.   Down to his last quarter,
Richie asks Evan to give him a couple of quarters for his last try at
the machine that takes up to three quarters. . . and Richie comes up
with a winning jackpot of over $400,000.
  In an expansive mood he treats the four to dinner and talks of
hiring a limousine and chauffeur to celebrate.   Evan, it is obvious,
is not happy.   It does not take a genius to recognize that he feels
he is entitled to at least half the winnings as it was his two quarters
that enabled his cousin to get the jackpot; you do not win  a jackpot
with one coin.    In fact, as it was Evan's two coins to Richie's one,
Evan feels, although he will not press the point, that he really is
entitled to two thirds.
  When he finally mentions that to Richie it sets off a whole series of
comic events as Ritchie does not see it Evan's way.    It was HIS
machine that one.   Finally, to keep the peace he offers Evans $1000
which Evans promptly rejects, tearing up the check.   The ante is later
upped to 3% and that paltry amount is also rejected.
  The girlfriends disagree about the sharing of the money with Evan.
This, too, leads to some funny moments.   One who does not think Evan
is entitled to anything is Richie's  mother, Selma (Viola Harris)  who
gives a great performance as a "smothering" mother to the nth degree.
  Too many gags, (and who wants to reveal them all?)  involve an Xray,
an attempt to frighten Selma to death as she cannot live without her
son should anything happen to him.   There is still another Xray which
accidentally is put up to the light backwards so the healthy appendage
is removed from Danny Pepper, (Matt Keeslar) an actor and a character.
A little incident with a man in the hospital elevator who allows the
door to shut so Richie cannot get on leads to more comedy.  In fact,
everything, however small and seemingly of no importance, takes on
new meaning in the next scenes and all good for great laughs.
   Warning:  You have no one to blame but yourself if you miss this
wonderfully entertaining film.   I can't remember when last I laughed
as hard and often in a movie.
