Title
Review for Low Self-Esteem Girl (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Bill Chambers
LOW SELF ESTEEM GIRL *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Corrina Hammond, Ted Dave, James Dawes, Rob McBeth
written and directed by Blaine Thurier
"Guys want her body. Zealots want her soul."
-Low Self Esteem Girl's honest tagline
A few minutes into Low Self Esteem Girl, I got the distinct feeling of 
watching an episode of "Candid Camera" in which the recording device 
itself, and not the participants, is the one being had. First-time director 
Blaine Thurier (a former cartoonist for Vancouver's "Terminal City") 
zigzags his digital video camera about the house of Lois (Corrina Hammond) 
as if a spy who has unwittingly stumbled upon a stage exercise: Lois and 
Gregg (Ted Dave), her one night stand, conduct a pillow-fight with 
overtones of rape, and then she offers him a beer--at which point I 
half-expected a drama teacher to step into frame and critique their 
performances.
The problem with most non-professional actors is that they're introverted, 
but Thurier loaded Low Self Esteem Girl with seasoned indie rockers, so his 
cast was used to putting on some kind of show. This inevitably leads to as 
much "Dogma 95"-posturing in front of as behind the camera. But, 
considering how many Canadian productions are devoid of such enthusiasm, 
Low Self Esteem Girl feels like a breath of fresh air. Dismissing or 
condemning the film for its source of power (i.e. obvious nods in the 
direction of Cassavetes' Faces and A Woman Under the Influence that pave 
the way for more organic improvisation and experimentation) would be 
counter-productive and unreasonably spiteful, principally because I got 
such a charge out of watching it.
The movie starts making an impact after that opening sequence. Gregg is a 
chronically late pot dealer who winds up selling Lois' address and the 
words key to seducing her to his best client, Garth (James Dawes), thereby 
discovering a cottage industry. Meanwhile, Lois enters into a "nice" 
relationship with Rob (Rob McBeth), a born-again urged by Carl (Carl 
Newman, eerily realistic until the screenplay betrays him), the leader of 
his youth group, to weave her into their denomination. In an effort to 
please everybody--she last--Lois opens her mind to Christian teachings ("So 
you have a crush on Jesus?") and continues to sleep around.
In my recent "Perspective Canada Line-Up" article, I theorized from a 
single sentence synopsis of the electric Low Self Esteem Girl that it is 
"one of those self-consciously daring, everything-but-the-kitchen-sink 
comedies young Canucks are famous for." Now, having actually experienced 
it, I find that "self-consciously daring" better describes said logline 
that was distributed to members of the press. If the suggestion that 
finding God might not be the end-all/be-all offends, well, it's always 
likely to offend.
For the film to be truly impulsive it would have to side with the 
Christians, portrayed here as passive-aggressive (emphasis on aggressive) 
liberals steeped in pop doctrine. (All the more surprising that it doesn't, 
given that Thurier and Newman once fronted a Christian alt-folk band.) In 
Carl's eagerness to hold an exorcism, Thurier reveals his roots as a comic 
strip artist, reducing the young pastor's ideals to word balloons, and Low 
Self Esteem Girl derails. Yet it never train-wrecks, thanks to the truthful 
reactions of those affected by church hostility. There's real sadness in 
Lois' conversion of faith--all she really gains in the process is a guilt 
complex, which doesn't make anyone a 'better' person per se; her pain is 
mirrored by confused Rob's eventual rebellion against organized religion 
through hard partying.
I characterized Low Self Esteem Girl to a friend as "depressing comedy," in 
that we laugh on the outside and cringe on the inside. In a good, 
thought-provoking way, I might add. (I'm thinking back to how easily two of 
its Christian characters caved into temptation--young people need to be 
hedonists.) More often than not, the film smacks of life and reflection; 
Thurier observes the fringe suburban streets, where the jobless 
twentysomethings partake in a junkie-chic sense of community, astutely. 
(Believe me: all of my friends reside in such a place.) Rarely does 
Canadian cinema sanction this much apperception and empathy, or come in for 
as many close-ups as Thurier does! The home video aesthetic somehow endears 
it even further, like a spunky class project, although I anxiously await 
the renaissance of the tripod. (--- For more first-run, DVD, and 
books-about-movies reviews, plus contests and the proverbial "more!", visit 
'Film Freak Central,' @ http://filmfreakcentral.net ---)
