Title
Review for La Bamba (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ellen Eades
     By this I mean that it's very difficult for me to really enjoy a movie
that contains masterpieces of scary-monster makeup, things that go bump in the
night, or sex that is so steamy I start feeling vicariously sore, or that
acquaints me intimately with things that should have stayed inside human bodies
rather than being exposed to the light and heat of the camera.  (I've had EMT
training, but gore in movies is quite different from gore in reality).  It's
hard for me to separate out the *quality* of a movie (good direction, good
acting, good script) from the emotions it evokes.  Thus, I tend not to go to
many movies because I know what to expect and that I won't like it.
     I saw LA BAMBA this Saturday and really loved it.  It has a certain 
quality which is best summarized as the triumph of the spirit over all
obstacles, including death.  There is a real love between the characters here
which is rare in movies today--love between brothers, love between children
and parent, love of young people for one another, love of music and the sharing
between performer and audience.  
     It's not rare for me to cry at movies; I cried during THE MISSION and HAIR
and, so help me, ROMANCING THE STONE.  It is rare for me to feel as though
there could be a smile behind the tears.  Despite tragedy, LA BAMBA brings me a
feeling of hope, not least because its message seems to be that music will
always be remembered long after the musicians have gone, as with all art.
     The only criticism I can make of LA BAMBA is that it is often heavy-handed
in its foreshadowing of Ritchie Valens's death.  The movie opens with a plane
crash, and this theme repeats often.  Despite this (and the heavy-handed
treatment of the Yaqui charm Ritchie wears), it was possible to forget at times
that tragedy was coming.  In particular, the performances of Esai Morales as
Ritchie's brother and Lou Diamond Phillips as Ritchie himself were very
convincing.  The performance scenes were very well done in the style of the
period.  I've learned to expect very good things from Luis Valdez, and this is
no exception.

Author
Brian Koller
"La Bamba" is a surprisingly good biography of
ill-fated Mexican-American rock and roll star
Ritchie Valens (Lou Diamond Phillips).  While
sometimes overdramatized, the film provides a
good character study, not only of Valens, but
of his troubled "black sheep" half-brother Bob
(Esai Morales).
The story begins with Valens already a teenager,
working as a day laborer with his strong willed
but loving mother (Rosana De Soto) and family
friend (and telegenic beauty) Rosie (Elizabeth Pena).
Thanks partly to Bob's success as a drug dealer,
Valens is able to attend a nice high school,
where he meets WASP blonde Donna (Danielle von Zerneck).
He also joins a Rock and Roll band, with his
energy and talent attracting the notice of Del-Fi
talent scout Joe Pantoliano.  Soon, Valens has
a nationwide hit single and is touring the country.
But while his career is soaring, his half-brother,
now married to Rosie, becomes violently embittered
over his success.
The most fun for me when watching this film was
the casting of contemporary rock artists as their
more famous 1950s counterparts.  Marshall Crenshaw,
who had always been compared to Buddy Holly,
finally gets to play Buddy Holly.  Stray Cats'
guitarist Brian Setzer is an ideal match for
rockabilly singer Eddie Cochran.  The group Los Lobos
dubs Phillip's impersonation of Valens.  Carlos Santana
performs the musical score.  Valens' real life
mother and half-brother have cameos.  By the way,
the real Ritchie Valens can be found in the fifties
B-film "Go, Johnny, Go".
"La Bamba" is not a perfect film.  Too much is
made of Valens not speaking Spanish.  He even has
the line "Yo no speako Espa~ol", which strains
credibility given the fact that everyone else in
his family seems to speak Spanish fluently.
A more obvious weakness is Morales' bad boy act,
which recurs even more often than Ritchie's prophetic
nightmare of two planes colliding.  Also, the
audience is led to believe that the tragic plane
crash that killed Holly, Valens, and novelty singer
Big Bopper was caused by the breaking of Valens'
talisman necklace.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movis.html

Author
Clark Quinn
Starring: Esai Morales, Rosana DeSoto, Elizabeth Pena, Joe Pantoliano, 
          Lou Diamond Phillips
Music by: Carlos Santana and Miles Goodman
Director of Photography: Adam Greenberg
Executive Music Producer: Joel Sill
Executive Producer: Stuart Benjamin
Produced by: Taylor Hackford and Bill Borden
Written and Directed by: Luis Valdez
     Luis Valdez (ZOOT SUIT) has crafted a lively, earthy, fond remembrance of 
Richard Valenzuela, who became famous as Ritchie Valens ("it could have been 
Richie Zuela").  Starting with the return of his wayward older step-brother, 
the Valenzuelas move into the Los Angeles area, and Richard finds an audience 
for his singing and playing, moving briefly on to fame and fortune.  Does 
anyone besides me not know what happened to Ritchie Valens?
     This is a picture that works on a number of levels.  First, the story is
(apparently) an accurate portrayal of the life of Ritchie Valens.  Second, the
story is engrossing as cinema; a moving, motivated tale of the trials and
tribulations of people who must face life with courage and dignity.  Finally,
this is a stirring celebration of the success of the music of the Fifties and 
of the cultural influences that shaped, at least, part of it.   
     I must credit the actors with an exceptional job.  I am not familiar with
any of the actors and actresses, which made it easy to avoid feeling that I was
watching a familiar actor play yet *another* part, but I never got the feeling
that I was watching some less-than talented performer stone-face through a
portrayal on the strength of a physical match.  Without exception, the 
characters were believable and sympathetic.  In the only character portrayal I
can attribute, Lou Diamond Phillips captures Ritchie Valens as a talented,
committed young man with senses of both humor and duty.  Also worth mentioning
are the performances of Valens' older step-brother, girl-friend, mother, and
agent.  In particular, Ritchie's older brother alternates between bouts of
good-natured hedonism and frustrated anger without slipping into bathos or 
pathos.  
     As might be expected, the music is exceptional.  I was only aware of
Ritchie Valens as a predecessor and influence on the band Los Lobos (aside
from being familiar with his greatest hit "La Bamba"), but was pleasantly
surprised to find that I greatly enjoyed all his songs.  While I am very fond
of Los Lobos, I wasn't aware that they had performed all of his songs until the
movie was over (they also appear as the mariachi band that Ritchie hears play
the title song on his adventurous trip to Tijuana).  The film also consists of
a succession of some of the classic songs of the fifties.  Carlos Santana also
had a hand in the music, according to the credits.  
     To sum up, great music, good acting, and an interesting story make LA
BAMBA not only a good movie, but a good time.  I'd give it a +2 on the Leeper
-4 to  +4 scale.  
Clark N. Quinn
clark%ics@sdcsvax.ucsd.edu 
OR {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     "Meteoric" is the word for the career of Ritchie Valens, who signed a
recording contract, became successful, had three top-ten singles, and died,
all in a span of eight months.  He died in a plane crash at age 17, having
only months before been a Mexican-American farmworker named Ricardo
Valenzuela.  LA BAMBA is the story of that last year of his life.
     Biographical films about singers give a brutally realistic picture of
their subjects' worlds, present a fawning tribute, or lie somewhere in
between.  LA BAMBA does a little of both.  Valens is a pure-hearted good guy
with a vision of what kind of music he wants to create, a white knight of
Rock and Roll.  Contrasting with him is his brother Bob (played by Esai
Morales), who played the bully villain of BAD BOYS).  BOB IS A SELF-CENTERED
FAILURE.  HE DEALS DRUGS, DRINKS TOO MUCH, MISTREATS THE WOMAN HE STOLE FROM
RITCHIE, AND GENERALLY TURNS HIS OWN FRUSTRATIONS INTO PAIN AND TROUBLE FOR
THOSE AROUND HIM.  HIS BASENESS SOMEHOW IS A LITTLE EASIER TO BELIEVE THAN
RITCHIE'S LOFTINESS, BUT TOGETHER THEY JUST ABOUT MAKE ONE WHOLE PERSON.  IN
FACT, BOB IS THE MORE INTERESTING OF THE TWO CHARACTERS.  RITCHIE'S STORY IS
OF THE IDEALIST WHO MAKES GOOD, A SORT OF LATTER-DAY HORATIO ALGER STORY.
BUT THROUGH BOB'S CHARACTER WE LEARN SOMETHING ABOUT MEXICAN-AMERICAN
FARMWORKERS AND THEIR COMMUNITY, WHICH IS MUCH MORE VALUABLE THAN JUST
ANOTHER STORY OF A SINGER'S SUCCESS.
     WHERE LA BAMBA's story is the most questionable is in its little
brushes with the occult.  We are told that Ritchie had repeated nightmares
and premonitions about plane crashes.  As a result, he has a terrible fear
of flying which he must reluctantly push aside to fulfill the demands of
stardom.  We are also told that he has lost every coin-toss of his life
except the one which put him on the flight which killed him.  He apparently
wins that toss, but the audience knows better.  If the premonitions indeed
pointed to the way he would die, they should be better documented than just
being thrown into a film.  If they did not really occur, then the
screenwriter should not claim they did in what is otherwise supposed to be a
factual story.
     But LA BAMBA is good entertainment even if before the film, like me,
you couldn't reliably name a single one of Valens's hits.  I still got
caught up in the excitement of the creation of a new kind of music, even if
it is not the kind of music I generally enjoy.  Rate it a low +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.
