Title
Review for Tong fong sam hop (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Sunga
Starring:
Michelle Yeoh, Anita Mui, Maggie Cheung, Damian Lau, Anthony Wong  Paul
Chin, James Pak, Shiguan Ren
Synopsis:
The plot of 'The Heroic Trio' revolves around a trio of costumed
superheroines. Police Commander Lau and his wife Tung witness a string
of mysterious baby kidnappings. Unknown to Lau and lucky for him Tung
(Anita Mui) is a masked vigilante called Wonder Woman. While
investigating the kidnappings, Wonder Woman meets a future teammate -- a
former badgirl turned bounty hunter named Chat (Maggie Cheung).
Meanwhile, the future third member of the Heroic Trio, Ching, (Michelle
Yeoh)  has been assigned by her evil master, a sorcerer, to steal a robe
of invisibility from a dying scientist whom she loves. Like the
musketeers and Dartagnan, Tung, Chat, and Ching initially fight each
other but eventually unite to battle Ching's evil master, a demented
oriental wizard who plans to use invisibility for world domination and
also wants to use the kidnapped babies to mutate a demonic royal ruling
class. The evil master and his associates are nearly impervious to
destruction, a situation which makes for exciting 'Terminator' style
battles.
Action Content: 
Hong Kong action choreography has come a remarkably long way from the
days of the old chop sockey flicks with their syncopated and unending
forearm thwacks. Flapping robes, whirling blades, spinning bodies and
people jumping up into the rafters come standard with kung fu movies,
but this movie in particular reminds me how far Hong Kong kung fu
choreography has evolved, and of the parallel between early American
theater and Hong Kong film. 
Back in the old days in American film when people did their own stunts
choreography was complex and very highly developed. We were graced with
the likes of physical comedian Charlie Chaplin, swashbuckler Douglas
Fairbanks, and dancer Ginger Rogers. Allowing for different culture,
Hong Kong film evolved along a similar path. For example, in Hong Kong
today self-effacing comedian Chaplin's influence is reborn in the likes
of Jackie Chan, while the spirit of Fairbanks' dazzling swordplay is
reborn in the similarly spectacular Hong Kong martial arts choreography
championed by the likes of Michelle Yeoh and Jet Li. Suspending our
disbelief for campy flying heroes, ‘The Heroic Trio' contains some of
the most entertaining, intricate and fast paced weapons battles on film. 
Stars: 
For those unfamiliar with Hong Kong film, The 'Heroic Trio' is a good
introduction to 3 of Hong Kong's premier talents. 
Malaysian (but ethnic Chinese) martial artial artist Michelle Yeoh does
all her own stunts, and is presently Asia's top female action star. She
graduated from the Royal Academy of Dance in London (B.A. in Dance with
a minor in drama), and won Miss Malaysia in 1983. She played opposite
Jackie Chan in 'Supercop (1992)', was voted one of People Magazine's 50
most beautiful people (1997), and will be starring opposite Pierce
Brosnan in the James Bond thriller, 'Tomorrow Never Dies', scheduled for
release in December of 1997. 
Maggie Cheung played opposite Jackie Chan in ‘Police Story (1985)'. She
is a former 1983 Miss World contestant who has won several Best Actress
awards, including the 1991 Turin Film Festival  ( Best Actress:
‘Farewell China'  ), the 1992 Chicago International Film Festival and
1992 Berlin Film Festival ( Best Actress: ‘The Actress' ), and the 1997
Golden Bauhinia Award, ( Best Actress: ‘Comrades - Almost a Love Story'
).
Anita Mui played a bespectacled store employee in Jackie Chan's ‘Rumble
in the Bronx (1995)' but by then was already a legendary dancer and
singer on the Hong Kong pop scene. On April 8, 1992 the Mayor of San
Francisco declared the day to be "Anita Mui Day" to honor Ms. Mui's
contributions to a local nursing home. She won a Golden Horse Best
Actress award in 1987. The Mayor of San Francisco again declared Anita
Mui Day for San Francisco on October 26, 1993.  
Opinion:
If you're tired of big budget Hollywood and in the mood for an
entertaining Hong Kong swashbuckling action fantasy (dubbed), 'The
Heroic Trio' has it all: flying bullets; masks; capes; robes; a bounty
hunter; a superheroine running along power lines high above the ground;
secret underground caverns; poison darts; a reunion of long lost family
members; a dying scientist; invisibility; a runaway train; kidnappings,
and; a sorcerer with a flesh-eating henchman. The choreography is great,
and I was also surprised by the artful cinematography. The camera work
not only manages to successfully capture the fast and furious fights,
but also includes stunning visuals such butterflies, rain, tears, blood,
and lightning in a dark fantasy setting reminiscent of Batman's Gotham
City. One note: good guys, bad guys, and objects defy gravity a lot.

Author
Tim Voon
Starring: Michelle Yeoh, Anita Mui, Maggie Cheung, Damian Lau, Anthony
Wong Paul Chin, James Pak,  Shiguan Ren Directed by: Johnny To Kei-Fung
Action Director: Ching Siu-Tung Written by: Sandy Shaw
The only reason why I came across this China Town kung-fu, girl chic
flick was because my eyes caught the name Michelle Yeoh on the front
cover. A recent convert fan of hers since Bond James Bond, I couldn't
help myself but indulge. Fantasy and fascination are quite becoming when
there are plenty of flying, fighting women in leathers lighting the
screen. So I had a picnic with this movie raging war faring women.
Somebody in modern time Hong Kong is stealing all the babies in town.
This has something vaguely to do with the search for the next Chinese
Emperor and a prophecy resurrecting Chinese world domination. All pretty
unconvincing, mumbo jumbo Chinese fiction, so let's forget about the
plot and focus on the women.
Wonder woman (Anita Mui) wears a rather flimsy purple two piece suit,
with matching cloak and mask. Boring! Nothing as sexy as the US version
of the one piece, flag drag outfit, with wonder belt, lasso and head
piece. Otherwise, Mui knows how to give good kick and glass eyed looks
of emotion when a baby cacks it, and the music, the music really swells
with the moment.
Now to Invisible Woman, my favourite actress Michelle Yeoh is dressed in
divine red. What makes her outfit by far the best, is the use of
excessive wind to blow lots of cloth about. She doubly knows how to kick
arse and when it comes to tragedy, the scale of wind is increased to
blow petals of flowers around the room – to remind her of the lover who
wanted to smell roses before he died. Hmmmm?
Then there is the effervescent, ever boisterous, femme fatale Maggie
Cheung – nicknamed the Thief Catcher - very sexy and very butch. Cheung
delightfully contrasts the dramatic styles of the other two females. She
is all playfulness and gives the movie cheek, as Mui represents
sensibility and Yeoh emits tragedy.
So the ending is all together great fun, as these Amazon sisters combine
to fight a demon reminiscent of the original TERMINATOR – no matter what
you do he keeps coming back. Making this funfest of female action
unbelievably exciting.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html
