Title
Review for Bride of Chucky (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Jamie Peck
BRIDE OF CHUCKY
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Chucky (again voiced by Brad Dourif), of course, is the star of the 
"Child's Play" series, a My Buddy-type doll possessed by the spirit of a 
slain serial killer. In "Bride," the plot (heh) picks up with his 
girlfriend Tiffany (Jennifer Tilly) resurrecting Chucky's remains (he 
was blown up at the end of "Child's Play 3") with the help of a black 
arts manual called "Voodoo for Dummies." Silly mortal. Before long, 
she's also been reduced to shin-high figurine status, and the plastic 
incarnations of these one-time lunatic lovebirds hit the road to scope 
out some potential new human bodies. 
The rest of this rocky horror puppet show plays out as Tiff and the 
Chuckster stalk a young couple (Nick Stabile and Katherine Heigl) with 
conjugal plans of their own, leading them towards a New Jersey grave 
where a magical, soul-transferring amulet allegedly lies in wait. Along 
the way, our murderous Barbie and Ken go through post-marriage motions 
similar to any given pair of newlyweds - bicker, argue, kiss and make 
up. But when they squabble over who's going to do the dishes, watch out. 
Hey, even faux people have got to work through their problems. 
Director Ronny Yu keeps the mayhem flashy and stages an inventive scene 
or two, but not even visual flair can make up for the fact that these 
creepy Kewpies are neither scary nor menacing. When one of them charges, 
it's nothing a good forward punt couldn't take care of. And when a 
climactic chase scene is needed, one of the dim-bulb protagonists must 
_pick_Chucky_up_ so the demonic toy can force his hostage to run at 
gunpoint. Throw in some silly casualties and a ridiculous ending (will 
"Son of Chucky" be next?) and this is a bizarrely bad 89-minutes at the 
movies. 
As is the thing to do in post-"Scream" slasher cinema, Don Mancini's 
screenplay slathers on the in-jokes and genre-parody. But little of the 
humor succeeds, proving self-reference can be completely worthless when 
it lacks bite. To be fair, though, most of "Bride of Chucky" is on 
auto-pilot, so it's not quite right to single out one misfired aspect of 
the film. Similarly shaky, the acting ranges from screeching camp to 
boring bland, the effects aren't that special and the story is one big 
groaner. Here's hoping Chucky and his entire clan - past, present and 
future - rest in peace.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Bride of Chucky" is another one of those guilty pleasures - you know, a movie
that you're ashamed for having liked because everyone else hates it. This
latest sequel is campy, dumb, unscary, but always teeming with a
tongue-in-cheek attitude that is refreshing to watch in these days of
homogenized horror movies. 
This time, Chucky (voiced by the ever-reliable Brad Dourif) is assembled out of
broken doll parts by his girlfriend Meg (the big-breasted Jennifer Tilly). She
reads a book called "Voodoo for Dummies" and presto, Chucky is back with
several scars running through his once cute Good Guys Doll appearance. No
matter, he's back in business and kills Meg and then transfers her spirit into
a female doll named Tiffany! Why? I wish I knew, but this isn't the kind of
movie that thrives on logic. 
The plot has to do with two teenagers in love who run away to Niagara Falls to
get married for two reasons - to escape the girl's domineering father (John
Ritter), the Chief of Police of a small town; and because her beau is about to
collect a reward at a New Jersey cemetery (!) by bringing two dolls courtesy of
Meg. Guess who the two dolls are? 
"Bride of Chucky" is certainly original and miles ahead of the last two Chucky
fests, which helped destroy the horror genre before "Scream" came along. This
is due partly to series creator and writer Don Mancini, who brings a level of
wit and satire to the proceedings. The dialogue is chock full of references to
"Natural Born Killers," Martha Stewart, "Boogie Nights," "Bride of
Frankenstein," and several infamous horror icons. 
The performances are crude but always riotous, including scene-stealing
Jennifer Tilly and her whiny voice that carries the day, and a Marilyn Manson
look alike that is hilariously played by Alexis Arquette. Brad Dourif's
high-pitched laugh and various asides redeem what could have been schlocky
junk. The teenagers are throwaway roles that could have been slipped in by any
number of anonymous teenage actors from the "Dawson's Creek" variety. 
"Bride of Chucky" is campy, outrageous fun that keeps moving at a fast clip and
is the latest in a string of postmodernist takes on horror movies. Now, if they
would only bring back the horror...
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Bill Chambers
BRIDE OF CHUCKY **1/2 (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers' Id (wchamber@netcom.ca)
(Visit my review archive, play some movie trivia, and more!
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers/ )
Revoke my critic's license; sentence me to a public hanging. Both
suitable punishments for what I'm about to write: BRIDE OF CHUCKY is a
fun, fun movie. Whether it's any good is another issue altogether, but
like another of this year's sequels-that-nobody-asked-for, Halloween:
H20 Twenty Years Later, BRIDE OF CHUCKY is bearable and even enjoyable.
Tilly stars as Meg (though not billed separately, Tilly's breasts steal
her every scene), ex-lover to Charles Lee Ray, the serial killer whose
soul inhabits "Chucky" the Good Guy doll. For three movies now, Chucky
has terrorized unsuspecting white folk. In this fourth Child's Play, Meg
steals a mangled Chucky from a police impound (which houses, among other
horror memorabilia, Jason's mask and Leatherface's chainsaw), sews him
back up, and revives his evil spirit with the assistance of a guidebook
called "Voodoo for Dummies". Their first victim: a goth punk wannabe
(hilarious Alexis Arquette of The Wedding Singer) who ends up suffocated
during a menage a trois with Chucky and Meg. But after domestic
squabbles ensue, Chucky electrocutes Meg in a bathtub-and her spirit
possesses a female doll called Tiffany. United as toys, Chucky
and Tiffany enlist the help of ignorant next door neighbour Jesse
(Stabile) to retrieve an amulet that will enable them to transfer their
souls back into a human being. So Jesse and his runaway fiancee, Jade
(Heigl, whose breasts also deserve special mention), naively transport
the multiple-murderer dolls across America, leaving a trail of bodies
behind.
As horror icons go, Chucky is one of the most absurd. His pint size and
minimal strength prevent him from doing much damage without the
assistance of a whole person. Yet in BRIDE OF CHUCKY, he (along with
Tiffany) manages to shoot a quiver of nails into corrupt police chief
John Ritter's face (after this and his turn as a psychotic android on
"Buffy The Vampire Slayer", Ritter has proved he can play a heavy), blow
up a car, and impale a pair of newleyweds with a thousand shards of
glass. After the lame, tame Urband Legend and I Know What You Did Last
Summer (why both those movies were given an "R" rating remains a mystery
to me), BRIDE OF CHUCKY's tasteless, repulsive and extreme violence is a
breath of fresh air. Chucky's a nihilist-he and Tiffany decide to off
one key character just because they haven't killed someone in a while!
Dourif's excellent voicework is the most lively and memorable
performance he (has repeatedly given) since becoming American cinema's
resident wacko. (After winning an Oscar for his portrayal of tragic
Billy Bibbit in One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest, Dourif took to playing
human monsters in such films as The Exorcist III and Body Parts.) His
Beavis-esque vocal stylings are matched by Kevin Yagher's special
effects: the puppeteering of Chucky and his bride is flawless-very
little of it looks computer-assisted.
If BRIDE OF CHUCKY fails to entertain on one level, it's in the
alliterate characters Jesse and Jade. Both are unaware of Chucky and
Tiffany's evil: they take turns accusing each other of a secret and
insatiable appetite for homicide. The trouble is, this young couple is
excruciatingly dull (although I suppose it's difficult not to be
upstaged by Chucky and Tiffany). And don't bother going for the
scares-there aren't any. The fright factor is nil, but the laugh
quotient is high; not since Peter Jackson's Meet The Feebles have
devilish (and, I should add, carnal) dolls been this guiltily enjoyable
to watch.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Ronny Yu.
Cast: Jennifer Tilly, Katherine Heigl, Nick Stabile, John Ritter, Alexis 
Arquette, Kathy Najimy; voice of Brad Dourif.
1998 - 90 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, and doll sex).
Reviewed October 17, 1998.
Although the original "Child's Play" was an intelligent, surprisingly 
well-crafted horror film, I have never been that big a fan of the 
series. I mean, it's hard to make a 3-foot doll scary, and by the time 
1991's "Child's Play 3" rolled around, the series felt pretty much dead 
and buried. But old slasher series' die hard, and since there has been a 
recent horror resurgence, it was inevitable that Chucky would indeed be 
back for a third sequel.
"Bride of Chucky" has a genuinely goofy premise, and is far more 
original than the other sequels. The film starts off with Tiffany 
(Jennifer Tilly), a bit of trailer-park trash, who gets ahold of the 
remains of the mostly destroyed Chucky doll, which holds the soul of her 
old boyfriend, Charles Lee Ray. She sews the parts back together and 
resurrects Chucky who, in exchange, murders Tiffany and transports her
 soul into a female doll. They realize that in order to get out of the 
doll bodies, they have to get a necklace that Charles is buried with in 
a small town in New Jersey. Through a series of circumstances, these two 
murderous, feuding dolls hitch a ride with a teenage couple, Jude 
(Katherine Heigl) and Jesse (Nick Stabile), who have run away to be 
together. Did you follow all that?
"Bride of Chucky" has one of the most absurd plots of the year, and some 
sequences are downright silly (a sex scene involving the Chucky and 
Tiffany dolls immediately springs to mind), but I have to admit that I 
do admire the filmmakers for trying something a little bit different, 
rather than recycling the same exact storyline for each sequel. In fact, 
the film is basically a "Chucky" road movie, which is actually quite 
intriguing, but it never really follows through with its aspirations. 
Just as in the recent, "Halloween: H20," the movie felt much too short, 
as if there was a rush to get to the ending. If another ten to fifteen 
minutes had been added to the running time, it would have been much more 
satisfying.
I must honestly admit, however, that there is a lot to like in the film. 
For one, the screenplay is far more sharply written than the other 
sequels in the series, and there are a lot of clever in-jokes and sharp 
lines of dialogue. The beginning, for example, is set in a building 
where all of history's killers' remains are locked up, and before we get 
to Chucky, the camera passes by a hockey mask and the Michael Myers 
mask. 
Another element I liked in the film is the realistic love-hate 
relationship between Chucky and Tiffany. Even though they are dolls, 
they act exactly like humans do, and are always fighting, but still love 
each other. They are some very funny exchanges between the two 
throughout, particularly a conversation where they discuss Martha 
Stewart.
For being a third sequel in a reputable slasher series, it is amazing 
some of the talent they were able to get. Director Ronny Yu is 
highly-acclaimed in China, and this is his American debut. Tilly is 
almost always a wonderful actress (and has even been nominated for an 
Academy Award), and she brings a lot of energy to the first act of the 
film, when she is in human form. The cinematography by Peter Pau is 
richly textured and well-done.
But if you look at "Bride of Chucky" as a horror film, which it is, that 
is where the film fails. There is so much zaniness in the story and 
dialogue that it is not the least bit scary or suspenseful (except for 
one scene involving Tilly and Alexis Arquette, as her gothic boyfriend). 
The movie also never takes off the way it should, and although it was 
surely on its way to getting to that next plateau, it never made it 
because it was simply too abrupt. If you are looking for a scary horror 
film during this Halloween season, then my recommendation would be to 
see "Urban Legend," which is far, far better. Although the filmmakers 
wanted "Bride of Chucky" to be more along the lines of recent 
genre-bending horror flicks, such as "Scream," what they basically have 
made is yet another 80's slasher film. You know, the type that usually 
wouldn't even get grandma's ticker going. 

Author
DeWyNGaLe
BRIDE OF CHUCKY by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: C
Child's Play is one of the most popular horror series around today.  In 1988,
the first film, Child's Play, was released and became a cult hit instantly. 
Two more films were released afterwards, and now, the fourth installment in the
Child's Play series has arrived.  In this one, Tiffany, played by the Oscar
nominated actress Jennifer Tilly, plays the girlfriend of Chucky when Chucky
was still a human.  When Chucky became a doll, their relationship was ruined. 
Years later, Tiffany has found Chucky, who has been almost completely destroyed
after the events that took place in Child's Play 3.  
Tiffany's plan is to bring Chucky back to life so the two can be together once
again.  She does so, but he isn't as nice as she had hoped.  After locking him
up in a cage, she decides to buy him a doll of a bride so he can have some
company.  Chucky is infuriated with Tiffany.  He breaks lose of the cage and
kills Tiffany while she is taking a bath.  Now, using voodoo, he transfers her
into the body of the doll.  She is the bride of Chucky.
The scenes with Tiffany and Chucky are especially funny.  The first thirty
minutes of the film, which includes these hilarious scenes, are the best parts
of the movie.  From here on, the film goes downhill.  When Tiffany was a human,
she lived in a trailer park.  Her neighbor was Jesse, played by Nick Stabile, a
teenager who helped her out with some things.  Tiffany and Chucky need to get
to New Jersey to find the amulet in the human form of Chucky's grave so that
they can be transferred into human bodies once again.  On the phone, Tiffany
calls Jesse and asks him to drive two dolls to New Jersey.  Thinking that the
Tiffany on the phone is the real Tiffany, Jesse accepts the offer.  He brings
his girlfriend Jade, played by Katherine Heigl.  The two plan to get married on
their journey to New Jersey, because of her over protective uncle that she
lives with, who is a police sheriff, played by John Ritter.  He does not want
them seeing each other, so she decides to run away.  From here, Chucky and
Tiffany go on a killing spree on their way to New Jersey which lead to some
funny and corny moments.  
The plot of Bride of Chucky is a little strange.  It is a lot of fun though. 
The film is not much of a horror movie, as the other ones were, but more of a
dark comedy.  Like I said, the film works wonderfully for the first thirty
minutes, but with one-dimensional characters such as Jade and Jesse that throw
the movie into the same old horror movie stuff, the film cannot succeed
overall.  The Tiffany doll was nice to have for a change, rather than Chucky by
himself.  She added a lot to the film.  Chucky is the same as ever.  He has a
bad temper and is also very funny.  The two together are very funny.  
After a while on the trip to New Jersey, the film becomes pretty much
pointless.  It is very repetitive throughout parts of the film.  A lot of jokes
do work, especially Tiffany's obsession with Martha Stuart.  The reason I did
like this film so much was mainly because it was so different from everything
else.  Although it wasn't horror, it was a fun plot and a fun movie.  If the
film concentrated completely on the dolls and not other characters such as
Jesse and Jade, the film could have been much better.  The way I look at it is-
A movie about a girl who is transformed into a doll hooks up with Chucky and
they go on a killing spree.  How good could it be?
The Bottom Line- More sequels could be made in this series- As long as they are
as different as this one.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BRIDE OF CHUCKY"
        If you're a horror film buff, you'll recall Chucky, the
supernatural doll with the soul of a serial killer, who came to life
in "Child's Play" (1988) and slashed his way through two subsequent
sequels. Now, he's back! But with a difference. Like "Scream" and "I
Know What You Did Last Summer," this Chucky tale, written by Don
Mancini, is an irreverent satire of the horror genre, aimed directly
at the teenage crowd. David Kirschner, the producer, states his
purpose succinctly: "We worked hard to get an R-rating because, if
you're not R-rated, you lose your 16, 17, and 18 year-old crowd. They
want to see the excitement, the chases, and the kill so, basically,
this is kind of a psychotic muppet movie."  Which isn't too surprising
since Kirschner began his career as an illustrator for Jim Henson,
creator of the Muppets. In this story, Chucky (a.k.a. Charles Lee Ray,
voiced by Brad Dourif) has a former girl-friend, Tiffany (Jennifer
Tilly) whose tarty soul has migrated into a doll too: a bridal
babe. Chucky and Tiffany do what you'd expect them to do, supervised
by Hong Kong director Ronny Yu ("The Bride with White Hair"),
considering the only way they can live happily ever after as humans is
to find compatible body donors. And the greatest horror is that, given
an offspring, there might be yet another sequel. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bride of Chucky" is a malevolent, blood splattering
1. It's just too gross!

Author
Matt Williams
After a seven-year absence, Chucky, the killer doll, has returned.  Yes,
Chucky has been shot, stabbed, incinerated, melted, and chopped into
teeny-tiny bits, but each time he comes back.  The world probably
doesn't need another Child's Play sequel...but, if it did, Bride of
Chucky is at least better than the previous two.
Whereas in previous sequels, Chucky was literally remade from scratch,
this time out, he's stitched back together (in true Frankenstein
fashion) by Tiffany (Jennifer Tilly).  You see, Tiffany was the
girlfriend of Charles Lee Ray, the murderer who originally placed his
soul inside the Chucky doll via a voodoo chant in the original Child's
Play.  She wants to bring back her dead boyfriend...but it's not too
long before she finds herself trapped in a doll's body as well.  If you
couldn't tell by the title, she becomes... THE BRIDE OF CHUCKY!
Well, once that's done with, the two killer dolls come up with a plan to
return to human hosts.  Apparently (in a fact somehow ignored by all the
prior Child's Play films), a special magical amulet is needed to swap
souls with a living human.  So Chucky and Tiffany must travel cross
country, get the amulet, and find an unfortunate couple to possess.
As luck would have it, Tiffany's white trash neighbor, Jesse (Nick
Stabile) is just about to elope with his sweetheart, Jade (Katherine
Heigl).  The two teens are running away from Jade's domineering
chief-of-police uncle Warren (John Ritter). When Chucky and Tiffany
manage to hitch a ride, the unsuspecting couple leave a trail of murder
victims in their wake, and find themselves accused of being "multiple
murderers".
The appeal of the Child's Play films is a simple one:  the none-sequitur
high concept of a harmless child's toy springing to life as a foul
mouthed mass murderer.  It's the age-old charm of something familiar
doing something unexpected.  This time around, we also get to watch
Chucky do drugs, headbang, and, yes, even have sex.  Can't you feel the
irresistible draw to the movie theater right now?
The screenplay for Bride of Chucky is much more comic in tone and better
written than the previous sequels (not that it takes much talent to top
lines like "Don't f*** with the Chuck!") If anything, the film lays on
the humor a bit too broadly, with over-obvious homages to Friday the
13th, Halloween and even Hellraiser.
The film is definitely guilty of overkill.  This is the type of movie
where a person would die from a papercut:  by drowning.  Yep, this film
even features a nice exploding body (I guess his blood pressure was a
little high).
If the mere idea of yet another Chucky-the-killer-doll movie is already
making you pluck out your eyes to prevent the terror, you should
definitely trust your instincts. For the die-hard Chucky fan (is there
such a thing?), you can trust yours.  However, for most people, you're
probably best off ignoring Bride of Chucky until it airs late at night
on the USA network...you might get a chuckle or two then.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BRIDE OF CHUCKY (1998) *  Directed by Ronnie Yu. Written by Don Mancini,
based on his original characters. Photography, Peter Pau. Editing, David
Wu, Randolph K. Bricker. Production design, Alicia Keywan. Art direction,
James McAteer. Puppet effects, Kevin Yagher. Music, Graeme Revell. Cast:
Jennifer Tilly (Tiffany - also the doll Tiffany's voice), Alexis Arquette
(Damien),  Katherine Heigl (Jade), Nick Stabile (Jesse), John Ritter (Chief
Warren Kincaid),  Brad Dourif (Voice of Chucky), et al.  A Universal
release. 89 minutes. R (violence, language, doll copulation)
"Child's Play," the original Chucky film, came out in 1988, was inventive
and scared large sections of its audiences. The sequels of 1990 and 1991
were near worthless. The fourth reincarnation of Chucky the killer doll
changes the title but not the junk.
Chucky was the transubstantiation of now defunct serial murderer Charles
Lee Ray who, as he lay dying, passed on his spirit (?) to an ordinary doll.
He also left behind his girlfriend Tiffany.
Tiffany, who gives a new meaning to "trailer trash," is a crude,
micro-skirted, chain-smoking dame painted like a wall of graffiti, and with
an enormous cleavage that threatens to explode. For years she's been
wanting her lover back. Now, as Chucky's bits and pieces are kept in a
police repository, the woman bribes a cop who steals the remnants-- and is
quickly terminated by Tiffany. She sets about to rebuild the whole Chucky.
Drawing the old, reliable mystical pentagram on the impossibly large floor
of her trailer, and going through mystical mumbo-jumbo and candle-lit
ceremonies, she reconstructs the doll.
She uses an instructions book, "Voodoo for Dummies." This sends an
immediate warning: version 4 will mix atrocities with jokes, gags, and
"funny" stuff.
The one-piece Chucky dispatches the creep Damien (get the name?), one of
Tiffany's lovers, as the latter is waiting in bed for sex with the lady. No
problem, because Tiffany, a Martha Stewart devotee, wants to marry, settle
down in a dream house, have kids... But Chucky spurns her.
One thing leading (don't ask) to another, Tiffany puts Chucky in a cage,
brings him a girl-doll, is electrocuted by Chucky but her spirit is
transferred to the other doll. The toy-couple bickers, exchanges barbs,
doesn't get along, but, take my word, will follow the cliche of "normal"
people: antagonism leading to love -- or at least, sex.
In another couple, the under-18 Jade is an orphan who lives with her uncle
Warren, the local Police Chief. Warren (who perhaps unconsciously lusts for
the girl), aided by his henchcops, puts all possible impediments between
her and her true love Jesse.
The dolls need to go to New Jersey, where there is, in a grave, an amulet
that can restore them to their human shape.Tiffany-the-person has already
availed herself of the services of her trailer-park neighbor Jesse. Now, as
Tiffany-the-doll (she has retained the T-woman's voice) she hires Jesse by
phone. For $1,000, he must deliver two dolls to Jersey. Jesse seizes the
opportunity to convince Jade to elope and start a new life with him. (A
little money goes a long way in the mind of the naive boy!)
The foursome's trip becomes a killing spree for the dolls, complete with
explosions, crashes, wrecks, you name it...
What really deserves a rapid death is the film itself. Some funny moments
do exist, but all in the context of mayhem, gore, destruction, ugliness
--it all feels like the product of a sick imagination that knows no bounds
in concocting disgusting scenes. I wondered what kind of public the movie
was directed at, and what the viewers' reactions were.
So I did a quick, small investigation. The personnel working at the theater
showing it was unanimously positive. "It's not great, but it's funny."
"It's for all audiences." "We kids, like that sort of thing." "It's for
teenagers." "It's for 20-24 year old people." "I'm 26 and I liked it."
"It's great fun." And more along those lines.
Now, I must say that I like good horror pictures, including the old German
silent classics, the Draculas and the Frankensteins, the Val Lewton
productions (The Cat People, I Walked with a Zombie, The Body Snatcher,
etc.), Rosemary's Baby... the list is large, and includes parodies such as
Love at First Bite. But I loathe bad horror, unintelligent horror for
dummies, horror that is essentially visual pornography.
The popularity of this last genre is disturbing. Not for moral reasons. I
do not believe that, for example, bad slasher flicks result in copycat
imitations in real life-- but I do not doubt that they condition
undiscriminating viewers into more and more bad taste. As Stendhal said :"
Bad taste leads to crime." And the cultural crimes of the media, are at the
very least, a colossal factor of the dumbing of the public from Aden to
Zitomir.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Possessed plastic dolls in love, plastic dolls having sex
Starring: Jennifer Tilly, Voice of Brad Dourif, Katherine Heigl, Nick
Stabile, John Ritter
Synopsis:
This is the fourth film in the CHUCKY series, which debuted in the late
1980s. Basically, Chucky is a plastic doll that can walk and talk
because it is possessed by the spirit of a slain murderer. In BRIDE OF
CHUCKY, Chucky's longtime girlfriend Tiffany (Jennifer Tilly) dies and
her spirit inhabits a female plastic doll through voodoo. Dolls Tiffany
and Chucky get married and embark on a quest to reach a cemetery in New
Jersey, where a mystical gem might enable them to be humans. The dolls
stow away in the back of a vehicle driven by a newly eloped couple, so
in the side plot, the couple suspects each other of being a murderer. 
Opinion:
BRIDE OF CHUCKY is an attempt at horror with humor, but doesn't succeed.
Somehow, Chucky moaning about mid life crisis, and how he should have
gotten married does not make for a very scary Chucky. And Tiffany
harping about mid life crisis, and how she should have gotten married
does not make for a very scary Tiffany. The suspenseless BRIDE OF CHUCKY
relies mostly on Jennifer Tilly's cleavage to keep attention during the
first half, and on occasional puns to keep attention during the second
half. The best that can be said about BRIDE OF CHUCKY is that it is
sarcastic.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Michael Dequina
In 1988, killer doll Chucky made his splash in _Child's_Play_; in 1978,
director John Carpenter burst onto the horror scene with _Halloween_.  Ten
and twenty years later, respectively, neither Chucky's novelty nor
Carpenter's horror skill have aged very well, as evidenced by the schlocky
_Bride_of_Chucky_ and _John_Carpenter's_Vampires_.
Unlike eating a box of chocolates, walking into the movie
_Bride_of_Chucky_, you're pretty sure what you're gonna get.  For the
fourth film in the _Child's_Play_ franchise, you pay your admission to see
Chucky, the diminutive, redheaded "Good Guy" doll possessed by the spirit
of a dead serial killer, slice and dice his way through a long line of
human victims--no more, no less, all done somewhat tongue-in-cheek but
largely done in the name of a good scare.
How surprising it is, then, to watch _Bride_, which plays less like
another sequel than a Zucker/Abrahams/Zucker sendup of the series.  Perhaps
writer Don Mancini (the creator of the series) saw self-parody as the only
way to keep Chucky alive in the irony-drenched post-_Scream_ horror
climate, making free use of self-deprecating dialogue such as "Chucky?
He's so '80s!"  The plot itself is a joke, with Tiffany (Jennifer Tilly), a
former flame of the incarnate Chucky, becoming Chucky the doll's (voiced by
Brad Dourif) partner in serial murder after her newly-liberated spirit
inhabits a female doll.
All of the added humor, though, does not make _Bride_of_Chucky_ a good
film--just a campy one.  For all their irony, post-_Scream_ thrillers, in
the end, are horror films, going after the big scare.  _Bride_, however,
makes no attempt to be scary; the scariest thing about it is the fact that
it was directed by the gifted Ronny Yu, who in his native Hong Kong
directed the brilliant 1993 action fantasy _The_Bride_with_White_Hair_.  As
gruesome as some of Chucky and Tiffany's murders are (for instance, one
man's face becomes a pincushion for nails), they are too over-the-top to
truly shock.  In fact, the film's big problem is just that, being too
over-the-top too much of the time, from the acting (the dreadful Tilly in
particular) to story developments (yes, a doll-doll sex scene is funny, but
_still_...).  Even a film called _Bride_of_Chucky_ could use some restraint
and be all the better for it.  By the time the film came to its predictable
"twist" ending (hint: what logically follows "_bride_ of..."?), you may eel
like groaning.  The audience with whom I saw the film did (and quite
loudly, I might add).
That's all _Bride_of_Chucky_ leaves you with--a groan: a groan that this
tired series may not yet be over; a groan that you blew hard-earned cash to
see it; but most of all, a groan that you've just lost 80-some-odd minutes
of your life that can never be recovered.
More polished technically, but no less groan-worthy, is _Vampires_.
Carpenter obviously has a lot of fun at the helm of this one, staging the
brutally (and, some would argue, excessively) bloody scenes of carnage with
gleeful abandon: blood, bodies, and body parts fly across the screen in
every direction.  A great deal of credit goes to the make-up work by the
KNB EFX Group (Robert Kurtzman, Gregory Nicotero, and Howard Berger), which
is convincing and, yes, more than a little repulsive.
So what's the problem?  Just about everything else, but mostly Don
Jakoby's odious script, which is based on John Steakley's novel _Vampire$_.
 There's no real plot, just vampire slayer Jack Crow (James Woods) hunting
out master vampire Valek (Thomas Ian Griffith), who is after a sacred cross
that will make him and his fellow bloodsuckers, as Crow's priest sidekick
(Tim Guinee) says, "a force unstoppable--unless we stop him!"  That line,
which would make the late Ed Wood proud, should tell you all you need to
know about the overall quality of the dialogue.
But the laughable dialogue and lack of plot isn't as problematic as the
uninteresting and unlikable characters.  For someone who was raised by the
Catholic church after his parents died when he was young, Jack is awfully
disrespectful, tossing around priests, threatening them with mortal
violence, and frequently flinging F-words at them.  Woods's insufferably
smug performance makes the character even more unsavory.  In addition to
being anti-Catholic, the film is also terribly misogynist, with female
lead, a Valek-bitten prostitute named Katrina (Sheryl Lee, reduced to
screaming and trembling), constantly getting slapped around and humiliated
by Jack's boorish partner Tony Montoya (Daniel Baldwin, who, quite simply,
sucks--bad pun intended).  Even more insulting?  Tony eventually falls for
Katrina, and--yep--her with him.
Like _Bride_of_Chucky_, I'm certain a number of _Vampires_'s laughs are
intentional; Carpenter has always displayed an arch sense of humor, and
that comes through in certain scenes, including the ridiculous resolution
scene.  But I'm not so sure so much of it was meant to be laughed at; two
women sitting behind me at the screening understandably laughed non-stop.
The most disheartening thing about _Vampires_, however, is not its
campiness, but its lack of scares; it's hard to believe the same man who
made the elegantly creepy (and largely bloodless) classic _Halloween_
directed this piece of schlock.  
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Chucky's never gonna die, and neither is this ongoing series of sequels
dedicated to the "good guy" toy from hell! Hong Kong director Ronny Yu
tackles this fourth part with stylish gusto, and adds an extra spice in
for effect: a bride for chucky, bien sur. Does Chucky really get lucky
in this one? You bet!!!
PLOT:
Chucky the killer doll is resurrected by his buxom ex-girlfriend Meg
because she believes that the spirit within Chucky, her real
ex-boyfriend mass murderer Charles Lee Ray, will come back to life and
marry her. Unfortunately for her, Chucky the wonder-knife has other
plans, and decides to bring her along as his rubber doll companion. The
slashing duo's plan is to retrieve an amulet that will allow their
spirits to rejoin physical human vehicles. Murder, mayhem and
all-around gruesomeness ensues.
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining, funny, campy sequel scores points for originality,
humour, great murder scenes, and the ever-loveable personality of
Chucky the psycho-doll! As sexist and rude as ever, Chucky steals every
scene in which he makes an appearance, with his beautifully psychotic
smile, and the addition of a handful of new murders to his rap sheet.
Just as cool is his sidekick Tiffany (with a splash of romance and
sensitivity tossed in), who actually manages to give white trash a good
name! The slick animatronics, the hip dialogue, the myriad of in-jokes
paying homage to other horror film contemporaries make this movie very
enjoyable, while allowing your brain to take the evening off for drinks
and a rest.
Not to mention the wonderful performance set forth by Jennifer's
Tilly's breasts who do a superb job of blending the character of the
film with the essence of her character. Her cans have done wonders
before, but this wonderful performance by her boobs is one to truly
cherish and consider "for your consideration". Her rack is sizeable,
luscious, delectable and plump in almost every scene, and manages to
portray every range of emotion from gregarity and jolliness to
melancholy and surprise. Her cleavage also makes an excellent showing,
and I'm not afraid to say this, almost brought me to tears in one
particular scene. 
Having said that, the
no-name-big-breasted-standard-horror-film-girlfriend was quite a
disappointment in my esteem, as was the
washboard-stomach-cardboard-cutout-boyfriend, who looked like a 32-year
old attempting to play a teenager (Perfectly cast for "Beverly Hills
90210"). The soundtrack was also extremely lame for a movie of its
revived genre, but the few Rob Zombie songs did manage to soothe my
musical hunger just a tad. All in all, this film is a good time at the
movie theatre for all those who want to see a movie about an evil
rubber doll who spews crude and foul remarks, the girl doll that loves
him, and the party of bloody bodies that get in their way. Warm up the
nachos, ice the Coke, take off your underwear, and prepare to have
yourself a brainless, good ol' time at the horror show!!! 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The first time that the full cinematic trailer for Gus Van Sant's
remake of PSYCHO was shown in the theatres was before this film.
Keep a close eye on the first scene, which offers a wink of the eye to
many of its horror sequel competitors, including Jason, Mike Myers and
Freddy Kreuger.
Screenwriter Don Mancini has a part in writing all four of the CHILD'S
PLAY films. He also co-executive produced this one.
This film was previously titled CHILD'S PLAY 4, CHILD'S PLAY 4: BRIDE
OF CHUCKY, CHUCKY and CHUCKY AND HIS BRIDE.
Brad Dourif did the voice of Chucky in all four CHILD'S PLAY films, and
also portrayed the original spirit of Chucky, mass murderer Charles Lee
Ray in the first film.
