Title
Review for American Outlaws (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICAN OUTLAWS" (Warner Bros.)
    Thomas Edison's "The Great Train Robbery" (1903) was the first
Western ever made and "Jesse James Under the Black Flag" (1923) first introduced
the outlaw folk hero. Now, more than 20 similarly-themed pictures later, Jesse
James and his notorious gang of outlaws ride again in a banal MTV spin on an
American legend. The story begins as Jesse (charasmatic Colin Farrell) and his
brother Frank (Gabriel Macht), Cole and Scott Younger (Scott Caan, Will
McCormack) and trusty Comanche Tom (Nathaniel Arcand), after four years of
fighting for the Rebs in the Civil War, return to Liberty, Missouri - only to
discover Union troops are occupying their hometown. And an avaricious East Coast
railroad baron, Thaddeus Rains (Harris Yulin), is forcing farmers to sell their
land at less than true value, aided by Allan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton) and his
infamous detectives who, back then, were just thugs who provided security. But
when Ma James (Kathy Bates) becomes one of their victims, Jesse and the rest of
the guys (Gregory Smith, Ty O'Neal, Joe Stevens) form the James-Younger gang to
wreak revenge by attacking the railroad's supply lines, sabotaging track and
robbing the banks where the payroll is kept. Plus there's romance - between
Jesse and a spunky hometown gal, Lee Mimms (Ali Larter). Working from a
politically-correct, cliché-drenched, sanitized and revisionist screenplay by
Roderick Taylor and John Rodgers, director Les Mayfield keeps the action
fast-paced and goes for lightweight laughs when he can. The choppy editing hurts
but Russell Boyd's cinematography, Luke Reichle's designer duds and Trevor
Rabin's music lend authenticity. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"American Outlaws" is a galloping, formulaic 3. It's the Wild West re-visited as
a date movie.

Author
Laura Clifford
When Jesse (Colin Farrell, "Tigerland") and Frank James (Gabriel Macht,
"The Adventures of Sebastian Cole") and Cole (Scott Caan, "Ready to Rumble")
and Bob Younger (Will McCormack, "Boiler Room") return home as renegade
soldiers from the wrong side of the Civil War, they immediately must face
losing their farms to railroad expansion.  Hot-tempered Cole kills two men
defending his family and is sentenced to be hung, but Jesse James saves
Cole while humiliating railroad baron Thaddeus Raines (Harris Yulin, "Rush
Hour II") and his hired detective agency head Alan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton,
"License to Kill").  They retaliate by burning down peoples' homes, killing
Jesse and Frank's Ma (Kathy Bates, "Misery") in the process.  Jesse and his 
friends decide they need to go to war against the railroad and the James Gang 
is born in "American Outlaws."
"American Outlaws'" tagline of 'Bad is good again' couldn't be more apt -
this is one flick that's so atrociously ridiculous it's entertaining,
the classic bad good movie.  Thankfully it has the sense not to take itself
too seriously, although there are groaners a'plenty when it does.
Screenwriters Roderick Taylor (TV's "Wild Horses") and John Rogers (standup
comic!) throw history out the window, give Jesse a comely, modern love
interest in Zee (Ali Larter, "Legally Blonde") and turn their young guns
into Robin Hoods.  While some of the sparring is amusing, other dialogue
is unintentionally gutbusting ('Don't turn around.  If you don't see it, 
it's not real.')
Director Les Mayfield ("Blue Streak") maintains a fast pace and makes his
cast look (mostly) good while showing no aptitude for creating a realistic
Western (one central stunt is right out of "The Wild, Wild West").  Gabriel 
Macht has good screen presence as mediator Frank James, Scott Caan does the 
chipped shoulder well and Will McCormack provides some top notch comic relief. 
Colin Farrell, so highly praised for his work in the little seen "Tigerland," 
is the pretty, daring-do loverboy here, and proves himself capable of both 
a teen heartthrob turn and 'Matrix' era stunt work.  Gregory Smith ("The 
Patriot") also acquits himself well as the younger Younger brother, who 
insists on riding with the gang.  Kathy Bates plays Ma for yucks and gets 
them, even in her death scene (grossly mishandled by Mayfield).  Timothy Dalton
does a horrendous Sean Connery impersonation and Terry O'Quinn ("The 
Stepfather") mostly looks constipated.  Ronny Cox acts cutely clueless as 
Zee's dad.
"American Outlaws?"  More like Ludicrous Larcenists...
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./Morgan Creek 
 Director: Les Mayfield
 Writer:  Roderick Taylor
 Cast: Colin Farrell, Scott Caan, Ali Larter, Timothy Dalton,
Gabriel Macht, Will McCormack, Gregory Smith, Kathy Bates
 Screened at: AMC Theater NY 8/14/01
   When I went to college back in the Jurassic Age our idea of fun
during freshman year was to call all the people in the local phone
book named Frank James and to say, "Hello, Frank?  This is
Jesse.  We ride tonight!"  Little did we know--after all we were not
even sophomoric then--that they must have heard this line a
hundred times, but then, this took the edge off the midterms and
that's what counted.  We weren't the only ones who had fun with
the James brothers.  Others have had the same idea and they
made money to boot, and what's more they gave lots of other
people enjoyment as well.  In fact given the status of Jesse James
in American mythology it's a wonder that (to my knowledge) no
one has tackled the subject since Walter Hill knocked out "The
Long Riders" twenty-one years ago with Keith and Robert
Carradine as the Younger brothers, Stacy and James Keach as
the James brothers, Randy and Dennis Quaid as the Miller boys
and Nicholas and Christopher Guest as the Ford brothers.  Quite
an idea, a quartet of real-life bros to play the legendary hero-
villains in that stylized and extremely bloody film, a mighty tough act
for Les Mayfield to follow.  Given that Mr. Mayfield's last film
was "Blue Streak" with Martin Lawrence, and that before that he
was at the helm of "Flubber" and "Encino Man," you'd be right to
assume that his "American Outlaws" would be both less bloody and more
humorous than the Hill take on the famous bandits.
   "American Outlaws" features a jokey Jesse played by the
charismatic Colin Farrell ("Tigerland"), who bears a striking
resemblance to a young Treat Williams.  Farrell does many of his own
stunts and is the subject of both premeditated and unintentional
humor.  Jesse teams up with his own brother Frank (Gabriel Macht)
and also with Cole Younger (Scott Caan) and Cole's brother Bob
(Will McCormack plus Comanche Tom played by Nathaniel
Arcand), and they hit the ground running before the credits begin to
roll as Mayfield takes us to the final days of the American Civil War
in 1865.  Though the James-Younger gang appears to have
mowed down more Yankees than Rambo 86'd Asians, the South
surrenders, Missouri is occupied by Northern troops, and the
Jameses are welcomed home by their Bible-thumping mama
(Kathy Bates).  To add to the troubles of the local farmers in the
Missouri town (actually filmed by Russell Boyd on a six-acre-long,
newly-built set near Austin, Texas), Eastern railroad tycoon
Thaddeus Rains (Harris Yulin) has the backing of the U.S.
government to buy up farms across far more land than is really
needed, displacing farmers who have spent their lives on the land. 
The James-Younger gang becomes a small army of resistance, a
guerrilla group if you will, hitting the railroad imperialists where it
hurts--in their wallets.  They rob the banks where the Rains
payrolls are kept, hit the railroad supply lines, and rip up tracks,
frustrating Allan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton), who has been hired
by Rains to head a small army to protect the interests of the
corporation.
   "American Outlaws" succeeds despite its rehashing of the
James legend because it avoids reinventing the wheel.  Rather
than going over the same material dug up by Walter Hill in the
1980 film, Mayfield keeps the picture's tone good-humored.  You
can virtually see the boyishly handsome Colin Farrell and the GQ-
cover model Scott Caan winking at the audience, while even the
villainous Timothy Dalton, decked out in a pin-striped suit, thick
black beard and ten-gallon hat in the 110-degree heat appears to
take his regular setbacks with a fine spirit.  There's plenty of
action--though not much from Ali Larter, who as Jesse's gal Zee
Mimms flirts outrageously with the outlaw until she finally ropes
him in--as farmhouses and banks take turns in being dynamited
and Jesse twists and turns to avoid Gatling guns and six-shooters
alike.  This is a fun western for people who don't particularly dig
westerns.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie games, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Jesse James, his brother Frank and a few of their cousins (better known as the
Younger boys) comprise a gang of outlaws who rob banks, shoot guns and give to
the poor. They don't want people's farms being taken over by greedy railroad
folk and they don't mind killing a few people in their pursuit of that goal. Now
yipee-ka-yay mother...well, something like that.  
CRITIQUE:
A harmless little movie. This film isn't out to hurt anybody. It stars a bunch
of unknowns, a few up-and-comers, a couple of has-beens and plenty of gunpowder,
and asks that you sit down, relax and not expect much from it. If you go in with
that attitude, you will likely be satisfied. Why? Well, the film offers you a
little bit of fun, a little bit of action and a whole lotta nothing. If you're
not interested in an original story...this might be for you. If you're not
interested in getting attached to characters, caring when they die, smiling when
they live...this might be for you. And if you're not interested in feeling
tension, getting swept up by energy or being surprised by anything that happens
in a movie...well, this might be for you. On the positive tip, the film offers
authenticity, a charismatic lead, a great looking babe, a few funny moments, a
nice camaraderie between the band of outlaws, at least two cool gunfight
sequences and not much thinking required. On the downside, the story is pretty
flimsy, the editing and pacing could not be any faster or less engaging, the
deaths and the ending are wrapped up way too quickly and the dialogue is some of
the worst that I've heard in any movie all year.
But then again, I was laughing through most it because it was so contrived, and
actually enjoying it, despite it being for the wrong reason. Does that count or
make any sense? Anyway, my personal favorite line was when one of the James
brothers started shooting up a train and someone asked Timothy Dalton what all
the noise was, and he snapped back, "Revenge!" Hehehehe...had me cwacking up, I
tell you. Which reminds me, James Bond is friggin' hilarious in this movie. He
seems to be playing a character in another movie altogether, hamming it up at
every turn, and following one of the strangest arcs that I've seen in any
character in quite some time (make up your mind, you bastard!). There are also a
couple of complete throwaway roles given to Kathy Bates (and if you look
closely, you can actually see her "cashing her paycheck" for this movie in one
of the bank scenes...seriously...check it out!), as well as Ronny Cox, who
respectively prove that nobody can deliver this awful dialogue and make it sound
genuine.
But you're not gonna see this movie for the characters and the dialogue anyway,
right? I mean, you're going to see it for the action, the gunfights, maybe even
the T&A, right? (okay, so maybe that last one was just me...there is none, btw).
Well, in that respect, the film does offer a few interesting shootouts, a couple
of nice stunts and dare I say...a charismatic performance from Colin Farrell
(oh, have you heard...this guy's going places!). So once again I find myself
stuck in the middle (copyright 1992 Mr. Blonde) of my recommendation meter. On
the one hand, the film offers a few entertaining moments, including some laughs
and decent gunplay, but on the other hand, the dialogue blows, the supposed
"romance" is bogus and the film moves faster than a speeding bullet (but without
letting you catch up!). I'm sooo confused...! Actually, I'd recommend that you
check it out on video where you might just enjoy it for the fluffy western that
it is.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Mexican (6/10) - The Quick and the Dead (7/10) - Shanghai Noon (6/10) -
Tombstone (7/10) - The Way of the Gun (6/10) - Westworld (6/10) - Wild Wild West
(3/10) -Young Guns (6/10)

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Now that Town & Country has finally come and gone after dozens of postponed
opening dates, the biggest laughingstocks on the constantly changing film
release schedule are a dueling pair of westerns - Texas Rangers and American
Outlaws - that have been playing chicken on the calendar for most of 2001.
Rangers, which is apparently so problematic its release has been delayed for
nearly 18 months, offers a star in Dawson's Creek's James Van Der Beek
(although one can only imagine the time and materials involved in fashioning
a cowboy hat to fit over his massive cranium).
On the other hand, Outlaws is essentially Young Guns 3 without the marquee
monikers. The most recognizable name, at least as far as the protagonists
go, is Scott Caan, and the only reason you know him is because of his dad.
Strangely enough, the film's biggest star is somebody moviegoers may have
heard tell of but most have never seen.  And now that I've finally seen
Tigerland's Colin Farrell in action, I'm wondering what the big deal is.
Outlaws is yet another take on the lives of Jesse James and his band of
merry men.  It's the same movie you've seen again and again, but with a
younger cast with which to extract money from a new generation, and it's
probably historically inaccurate enough to give American History teachers a
cardiac episode or two.  Instead of trying to be like Tombstone and Ride
With the Devil, it's more like The Newton Boys and Wild Wild West.
The film opens during the tail end of the Civil War as we are introduced to
a handful of Quantrill's Rangers, a guerilla outfit that skirmishes with the
dastardly Union soldiers (a la Devil's Missouri Irregulars).  Leader Jesse
James (Farrell), his sharp-shooting brother Frank (Gabriel Macht, Simply
Irresistible) and cousins Cole (Caan, Gone in 60 Seconds) and Bob (Will
McCormack) Younger all show they're quick on their feet as they drive those
darn Bluecoats into a retreat.  And they've even got a minority sidekick
(Nathaniel Arcand), just like Guns' Lou Diamond Phillips, or Jeffrey Wright
in Devil.
When they return home to Missouri, the boys learn the railroad company (led
by The X-Files Terry O'Quinn and The Hurricane's Harris Yulin) is trying to
buy huge chunks of land on which to extend their tracks into the great
frontier.  If you don't sell your land, they try you for treason, hang you
and take it anyway.  And, wouldn't you know it, the James' homestead is
right in the way of the railroad.
So the boys start holding up banks and robbing trains, which somehow
prevents the railroad from being built.  What's more, they give the stolen
money back to the community, like some kind of redneck Robin Hoods.  And all
the while they're being pursued by Allan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton), a
super-duper detective who sounds a whole lot like another guy who used to
play Bond before Pierce Brosnan.
But it's not all fun and games.  There's jealousy within the gang, and a
growing potential for everyone to start turning on each other quicker than
the houseguests on Big Brother 2.  Jesse has to deal with his burgeoning
feelings for a doctor's piece-of-ass daughter (Ali Larter. Legally Blonde),
who's ripe for the pickin' even though she ain't kin.  And what would a
western be without people crashing through saloon windows (did this ever
actually happen in the Old West with the consistency it does in cinematic
westerns)?
I know what you're thinking - these boys all sound like Mensa candidates,
but a genius with a Southern accent is harder to find than a penguin at the
equator.  Most of these guys don't even bother with drawls (other than
Farrell's stab at covering up his Irish brogue).  The Native American has
more of a Southern accent than most of the white guys do.  And speaking of
voices sounding out of place, I thought I had mistakenly wandered into A
Knight's Tale when the R.L. Burnside song started blaring in the theatre.
It wasn't even a regular Burnside song, but rather one of the hip-hop
versions produced by Tim Rothrock.  The rest of the score is made up of
guitar-heavy crap courtesy of Yes' Trevor Rabin.
The quality of Outlaws should come as no surprise if you're at all familiar
with the previous work of director Les Mayfield (Blue Streak, Flubber), a
man who knows his shit when it comes to absolute mediocrity.  And let's not
forget the writers - Roderick Taylor has penned 11 made-for-television
movies, including The Gambler Part III, and John Rogers created TV's Jackie
Chan Adventures.  Those are some impressive filmographies from two men who
include enough foreshadowing in their script to shade the entire State of
Missouri.

Author
Robin Clifford
The Civil War has ended and the rebel troops have put down their guns and
are heading home to the hoped for peace of their farms and former lives.
But, in the town of Liberty, Missouri, Jesse James and his friends find
that the head of the Rock Island Railroad, Thaddeus Rains (Harris Yulin),
is buying up all the farms dirt cheap and it's up to the James-Younger Gang
to put a stop to the robber baron's nefarious plans in "American Outlaws."
The outlaw has often been a folk hero for the masses at the very least
since Robin Hood and his band of merry men roamed Sherwood Forest and
thwarted the evil plans of the Sheriff of Nottingham around the time of the
Crusades. In America's Old West, the name Jesse James was synonymous with
popular desperado and has been the subject of no fewer than 23 different
films since the 1921 silent flick, "Jesse James Under the Black Flag." Most
of these movie treatments of the life of the notorious outlaw depict him as
a Good Samaritan who robs from the evil rich, usually the railroads and
their banks, and gives to the needy poor. "American Outlaw" forgoes any
attempt to tell the true story of the James brothers and their gang, opting
instead to adapt the "legend" in this latest telling of American history.
The film starts out with an exciting battlefield sequence at the very end
of the American Civil War. A Confederate cavalry column is ambushed by
superior, more heavily armed Yankee forces, but the brave rebels, in the
persons of Jesse and Frank James (Colin Farrell and Gabriel Macht), Cole
and Bob Younger (Scott Caan and Will McCormack) and trusted comrade
Comanche Tom (Nathaniel Arcand) (and a few other Johnny Rebs) thwart the
Yanks and win the battle, finding out, too late, that the war officially
ended the day before. It is an exciting, noisy introduction to a bunch of
good-looking, likable guys and sets the tone for the rest of the film.
As the war-weary soldiers head to the supposed safety and security of the
Missouri homestead, they find that a blue-coat regiment has garrisoned
their town and is trying to force the local folks to sell their farms to
the railroad at far less than true value. One of the locals, who resisted
the blatant attempt to take his land, is hanged as rebel and left in the
town square as a reminder to Liberty that resistance to the will of
railroad baron Rains is futile. Legions of Pinkerton detectives, led by
Allan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton), are brought in to reinforce the point.
Incensed by the murder of their friend, Jesse and the boys, supplemented by
the Younger's little brother Jim (Gregory Smith), Clell Miller (Ty O'Neal)
and Loni Packwood (Joe Stevens), decide that the railroad must be stopped.
When Pinkerton's goons start burning down the homes of the obstinate
farmers, they make the fatal mistake of blowing up the James homestead,
killing Ma James (Kathy Baker) in the process. This is a major blunder by
Mr. Rains and the James-Younger Gang declares war on the railroad, robbing
his banks and disrupting his supply lines. Rains presses the reluctant
Allan Pinkerton to bring his forces to bear on the outlaws in the David
versus Goliath battle.
"American Outlaws" tag line, "bad is good again," should tell you something
about the nature of the story. In this sanitized, politically correct
telling of the James Gang legend all the outlaws are noble, kind and good.
They are ruthless in dealing with Rains's henchmen, but careful not to
involve innocents in their frequent gun battles with Pinkerton's private
army, even in the middle of a bustling town. Scenes of the gallant young
men giving large sums of stolen loot to the church or scattering dollars to
the poor make you see that these are just good boys who are forced into a
life of crime to protect their farms, families and selves.
But, what it is really all about is romance, intrigue, shootouts, horse
chases, lots of things blowing up, revenge and justice. The clichéd,
sometimes goofy, not often serious dialogue is an unusual plus for the film
and helps string together the set action pieces, starting with the Civil
War opening. There are bank robbery sequences, a cacophonous ambush, a
grand train escape scene and more by way of action. There is also a stab at
romance between Jesse and his childhood sweetheart, Zee Mimms (Ali Larter),
in a move that holds homage to "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" with
Zee a strong, supportive friend and true love (and, she is hell with a
canon). Sure it's politically correct, but in a good, positive way. If the
outlaws weren't always killing people and breaking the law, I'd have this
nice bunch of guys and gal over for dinner.
The cast is uniformly personable with Irishman Colin Farrell first among
equals as the pivotal character Jesse James. He displays humor, charm and
wit and does a darn good job performing the tough stunts and horse riding.
Scot Caan is solid as Cole Younger, the only rival to the charismatic
Jesse. Gabriel Macht steals the screen as Frank James and puts a nice spin
on his perf as the gang's "mother" and quiet wise man, as well as being the
best shot. Will McCormack is endearing as Bob Younger, especially his hurt
reaction when he sees how bad his wanted poster picture looks. The rest of
the gang fits the bill and everyone worked and trained hard for their
rolls. Vet thesps Dalton, Bates, Yulin, Ronny Cox and Terry O'Quinn give
the air of maturity without spoiling the film's inherent youthful fun.
Production values are first rate with Russell Boyd's lensing providing a
crystal clear image with fluid camera work that captures the action
beautifully. Authentic-looking costume by Luke Reichle gives a hip, Old
West look to the handsome cast, with a lot of individuality given to each
player. Production designers Cary White and John Frick make the Wild West
come alive with their recreation of frontier towns. The screenplay by
Roderick Taylor and John Rogers is full of cliché but uses it to good
affect, although some of the dialogue made me slap my head.
"American Outlaws" is good-hearted and good-natured fun that isn't going to
bump anything off of the best western film list. It does entertain, it
looks good and there is solid acting that could be star making. Finally,
some good mainstream summer entertainment. I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
AMERICAN OUTLAWS, by director Les Mayfield (BLUE STREAK), turns the
James-Younger outlaw gang into good guys who combine James Bond's invincibility
with Robin Hood's altruism.  Set to a modern beat and scripted with modern
dialog, the movie is a pseudo-historical, would-be comedy.  Starring a bunch of
relatively indistinguishable young male leads and one token female (Ali Larter),
it is a formulaic film carefully designed to appeal to just the right
demographics.  The guys are like a bunch of frat boys hamming it up as bank
robbers.  (If you're looking for a contemporary take on an old story, A KNIGHT'S
TALE is much more sharply written and a whole lot more fun.)
The members of the famous gang include, Jesse and Frank James (Colin Farrell and
Gabriel Macht); Cole, Bob and Jim Younger (Scott Caan, Will McCormack and
Gregory Smith) and Comanche Tom (Nathaniel Arcand).  We learn how, just after
the end of the Civil War, they were forced into a life of killing and robbing by
Yankees in general and the railroads in particular.  The best acting comes from
ex-Bond Timothy Dalton as the evil Allan Pinkerton.  
So the film can have explosions worthy of the next DIE HARD sequel, both sides
are given great dynamite.  A stick of this stuff and entire buildings go up in a
flash, completely demolishing everything.  Employing Burma Shave type signs --
bet you didn't know that they had them way back then -- the boys also use
dynamite to scare people into doing what they want.
If the movie does have a saving grace, it is this. Perhaps this undeserving film
will do great box office and thus encourage the studios to make some good
westerns again.  This is not as crazy an idea as it might seem.  Remember, it
was less than a decade ago that UNFORGIVEN won a bunch of Academy Awards,
including Best Picture.   
AMERICAN OUTLAWS runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for "western violence" and would
be acceptable for kids around 7 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who thought the film was really excellent, gave it ***
1/2.  He commented on how they needed to make more westerns.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 17, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Max Messier
Not so long ago, men by the names of Peckinpah, Ford, Leone, and
Eastwood made westerns.  Real westerns.  These were some of the best
films of the twentieth century.
Those days are gone.  Now we have crap like Wild Wild West to pass for
the western.  And that record is not improved with the unbearable tale
of American Outlaws.
Outlaws is yet another re-telling of the Jesse James legend, courtesy of
B-movie king James G. Robinson (producer of such classics as Wrongfully
Accused and Chill Factor).  Delayed since the spring, this version stars
the Irish hunka hunka burning love Colin Farrell (the best part of
Schumacher's Tigerland) as the bad-ass Jesse James.  Alas, any sense of
his character has been left on the ranch, leaving us with only cute
chicks like Ali Larter (minus the whipped cream) to watch.
The spin this time around: Fresh from serving as Southern militiamen in
the Civil War, Jesse James (Farrell), his brother Frank (Gabriel Macht),
and his pal Cole Younger (Scott Caan) lay down their arms and head home
to Missouri to tend the family farms after the war has ended.  But
trouble is brewing in their small town of Liberty when evil railroad
baron Thaddeus Rains (Harris Yulin) and his cronies Rollin Parker (Terry
O'Quinn) and Allan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton) demand the boys turn over
their lands to the railroads.  The Jameses and the Youngers then join
forces to fight the railroad -- by robbing banks up and down Missouri,
thus cutting off the railroad's financial surplus and playing Robin Hood
to the local people.
Along the way, the boys squabble over who's the cutest of the gang,
who's the most popular cowboy in the gang, and who ought to go on MTV's
Total Request Live.  They rob numerous banks with identical interiors,
always with the kindest of hearts, strutting in their grungy dusters as
Moby songs play in the background.  The witty banter they share could be
plastered within a Hallmark card.
The biggest disappointment here lies in the acting of Colin Farrell. 
After a great job in Tigerland, Farrell walks through this role easier
then Nicolas Cage in Gone in 60 Seconds.  And his American accent rivals
Richard Gere's Irish accent in The Jackal.  Combined with feeling like
Bonanza: The Teen Years, this homogenized production (toned down to get
the ever-popular PG-13 rating) gives us an invincible Jesse James that
quickly grows tiresome and boring.  The unbearable villains courtesy of
Timothy Dalton and Thaddeus Rains spend the entire film proclaiming that
everyone should be hanged, sucking out any energy left in the film.
Not to mention: The real story of Jesse James and his gang bears no
resemblance to the plot of American Outlaws.  Instead, the movie is full
of old, outrageous tales about the Wild West -- tales which went out of
style in 5-cent magazines about a century ago.
Director: Les Mayfield
Producer: James G. Robinson, Bill Gerber
Writer: Roderick Taylor, John Rodgers
Starring: Colin Farrell, Ali Larter, Scott Caan, Gabriel Macht, Timothy
Dalton, Terry O'Quinn, Ronny Cox, Harris Yulin
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Bob Bloom
AMERICAN OUTLAWS (2001) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Colin Farrell, Scott Caan,
Ali Larter, Gabriel Macht, Gregory Smith, Harris Yulin, Will McCormack, Ronny
Cox, Terry O'Quinn, Nathaniel Arcand, Kathy Bates and Timothy Dalton. Story by
Roderick Taylor. Screenplay by Taylor and John Rogers. Directed by Les Mayfield.
About 95 minutes. Rated PG-13 for violence. 
 American Outlaws is a pretty, but disposable movie. 
 This feature is just another retelling of the Jesse James legend. It adds
nothing to the canon. Its only reason for being is to show off a few studly
young actors shooting pistols and riding horses. 
 The story of Jesse James has been told and retold so many times that it is
almost unnecessary to discuss the plot. After all, actors from Tyrone Power to
Roy Rogers to Clayton ("The Lone Ranger") Moore to James Keach have portrayed
the famed (or infamous, depending on your point of view) Missouri outlaw. 
 Under the direction of Les Mayfield (who is comfortable with remakes, having
helmed Flubber as well as Miracle on 34th Street), we get the same, tired
retread: brothers Jesse and Frank James, along with their cousins, the Younger
brothers, return home after the Civil War only to find that the evil railroad
interests are trying to buy up their land cheaply, and, when failing, are
fomenting a reign of terror to drive the farmers out. 
 Jesse, Frank and the Youngers declare war on the railroad, holding up their
banks and trains, giving some of the loot to their poor neighbors and acting
like 19th-century Robin Hoods. 
 The scenery is lovely, the action is quick-paced, the bullets fly and the
explosions are massive and loud. 
But, what gnaws at you as you watch is, Why another Jesse James movie? The only
notable divergence is a tip of the hat to contemporary gender equality as
Jesse's bride leads a daring rescue of her imprisoned husband. Big deal. 
 That is not say the film is not fun. It is very likable with a personable cast
headed by Colin Farrell as Jesse; Scott Caan (looking and sounding a lot like
his old man, James) as Cole Younger; Ali Larter as Jesse's woman, Zee; and
Gabriel Macht as the wise and careful Frank James. 
 Also in the cast is ex-007 Timothy Dalton as Allan Pinkerton, hired to capture
Jesse; and Harris Yulin and Terry O'Quinn as the hissable railroad baddies. 
 Farrell is a very pleasant Jesse, a soft-spoken young man, sure of himself and
of his mission. The film's only tension is between him and Caan's Cole Younger
as to who is the leader of their outlaw band. 
 Larter is most photogenic and she is given plenty of opportunity to wave around
her golden locks, which has a nice clean, sheen, considering she lives on a farm
in 19th century Missouri and is without any hair products. 
 American Outlaws is a nice diversion. It's one of those movies you watch, enjoy
for the moment then quickly forget. It won't bring about a resurgence in the
sadly neglected Western genre, but it should make enough money at the box office
for other filmmakers wanting to saddle up to consider looking west. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
American Outlaws (2001)
Colin Farrell, Scott Caan, Ali Larter, Gabriel Macht, Gregory Smith,
Harris Yulin, Will McCormack, Kathy Bates, Timothy Dalton, Ronny Cox,
Terry O'Quinn, Nathaniel Arcand. Screenplay by Roderick Taylor and John
Rogers, from a story by Taylor. Directed by Les Mayfield. 100 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
I don't want to be a writer anymore. I want to be an outlaw in a
contemporary western. How grand life would be. Why, I can see myself
there now...
Like Colin Farrell, the star of "American Outlaws," I am the dreamiest
Jesse James ever, looking less like a bandit and more like the grand
prize in my sister's old "Mystery Date" board game. No matter how rough
the fighting gets, my hair always stays perfectly in place, arcing out
over my thick manly eyebrows which are offset by my button nose and
boyish smile.
When battling evil railroad barons, I surround myself with relatives and
friends, such as my brother Frank (Gabriel Macht), a handsome, bearded
man who, like most men in the 1800s, is prone to quoting Shakespeare.
And my cousin, Cole Younger (Scott Caan), a hot tempered but lovable lad
with a body straight out of the "fanatics only" section of Gold's Gym.
Man, do we look great with our shirts off.
The boys and I leap on our horses and gallop across the land, robbing
banks and trading quips while the bullets fly. Me and Frank and Cole
don't really have to worry about bullets, though. Oh sure, one of us may
get the occasional flesh wound, so we can grimace while everyone fusses
over us in a vaguely erotic fashion, but we won't die, because the
bullets of our opponents can only kill ugly men and extras.
Once in a while we rob trains and, boy, do we ever get clever then! You
see, instead of just stopping a train, we do a homage to those vintage
Burma Shave roadside markers, with gang members holding up a series of
funny signs. You know, just like they did in the real Old West.
And our thrilling exploits are accompanied by authentic Wild West music
by Moby.
In case you were wondering, we didn't start off as sexy outlaws. At
first we were sexy Rebel soldiers in the War Between the States,
protecting ourselves from waves of enemy fire by crouching behind thin
pieces of wood. After the war ended, we came home, only to learn that
the railroad was taking our farms, with security expert Allan Pinkerton
(Timothy Dalton) backing them up.
Those monsters blew up our houses and killed my ma (Kathy Bates), so we
get our revenge by robbing banks and trains. Our neighbors love us,
because we throw some money their way and we become folk heroes, with
trashy newspapers chronicling our adventures. Oh, how we laugh at the
foolishness of the unrealistic stories. I mean, what's the point in
taking the lives of genuine historic figures and turning them into glib,
glossy fairy tales about guys more suited to the Abercrombie & Fitch
catalog than the frontier?
What, indeed. See you at Westworld, folks.
