Title
Review for Wayne's World 2 (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:31, Comedy, 1993
MPAA rating: PG-13 (explicit language, adult situations, adult    
                   humor)
Rating: four (on a scale of zero to five)
Director: Stephen Surjik
Cast: Mike Myers, Dana Carvey, Christopher Walken, Tia Carrere,   
      Ralph Brown, Kim Basinger, Chris Farley, Aerosmith,
      Drew Barrymore, Ed O'Neill, Charlton Heston
     Wayne Campbell (Mike Myers) and Garth Algar (Dana Carvey) have
moved out and are on their own.  Wayne is visited in a dream by Jim
Morrison, who tells Wayne to have a concert, the modern version of
Woodstock.  Wayne and Garth go through many problems to try and make
the concert happen.  Also, Christopher Walken is trying to break up
Wayne and his girlfriend Cassandra (Tia Carrere).
     The problem with most sequels of great movies is that the sequel
stinks, take CADDYSHACK and CADDYSHACK 2 for instance.  Luckily WAYNE'S
WORLD 2 doesn't fall into that problem.  WAYNE'S WORLD 2 keeps the
charm of the original, without being a carbon copy of the original.  It
is great to see Wayne and Garth back in action and in great form.
     Some of the cameos in this film are great.  Especially Charlton
Heston and Drew Barrymore.  They keep the general idea of the film
moving.  Other cameos, like Ed O'Neill's, are disappointing, but they
are few.
     WAYNE'S WORLD 2 has a kick-ass soundtrack, that includes
Aerosmith, Gin Blossoms, and Bad Company that keeps the mood of the
film going throughout.  WAYNE'S WORLD 2 is well-written, and those that
enjoyed the first will probably enjoy number two.  Also, as a word of
advise, stay through the end credits.  Like the first film, this film
has a cute segment in the end credits.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mike Myers, Dana Carvey, Tia Carrere, Christopher Walken.
Screenplay:  Mike Myers, Bonnie Turner & Terry Turner.
Director:  Stephen Surjik.
     "Wayne's World" was already a minor miracle by the standards of
"Saturday Night Live" sketches before it ever made it to the big
screen.  Where most SNL premises exhaust all charm in roughly a minute,
Wayne and Garth provided consistent laughs.  Then they tempted fate by
turning a five-minute sketch into a full length film, and it became a
huge, goofy hit.  So the question became, would the inevitable sequel
finally show a concept running on fumes?  Happily, the answer is no.
WAYNE'S WORLD 2 is a collection of more good-natured pokes at popular
culture, propelled by the infectious exuberance of Mike Myers as our
hero.
     WAYNE'S WORLD 2 again follows the adventures of Aurora, Illinois'
favorite public access television stars, Wayne Campbell (Myers) and
Garth Algar (Dana Carvey).  The boys have finally moved out of their
parents' homes, but all is not well.  Wayne, fearing the advances of
shady agent Bobby Cahn (Christopher Walken) on his girlfriend Cassandra
(Tia Carrere), looks for a greater purpose to his life.  He finds it in
a vision which leads him to organize a music festival called
Waynestock, lacking only any actual bands.  Garth, meanwhile, faces the
advances of the seductive Honey Hornee (Kim Basinger).
     Of course, plot ultimately means very little.  WAYNE'S WORLD, in
both its television and film incarnations, is about a generation whose
collective consciousness is a swirl of pop culture icons.  The gags
play on both genre conventions and particular images, but somehow they
manage to be sharper and more "in" than the slew of genre parodies
which littered theaters this year.  The best known targets in WAYNE'S
WORLD 2 (kung fu films, THE GRADUATE, THE DOORS) get the most extensive
treatments, but Myers isn't afraid to pull out obscure references to
Mahogany Rush or 70's detergent and shampoo commercials.  Wayne and
Garth, for all the inevitable comparisons, are no Beavis and Butthead;
they're clever and sharp- witted, simply with all their literacy
derived from the media.  They're in on the joke with their audience,
and they're willing to assume that audience can keep up with them.
     Social commentary aside, WAYNE'S WORLD 2 is just plain laugh-
out-loud funny.  Even the most obvious gags, like the performance of
Village People's "Y.M.C.A." which is destined to become this film's
"Bohemian Rhapsody," are handled with real zest.  The kung fu sequence,
a showdown between Cassandra's father (played by veteran actor James
Hong) and Wayne, is a hysterical parody of the exaggerated sound
effects in "chop-socky" films, and the sequence from THE GRADUATE
features such minor but funky flourishes as using The Lemonheads'
recent cover of "Mrs. Robinson."  Through it all struts Mike Myers,
sporting Wayne's trademark wiseguy grin.  The sense of fun he pumps
into Wayne is almost always engaging, and most importantly he never
seems to be trying to put anything over on his audience.  As a
performer, his enthusiasm can make up for numerous rough edges.
     And there are rough edges in WAYNE'S WORLD 2.  Christopher
Walken's character is basically a retread of Rob Lowe's from the first
film, but without the campy appeal.  The Dana Carvey/ Kim Basinger
segments never really worked for me, primarily because I generally find
Carvey annoying.  Overall, the direction isn't as creative as Penelope
Spheeris' work in the first, but Spheeris turned out THE BEVERLY
HILLBILLIES, so maybe that makes it even.  Like many recent sequels,
WAYNE'S WORLD 2 includes copycat elements from its predecessor, but far
fewer than most, and there's plenty of fresh fun to be found.

Author
Michael S. Huang
Starring: Mike Myers, Dana Carvey
Co-Starring: Christopher Walken, Tia Carrere, Ralph Brown
Appearances by: Kim Basinger, Heather Locklear, Charleton Heston,
                Aerosmith, Jay Leno
Written by: Mike Myers and Bonnie Turner & Jerry Turner
Directed by: Stephen Surjik
     One year has passed since the last time we saw them, and but Wayne
Campbell and Garth Algar are back but, they've moved out of their
parents homes, and now have their own pad in an abandoned warehouse.
Wayne's still hopelessly infatuated with his girlfriend, Cassandra, and
of course Garth is still having his own, personal growing pains.
     They guys are just finishing off one of their shows, and head off
to an Aerosmith concert where they run across Cassandra and her new
manager, a stereotypical industry slime not unlike the character Rob
Lowe portrayed in the previous film.
     Again, the promoter is not only after the money that Cassandra's
talent can bring in.  The storyline quickly degrades to a parallel of
the original, "guy loses chick, guy realizes mistake, and guy gets
chick back."
     Fortunately, there is more to this movie than this somewhat sheer
plot.  The wit and humor in this film are surprisingly intelligent and
fresh with many inside jokes on the film and music industries as well
as just a lot of hilarious scenes of Wayne and Garth showing their true
color.
     Highlights of the movie include a spoof of JURASSIC PARK, Garth's
seduction by a married woman, a surprise appearance by Charleton
Heston, a 1960's Batman setup in the guy's pad, and some pretty groovy
chats with Jim Morrison and some "naked Indian guy," an unexpected
lip-sync of YMCA (you could see that one coming a mile away) and of
course a hilarious parody of those badly-dubbed kung-fu movies we love
to laugh at.
     And if you've ever wondered why there's always boxes of
watermelons, chickens, and people walking plate glass in the middle of
streets, you'll find out here.
     This movie also explores Wayne and Garth a little more.  Garth has
somewhat of a "coming of age" and Wayne gets to learn a little about
himself (with a little help from our old friend, Jim Morrison).  A few
old jokes from the previous movie are explored here again, but this
time with a few twists to keep them fresh, and luckily, few, if any of
them are overused.
     Overall, the movie has plenty of continuity flaws (especially in
the fight scent between Garth and Cassandra's dad), but these are
easily overlooked as this is, after Wayne's World.  The plot is flimsy
but manageable.  There are a few special effects, but they are fairly
seamless, and fill nicely into the plot.  The acting is good, for this
sort of movie, but there are some very bright spots.
     In the big picture, this movie is just plain fun.  There is lots
of intelligent humor that makes this film special.  During the whole
one hour and 40 minutes, I didn't even think about looking at my watch
a single time.  Silly, but riotous at times, this is an excellent movie
even better than the original.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Mike Myers, Dana Carvey, Christopher Walken, Tia Carrere
Director:  Stephen Surjik
Producer:  Lorne Michaels
Screenplay:  Mike Myers, Bonnie Turner, and Terry Turner
Music:  Carter Burwell and various artists
Released by Paramount Pictures
     The original WAYNE'S WORLD boasted a number of clever bits and
parodies glued together by a silly plotline, but at least it was
something a new, and a little different.  WAYNE'S WORLD 2 boasts far
fewer clever bits and parodies glued together by a nonsensical
plotline, and there's absolutely nothing remotely new or different
about this sequel.  It isn't appalling, but it's not worth a trip to
the theaters, either.
     A year has passed since the last cinematic recounting of the
adventures of Wayne (Mike Myers) and Garth (Dana Carvey), the intrepid
duo from the SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE skits.  Now, the two middle-aged
post-teenagers have moved out of their parents' houses and into an
abandoned doll factory.  Neither has any idea what to do with his life,
but Wayne's search begins through a dream-meeting with Jim Morrison.
Our slumbering hero is told to organize a concert in Aurora, Illinois,
and get as many acts as he can.  "If you book them, they will come,"
promises Morrison.  So, with Garth's help, Wayne gets to work setting
things up.
     There are some worthwhile moments in WAYNE'S WORLD 2, but not
enough to justify the filming of a movie.  In the humorous parodies
category are a lampooning of Hong Kong chop-socky films, take-offs of
various old TV commercials (one of which occurs mid-way through the
closing credits--those who depart theaters early, take notice), and a
quick satire of a famous JURASSIC PARK scene.  Equally amusing are
sequences where Garth reacts with horror to the thought of listening to
mellow musician Kenny G, and where Wayne, Garth, and friends
impersonate the Village People.
     That's about it, though, and even the funniest parts are far-from-
original.  In fact, you'd be hard-pressed to find anything in this
movie that's unique.  Even more unfortunate is that WAYNE'S WORLD 2 is
in the unenviable position of having been outdone by the movie preview
before it.  Packaged along with the feature presentation is a trailer
for Paramount's March release THE NAKED GUN 33 1/3, and this 90-second
gem is far better than anything that WAYNE'S WORLD 2 has to offer.
     In addition to Myers and Carvey, Tia Carrere also returns,
although her character is relegated to a disjointed subplot that
involves an underscripted slimeball record producer played by
Christopher Walken (who does a marvellous job acting as if he's playing
the heavy in a serious movie).  There are a number of cameos--by Kim
Basinger, Drew Barrymore, Heather Locklear, Charlton Heston, Kevin
Pollack, Olivia D'Abo, Jay Leno, Rip Taylor, Aerosmith, and others -
but few of these provide anything beyond juvenile puns and one-liners.
At times, WAYNE'S WORLD 2 tries to be like THE NAKED GUN, and falls
flat on its face.
     In the final analysis, WAYNE'S WORLD 2 lacks inspiration, and uses
up ninety-five minutes trying to find some.  As far as sequels go, this
is definitely not the worst of the year, and there are enough moments
to provide satisfaction to those who go in with suitably-limited
expectations, but this shtick is getting old.  This is mass-market
comedy at its least impressive.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Spielberg, Mallick and Benigni actually didn't have to
bother. The acronym "WW2" won't lose the original meaning to
the new generations of moviegoers.
That is one of the conclusions that the critical viewer
might draw from WAYNE'S WORLD 2, 1993 film directed by
Stephen Surjik, sequel to the popular 1991 comedy. The
original was, like some other comedies, based on sketch used
in SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE show. Although it didn't reach the
cult status of BLUES BROTHERS, that light-hearted comedy,
directed by talented Penelope Spheeris, provided enough
laughs and entertaining pop culture references that it
became pop culture phenomenon itself (some of the words and
phrases used by characters of Wayne and Garth entered into
peoples' vocabulary). Two years later, when inevitable
sequel came, times changed. Spheeris was out of picture, and
Myers, besides playing the main character, had conceived the
whole concept, had to cope with less talented Surjik.
This parody, like so many that used to be made in Hollywood
in those times, has hardly a noticeable plot. The characters
are same - Wayne (played by Myers) and Garth (played by Dana
Carvey) are two headbangers who live in suburban Chicago and
broadcast their show out of basement in Wayne's home (in
this film, the studio has moved to abandoned doll factory).
While Wayne's girlfriend Cassandra (Tia Carrere) is being
wooed by sleazy producer Bobby (Christpher Walken) to go to
California, Wayne sees the vision that would convince him to
organise Woodstock-like concert in his home town. These
storylines serve as a weak fundament to series of gags,
referencing popular films, television shows and, in the end
credits, even obscure 1970s commercial. Unfortunately for
Myers and all the people involved, some of those gags work,
and some don't. Same concepts that looked refreshing and
entertaining two years earlier, seem boring and repetitive
now. Fortunately, film provides few laughs and hour and half
spent in front of the screen doesn't look a total waste of
time.
