Title
Review for 8˝ Women (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
8-1/2 WOMEN
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  John Standing, Matthew Delamere, Polly Walker, Vivian Wu,
Shizuka Inoh, Barbara Sarafian, Toni Collette, Amanda Plummer, Kirina
Mano, Natacha Amal.
Screenplay:  Peter Greenaway.
Producers:  Kees Kasander.
Director:  Peter Greenaway.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  120 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In 8-1/2 WOMEN, Peter Greenaway makes a film, and several completely
nude men and women appear ... but I repeat myself. Greenaway's
sensibilities have never shied away from provocative issues or images,
specifically where the human body is concerned. His obsession with flesh
has played a prominent role in his most prominent films: THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER; THE PILLOW BOOK; and PROSPERO'S BOOKS, in
which even Sir John Gielgud dropped trou. Yes indeed, Peter Greenaway
loves putting naked people on the screen. In 8-1/2 WOMEN, lead actor John
Standing's genitalia get so much screen time, they probably should have
gotten third billing in the credits.
     The question with Greenaway has always been whether there is much to
his exercises in conspicuous kink besides the conspicuous kink itself. In
the case of 8-1/2 WOMEN, the answer is, "Sort of." The story concerns
Philip Emmenthal (Standing), a 55-year-old millionaire banker living in
Geneva, and his son Storey (Matthew Delamere). As the film opens, Philip's
wife has just passed away, leaving him despondent. Storey, however, is
convinced that the old man just needs to jump back in the saddle, and
tries to persuade him to seek female companionship. Ultimately, he comes
up with an even more intriguing idea: Turn their Swiss mansion into a
private harem made up of women who are indebted to them in some fashion.
Thus the rooms are filled with women like Griselda (Toni Collette), a
former nun; Simato (Shizuka Inoh), a compulsive gambler; Giaconda (Natacha
Amal), who loves to be pregnant; and Beryl (Amanda Plummer), whose tastes
run to livestock.
     By the time 8-1/2 WOMEN winds to its conclusion, it's hard to imagine
a sexual fetish or taboo that's been left unexplored or undiscussed. 
There's incest and bestiality, transgender role-playing and racial
role-playing, madonna/whores and servant girls. There's even the ghastly
sight of Amanda Plummer in neck brace and the kind of garish make-up
usually associated with the Emcee in CABARET. Don't mistake this, however,
for a film designed to arouse anything but curiosity. The episodes appear
and disappear as though the whole enterprise were simply a fashion show
for perversity, with scarcely a hint of eroticism to get in the way. As
flesh-baring free-for-alls go, this one is pretty flaccid stuff.
     In a way, however, that absence of sexual intensity is what the film
is all about. In a reflexive gag based on a reflexive film, Greenaway has
his two main characters comment on Fellini's 8-1/2, with Philip wondering
"how many film-makers ... make films simply to act out their sexual
fantasies," to which Storey replies, "All of them, I suppose." 8-1/2 WOMEN
becomes Greenaway's acting out of his realization that sexual fantasies
can't be brought to life, or they're no longer fantasies. Philip may have
had a sexually unadventurous life with his wife, but he discovers that
there are inevitable pitfalls to dealing with outrageous quests for
pleasure; only when he begins to fall for one of his women (Polly Walker) 
does he seem happy in his self-made sex palace. In his typically skewed
fashion, Greenaway has made an intentionally un-titillating cautionary
tale.
     If only Greenaway's films felt as much like stories of real people as
they felt like lessons. There's no question that Greenaway is a superb
film stylist; he crafts powerful compositions like the interchanging
medium- and close-range shot of the father and son conversing by the
indoor pool, ripples reflecting off the walls. His films too often lack
real emotional resonance, however, and 8-1/2 WOMEN is no exception. There
are isolated moments when Philip's grief seems more central to the story
than the director's aesthetics, and there's a surprisingly funny scene in
which one female servant discusses her failed "try-out" for the harem with
a co-worker. More often, 8-1/2 WOMEN is another case of Greenaway giving
his audience lots to look at, a bit less to think about and virtually
nothing to feel. He's a maker of intriguing but only fitfully satisfying 
films that happen to include lots of penises and breasts. He may be
cinema's foremost purveyor of art-core porn.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

8 1/2 WOMEN (director/writer: Peter Greenaway; cinematographer: Sacha
Vierny; editor: Elmer Leupen; cast: John Standing (Philip Emmenthal),
Matthew Delamere (Storey Emmenthal), Polly Walker (Palmira), Amanda
Plummer (Beryl), Toni Collette (Griselda), Kirina Mano (Mio), Vivian Wu
(Kito), Natacha Amal (Giaconda), Giulietta (Manna Fujiwara); Runtime:
122; Lions Gate Films; 1999-Netherlands/UK/Ger/Lux)
It's possible for Peter Greeaway ("Drowning by Numbers"/ "A Zed and Two
Noughts"/``Prospero's Books'') to make a more boring sexual/erotic
fantasy film, one that is more didactic and analytical, but not likely
that he could duplicate one that is also so full of itself as this one
was. It is the director's audacious opinion that he can get away without
having a story to go with the full frontal nudity display of men and
women he flaunts throughout the film. It results in a torturous viewing
experience, as pablum is spouted in verbose spurts of emotive stagy
responses, while the reward for the viewer is a few stilted visual
delights and a few restrained chuckles to be had at the absurdity of all
the perversity. The film defies social conventions and commercial
filmmaking sensibilities, something Greenaway has built a reputation on,
as his films are critic-proof, playing to
art-house audience types who relish his deft camerawork and the cerebral
challenges his films pose as puzzlers.
A wealthy 55-year-old Swiss businessman Philip Emmenthal (John
Standing), the director's alter ego for the film, has just become a
widow and grieves his wife's death by wondering who's going to hold and
love me now for my body. He wants someone to hold him, and to the rescue
comes his narcissistic thirtysomething son Storey (Matthew Delamere),
who gets into bed with him for some tender incest. The two bond further
by trading sexual fantasies: Storey's is that he's in love with his own
penis ever since he was a child and looked at himself in a double
mirror. The old man responds to his kid's fantasty, by telling him that
he should get a woman to kiss his dick.
After he goes to the cinema with his son and sees Fellini's 8 1/2 (an
overated film that the passage of time has been unkind to), and watches
Mastroianni setting up a harem of women, this gives the son an idea on
how he can console his father, as he copies the film,  setting up a
harem in their Swiss estate. After viewing the film again on video, the
son begins collecting the 8 1/2 women -- the half is an amputee bound in
a wheelchair named Giulietta (Manna Fujiwara) -- Is her name an homage
to Fellini's wife? If so, what a left-handed honor is bestown on
Fellini! The father's response to the film is, "How many film directors
make films to satisfy their sexual fantasies?" The son says --  "most of
them." Which is about the best way of explaining what this very personal
film means for Greenaway.
The film revolves around the woman collected, as the location of the
story moves from Kyoto, Japan, where the father closes a deal on
pachinko parlors (pinball games), to different parts of Europe. In
Kyoto, Kito (Vivian Wu) is a repressed and headstrong business woman on
their staff. She engineered their real-estate deals in Japan and helps
them collect the Asian women. The women collected who make some kind of
impression include a compulsive pachinko player (Shizuka Inoh) who gets
in gambling debt, thereby selling her body to Storey to cancel the debt,
with her approving husband by her side; Mio (Kirina Mano), a female
impersonator who happens to be female; a bizarre, horsewoman thief
(Amanda Plummer), in a neck brace and facially made up like Joel Grey
was in  "Cabaret," who loves horses and sleeps with a pig; Griselda
(Collette), who is a Norwegian bankteller and a wannabe nun; a greedy
baby-making entrepenaur Giaconda (Natacha Amal) who sells her newborn
babies for as high as $25,000; and, best of all, the only performance
worth talking about in the film, the scheming Palmira (Polly Walker) as
the adventurous libertine, willing to sell her voluptious body to Philip
(she looks great in the nude). She is, of course, by the nature of the
film, more attracted to Philip's aging, decrepit body than she is to his
son's healthy and vital one.
The film didn't mean much to me, but it did say something about how
women understand sex better than men and men are such children when it
comes to sex. It brought up things that are taboo and showed how art is
a metaphor for one's obsessions in sex. The film felt so much like
attending a tedious college lecture in a Fellini 101 course in
perversity as expounded by the arid Professor Greenaway, that it turned
into an anti-erotic movie, a text book type of film where you can bring
in all sorts of intellectual things that weren't developed in the film,
but were only hinted at, and thereby there will always be something
perceived about the film to justify it as an erstwhile effort.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David N. Butterworth
        In his brilliant feature debut "The Falls," 92 biographies of the
survivors of a violent, unknown event are outlined with meticulous and
loving detail.  In "Drowning by Numbers," the integers 1 through 100 flow
through the film, pinned to trees and tin baths, painted on buildings,
cows, and passers-by.  In "The Baby of Mâcon," Julia Ormond's character is
raped 217 times.
        Numerology is just one of the eclectic British director's many
obsessions and here, for perhaps the first time, the numerical allusion
isn't oblique--it's a direct reference to Federico Fellini's "8 1/2."  "How
many film directors make films to satisfy their sexual fantasies?" queries
one of the film's leading men during a screening of Fellini's masterpiece.
It's a rare and telling admission from Greenaway--if only "8 1/2 Women"
were *his* masterpiece.  Unfortunately, the director's latest cinematic
put-on leaves a lot to be desired.
        Just as Robert Altman was able to convince Madeleine Stowe, Frances
McDormand, Julianne Moore (and Huey Lewis!) to bare all in his 1993 film
"Short Cuts," so too does Greenaway have Toni Collette, Amanda Plummer,
Polly Walker (and John Standing!) parade around in the altogether in "8 1/2
Women."  Few filmmakers are as successful in celebrating the naked human
form than Greenaway, since the director--a classically-trained painter--has
always compared the nudity in his films to the role of the nude in Art.
Think Walker as a Botticelli angel.
        In "8 1/2 Women," there's room and then some for Greenaway's
elaborate detailing, intellectual hypothesizing, and preponderance of
naughty bits.  A Swiss banker's wife dies leaving him emotionally paralyzed
and sexually unfulfilled (Standing plays the banker).  Inspired by a
screening of "8 1/2," the banker's cocksure son (an irritating Matthew
Delamere) convinces his father to populate his lavish Geneva estate with
concubines to bring his dreams to life.  This the banker does--among the
women a mother, a whore, a nun, and a legless paraplegic (the half of the
title)--yet he soon comes to recognize the darker, more disturbing side to
fantasy.
        "8 1/2 Women" is a Greenaway film through and through--intriguing
to fans and maddening to the uninitiated--but the pieces of his latest
puzzle never seem to come together in any satisfying way.  The writing is
too obviously designed to shock, the sexism too overt (this might well be
Greenaway's most misogynistic film since 1985's "A Zed and Two Noughts"),
and the structure too self-consciously convoluted.  There are hints and
reminders of greatness, such as the overlays introducing each sequence,
bird calls on the soundtrack (a throwback to the ornithological excesses of
"The Falls"?), and a kinky scene in which our protagonists sniff handfuls
of Toni Collette's recently shorn hair.
        But the picture feels incomplete, rushed, and half-hearted--for
every wonderfully constructed scene and priceless interchange of dialogue
there are awkward moments and stilted sequences which go nowhere.
        A mediocre Greenaway film still stands head and shoulders above
your standard Hollywood fare, but as films of this talented filmmaker go,
"8 1/2 Women" proves a huge disappointment.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
David Dalgleish
"How many film directors make films to satisfy their sexual fantasies?"
Starring John Standing, Matthew Delamere, Vivian Wu, Polly Walker;
Written & Directed by Peter Greenaway;
Cinematography by Sacha Vierny
        Like all of Peter Greenaway's movies, 8 1/2 WOMEN is founded on an
intellectual conceit which is, in theory, intriguing and suggestive.
Unlike most of them, though, it fails to find a structure which can shape
and elaborate its central conceit.  What we are left with, in practice, is
a movie which is often intriguing, often suggestive, never cohesive.
        The premise is this: after the death of his wife, Philip Emmenthal
(John Standing) and his son Storey (Matthew Delamere), inspired by the
famous harem scene in Fellini's 8 1/2, decide to turn their Swiss mansion
into a harem.  There they keep 8 1/2 women, with whom they act out their
sexual fantasies, only to discover that they are unable to govern those
fantasies: the women's inclinations, sexual and otherwise, are too much for
the two men to handle.  Soon the balance of power in the harem has shifted.
        It is played as intellectual farce, which means that it avoids the
obvious humour, but, by the same token, isn't all that funny.  We begin in
Japan, where the Emmenthals and their assistant Kito (Vivian Wu) are inking
a deal with a Japanese businessman, who is signing over 8 1/2 pachinko
parlours to discharge a substantial debt.   Philip then returns to Geneva;
a short time later, his wife dies.   During his period of mourning, he
wonders if his devotion to his rather passive spouse denied him the
opportunity for sensual experimentation for all those years of marriage.
Storey, sympathetic, offers his father access to his new Japanese
girlfriend as a kind of filial gesture--the father and son have, to put it
mildly, a rather uninhibited relationship with respect to sexual matters.
        Events proceed from there according to the film's perverse logic,
until the Emmenthals have stocked their household with an assortment of
strange women, including a Japanese who wants to be a female impersonator
so she can appear more feminine than she already is (BULLET BALLET's Kirina
Maso); a self-possessed, opportunistic woman who cheerfully negotiates the
terms of her own sexual indenturement (ENCHANTED APRIL's Polly Walker); and
an injured horse thief who keeps a pet pig of whom she is perhaps
unnaturally fond (PULP FICTION's Amanda Plummer).  Greenaway scrupulously
avoids taking a straightforward approach to the material--the women at
first seem to represent male-constructed stereotypes (nun, prostitute,
mother, etc.), but are in fact much more complex and vital.
        The typical Greenaway film uses a single location and/or
structuring device--the zoo in A ZED & TWO NOUGHTS, _The Tempest_ in
PROSPERO'S BOOKS, and so on--to provide a framework for the web of visual
quotes, historical references, interlocking metaphors and schematic
plotting which makes up his work.  In 8 1/2 WOMEN, however, the framework
(and the visual scheme inspired by it) is not nearly as rigorous.  There
are some of the usual geometric parallels--8 1/2 pachinko parlours;
Fellini's 8 1/2; 8 1/2 women--but these are surface decorations, not
guiding principles.  Much of the film in fact seems digressive and
unnecessary, like a scene in which two servants discuss sexual deviance, or
a mildly amusing sequence in which Philip is refused entrance to his wife's
funeral because he has worn white, and has to switch clothes--in broad
daylight--with his black-clad retinue so that he can attend.
        The film's visual texture is lavish and baroquely inventive by
anyone else's standards--fastidious attention is devoted to the sets,
costumes, art design, and lighting--but for Greenaway it represents a kind
of minimalism.  Many elements characteristic of his work are gone or
downplayed: the stately tracking shots, the use of multiple frames, the
striking music.  These are replaced by visual tricks which sometimes seem
like empty contrivance.  A methodical alternating series of close-ups and
long-shots of Philip and Storey seated by an indoor pool, for example, is
distracting and self-conscious.  Greenaway's tactics are always
self-conscious, but here it serves no purpose.
        Nevertheless, Greenaway and his longtime cinematographer Sacha
Vierny provide us with an abundance of diverting images.  A Japanese dancer
poses in the Emmenthals' courtyard, daintily manipulating her fan, while
her movements are partly obscured by a huge pink pig in the foreground. A
nude woman rides a horse bareback across a bright green meadow.  Two naked
men sign a document in the middle of a gaudy pachinko parlour while the
resident gamblers look on soberly.  The movie's nonchalant dismissal of
convention is refreshing.  Still, there are signs that the enfant terrible
is mellowing: the single most transgressive act in the movie--consensual
father-son incest--takes place off-screen.
         There is much to admire in 8 1/2 WOMEN, however discursive and
long-winded it might be.  The intricate ambivalence of the movie's
"meaning" offers a welcome contrast to the transparent motives and methods
of most mainstream cinema.  However, the convoluted, paradoxical ironies
that weave their way through the film do tend to cancel each other out.
Reflections on sex, death, gender, art and the body are offered and then
forgotten; their meaning is not amplified as the movie progresses.   We are
left, in the end, with little more than postmodern artifice: clever,
provocative, and self-defeating.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate
 Director: Peter Greenaway
 Writer: Peter Greenaway
 Cast: John Standing, Matthew Delamere, Vivian Wu, Annie
Shizuka Inoh, Barbara Sarafian, Kirina Mano, Toni Collette,
Amanda Plummer, Natacha Amal, Manna Fujiwara, Polly
Walker, Elizabeth Berrington, Myriam Muller, Don Warrington,
Claire Johnston
   Those who take in "8-1/2 Women" as their introduction to
Peter Greenaway's vision would likely that the picture is far-
out, different, novel.  Indeed it is.  But the old Greenaway
hands can't be blamed for feeling that the fifty-seven-year old
Welsh director is losing his experimental edge.  Put "8-1/2
Women" side by side with such daring pictures as his "Pillow
Book," "Drowning by Numbers" and in my conviction his best
work "The Draughtsman's Contract" and the film evokes no
such probing or even visual splendor.  "The Draughtsman's
Contract," for example, which came out of Greenaway's more
youthful mind, deals with an arrogant young artist who takes
commissions from the mistress of an estate in return for
sexual favors--not unlike his current movie, by the way--but
the 1982 movie was delightfully inflected by its 17th Century
spirit and looks more sumptuous than "8-1/2 Women." 
Greenaway made history in the U.S. when his "The Cook,
The Thief, His Wife & Her Lover" (1989)--a parable about
love, revenge and greed--made the Motion Picture Academy
change its concept of rating movies, eliminating the "X" rating
in favor of the current "NC-17."
   Thematically, Greenaway has always been obsessed by
humankind's avarice, sexual fantasies, and revenge, while
visually his movies tend to be distant, cold, and aloof with a
strong emphasis on visual splendor over narrative
conventions.  Leaving much of narrative to the printed page,
Greenaway believes that cinema is first, last and always for
the eye, with story lines taking a back seat.  But "8-1/2
Women," oddly enough, follows conventional story lines from 
A to Z without the challenging experimentation of his previous
offerings.  This time he singles out the idle rich for his satiric
barbs, honing in on a father-son duo who have the most
stereotypical views of women, who exploit them when they
are weakest, and who get their deserved comeuppance in the
end.  That's about as conventional as you can get with
Greenaway.
   What sets the story in motion is the grieving of a
prosperous Geneva banker, Phil Emmenthal (John Standing)
after the death of his wife and the efforts of his son, Storey
Emmenthal (Matthew Delamere) to perk his old man up. 
When the two inherit pachinko (gambling) parlors in Kyoto,
Japan, they may have intended to run them strictly for the
profits that would come from the Japanese fascination with
gambling.  But after seeing Fellini's 1963 movie "8-1/2"
illustrating its self-analytical filmmaker's utilization of women
for his new project, Matthew conceives of a way to cheer up
his grieving dad.  Letting their fantasies run reckless, father
and son commit incest with each other and then turn their
Geneva estate into a bordello.  To serve them, they employ
eight women plus one additional female who has no legs.
The harem include Kito (Vivian Wu), who turns on when she
sees male-female impersonates; Giaconda (Natacha Amal),
who has had six children and will produce another for the
bankers in return for $25,000; Beryl (Amanda Plummer), who
steals horses and fears extradition to Saudi Arabia where she
could receive harsh punishment; Griselda (Toni Collette), who
is pushed into portraying a nun; Palmira (Polly Walker), a
beautiful hooker with the heart of gold.  
   Filmed exquisitely in Japan and Luxembourg by
Greenaway's regular photographer Sacha Vierny, "8-1/2
Women" graphically demonstrates--with liberal use of both
male and female frontal nudity--that the sexual fantasies of
the men soon become banal to them and that the women
ultimately gain the upper hand with fancies of their own.  To
illustrate the vapid, stereotypical views of women held by the
Emmenthals, Greenaway populates the screen with females 
representing the usual clichs.  The bankers run through an
earth mother, the eternally pregnant woman, the thief, the
fainthearted, the heart-of-gold whore, the nun-at-heart, and
the servant; the only creature engaging them when the sex
becomes routine being Palmira--who has no use for "unused"
youth, goes after the older man, and evokes the envy and
frustration of young Storey.  John Standing and Matthew
Delamere do make a convincing father-son team, the son's
ultimately disastrous advice assuring us that the scheme,
however unusual, is credible enough.
   To embody his view that painting represents the best
means of contemplating the world, Greenaway calls upon
some of the great works of art in formulating his women. 
Mother Earth is found in the works of della Francesca,
Rubens and Picasso while the chaste nun has been painted
by Rembrandt and fantasied by de Sade.  The good-looking,
sympathetic whore has been the subject of fantasies from
Mary Magdalene to Marilyn Monroe.
   The vision is there, all right.  What is lacking are a deeper
exploration of the connection between the paintings and this
picture and a truly experimental style to cast Greenaway's
bold notion into a more innovative style--a technique that
could have a better chance of capturing audience awe.
Rated R.  Running Time: 120 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
