Title
Review for Sidewalks of New York (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
You can't blame writer/director/producer/star Edward Burns for not looking
back at his last feature film, the commercial and critical flop No Looking
Back.  After becoming the darling of American independent cinema with 1995's
The Brothers McMullen and following it up with the underappreciated She's
the One the following year, Burns grounded out in 1998 with Back, a gloomy,
critically maligned film about a love triangle that didn't even begin to
recoup its $5 million budget at the box office (it grossed under $200k).
Since then, the quadruple threat has landed significant acting roles in two
major motion pictures - Saving Private Ryan and 15 Minutes - but with
Sidewalks of New York, Burns should feel like he's kickin' it all the way
back to the mid '90s.
Sidewalks is set in - big surprise - New York City and focuses on the lives
of six characters who stagger through their lives searching for love (mostly
in all the wrong places, too).  The film begins with faux man-on-the-street
interviews with each of the six describing their first sexual experiences
before launching into the story proper.  Burns does two things that make the
film interesting:  He uses a handheld camera to shoot most of Sidewalks, and
he has each character hail from a different borough of the city (only one is
an outsider).  Hey - let's meet them right now, shall we?
- Tommy (Burns) is a reporter for an Entertainment Tonight-type show (a bit
of an inside joke, as Burns worked for ET until he slipped Robert Redford a
tape of McMullen) and has just been kicked out of his Queens apartment by
his girlfriend.  Tommy temporarily stays with his boss (Dennis Farina,
Snatch), who is quick to provide over-the-top advice about how to score with
chicks.  Then, one day, Tommy meets...
- Maria (Rosario Dawson, Josie and the Pussycats), a native of Staten Island
who teaches the 6th grade in a ritzy area of Manhattan where her salary is
dwarfed by the allowances of her students.  Maria is recently divorced and,
though she's attracted to Tommy, is leery of getting involved because she
just can't seem to get rid of...
- Benjamin (David Krumholtz, The Mexican) a struggling musician from
Brooklyn who pays the bills by working as a doorman.  He's still in love
with the beautiful Maria and doesn't see anything wrong with dropping by her
apartment in the middle of the night.  Benjamin thinks he still has a shot
with his ex, but, in the meantime, becomes infatuated with...
- Ashley (Brittany Murphy, Girl Interrupted), a guitar-playing NYU student
from Iowa (and the only character who hasn't lived in the Big Apple their
entire life).  She's having an affair with an older, married man who swears
he's going to leave his wife to be with her.  Should she try to find
somebody her own age to frolic with, or simply be content with...
- Griffin (Stanley Tucci, Joe Gould's Secret), a once-divorced Bronx dentist
who has remarried a sweet, young honey yet insists on stepping out with
Ashley on a regular basis despite his fear of the stigma that twice-divorced
men can carry.  Griffin is the only unlikable character in the film, which
makes you wonder how he landed...
- Annie (Heather Graham, Say It Isn't So), a WASP-y real estate agent from
the Upper East Side of Manhattan who foolishly believes she has the perfect
marriage.  The story comes full circle when Annie shows an apartment to the
recently homeless Tommy.
If any of this sounds familiar, it must be because you've seen Woody Allen's
Husbands and Wives, which had a similar (yet much more downbeat) story about
doomed relationships, faux interviews with the main characters, shaky,
handheld camera work, and a comparable setting.  I'm usually against the
idea of lifting ideas from other films, but if you're going to do it, why
not swipe 'em from something as wonderful as Wives?  Copying Rocky to make
Driven...now that I've got a problem with.
Sidewalks is much dirtier than Wives, with gags about dick size and various
private-part odors.  It also helps to perpetuate several myths that
outsiders to New York City have come to accept as reality - Jews are really
cheap and black people don't exist.  But Burns fleshes out his characters
with enough quirky sexual hang-ups and various fears (like loneliness and
disease) to keep things more than interesting.  Nothing really exciting or
surprising happens, but it doesn't need to.  And that's the sign of a good
film.
1:43 - R for sexual content and language

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Classics 
 Director: Edward Burns
 Writer:  Edward Burns
 Cast: Edward Burns, Rosario, Dawson, Dennis Farina, Heather
Graham, David Krumholtz, Brittany Murphy, Stanley Tucci,
Michael Leydon Campbell, Nadia Dajani, Callie Thorne, Aida
Turturro
   There are seven million stories in New York, the world's most
exciting city.  The six principal ones related by the comic genius
Edward Burns in "Sidewalks of New York" are not unique, not
necessarily encompassing even the most dramatic or exciting of
the lives of the people who inhabit Our Town.  But Burns has a
way of making us think they are.  Maybe this talent has something to
do with the subject of his movie: sex, or at least love and sex, not
necessarily in that order.  Maybe it has to do with the diverse mix
of performers who represent characters of various ages from 
youthful adults to middle-aged.  Most of all, I think it has to do
with the nature of the their dilemma: their feeling that somehow
there is a void, that life is passing them by, that while they long for
stability, they may be missing some greater adventure or, that
conversely, while they're seeking some greater quest, what
they really lack in their lives is balance.
   "Sidewalks of New York," the third film which he has written and
directed and in which he has taken the principal role (he is also
working now on "Ash Wednesday"), is an updated version of Max
Ophuls 1950 film"La Ronde"--a witty account of various people
having affairs, forming a chain that eventually comes full circle.
Burns deliberately eschews the European flair, the particular
sophistication of the work that perhaps inspired it, choosing
instead more American urban take on this universal western
theme  But it may not be dismissed as mere fluff.  You could well
leave the theater in a somber mood, because after the laughs, the
recognition that your hopes and fears are reflected in the lives of
the people on the screen could lead you to reassess your own
Grand Design.  In that sense, "Sidewalks of New York," while less
entertaining than Burns's "She's the One" (about a fella who
married on impulse after discovering that his wife is cheating on
him), and the director's smashing debut "The Brothers McMullen"
(a compelling tale of three brothers with different personalities
living under one roof), carries more gravidas.
   Thoroughly character-driven and piloted by mock interviews in a
faux-documentary style, "Sidewalks" deals with six New Yorkers
from various walks (so to speak) of life whose lives and loves
weave and twine and ultimately fall together at the bittersweet
conclusion. Queens-born Tommy (played by writer-director Burns
as the principal character as would Woody Allen were he to direct
the film), is Mr. Outer-Borough, a guy who does not take to self-
disparagement just because he did not grow up in Manhattan but
instead believes that Manhattan would not exist were it not for
people like him.  He is living with the slick Carpo (Dennis Farina),
who considers himself Tommy's mentor in love and sex, claiming
500 conquests in the past year, lessons that Tommy does not
necessarily follow when flirting with sixth-grade teacher Maria
(Rosario Dawson), who has been divorced for a year from
Brooklyn doorman Benjamin (David Krumholtz).  Perhaps the
most involving of the eternal triangles exists among Griffin
(Stanley Tucci), a Park Avenue dentist married to trophy wife and
real-estate agent Annie (Heather Graham) but conducting an
affair with Iowa-transplant Ashley (Brittany Murphy) who is twenty
years his junior.
   As this is Burns's most character-driven movie, you get the
impression that he scours up as much chatter as would an Eric
Rohmer, but there's nothing static in this fast-paced yarn.  Burns's
cameraman, Frank Prinzi, switches repeatedly from an
unidentified interviewer who asks mighty personal questions about
sex to each character to the same individuals as they actually live
their love lives--a kind of show-and-tell, tell-and-show merry-go-
roundelay of escapades. Our  sympathies go out to all, even to the
conniving, lying, sniveling dentist who flat-out lies to his wife about
his affair with an adorable waitress.  If Burns is taking sides, it's
generally with the women: not that he'd go along with Dr. T. that
all women are saints, since after all Ashley must share the blame
as a housebreaker with Griffin, and Maria must come to terms
with her refusal to return Tommy's sincere calls.  The film was shot
in just 17 days and though they're tightly scripted, the performers
with almost no exception have the proclivity to say "y'know"
repeatedly, an annoying tic that Burns may have copied from one
of Woody Allen's bad habits.
   Men and women might both pick up a few pointers on how to
flirt, whether at the video store, in a museum, in the park, in a
coffee shop, even in the dentist's office. Side characters play their
part to strengthen the film's vision, particularly Michael Leydon
Campbell in the double role as the multi-pierced young band
member Glo and a middle-aged married guy, Harry,  who wants to
build a log cabin in the woods (most likely to have a place to take
his women rather than to read Plato under the stars).
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
