Title
Review for Catfish in Black Bean Sauce (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Norm Schrager
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/9b206d129b15a14d8825697200193239?OpenDocument
Now here's an unconventional family for the new decade: two Vietnamese
siblings are brought up in California by a black couple; sister Mai
marries an Asian, and brother Dwayne's getting engaged to an
African-American woman (Love and Basketball's Sanaa Lathan).  While this
is juicy enough, first time writer/director/actor Chi Moui Lo throws
some real spice into his comedy-drama mix: Mai (The Joy Luck Club's
Lauren Tom) has found her Vietnamese birth mother, and is bringing her
to the States.
Lo, who plays Dwayne, uses these circumstances to attempt an original
look at families and their identities, but his basic concepts are better
than their execution.  The effort is certainly worth noticing -- his
script is an impressive debut, trying to flesh out nine closely-knit
characters -- but some stale and predictable presentation drags down a
strong idea.
We're first introduced to Dwayne as he plays cards with his parents
(veteran actors Paul Winfield and Mary Alice) and shuns his mother's
pleas to adopt their newfound blind cat.  When they complain that the
cat thinks he's human, it's a subtle means of explanation -- that poor
cat is just the first of the cast to question his identity.
It all gets put into motion with the arrival of the mother, Thanh (actor
Kieu Chinh, known as "the Meryl Streep of Vietnam").  Mai is sure of her
desire to be with her birth mother, but Dwayne discards the idea.  While
the pair wrestle with their own reactions to this new woman in their
lives, it sends the rest of the family into turmoil.  Dolores, Mai's
American mother, immediately resents Thanh with a twist of pride and
jealousy that Mary Alice boldly brings to the movie.  While Papa Harold
tries to keep the peace (a role for which the tall, easygoing Paul
Winfield was practically born), Dwayne reconsiders his Americanization
and his impending marriage.
Lo tries to keep it all moving with a colorful mixture of joy and
conflict, even easing in the occasional flashback to bring a certain
pathos to the kids' development.  But along the way, there's rat-a-tat
comedy dialogue that's overwritten, some clunky dream sequences, and the
periodic montage that screams B-movie, or even worse, B-movie satire.
The director's strength seems to be in playing it for drama.  There's a
healthy honesty to his story, and he extracts strong emotional
performances out of his leads.  But even he is a far better dramatic
player than comedian.  One particular Abbott and Costello-esque exchange
with his roommate (Tyler Christopher) screams to be taken down a notch.
But that's the kind of basic problem revealing a beginner who's on to
something good, but is still just out of the gate.  After the
possibility of a strong conclusion, the film's final act unfortunately
heads for sitcom country.  This includes a sequence that gathers all the
players in one room, in a stilted attempt at wacky chaos.  Neither the
shots, editing, nor actors' timing was worth the trouble.
Nevertheless, Catfish in Black Bean Sauce takes a considerable dive into
its characters heads without telegraphing their every feeling.  And
although race certainly plays a part in the film's development, this
isn't a movie where race is an issue.  These positives reflect the
balance and smarts that Chi Moui Lo could really show off in his next
film.
Director: Chi Moui Lo
Producers: Chi Moui Lo
Writer: Chi Moui Lo
Starring: Chi Moui Lo, Sanaa Lathan, Paul Winfield, Mary Alice, Lauren
Tom, Kieu Chinh, Tyler Christopher, Tzi Ma, George Wallace, Wing Chen
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
