Title
Review for Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Frank Maloney
     ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES is a film starring Kevin Costner,
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Morgan Freeman, and Alan Rickman.  The
film was directed by Kevin Reynolds, written by Pen Densham and John
Watson.
     This morning before I went to the first showing of ROBIN HOOD I
read a review of the film in the morning paper.  The reviewer was pretty
disappointed and reading the review so was I.  A few hours later I was
sitting the darkened auditorium and enjoying the hell out of myself.  I
have some reservations, mostly about Costner himself, but overall I can
recommend ROBIN HOOD to anyone who enjoys action/adventure movies.
     All the principals and most of the supporting players are obviously
having a wonderful time.  The exception, as I have indicated, is Kevin
Costner.  Now, I am a fan of Costner's, but I felt he was very
uncomfortable with large parts of his role here.  Often his speech was
too flat, as if he didn't know how to read his lines, hampered by the
most curious and unnecessary accent.  Being an American actor, Costner, 
apparently, is not trained in doing accents, so he did not attempt to
sustain even a stage-British accent, but instead compromised by
broadening some vowels and dropping some r's.  The effect is slightly
silly, but most noticible only when he is slugging his way doggedly
through set-piece speeches.  In a tete-a-tete, on the other hand, with
Mastrantonio, he speaks and sounds easy and natural, with richer
inflections and a blessed reversion to his natural accent.  I think, I'm
afraid, that Costner should have limited himself to the role of producer
for ROBIN HOOD and in the future to stick the purely American roles that
I have loved him previously.  (Lyndol, my best sounding board, however,
says he had no problems with Costner as Robin Hood, so I expect as many
viewers to say I'm too harsh as to say I'm too easy on our star.)
     Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, on the other hand, was simply perfect
as the Lady Marian.  She brought a strength and independence to the
familiar character that I've never seen before (although I've never seen
ROBIN AND MARIAN, so I'm prepared to be corrected here, as elsewhere).
She's brave, intelligent, aggressive and assertive, a natural born
leader herself.  And she's an older Marian than the one's I'm used to,
not a crone, but surely a mature woman.  All these reasons make her
excessive screaming in the climactic sword fight all the more
unacceptable and irritating.  This is certainly a Hollywood tradition
(Basinger in BATMAN, or Hawn in BIRD ON A WIRE, par exemple) and maybe a
dramaturgical problem as well (the third party has to have something to
do while she's on "stage"), but I don't have to like it.
     An unusual addition to the familiar cast of the Robin Hood legend
is Azeem, the Moor, played by Morgan Freeman.  I enjoyed Freeman's
charaterization of Azeem enormously.  In some ways, he was our
spokesman, our eyes, the one who sees the barbarism of Merry Olde
England and comments on it both in words and body language.  Also,
Freeman was subtly and hugely funny; his relationship to Robin was the
occasion of several of the better jokes in the movie.  And Freeman look
marvelous, younger and in better shape than I've seen him in years.
Some people are going to say that Azeem was added to the story as a
token gesture to Costner's sense of political correctness, but I
remember that wondeful Richard Greene Robin Hood TV series from the
early 1950s in which one episode featured a Saracen dazzling the Merry
Men with his superior technology and nobility, and another episode
featured a Byzantine princess, who was even more exotic in that context
of Sherwood Forest.  Legends are always updated in their details by the
storytellers, and the presence of Azeem in this version is both welcome
and interesting, in my humble opinion.
     And speaking of comic roles, I was totally unprepared for the
hilarious reading Alan Rickman brought to his interpretation of the
Sheriff of Nottingham.  Rickman, of course, is famous nowdays as a major
heavy, genius, psychopath, torturer (do see CLOSETLAND if you can).  And
here as the Sheriff, a role usually more buffoonish than satanic, he
combines the psychopath with the comedian in way that was sinister,
ridiculous, threatening, hilarious, and made all the more evil by an
underlying childishness.  Rickman is a brilliant actor, who has mastered
the physical side of acting.  The slightest gesture, the smallest
movement of his eyelids communicate and communicate volumes about his
character.  Rickman is the true star of ROBIN HOOD and the real reason
to see it.
     (Another acting appearance I was also unprepared for comes in the
form of a surprise and wonderful cameo at the very end of the movie.
You will love it.  But don't spoil for anyone else.)
     There is an element of fantasy that has been added to the legend
here, also, which I am of two minds about.  The Sheriff keeps a witch in
his castle, a witch who raised him, who advises him, who prognosticates
successfully for him, and who even fights for him.  It's not quite
right, not quite wrong, and I'll be interested to hear how others react
to it.  Generally, I like magic and witches in my movies, and this witch
is having a grand time living up to the traditions of her role.  But is
it really necessary in order to give some rhyme or reason to the
Sheriff's personality?
     The photography, the sets, and the location scenery are all
wonderful, as they should be for $50 million.  The action is decidely
Spielbergian; the director Kevin Reynolds is a former protege of the
master and he learned his lessons well.  Unfortunately, he didn't have
much control over the other Kevin; indeed, the gossip is that the two
men were close friends going into the project and are no longer on
speaking terms, thanks to Costner's interference.  Costner, himself, has
been quoted recently as saying that it isn't what he wanted it to be;
he's complained that the relevance and meaning of the coy nude scene
(using a body double, I hear) was lost on the cutting room floor --
Marian is supposed to see the scars on Robin's back and understand that
he's grown during the Crusades.  From other things Costner's been
saying, I'd say he needs a good enema, but hey! what do I know about
the pressures of being a superstar?
     I miss Prince John, however.  Making the Sheriff, a royal servant,
into a major player in England's dynastic politics makes no sense
historically and introduces more ridiculousness into the script than a
boatload of Moors and witches.  The script, by the way, is loaded with
awkward locutions, stilted speeches only marginally made acceptable by
the skill of the actors.
     ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES, is not an unqualified success, but
it has more enough strengths and will be talked about enough this summer
that I can, without hesitation, recommend it to you, even at full ticket
prices.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     The long-awaited, long-hyped version of Robin Hood hit the screens
last night.  Was it worth it?
     This version isn't as much fun as, say, the Errol Flynn version.
It's a more serious, subdued, uneven movie.  There is some wonderful
photography, the sets look very medieval, and most of the costumes are
pretty good.  The main problems in the movie are the fault of the novice
director (the only other movie this director had made was Heathers) and
that script.  Costner's accent problems pale beside these major flaws.
Still, the movie is definitely worth viewing on the big screen.  Once,
anyway.
     This movie opens in a hideous Islamic prison in Jerusalem.  A
reasonably illogical thing happens, permitting Robin Hood (Kevin
Costner) and Azheem (Morgan Freeman) to escape.  Back in England,
Robin's father (an all-to-brief performance by Brian Blessed) is
murdered by the sheriff of Nottingham (a scene-chewing performance by
Alan Rickman) and his "merry" men.  So by the time Robin arrives in
England, all hell has broken loose.
     Some of the best scenes in the entire movie are some sweeping shots
of the English countryside as Robin watches Sir Guy of Gisborn set dogs
on a 12-year-old boy.  Robin, naturally, intercedes, killing a few
knights and rescuing the boy.
     Part of the problem with this movie is the far-too-campy
performance by Alan Rickman as the sheriff, and the really awful lines
he is given to say.  Rickman, who played the memorable Hans in DIE HARD,
was completely out-of-control in this movie.  Costner gives a very
earnest performance as Robin, and his accent is unbelievably
inconsistent.  Both Morgan Freeman and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio give
the only really strong performances of the film, although the actors who
play the thieves and their families were all fine.
     Getting back to the script for a minute, anachronisms abound in the
attitudes of the characters.  While there were a few Moors in England at
this time, given that the Crusades were in full force, it's unlikely
Azheem would have wanted to go to England, or that he would have
survived for very long once he was there.  You have the sheriff talking
about his "sanity," which was practically an unknown concept back at
that time.  You have a very odd speech about "nobility" that Robin
gives, and a rousing, but equally odd speech given by Azheem about
freedom.  I don't expect screenwriters to have their characters speak in
genuinely medieval English---it would have been almost unintelligible to
the average film viewer.  But I do expect screenwriters to have done
enough research about the period and not give their characters
unreasonable attitudes given the time.
     The screenwriters did successfully portray the fact that the Moors
were technologically superior to the English at that time.  Azheem makes
a few remarks about "savages," cooly assists at a difficult birth, and
tries to teach Robin how to use a telescope.  (Robin doesn't get it)
     One other problem with this movie---though it's rated PG-13, it has
a few really gross little twists in it.  It's not a good movie for
sensitive children (or adults!).  There are also two attempted rapes, a
hand amputation, hangings, various cuttings, and lots of sword & arrow
play.  The film editing was a little sloppy; about ten minutes could
have been cut with no loss whatsoever.
Spoilers (but if you know the Robin Hood story, not really)
     There are only two small surprises in this movie, but both were
unbelievably telegraphed.  There is something of a surprise at the very
end of the movie.  At least, it was a surprise to most of the audience,
who started applauding and cheering for the first time in the entire
film.
     The climax of this movie had that really stupid plot device of a
character that should have been dead already returning for one last
attack on Robin and Marion.  This was a tired hack a few years ago.  Why
do screen writers persist on doing this????  Why do producers and
directors let them?

Author
Scott Eggimann
          Capsule Review:  An exciting, captivating adventure film about
     the classic story of Robin Hood and his quest to fight evil and
     return justice to the poor people of England.  Rating: +3 (-4 to +4);
     Worth the full admission price.
     Many years have passed since I first read the story of Robin Hood
and his band of merry men.  Since then, the closest I've come to the
story has been through Walt Disney's animated version.  The story I
remember is a childhood fantasy depicting the epic battle of good versus
evil and the current movie holds onto that theme.  This movie is not
getting good reviews, and I'm not sure why.
     Having a small background in European history during the Crusades
certainly enhances the numerous references to that period, but it is not
necessary for understanding and enjoyment.
     Robin of Locksley (Kevin Costner) certainly follows all the steps
of the classic hero.  He goes off to fight with King Richard in his
quest to convert the barbarians to Christianity.  His decent to the
underworld is where we first see him.  Robin is a prisoner in a Turkish
prison.  His successful escape brings with him the Moor Azeem (Morgan
Freedman) -- a little irony here, his enemy in the Crusades.
     In the first ten minutes of the film, Robin is firmly established
as a hero (in the literary sense).  With this type of introduction, I
was prepared for either a big let down or a continuation of this
theme.  I was not let down, Robin actually makes several symbolic trips
to the underworld to turn this movie into an exciting adventure story.
     The relationship between Robin and Azeem is a perfect union.  Robin
is a representative of the allegedly "civilized" English people and
Azeem is a representative of the so called "barbarians."  Ironically it
is Azeem who shows the barbaric nature of the English people during King
Richard's reign.  Their relationship shows that two enemies can combine
to fight a common foe; once in Turkey and again in England.  The two
learn from each other and provide the spark to lead other men to a cause
greater than anything either of them had faced before.
     Beautiful breathtaking scenes permeate this movie.  One image is of
Robin's father exiting his castle dressed in his black battle armor on
top his black steed preparing to battle the overwhelming mob in front of
him (reminiscent of the suicide scene in the beginning of DANCES WITH
WOLVES, that Costner had just completed filming).
     Humor is rampant through the movie.  I was not prepared for the
Sheriff of Nottingham.  He is actually a very funny person, his facial
expressions and comments are very comical.  Once you accept that he can
be a funny person and laugh at his humor, he becomes a much more
enjoyable character.  The Sheriff is a complex character who you can
never quite figure out.
     Leave your expectations at home about some of the more memorable
stories of Robin Hood:  I don't quite remember the whole story I read,
but I don't remember any mentions of the Crusades, and I definitely
don't remember the Moor Azeem.  Robin says he's robbing from the rich
and giving to the poor, but you don't really get to seem him giving away
all that much.   I guess the story had to be updated for a new
generation.  If this is the case, then I liked the updating.
     One more thing...  How come Robin did not have an English accent
while everybody else did?  I suppose an English actor or a language
instructor for Costner would have made the small details of this movie
more entertaining.
     I left the theater wondering if the situation were reversed, if
Robin would have followed Akeem to Azeem's homeland for saving his life.
I think he would have.  The successful relationship of the two is so
strong that I could accept the reversal of situations.  This isn't a
one sided relationship, both friends learn from each other.  Since these
two play such an important role in the success of the movie, we must be
able to believe they are sincere.

Author
Jerry Saravia
ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THIEVES (1991)
Reviewed by Jerry Saravia
October 16th, 2001 (originally viewed on July, 1991)
As legend would have it, Robin Hood was a man of the people, one who identified
with the poverty of the English people and would steal from the rich and give to
the poor. His determination resulted in ongoing fueds with princes and paupers
and those whom he stole from. The legend resulted in one terrific film with
Errol Flynn back in 1938 called "The Adventures of Robin Hood" (it is still the
definitive version). There was also the more mature, older Robin trying to have
a romantic relationship with a suicidal Maid Marian in "Robin and Marian,"
starring Sean Connery and Audrey Hepburn. In 1991, Kevin Costner and director
Kevin Reynolds had the temerity to bring back Robin Hood to the screen with
Costner's American accent almost intact as a sour but also determined Robin. It
almost felt like the end of cinema as we knew it. Casting Costner was like
casting Gary Cooper as Dracula! Yes, brave casting indeed, but could Costner do
it?
"Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves" has Costner as a depressed Robin with only
occasional flashes of humor. His depression stems from the fact that he has just
arrived back from the war of the Crusades after a few years, leaving with a Moor
named Azeem (Morgan Freeman) back to England and good old Sherwood Forest.
Unfortunately, Robin's father (Brian Blessed) has been killed by the evil
Sheriff of Nottingham (Alan Rickman) and now, Robin wants revenge. Plus, he
decides to help several homeless Englishmen and other denizens from the Sherwood
Forest and other villages who need a strong leader to lead them and grant them
freedom. Who better than Robin himself? 
In hindsight, I dreaded watching yet another update on the Robin legend. Patrick
Bergin showed some dash but little chemistry in the TV movie that was to be
released theatrically the same year as this film. Only Sean Connery came close
as a fitting replacement to Errol Flynn. Costner shows little gleam - he is the
most morose Robin Hood to ever appear on screen. And yet I must confess that I
enjoyed Kevin Reynold's remake immensely. It is clever, witty, wicked, dark, and
often joyous. It is by no means a great film, largely because of Costner, but it
is a fun ride for the most part. 
The action scenes have a thrilling intensity to them. The escape from the
dungeon in the opening sequence (through a modern manhole!) has the
nerve-wracking thrills of an Indiana Jones flick. There are also point-of-view
shots of arrows flying through the air, discovery of gunpowder long before Marco
Polo that results in fiery explosions, flaming arrows, swords that emit sparks
when clanging against each other, screaming crones, black magic, a Maid Marian
(Mary Elizabeth Manstrantonio) that knows how to wield a sword though she ends
up as a scared damsel in distress anyway, double-crosses galore, evil priests
and clerics, and so on. This Robin Hood is designed to entertain you in any way
it can and it succeeds. 
Though it contains a miscast Kevin Costner, the other actors do their best and
bring some sense of style. Mary Elizabeth Manstrantonio is almost Shakesperean
in her mannerisms and excellent English accent as the fierce, loving Maid
Marian. Morgan Freeman excels as Robin's trusty aide who has a bigger sword than
anyone in the movie. But it is really Alan Rickman who steals the show and is at
his devilish, wicked best as the theatrical Sheriff of Nottingham ("Call off
Christmas!"). Rickman goes over-the-top but hilariously so, he just can't
believe one man and his merry band of men could revolt against him. 
Director Kevin Reynolds opts for too many close-ups and so this Robin Hood tale
does lack the grandeur of the earlier incarnations. Still, in terms of action
setpieces, he has the right flair. The fiery forest attack is expertly done as
is the heartstopping climax where the Sheriff has a sword duel with Robin. There
is also a nifty sequence where Robin fights a guard who turns out to be Maid
Marian!  
Overlong and nearly parodic (plus containing a "Star Wars" subplot that sure is
grating), "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves" is often superb entertainment and a
nice addition to the Robin Hood cinematic legends. Plus, check out the grandly
majestic cameo at the end by a great, iconic actor - it is one of the best
cameos in history. It is such a wonderful surprise that it had audiences
cheering at the end of a screening I saw, as if the real hero had finally
arrived. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Randy Parker
        ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THIEVES--you have to wonder if the critics
and the public saw the same movie.  The critics generally regarded the film
as a dreary waste of two hours, while the movie-going public found the
classic Robin Hood legend irresistible.  Who was right?  If you ask me, the
truth lies somewhere in between.
        Without question, the film falls victim to numerous plagues, the
most lethal of which is an unusually shaky performance by Kevin Costner,
who is tragically miscast in the title role.  Additionally, the movie
suffers from a wildly inconsistent tone, which is somber one minute and
airy the next.
        But somehow, warts and all, the film manages to offer a rollicking
good time.  PRINCE OF THIEVES is an undeniably entertaining crowd-pleaser,
thanks to rousing action scenes and robust performances from Morgan Freeman
and Alan Rickman.  Be careful not to confuse the movie with the inept 20th
Century Fox version starring Patrick Bergin and Uma Thurman, which truly is
an appalling waste of time.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I saw the coming attraction for ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES several
months ago and decided then that I wanted to see it.  After all, it did not
have police and was not set in L.A.  How many films come out that even are
set before the 20th Century?  Filmmakers don't seem to want to gamble on
ever-diminishing public knowledge of history.  I had hope this could be a
good film.  Then I read the article in the June 1991 CINEFANTASTIQUE which
said:
     "The new film's approach to the legend can be [the
     producer/screenwriter's] description of the Merrie Men as
     medieval Hell's Angels.  Add to that [director Keith]
     Reynolds's observation that '[Christian] Slater [as Will
     Scarlet] plays a 12th Century James Dean' (complete with
     Rocker quiff), the overall opinion that Maid Marian is a 12th
     Century feminist, and the fact that this film's humor is of a
     very contemporary nature....  [The Sheriff is] evil
     personified.  With King Richard absent England has reverted
     to paganism and human sacrifice.  The God/Christianity
     vs. Evil/Darkside is even more potent."  [according to co-
     producer/co-screenwriter John Watson].
This was not at all encouraging.  This is no place near what a telling of
Robin Hood should be.  I wrote an article at the time complaining about
filmmakers who do not have respect for the material.  It sounded as if the
film was being made with no respect for the characters or the period.  They
had let Christianity versus paganism become the conflict rather than the
Anglo-Saxon populace against the Normans who had conquered the country in
the previous century and had set themselves up as the ruling nobility.  That
is why Robin, though technically from a noble family, had no real political
power.  He was of Anglo-Saxon nobility and was considered by the Anglo-
Saxons to be rightfully of the ruling class.  But it was the Normans who
ruled.
     Then Fox Television did their own version of Robin Hood, one not great
but creditable.  I wondered if it might not be better than the film it was
trying to imitate.  And I got into at least one argument with someone who
thought I was not being fair to ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES.  Then I went
on vacation.  I came back to find ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES opened to
calamitous reviews.  Now I have seen it and I would say that while
everything bad I predicted about the film turned out to be quite true, I
think that the film was not as bad as most of the critics seem to think.  So
part of my job now is to defend the film that I formerly criticized.
     There is little wrong with ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES that could not
have been fixed by just not making this film about Robin Hood.  The Robin
Hood of legend was outlawed as a young teenager.  It was his youth that made
him an outlaw since after being taunted about his youth he shot a king's
deer to prove he had the prowess of a man.  The film's concept that Robin
had been to the Crusades and had picked up a Moorish sidekick was inventive
but also purely invention.  That the Moor would bring with him the knowledge
of gunpowder is unlikely and the telescope--not invented until the
Renaissance--is absurd.  In a lighter film, such as THE CRIMSON PIRATE, such
anachronisms might be a little more acceptable, but with the exception of
the performance of the Sheriff of Nottingham (played by Alan Rickman, who
has more fun with his role than the audience does), this film is just not
that light.  Speaking of Rickman's Sheriff, while I would probably have
liked to see the film less tongue-in-cheek, Rickman's screwball wedding
scene has to rank as a guilty pleasure.  (The real Sheriff was married and
had a daughter who eventually succeeded at the feat her father botched:
killing Robin Hood, albeit and old and ill Robin Hood.)
     One of the major problems was that the script was just not very
professionally written.  Pieces that have already been used in far too many
films show up here.  [Minor spoiler alert: The reader who has not seen the
film may want to skip to the next paragraph.]  In searching for Marian,
Robin must fight a hooded guardian who nearly bests him.  Can you guess who
this warrior is?  Yup!  In two or three scenes characters bragging about
their expertise are cut short because they were not watching what they were
doing and did something like riding right into a tree branch.  They even
manage a horror film jump scene.  This is very inadequate script-writing.
And when the Sheriff tells Robin his father died "squealing like a pig,"
this was an allusion to a similar line also spoken to Costner in THE
UNTOUCHABLES.
     Dialogue is particularly anachronistic, with characters using lines
like "full of piss and wind" and saying Robin has "balls of stone."  The
Sheriff tells someone, "Shut up, you twit."  This is the kind of script-
writing where whenever someone falls there is always a fortuitous haystack
to break the fall.  When swords strike each other or a wall there are always
sparks.
     But having promised to defend the film, I will.  The main criticism
that has been leveled at the film is that Costner is much too laid back to
play Robin.  This strikes me as nonsense.  He does not have the umph of an
Errol Flynn swinging through the trees and calling, "Welcome to Sherwood,
milady!"  Costner's performance is at worst non-traditional, but with the
exception of some accent problems it is still a valid interpretation of the
character.  The film has been criticized for having too many scenes that are
too dark.  It seems to me that the lighting is perfectly reasonable to
create a period feel.  The night was a lot darker in the late 12th Century.
As for the darkness of tone in what some will interpret as children's film,
good!  We are talking about some nasty people.  Let's not sugar-coat them.
     As the film ended I decided it deserved some breed of a zero rating.
The gratuitous rock music song over the end credits convinced me it was a
low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     What shows up the pandering and silliness of Kevin Reynolds's ROBIN
HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES even more is the other version of Robin Hood made
for Fox Television and directed by John Irvin.  This is not a flashy ROBIN
HOOD and it certainly is not the original story, but it is certainly the
more intelligent retelling of the story.  I think that was pretty much to be
expected.  Director John Irvin is probably most respected for his BBC
television adaptation of John LeCarre's TINKER, TAILOR, SOLDIER, SPY.  He
has gotten into wider-appeal films since, things, like GHOST STORY and
HAMBURGER HILL and even RAW DEAL, but clearly this is a man who can do
intelligence on the screen.  Rather than side-stepping the politics of the
time as Reynolds did, Irvin's version, written by Sam Resnick and John
McGrath, is steeped in the politics of the time.  Robert Hode (played by
Patrick Bergin) is a Saxon noble who has been a lifelong friend of the
Norman Baron Daguerre (played by Jeroem Krabbe).  Robert wants what is best
for the Saxons; Daguerre wants England to become strong under Norman rule.
Both are "good guys."  The "bad guy" is another Norman noble, Miles
Falconier (played by Jurgen Prochnow), whose selfishness turns Norman
against Saxon and shows the two friends where their differences lie.
     Falconier, incidentally, is cruel to Norman and Saxon alike.  The
reason for his presence in the land is to force himself on the Norman Lady
Marian (pronounced Mar-ee-AHN) in an arranged marriage.  Marian (played by
Uma Thurman), of course, has taken a liking to the Saxon who has been
outlawed and who has changed the spelling of his last name to "Hood."  It is
with pride that she tells Falconier that she has already given herself to
another "with the greatest of pleasure."  Incidentally, I caught only one
reference to the Sheriff of Nottingham and it was unclear if it referred to
any character we had seen.  It might have been a title for Daguerre.
     While Reynolds's version insists on making the good guys Christian and
the bad guys into believers in witchcraft, the Irvin version, probably with
more historical accuracy, makes the Normans the Christians and the Saxons
still drenched in the so-called "pagan" religion of their ancestors.  While
the Reynolds version gives the edge to the Saxons because a Moor brings them
scientific knowledge anachronistic to the period, the Irvin version gives
the edge to the Saxons because the Normans still accept some of the pagan
customs.  (Which of course they still do, as witnessed by the presence of
the spring fertility symbols of the rabbit and the egg at Easter and the
winter solstice holiday's association with mistletoe, holly Yule logs, and
the bringing of trees indoors, all inherited by Christmas.  It is as much of
the compromise worked between Norman and Saxon as anything else is.)
     So Irvin's is the second version of ROBIN HOOD which also plays very
fast and loose with the  original story, but at least it replaces fidelity
to the story with some intelligence and some historical accuracy, and in
that it is the better film.  My rating for Irvin's ROBIN HOOD would be a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Rick Innis
     I realise this has been extensively reviewed in the past, but as
it's just opened in Britain I thought I'd offer my 2d (old pence) worth.
     Summary: Robin of Locksley returns from the Crusades, accompanied
by a Moorish warrior whose life he saved and who has sworn to repay this
debt of honour, to find his father has been slain and his lands
appropriated by the Sheriff of Nottingham.  Evading pursuit by the
Sheriff's men takes Locksley into the supposedly haunted Sherwood
Forest, where he is accosted by a band of robbers which he then proceeds
to take over, turning them into a force through which he plans to take
his revenge of the Sheriff.
     This film has a lot going for it -- action, adventure and really
wild things by the score.  The script is well written, the plot has some
nice twists and turns in it and the supporting characters are well drawn
-- Marian is fiercely independent and contemptuous of the men's
crusading ambitions, the Sheriff oscillates between being a comic
buffoon and a dangerous madman, and the outlaws are a cheerfully earthy
bunch of Englishmen (with one exception, see below.)  
     Unfortunately, to my perceptions, this film has one major flaw --
the star.  In a film in which all bar two of the other characters have
English accents and use British English idioms (and one of them is a
Moor, so that's all right), Costner's American accent and mannerisms jar
dreadfully.  Costner is too clean-cut, decent and wholesomely
all-American to be convincing, and this destroyed a lot of the film for
me.  A decent voice coach would have gone a long way towards sorting
this out.  Unfortunately Christian Slater as Will Scarlet (in a role
severely underplayed, I thought) suffered the same problem.  If everyone
else in the film had had American accents it probably wouldn't have been
so noticeable (c.f., DANGEROUS LIAISONS and AMADEUS), but the mixture
just doesn't work.  I left with the feeling that was originally a
British production which had been hijacked by an American production
company with its eye on the box office and nothing else.
     Verdict: if you sink a few beers first and watch it on video it's
probably bearable, but I think I'll stick with the HTV series with
Michael Praed, made during the early 80's and also now out on video.
