Title
Review for Pope Must Die, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE POPE MUST DIE is film by Peter Richardson, written by Peter
Richardson and Pete Richens.  It stars Robbie Coltrane, Beverly
D'Angelo, Herbert Lom, Alex Rocco, Peter Richardson.  "Rated R for
irreverence."
     THE POPE MUST DIE is a British film that opened to solid box-office
in early June in London and is still playing in Britain, where it was
among the top-grossing films last month.  This is one more reason to
think that the British think Catholicism is pretty funny stuff, which I
can only assume is what's carrying the film.  I don't think the humor is
translating very well to American audiences.  Instead, over here we're
getting a rather bogus first-amendment controversy to fan ticket sales.
Lots of papers in this country have either refused to carry Miramax's
advertising or have edited the title in the ads down to "The Pope Must ...!"
     The film is a satiric fantasy about a rather failed priest, Dave
Albinizi, who gets elected Pope as the result of a clerical error
instead of a photogenic and phony Cardinal Albini, the favorite son of
corruption in the Vatican.  The story derives, as did the story in
GODFATHER PART III, from the Banco Ambrosiano scandal that rocked the
Vatican some years back.
     Robbie Coltrane plays Dave Albinizi with his usually cuddly-cute
adroitness.  Certainly, Coltrane is a major reason to sit through the
problem-ridden production.  However, his NUNS ON THE RUN was both
funnier and a more effective vehicle for satirizing the Church.  The
supporting players provide some further richness.  Alex Rocco as the
Cardinal who talked like a Hollywood agent and carried a cruciform
cellular phone gets in some fine business.  Paul Bartel as the swishy
Monsignor Vitchie is positively queenly.  Herbert Lom does Vittorio
Correlli, the godfather behind the machinations, to a turn until we get
about two-thirds of the way through the film.  He loses his edge just as
the script goes ballistic and loses all its control, too.  The woman who
plays Correlli's daughter does a well-deserved send-up of the
unfortunate Sophia Coppola.  There's also worthy of mention the
nun-from-hell role from Annette Crosby.  Finally, director Peter
Richardson provides an attractive, if not particularly dynamic, part as
the only honest man in the Vatican.
     One of the Seattle reviewers suggested that if Richardson had spent
more time directing the movie and less time directing himself, we would
have all benefited.  Despite the excellent character actors, despite
Beverly D'Angel's rather late appearance, and especially despite the
cloying appearance of Salvatore Cascio, the too cute kid from CINEMA
PARADISO (the movie I love to hate), there is no here here.  No story
that holds together, no vision, no conviction, no fire, certainly not
the anti-rational anarchy of the Python gang.  The movie is flat, flat,
flat.  There is no cinematography or score worth mentioning.  The pacing
is arrhythmic, but a certain boon for the refreshment counter.
     It's true Richardson gets in a couple well placed kicks at both CNN
and BBC.  The Vatican exercise video with the chorus line of idiotically
smiling priests ("Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John/Work that fat until it's
gone") is pretty fine.  However, it ain't enough.
     I cannot recommend this movie, even at matinee prices.  Maybe as a
$1.98 rental next winter, but only if it's one of those nights.
