Title
Review for Cops and Robbersons (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Despite what the "critics" claim, COPS & ROBBERSONS may be the
movie that jump-starts the career of Chevy Chase.  Said career needs
*something*, considering that its brightest spot (in the last five
years, at least) is a nacho chip commercial.
     Survive the trailer for 3 NINJAS STRIKE BACK--Pepto Bismal
encouraged--and you're ready for COPS & ROBBERSONS: a nicely
underplayed, almost-charming comedy about a super-tough city-cop
(Palance) who invades Suburbia to start a stake-out.
     Welcome to Pleasant Valley--a sickly sweet suburb located only a
few blocks away from the preplanned nonsense of E.T. and EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS.  The cars and homes and streets look almost alike and in
this idyllic little world lives the less-than-idyllic Robbersons.
     The father, Norman (Chase), is a cop-show junkie who spends his
boring days humming TV themes and reading penal codes and driving with
a police radio.  Over-eager Mom (Wiest) tries to be super-sunny, but
she can't even get the family to eat dinner together.  The daughter is
dating, the older son (Ritcher) is smoking, and his younger brother
thinks he's a vampire.
     Clearly, this family needs *something*.
     Enter Detective Jake Stone (Palace).  He and his partner (Gray)
want to spy on a counterfeiter (Davi) living next door.  Jake is a
seasoned sourpuss and his relationship with the Robbersons is strictly
hate-hate.  That is, until Norman starts snooping and ends up
introducing "Uncle" Jake to their nefarious neighbor.  Said action
forces Jake and The Young Man to maintain their cover for 24
hours-a-day and, thus, eat, sleep, and shoot with the Robbersons.
     COPS & ROBBERSONS is 100% light comedy.  The plot is absurd, the
characters are sketches, and the gags are mild.  Even the prerequisite
free-for-all ending is a tame one, save for Chase impersonating Robin
Hood Daffy with a gag stolen from Chuck Jones.
     What's fun, though, is the lazy chemistry between the leads and
their delivery of some great, goofy dialogue from writer Bernie
Somers.
     Chase remains *the* effortlest bumbler.  His blase blunder hints
at the simplicity that Peter Sellers brought to the role of *Chief*
Inspector Jacques Clouseau.  Watch him roll a cigarette for maximum
minimum-hilarity.
     COPS plays closer to ensemble comedy and Chase shares his share of
screen time with both Jack Palance and Robert Davi--two rasping
rapscallions who get quite a bit of mileage by simply leering at Chevy
chasing his tail.  Palace doesn't have much of character, though, but
he gets to growl great lines like "Don't ever throw a cat on me."
Listen for his classic monologue about mowing grass.
     (The obligatory one-armed pushup occurs in a photo montage before
the closing credits.)
     Dianne Wiest doesn't get to play as often as the boys, but she's a
stitch in her few scenes and, in the finale, go nuts with gusto.
     COPS & ROBBERSONS strains in a couple places.  The beginning is a
bust--come on, *another* exploding car?  Then there's Chase doing
DeNiro doing TAXI DRIVER.  Save that one for your next SATURDAY NIGHT
LIVE appearance, Chevy.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     All right, I'll admit it:  I'm guilty of a bias towards writers.
Perhaps it's the part of me that identifies with them, or the romantic
image of a guy alone in a room staring down a blank sheet of paper in a
battered manual Smith-Corona until the paper blinks first.  The fact is
that when I feel a project has gone sour, the writer is frequently the
last target of my wrath, and the first one to get the benefit of the
doubt.  Not this time.  I can't think of a director alive who could
have done anything with COPS & ROBBERSONS, or an actor who could have
made it watchabel.  To call this script inept would be to give it more
credit than it deserves.
     Chevy Chase stars as Norman Robberson, a suburban father of three
whose family doesn't respect him at all.  To compensate for his
timidity in real life, Norman watches every T.V. cop show he can,
memorizes police procedures and worships their heroics from afar.  The
chance to worship up close comes when a counterfeiter (Robert Davi)
moves in next door, and the police decide to set up a stakeout in the
Robbersons' home.  The veteran in the stakeout team is Jake Stone (Jack
Palance), a growling tough guy who immediately commands everyone's
respect.  Meanwhile, Norman gets caught up in the action, and in his
attempt to "help out" ends up jeopardizing the entire operation.
     It is exceedingly difficult to imagine what Bernie Somers was
thinking when he started putting this mess together.  It often seems as
though he never developed the idea beyond a single-sentence
pitch--"cops move in with a loser who idolizes cops."  There isn't a
single original situation or character to be found, but that can be
said of eight scripts out of ten that come out of Hollywood.  The more
telling point is that Somers didn't seem to have a clue where to go
with this story.  The predictable resolution would have been for
milquetoast Norman to discover an inner reserve of strength and end up
saving the day.  But even that simplistic an answer seems to be beyond
his grasp.  Norman begins and ends the film exactly the same, and there
isn't even a pat answer provided for why there is anything different in
the way his family would treat him.
     Then there are the other characterizations, which run from the
stereotypical to the incomprehensible.  Jason James Richter (FREE
WILLY) as the rebellious son and Fay Masterson (THE MAN WITHOUT A FACE)
as the teenage daughter are completely without personality, and Diane
Weist is saddled with an unpleasant shrewishness.  Robert Davi, who by
now might as well have the word "villain" tattooed to his forehead,
bounces from nasty to clownish as the counterfeiter.  Among the
creative stretches in the plot are the daughter falling for the hunky
young cop (David Barry Gray) and the family ending up hostages.
Please, my heart can't take any more surprises.
     The biggest losers, however, are probably the two names above the
title.  Chase, as I've already noted, is stuck with a character who
goes nowhere, dooming him from the start.  Still, it would have been
nice if he hadn't walked through the film as though he were still
stunned by the cancellation of his talk show.  He's not even as
endearingly incompetent as the VACATION series' Clark Griswold, just
deathly boring.  Jack Palance doesn't fare much better, but he does
have an innate gruff charm that transcends the role as written;
however, that still doesn't explain why the Robbersons seem so
instantly drawn to Jake despite his abusiveness, nor why Jake
eventually reciprocates.  If all you want is the chance to see Palance
flare his nostrils and roll his own cigarettes, rent CITY SLICKERS
again.
     I laughed exactly twice during COPS & ROBBERSONS, once when Chase
attempts to roll his own cigarette and once during a coda which plays
on Palance's famous one-armed pushups.  Even at bargain prices, that's
two bucks a laugh.  *That's* a crime.
