Title
Review for Rumble Fish (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
RUMBLE FISH (director/writer: Francis Ford Coppola; screenwriter:
original story by S.E. Hinton; cinematographer: Stephen H. Burum; cast:
Mickey Rourke (The Motorcycle Boy), Matt Dillon (Rusty James), Diane
Lane (Patty), Diana Scarwid (Cassandra), Dennis Hopper  (Father),
Vincent Spano (Steve), Tom Wait (Benny), Nicholas Cage (Smokey), Larry
Fishburne (Midget), 1983)
A seminal work in teen films, shot appropriately in B/W (except for the
fish). It tells the story of troubled teens in Tulsa and their yearnings
for the "good ole days" of gang wars. It is an arty (some critics say
pretentious) film, about a punky street kid, Rusty James (Dillon), who
idolizes his older brother, "The Motorcycle Boy" (Rourke). He has been a
hoodlum legend for the kids in the neighborhood, but now has second
thoughts about his life, as he returns from California to give his
brother a chance to escape the life he is stuck in. Their alcoholic
father is played by Dennis Hopper, with all the odd tics and mannerisms
he seems to muster for the peculiar characters he always seems to play.
Rumble fish are fighting fish who will try and kill themselves if shown
their own reflection, and other fish if they are taken out of their
natural habitat and placed in fish tanks.That is the message of the
film, as Rourke's last desperate act is to free these pet store fish to
the river, as he exhorts his brother to ride away from his home city. It
is his hope that by getting his brother far away from his bad
upbringing, he will learn to find out who he really is.
What works very well for Coppola, is the over-all mood he captures of
how the inner city kids react to their identity crises. We see how they
are turned off by school and how they don't have proper parental
guidance; it is also pointed out that if these kids had the proper role
models things might be a lot different for them. Their main problem is
that they find themselves in troublesome situations that they can't
handle by themselves. Rusty can fearlessly fight and he can attract
girls, but he can't think straight. He can't be a gang leader, as one of
his street pals, Smokey (Cage), tells him, "because he is on a death
course and no one would follow him for long, no one really wants to die
with him."
"The Motorcycle Kid" is an existential hero, saying very little; but if
you get into his rap, he is more likely to be a hero found in a Camus
story than in a teen film. That makes his characterization seem
controversial and arbitrary here. He is a gigantic adult figure as
compared to the others we see in the film, such as, his alcoholic
father, and the neighborhood cop, who hates his guts for being a hero to
these kids. He has a swagger to him and a way about him that makes him
larger than life, even mythic. He sees the world without a true sense of
colors. Besides not being prejudice, he is actually "physically" color
blind. We see how this affects him when he rides his cycle through a red
light and how he walks the drug infested, sleazy streets in town,
oblivious of all the different shades of faces he sees and the danger
that is all around him.
His kid brother is dumb, he just doesn't get things, and is heading for
a disastrous life. When he has an affair with a girl he really seems to
like, Patty (Diane), he loses her because he doesn't have enough common
sense to treat her right. Everything he does ends in violence or in an
incomprehensible situation. He has no plans for himself and gives no
thought about the future. There was not really anything new revealed
about this sort of character that hasn't been seen in other teen films;
but, the film does have the gritty feel of reality to it and
intelligence in how the story was presented.
I'm on the side of those who liked this emotionally wrought, stylized
film, adapted from a novel by S.E. Hinton, warts and all. It brought a
higher quality to this teen genre film than usually seen in such films,
even if, I doubt if it would reach the troubled kids the film was about,
who in all probability, would not choose to see such an arresting film.
To the film's credit, it was not a glossy look at the kids: it had the
good sense to stay true to its theme without just blaming society for
the problems presented.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brandon Herring
'Rumble Fish' is one of the best movies ever made, it's ability to movie the
viewer while both entertaining, and fascinating, is just one of the specialties
of the movie. I thought the camera shots, and visual shots were just amazing,
and stunned me. This is the only movie, to which at home, after it was over, I
sat there, didn't move, and after I got out of shocked, I clapped. Just
fantastic.
Matt Dillon plays Rusty James, a young man, who is faced with the shadow of his
brother, and trying to live up to that shadow. He is not sure what his brother
has done, to be so hated in the world they live in, nor can he understand how
he can live up to his brother and be just like him. Rusty James has been living
the life good until his brother, played by Mickey Rourke comes back, and shocks
everyone.
Mickey Rourke (Although some say he's odd), plays his character 'The Motorcycle
boy' quite well, who is the older brother of Rusty James, and has done some bad
stuff in his days, and tries to tell his brother not to repeat those mistakes
he did. But Rusty James wants to be his brother, but fails many times.
Their father, played well by Dennis Hopper, is a drunk, who most of the time is
at the local pub drinking his heart away, and never paying attention to the
kids he has left. He does love them, but loves the alcohol even more. Some
nights he will spend with his kids, and some others he will ignore them. But as
the others is shocked to see that his oldest son is back.
Rusty and his brother, have to overcome the shock of the town, by leaving with
Rusty's friend, and going out of the town, eventually coming in contact with
terror, gangs, and beer. Although it doesn't work completely, ultimately ending
in an abrupt finale, that is both heart wrenching as much as it is compelling.
The characters are very well made out, with none of them being muddled, or
washed out. Matt Dillon and Mickey Rourke give superb performances as the two
brothers on the run from their life. One has a fetish of fish, the other of
life, and trying to figure out what life is. Nicholas Cage, and Dennis Hopper
give excellent supporting cast as does Diane Lane as Matt Dillon's
ex-girlfriend.
Francis Ford Coppola who directed classics such as The Godfather Trilogy, Bram
Stoker's Dracula (1992), Apocalypse Now, and more, strikes this film with a
block of cement almost. He adapted the screenplay from J. Hilton's book, which
also is well-known. Francis does a great job-directing as he does writing, and
I think which makes this film even more the better.
Some may cringe at the fact that the movie is black and white, but to me it
makes it even more authentic, and you get so involved in the story, you dont
even recognize that the movie is in black and white, and some of the sequences
with the fish are in color, and again, your so absorbed in the story, that your
dont even realize that your watching a color sequence. With all these points,
this film deserves all the credit it gets, and gets my pick as one of the best
films ever made. See it, experience it, and relive it over and over. By the
way, this is Matt Dillon's third J. Hilton film, and Francis Ford Coppola's
second (following The Outsiders).
