Title
Review for Sa pusod ng dagat (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
[Screened at the Cinequest Film Festival 9, San Jose]
[1.5/4.0]  (dialog in Tagalog, English subtitles)
The remote islands of the Philippines are a beautiful place. Life there is
simple, but not easy. Although the people live in the standard definition of
poverty, there is a richness to their lives that is missing in what is
commonly called civilization. This story is narrated from the point of view
of Pepito, a young man living on an island. Pepito's father died as sea when
he was young. Because his mother is the island's midwife and he has no
female siblings, he has been forced to become an apprentice midwife, which
is highly unusual for a male. This occupation keeps them busy because the
families of the island are continually having children. Some of the young
adults are drawn to life in the big city as an escape from the boredom of
the island, and although Pepito travels to the city due to his love of the
travelling schoolteacher, he is eventually drawn back to the place he
belongs to.
Although the story has the potential to be compelling, the film squanders
its opportunities by choosing to squeeze in as much melodrama as possible.
This predilection is demonstrated early when the tragedy of Pepito's
father's death is dwelled upon for much too long. In fact, several
exceedingly tragic turn of events take place in the story, thus making the
whole narrative feel manipulative. The inclusion of elements of magical
realism, like functional voodoo dolls and a woman giving birth to a snake,
further made me feel removed from the film. Also adding to the feeling of
detachment are the many poor acting performances, which made me feel I was
watching amateur actors rather than real characters. To be fair, there is
probably a cultural context to the story that the film builds upon that I
missed, and I have not seen any other Philippine films to compare it
against. The cinematography cannot be faulted, as the stunning beauty of
this tropical paradise is well presented.
Not recommended. It probably will be enjoyed by fans of magic realism, and
it probably captures some of the spirit of rural island life in the
Philippines, but it is hampered by stiff acting, plodding story, and
overwrought melodrama.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
