Title
Review for Exit Wounds (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
What happens if you single-handedly save the life of the Vice President, 
killing dozens of bad guys in the process and risking your own life?  If 
you're Steven Seagal, you will, of course, get in trouble with your 
superiors for using excessive force.
EXIT WOUNDS, by director Andrzej Bartkowiak, a cinematographer whose 
only other directorial assignment was on ROMEO MUST DIE, is a standard 
issue Steven Seagal picture.  With plenty of car crashes, loud 
explosions, noisy guns and corrupt cops, the script follows the usual 
formula.  Only in the brief introduction of a dot-com subtheme does the 
film vary from the standard recipe.  Why they needed two screenwriters 
(Ed Horowitz and Richard D'Ovidio) and one novelist (John Westermann) to 
come up with the canonical story is the only mystery.
The story opens hypocritically with the Vice President lecturing on the 
evils of guns in our society.  After this sop to morality, the 
hyperviolence begins.  Too bad they couldn't have gotten Quentin 
Tarantino to do a cameo as the Vice President.  Now, that would have 
been funny.  
Tom Arnold provides the movie's humor, playing controversial television 
host Henry Wayne.  Officer Orin Boyd (Seagal) meets Wayne in a 
rageaholic meeting.  Boyd is sent to the therapy session by his new 
commander, played by Jill Hennessy ("Law and Order").  Watching this 
intelligent actress being completely wasted in such a mindless role is 
embarrassing.  One only hopes that she collected a sizeable paycheck for 
the part.
The plot involves drugs, with Latrill Walker (DMX) being the flashiest 
big-time dealer around.  Going to a new car dealership, Latrill plunks 
down almost three hundred thousand in cash so he can drive away with the 
fastest and most expensive car on the showroom floor.
If you have a high tolerance for violence and like lots of stunt work, 
EXIT WOUNDS delivers.  Sit on the front row so that you can get the 
maximum adrenaline rush.  The movie is like a roller coaster ride at an 
amusement park, so you might as well go for maximum thrills.  Those 
wanting a bit more substance for their entertainment dollars would be 
well advised to pick another theater door.
EXIT WOUNDS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for strong violence, language and 
some sexuality/nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Ross Anthony
Here you'll find everything you'd expect from a film called "Exit 
Wounds" ... lots of gunfire, car chases, things blowing up and catching 
fire, expensive sports cars, cool good guys, crafty bad guys, hip music, 
tough guy one-liners, comedic sequences, and of course, gratuitous 
frontal nudity. I'm not quite sure the reason for the title, except that 
it sounds cool and implies plenty of bullets in flight. Wait, perhaps 
they were playing on the words in a more emotional sense, since Seagal 
is forced to "exit" a desirable position on the force. Naaaah, this is 
definitely a "shut the mind off and enjoy the action" type of film. 
An opening action sequence makes that point crystal clear, Lone Ranger 
Seagal single-handedly saves the vice president from a well-armed 
motorcade ambush. In the very next scene, despite his heroism, Seagal is 
promptly reprimanded and demoted for his inability to follow orders. 
Soon enough Seagal finds himself station in the rough part of town where 
a group of cops welcome him with an electric zapper and a 
stress-management group with desks comically too small for his huge 
body. 
The film does an excellent job of keeping action rolling and 
interjecting comic relief: Anthony Anderson in the Lamborgini scene, Tom 
Arnold in stress management, and as the credits roll the two of them 
chewing the fat improv-style will send you on your way chuckling. 
Of course, the story line has more holes than Seagal's stylishly dark 
garbs after a rain of bullets. He's so cool, never a scratch. And a few 
of the "dialogue only" scenes grind to a jam even a crowbar couldn't 
free. Still, you can't argue with a good car chase or helicopter 
bursting into flames, strong pacing, tight direction, and good 
old-fashioned action ... a lot of fun. Also worthy of note, a nice 
performance by DMX. 
Exit Wounds. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Steven Seagal, DMX, Isaiah Washington, Michael Jai White, 
Anthony Anderson, Jill Hennessy, David Vadim, Tom Arnold. 
*  Directed by Andrzej Bartkowiak. 
*  Written by Ed Horowitz, Richard D'Ovidio. 
*  Based on the novel by: John Westermann. 
*  Produced by Joel Silver, Dan Cracchiolo at Warner Bros/Village 
Roadshow/NPV Ent./Silver Pictures. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Bob Bloom

Exit Wounds (2001) 1 star out of 4. Starring Steven Seagal, DMX, Isaiah
Washington, Jill Hennessy, Michael Jai White, Anthony Anderson, Bill
Duke and Bruce McGill. Screenplay by Ed Horowitz and Richard D'Ovidio.
Based on a novel by John Westermann. Directed by Andrzej Barttkowiak.
Rated R.
 If you have low or no expectations when going to see Exit Wounds, then
you wonít be disappointed.
 Keep in mind, it stars Steven Seagal, which means there is little
acting, but lots of explosions, vehicular mayhem, thousands of rounds of
ammunition spent and a body count that dwarfs the Civil War.
 In this outing, Seagal is Orin Boyd, a Detroit cop. And guess what?
Heís a loose cannon, a lone wolf, ěThe Lone Ranger.î Yep, heís the
clichéd cop who doesnít play by the rules.
 Exit Wounds is a confusing mess dealing with heroin and crooked cops.
Along the way, of course, the requisite amount of double crosses occur.
 But it is easy to tell whoís on which side of the law merely by
checking the cast list. Supporting Seagal are DMX, Isaiah Washington,
Jill Hennessy, Michael Jai White, Bill Duke and Bruce McGill.
 To show the caliber of this movie, Tom Arnold tags along as the comedy
relief.
 Nothing that happens in Exit Wounds is unexpected. It is as if
scriptwriters Ed Horowitz and Richard DíOvidio fed the story parameters
into a computer and it spit out a script.
 Overall, Exit Wounds is schlock, B-movie escapism. Go in expecting
nothing and you wonít be disappointed.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A "Dirty Harry" type cop, who kicks ass in his job, but apparently doesn't
play by the rules, gets demoted to a rough part of town. Soon enough, the
detective partners with a rookie cop and stumbles across a drug traffic
ring. The next thing you know, they're both neck up in police corruption,
car chases, explosions, rat-tat-tats and Steven Seagal's bigass chin!
CRITIQUE:
Not bad, not bad at all. Surprisingly competent despite its many
contrivances, this film is officially my first guilty pleasure of the year!
And what does that mean? That means that as long as you don't take this film
too seriously, and basically take it for what it is, which is a typical
action flick with comic relief spread throughout, you will more than likely
be quite entertained by it all. And to top it all off, this movie is not a
Steven Seagal movie at all! In fact, even though his tubby face is on the
poster and his name above the credits, this film has a multitude of
characters, all of which add a little spice to the film's very basic
ingredients. Yeah, sure the movie has its over-the-top moments, like the
typical unappreciative head of the police demoting Seagal because he's a cop
who doesn't play by the rules (even though he saved the vice-president's
life!). And its just "plain stupid" scenes, like when DMX walks into a car
dealership, tosses the guy a bag full of cash and drives out with a car in
less than three minutes (no paperwork...nothing!). But for me, a few of
these goofy scenarios didn't spoil the overall fun that I had watching this
movie. And trust me...I was as surprised as anyone!! I don't particularly
like Steven Seagal, the man or the actor, and never thought twice about any
of his movies, but this flick thankfully doesn't focus on him, and that's a
definite plus.
DMX is the real show-stopper here, giving us plenty of on-screen charisma,
some kick-ass moves and even a healthy dose of acting shop 101. You go,
boy!! The rest of the cast also helped take the emphasis off ol' chubface,
and added some much needed humor into the mix as well, as both Tom Arnold
and Anthony Anderson took the reigns and rode 'em whole in here. And
speaking of those two, do not leave your seat at the end of the movie if you
liked what they did in the flick, because there is another really humorous
session between the two of them during the closing credits, that just put
the icing on this fluffy cake. So what's good about the movie? Well, it's
got lotsa gunplay, some wicked shots from the director, an actual story with
surprises, despite its basic plot line of "crooked cops" which we've seen a
thousand times, adrenalized action sequences, car chases and explosions and
even some T&A (for the kids...hehe). The negatives include Seagal's acting
talent, the obvious dummies and stunt people used in some of the sequences
(geeeez, are we really supposed to believe that Seagal could even ride a
motorcycle, no less, do the things done in this movie?), the somewhat
preposterous denouement once everything is out in the open, and oh, did I
mention Seagal?
Anyway, I think the people who go into this movie expecting to see some
solid action, a few laughs and an overall forgettable story, will likely be
quite entertained by it all. If you're looking to nail Seagal on his "same
ol', same ol" character and the basic generic tone of the movie, then you
could do that, too. But for me, I decided to take it as it came and I
honestly can't say that the film wasn't an enjoyable one, despite its many
faults. So take off that mask of cynicism and enjoy this movie for what it
is...a fun, good ol' guilty pleasure of guns, explosions and Steven Seagal
doing things with his body that we all know he can't really do without his
faithful stuntmen by his side! No substance here, folks...just good ol'
fashioned "guy stuff"!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Corruptor (7/10) - Mission Impossible 2 (7/10) - Payback (8/10) - The
Replacement Killers (6/10) - Romeo Must Die (3/10) - Ronin (8/10) - Shaft
(7/10) - Traffic (8/10)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Andrzej Bartkowiak.
Cast: Steven Seagal, DMX, Isaiah Washington, Anthony Anderson, Tom Arnold, 
Jill Hennessy, Michael Jai White, Bill Duke, Eva Mendes, Bruce McGill, David 
Vadim.
2001 - 103 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 17, 2001.
Steven Seagal's face must be crazy-glued, or something. That is the one 
overwhelming thought that plagued me throughout "Exit Wounds," his first 
big-screen motion picture since 1997's "Fire Down Below." In every single 
shot of Seagal, he has  the same brooding facial expression, as if he has 
been constipated for the last week. Either the look on his face has been 
permanently molded and glued down, or he should seriously consider flexing 
the muscles a little more. It wouldn't hurt to take some acting lessons while 
he's at it.
Seagal may be a mannequin who coasts through the 103-minute duration, but his 
annoying presence isn't the only problem this generic actioner has. "Exit 
Wounds" is a cliched journey through incomprehensible storytelling, 
fast-paced car chases, violent shoot-outs, a speech on the importance of gun 
safety, and everything else you would expect from a "Steven Seagal movie." On 
that level, the film delivers for his die-hard fans, but does he really have 
enough to warrant its dubious existence? Probably not.
Because "Exit Wounds" painstakingly keeps its mid-story plot twists under 
wraps (all of which can be seen ten miles ahead by any viewer with an IQ over 
-3), much of the picture has no story at all. What can be said is that Seagal 
plays Detroit detective Orin Boyd, a hot-tempered character who is fired and 
relocated to the infamous Precinct 15 after an unprofessional, irresponsible 
job at saving the Vice President's life during an assassination attempt. 
Saddled, at first, with the embarrassing job of directing traffic, Boyd soon 
catches wind of a planned drug deal that leads him to Latrell Walker (DMX), a 
mysteriously wealthy, young man whose brother is in prison. Latrell may not 
be the bad guy he seems, however, and some of Boyd's fellow cops at the 
precinct may not be as honorable as they appear.
"Exit Wounds," laughably based on an actual novel by John Westermann, and 
directed with mild aplomb by Andrzej Bartkowiak, has little to offer in the 
way of substance and characters worth caring about, but does manage to fire 
off a few exciting sequences. While not what one would exactly call 
"action-packed," there are several scenes that are edited and directed with 
such energy (including a slam-bang car chase), it's a shame the rest of the 
movie is so very bad.
Recording artist DMX (2000's "Romeo Must Die") is in every way a perfect 
match for Steven Seagal, in that he sleepwalks through a part without showing 
the slightest alteration on his emotion and facial expression. Better is 
Anthony Anderson (2000's "Me, Myself, & Irene"), a funny, charismatic rising 
star who, here, plays Latrell's buddy and the owner of a strip club. In the 
future, he should turn his back on weak material such as this. Other 
supporting players include Isaiah Washington (1999's "True Crime"), as 
Seagal's partner at the 15th Precinct; Jill Hennessy (2000's "Autumn in New 
York"), beautiful, but wasted, as Seagal's superior; Eva Mendes (2000's 
"Urban Legends: Final Cut"), even more beautiful, and even more wasted; and 
Tom Arnold (2000's "Shriek If You Know What I Did Last Friday the 13th"), 
grating as a morning talk show host whom Boyd meets at an Anger Management 
class.
The screenplay, by Ed Horowitz and Richard D'Ovidio, is a strictly 
cut-and-paste job that shows up to lay out the basic groundwork, and then 
makes way for more blasting guns than I've seen within a two-hour radius 
since the last John Woo opus. What "Exit Wounds" ultimately never escapes is 
its low-rent, unpolished feel--a position that fails to give the film any 
credibility. It's a stupid action pic made exclusively for those select 
people whose ability to stay awake during a movie is judged by how frequently 
an explosion occurs. 
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Max Messier
To watch a Steven Seagal film, one must fully suspend all disbelief. 
And to fully enjoy the audacity of Seagal, one must ignore all of the
consequences associated with the following: Starting fistfights with
large men in flashy nightclubs, destroying everything in sight along the
way.  Surviving every semi-automatic gun battle and car crash without a
scratch.  Purchasing Italian racing cars with bundles of $100 bills
stuffed in a gym bag.  Actually being able to cash out stock options
from a dot-com and then creating a private surveillance unit devoted to
uncovering a ring of corrupt Detroit cops involved in smuggling heroin
inside of sweatshop-produced t-shirts.  OK... maybe that corrupt cops
thing is a bit hard to swallow.
I remember a time when I used to enjoy Seagal.  Such films as Above the
Law, Hard to Kill, Marked for Death, Under Siege, and Out for Justice
are all solid action films from the '90s.  Under Siege is even kind of
good.  But lately, films like Under Siege 2, Fire Down Below, and The
Patriot have shown the age of the Italian stallion of Aikido.
Now, Exit Wounds stands as Seagal's biggest failure, a pitiful reminder
of the death of the American action film.  By overextending the
violence, the ludicrousness, and the sheer improbability of everything,
Exit Wounds plays out like a circus of the damned with Tom Arnold
working the Tilt-A-Whirl.  (Speaking of Tom Arnold, it's always a bad
sign when his thespian attempts at comedy are the most memorable parts
of a film.)
Exit Wounds is bad -- really, really bad.  Should you care about the
plot, the mighty Steven plays Orin Boyd, a burned out cop without his
trademark pony-nub who gets reassigned to a tough Detroit precinct after
saving the Vice-President's life during a Michigan militia terrorist
act.  Apparently, this particular precinct is filled with police
officers who use the gym way too much, use stun guns in strange naked
homoerotic bonding moments, and routinely steal heroin from police labs
to fund those out-of-state fishing trips so popular among Detroit city
cops.  Then there's DMX, the hardcore rapper-turned-actor who does a
better job in his music videos than in this role as a stereotypical drug
dealer/club owner/martial arts master/dot-com entrepreneur.  Seagal and
DMX team up to stop the corrupt cop ring, run by Michael Jai White
(Spawn).
The gratuitous violence of Exit Wounds would have made Peckinpah cringe
and reach for the stop button on the remote.  In earlier Seagal films,
you got brief moments of violence that made the films memorable and not
so gory.  Exit Wounds overflows with carnage -- people being bloodied by
fists wrapped in chains, body parts being impaled on exposed bolts and
pipes, people being crushed by oncoming cars and buses.  And every
single car involved in a chase sequence erupts in flames, of course.
The biggest shame of the film is the misuse of Seagal.  Instead of
having Seagal demonstrate the prowess and speed of a 7th Dan of Aikido,
shown off so well in his earlier films, he ends up being nothing more
than a patsy, used to connect the dots of all the inane plot points in
what stands as a truly rotten film.
Director: Andrzej Bartkowiak
Producer: Joel Silver, Dan Cracchiolo
Writer: Ed Horowitz, Richard D'Ovidio
Starring: Steven Seagal, DMX, Tom Arnold, Isaiah Washington, Bill Duke,
Michael Jai White
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Bob Bloom
Exit Wounds (2001) 1 star out of 4. Starring Steven Seagal, DMX, Isaiah
Washington, Jill Hennessy, Michael Jai White, Anthony Anderson, Bill
Duke and Bruce McGill. Screenplay by Ed Horowitz and Richard D'Ovidio.
Based on a novel by John Westermann. Directed by Andrzej Barttkowiak.
Rated R.
 If you have low or no expectations when going to see Exit Wounds, then
you wonít be disappointed.
 Keep in mind, it stars Steven Seagal, which means there is little
acting, but lots of explosions, vehicular mayhem, thousands of rounds of
ammunition spent and a body count that dwarfs the Civil War.
 In this outing, Seagal is Orin Boyd, a Detroit cop. And guess what?
Heís a loose cannon, a lone wolf, ěThe Lone Ranger.î Yep, heís the
clichéd cop who doesnít play by the rules.
 Exit Wounds is a confusing mess dealing with heroin and crooked cops.
Along the way, of course, the requisite amount of double crosses occur.
 But it is easy to tell whoís on which side of the law merely by
checking the cast list. Supporting Seagal are DMX, Isaiah Washington,
Jill Hennessy, Michael Jai White, Bill Duke and Bruce McGill.
 To show the caliber of this movie, Tom Arnold tags along as the comedy
relief.
 Nothing that happens in Exit Wounds is unexpected. It is as if
scriptwriters Ed Horowitz and Richard DíOvidio fed the story parameters
into a computer and it spit out a script.
 Overall, Exit Wounds is schlock, B-movie escapism. Go in expecting
nothing and you wonít be disappointed.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
