Title
Review for Gabbeh (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GABBEH (director and writer: Mohsen Makhmalbaf; cinematographer: Mahmoud
Kalari; cast: Shaghayegh Djodat (Gabbeh), Hossein Moharami (Old Man),
Roghieh Moharami (Roghieh), Abbas Sayahi (Uncle), Iran-1996)
A gorgeously filmed fable taking place in the steppes of southeastern
Iran, about the nomadic Ghashghai tribe noted for the handicraft of
their beautiful carpets. A gabbeh is a carpet, and it is also the name
of a young tribeswoman (Djodat), whose father won't give her permission
to marry, saying he will kill her if she runs away with the suitor who
is calling her daily with wolf calls from the distant hills. She appears
like an attractive apparition sitting by the stream, where sometimes she
is seen smiling sweetly and other times sadly reflecting the pains she
feels in her tender heart, clad in a traditional dress, which is an
ornate blue color that matches the carpet.
To fully appreciate the tale, which is told in the same fanciful manner
these simple nomads weave their carpets, one must suspend one's reality
and enter into a fairy tale land of richly decorative colors and
visions, and take heed as Gabbeh sings her heartfelt song that "love is
color" and that "love is pain."
The film opens as an elderly couple (Hossein Moharami and Roghieh
Moharami) argue back and forth by the stream, as they try to decide
which one of them should stand in the water and wash the carpet they
have just made, which has the design of a woman in blue and a man in red
riding together on a white horse. We see the carpet as if were a magical
one as it is spread out on the water. Their creation is made from their
life history and their bitter and joyous memories.
For those who value Persian rugs, they realize this is so because of the
all stories and detail that go into the carpet, making it an inspired
work of art that gives it its intrinsic value; it is a work of art that
is unrivaled precisely because it is made without set patterns.
The film was originally sponsored by the Persian carpet industry hoping
to have it made as a documentary. But if you can ignore that, you will
see a film that turns out to be so endearing, that you will be taken in
by the power of its raw beauty.
It tells of the girl's song about her lover calling to her on horseback
and how these calls tear at her heart, and about her mean father who
won't let her marry until her 57-year-old uncle weds.  What finally
breaks her heart, is that when the uncle marries for the first time she,
as the eldest, is then told that she will have to wait until her mother
gives birth to her eight child before she can marry her lover. This
seems to be too much for the young girl to endure.
We are left with the impression that Gabbeh has at last summoned up
enough nerve to run away with her lover, as the father rides after them
firing some shots and soon returns to his tribe to tell them they better
not desert the tribe, or else they too would be dead. But in this
enchanting film, what appears to be happening might be different than
what actually occurs, as we are left to ponder her relationship with the
elderly couple (oddly enough, the old wife is wearing a tradition blue
dress that is identical to Gabbeh's).
I quite frankly don't understand all the cultural ramifications of the
tale and what the exact meaning of its conclusion amounts to, but that
didn't hinder me from being amazed by the stunningly lush landscapes
seen and from enjoying the film as is.
Iranian films of this nature require a different way of looking at them,
something that American audiences might take a lot of getting used to.
This artistic (not poetic) film, is one that is not necessarily better
than American films, as much as it is different from them. Don't look
for the usual Hollywood formula contrivances to drive the film to its
conclusion. In Iran there seems to be a genuine respect for the artist,
that allows him to tell his story as he sees fit without some studio
execs coming in and cutting it up (that is not to downplay or neglect
the repressive regime that acts as a censor and makes their film
industry suffer unduly because of their narrow mindedness).
This fairy tale film is a feast for hungry eyes (I can't get over how
the wheat fields depicted looked so much like Van Gogh's). But, with
that being said, I would be remiss if I did not mention that this simple
tale, is one that has almost no insight into modern Iran; it is a
popular film, aimed at upsetting no one-- foreigner and Iranian alike.
If I had to compare it with an American type of film it most closely
resembles, I would have to say a "Disney" film. In other words, this is
not a personal film, one in which the director's poetical vision is
inspirational. Instead, it is a safe non-political, though, beautifully
shot romantic fantasy, that is more pleasing to the eye than to the
mind. It is one to be admired, as one does a beautiful woman, but it is
not one that invites further introspection.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews "
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ben Hoffman
This is only the second Iranian film I have been privileged to view.
The other was the delightful, Oscar-nominated for Best Foreign Film ,
THE WHITE BALLOON.    While the latter was a straightforward story of a
little girl's adventure as she goes into town to buy a fish for her
home aquarium, GABBEH is unlike any other film I have seen.   It is a
fascinating fairy tale about young love in the steppes of Southeastern
Iran where Gabbeh (Shaghayegh Djodat) lives with her  nomadic tribe.
The tribe was noted for their beautiful carpets.
The film opens with an elderly couple (Hossein Moharami and Roghieh
Moharami) on a farm as they discuss who will wash the newly completed
carpet which has woven into it, a young girl and her lover.  The
gabbehs are not mere carpets.  The pictures  woven tell the stories of
their lives, their hopes,   Unlike carpets everywhere, the gabbehs do
not have a pre-set design but depend on the inspiration of the weaver.
As part of this very imaginative fairy tale, the name Gabbeh is given
to the protagonist.  Her clothing, like the carpet, is blue.  She sits
nearby the stream where the old couple is washing the gabbeh and,
again  fairy-tale- like, we are left to wonder until the film's very
end about her relationship with  the old man and woman.
The film's story, as sung and related by the young  woman, is of the
lover from a neighboring clan who rides on horseback atop the mountain
ridge and gives forth wolf calls to her, beckoning her to come to him.
Her father has promised Gabbeh she can get married after her uncle has
gotten married,   After that has happened, he tells her to wait until
her mother gives birth to a new child.
Unable to abide by these delays any longer, Gabbeh runs away to the
mountain where her lover has an extra horse and she and he ride away.
When her father learns of this, he takes his rifle and goes after
them   Two shots  ring out and the father returns to tell the
tribespeople that he had to kill the couple as a warning to others not
to desert the tribe.   If you  think that is where the story ends, you
are, as was I, in for a couple of big surprises which put finishing
touches on this lovely film.    For something different, something
enchanting, you cannot miss with GABBEH,
Mention must be made of the exceptionally fine photography by director
of photography Mahmoud Kalari. The wheat fields, the winds that sweep
them; the many gabbehs that dry on the landscape are gloriously
presented.

Screenplay and direction by Mohsen Makhmalbaf,
