Title
Review for Nineteen Eighty-Four (1984)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1984, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[science fiction/drama]
starring: John Hurt (Winston Smith), Suzanna Hamilton (Julia), Richard Burton
(O'Brien), produced by Simon Perry, written by Michael Radford, Jonathon
Gems, directed by Radford, based on the novel by George Orwell.
When a film is based on a famous novel, the filmmakers often make the
mistake of assuming the viewer is familiar with the material and thus don't
provide necessary details. "1984" is a perfect example of this. The film has
what could and should be very intelligent themes, but it seems more
interested in its Gothic atmosphere than telling its story.
The film is based on George Orwell's novel and it does an excellent job of
capturing the dark mood of the extremely oppressive government where everyone
must work "for the common good" and free will and free thinking is not
allowed. 
The main character is Winston Smith (Hurt), a man who looks like he has been
worked to death his entire life. We learn he has a passionate, but silent,
hatred for his government. But the only thing Winston can do to fight back is
to keep a journal of his thoughts and a constant belief in hope.
The first act is a surrealistic experience. We often go inside the mind of
Winston and see encounters so bizarre it is often difficult to tell the dream
sequences apart from reality. There isn't much dialogue, so we learn about
the setting through Winston's thoughts, which sound so vague and overly
written they don't make much sense. 
Winston is some sort of record keeper for the government. He "erases"
certain people from existence and rewrites history according to the
government's demands. There is also a woman who seems to take an interest in
him, and the two must use very secretive measures to communicate with each
other. Eventually he learns her name is Julia (Hamilton), and they
immediately indulge in a secret, but  passionate affair. It is implied they
love each other even though they have no chemistry and barely know each
other. 
As easy as it is to understand how oppressive this government is, it doesn't
take the time to establish the necessary details which would explain why
Winston and Julia must be so secretive. There are two-way television monitors
just about everywhere, so to escape the eye of "Big Brother" (who has the
voice of a woman) they rent a room in the ghettos of the "Proletarians." The
Proletarians are poor people who seem to live in the same place as the
masses, yet are not oppressed and no reason for this is given, not even in
passing.
The final act aims to be the brilliant political allegory that is the basis
of the story, but only scratches the surface. Winston is befriended by a high
government official, O'Brien (Burton), who he believes is actually the leader
of an underground revolution. But everything falls apart when he and Julia
are caught, tortured, and brain-washed. Burton gives a cold, but powerful
performance as O'Brien as he speaks of the establishment in ways that should
be thought-provoking, but seem little more than fascist/sci-fi moviespeak. 
"1984"seems more like a collection of images rather than a straight story.
Radford is obviously trying to set up plot and theme through surrealism, but
it doesn't work because all the details seem to be implied.
Please visit Chad'z movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Michael Radford
Writer: Michael Radford (Based on the novel by George Orwell)
Starring: John Hurt, Suzanna Hamilton, Richard Burton, Cyril Cusack
George Orwell is probably one of the greatest writers of all time.  And 
his "1984" is probably his best (although I might argue it could be 
"Animal Farm").  The novel, written around 1948, I think, is a bleak 
story of a future where there is peace but the expense is a totalitarian 
state where everyone is miserable and afraid because there are TVs 
everywhere where "Big Brother" watches so you don't do anything 
treasonous.  It's a frightening idea and pretty much illustrates that 
"Give Peace a Chance" might be a bad idea.
Michael Radford (director of "Il Postino") directed this film, 
ironically made in 1984 within the dates the book took place.  He paints 
a futuristic world which doesn't resemble anything else before.  There 
are no flying cars, monorails, or anything.  The world is just a ruin 
with run-down buildings and plain old buses and what-not.  In every 
room, there is a big television where Big Brother, the symbol of the 
state, is watching and the Thought Police are always the threat of even 
thinking of a treasonous act.
Our protagonist is Winston Smith (John Hurt), who really looks like he 
has been beaten down by the state in all senses of the word.  He is a 
state worker who rewrites history the way the government wants it and in 
his spare time, writes in a journal about his dreams of having rampant 
sex, which is prohibited.  One of his co-workers, Parsons (Gregor 
Fisher), is the symbol of the ultimate defeat of the state, since he is 
constantly telling of his love for everything that embodies Big Brother. 
 In one darkly humorous scene, he talks about the processed meat and how 
it isn't even meat and that's why it's good.
Winston runs into (literally) a woman named Julia (Suzanna Hamilton) 
who's also a government worker and who passes him a note (Hello?  Junior 
High?) saying she loves him and wants to meet him.  They carefully plan 
their meetings and end up having intense sex in a far off place where no 
one, not even Big Brother is watching.  Their sex is not actually about 
love, but as a form of rebellion and expression of their way to 
anti-supress themselves.  They try to join the rebellion, headed by an 
O'Brien (Richard Burton, in his final performance), but that turns out 
to wind them up in prison and a torture sequence on Winston where he is 
beaten into admitting that 2 + 2 doesn't equal 4 and stuff like that.  
It's a horrific scene in all senses of the word.
"1984" the film works because it wonderfully embodies the bleakness that 
was the book.  All of the scenes are drearily set and the film is as 
depressing and thought-provoking as the book...well, maybe not as 
thought-provoking.  And John Hurt and Richard Burton are fabulous in 
their respective parts.
I highly reccomend this film for anyone who loved the book, but for 
anyone else, it's not going to be fun.  It's a highly depressing film 
that is so dark that you might have to watch it in two sittings.  But 
the message is still there and that's what counts.  If you want a 
livelier film (and a better one, in my opinion), try Terry Gilliam's 
"Brazil."  But this one will do if you're looking for a good 
intellectual film.
