Title
Review for Kids (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Kelvyn Harris

I have recently rented the movie "Kids" and have to say that  this film
was "real to life" than any other film focusing on teens.  The story is
about a day in the lives of three New Yorkers.  In the beginning of the
film, the very promiscuous Telly engages in sex with a girl.   After
this encounter, he brags about it to his friend, Casper.  The two drink,
steal from a grocer, hangs out with teens, and engage in illegal
activities.  One of Telly's girls discovers that  she contracted  HIV,
thus she tries to find Telly and tell him.  
In my opinion, as I said in the beginning, this is very true and
in-depth as if "Kids" was filmed like a documentary.   If I am not
mistaken, this was released at the same time as "Clueless" and
"Dangerous Minds."  Although "Dangerous Minds"  is based on a true
story, the film had typical aspects that were portrayed in other films:
concerned teacher, unappreciated students, etc.  The acting in "Kids" is
wonderfully portrayed ;  the direction was original, and it was told
uniquely by the writers.
The film raised controversy about its subject matter.  If I'm not
mistaken, Miramax was under fire for being involved with this film(
since The Walt Disney Co. bought it.)  Instead of being scrutinized, it
was released under the banner "Shining Excalibur Films" and was released
in some cities.  When movies are released in limited cities, it is like
a response to studios that "Middle America" will not accept it.
(Remember "Henry and June"  and  "The Last Temptation of Christ")  They(
film industry) are scared to release socially conscious films because of
losing money and being boycotted by groups. 
If you ask me, I think that we, as moviegoers, should wirte to
film/video/TV distributors  and tell them to make films that have  and
make a difference rather than tell cliched tales, especially television.
To finalized, "Kids" should be watched by older, mature teens and
adults( with caution.)    
NOTE: I would appreciate it if you do not send any unsolicited e-mail to
this address.
This is a simple request one can follow and apply. Thank you.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: 7/21/95 (New York); 
                   7/28/95 (limited release elsewhere) 
Running Length: 1:35 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Profanity, sex, violence, drugs) --
                     No one under 18 admitted without parent 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
     The vision presented in Larry Clark's KIDS is as bleak as things 
get -- an ugly portrait of amoral youths who resort to drugs and sex not 
as a form of rebellion, but to fill the void of otherwise empty and 
meaningless lives.  Unfortunately, KIDS is an accurate portrayal of how 
certain inner city children live out their existences.  Take a look at 
the documentary TEEN DREAMS if you doubt how dangerously close to 
reality this fictional presentation comes. 
     On the outside, Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) is the kind of clean-cut 
teenage boy any mother might let her daughter go out with.  He looks 
"normal" -- perhaps even a little nerdy -- and can be polite and sincere 
when it suits him.  But Telly is an inveterate liar.  He will say or do 
anything to satisfy his addiction for deflowering virgins.  Sexually 
uninitiated girls present the greatest challenge and, as a bonus, are 
guaranteed disease-free.  Not that he believes in AIDS anyway -- 
condoms, in his opinion, are a waste of time. 
     Telly's best friend is Casper (Justin Pierce).  While Casper also 
enjoys sex, his partners don't have to come with their hymens intact.  
And Casper's as much into drugs and drink as sleeping with girls.  Like 
Telly, he's not concerned about the future or the consequences of his 
actions.  He takes life as it comes, whether that means inhaling dope, 
raping a stoned girl, or beating someone half to death with a 
skateboard. 
     Then there's Jennie (Chloe Sevigny), who's only had sex once, but, 
without protection, that was enough to do irreparable damage.  When her 
HIV test comes back positive, her life collapses around her.  Nothing 
makes sense.  Her best friend, Ruby (Rosario Dawson), has had sex with 
at least eight guys, yet she's clean.  And when Jennie rushes to stop 
another girl from sharing her fate, she arrives too late. 
     KIDS is shot like a documentary and, in its uncompromising 
depiction of every aspect of the characters' social and sexual 
interactions, it seems almost too raw for fiction.  Clark has 
meticulously designed this movie to blur the lines between reality and 
scripted story, hiring 20 year old Harmony Korine to write a screenplay 
that reflects what's really going on in the streets.  The actors are all 
newcomers, and their unfamiliar faces and unpolished-yet-effective 
performances add to the documentary-like effect.   
     KIDS follows the activities of a small group of teenagers over a 
twenty-four hour period (a little time frame cheating, by way of 
flashbacks, occurs).  And what a twenty-four hours it is...  KIDS will 
likely shock some viewers, but even those expecting this kind of 
grueling expose will be disturbed by the casual manner in which the most 
heinous acts are carried out.  If people lose their souls as children, 
what happens when they grow up?  This is a tragedy without a last act -- 
a wrenching experience that offers no catharsis. 
     One of the ironies surrounding KIDS is that the MPAA wanted to slap 
it with an NC-17, which would have disallowed anyone under 17 from 
seeing it.  Yet, despite the graphic nature of the material, this is the 
sort of thing many teenagers live with every day -- so, apparently, the 
message is that they can experience it outside theaters, but not view it 
on the screen.  Miramax's decision to release the film unrated through a 
spinoff company at least allows the under-17 crowd an opportunity to see 
KIDS, if only in the company of a parent or legal guardian. 
     Those who call KIDS exploitative may have seen the film, but they 
haven't bothered to really watch it.  There is not a gratuitous moment 
in this picture, although some of the images are so strong that viewers 
will wish to close their eyes or turn away.  KIDS shows what transpires 
when children are set adrift in a heartless world, and warns us what 
happens -- and is already happening -- in the absence of love and 
guidance. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Once you get past the novelty of their uncensored (and unrated) 
behavior, the remarkable first film from celebrated photographer Larry 
Clark becomes a bit of a bore.  Though realistic enough to qualify as 
a documentary, the *extremely* explicit story skirts dangerously close 
to the one-note repetition of pornography.  (Which some will label 
this film as.)  
KIDS is compelling, but cold.  There's very little joy in the lives of 
these promiscuous, drug-abusing Manhattan teens.  I'd like to see a 
greater contrast between the "adult" abusive behaviors and the 
"children" performing them.  Alas, this is Clark's vision of hell, and 
his sermon has no place for poignancy.  
A single hour of this was plenty for me.  Too much talk; too little  
action.  (And poorly filmed at that.)  Far more interesting were the  
male patrons who began grunting as the MORTAL KOMBAT theme played over  
the opening credits.  Perhaps experiencing some sort of post-video  
combat stress syndrome?  Great theme music, tho.
Screenwriter Gregory Widen (BACKDRAFT, HIGHLANDER) makes his directing 
debut with a modestly engaging religious thriller that wouldn't have 
been out of place 20 years ago as a follow-up to THE EXORCIST.  Now, 
in the nineties, where standards are *much* higher, plot problems and 
cheap FX nearly sink the fascinating premise of renegade angels waging 
a millennia-old war on Earth.  (The situation isn't helped by that 
awful, ambiguous title.  The original-- GOD'S ARMY-- was much better.)
Christopher Walken stars as Gabriel, horn player extraordinare and 
leader of the rogue seraphs.  He's delightfully wicked in his cross-
country search for the "blackest" of human souls.  Also watch Viggo 
Mortensen, sinister fun as the late-arriving Lucifier.  Less appealing 
is the opposition.  The good guys include Simon (Eric Stoltz) and his 
human helper Thomas Dagget (Elias Koteas), a former priest-turned-
police investigator.  Both are a bore.
I don't know if you'll find a better film in local theaters this 
week than Bryan Singer's THE USUAL SUSPECTS.  His tale of a "heist 
gone bad" is told in detailed flashback, as part of an interrogation 
between the sole surviving participant (Kevin Spacey) and a very-
interested investigator (Chazz Palminteri).  These two are the anchors 
of a top-notch ensemble cast that includes Stephen Baldwin, Gabriel 
Byrne, Kevin Pollack, Pete Postlethwaite, Benicio Del Toro, and Dan 
Hedaya.
The convoluted plot requires a second viewing to fully appreciate the 
intricacies of Christopher McQuarrie's ingenious screenplay.  Hint: 
take notes.  However confusing to the uninitiated, THE USUAL SUSPECTS 
rewards on more levels than I choose to describe here.  My favorite is 
the lush score by John Ottman, who, oddly enough, also edited the 
picture.  Recommended.
The first mainstream American "drag comedy"-- call it our answer to 
PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT-- is neither sassy nor subtle enough to 
be *really* funny.  (Think "drag light.")  What you *do* get is the 
remarkably amusing sight of macho macho men Wesley Snipes and Patrick 
Swayze in high heels and make-up.  They're good for more than a few 
laughs; maybe more than Middle America is completely comfortable with.
The elongated title (TO WONG FOO, THANKS FOR EVERYTHING, JULIE NEWMAR) 
refers to the inscription on a celebrity photo that the "girls" take 
with them on a cross-country car trip that lands them broken-down and 
detoured in a tiny midwestern town.  Sound familiar?  Of course, no 
one there has a lick of fashion sense, much less the ability to 
recognize a man dressed as a woman.  [ Insert "Wonder Woman" theme. ]
What ensues is mild hilarity-with-a-message, such as a local yokel 
with a crush on John Leguizamo.  (He plays the third wheel, Chi Chi 
Rodriguez, a whiny Hispanic queen who is already putting Rosie Perez 
out of work.)  Also pay attention to Chris Penn, a scene-stealer as 
the hilariously homophobic Sheriff Dollard.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     KIDS is a film by first time director Larry Clark about a group of kids
from about 10 to 15 years in age.  They are a culturally diverse group of
boys and girls who share a common trait, they represent a good parent's
worst nightmare and they have zero moral values.  Let me warn you upfront
that as a parent, watching this show was about as enjoyable as having
boiling oil poured over my body.  Non-parents may be able to view the movie
more dispassionately and give it higher marks.  On the other hand, the
people who should probably see KIDS are parents, especially poor to mediocre
ones.  Having thus been forewarned, let me continue with the review.
     KIDS tells the story of Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) and Jennie (Chloe
Sevigny), and their friends Ruby (Rosario Dawson), Harold (Harold Hunter),
Darcy (Yakira Peguero), Casper (Justin Pierce), and many others.  Telly
spends all of his waking hours plotting ways to seduce very young girls into
having sex for the first time.  When he is not busying doing this, he and
his friends are drinking malt liquor, doing drugs, stealing things, trashing
houses, lying constantly, and demonstrating all of the traits associated
with what was known as hoodlum behavior in a more genteel age.
     Although the script by Harmony Korine does not show any of the kids as
having positive attributes, it does portray the girls as sort of willing
victims.  Given that statistics show that teenage mothers have typically had
liaisons with men in their early 20s, this depiction of girl as victim may
not be inaccurate.  In this movie, the kids were painted in degrees of evil,
but the worst were the boys.  A set of frightening images all around.  The
most graphic horror movies are nothing compared to KIDS.
     Although the filming does not have the hand held camera instability of
a documentary, overall, the script and especially the low quality of the
acting makes you think you are watching a poor documentary of an extremely
important subject.  I read the director had the kids ad lib a lot.  The
picture feels as if they cast them all in a single day on the street and
told the kids to just act natural.  I suspect it was more organized than
that, but it feels pretty amateurish.  The depressing and filthy sets add to
its documentary feel.
     The boys and the girls in the movie are obsessed with sex.  They talk
about it constantly, and do it when not busy with drinking, getting stoned
and passing out, or other such activities.  They all act as if they had
fried their brains with drinking and drugs years ago and thereby reduced
their IQ levels to under 80.  Low mumbling and foul language is the way they
communicate.  You may wish many of the scenes were subtitled.
     Most of the movie is about Jennie and her quest for Telly after she
finds he got her HIV positive with her only sexual encounter ever.  The
movie totally ignores the possibility of teen pregnancy and of getting
thrown in jail, yet has a girl get AIDS with a single incident.  The
relative likelihood of the problems were totally out of proportion.
     KIDS runs 1:30, and I saw every painful minute of it, but wish I
hadn't.  It is unrated because the MPAA board was going to give it an NC-17
and since the producer wanted kids to be able to see KIDS, he released it as
unrated instead.  There is no way I would let a kid see this show.  It is
perhaps useful material for adults but could be misinterpreted by kids.  On
the other hand, most of the people in the audience I was at seemed to be
about 18.  I wondered what they thought of it.  Beside all of the horror
mentioned above, it has extreme violence which is treated as nothing by the
kids in the movie.  So we may have killed someone; so what.  One of the
kids, I think Casper, sums the kids' philosophy when he says "when you are
young, not much matters".  I can not actually recommend this show that makes
Kafka look like an optimist, but if you do go, you may gain some insights,
depressing as the film may be.  I award KIDS ** for risk taking and chilling
realism.  Were I not a parent, perhaps I might have been able to view it
more charitably and give another half star or so.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     With his debut feature, Larry Clark has made an unpleasant film
about a few repulsive characters who lead a fairly irredeemable
existence.  Premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in Utah, it
provoked a hailstorm of accolades from critics who latched onto its
uncompromising style and raw vision of (mostly) white urban American
youth.  Even the film's rating created a ruckus, with Disney subsidiary
Miramax first appealing the obviously unavoidable NC-17 and then
creating a new company (Shining Excalibur) to release it unrated.  The
hype machine has turned the movie's release into something of an event,
daring audiences to come stare into the abyss that is young America.
Unfortunately, while the flick itself lives up to its billing, it
doesn't deliver much else.
     The story is pretty thin.  Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) is an obnoxious
kid who brags about his knack for seducing virgins (we see him having
sex with one in the movie's very first scene).  Casper (Justin Pierce)
is his pal, slightly more sympathetic because he's something of a
straight man to Telly's obscene vocal meanderings.  Jennie (Chloe
Sevigny) is one of the girls Telly has deflowered, and when she tests
HIV-positive, she sets off across New York City on a quest to catch
Telly--the only sexual partner she's ever had--before he screws again.
     Not that we're given the impression that Telly would stop having
sex, or even start wearing a condom, if he knew he had the AIDS virus.
At one point, he remarks in voice-over that sex means everything to
him, and his worldview is so nihilistic that concern for someone else's
life is probably beyond him.  In fact, KIDS reminded me of another
relentlessly despairing New York cult film, LIQUID SKY.  In that movie,
a character is bemused and pleased by her ability to kill people by
having sex with them, and it follows that Telly might get a similar
macho thrill out of having a secret weapon at his disposal.
     Another movie KIDS bears a passing resemblance to is A
CLOCKWORK ORANGE, where Alex and his "droogs" get hopped up at the
Korova milk bar and then go out looking for a fight.  That movie
shocked audiences with jubilant scenes of violence and then posed
questions about whether or not Alex could be reformed by the state.
But there is no state in KIDS.  The police aren't a concern, and the
parents are absent or ineffectual.  This state of mind regenerates
itself in a tight cycle, as we see the younger counterparts of these
kids hanging out at the same parties, experimenting with drugs and
trying their best to talk tough.
     The centerpiece of KIDS is a scene in Washington Square park,
where a rowdy gang of skateboarders, including Telly and Casper, taunt
first a gay couple and then a man whom they proceed to beat within an
inch of his life.  That's the moment where the characters lose our
sympathy completely, and we realize how much damage stands to be done
by these loser kids.  And then there's a great scene right after it
where the kids strip down and go swimming in the middle of the night,
showing themselves off to each other (a pair of girls along for the
ride kiss just to make the boys crazy).  It's the closest thing to an
innocent good time these characters have, even though Telly is scheming
on his next conquest through it all.
     As a realistic portrait of those bleak teenage years, I guess
KIDS should get high marks.  The music is just right.  The actors, who
aren't professionally trained, do a great job inhabiting their roles,
and Harmony Korine's screenplay goes a long way toward creating this
film's naturalistic feel.  KIDS is mostly well-directed, even though
some shots go on forever, striving for realism but instead dulling the
senses with pseudo-documentary stylistics.  Jennie is the closest thing
we have to a sympathetic character, and even she is violated in the
neat-but-predictable denouement.
     Critical reaction to the film has been almost worshipful, and
as best I can figure out, that's for two reasons.  One is that the film
is supposedly a "wake-up call," and I guess it serves that purpose for
folks who haven't yet figured out that this world is populated more and
more by selfish, disenfranchised youth who get their kicks from drugs,
sex, and casual cruelty.  The other is that the film is a contemporary
tragedy, telling the story of young people with no direction, no
family, and nothing to look forward to.  It's admirable that the film
avoids moralizing, and that it is frank, brutal, and honest.  I'd like
to see it spur serious debate about the plight of young people in our
society.  But KIDS remains more satisfying as an event than as a
movie.  We barely feel for these kids, and that's a big part of why
this movie seems nearly as empty as the lives it depicts.  That might
be exactly the intention here, but I'd argue that makes for
questionable drama, and mediocre movies.

Author
Freddie Elmer Mullins
        New On Video:  Very few movies have the courage to follow
through with its convictions when the sledding gets rough.
Many of todays films ask harsh questions, but try for a
predictable happy ending to the problems they claim to be
exposing.  Larry Clarks Kids is one of the notable exceptions
to this trend.  
The story begins with teenager Telly(newcomer
Leo Fitzpatrick) taking advantage of his latest teenage sexual
conquest.  His soothing of the girls fears keys the audience to
the fact that Telly is singing an old song.  It seems that he
has little else in this life, and his sole enjoyment is the
taking of a girls virginity.  Telly and his friend
Casper(Justin Pierce) live from one party, sexual encounter, or
taking of drugs to the next. When one of Tellys former
conquests, Jennifer(Chloe Sevigny), discovers she is HIV
positive, she tracks him all over Manhattan to try to stop him
before another virgin is corrupted. 
Kids follows Telly & Casper
from one vignette to another over a 24-hour period in
Manhattan, with the themes of personal gratification,
bestiality, and hedonism exhibited to the highest degree.  The
kids in Kids inhabit a harrowing world of innocence lost with
pleasure justifying any means to reach it.  Larry Clark has
published several famous collections of urban photography, and
he has not changed his approach with the quasi-documentary
quality found in Kids.  
He creates an entire culture for his
characters by almost entirely removing any adults from the
film.  The kids are in their own world, and they are
comfortable with it.  They understand its subtleties and
nuances without having to verbalize anything.  They are
pressurized containers that spew forth violence, excessive
amounts of profanity, or flagrant sexuality.  They are a kind
of earlier version of Malcolm McDowells Alex in A Clockwork
Orange(1971).  They exist to please themselves, and no one will
stand in their way.  
Clark makes no judgments about what these
children do, nor does he attempt to ascertain what made them
this way.  His camera only records the fact that they do exist
and are a force to be reckoned.  No movie since Abel Ferarras
The Bad Lieutenant has examined the dark nature of sexuality
and emotional isolation in an urban setting.  The use of New
York locales also make for an extremely true to life
experience, much like The Panic in Needle Park(1971).  The
viewer never gets the impression that any acting takes place;
its just life as usual.  (Unrated, 95 minutes, Vidmark
Entertainment)

Author
Ryan Kohler
     "Kids" portends to inform America what their kids are "really"
like.  To do this, screenwriter (?), Harmony Korine, and director
(double ?) Larry Clark, have created the dumbest characters since those
poor, dumb clods who didn't follow Gene Hackman up the Christmas tree in
"The Poseidon Adventure."  
     These characters include Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick), a would-be
lothario whose idea of safe-sex is to do only virgins.  As it turns out,
he is HIV positive and has infected Jennie (Chloe Sevigny, a truly
horrid actress).  The movie then takes two paths: it follows Telly and
his friend Casper (Justin Pierce) as they roam New York City, drinking,
doing drugs, drinking, beating up a guy in the park, and drinking.  It
also follows Jennie as she attempts to keep Telly from infecting anyone
else.
     Captivating stuff, isn't it?  I didn't think so either.  Perhaps
things could have been better if Clark and/or Korine had a clue about
film making.  Clark, a photographer who evidently enjoys taking pictures
of teens, shows the skill of Ed Wood in working a camera.  I would
assume, since "Kids" tries to have a documentary feel about it, that
Clark wanted the viewer to feel like he was with these punks.  Shame it
didn't work; he is unable to make the images on the screen create any
emotion other than anger: not anger at the characters, anger that he and
his writer, Korine, foisted this upon us.
     There is not one appealing character in this film, not even the
alleged protagonist, or, perhaps, conscience, Jennie.  Since much of the
film revolves around Jennie attempting to stop Telly from infecting
anyone else with HIV, Jennie's actions near the end of the film range on
the pathetic and pointless.  Chloe Sevigny (who almost single handedly
ruined "The Last Days of Disco") brings a glazed look to her role as
Jennie.  She carries no emotions whatsoever: not as she waits for the
results of her HIV test, not as she finds out she is HIV-positive, not
as she talks to her girlfriends about things like sex.  If an actress of
some skill or talent had taken the role, perhaps Jennie would not have
remained such a blank character.
     Telly is nothing but a one-dimensional idiot.  He shows no
remorse, nothing of any redeeming value, he is just a walking fuck
machine, always on the look out for another virgin.  Leo Fitzpatrick
does nothing with the part.  As his partner, Casper, Justin Pierce is
just as crude and unbelievable.  
     Harmony Korine's screenplay was, I guess, supposed to be a
shocking expose.  Shame it wasn't.  Oh, it is shocking, alright:
shocking in its ineptitude.  There is no real structure, no reason for
characters actions.  It seems Korine just threw in whatever shocking
events he could think of: rape, assault within an inch of a man's life,
thievery, breaking into a public pool (okay, breaking into a pool isn't
all that shocking, but still. . .)  Maybe Korine should have heeded this
lesson: shocks for sake of shocks generally don't work.
     It is well known that there are plenty of teenagers who think they
are God's gift and can do no wrong, but, in truth, are complete frickin'
idiots (my high school had a football team, so I can talk from
experience.) There is certainly a film to be made that explores today's
teenagers with frank honesty; perhaps that is the film "Kids" was trying
to be.  What comes out, however, is a pointless, meandering mess.  
     "Kids" shocked me.  It shocked me that a screenplay like Harmony
Korine's could get bought.  It shocked me that a studio would allow a
director to spend their money without even demonstrating an ounce of skill
or ability in film making.  It shocked me to consider that, outside of
Sharon Stone's body of work, there has rarely been such bad acting
captured on film.
     Perhaps dear Casper said it best with the film's concluding line:
"What happened?"  My thoughts exactly, my friend, my thoughts exactly. 
Rating: Not even worth a letter grade.

Author
Josh Byer
     A shocking movie following the young protagonist, and his sidekick
"Casper, Casper, he's the fuckingest friendly ghost;" was easily one of
the most disturbing films I've ever seen.
     It takes place in the lower class neighborhoods of New York,
showing a Canjin' boy like myself quite a culture shock of violence,
sex, and lack of morality.
     Although a moral line is drawn in this movie by the main
character, it is hard to spot.  Granted: he does kick the shit out of a
black man, but his black buddy helps him.  Not Granted: he fucks virgins
regardless of intention, then looks for another fuck toy.
     See this movie.  It will bother you, and the screen gets hard to
look at at times, but it is a superb accomplishment of film-making.
This is the only feature of 1995 I have seen that offers not only
believable characters and setting, but a believable story with a real
ending.  Unfortunately, the ending was a little weak, and a little
drawn out, but a monumentous film filled with unknowns giving
Oscar-caliber performances gave me what I felt other great independent
films lacked.
     The story and writing of CLERKS was good, but most of the actors
were weak.  In KIDS, they're all strong.  Shockingly so.  Not the
pretty people we love to look at on the big screen, but the ugly ones
we try not to look at them.  But they are worth looking at them, if
only to see the lifestyle the represent.
     Final Commentary: Take the WATERWORLD chumps' 200 mil, and give it
to this crew to play with.  You'll get a hundred movies all superior to
Kevin's crowning achievement.

Author
Ted Prigge
I think I like the ideals behind Larry Clark's "Kids" more than the
actual movie.  Being amongst the generation that Clark is compaining
about (actually more like bitching), I can first hand say that my
generation is rude, self-absorbed, uncautionary, and that we mostly feel
invincible most of the time.  We do drugs, drink a lot, and have tons of
sex, sometimes unprotected (condoms being a global franchise instead of
a means of real protection these days).  What Larry Clark does is
totally overexaggerate the problem, hinting it as apocalyptic, offering
no solution and no hope.  It's a boring, uncomfortable, one-dimensional
film.
"Kids" has no real plot, which is okay, except one small one: Jennie
(Chloe Sevigny, who apparently goes to the same college as I do) finds
out she is HIV-positive, despite having had relations with only one guy:
Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick), a slack-jawed schmuck of a kid who talks like
he's mentally retarded...yet is still the resident Cassanova.  So she
goes around the Big Apple, going to people's houses, attending parties,
etc, in hopes of finding him and telling him before he beds someone
else.
The film is filled with scenes of young teenagers having sex, fooling
around, drinking, doing lot of drugs, stealing, beating innocent men to
near-death with skateboards, swimming in underwear, talking casually
about sex (and how condoms make your penis shrink), and all that.  It's
filled completely with this stuff, and there is no one out there who's
the voice of reason, hope, or even common sense.  Even the girl who
seems intelligent, and who's parents' strictness with her might have
paid off, is easily seduced by the moronic Telly, and gives up her
virginity way too easily for someone she's structured to be.  And Jennie
is stupid enough to "accidentally" take something which prohibits her
from moving quickly enough to stop Telly from sleeping with more
chicks.  The things the kids do in this movie are as plot devices, not
really because they're that way.
Sure, some parts are very good.  I liked Chloe Sevigny as a whole. 
She's really the only very good part of it, acting wonderfully, and
showing a lot of stored-up emotion.  I liked some of the other
actresses, and even the script sounds kind of real now and then.  A lot
of the time, though, it sounds so fake and fabricated that any
"grittiness" it tries to present is lost.  I also liked how the scene
where Telly is screwing his last girl for the evening (there are two in
the same day), it felt scarier than the first one since you knew that he
was HIV-positive, and this innocent little virgin was contracting it as
well.
But that's about all that's good about this film.  It's view on the
subject is completely naive and never backed-up.  Larry Clark, who has
done photographs of kids in the city, claims to know exactly what kids
these days are like.  He thinks that they're all overly-precocious,
naive, and just plain stupid.  He needs to go back and do some more
research.  He has taken a problem with the world, tried to sell it by
overexaggerating it, and slaps on a weak story.  Larry wants this to be
a satire.
But what Larry forgets is that a weak story can take away from the
message.  A strong story, on the other hand, can be constructed in such
a way that it backs up the story well, as in such cases as Kubrick's
masterpieces "Dr. Strangelove" and "A Clockwork Orange," which are two
of the best examples on how to make a satire.
Not only is the film un-focused, naive, and weak, but it also never
really identifies or explores the problem.  Is it that the kids are
having too much sex?  That they think they're invincible?  And if so,
why is that?  Are they're parents uncaring?  Were they raised by bad
role models on television?  We do see a scene dealing with a parent
who's main problem is she's breat-feeding in front of two horny teenage
boys.  But it never really explores anything into the problem(s) dealing
with kids.  It remains totally one-sided on the topic, and all of the
characters are crap since Larry Clark has nothing but sophomoric
pretention towards them.
The ending is pretty good, albeit very contrived.  There is a part which
is tossed in JUST so this can happen, kind of weakening the effect.
"Kids" has been critically acclaimed by some, and pissed on by others
(including myself).  It's been called "a masterpiece," " a wake-up call
to the world," and even received two thumbs up from Siskel and Ebert. 
But unlike most of the haters of this film, I was not offended by the
fact that teenagers were shown having sex, doing drugs, drinking, etc. 
I would never give a film a bad rating for such superficial reasons as
that.  To me, as a part of the generation Larry is blasting, I think
it's a very flawed film.  If I were to construct a "gritty satire on the
decadence of the youth in America," I'd probably do it a lot
differently.  
Larry Clark, however, has constructed it in an un-focused, and
completely ignorant fashion.  It's uncomfortable to watch in the worst
way, and unentertaining in the most annoying way.  The film has good
intentions, but good intentions does not a good film make.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Christopher Null
     So much hype has surrounded KIDS, the gritty, "not rated" feature about
New York teens, that it was almost impossible to go into the film
objectively.  I was expecting an ultra-graphic film about sex, drugs, and
life on the mean city streets.  That's about what I got.
     The film follows a few characters through one day in New York City.
Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) and his buddy Casper (Justin Pierce) skateboard, do
a little petty thievery, drink malt liquor, hustle drugs, beat up a black
man, throw some dice, and if a virgin or two happen to cross their path,
Telly is only too happy to perform a little "virgin surgery."  On their
trail is Jennie (Chloe Sevigny), a prior virginal conquest of Telly's, who
discovers she is HIV-positive that morning and is on the verge of a nervous
breakdown.
     When the boys aren't wandering, they're talking.  And when they're
talking, it is *always* about sex.  Written by 19-year old Harmony Korine,
the dialogue is completely on the mark yet is totally disgusting.  Too bad
there's no one around to wash some mouths out with soap.
     The film is shocking, not because the subject matter is foreign to us,
but rather, because for all intents and purposes, these really are KIDS,
barely into puberty.  The movie is shot almost like a documentary, and the
sheer "realness" of the picture is what has parents, teens, Bob Dole, and
the MPAA staring with their mouths agape.
     Although watching these disgusting kids do disgusting things over and
over gets old after awhile, the movie is unforgettable.  The cast assembled
here is rough and unpolished--perfect for the subject matter.  Director
Larry Clark brings his skill at photography to brilliant use, showing the
underbelly of New York in all its seamy squalor.
     "There's nothing in the world to worry about."  This is one of the many
lines in Telly's arsenal when soothing his virgins during their initiation.
It's also the most frightening statement in the film, showing just how sad
the state of youth in America really is these days.  Deeply shocking and
disturbing, this film's hype exists for a reason.
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)
