Title
Review for Frankenstein (1931)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
"Frankenstein" is a highly entertaining, action-packed,
and suspenseful version of the Mary Shelley classic.
The sets, makeup, and cinematography are excellent,
and more than enough to compensate for the hammy
acting and sensational storyline.
Dr. Frankenstein (Colin Clive), a young man obsessed
with bringing the dead to life, and his loyal hunchbacked
assistant Fritz (Dwight Frye) troll the graveyards
for corpses.  They have assembled a composite corpse
which is brought to life during an electrical storm.
Unfortunately, the former corpse (Boris Karloff) is a
violent monster with a criminal's brain.  This being a
film, the monster escapes to terrorize the rural German
countryside, spoiling the wedding of Dr. Frankenstein
to blonde mother substitute Mae Clarke.
There is much to enjoy about "Frankenstein".  The
sets, especially the laboratory, the mill, and the
German village, are excellent.  The performances of
Clive, Frye and Karloff are so memorable that they
defined the stereotypes (respectively) of the mad scientist,
his hunchbacked assistant (more often named 'Igor'),
and Frankenstein's monster.  Ironically, Karloff in
later years would be acknowledged for his perfect-diction
speaking voice (e.g. "The Grinch who Stole Christmas")
but here his character, in the role that made him famous,
only gets to grunt.
Although it was only James Whales' third film as a
director, he has the touch of a master.  The close-ups
of Clive and (especially) Karloff are effective, and
the scene with the peasant (Michael Mark) carrying his
lifeless daughter (Marilyn Harris) through the astonished
village may be the best in the film.  Comic relief is
provided by Frederick Kerr as Dr. Frankenstein's
curmudgeony father.
Universal Studios felt the need to soften the impact
of this early horror film.  Edward Van Sloan, who has
a small role as Frankenstein's precise university
professor, begins "Frankenstein" with an introduction
warning the faint of heart to exit the theatre.  To
Whale's distress, the scene with Karloff tossing Harris
into the lake was cut (although it has since been restored).
The ending was also modified, with Dr. Frankenstein
surviving to see a happy ending with Clarke.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
David Dalgleish
"Frankenstein was interested only in human life: first to destroy it, 
then recreate it."
Starring Boris Karloff, Colin Clive, Mae Clarke, John Boles, Edward 
Van Sloan;
Directed by James Whale;
Written by John L. Balderston, Francis Edward Faragoh, and Garett 
Fort, from a play by Peggy Webling;
Cinematography by Arthur Edeson
If parody is a form of tribute, then James Whale's FRANKENSTEIN is 
surely one of the most honoured films of all time.  Few movies, if 
any, have been aped and imitated so often and so pervasively.  Boris 
Karloff's braying, lurching monster.  The hunched, atavistic lab 
assistant.  Dr. Frankenstein in his white labcoat, scuttling around 
his lab, dwarfed by the vast walls and the mad scientist decor.  They 
have become icons of our culture, and it is a measure of how good 
FRANKENSTEIN is that it emerges, indefatigable, from this smothering 
pile of cultural baggage, retaining still some measure of the power it 
must once have had.
All popular works suffer from inevitable datedness, because the 
conventions they manipulate to provoke sensation are as ephemeral as 
the box-office success they strive for; but FRANKENSTEIN, if not 
exactly contemporary in feel, is at least well-preserved: watching it 
is not simply an exercise in camp nostalgia.  It has more to offer.
For one thing, at only seventy minutes, it seems a model of clarity 
and purpose compared to the flaccid torpor of today's blockbusters.  
Whale finds a fine balance, embellishing outlandish scenes with 
extravagant stylistic flourishes, but proceeding through the straight 
scenes with ruthless economy.  Compared to the melodramatic excesses 
customary of popular films, the key moments are charged--rather 
impressively--with a stark simplicity of emotion and imagery.  The 
monster choking a man to death, a little girl innocently offering him 
a flower, a windmill burned by a frenzied mob: the images are concise, 
bare, direct, and remain vivid in the mind's eye.
There is also, at times, a surprising degree of dramatic 
understatement.  The ultimate meeting of maker and monster, at the 
edge of a cliff after an urgent mob/chase scene, is expressed in a 
couple of quick close-ups.  We see the monster's face and 
Frankenstein's face, and there are no words.  We know all we need to 
know.  (In the novel, the equivalent of this scene is the starting 
point for much speechifying.)  Earlier, when the monster is birthed, 
we don't see (as I anticipated) a head-on shot of Boris Karloff 
sitting bolt upright, eyes wide and wild.  Instead, we see him in 
flashes: a hand twitching, a glimpse of the head behind the gloating 
figure of Dr. Frankenstein (Colin Clive).  He comes to life in 
pieces--which is somehow rather appropriate.
Boris Karloff's performance has long since become legend, so much so 
that it is easy to forget that it is just that: a performance, and a 
savvy one.  The role, of course, did not require much dramatic range, 
but it required something beyond the haunted gaunt pallor of the 
make-up.  The shambling wooden gait is obviously intended to suggest 
the unnatural quality of his existence.  But Karloff adds something 
more: even though he himself is not freakishly large, it seems as if 
he is, for he dominates the screen.  He achieves this by seeming to 
place his entire weight on each foot as he walks, giving the sense of 
ponderous body mass, of largeness.  It's remarkable how dramatically 
effective this simple trick is.  And in the fight scenes, the brute 
unchoreographed simplicity of the monster's violence powerfully 
suggests his animal innocence.
Although the script--itself taken from a theatrical adaptation--plays 
fast and loose with the original novel, it retains crucial thematic 
elements, one of which is the concept of the monster's innocence.  He 
is abused, persecuted, vilified, yet he wilfully initiates no 
wrongdoing; he simply responds, in his bewilderment, to the 
provocation around him.  The movie cheats somewhat by having the 
monster's brain come from a criminal (stored in a jar helpfully 
labelled "ABNORMAL BRAIN"), but the way it develops, this becomes 
irrelevant.  When he tosses a girl into a lake, it is not the 
malicious act of a criminal--no criminal's gaping grin could seem so 
silly--but rather the amoral act of an infant who has not yet learned 
how to interpret the world and respond in socially appropriate ways.  
The creator is, in a way, as sociopathic as his creation, and Dr. 
Frankenstein's sin lies not so much in having made this unnatural 
being, but rather in abandoning it to its fate.  His crime is not 
hubris, but lack of moral responsibility.
The story plays out in a series of improbably spacious rooms, a 
panoply of ornate TARDIS chambers, bigger inside than out.  The narrow 
dark spire of Frankenstein's retreat opens up to reveal vast shadowy 
spaces; the rooms of the Frankenstein household, even the hallway, are 
palatial in their dimensions.  But there are no ceilings.  Long-shots 
show us extensive horizontal space but never tilt up to show us what 
is overhead, creating the sense of an oppressively low ceiling always 
just out of sight.  It's a strange sensation, this almost subliminal 
distortion of spatial perception, and--while it is doubtless a mere 
accident of the mechanics of production--it is odd, unsettling, and 
the perfect ambience for a tale of terror.
There is one ceiling in the film, and that is in the 
laboratory--which is a marvel of set design, a comic-book array of 
Gothic exaggeration and primitive sci-fi apparatus--where the sheer 
walls frown forebodingly down on the banks and coils of machinery: 
this is a space that seems more vertical than horizontal.  When the 
instant of creation arrives, the monster's incumbent form--in an 
inspired moment--is hoisted off the floor on a gurney and winched up 
to an aperture in the ceiling, where it bathes in the lightning-glare 
of the storm, in the sturm and drang of the sky.  Watching from below 
as flares of illumination flicker about the immobilized body, it truly 
seems as if we behold something greater than us, beyond our ken, 
unknowable: the act of creation is irradiated by mystery, as it should 
be.  The film entire may not be perfect, but in splendid set-pieces 
such as this, it is lit from within by the eternal fire of myth, and 
makes its flame burn brighter.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Although Boris Karloff's makeup and performance have entered the pop culture 
realm, this "Frankenstein" version from 1931 is not the best or the most 
faithful of Mary Shelley's novel. Still, compared to most other film versions 
(there have been over 100), it is one of the most effective and perhaps, one 
of the most atmospheric. 
James Whale's "Frankenstein" stars the harsh presence of Colin Clive as the 
mad Dr. Frankenstein, slaving away at creating life from a corpse inside a 
remote watchtower. He gets assistance from Fritz (Dwight Frye), a hunchback 
who inadvertently steals a criminal brain from the local medical school. Once 
the creation, now with a criminal brain, is brought to life with the use of 
electrical devices and a brewing storm, it begins to wreck havoc, escaping 
his prison and tormenting the local villagers. Eventually, Frankenstein 
leaves the castle for more modest surroundings, and is ready to marry his 
adoring Elizabeth (Mae Clarke) until terror strikes again in the face of the 
wandering Monster. 
There are far too many inconsistencies in the film to warrant the heaps of 
praise it has received since it was initially released. Number one: how does 
the Monster know about Frankenstein's bride-to-be and why does he attack her? 
Number two: how is it that a villager knows his drowned daughter was murdered 
by the Monster? Could she not have just drowned? Number three: where does the 
film take place? Germany? Scotland? And what is with all the German and 
Slavic names when everyone speaks with an English accent? 
Such inconsistencies aside, "Frankenstein" certainly has a lot to recommend 
it. Karloff is menacing, tender, sympathetic, cruel, and pathetic as the 
Monster - his first appearance where he walks slowly facing Frankenstein and 
stares inertly still sends chills to my spine. I admire Colin Clive's 
hard-edged performance as the scientist - he shows the doctor's mental 
breakdown and exhaustion perfectly. Mae Clarke does not have a lot of screen 
time but she is sweetly innocent - her scenes with John Boles as Victor, 
Henry and Elizabeth's mutual friend, suggests that Victor has mutual 
affection for her. Edward Van Sloan (who appeared the same year as Professor 
Van Helsing in "Dracula") is the most watchable presence on screen as an old 
professor who has a keen interest in this creation, though he is nonplussed 
by it at the beginning. He also presents the film in a prologue, which had 
not been in all existing prints, where he warns the audience that it may 
shock them, perhaps terrify them.
"Frankenstein" had some major trims in its original release thanks to the 
Production Code. One was the deletion of Maria's drowning, as she is thrown 
in the lake by the Monster who expects her to float like the daisies. 
Originally, it had just shown the Monster smiling and reaching out its hands 
to the girl. This minor trim makes the preceding scene of her father carrying 
her lifeless body far more violent than intended. 
The other deletion was a line of dialogue said by Dr. Frankenstein after the 
first signs of life in the Monster. The deleted line - "In the name of God, 
now I know what it feels like to be God" - was certainly essential and in 
keeping with Mary Shelley's theme of man's attempt to emulate God. 
"Frankenstein" is not a perfect film and not nearly as unifying as a whole as 
the superior "Bride of Frankenstein," the latter in my estimation is the best 
damn version ever. If nothing else, Karloff still makes one shudder and that 
is enough to consider the film a horror classic - he makes the film his own.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com 
or at Faust667@aol.com
