Title
Review for Anne Frank Remembered (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED (UK, 1995)**** Written, produced and directed by 
Jon Blair. Photography, Barry Ackroyd. Editing, Karen Steininger. Music, 
Carl Davis.  Cast: Kenneth Branagh (Narrator), Glenn Close (reading 
excerpts from "The Diary of Anne Frank"), Miep Gies,Hanneli Goslar and 
Peter Pfeffer. A Sony Pictures Classics release.122 minutes. Rated PG.
Awards: Oscar winner in 1996; Jury Prize at the 1995 Hamptons Festival; 
Gold Plaque at Chicago International Film Festival; Audience Award at 
the International Documentary Festival, Amsterdam.  
I have just finished watching this long documentary, on tape. I am 
stunned, shaken up and grateful that I can write on it rather than 
discuss it verbally.
In the classic "Hiroshima, mon Amour," a French woman, an extra in a 
"Ban the Bomb" movie being shot, and a local Japanese architect, have a 
touching brief encounter. She tells him of her visits to the martyr 
city: "I have seen everything in Hiroshima." He replies: "No, you saw 
nothing in Hiroshima."
Some of us may think that they've read or seen everything about the 
Holocaust and Anne Frank, This film proves we have seen nothing. The 
story is a neverending one. Something new discovered every day. As one 
of the participants in the documentary says of the long, nightmarish 
train journey to a concentration camp: "You refuse reality. After a 
while imagination stops." 
"Anne Frank Remembered" was made principally by the man who was given 
the 1994 British Academy award for his documentary "Schindler." Jon 
Blair has done a terrific job in combining war and remembrance, the 
portrait of Anne and the horrors of the Nazis, old and sadly familiar 
archival footage and much that was unfamiliar or newly found. He and his 
staff  interweave with superb skill and balance past and present, 
interviews with surviving friends of the Frank family.
The film even transcends personal tragedy and unspeakable mass crimes 
during World War II. It stands for all types of man's inhumanity to man 
fostered by prejudice, racial, ethnic, religious discrimination.
At the center of this work is 80-plus Miep Gies, a gentle, gentile lady  
who in the 1940s worked for Otto Frank. (Anne's father had a small 
pectin-making business in Amsterdam). While the Franks were in hiding, 
she was their contact with the outside, their purveyor of food, 
necessities and news. Miep is a marvelous woman whom one would never 
call "an old lady." Her faculties are intact, her mind  lucid, her 
intelligence high, her manner eloquent yet straightforward. Miep is also 
the person who found and saved for years the diary of Anne Frank.
The movie does not push the pedal on pathos or sentiment. It doesn't 
have to. Places, events and people speak for themselves. Miep is not the 
only witness. She shares the screen with other, equally unrhetorical yet 
quite sophisticated friends of Anne and her folks.
They take up a big chunk of time, yet they're always effective as they 
speak calmly, go to the end of what they're saying and do not produce 
sound bites. 
You never have the impression of watching "talking heads." This is 
reinforced by the interviewer, present, unseen and unobtrusive. 
Exceptionally he is heard asking a question, always brief and to the 
point. He never controls or manipulates his subjects, never puts words 
in their mouth.
The film does start with background information that the average person 
does not know perhaps, especially when we refer to the Franks as Dutch 
Jews. The Franks were an old, distinguished family of Germans who, like 
countless others, happened to be Jewish, cultured, totally assimilated, 
patriotic, with relatives who had fought for Germany in WWI. Their 
children, first Margot then Anna (as they called her) were born in 
Frankfurt.
Unlike many other Germans, Otto Frank saw the handwriting on the wall. 
With his wife and children he left Germany for Holland in 1933, as soon 
as Hitler was given dictatorial powers. They were later joined by more 
Jews, many of them erstywhile personalities in Germany, like a former 
Minister for the Press.
Emigrating very early, Mr. Frank was wise. But later, when one was sure 
of the defeat of Germany and optimism set in, it was not so smart to 
hide instead of fleeing, assuming this were possible. This is perhaps 
the only miscalculation by Otto Frank, who was a superb, sensitive, 
devoted husband and father, an all-around superior human being, and the 
sole survivor of the four Franks.
There was, of course, the trust that Jews put in the Dutch, a justified 
confidence. While, after the occupation of Holland, some Dutch Nazi 
groups sprouted up, the great majority of the population were protective 
of "their" Jews -- witness the steady help to the Franks. Only one other 
country can claim the same massive, heartfelt assistance to Jews: 
Denmark. 
Anne is not sentimentalized or idealized. We hear that she was a 
naughty, even impertinent child. The mother of a friend used to say "God 
knows everything...Anne knows everything better". In hiding, she was not 
always easy to be with. She wrote of her contempt for her mother and her 
dislike of 54-year old dentist Fritz Pfeffer. (He was the eight person 
to go to the hideout, after Otto's associate Hermann van Pels, his wife 
and son).
"Anne Frank" is a succession of gripping moments, scenes and sequences, 
done with restraint and taste (including Branagh's narration), which 
make it all the more devastating. A must-see film, above all  for those 
young and youngish who, in this information age, know so pathetically 
little of history. 

Author
James Berardinelli
     Since its initial publication in 1947, THE DIARY OF ANNE FRANK has 
sold more than 25 million copies.  It has been adapted for the stage, 
and, in 1959, made into a feature film.  As this new essay about Anne 
observes, she has become "Hitler's most famous victim" and "a symbol of 
10 million murdered", more than ten percent of whom were children.  
Director Jon Blair (who made the award-winning documentary, SCHINDLER) 
earned a best documentary Oscar for this, the only comprehensive motion 
picture chronicling Anne Frank's life.
     Those who have read the diary are aware of Anne's indomitable 
spirit, but, in terms of an historical perspective, her writings cover 
only two years.  Blair's film fills in factual gaps, providing 
previously-unrevealed tidbits about the Frank family.  More importantly, 
however, the movie extends the tale beyond August 1944, when the last 
journal entry was made.  During the second half of this film, we follow 
the ultimately-fatal journey that took Anne from her family's hiding 
place in Amsterdam to Gestapo headquarters to Auschwitz and, finally, 
Bergen-Belsen, where she died in February 1945 of typhus (one month 
before the camp was liberated by advancing allied troops).  Of the seven 
who went into hiding with Anne, only one survived the war -- her father, 
Otto Frank, who devoted the rest of his life to keeping his young 
daughter's memory alive.
     ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED interviews a number of people who knew Anne, 
either before or after she was sent to the concentration camps.  Miep 
Gies, one of the quartet who concealed the Frank family from the Nazis 
in Amsterdam for over a year, offers extensive recollections of Anne, 
her father, and the war.  Anne's lone surviving relative, Bernd Elias, 
expresses his feelings about his cousin.  Excerpts from 1976 and 1979 
interviews with Otto Frank (who died in 1980) are included.  Together 
with many other testimonials, these form a compelling picture of events 
not covered by Anne's diary. 
     In making ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED, Blair obtained the cooperation of 
the Anne Frank House and Museum in Amsterdam, and was granted permission 
not only to film in the actual place where the Frank family was hidden, 
but to re-create the furnishings.  With the camera panning through the 
rooms and Glenn Close reading excerpts from the diary, Anne's presence 
is almost palpable.
     As is always true of movies involving the Holocaust, the most 
difficult part to watch takes place in the concentration camps.  Using 
eyewitness accounts, ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED pieces together horrifying 
images of Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen at the time when Anne moved from 
one to the other.  Despite all that has been written and filmed about 
Hitler's final solution, each new image or word serves only to add new 
dimensions to our perspective of this monstrous crime against humanity.  
     Perhaps the most remarkable piece of archival footage presented in 
this film is a small, one-second film clip of Anne on a balcony -- the 
only known moving picture ever taken of her.  It represents a tenuous 
link to a girl who is known to so many people through her diary.  Even 
Otto Frank admitted that he never really knew his daughter until he read 
what she had written. 
     ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED is as important for what it will preserve for 
posterity as for the story it tells today.  The message emerging from 
the Holocaust has always been "Never Forget", and films of this quality 
make it impossible not to remember.  If the story of each of Hitler's 
victims was told with the sensitivity and power of ANNE FRANK 
REMEMBERED, there would not be enough buckets in the world to hold all 
the tears.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This sometimes-tedious and often-moving documentary charts the life
and times of Anne Frank, the young diarist and most-famous victim of
Adolph Hitler.  Writer/director/producer Jon Blair has collected a
staggering amount of historical material on both Anne and the Frank
family.  We meet Miep Gies, one of the family's protectors who is still
alive.  She recounts how she found the diary in the days after the
Germans captured the Franks.  We watch Otto Frank, Anne's father and
surviving family member, in interview footage filmed before his death.
Blair successfully combines these clips, footage, and other historical
records to recount exactly what happened during that terrible period of
European history.  As narrated by Kenneth Branagh and with diary excepts
read by Glenn Close, ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED retells more than just Anne's
story.  We meet and learn about the *many* friends, family members, and
acquaintances whose lives were touched by this young woman and her
writings.  Winner of the last year's Academy Award for Best Documentary.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When I write a review of a film, particularly a historical film, I
often try to give context for the story in the film.  I try to create a
frame to surround the film telling many of the incidental things that
would be of interest to a viewer.  That is what the feature-length
documentary ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED does for the book THE DIARY OF ANNE
FRANK and its dramatic adaptations.  It generally assumes that the
viewer has read or seen some version of the true story of the Jewish
family that hid from the Nazis for two years in the cramped attic of an
Amsterdam factory.  Instead of having extensive excerpts from the book,
this account tells the viewer nearly everything else of value to
someone who is experiencing the story.  It starts with the background
of the Frank family, their lives and especially their times.  Anecdotes
are told of Anne's school experiences.  The film tells how the Frank
family went into hiding and gives a quick summary of their lives those
two years in the stifling attic.  There Anne's closest confidant was
the diary she had been given on her 13th birthday.  After telling how
the family was betrayed and captured it goes into detail about their
lives and the lives of people they knew in the camps.  It tells of the
death of Anne Frank and her sister.  The liberation, the re-discovery
of the diary, its publishing, public reaction, the play the film, and
authenticity challenges are all covered.  This is everything known
about the story Anne Frank and her diary that one cannot get from the
book itself.
     Jon Blair, who previously made the documentary SCHINDLER, had to
be not just skillful but extraordinarily lucky to find some of the
material presented.  Details about Anne and her personal life are
presented by Hanneli Goslar, Anne's friend from age four.  They were
separated by Anne's hiding, but she coincidentally was able to find
Anne when they both were interned at Bergen-Belsen concentration camp
and was nearby when Anne died.  One interview brings out the mixed
emotions toward Anne of Peter Pepper, the son of the dentist who shared
Anne's hiding place and whom Anne dubbed Dr. Idiot.  During the period
of hiding Anne seemed to conflict with every adult in the attic except
her beloved father and these conflicts seem to make her even more real.
Blair is even able to interview one of the burglars who preyed on the
factory below the attic.  In Anne's accounts of these incidents the
Franks could do nothing but wait in silence for the criminals to leave
for fear of letting be known their presence.  The one major question
that Blair must leave unanswered is who it was who eventually betrayed
the hiding place of the Frank family.
     Blair recreates in harrowing detail the life that Anne must have
led in the camps and the fates of the people who hid in the attic.
Only Otto Frank survived, but there is information and eyewitness
accounts of what happened to most of the people from the attic.  Blair
documents how Anne's spirit was broken as she went from Westerbrook to
Auschwitz to her death from disease at Bergen-Belsen.  Blair speculates
that had she held on to that spirit she could have survived the month
between her death and liberation.
     Blair mixes 1940s footage with material he shot and interviews
with people who are now dead.  Some of the people he brought together
for the first time since the 1940s.  The film is narrated by Kenneth
Branagh and selections are read from the diary by Glenn Close.  While
the photography is mostly understated, there is occasionally a haunting
image in the photography.  One shot makes the tower over the railroad
entrance to Auschwitz look extraordinarily like the head of some giant
ogre with glowing eyes from some fairy tale that could not match for
violence what actually took place here.
     I suppose I would rate ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED a +3 on the -4 to +4
scale, though I have not given it the same sort of thought I usually
give a rating.  I take the subject of the Holocaust very seriously and
would have a very hard time objectively comparing this film to, say,
RICHARD III or THE GODFATHER.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Most of us have seen various TV screenings of Anne Frank's Diary
and grieved for the young girl who met such a horrible death at the
hands of the Nazis just as the war was coming to an end.  But no matter
how many times you have seen it, someone else has found a new way of
presenting it, has found new, previously unseen footage of the atrocity
that was the Holocaust.  Now come ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED, an
unforgettable documentary that will tear at your heart.
     When, some years ago, I visited the very house where she and her
family were hidden in the attic, I was extremely touched.  And every
time I see a film about the tragic incident I am spellbound again.
     This is the kind of film that must be seen again and again so that
nothing like the horror of the death camps will ever happen again.
This is what movie-making does best, bringing to us history the way it
really happened.  No adjectives are strong enough to fully do justice
to the accuracy and poignancy of the film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED is a fresh telling of the tragic life of
Anne Frank.  It is a documentary where Anne's friends are interviewed
and these interviews are beautifully interwoven by the editor Karen
Steininger with moving and still images of Anne's era along with videos
of the attic where she and seven others hid. This is not a sentimental
film neither is it ever manipulative.  It records the history in a
stark, but effective and factual retelling.
     Most films about Anne Frank have been entitled THE DIARY OF ANNE
FRANK and center on the time of the diary with her as the focus.  In
ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED, the brilliant new director, writer, and producer
Jon Blair chooses to consider the totality of her life from her
father's marriage to after her death, and he also dwells more on the
other people ensconced with her.  In this more complete rendition, Anne
comes alive as much more human and her death even more tragic.  The
story is told chronologically, and there is as much time devoted to the
periods before and after the diary as to the diary period itself.
     The great Shakespearean actor and director Kenneth Branagh does
the narration.  He delivers his lines with little emotion, but much
impact.  He starts by telling the audience that, "She is perhaps
Hitler's best known victim."
     Anne's father Otto comes to life in the film both as a person and
literally since they show him being interviewed in 1979 before his
death the following year.  He is a German Jew who left for the
purported safety of Holland since after all Germany did not invade
Holland in WW I.  He was a world traveler and even worked at Macy's in
New York for a while.  He was a model employer and an excellent father
who later asked one of his fellow concentration camp victims to call
him Papa Frank since he had a strong need to be a papa even though his
real family was not with him and might, indeed, even be dead.  As good
a father as he was, he admits at the end that, "I only got to know my
daughter really through the diary."  This is one of many passages in
the film that speaks to all of us today.  Do we really know our kids?
     When the Nazis demanded that every Jew between 15 and 40 go to the
labor camps, the Frank family went into hiding in the attic above the
family store.  Otto's four employees risked their lives keeping them
hidden and bringing them food, supplies, and even school books
regularly.  They even turned record profits and thereby helped to keep
the supplies coming.
     Anne comes alive in the film as a energetic girl who was somewhat
of the class clown.  She is described as a "saucy girl" by one of her
classmates.  She wanted so bad to make something of her life.  She had
plays complete with tickets that she typed up.  Her diary tells of the
imaginary life she has with her cousin living in Switzerland as well as
her real life being caged up like a bird in the attic.  Her diary is
read lovingly by Glenn Close.  Anne confides in one section that, "They
keep telling me I should talk less and mind my own business, but I
seemed doomed to failure."
     The movie describes the real problems and joys she has with the
people housed in close confinement with her, especially the mother she
did not like, her on again/off again boyfriend Peter van Pels, and the
54 year old stern dentist Fritz Pfeffer whom she loathed but had to
share a bedroom.  As the narrator says, "The relationship between the
54 year old disciplinarian and the free spirited teen was inevitably
stormy."  Anne says of her mother, "I'm the opposite of my mother, and
we clash.  I have to be my own mother."  We learn that her mother
suffered from severe problems of depression and had trouble coping with
her terrible situation.
     The film gives insights into many of the other members of the
household in hiding.  Pfeffer's son Peter was safe in London during the
war.  We learn from him in an interview that his father was a sportsman
used to riding horses and being in the outdoors so being confined like
that brought out the worst in him.  In one of the more moving scenes of
the show, Peter, for the first time, meets Miep Gies who was one of the
people in the shop who hid and helped his father.
     Eventually things begin to look up with the invasion of Europe by
the Allies.  Anne is elated and tells her diary, "Where there is hope,
there is life."  Her hopes were short lived.  Someone told the Germans
where they were hiding, and all eight of them as well as the two male
members of Otto's staff were send to concentration camps.
     The movie then shifts from interviews with people who knew or
helped them in Amsterdam to people who were with them in the horrors of
the camps.  These are horrors that the world needs to hear again and
again.  They were sent to the camps packed into cattle cars for days
where they could not move and had to go to the bathroom right where
they stood.  Although this lasted for three days, they had no idea how
long they would be in the cars and became dazed and confused.  When
they got to the camps, one man remarked that he truly thought he had
died, and this was hell.  One half of the occupants of the cattle cars
were gassed immediately, but amazingly most of those who had hidden in
the Frank attic lived until just a few weeks to a few days before their
camp's liberation.  Only Otto survived.  Another tragic interview is of
the woman who had to tell Otto that his entire family had been killed.
     The initial publication of Anne's diary had little impact, but
eventually its fame grew, and it was translated into hundreds of
languages and made into a play and then into many different movies, the
first and most famous movie version being George Stevens's 1959 one.
Because of this fame, Gies says, "Otto came to symbolize the perfect
father that everyone craves."  The house where they hid and to which I
made a moving pilgrimage one snowy and freezing cold winter day in
1985, is visited by over a half million visitors a year.  There is
actually little to see there and yet, no one will leave the place
untouched.
     As Gies puts it, "The past go always with you your whole life" or
as Anne says in her diary, "I want to go on living even after death."
This movie will stay with me as it will anyone lucky enough to see it.
A brilliant piece of cinematic art, and one incredible story.  This
review has only barely touched the surface of all that is revealed in
the film. Even if you think you know it all, this film will be a
revelation to you.
     ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED runs a fast 2:02, and I would not want a
minute of it cut.  Most of the show is in English, but there is a
little Dutch and German with English subtitles. The film is rated PG
because of the horrors it discusses.  There is little of the emaciated
or dying people in concentration camp scenes so I think there is not
much visually to shock young viewers.  Any kid old enough to consider
the subject matter could see the film, and my guess is that means
anyone over 8.  I give this film my strongest recommendation possible,
and I believe the world would be a better place if everyone saw it.
I give it **** for being a perfect movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
