Title
Review for Collectors, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     John Wayne Gacy, serial killer?  Or John Wayne Gacy, artist?  The
new documentary Collectors lets you decide whether a mass murderer who
paints in his cell produces something to be treasured or something to be
despised.  Not surprisingly, filmmaker Julian P. Hobbs has found plenty
of people on both sides of the issue.
     Collectors largely revolves around the art -- most of it very good
-- of Elmer Wayne Henley, who in the early 1970's killed some 27 young
boys with the help of Dean "The Candyman" Corll in southwest Houston. 
In 1973, Corll turned on his accomplice and Henley shot him.  Henley is
now serving six life sentences for his crimes.  He has little to do but
paint.
     Oddly, I grew up in southwest Houston and had never heard of this
case until now.  Recently has Henley turned up in the news again, as his
Houston art shows have been sell-outs, with curious onlookers anxious to
own a piece of a killer's psyche.
     Hobbs takes us inside the overstuffed homes of the serial killer
art collectors while providing equal time to the victims' relatives and
rights advocates (all staunchly against the sale of the art, despite the
fact that up to 1/3 of proceeds go to rights groups).  He also visits
with authors and shrinks, all anxious to explain why Joe America would
dirty his hands with this stuff.  Ironically, none of the arguments are
compelling on either side.  The collectors can't explain their passions,
and the naysayers adhere, as naysayers tend to do, to the irrational
belief that nothing good should come from the crimes.  We are left to
our own devices to figure out why someone would want a demon scrawled by
the likes of Richard Ramirez.
     As a documentary, Collectors is nothing short of fascinating.  We
see countless samples of killer artwork -- much of it atrocious
pen-on-paper sketchwork, but some quite good.  We get to hear Henley
himself, and we see that he is not a monster.  As well, Hobbs' choice of
music matches the mood of the film perfectly, and the photography is far
beyond what anyone would hope for from an independent documentary.
     Ultimately, Hobbs keeps an even keel and lets you decide what you
want to think about Henley and co.  But a better question to ponder is
this: Which is creepier: the serial killer artists or the collectors
themselves?
Director: Julian P. Hobbs
Producer: Julian P. Hobbs, Christopher Trent
Starring: Rick Stanton, Tobias Allen, Harold Schechter, Elmer Wayne
Henley, Walter Scott, Andy Kahan, Joe Coleman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
