Title
Review for Addams Family, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Kenneth E. Mohnkern
     Here's another recommendation for THE ADDAMS FAMILY.  It's not the
greatest movie of all time, but it's worth the matinee price.  I
couldn't imagine ahead of time what sort of plot they might give us, but
it really wasn't too bad.  There *is* a plot, but it's not the important
thing here.  Don't see this movie for the plot.  Sit back and enjoy the
good performances.
     Raul Julia is terrific as Gomez, energetic, swashbuckling, romantic
(swooning over Morticia at her every French word).  Angelica Huston
(Morticia) is also quite good, but I thought Christina Ricci stole the
show as Wednesday.  Straightfaced, intense, but she's a little kid all
the way - mischievous and playful.  She's got a future in film.  (She
was also in MERMAIDS.)  The reason I had looked forward to seeing this
was Huston and Julia.  If they had cast Cher (the original choice for
Morticia) and Mel Gibson (or whoever) to star, it wouldn't be nearly as
good.
     Others - the woman who played the nasty mother; Dan Hedeya, the
sleazy family lawyer; and even Christopher Lloyd as Fester - seemed to
be pretty flat and stereotypical here.  That may be why the film started
to drag a bit for me in the middle, as we saw the evil plan unfolding.
We saw less of the great characters and more of the 2-D bad guys.
     Director Barry Sonnenfeld (cinematographer for MILLER'S CROSSING
and RAISING ARIZONA) does a pretty good job in his first directorship.
The camera has as much playful energy and vitality as the Addamses.
There are plenty of "point-of-view" shots, several with Thing (the best
performance by a hand I've seen).  The trip to the vaults is well done
-- spinning, falling, floating through mist.  And you've got to stay
aware -- there's always a choice tidbit going on the in the background.
(Granny: "Here, Kitty.")
     I have to agree that the highlight of the film is the school talent
show with all the parents in the audience and children onstage singing
"Getting to Know You," followed by Wednesday and Pugsly showing their
swordfighting abilities, Wednesday delivering a poetry-laden death
scene.
     There were plenty of kids in the theater.  It's a film you can take
them to, without having your intelligence insulted.
     Obligatory "favorite scenes" follow:
     There are plenty of great lines, and as many great visuals, but
here are a couple:
     The driveway gate has closed on Tulley's coat.  He's struggling to
get free.  Morticia (looking out the window, noting who's come to
visit): "It's Tulley, playing with Gate."
     The opening shot, carolers in front of the house.  Camera travels
up the face of the house, revealing The Addams Family, practicing a
holiday tradition.
     The next shot, a closeup of the Addams' cuckoo clock with little
animated members of the family all over it.  Meet, bend, smooch.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., PG-13, Comedy, 1991
Director: Barry Sonnenfeld
Cast: Raul Julia, Anjelica Huston, Christopher Lloyd, Christina Ricci,
      Elizabeth Wilson, Judith Malina, Dan Hedaya, Jimmy Workman
     Raul Julia and Anjelica Huston head the bizarre Addams family.
Julia has a fortune in money hidden in his gigantic house.  An evil
family wants to take Julia's money.  They send in Christopher Lloyd, who
looks just like Julia's brother, Uncle Fester who disappeared twenty
years before.  Lloyd has to fit in with the Addams family in order to
find out where the money is hidden.
     I found THE ADDAMS FAMILY to be a very good and funny film.  THE
ADDAMS FAMILY is slapstick comedy, but not as good as THE NAKED GUN 2+:
THE SMELL OF FEAR.  On a zero to five scale I give it a four.  THE
ADDAMS FAMILY is rated PG-13 for explicit language and adult situations.
     THE ADDAMS FAMILY, until just recently, has been playing in most of
the big theaters, it is now playing in the smaller theaters, and will
soon be coming to video.  I just saw the film at a reduced rate, and
found it worth the money.  I highly recommend if you are a fan of comedy
you watch this film at a small theater or wait for the video.  Not
everybody will like this film however.  My father gave up on the film
after about ten minutes because he said that the film was pointless,
plotless, and filled with corny gags.  My mother was not very impressed
with the film either because she said that it had a stupid plot, was
pointless, and during the entire film she laughed only four times.
However, I know several people who enjoyed the film very much.   So,
because of the wide range of reaction to the film you might want to wait
for the video so that you don't feel that you wasted your money.
     THE ADDAMS FAMILY is based on an old black-and-white television
show by the same name.  The actors/actresses have been changed.  I have
never seen the television show so I don't know if it is like the film,
but episodes have recently come out on video because of the popularity
of the movie and I plan to rent them to see if they are any good.
     My favorite character/thing in the film was the hand; I also feel
that it was the most likable thing in the film.  I liked the idea of
having just a hand and giving it personality, however, it is totally
unrealistic, and that might turn some people off from the film.  I also
really liked the Addam's neighbor.  He's not on for much time but was
funny when he was on.  The two kids Pugsly and Wednesday (played, in
order, by Jimmy Workman and Christina Ricci) were cool, but not as good
as the rest of the cast.  I felt their roles were under written.  Raul
Julia and Anjelica Huston were ... well ... bizarre.   And Christopher
Lloyd (Dr. Emmett Brown in the BACK TO THE FUTURE trilogy) was good, and
funny, as the fake Uncle Fester.

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE ADDAMS FAMILY is a movie directed by Barry Sonnenfeld, produced
by Scott Rudin, from a script by Caroline Thompson and Larry Wilson.  It
stars Raul Julia, Anjelica Huston, Christopher Lloyd, Christina Ricci.
Rated PB-13, "due to subject matter."
     THE ADDAMS FAMILY is derived from Charles Addams's classic "New
Yorker" cartoons and from the 1964-1966 U.S. television series (starring
Carolyn Jones and John Astin).  Rudin and Sonnenfeld, a first-time
director, decided to concentrate more on the cartoons than the TV
version, to good effect, I think.  The opening sequence is a direct lift
from a famous Addams Family cartoon, in fact.  I enjoyed the resultant
silliness.  Indeed, one of the strengths of the movie is that it is
silly, it knows it's silly, it rejoices in its knowledge.  It is serious
about silliness.
     The performers represent a dream cast, the kind of inevitable
choices that result from a lot of selling and looking around.  Anjelica
Huston is the only woman in the U.S. who could have played Morticia as
well as Carolyn Jones did nearly 30 years ago, at least she surely gives
us that impression.  Morticia is the perfect mother, the all-American
mom seen in a negative, just as the Family itself is the all-American
family with their every pixel reversed.  Of course, Morticia is a
patrician mom, but she's still concerned with her children's happiness,
as when she temporarily interrupts little Wednesday about to electrocute
her cheerfully loathsome brother Pugsley.  One of the ways we knows the
Addamses are our opposites is their cheerfulness and domestic bliss.
Another, of course, is the current of sexuality always a molecule or two
beneath the surface.  Whether Tish is speaking French or strapped to the
Wheel, her eyes are merry and wise, never would she consider raising her
voice or disturbing her flawless complexion of dead-white porcelain with
negative thoughts.
     Whether Raul Julia comes up to manic John Astin's mark as Gomez
Addams, Julia gives it a great shot.  He is the last of the great
romantics, the last of the Latin Lovers.  He glitters, he sparkles, he
burns brightly.  He is vastly more alive than you and I will ever be.
He also interjects some new emotions into Gomez' psychology, if that's
the word.  This Gomez feels guilt, remorse, dejection, suspicion,
depression, failure, and is not always in complete control.  And he
sings and dances.  And of course, Julia looks and sounds a lot more like
a Gomez than Astin did.
     Christopher Lloyd plays Uncle Fester, or does he?  That is the crux
of the plot, such as it is.  The part was pioneered by a defoliated
Jackie Coogan.  Lloyd apparently had to gain a lot of weight and loose
some height to fit into Fester's shapeless robe.  The result is a
remarkably unattractive Lloyd, a monster turning into a kindly uncle (in
the Addams's terms), torn between his villainous mother, played by
Elizabeth Wilson, and the somewhat perilous love the Addamses offer.
There's a wonderful scene between Morticia and Fester in the Family's
graveyard; she tours the ancestors' graves and monument, filling him and
us in on the grand tradition to which is an heir apparent.  Lloyd gives
us an excellent performance, vastly better than anything Coogan could
have come up with, if that's the standard.
     A word about Christina Ricci, who plays Wednesday:  wonderful.
Wednesday is full of woe, of course, fascinated with ways to kill
Pugsley, as who would not be.  Ricci establishes a remarkably
sophisticated character, who more than holds own against the adult
actors.
     There's a lot about the look and feel of THE ADDAMS FAMILY that
makes me think of EDWARD SCISSORHANDS and BEETLEJUICE and no wonder.
Caroline Thompson worked on both scripts and Larry Wilson was Tim
Burton's co-producer on BEETLEJUICE.  Marc Shalman's score sounds like
recycle Danny Elfman, who composes for Burton's movies.  The Family
graveyard, in particular, bears visual resemblances for both of the
above Burton opera.
     Over all, I was completely charmed and taken with THE ADDAMS
FAMILY.  It lived up to my every expectation and then some.  The grand
ball scene reintroduced me to the sisters Flora and Fauna and to Cousin
It, inter alios.  Like Addams's original cartoons, violence is never
shown on the screen.  Wednesday may pull the switch on the Pugsley's
electric chair, but we never see or hear the aftermath.  Like the sexual
tensions between Morticia and Gomez, nothing is ever explicit; that
would be too common, too much like the lives you and I live.
     I have this theory about the appeal of the Addams Family.  By
turning the American family inside out, by reversing our pixels, Charles
Addams said to us that under our costumes we are all lovable monsters,
that all our lives are weird beyond imaging and explaining.  That
violence and sexuality lives with us as closely as our children or our
siblings.  And it's ok.  It's harmless and funny, and dangerous, and
ever present.  The Addams Family is who we are, not the abberation, not
the exception, but the rule, the archetype.  And we love them.
     I can recommend THE ADDAMS FAMILY to anyone who is not a terminally
humorless dweeb, as are the reviewer for Seattle's two daily newspapers,
one of whom actually was clueless enough to complain, "And what are these
people, vampires or what?"  That would be telling and it would spoil
the joke.  Pay full ticket price, if you have to, you will get your
money's worth.
