Title
Review for Sandy Bottom Orchestra, The (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
On Sunday night, August 27, at 8 PM, Showtime TV premieres
this sugar-coated drama about an eccentric family struggling to belong
in a small town in Northern Wisconsin. Based on the novel, "The Sandy
Bottom Orchestra," by husband-and-wife Garrison Keillor and Jenny Lind
Nilsson, it's constructed as a reminiscence, narrated by 14 year-old
Rachel (Madeline Zima), a talented violinist, who lives in Sandy
Bottom and studies at Amidore's Music School. Her mother Ingrid
(Glenne Headley) gave up a promising career as a classical pianist to
marry Norman (Tom Irwin), a local dairy farmer who dreams of
conducting an orchestra. Determined to bring culture to their
provincial, little town, Ingrid tackles community "causes," like
introducing sophisticated hymns to the recalcitrant members of the
Zion Methodist Church choir, along with its troubled minister (Richard
McMillan), and fighting to preserve a magnificent historical building
which the Mayor wants to demolish to make way for a pizza parlor. Her
closest friend is an 80 year-old widow (Jane Powell), who not only
understands Ingrid's frustration but seems to be her only ally.  Two
pivotal crises occur when Norman, playing the impresario, decides to
forgo the traditional marching and oom-pah bands to present a
classical concert at the annual Dairy Days celebration and when
Rachel's parents decide she should apply to Interlochen Music School
in Michigan - but neither is explored in enough depth to be
emotionally effective. Under the direction of Bradley Wigor, the
actors rise above the bland superficiality of Joseph Maurer's script
and the cinematography is beautiful. On the Granger
Made-for-Television Movie Gauge, "The Sandy Bottom Orchestra" is a
slow-paced, syrupy, sentimental 6, as it answers Ingrid's question: "I
wonder what it would be like to feel you were part of something
important." Additional playdates are Aug.30 at 9:35 AM, Sept. 2 at
8:15 AM, Sept. 22 at 11:15 AM, and Sept. 25 at 6:15 PM.
