Title
Review for Three of Hearts (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  4/30/93
Running Length:  1:41
Rated:  R (Mature themes, language, sexual situations, violence)
Starring:  William Baldwin, Kelly Lynch, Sherilyn Fenn
Director:  Yurek Bogayevicz 
Producers:  Joel B. Michaels and Matthew Irmas
Screenplay:  Adam Greenman and Mitch Glazer
Music:  Joe Jackson
Released by New Line Cinema
     The relationship between Connie (Kelly Lynch) and Ellen (Sherilyn
Fenn) is about to end.  Needing "space," Ellen breaks the news to her
lover that it's time to move on.  Crushed and on the verge of a
breakdown, Connie is unable to let Ellen simply disappear from her
life.  But, as determined as Connie is to rekindle things, Ellen is
equally sure that it would be better for both of them not to see each
other.  Meanwhile, needing a date for her sister's wedding, Connie
hires Joe (William Baldwin), a male escort.  The two become friends and
together, they concoct a scheme by which Connie can get her lover
back:  Joe will get Ellen to fall in love with him, then dump her.
Emotionally distraught and no longer able to trust men, Ellen will
presumably come back to Connie.  Unfortunately, as Joe puts the plan
into action, he unexpectedly falls for his intended "victim."
     Not many American movies approach gay relationships in the natural
way that THREE OF HEARTS does.  This kind of attitude is refreshing to
see, as well as long overdue.  Most gay/lesbian films treat the subject
with great somberness, presenting the issue, preaching about it, and
thoroughly alienating large portions of the audience in the process
(THE LIVING END and CLAIRE OF THE MOON are prime examples of this type
of film making).  In THREE OF HEARTS the relationship between Connie (a
lesbian) and Ellen (a bisexual) is treated normally, in much the same
way that heterosexual liaisons are presented.  That's not to say that
the difficulties of being a lesbian in today's society are ignored
(Connie has yet to admit the truth to her parents, and she wrestles
with this decision), but the movie doesn't make a big deal out of one
of its couples being a female/female pairing.
     Unfortunately for THREE OF HEARTS, its treatment of Connie and
Ellen's relationship is one of the few things that it does right.  This
film follows traditional romantic comedy formulas.  The script is
predictable up to the unsatisfying end when the writers, apparently
unable to decide how to wrap up the situation, simply stopped the story
right in the middle of everything.  The overall effect is that the
viewer is likely to leave the theater feeling unsatisfied, if not
cheated.
     William Baldwin and Sherilyn Fenn work well with each other.  They
aren't a great couple, but their scenes together are nicely-written and
skillfully acted.  There just aren't enough of them to save an
otherwise below-par film.  Kelly Lynch's Connie is one of THREE OF
HEARTS' most severe liabilities.  Given her artificially mercurial
disposition, the character is completely unconvincing, and the actress
playing her doesn't seem aware of the meaning of subtlety.
     THREE OF HEARTS is billed as a romantic comedy but, while there's
a lot of romance, there's little comedy.  This isn't an instance when
supposedly-funny scenes don't make anyone laugh; the film rarely tries
for humor.  There is also a scene of excessive violence that one
wouldn't expect in something breezy and lighthearted.  This is a case
of marketing misrepresenting a movie, perhaps to its detriment.  The
unexpectedly dramatic structure didn't bother me, but some viewers
might be displeased.
     Overall, with the exception of the lesbian theme, there's not much
new or original in THREE OF HEARTS.  Unfortunately, too many love
stories fall into this category.  Innovative and interesting renderings
of relationships seem to be at a premium; it's obviously much easier to
stick a few characters into stock situations and let the plot grind on
to a stopping point.  It's disappointing, but that's the way too many
movies are made today.
Note:  in response to some requests, all movie reviews written by me may
       be reprinted provided that they carry the following notification:
       "Copyright 1993 by James Berardinelli".
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
