Title
Review for Journey of August King, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The mountains of North Carolina are the setting for this agreeable
period drama (1815) about a lonely, widowed farmer (Jason Patric) who
befriends a runaway slave (Thandie Newton) on his three-day trek back
from trading.  He's a quiet, gentle man who consents to conceal the girl
in his horse-drawn cart, along with the geese, pig, and cow that he's
carrying.  Her owner (a squinty Larry Drake) is also on the trail, as
are numerous other people, which makes the journey all the more
dangerous.  (And dangerously graphic!  Cover your eyes after a male
slave is captured.  The fate that befalls him involves one of the most
violent acts that I've seen in some time!) Rather engrossing for both
the excellent period detail and the breathtaking scenery, THE JOURNEY OF
AUGUST KING doesn't muster much in the way of dramatic weight.  Missing
is a sense of August King The Person.  We're shown what he *does*, but
not who he *is*.  Thus, whatever metaphorical "journey" he undergoes can
only be inferred.  And that's no good.  Nice use of the accompanying
animals, tho.  They are a small supporting cast unto themselves.  Filmed
entirely in North Carolina.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: beginning 12/8/95 (delayed from 11/3) (limited)
Running Length: 1:32
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, execution)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Jason Patric, Thandie Newton, Larry Drake, Sam Waterston,
      Sarah Jayne Wylde
Director: John Duigan
Producers: Nick Wechsler and Sam Waterston
Screenplay: John Ehle based on his novel
Cinematography: Slawomir Idziak
Music: Stephen Endelman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING is as close to a flawless motion picture
as is likely to be produced by the film industry (independent or
mainstream).  Featuring strong acting, realistic set and costume design,
an intelligent script, solid directing, and evocative cinematography,
every facet of this movie is impressive.  It is a thoughtful,
emotionally-rich production that explores its title in both a literal
and a metaphysical sense.  In the process, the audience experiences both
of August King's journeys:  the one he takes through the mountains of
western North Carolina and the one his soul makes from loss to
salvation.
     While most films require one to three years to produce, for THE
JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING, the process lasted twenty-five years.  The novel
was published in 1971, and Universal Pictures immediately optioned the
screen rights.  Now, over two decades and three screenplays later, the
movie has finally made it to theaters.  Following a short film festival
run (which included the coveted closing position at Venice), the picture
is scheduled for a late-1995 release in New York and Los Angeles, with
wider distribution in early 1996.
     In a performance that is remarkable because of its reserve and
restraint, Jason Patric plays the title character, a widowed
frontiersman making his way home from town in 1815 North Carolina.  He
has just used the year's gains to buy a milk cow, a boar, and two geese.
Along the road, he meets up with a runaway slave girl (Thandie Newton),
heading for the freedom of the North.  Her owner, Olaf Singletary (Larry
Drake), desperately wants her back and is offering a handsome reward for
her return--five acres of land and a good horse.  August thinks this
is too cheap a price for a human life, but is still reluctant to help
the girl because it's against the law.  Eventually, however, her bleak
circumstances prick his conscience, and he allows her to hide in his
wagon.  Thus begins his complicity in an act that could lead to his
complete financial ruin.
     This film boasts one of the best-researched and most discerning
scripts of its kind to come along in a while.  Every situation is
carefully designed to avoid melodrama or sensationalism.  There is
nothing in this film that feels even vaguely contrived.  The story is
not true, but it easily could be.  Even the dialogue--both the lines
and the manner in which they are delivered--is handled with a
consideration for detail and authenticity.
     One gripping element of THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING is the way the
plot moves in tandem with character development.  The most emotionally-
stirring scenes are the simple ones.  When August willingly sacrifices a
prized possession to enable the slave Annalees to remain hidden, he is
not only aiding her physical liberation, but assisting the deliverance
of his own soul, which has lain in a self-made purgatory since the death
of his wife.
     Australian director John Duigan, whose previous efforts include THE
YEAR MY VOICE BROKE, FLIRTING, and SIRENS, is in complete control of the
material.  Working with his best script yet, Duigan displays his mastery
of tone and pacing.  THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING advances slowly and
deliberately, allowing the characters necessary time to breathe and
expand.  Nothing is hurried or forced; Duigan understands how to move
action and transform personalities without cheating or manipulating his
audience.
     Cinematographer Slawomir Idziak, Krzysztof Kieslowski's long time
collaborator (A SHORT FILM ABOUT KILLING, THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE,
BLUE), forges a powerfully artistic sense of atmosphere, using
specially-designed amber filters to soften some of the brighter
sequences.  With various shots of mist-shrouded mountains and roiling
thunderheads, Idziak solidifies THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING from a visual
perspective.
     Thandie Newton, who starred in Duigan's FLIRTING, and later
appeared in JEFFERSON IN PARIS, brings a mix of quiet dignity and
desperation to Annalees, as well as a subtle eroticism of which the
character is ignorant.  Newton and Patric work well together, with
Annalees' spirit counterbalancing August's reticence.  Larry Drake
(DARKMAN) creates a complex antagonist in Olaf Singletary, a man who is
not so much evil as he is torn by the conflict between his own needs and
society's expectations.
     Although it is most obviously a tale of redemption, THE JOURNEY OF
AUGUST KING is also a love story (in the most basic sense of the word
"love").  Despite the lack of romance and limited sensuality, there's no
doubt that an intimate bond develops between August and Annalees,
although it's *not* the one most movies would choose.  Each learns from
the other and, by the final reel, it's unclear who has gained more from
the exchange.  The toll of the journey seems a small price to pay for
what they achieve, separately and together.  And for those fortunate
enough to see this film, THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING offers a look
through the window of a rare and special story.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
