Title
Review for Big Store, The (1941)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BIG STORE, THE (1941)  Directed by Charles Reisner. Written by Nat 
Perrin (story), Sid Kuller, Hal Fimberg, Ray Golden. Photography, 
Charles Lawton. Art Director , Cedric Gibbons with Stan Rogers.  Se 
decoration, Edwin B. Willis,  Cast: Groucho Marx (Wolf J. Flywheel), 
Chico Marx (Ravelli), Harpo Marx (Wacky), Tony Martin (Tommy Rogers), 
Virginia Grey (Joan Suttton), Margaret Dumont (Martha Phelps), 
Douglass Dumbrille (Mr. Grover), William Tannen (Fred Sutton), Marion 
Martin (Peggy Arden), Virginia O'Brien (Kitty), Henry Armetta 
(Giuseppi), et al. An MGM film. 89 minutes
The Marxes --with Groucho pretending to be great private eye -- save 
a big department store from crooks.
Practically everybody who has written about this film badmouths it as 
one of the weakest Marx works, if not the weakest. Here is my 
minority opinion.
The movie is certainly not a Marx classic, but it is still a delight 
with many qualities. The brothers do have their share of mad moments 
or even scenes. The Groucho-Margaret Dumont duo (she is, as usual, 
his "souffre-douleur") does nicely. Character actor Henry Armetta has 
funny turns as a customer who comes to the store with his wife and 12 
kids. Six of the latter disappear temporarily within beds which, like 
some other items, each with its own electric wall-button, makes them 
appear or disappear. (A nice parody of the famous hide-a-bed that can 
be stored inside a wall.).
Groucho leads an amusing crows of dancer-singers, all store 
employees, to the pretty good tune of "Sing While you Sell," which 
comes with a medley of boogie woogie and then-familiar songs: "Yes My 
Darling Daughter,""Mama Yo Quiero" and others.
Virginia O'Brien sings a lullaby. She was a specialty comic singer 
for MGM in the 40s, appearing in a dozen and half movies.  Well-known 
for her dead-pan delivery,
she would face the camera in totally impassive closeups, stone-faced. 
No matter what the song she would never shift to any other 
expressions. This is still quite funny.
Singer Tony Martin, very popular, rather handsome and endowed with a 
good voice, does here "If It's You," a pleasant romantic song, and in 
the finale "The Tenement Symphony," with a large orchestra and young 
people's choruses. This number is now ridiculed by many, yet I 
believe that it does not deserve this reaction. Yes, it is  corny, 
but has some good passages that don't call for all that scorn.  The 
music is not bad but it is too grandly sentimental and overall dated. 
Still, the public of the 40s and 50s found it impressive.
Then there's the music provided by Chico and Harpo. They do a piano 
piece for four hands that's clever and amusing. Later, Harpo at the 
harp delivers a pleasant medley within a setting of mirrors in which 
Harpo is shown playing other instruments too. The special effects 
people did a pretty clever job. I suspect that it was inspired both 
by mirror tricks in previous Marx movies. The famous 1948 Hall of 
Mirrors sequence at the end of Orson Welles' Lady from Shanghai may 
or may not have been influenced by this number.
All things considered The Big Store is eminently watchable (and 
listenable) to this day, and a plus in the Marx filmography.
