Title
Review for Dulce olor a muerte, Un (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
(Dialog in Spanish, English subtitles)
This film was released under the English title "A Sweet Scent of Death".
This film was screened at Cinequest 10, the San Jose film festival.
The rural countryside is often depicted as a serene realm with a
simple life. However, it can also be a complex place filled with love,
tragedy, honor, and deception. It can be a place where friends are
held exceptionally close, and outsiders are distrusted and avoided.
The story begins with the young Ramón (Diego Luna) opening the day at
his mother's general store. He is visited there by the object of his
affection, Adela, and he give her a gift of a bottle of perfume. She
is friendly and accepts it, but they clearly have not yet developed a
relationship. Her family is one of several newcomers to the area,
which are all considered outsiders to the town, and are warily
mistrusted by the longtime resident families.
A web of intrigue begins to emerge when Adela is found naked and
lifeless in an oat field. Being a newcomer, she is not immediately
recognized by the people. When Ramón appears on the scene, he tries to
give the corpse some dignity by covering her with his shirt. The
openly grieving Ramón is identified as her boyfriend, and although he
knows this falsely represents their relationship, he does not deny it.
Although the corrupt federale wants to quickly investigate the crime
(he suspects Ramón, as a jealous lover), the paternal sheriff Justino
(Hector Alterio) manages to keep the investigation a local affair.
Being the godfather of Ramón, he knows the boy well enough to feel
that he is innocent.
Most of the village's people pin the crime on "The Gypsy" (Karra
Elejalde), a shady vagabond who has many scattered lovers. The men of
the village encourage Ramón to avenge the death of his girlfriend by
seeking out "The Gypsy" and killing him. Ramón relishes the
recognition of Adela as his girlfriend, an accomplishment he was never
able to achieve, and he lets the attention sweep him into
self-delusion.
The film is a complex story with many dimensions, whose many parts
construct a single portrait. The many different components are
effectively explored without dwelling on any single aspect. Although
parts of the story drag for too long, there still remain several
colorful and engaging facets that keep the film enjoyable. This is
clearly a film about this particular culture, the themes of honor and
revenge can seem alien and jarring to viewers from other cultures. In
the end, the primary mystery is solved, but the primary satisfaction
is not the closure of this thread, but the overall portrait that was
painted.
Recommended. This is a multifaceted film, whose primary mystery is
perhaps not its most interesting aspect. It weaves a tapestry of the
many dimensions of life in rural Mexico.
