Title
Review for Nelly & Monsieur Arnaud (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NELLY AND MONSIEUR ARNAUD (NELLY ET M. ARNAUD) is a French film
that garnered numerous awards there.  For me the film is a fascinating
character study of Nelly and Monsieur Arnaud, but others will probably
characterize the picture as a romance to which I would not argue.  This
is one of those rare films that appears to have no actors.  These
characters are so realistically drawn that I did not for a minute think
I was observing actors, rather I was eavesdropping on real life.
     First, a warning.  If you must have sex or nudity or if you need
dramatic events and fast pacing to enjoy a movie, do not waste your
time with NELLY AND MONSIEUR ARNAUD as you will be quite disappointed.
This is a film that takes its own sweet time and one with a satisfying
but slightly surprising ending of the sort you hardly ever see in
American films.  Don't try to guess the ending you will be wrong, and
anyway, the fruits to be savored of this film are getting to know the
characters.
     As the story unfolds, Nelly played by Emmanuelle Beart (Manon from
MANON OF THE SPRING and Claire Phelps from MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE among
many films) is at a Parisian cafe confiding her marriage problems with
her friend Jacqueline (Claire Nadeau).  Nelly tells Jacqueline that her
husband, Jerome (Charles Berling), is a couch potato who lost his job
and who is not serious looking for another one.  Nelly lost hers too,
but is doing odd jobs in a futile attempt to attack their mounting
debt.
     Into the cafe comes Monsieur Arnaud played by Michel Serrault (Mr.
Raymond in LES DIABOLIQUES (1954) and 53 other films after that).  It
seems that years ago Monsieur Arnaud had an affair with married and now
43 year old Jacqueline and is still a good friend of hers.
     Whereas Nelly is 25 with the looks of a fashion model, Monsieur
Arnaud is 40 years her senior, but strikingly handsome and
distinguished.  He has gorgeous, straight, silver gray hair, and wears
impeccable suits (costumes by Catherine Bouchard).  Both have excellent
bodies and the camera loves them.
     For good looking characters, their talent has nothing to do with
their physical attractiveness.  Both turn out to be compassionate
people who are good listeners.  Moreover the performances by Beart and
Serrault are compelling and worthy of Academy Award consideration.
Once Monsieur Arnaud hears Nelly's tale of woe, he loans her enough
money to get her out of debt, and he gives her a job transcribing and
editing his memoirs of his time in French Polynesia after the war when
he was a young judge.  Although the job is to be performed in his
apartment, there are no strings attached.
     There is a slight mystery about Monsieur Arnaud since he stopped
being a judge in mid-career and became a wealth businessman.  As he
explains it, "We struck it rich in real estate, making Paris ugly."  He
is in the process of selling his vast collect of rare and not so rare
books telling Nelly, "You reach an age when you read the same few books
over and over."  The reason to see the film is the evolving
relationship between the two of them and their rich conversations
together.  At one point, in jest, he confides in her, "Marry an old man
like me and you'll have liberty, security, and austerity."
     Nelly quickly and amicably divorces her husband and eventually
strikes up a relationship with Monsieur Arnaud's publisher Vincent
(Jean-Hugues Anglade).  Most of the show for me remains a beautiful
character study of two people.  The script by Jacques Fieschi, Claude
Sautet, and Yves Ulmann is exquisite.  Director Claude Sautet takes a
story and slowly wraps his audience into it.  A mesmerizing tale.
     NELLY AND MONSIEUR ARNAUD runs 1:46 with carefully and almost
dreamy editing by Jacqueline Thiedot.  The picture is in French with
easy to follow English subtitles.  The film is not rated, but would be
PG or PG-13.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  I remember only a
single mild cuss word.  Given the subject matter, my guess is that it
would not interest kids under 10, but I don't see how it could harm
anyone.  I recommend this delightful talkfest of a film to you and give
it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Emmanuelle Beart, Michel Serrault, Jean-Hugues Anglade, 
      Claire Nadeau, Francoise Brion, Michele Laroque, Michel Lonsdale,
      Charles Berling, Jean-Pierre Lorit
Director: Claude Sautet
Producer: Alain Sarde
Screenplay: Claude Sautet, Jacques Fieschi, and Yves Ulmann
Cinematography: Jean-Francois Robin
Music: Philippe Sarde
     There's a line near the end of NELLY & MONSIEUR ARNAUD that, for 
me, sums up the entire movie:  "We all want love, but when we find it, 
we pull back.  It scares us."  Claude Sautet's feature is about the 
mysteries of the human heart and mind, and, while it doesn't pack the 
same emotional power as his 1992 film, UN COEUR EN HIVER, it deals with 
many of the same subjects in an equally intelligent manner.
     Some complain that Sautet's films are too intellectual, but, like 
Eric Rohmer, the film maker uses conversation to delve deeply into the 
core of his characters.  You don't start out feeling much for the men 
and women who populate his films, but, by the final reel, you empathize 
with them all.  In NELLY & MONSIEUR ARNAUD, Sautet injects the finale 
with a bitter dash of irony -- it's an unexpected twist that underscores 
his main theme.
     Nelly (the enchanting Emmanuelle Beart) is trapped in a dying 
marriage with her husband, Jerome (Charles Berling).  While he vegetates 
at home watching TV, she goes out and gets odd jobs, trying to earn 
enough money to dig them out of a 30,000-franc financial hole.  One day, 
Nelly's friend, Jacqueline (Claire Nadeau), introduces her to an elderly 
acquaintance, Pierre Arnaud (Michel Serrault).  Nelly and M. Arnaud talk 
for a while, and he offers her both a loan to cover her debts and a job 
typing and editing his memoirs.  She accepts.  Soon, the pair are 
spending several hours a day together, unwittingly becoming deeply 
involved in each other's lives as their outside relationships grow pale.
     NELLY & MONSIEUR ARNAUD is as close to a perfectly-acted motion 
picture as is likely to be found.  Emmanuelle Beart (MANON OF THE 
SPRING, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE), one of today's most attractive and 
accomplished French actresses, emotes as much with her eyes and gestures 
as with her words.  There's a scene where the slight cock of her head 
gives a poignant negative answer to the question, "Are you happy?"  Her 
co-star, Michel Serrault, matches her scene-for-scene with a towering 
performance of often restrained, but occasionally unleashed, passion.  
Jean-Hughes Anglade (as Arnaud's editor and Nelly's lover) and Claire 
Nadeau are solid in supporting roles.
     It's easy to see NELLY & MONSIEUR ARNAUD as a May/December romance, 
but it's more than that.  It's about longing for the forbidden fruit, 
shielding oneself from disappointment, and holding back from the thing 
most wanted.  Sometimes love involves passion; on other occasions, the 
two are separate.  As in Kieslowski's RED, the relationship between the 
beautiful, young woman and the aging ex-judge runs far deeper than a 
term like "friendship" can adequately describe.
     Sautet's film was nominated for a ton of Cesar awards.  It won two:  
best director for Sautet and best actor for Serrault.  Both are 
deserved.  This is a leisurely, compelling look at emotions that are 
common to all human beings.  When Nelly confesses to M. Arnaud that he's 
a part of her life now, she speaks for them both.  Like a couple that 
has been together for years, they confide in each other, quarrel, and 
reconcile.  They are well-matched in every way except age.
     There are times when NELLY & MONSIEUR ARNAUD seems a little 
sterile, and several secondary relationships don't consistently engage 
the audience.  But when Beart and Serrault are together on screen, they 
make the most unusual kind of magic.  These are two great actors giving 
top-notch performances, and the restrained romance they project is 
fascinating.  It's this quality, more than any other, that makes NELLY & 
MONSIEUR ARNAUD a rewarding motion picture.
