Title
Review for Famous (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
It can now be revealed.  Christopher Guest (WAITING FOR GUFFMAN and BEST IN
SHOW) does not actually have a patent on the mockumentary.  It just seems that
he must.  Fresh with this knowledge, Griffin Dunne decided to make his
mockumentary mark with LISA PICARD IS FAMOUS.
Examining the world of fame, Dunne, as documentarian Andrew, carefully selects a
subject "on the verge."  With her popular Wheat Chex commercial on her resume
and a part - well, just a scene -- in an upcoming television movie, Lisa Picard
(Laura Kirk) must be on the verge of major stardom and fame.  (You remember the
controversial Wheat Chex commercial don't you?  You know, the erotic one with
the couple having sex and breakfast in bed.)  Making it as an actress is
difficult after the cereal commercial since young Lisa is already typecast.  No
BMW commercials for her.  Right now she's working on her next big break as she
tries out for an Advil ad.
Interspersed with tales of Lisa's life, the movie covers her friends, who have
their own stories.  There are also interviews with actors and actresses who have
already achieved fame.  Carrie Fisher, for example, introduces us to none other
than the dog who rocketed to the top of the canine acting charts for his
signature role in THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.
Even the best mockumentaries tend to delight more with big smiles than big
laughs.  LISA PICARD IS FAMOUS may not be one of the best, but it does find ways
to produce some quite large laughs.  Dunne's cast, including those who play
themselves, is great.  As the hard working chatterbox with almost enough perky
enthusiasm to get herself through any crisis, Lisa is endearing.  When Advil
ends up giving her a headache, you'll feel a tinge of pain too.  After all, how
could a girl who has worked her way up from playing Sally Starfish and Anne
Frank's mother not earn your support?
Among the many star cameos, Fisher Stevens gives one of the best.  He explains
how important it is to get into the mind of a character.  Since he couldn't go
to India, he studied for a part as an Indian by staying at a motel run by
Indians.  His immersion was so effective that he had trouble getting a part as a
white character after that.  
There's also a dark side to fame as Princess Leia, oops, I mean Carrie Fisher,
confesses.  "When I got famous," she says, "I got depressed because I realized
that someday I would get instantly not famous."  A chilling thought.  You may
not have to worry about this, but Lisa does.  All you need to do is sit back and
laugh.  And laugh you will while watching this little charmer.  
LISA PICARD IS FAMOUS runs 1:32.  It is not rated but would be PG-13 for sexual
situations and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
The film is playing in very limited release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it recently finished a run at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
FAMOUS (LISA PICARD IS "FAMOUS") (director: Griffin Dunne; screenwriters: Laura
Kirk/Nat DeWolf; cinematographer: William Rexer II; editor: Nancy Baker; cast:
Laura Kirk (Lisa Picard), Nat DeWolf (Tate Kelley), Griffin Dunne (Video Man),
Daniel London (Boyfriend), Jack Howard (Commercial Stud), Sandra Bullock
(Herself), Carrie Fisher (Herself),  Melissa Gilbert (Herself), Penelope Ann
Miller (Herself), Buck Henry (Himself), Charlie Sheen (Himself), Spike Lee
(Himself), David Holtzman (Himself), Fisher Stevens (Himself); Runtime: 87;
GreeneStreet Films; 2000) 
Griffin Dunne, actor-turned-director, directs this mockdocumentary, with him
becoming part of the action in a purposefully obtrusive way. "Famous" was
created by two unemployed actors who also star in it, Nat DeWolf (Tate Kelley)
and Laura Kirk (Lisa Picard), which as it turns out is a fictional story about
two unemployed actors who seek fame and fortune. It's a theme that's been done
often, but in this very witty and bitter-sweet comedy the characters are truly
endearing and funny. 
The project got off the ground four years ago when Nat and Laura were living in
NYC and were co-scripting a movie. Mira Sorvino was in the same acting class as
Laura and read the script. She laughed so much, that she decided to co-produce
the project with Dolly Hall, a lifelong friend of Griffin Dunne. That's how
Griffin got aboard and took control, as he was able to get funding and lineup a
host of celebs doing cameos. The actors improvised a script by doing readings in
their apartment and when it came time for filming, they had a tight script which
they adhered to about eighty percent of the time. There was one scene they did
by an elevator, where a guy who had a bit part in a minor film just became part
of the film unexpectedly as he was interviewed by Dunne. The film was shot on a
digital camera. 
Lisa Picard is the focus of a documentary. She's the potentially famous actor
whom the filmmaker, played by Dunne, is searching the streets of Manhattan for:
"An actress who would talk to me before she got famous," and he believes it's
imminent that the one who is so willing to talk to him, Lisa, will become
famous. She's already on her way in the business, as the soft porn commercial
she did advertising a 'Wheat Chex' cereal got her some notoriety. She also by
chance got a bit part in Melissa Gilbert's upcoming made-for-TV movie "Phone
Call For Help." Her gay best friend is also a struggling actor, Tate Kelley. His
claim to fame is as an extra on a soap opera, and he is diligently pushing a
one-man off-off Broadway play about his anger at the public's homophobia and to
celebrate his own gay pride. He performs in his underwear and gives a shrill
performance that is bound to turn everyone off; the filmmaker manages to get in
a dig at newspaper theater critics and their supposed good taste, by having one
of them give it a rave review. This gets the attention of celebs Spike Lee and
Charlie Sheen, who bring it to Hollywood and change the story and almost leave
the dull Tate completely out of the film--as they just credit him with the film
being based on his play. 
What makes the two leads hilarious, is that they are ambitious to the point of
being narrow-minded and are humorless about their situation. They can't stop
from being self-centered. Lisa has a few very funny scenes with her pliable
boyfriend (London), who supports the self-absorbed actress through thick and
thin and when he is no longer useful to her gets pushed aside by the pushy but
not-famous-yet actress. She was also very funny auditioning for an Advil spot
which she doesn't get, as behind the humor it shows how being rejected is part
of the business but it is very difficult not to take it as something personal.
The film does a savage job dissecting the thirst there is for fame, in a
storyline that is very much New Yorkish in attitude and spirit. Buck Henry has
some funny comments as a talking head on how fame makes you feel good, while
noted underground filmmaker, someone who is not famous, David Holtzman, comments
he has known famous people tell him their fame is like eating all the time. It
might not be all new material and the characters do grow somewhat weary after a
fast start but, all things considered, it was surprisingly a lot of fun. 
When at the Williamstown Film Festival, where I saw it, Nat was asked his take
on fame and replied: "I bought a tux for the Cannes Film Festival and ended up
wearing the tux the remainder of the year to do catering work." The two are
presently working on two other comedy scripts, but as of yet fame has not come
their way. The two are still unemployed and are contemplating any offers for a
TV series. But they are concerned on how the characters they created would
change if a TV series picked it up, as they don't want to sell out or get
fame--but they do want employment in their chosen field. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
