Title
Review for Gods Must Be Crazy II, The (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  "Pleasant" is the word for this
     lightweight African adventure starring N!xau again as the
     benevolent if not always well-understood Xixo, the Kalihari
     Bushman.  Again slapstick and political farce mix in this
     cultural-misunderstanding comedy.  Rating: +2.
     When THE BEAR was released, I said that it was one film that I would
not mind see being turned into a series because the character is interesting
enough that I would not mind every year or so looking in to see what he was
up to.  Now that I have seen two "The Gods Must be Crazy" films, I think I
would enjoy seeing as many of them as Jamie Uys wants to make.  I thought
the 1981 THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY depended a little too much on political
farce and on a brand of comedy that goes back to the silent film days.  But
then perhaps the film industry in Botswana is as young today as the American
film industry was when those gags were popular here.  What really was
excellent about the first film was its view of modern society through the
eyes of a Kalihari Bushman, Xixo (played by N!xau).  In the newer film, Xixo
is back, once again played by N!xau, who is by now running the risk of being
typecast as a Kalihari Bushman and who may never get to play the classic
roles such as the one uncorrupt cop in a big-city police force or the odd
new partner of two policeman chasing down a killer.
     The new plot has nine people running around the Kalihari in small
groups that invariably got split up and  united in various combinations.
You have one adult Bushman, two Bushman children, two soldiers fighting, two
poachers fleeing, one woman lawyer, one lost game warden, and a micro-plane
high up in a tree.  The chaos starts when Xixo's two children find a
poachers' truck and climb on, only to have it start up so that they cannot
get off.  Xixo reads the tracks in the sand, understands what happened, and
sets off to find his children.  Meanwhile, Ann Taylor, a New York Lawyer
(played by Lena Farugia), goes up for a half-hour plane ride with one game
warden and finds herself stranded with another warden and an ultra-light
airplane that is out of fuel.  Also on the loose are two enemy mercenaries:
one African, one Cuban.
     As with the previous film, there is humorous animal footage, though
this time obvious mock-ups of animals are often used and in one scene there
appears to be two men in a rhinoceros suit.  There is also a bit too much
slapstick and fast-motion photography for intended humorous effect.  There
is, alas, less of the Bushman's view of our culture, but the story is
affectionately told and charming if not always convincing.  THE GODS MUST BE
CRAZY II is a likable if lightweight film.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
          CAPSULE:  Not really a sequel, but another film using the same
     clever basis as its predecessor.  A Bushman's children are carried
     away in a truck, which they have never seen before.  He follows the
     tracks, hoping to find them.  Along his way, he encounters a
     biologist, a lost lawyer, poachers and soldiers.  A very funny film
     with a mild philosophical lesson.  Suitable for everyone.
     Following the rule that a sequel must stand on its own, Part Two can be
seen by anyone, whether they saw the original or not.  The producers clearly
knew they had a winning formula, and so (mercifully) not one thing has changed
about how the story is told.  The production values are much higher this time,
which is a plus.  The humor, acting and scenery are virtually identical to the
first film.  That is, there is a droll narrator, some slapstick, a man and a
woman, lots and lots of funny one liners, and interesting and funny animals
(with one creature I cannot identify being entitled to an Oscar for best
supporting beast).
     The only returning character is Xixo (KEE-ko), played once again by N!xua
(I think the ! is a clucking sound made with the tongue; used in the Bushman
language, apparently).  But the formula is identical.  It would be pointless to
summarize the plot beyond what is said in the capsule; the story really isn't
important.  The point of the film is to show the silliness more "advanced"
society can achieve, by comparing its members to Xixo and his simpler ways.
But, the message is very gently delivered, and even the most staunch
conservatives (like me) will not be put off.
