Title
Review for Witches of Eastwick, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I'm not sure I should be writing a review of THE WITCHES OF  EASTWICK,
because I'm not sure just what the hell (pardon  the expression) was going on
in it.  However, I can express the most important observation I made of it,
i.e. I didn't  like it.  If I had to summarize this film, I think I'd conclude
it was an updating of one of those old New England folk tales of someone
selling their souls to Old Scratch and how they try to get out of the deal.
That's the kernel of it, anyway.  Tossed into this are little bits and pieces 
that occasionally seem to be saying something about men and women, feminism,
the role of the devil, modern reformers, and friendship.  Unfortunately,
little or no effort is ever made to follow up and elucidate on these concepts;
they're simply thrown out and then left to rot while the film goes on apace.
     Actually, I think that most of the audience was even more confused than I
was.  They came in expecting some kind of supernatural comedy, on the level of
GHOSTBUSTERS, and were a bit confused to be getting a folk tale with
philosophical overtones.  They laughed, or tried to laugh, at moments that 
were either barely funny, or much more horrible than funny, as if that could
bend the film away from it's rather frightening direction.  Three women (Cher,
Susan Sarandon, and Michelle Pfieffer) live in Eastwick, a small midwestern 
town.  One night, while drinking late into the evening, they begin wishing for
the ideal man to drop into their lives.   In seeming answer to their idle
daydreams, a wealthy eccentric moves into a mansion on the hill and seduces
each one by attempting to be everything they want him to be.  He soon shows
evidence of mystical--perhaps demonic--power, and his devotion to the women's
merest fantasies or wishes has dangerous overtones.  Even worse, when
ignored his moods become ugly, and he mistreats the women for spurning him.
     Anyway, the problems: all three female characters are fairly 
uninteresting, and several are cardboard stereotypes, especially Sarandon's
character.  We never get inside them, never feel sympathetic to them, because
their dialogue and personalities seem pretty bland.  As for Nicholson, well,
even The Devil needs a direction to go in, and while Darryl Van Horne is the
most interesting character in the movie (due to the grace of the screenwriter
and, more importantly, Nicholson's acting), he still can't be yanked in one
direction and then another without making him a little vague.   And then
there's the special effects.  Not in themselves--they weren't that good--but
their overuse.  I was almost positive, until I saw the credits, that THE
WITCHES OF EASTWICK was either produced by Alexander Salkind (who has turned
out the slop named SUPERMAN II and III and SUPERGIRL), because of the big name
actors in dopy stunts, or Stephen Spielberg, after the 18th vomit scene and
the Nicholson-blown-down-the-street stunt.  Nope, it's another bunch of guys,
and directed by George Miller, who has shown great skill with stunts/special
effects before (THE ROAD WARRIOR, "Nightmare at 20,00 Feet" episode of 
TWILIGHT ZONE: THE MOVIE) but apparently doesn't know when to turn off the wind
machine and let his people act.  F'gawds sake, guys, this is JACK NICHOLSON!
Let him loose!  Let him grin demonically!  Skip the splitting earth and fake
lightning!  Watching the scene where Nicholson is tossed out of the car by the
voodoo doll, all I could think of was, "What a waste".  If you're going to
use slapstick like that, use it up on Pee Wee Herman.
     Nicholson does what he can with the role, and when he can find his
bearings, can be extremely good (the scene in the church, for instance), but
most of the time, he seems a bit stiff, as if he's not sure what he should be
doing next.  And no wonder.  This script goes all over the map, giving you
the feeling that it'd just love to be allegory, but it's not sure about what--
maybe if you give it time it'll think of something.
     So what is THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK?  A horror movie?  A folk tale?  A
comedy?  A statement about women?  An examination of the religious right or
comparitive morality?  I tend to think of the image that seems to dominate the
movie for me...watching someone regurgitate half-digested bits of food and
cherry pits all over rooms, people, the screen, and ultimately, the audience.
In other words, a mess.  Grade: D ($2.00) if you like Nicholson enough to
watch him here; maybe 25% of his charm is able to make it through the logjams
of others.

Author
Martin Maenza
     I saw THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK on its opening weekend, and I found it to be
a highly interesting movie.  I would recommend it to moviegoers--especially
those who like their drama with a slight bit of comedy.  I would not in the
least place this film in a genre of horror films since it is not horror as in
FRIDAY THE 13TH (you chose a part) and its like.
     First and foremost, THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK is a drama, which stars Jack
Nicholson as Darrel, "your basic horny little devil," as he states to one of the
three Eastwick women.  Also starring in the film as the witches, if you will,
are Cher, Michelle Pfeiffer (of LADYHAWKE and GREASE II fame), and Susan
Sarandon.  There acting is all quite good though I would not place it into
Academy Award categories (although I would love to be proven wrong).  The
performance by another actor and actress--the owners of the town paper--are
also quite good.
     Nicholson, of course, seems almost natural in this role.  He has that
somewhat demonic quality about him (as shown in THE SHINING) as well as a sense
of appeal.  He seems so natural spouting his sexual intents to Cher and
Sarandon.  If I were to chose any actor to be the devil, I might very well have
chosen him.  Like Cher says in one scene, "I don't find you the least bit
attractive, and you smell," right to Nicholson.  I think it serves better that
the Devil isn't a Bruce Willis, Don Johnson or Tom Selleck type.  The Devil's
charm should come from his deception and his silver tongue, not from a great
body and a huge sex organ.
     As a side note on sex, I notice they did not compromise any of the
actresses by placing them in any nude scenes.  I think this was highly tasteful
as well as adding to the overall mystery of what sex with the Devil would
actually turn into.  Besides, the violent acts (the few shown) and the needed
sexually explicit language were quite sufficient enough to place this in the R
category where a film like this belongs.  This is a movie for adults to enjoy
as a movie without having pre-pubescent children being in the theatre spoiling
it.
     Eastwick is your basic New England village, a small community where church
and school seem to be the center point.  Its newspaper is still publishing only
local news and minor gossip.  It's quite a picturesque place.  Yet during a
speech (sermon) by the school's sometimes lecherous principal, a massive storm
approaches and rains out the event.  Later, it is suggested by the three
divorced/widowed women (Cher & company) that they have caused the storm by
thoughts of their own.  Subconsciously, the women begin to talk of an ideal man,
which prompts the arrival of Darrel, a mysterious out-of-towner who buys the
old castle.
     Soon each of the women have their own encounter with this devil, who
manages to seduce all three.  Further, they begin to carry on activities which
the town folk highly frown upon.  I particularly loved the effects done during
the tennis game--simple yet highly effective for the scene.
     Of course, once the women realize who they are dealing with and how much
power he has, they decide to beat him at his own game.  These scenes, as do
some others, tend to be quite comic indeed.  Yet I could also sense some form
of gothic horror in the final confrontation scenes.  I was surely glued to my
seat.
     I have not read the story by John Updike upon which the film was based,
but I would like to.  I found the story quite appealing and entertaining.
Unlike some movies I have seen, this one was well worth seeing.
     One final note: wasn't the stunt with the cherries both sickening and
humorous at the same time?  People at the showing I went to were both grossed
out and laughing almost simultaneously.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Broadband supernatural comedy has
     insight, slapstick, violence, horror, special effects,
     sophisticated comedy, profanity, a monster, vomit scenes,
     Jack Nicholson, Michelle Pfeiffer, Susan Sarandon, and Cher.
     For fans of six or seven of the above only.
     John Updike is a prize-winning writer of serious literature about
people finding their identities and that sort of thing.  His masterwork was
his trilogy of novels RABBIT RUN, RABBIT REDUX, and RABBIT IS RICH.  There
was something of a stir when he wrote THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK about three
women in a provincial Connecticut village who have a brush with a warlock.
People thought he was too good a writer to fall back on the fantasy market.
My guess is that it was a calculated financial move.  I have no figures but
I'd be surprised if it was not his most profitable book.
     Now THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK has been adapted into a film by George
Miller--you know, the man who directed the "Mad Max" films.  Add a musical
score by John Williams, a cast like Jack Nicholson, Cher, Michelle Pfeiffer,
and Susan Sarandon, and makeup by Rob Bottin (THE HOWLING) and you've got
one heck of a motley crew contributing to a movie.  With a crew like this
you might expect a film that is something of a hodge-podge.  That's pretty
good expecting on your part.  This film is an incredible hodge-podge, in
fact.  The film can't decide if it is light fantasy, horror, soul-searching
literature, comedy, Peyton Place, or what.  I would use a cliche like "This
film throws in everything but the kitchen sink," but it wouldn't be quite
true.  Instead I'll say this film throws in NEARLY everything including the
kitchen sink.  Warlock Jack Nicholson--I forget his character's name--
breezes into a provincial Connecticut town after he is wished to do so by
three unattached women (played by Pfeiffer, Sarandon, and Cher).  He takes
up residence in an old house where witches were once burned  (Pretty hard to
find.  Actually only one person in North America was ever sentenced to be
burned for witchcraft.  He escaped.  Salem has a very small witch-hunt
compared to what used to go on it Europe and all the Salem witches who were
executed were hanged.)  The three women have simultaneous affairs with
Nicholson and all seem to be taking it amicably.  Then things start to sour.
     Nicholson glides through his part, sometimes impishly childlike, often
ranting and bellowing like Ralph Kramden.  The three women are believable in
their parts and perhaps more realistic than most women in witchcraft films,
but don't look for them at Oscar time.  The film has some powerful scenes of
evil--some seem inspired by SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES--but as good an
actor as Nicholson is, he never rises to the malevolence of Jonathan Pryce
in SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES.
     THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK has its moments but they do not add up to one
whole movie of any kind.  It has something for everyone but it will have
enough of anything only for real fans.  Rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     P.S.  To save having everyone e-mailing me Nicholson's character's
name, yes, I do remember it, but it's an inside joke.
