Title
Review for Shallow Grave (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Kevin Patterson
Shallow Grave  *** (out of four)
R, 1995
Directed by Danny Boyle. Written by John Hodge.
Starring Ewan McGregor, Kerry Fox, Christopher Eccleston.
While watching "Shallow Grave," I found myself periodically noticing thematic
similarities to the Coens' "Blood Simple." Both are good films in which
several characters, none of whom are the most conscientious to have walked the
earth but still are not really evil, indulge in an act of deception that soon
necessitates more serious crimes. The body count rises, and before long
seemingly normal people have blood on their hands.
Both films are also flawed, but for different reasons. "Blood Simple" is
unrelentingly dark and moody, but its characterizations were a little hollow.
"Shallow Grave," on the other hand, is nearly flawless for an hour and twenty
minutes, and then the filmmakers throw away much of what they'd accomplished
for a more standard, audience-pleasing ending. The events of the film were
sufficiently intense and disturbing that I honestly felt quite troubled by
what I was witnessing on screen most of the time, yet there was a slight grin
on my face at the end.
As the film begins, we are introduced to Alex (Ewan McGregor), Juliet (Kerry
Fox), and David (Christopher Eccleston), a Scottish trio living in an
apartment in Glasgow. They are all sarcastic and occasionally obnoxious, but
other than that they seem like a fairly normal bunch. A man named Hugo moves
into the apartment's remaining vacancy, and the next morning he is found dead
of a drug overdose. Juliet is about to call the police when Alex discovers
that Hugo had brought with him a suitcase filled to the brim with cash
(presumably from criminal activities).
The three eventually decide to keep the money and cover up the death; after a
drawing of straws, the particularly unenviable task of mutilating the body so
as to make it unidentifiable and burying it falls to David, who had been the
most reluctant to partake in the scheme from the beginning. All of this
transpires in the first twenty minutes or so of the film, and part of what
makes "Shallow Grave" so brilliant for a while is that I honestly had no idea
what was coming next. Other than the obvious question of why they don't report
the death and simply hide the cash, which is not addressed, the plotting and
characterization, while sometimes predictable, worked in a way that kept my
attention and, on more than one occasion, gave me chills.
I will, therefore, attempt to continue this review in a way that doesn't give
away too much of the plot. Broadly, the trio are in danger due to Hugo's
underworld connections, as two goons search for the money and kill several
people in the process. A police inspector (Ken Stott) is clearly suspicious
and visits the apartment, asking pointed questions and trying to unnerve the
three suspects by exchanging banal and weirdly humorous bits of dialogue with
a junior detective. David, meanwhile, becomes increasingly paranoid, moves
into the attic, and develops an affinity for sharp objects. Director Danny
Boyle effectively creates an atmosphere of mounting tension and suspicion in
the apartment, and finally the three seem ready to turn against each other.
While I do not consider myself the "happy endings are automatically stupid"
type, I thought that "Shallow Grave" really should have ended in tragedy - a
realistic analysis of the story up to the last ten minutes of the film would
indicate that all three characters were probably about to end up in prison, in
the mental hospital, or in the morgue. This could have been accomplished,
quite credibly, but then Boyle and screenwriter John Hodge seem to flinch and
opt for a more conventional "caper" ending in which we get a kick out of
seeing who outsmarted whom, and nothing more. Granted, this isn't really a
"happy" ending, but it's still pretty light-hearted compared to what preceded
it. I really shouldn't say anything more about the ending as far as details
go, but let me add that it seemed not only shallow and lazy but also
inconsistent with the rest of the film and not very believable.
Yes, this ending made me crack a smile for a couple of minutes, but ultimately
it left me feeling as if I'd been cheated. Still, "Shallow Grave" was
brilliant most of the way through, and it does at least meet the minimum
requirements for an entertaining thriller, and I am therefore awarding it
three stars. I guess I just can't help but think about that fourth star that
Boyle and Hodge let slip away.
Visit my Film Reviews page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Here we have a humorous, taut, gory and fast-moving mystery that
will keep you more than interested as your emotions get rocked about in
this sometimes funny, sometimes violent film.  Made in Scotland (in
1994) we here in the States could occasionally use subtitles but for
the most part we know what is being said and what is happening.
     Juliet (Kerry Fox), David (Christopher Eccleston) and Alex (Ewan
McGregor) live together as friends in a large apartment.  They
advertise for a fourth roommate.  Juliet is a doctor, Alex is a
reporter but I never did find out what David does for a living except
that he is always in a hurry as he leaves with his briefcase.  After
interviewing what seems like dozens of people, none of whom fits the
criteria set up by the three roommates, (picky, picky, picky) they
finally agree on Hugo (Keith Allen) who appears to be just the right
kind of roommate they are looking for.
     That, however, does not last long as the very next morning they
discover Hugo lying nude and dead (Dr. Juliet confirms he O.D.'d) and a
drawer reveals a hypodermic needle.)  While they are about to call the
police, they discover a suitcase which when opened reveals it is filled
with money.  This presents a dilemma. To keep or not to keep, that is
the question.  They decide, after much ... well, a little ... soul
searching they could use the money better than the authorities.  Of
course,  there is the little matter of getting rid of the body.
     All of this takes place in perhaps the first twenty minutes of the
film.  The fun and the mystery, more murders and police, disputes among
the three former friends take up the the remainder of the film.
     Nicely directed by Danny Boyle who manages to bring out the
changes in people when money is involved ... and to do it with no
wasted film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SHALLOW GRAVE is the movie that asks the question can three bored,
young professionals who share a flat find happiness if they find a dead
body and a suitcase full of money.  According to the press reports,
this Scottish movie is one of the most popular movies in Britain in
recent times.  It tells the story of three yuppies who live together in
separate rooms in a flat in Glasgow.
     There is a doctor named Juliet (played by Kerry Fox who was
wonderful in AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE), an accountant named David (played
by Christopher Eccleston who played the killer in GIVE IT TO HIM), and
a newspaper report named Alex (Ewan McGregor).  The "dead body" is
named Hugo (played by Keith Allen who played William Hurt's adopted
son's real father in SECOND BEST).  I loved the choice of names.
Juliet was easy to fall in love with, and Hugo was easy to figure might
get into trouble. (To be fair about names, I should point out that
there was only one king of England with my name (Steven) and that he
was arguably the worse of the lot.)
     This movie is fascinating and has a whole series of great plot set
ups.  The filming is imaginative and takes many risks.  The actors and
actress are good with the exception of McGregor who does Alex as the
standard obnoxious character you have seen done many times before.  I
thought Fox gave the most intriguing and fully developed performance--I
look forward to seeing her in more movies in the future.  The small
part of Hugo was the briefest but perhaps the best.
     There is a lot good about this show and yet it is seriously
underdeveloped.  The characters start off fine, but then are not given
any memorable lines.  Many times the writer will create a scene quite
well and then do nothing much with it.  If they had written a much
stronger role for the police it would have added to the tension and the
drama greatly, but the police characters were just grafted onto the
plot.  The movie seemed too concerned with style over character
development
     The director (Danny Boyle) clearly wants to be the Hitchcock of
the 90s, but he gets quickly lost.  We end up with a Hitchcock-lite
tale that has gratuitous violence a la Steven King or any slasher movie
pasted on in place of a viable script.  The good news is that the
violence is contained to a relatively few number of scenes.  The bad
news is that one of them seems to go on forever.
     The movie runs about 1:37, but for the small amount of material
they had, it needed to be 10-15 minutes shorter.  It is correctly rated
R for scenes of extreme violence that has the audience gasping aloud
"Oh my God" and for a little bit of nudity.  I found that even I had to
look away after a while during the long violent scene.  I don't think
this show is appropriate for teenagers.  I liked many parts of the
movie so I gave it **, but I can not bring myself to recommend it.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 23, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Quentin Tarantino may prove to have a more profound effect on
the immediate future of cinema than any other single individual.
It's not just that other new filmmakers will be mimicking his style,
though such recent fare as LOVE AND A .45 shows that he is already
having an influence in that respect.  No, Tarantino's most important
legacy may be that films which until only recently would have seemed
doomed to obscurity are finding enthusiastic distribution because
the audience has spoken:  dark, funny and twisted is *in*.  The
first beneficiary of the Tarantino Effect might be the British
import SHALLOW GRAVE, a macabre little thriller with some shaky
characterizations but a great look and feel.
     SHALLOW GRAVE is the story of three friends sharing a flat in
Glasgow:  Juliet (Kerry Fox), a doctor with a penchant for avoiding
her suitors; Alex (Ewan McGregor), a cocky journalist; and David
(Christopher Eccleston), a quiet accountant.  Their search for a
fourth flatmate brings Hugo (Keith Allen), a secretive fellow who
claims to be a writer.  However, when the three friends find Hugo
dead in his room one day of apparent heart failure, they discover at
least one thing he failed to mention:  a suitcase full of money.
Rather than report the death, they decide to keep the money and
dispose of the body.  But as Hugo's "business associates" begin to
come around and the police begin to get suspicious, the friendship
proves considerably less than stable, as each one begins to become
distrustful and to plot ways to get hold of the cash.
     Thrillers like SHALLOW GRAVE depend on tight plotting, tense
situations and atmosphere, and it hits about two out of three.  The
point behind disposing of the body is somewhat lost on me, since
they could have reported the death without reporting the money, and
a few late developments are glossed over so quickly that it's easy
for the audience to wonder exactly what happened when.  But it is
mostly in retrospect that these problems appear, because SHALLOW
GRAVE is a pretty intense piece of work.  A pair of interviews with
a police detective are extremely effective, as you begin to watch
the roommates' resolve crumble, and Danny Boyle's direction
highlights a marvelous set, the massive flat shared by Juliet, David
and Alex.  The lighting, the bold colors and the seemingly endless
hiding places create a mounting paranoia that sweeps you in even as
it sweeps in the characters.
     Yet for all its tension and eventual excursions into viscera,
SHALLOW GRAVE is essentially a character piece that examines how the
fragile relationships between these three individuals are shattered
by their shared secret.  Christopher Eccleston has the meatiest
part, a boring man who is changed forever by his role in the crime.
Determined not to let his actions be for nothing, he retreats into
the attic with the money, and becomes the most hardened of the
three.  Unfortunately, the other two leads are not nearly as well
developed.  Kerry Fox is savvy and manipulative as Juliet, but there
is something missing, a bit too much left unsaid, particularly her
refusal to deal with the men who call for her or approach her at
social functions.  Ewan McGregor's Alex has the best quips, and his
bluster early in the film (especially during the opening montage
where the friends grill applicants for the room) gives way to a
convincing fear as he realizes the he has gotten in way over his
head, but he too isn't given quite enough background.  While the
story could have been about how their mutual participation in this
event changes all three, it ends up that David is the only one whose
state of mind is examined in any depth.
     Still, SHALLOW GRAVE works fundamentally because it keeps the
pressure on.  It is always only a matter of time before a "perfect
crime" is revealed in its imperfection, and the multiple double-
crosses are fun to watch.  Though SHALLOW GRAVE could have been
tighter and more psychological, Eccleston's intense performance and
a few nasty little twists make it a thriller that keeps you
watching, guessing and squirming.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: 2/95 limited release
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, nudity, language, mature themes)
     A couple of cliches come to mind while watching Danny Boyle's
deliciously diabolical feature debut, SHALLOW GRAVE.  The first--that
money is the root of all evil--is obvious.  The other--that it's
always the quiet ones who bear the closest watching--is only marginally
more obscure.
     The comparisons are already out.  Check the newspaper blurbs and
you'll see that Boyle is being touted as the "new Hitchcock" or the
successor to the Coen Brothers.  There's even a reference or two to
Quentin Tarantino and PULP FICTION.  And, to one degree or another, these
are all valid comments.  SHALLOW GRAVE has a quick-paced, Hitchcockian
sense of suspense, the Coen Brothers' noir atmosphere, and a PULP
FICTION-like ability to make us laugh in the most gruesome of
circumstances.  However, more than anything else, SHALLOW GRAVE recalls a
couple of recent John Dahl films (THE LAST SEDUCTION and RED ROCK WEST)
in overall feel, if not in specific content.  Boyle has the same twisted
fun with his characters.
     The film starts off a little slowly with some necessary exposition
to get the story jump-started.  Three flatmates--Juliette (Kerry Fox),
a doctor; David (Christopher Eccleston), an accountant; and Alex (Ewan
McGregor), a journalist--are looking for someone to move into the
vacant fourth bedroom of their suite.  After interviewing an interesting
range of applicants, they settle on Hugo (Keith Allen), whose outlook on
life seems a good match for their own.  And his willingness to pay up
front with cold cash doesn't hurt.
     However, Hugo's time with the trio is destined to be short.  One
day, he moves in; the next, he's dead, apparently of a drug overdose.
Left behind in his room are his corpse, evidence of his addiction, and a
suitcase full of money.  This presents a dilemma for the flatmates:  call
the cops or dump the body and keep the cash.  Because of the nature of
the film, it's not hard to guess which they choose.  So, while two thugs
searching for Hugo begin leaving a trail of dead bodies, Juliette, David,
and Alex take Hugo's remains out to the woods where they mutilate the
corpse beyond recognition and bury it in a shallow grave.
     There aren't any real, three-dimensional characters in SHALLOW
GRAVE, but the stock types are played with such ability by Fox (the aloof
female), Eccleston (the reclusive nerd), and McGregor (the wisecracking
party boy), that it doesn't matter.  Director Danny Boyle, a veteran of
British TV (his work on INSPECTOR MORSE has been seen on this side of the
Atlantic), imbues SHALLOW GRAVE with a style that at times seems a little
too slick.
     In fact, a weakness of this film is that it occasionally tries to be
too clever (bordering on smug).  Several of the apparently "shocking"
plot twists aren't all that surprising, but Boyle treats each new turn of
John Hodge's script as if it was the most unexpected possibility.  This
objection is in the nature of a minor quibble, however, since it does
little to detract from the viewer's overall satisfaction.  Taken as a
whole, SHALLOW GRAVE is a reasonably enjoyable (for those captivated by
this sort of thing) black comedy/noir thriller that justifies at least a
portion of the praise being heaped upon it from overseas.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Bryant Frazer
     There's a guaranteed audience these days for the "sophisticated
thriller."  In genrespeak, that's the movie with a self-consciously
twisting and turning plotline, overtly intelligent characters, and a
calculated streak of nastiness allowing the viewer to feel truly
decadent, giggling along with the filmmakers. SHALLOW GRAVE is such a
movie, a British import about a trio of flatmates who conspire against
their own better judgment to take advantage of someone else's
ill-gotten gains. When I saw it, with a "sophisticated" crowd, the
folks to the left and right of me were swept up in the movie, cackling
evilly or burying faces in hands when the proceedings on-screen became
particularly gruesome. It's definitely a crowd-pleaser.
     Incredibly, some reviewers have been comparing SHALLOW GRAVE to
Quentin Tarantino's films, as though the director of PULP FICTION
somehow invented the stylish thriller.  Rubbish. SHALLOW GRAVE owes its
existence pretty much in its entirety to the films of Alfred Hitchcock,
which it apes shamelessly. It's a canny imitation, and the director has
done enough homework to know what kind of homage works and what's just
stupid (the movie is fiercely intelligent). But intelligence alone
doesn't completely compensate for SHALLOW GRAVE's shortcomings. Perhaps
overconfidence leads this film to count on its audience being so
delighted by each new odd camera angle and unexpected revelation that
it becomes lazy in terms of showing us anything truly surprising.
     The film opens with a crazy high-speed tour of city streets, set
to a thumping high energy soundtrack. It resembles nothing so much as
Shinya Tsukamoto's cautionary horror fable TETSUO, and it's hard to
understand why the film takes such a hyperkinetic approach during its
opening credits. Things slow down from there, as we settle in for a
study of three characters sharing an apartment--Alex (Ewan McGregor),
David (Christopher Eccleston), and Juliet (Kerry Fox). The casual
cruelty of these characters is established immediately, as they
interview and humiliate potential roommates. Alex is the most outgoing
of the three, with the loosest tongue.  David is shy and retreating,
while the smart and sensible Juliet (whose boyfriend is conspicuously
absent) functions as the apex of a very repressed sexual triangle. They
finally settle on a strange fellow named Hugo (Keith Allen), an
apparently well-off writer who pays his first rent in cash. But soon,
Hugo is a corpse, and the suitcase of cash he leaves behind in his
bedroom is too much of a temptation. What if, Alex wants to know, the
three of them dispose of the body and keep the money?
     That's probably the first 10 minutes. The rest of the movie
springs out of that proposition, as the situation becomes more and more
precarious and the riches bring out the worst in everybody. The ensuing
shenanigans are both intense and wickedly funny, and it wouldn't do to
spoil them here. It's very easy to place yourself in these roles, and
the triumph of any thriller is that the audience feels the fear and
isolation of the characters. But while one character's complete
transformation is essential to the storyline, it's wholly unbelievable.
The sexual dynamics (which pivot on Juliet's status as an object of
desire) are intriguing and well-handled, but Boyle's relentless homage
to Hitchcock (odd camera angles, snickering gallows humor, and shots
lifted wholesale from VERTIGO and PSYCHO) wears thin.  It's more than a
little disappointing when the credits finally roll, because we hope for
more from this clever thriller.  But perhaps it's to the director's
credit that we really do want to spend more time with these rather
unpleasant people, feeding ravenously, vicariously off of their
actions.
