Title
Review for Trial by Jury (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TRIAL BY JURY is a thriller first and a courtroom drama second.
It stars Armand Assante as the smooth talking, smooth dressing, classic
wiseguy , a.k.a.  Mafia boss.  The district attorney played by Garbriel
Byrne wants in the worse way possible to convict him.  In a long trial
that dominates the first three quarters of the movie, a juror (Joanne
Whalley-Kilmer) is tampered with by Assante's people.  The small time
bad guy who works for Assante and does most of the actual tampering is
played by William Hurt.  All of these facts and much more including, I
am sorry to report, a key twist at the end of the show you can learn by
seeing the trailers as I have done already on 4 or 5 occasions.
     Now, I ask you.  Does this sort of sound like a formula plot?
Right you are and therein lies the major flaw in the film, the script.
It is straight out of Script Writing 101.  In the first three quarters
it has characters do very predictable things and do them s-l-o-w-l-y.
Many actions were not thought through by the writer, e.g., a woman who
is frightened and threaten with death walks into her dark apartment and
is in no hurry in turning on the light.  This is only one of the small
problems with the film's believability.
     I did not believe the characters during the first three quarters.
Just a bunch of actors reading formula dialog.  In the last quarter, it
just flat got ridiculous.  I did not believe it at all.  Major
suspension of disbelief is necessary to stay a believer till the end.
     The William Hurt character was another problem.  He was miscast in
his role, and the role was not written well or very bright.  What a
waste of a great actor.
     What the movie has going for it is two terrific looking leads in
Assante and Whalley-Kilmer.  Their looks and their acting I always find
interesting.  Actually, I knew the show was in major trouble when a
brief love scene involving Whalley-Kilmer, whom I think is one of the
prettiest women on the planet, started to bore me and found me looking
at my watch.
     Even small details like Assante's clothing provided intriguing
images.  Finally, I must admit, that I love jury trial scenes even
poorly done ones.  They fascinate me.
     The movie runs about 2 hours and is rated R by the MPAA.  There is
a little nudity and a medium amount of violence.  I think teenagers
could see it if they like.  On the other hand, I do not recommend the
show to any age group, and I generously award it * 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 9, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Joanne Whalley-Kilmer, Armand Assante, Gabriel Byrne, 
           William Hurt, Kathleen Quinlan 
Director:  Heywood Gould 
Producers:  James G. Robinson and Chris Meledandri & Mark Gordon 
Screenplay:  Jordan Katz and Heywood Gould 
Cinematography:  Frederick Elmes 
Music:  Terence Blanchard 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     It never ceases to amaze me how badly a poor script can screw up a
potentially fascinating premise.  Exhibit one for the prosecution:
TRIAL BY JURY.
     Consider Valerie Alston (Joanne Whalley-Kilmer), a civic-minded
citizen who gets picked to be on the jury for the Rusty Pirone (Armand
Assante) murder trial.  She has every intention of following her
conscience until a little visit from Pirone's henchman Tommy Vesey
(William Hurt) gives her something to think about.  If there's a
mistrial, he claims, she and her son (wooden child actor Bryan
Shilowich) will be protected.  If Pirone goes to jail, both of them
will die.
     As the trial progresses, the evidence against Pirone mounts until
no reasonable juror could consider him anything but guilty.  So Valerie
is faced with an unpleasant--and potentially deadly--choice: acquit
and live, or convict and risk death.
     The theatrical and television previews make this film look like a
clever thriller centered around this dilemma.  But, as is often the
case, that's because such advertisements use only the best scenes.
Left out are numerous instances of overacting, underacting, terrible
dialogue, and poor plotting.
     Despite a compelling basis for its story, Jordan Katz and Heywood
Gould's screenplay vacillates between the contrived and the downright
moronic.  The characters are strictly one-dimensional types engaging in
flat, stilted conversations.  Melodrama suffuses several
potentially-taut sequences, and the conclusion would be right at home
in such films as BASIC INSTINCT.
     Aside from a brief appearance by character actor Mike Starr (who
plays a witness for the prosecution), Armand Assante gives the only
noteworthy performance.  His often-magnetic (and never subdued)
presence only makes you aware of what this film might have been had a
more competent production team taken charge.
     Unfortunately, Joanne Whalley-Kilmer is unable to carry to burden
of the lead role.  For whatever reason, grasping Valerie's psyche seems
beyond the actress (or maybe she just didn't care enough), and she
comes across as stale.  The only thing striking about Whalley-Kilmer is
the array of glitzy outfits she gets to wear.
     Kenneth Branagh's DEAD AGAIN took a dopey premise and built a
solid, entertaining plot around it.  TRIAL BY JURY manages to do the
opposite.  Even as an homage to '40s film noir flicks, it's woeful.
You need more than Joanne Whalley-Kilmer doing a Rita Hayworth
impersonation to accomplish that.
     Quentin Tarantino's much-awaited second feature won't be in
theaters for another two months.  Apparently, however, TRIAL BY JURY
has chosen to herald that picture.  After all, the script for this film
is nothing if not pulp fiction.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
