Title
Review for From Russia with Love (1963)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Daniela Bianchi, Pedro Armendariz, Lotte Lenya,
      Robert Shaw, Bernard Lee, Lois Maxwell
Director: Terence Young
Producers: Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Johnanna Harwood, based on the novel
      by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, along with its successor, GOLDFINGER, 
represents Bond at his best.  Although the series has run for more than 
thirty years with seventeen "official" entries, it has yet to better, or 
even equal, what it achieved in 1963-1964 with the release of these two 
films.  By combining solid storylines, tightly-paced action sequences, 
memorable villains, and Sean Connery in top form, RUSSIA and GOLDFINGER 
mark the cinematic apex for Ian Fleming's 007.
     The elements of FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE move the movie closer to the 
recognizable "Bond formula" than was the case for its predecessor, DR. 
NO.  Here, the action scenes are more numerous and generate added 
tension, the title sequence has a familiar flavor, John Barry's 
distinctive score replaces the workmanlike music of Monty Norman, Q 
makes his first appearance, and Connery tones up 007's sophistication 
while downplaying his cold-bloodedness. 
     Unlike the megalomaniacs in later Bond films, the villains in FROM 
RUSSIA WITH LOVE aren't after world domination (at least not 
immediately).  In fact, they want something significantly less 
ambitious:  a Russian decoding device.  Two of SPECTRE's top operatives 
are on the mission:  #3, former KGB agent Rosa Klebb (Lotte Lenya), and 
#5, Kronsteen (Vladek Sheybal), a chess master who has meticulously 
plotted every move and weighed all alternatives.  The pair reports 
directly to the mysterious #1, Blofeld, whose face remains hidden until 
YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE.
     Kronsteen's manipulative plan involves using Bond and Russian 
cipher clerk Tatiana Romanova (Daniela Bianchi) as pawns.  Once the 
British agent has obtained the decoding device from Tatiana, SPECTRE 
thug Red Grant (Robert Shaw) is to take it from him, leaving behind a 
corpse.  The plot is suitably complicated (but not so convoluted that 
the viewer will get lost), and, even though 007 suspects a trap, the 
lure of a beautiful woman and a valuable espionage coup is too enticing 
to resist.  So he travels to Istanbul, where Tatiana has arranged to 
meet him.
     Connery, who felt his way through parts of DR. NO, has mastered his 
character by this outing.  He acts the role with confidence and 
familiarity, easily establishing his reputation as the inimitable 007.  
He is surrounded by an interesting supporting cast that includes Miss 
Universe 1960, Daniela Bianchi (whose voice was dubbed over), and Lotte 
Lenya as an especially vicious adversary.  Playing his part with the 
perfect combination of toughness and sly wit, Pedro Armendariz (in his 
final acting appearance) is delightful as Kerim Bay, Bond's Turkish 
ally.
     FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE is among the most tightly-plotted of all the 
Bond films, and, as a result, is one of the shortest.  It moves briskly, 
blending intrigue, romance, and action into an immensely satisfying 
whole.  RUSSIA exudes style, as typified by a fight in a gypsy camp 
where Bond offhandedly dispatches rogues to the strains of John Barry's 
"007 theme".  This movie has several such memorable moments, including 
an inventively choreographed fight sequence with Bond and Grant going at 
it in the confined space of two train compartments.  Shortly after that, 
there's a death-defying chase between Bond and a helicopter.
     Standing at the pinnacle of the series, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE shows 
how good a Bond film can be when all the ingredients mesh.  This movie 
isn't just a fun popcorn-munching action adventure flick; it's a good 
motion picture by any standards.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, the 2nd entry in the James Bond series, is 
still the definitive Sean Connery as Bond film, and, except for possibly 
GOLDFINGER, the finest film in the series.  A fast-paced, intelligent, 
witty, and suspenseful film, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE is a magnificent 
entry in the espionage film genre, and a film that just isn't made today 
anymore.
The plot is relatively simple, and quite deceptive.  Bond isn't 
looking to save the world, or prevent nuclear holocaust.  Instead, the 
object in question is a coding maching: a Lecter, the machine the 
Soviets use for all their secret transmissions.  Former KGB agent Rosa 
Klebb (Lotte Lenya) and 5 (Vladek Sheybal), two agents now working 
for SPECTRE, are trying to obtain a Russian coding device to conduct 
criminal operations.  They decide to use British agent James Bond (Sean 
Connery) to obtain the device from Russian cipher clerk Tatiana Romanova 
(Daniela Bianchi).  Romanova is hired by Klebb, acting as a KGB agent, 
to fake a defection and seduce Bond in order to eliminate him.  Once 
Bond has the machine, SPECTRE agent Red Grant (Robert Shaw) is to kill 
Bond, the girl, and take the coding device.  Bond suspects a trap from 
the beginning, but he can't resist the opportunity to get a Lecter, and 
to meet Tatiana.  Once there, he successfully gets the Lecter (and 
romances the girl), before having a memorable train ride with Robert 
Shaw's Grant.
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE is where so many of the trademark 
characteristics of a Bond film became set in stone.  John Barry's theme 
reappears constantly.  The action set-piece before the film's credits is 
also introduced for the first time.  The viewers also get a glimpse of Q 
(Desmond Llewelyn) for the first time, as he devises his very first 
gadget: a briefcase.  The film is also the last to not have the 
excessive gadgetry that have plagued recent Bond films.  The script, 
instead of having outrageously sexist one-liners and pathetic attempts 
at campy humor, is instead more formal, more serious, with emphasis not 
on humor but on the business at hand.  Yet, there is enough of the camp 
element to make the film more than action-entertaining: James Bond is 
also, besides the world's best spy, a downright misogynist dinosaur, and 
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE introduces that subtlely, a trait later Bond films 
forget.
The strength lies in the performances.  Everyone's fantastic, from 
Bianchi, to the excellent Shaw, to Lenya, who gives a marvelous turn as 
Klebb.  Shaw, who would experience his massive burst of fame 12 years 
later in Steven Spielberg's JAWS, is nevertheless quite good in his 
relatively simple role as the psychotic killer.  Lenya is a riot at 
Klebb, who is magnificently portrayed as the man-hater who manages to 
get things done.  The supporting cast, especially the players in 
Istanbul, do a fine job, especially Armendariz as Karim Bey.  There are 
many extravagant set-pieces (the Gypsys, the train, and more...), but 
the film doesn't feel overly stunt-conscious: it is more on the 
cat-and-mouse game played by three sides.
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, howver, belongs to Sean Connery.  He 
establishes his persona as the coolest human being on the planet with a 
magnificent mix of panache, humor, and cold-hearted boldness.  One of 
the finest scenes is when Bond is carefully checking his room for 
'bugs'.  With the Bond theme roaring in the background, Connery 
calmly checks his room with a cool sense of calm, with an indelible 
strut and manner.  It is this overwhelming sense of intelligence mixed 
with panache and sheer guts that makes Bond such a phenomenal character. 
 Connery is simply stellar: it is simply a seminal performance, with 
enough humor and enough hard-edged toughness to make it magical.
This is one of those great espionage thrillers that focuses on the 
actual spying part.  There are no fierce explosions, or anything of the 
kind.  FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE is so good because it actually could have 
happened: this is the stuff spies really do.  There are no overwhelming 
gadgets or toys that the agents use, except their heads.  Bond is so 
much smarter in this film than the later attempts, especially the 
dreadful Roger Moore era.  It is a harder edged film, with a simple, yet 
fast and intelligent plot that relies on conversations, multiple 
characters, and cat-and-mouse games of surveillance, 'bugging', 
and anticipation.  The train scene is the true spectacle: its a stellar 
game of classic suspence.  Like that scene, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE is a 
classic, knockout film, powered by strong performances, plot twists, and 
intrigue on a grand scale.  One of the best Bonds, and a perfect example 
of what the model should be for all other espionage films to come.  
Fantastic.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the last decade of its existence Soviet Union was
desperately trying to counter overwhelming Western efforts
on the propaganda front of Cold War. That effort, among
other things, consisted in the multitude of explicitly
anti-Soviet spy and action thrillers like RED DAWN or RAMBO
2, so Soviets had to produce novels, movies and television
shows that would give their side of the story. One of such
examples was 1984 mini-series TASS IS AUTHORISED TO
DECLARE..., aired on former Yugoslav television in mid
1980s. The series was boring as hell, but those viewers
patient enough to sit through it in its entirety were
rewarded with occasional hilarious moment or too. One of
them was the scene featuring KGB agent leisurely discussing
James Bond movies with his CIA counterpart and mentioning
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE. The author of this review is unaware
whether Soviet citizens in 1984 were able to watch that
particular film, but the citizens of former Yugoslavia were
not. That 1963 Bond film, second in the row, was
unofficially banned by former Yugoslav authorities not
because of anti-Soviet content, but because the part of the
plot takes place in former Yugoslavia, and the original
novel by Ian Fleming had painted quite unflattering picture
of Zagreb, then one of major cities of former federation.
Ironically, it was video distributor from Zagreb that
introduced the film to the audience only few years later.
It's quite a shame, because for many critics view FROM
RUSSIA WITH LOVE as the best Bond film.
The plot of the film begins when the anonymous head of
SPECTRE organisation authorises very complex plan that would
utilise Cold War rivalry between Britain and USSR. At first,
British secret agent James Bond (played by Sean Connery) is
sent to Istanbul in order to meet Tatiana Romanova (played
by Daniela Bianchi), young and beautiful deciphering clerk
in Soviet Consulate. Romanova is offering her services in
obtaining precious decoding device Lektor from the Consulate
in exchange for meeting with handsome British agent she had
allegedly fallen in love by watching his photos in KGB
files. Bond suspects a trap, and he is right, since
Romanova's actions have been actually directed by KGB
spymaster Rosa Klebb (played by Lotte Lenya). But Romanova
is deceived too, since her boss has just defected to SPECTRE
and the ultimate goal of the operation is to bring Lektor to
SPECTRE and kill Bond in the process.
One of the reasons why FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE happens to be
one of the most popular Bond films is the fact that it
remains the closest to the original vision of the character
creator Ian Fleming (who also got cameo role in the film).
In this film Bond doesn't have to save the world from evil
megalomaniacs and their underground armies. The story
revolves around rather minor Cold War skirmish, hardly
relevant in the general scheme of things, an episode that
could be inspired by Ian Fleming's real life adventures
during his career in British intelligence. The lack of
spectacle usually associated with Bond films is compensated
with the complex and intriguing, yet understandable plot.
Although the intrigue involves double deception, the
scriptwriters Johanna Harwood and Richard Maibum didn't left
audience in the dark - from the opening scenes viewers are
told about all major details of the conspiracy. That
provides additional suspense, because audience knows that
Bond is about to face the danger. Even if we are aware of
the unwritten rules that mandate Bond winning at the end of
the day, the film still remains interesting. Realism of the
film is underlined with scriptwriters' efforts to provide
some continuity to the series (unlike the rest of Bond
movies that usually start from scratch). Events of the
previous movie (DR. NO) are referenced, and Sylvia (played
by Eunice Grayson) is the only Bond girl who was
romantically involved with Bond in two separate Bond films.
Despite the higher dosage of realism, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE
still follows the escapist formula of Bond movies. Bond
still gets it on with beautiful women and locations of
Istanbul are quite exotic (although Wales locations are poor
substitute for the coast of Istria, and Venice scenes are
even poorer example of blue screen techniques) and Bond
still flirts with Moneypenny. The action is not that
spectacular, except in the last scenes of the film (where
Bond uses some rather crude tools to deal with villains,
instead of his favourite gadgets), but the fight scene in
train is one of the best in the history of Bond films.
Finally, legendary Bond gadgets are introduced, as well as
their inventor, Major Boothroyd a.k.a. Q (played by recently
deceased Desmond Llewelyn). Another Bond movie ingredient -
cool opening titles - seem somewhat inferior compared with
the similar scenes in latter Bond films.
The acting is superb, as usual. Connery again proves that he
was born to play James Bond and that nobody could do it any
better. He is especially good in this film, where the script
his usual cockiness confronts with the realities of world
where even the heroes might lose a fight or two and let the
villains, at least for a while, to have the upper hand.
Connery's role is very good, but his partners also did a
very good job. Pedro Armendariz as his Istanbul sidekick
Karim Bey is especially interesting to watch, since he plays
the character who actually shares Bond's hedonism - we might
see Karim Bey as some kind of local James Bond. That role is
even more powerful when we consider that Armendariz shot
this film while being terminally ill. Daniela Bianchi,
Italian model and Miss Universe 1960, does more than decent,
actually very good job as Bond girl, at least for someone
who got the role on the basis of a good look. Robert Shaw as
villain is also impressive - Bond films rarely featured
truly psychopathic, yet efficient and realistic baddies like
this one. Another impressive villain is Lotte Lenya as
Klebb; she even manages to bring some interesting subtexts
to her role - I wonder why the makers of CELLULOID CLOSET
missed the scenes that feature Klebb and Romanova together.
Of course, those who like to nit-pick would find some flaws.
My major complaint is somewhat too romantic and rather
unrealistic portrayal of Gypsies and terribly fake
"catfight" in Gypsy camp. But, generally speaking, FROM
RUSSIA WITH LOVE should be praised as rarely intelligent,
yet still entertaining Bond film, one of the shiniest
examples of Bonds from golden Connery era. All those who
like to truly appreciate Bond phenomenon should watch it.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This second movie in the James Bond series is better than the 
first, DR. NO, but still not quite as good as GOLDFINGER, the third. 
FROM RUSSIA is notable, though, in that it's the only Sean Connery 
Bond film where Bond gets it on with four different women, including 
two gypsy women at the same time. Now that's a man with a license 
for more than just killing.
        This time, the race is on to see who will get ahold of a new 
decryption technology--the good guys (British intelligence) or the bad 
guys (SPECTRE). SPECTRE gets the jump on 007 by sending him 
one of their own, a beautiful Russian woman who claims to have 
defected from the KGB. She doesn't even know she's working for 
SPECTRE (that's how clever those guys are) and she's convinced she'll 
be doing Mother Russia a great service by giving Bond false 
information. She ends up giving Bond a lot more--and falling in love 
with him as a result.
        FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE moves more slowly than most 
of the later Bond movies, but is still definitely entertaining, and meets 
the quota of chases, explosions, shootouts, belly dancers, cat fights and 
other degrading depictions of women. How James Bond manages to 
sleep with all those women and still not catch every sexually 
transmitted disease under the sun is beyond me. Maybe it helps to stay 
away from female characters named Colonel Klapp.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SPECTRE, up to its old tricks again in the second installment of
the Bond series, has its sights set on getting a Russian decoder called
a Lektor.  Their plan will require the demise of Mr. Bond, which is
just fine by their number 1.  (We never see number 1's face, only a
hand stroking a snow-white cat that perpetually sits in his lap.  The
credits list him as Ernst Blofeld, but put a "?" where the actor's name
should go.)
     In 1963's FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, SPECTRE lures Bond to Turkey
under the ruse that a beautiful young Russian woman named Tatiana
Romanova, played fetchingly by Daniela Bianchi, has possession of a
Lektor and is willing to turn it over to the West with one proviso.
The Western agent accepting it must be James Bond, played this time by
an even more confident Sean Connery than in DR. NO.  SPECTRE figures
Bond will smell a trap but that he will not be able to resist coming,
what with the chance of bedding a beautiful lass and getting a decoder
as a bonus prize.
     Tatiana, being a loyal Russian is similarly duped by former KGB
agent Rosa Klebb (Lotte Lenya) into thinking the operation is a Russian
one to trap Bond.  Actually Rosa is number 3 in the SPECTRE hierarchy.
     This is the first Bond film in which he gets his now normal
assortment of gadgets before his mission.  This time it's a relatively
simple briefcase with a tear gas canister, extra ammo, a rifle with an
infrared sight, a bunch of gold coins and a hidden knife.  The tear gas
canister, for example, explodes in the face of someone attempting to
break into the briefcase.  Although he does not get fancy cars this
time, he does get to have a big adventure on the famous Orient Express.
     Featured attractions of the Bond films are the exotic locales --
Istanbul and Venice are prominently featured this time, especially the
spires of their skylines which seem to reach for the heavens.  Along
with the images comes more great Bond music by composer John Barry.
     FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE contains easily one of the hokiest scenes of
any Bond film.  Two gypsy girls -- they'd probably be referred to as
young women today -- engage in an incredibly fake wrestling match to
see who will win the honor of marrying the chief's son.  Fortuitously,
Robert Shaw, playing SPECTRE's chief hunk Red Grant, and his fellow
goons show up to shoot up the place in the hope of taking out Bond.
Surprise, Bond lives, but at least the wrestling farce is broken up.
     Unlike the first movie, DR. NO, which rarely flagged, this one has
too many slow parts that fail to keep the viewers' attention.  But any
Bond film starring Connery remains a delight to watch.
     In my favorite small scene, we learn of one of the few times that
Bond missed a clue.  "'Red wine with fish' that should have told me
something," Bond laments.  Clearly a character who orders red wine with
his fish should have been suspected right away.
     FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE runs 1:50.  It is rated PG for violence and
sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, thought FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE was a
really good movie but liked DR. NO, the only other Bond film he has
seen, much better.  And again, his only complaint was that it had too
much kissing.
