Title
Review for Swordfish (2001)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Whatever happened to the good old days when John Travolta would make a
couple of really bad pictures and then stage a big career "comeback" with
something like Look Who's Talking? Since he blasted his way back on top with
1994's Pulp Fiction, Travolta hasn't come close to getting the Hollywood
bitch-slap off of the $20 million-per-film scrap heap that he so richly
deserves. C'mon - were Two of a Kind and Staying Alive really any worse than
Mad City and Lucky Numbers? We're talking about a guy with seven Razzie
nominations as compared to his two Oscar nods. And let's not even get
started on the whole Battlefield Earth thing, girlfriend.
All of which makes Swordfish's opening scene even more curious. Travolta,
playing yet another bad guy role (he hasn't worn the white hat since A Civil
Action.sort of), delivers a bizarre monologue directly into the camera,
declaring that Hollywood makes shitty, unimaginative films, before picking
apart the realism of the ending of Dog Day Afternoon (thusly telegraphing
the end of this film). His character, Gabriel Shear, is a high-tech
terrorist who needs only a world-class computer hacker to pull off a $9.5
billion raid of a secret government account to carry out his dastardly deeds
(which he does to defend the honor of his country, natch).
After the strange soliloquy, Swordfish kicks off with a bang...literally.
Shear and his band of miscreants are in the midst of a bank robbery, with
dozens of hostages wired to the hilt with explosives rigged to blow if they
leave the perimeter of the bank. The feds either don't know, don't care, or
don't believe Shear, inadvertently dragging one hostage to a loud, grisly
death that takes out several vehicles, storefronts and military personnel.
It's a terrific scene, and it turns out to be the end of the film. The rest
is told during an hour-long flashback through the eyes of Stanley Jobson
(Hugh Jackman, Someone Like You).
Jobson, we learn, is the world's former #1 computer hacker who has just been
paroled after a two-year stint at Leavenworth under the condition that he
never touch another computer again for the rest of his life. The bust, which
involved a virus that disabled the government's ability to read our personal
e-mail messages, left Jobson's marriage in shambles and, even worse, finds
his young daughter (Camryn Grimes, The Young and the Restless) calling the
Porn King of Southern California "Daddy." He's living with a ratty dog in an
even rattier trailer on a Midland, Texas oilfield when the comely Ginger
(Jackman's X-Men co-star Halle Berry) shows up, sticks a wad of cash under
his nose, and leads him back to Los Angeles to meet with her boss, Shear.
After a strange job interview that involves cracking the Defense
Department's computer system while getting a blow job and having a gun
jammed into his temple, Jobson decides to stick around long enough to make a
wad of cash in hopes of winning legal custody of his daughter with the
money. Now, I personally guarantee the world's top two hackers look more
like the Comic Book Store Guy from The Simpsons than Hugh Jackman (or
Bedazzled's Rudolf Martin, who plays another dreamboat computer geek). Is
anybody buying this crap?
Shear and his crew are being chased by an FBI agent, played by Don Cheadle
(in somewhat of a reprisal of his Traffic role). He's the same guy who
busted Stanley the first time around, too. There is, of course, a whole lot
of computer hokum (and the inevitable exciting hacking scene - always a
cinematic thrill), as well as a laughable scene where Stanley jumps off a
cliff and rolls for about 15 minutes. In real life, he'd be in frigging
China. There's also a shocking bit at the end where one of the country's top
black actresses gets lynched (oh my God, somebody get Spike Lee on the
phone...pronto!). And there's plenty of confusion about who is working for
whom, but the whole thing boils down to one secret government agency
battling other secret government agencies.
Swordfish was directed by Dominic Sena (Gone in 60 Seconds), and while it's
a stylish enough picture (thanks to cinematographer Paul Cameron), it has
the misfortune of being written by Skip Woods. Woods wrote and directed a
horrendous film called Thursday (when it played at the Toronto International
Film Festival, critic Roger Ebert belittled Woods during a post-screening
Q&A session) and hasn't shown much growth in his talent since then.
Swordfish certainly isn't a bad film; it's the kind of loud,
testosterone-driven (Berry got paid $500,000 per boob to show 'em) stuff
that fuels the summer box office with its mediocrity.
1:39 - R for violence, language and some sexuality/nudity

Author
Homer Yen
"Swordfish," a sometimes-explosive high-tech thriller,
will hook you  but only for its first 15 minutes. 
Its opening is a captivating hostage sequence in which
police and SWAT teams tragically underestimate the
fortitude of the cunning Gabriel (John Travolta).  He
is a villain who will not hesitate to sacrifice
innocent lives or even his own to pull off an
improbable heist.  The events that unfold during these
taut opening minutes are mesmerizing with effects that
easily outdo key scenes from "The Matrix" in
presentation and intensity.
After that, however, its creativity and pace start to
sputter.  It then begins to regress into a generic,
albeit flashy, shoot-em-up action flick.  Bullets fly
and cars explode while the body count rises.  But its
biggest casualty, unfortunately, is the story, which
amounts to a tepid heist flick wrapped in some cheeky
banter and black humor.
At least John Travolta looks quite comfortable as the
megalomaniacal villain.  He swaggers with bravado,
sports a tough-guy haircut and chin hair, and projects
an aura of hipness and fear.  From his exotic sports
cars to his mountaintop villa to his gaggle of
beautiful girls, he lives a life that other men can
only dream about.  His lifestyle, however, does not
come about from a lack of ambition or from a lack of
ruthlessness.  
For his next big job, he plans to steal $9 billion
from a federal drug fund, but will need to recruit a
crack computer hacker.  With the help of his prurient
assistant, Ginger (Halle Berry), Gabriel tries to
enlist Stan (Hugh Jackman), an ex-con whose previous
successful assault on an FBI database sent him to jail
and also caused him to lose custody of his daughter. 
Stan has no desire to return to prison and only wishes
to be rejoined with his daughter.  But for a fee of
$10 million, which will more than pay for the lawyers
needed to win custody, how can our hacker refuse?  
Berry also does good things as the sexy moll who may
be more than she seems under those skin-tight dresses.
 She uses her siren-like charms to keep Stan focused
on his task and exudes a confidence that makes her
topless scene just an extension of her self-assurance
rather than something gratuitous.
Jackman, however, is absolutely listless.  His scenes
with his daughter don't strike up any poignant
emotions, and his brooding demeanor that gained him
much notice in "X-Men" has been replaced with silly,
self-congratulatory gyrations as he moves closer to
developing a program to break through the firewall
security codes.   Sadly, his on-screen time consists
mostly of incredibly fast typing and keyboard
clattering.  
Another annoying issue is that as a tech-driven film,
computer jargon and graphics are heavily used. 
There's a lot of focus on Stan's computer screens as
words like 'port scan' and 'crypto algorithm' flash
about.  It may look cool, but it doesn't really tell a
story.  
Completely underutilized, however, is Don Cheadle who
plays the federal agent trying to track Gabriel down. 
His look of concern may be that of a detective who
knows that Gabriel is capable of mass destruction. 
Or, he may just be worried that he'll be playing the
role of effete cops for the rest of his career.
"Swordfish" is ultimately just a glossy but somewhat
hollow production.  Aside from its whiz-bang
beginning, it only manages to be an undistinguished,
bullet-ridden thriller.  

Author
Robin Clifford
Gabriel Shear (John Travolta) is a renegade spy who wants to finance his 
own brand of patriotic anti-terrorism. Years ago, the DEA established a 
secret slush fund to launder money used to seize and destroy illegal drugs. 
Now, with interest, the fund is worth $9.5 billion and Gabriel will do 
anything to grab it all in "Swordfish." 
Producer Joel Silver, the driving force behind "Swordfish," takes an 
intriguing idea of a high tech super heist, mixes the talents of Travolta, 
Hugh Jackman ("X-Men") and Halle Berry (also "X-Men") and comes up with a 
mediocre thriller that moves briskly but goes no where. 
Travolta's super spy Gabriel is an enigma. We first meet him as he 
pontificates over the plusses and minuses of the movie "Dog Day Afternoon." 
As he drinks his coffee, he tells his colleagues that Al Pacino's character 
didn't go far enough. If he started popping hostages, Gabriel explains, he 
could have gotten away Scott free - and get his boyfriend that sex change 
operation. We leave the confines of the coffee klatch and, in a whirlwind 
of activity, we find ourselves amidst an even grander hostage situation. 
The action goes, literally, ballistic as the police screw up the situation 
and force Gabriel and his crew to explode a bomb-laden hostage, to 
devastating effect. 
This slickly explosive beginning turns to flashback as we go back to four 
days before. The vivacious Ginger (Halle Berry) pays a visit to 
down-on-his-luck Stanley (Hugh Jackman), a former computer hacker whose 
life was ruined when he was caught wreaking havoc on a secret FBI 
cyberspace surveillance operation. Ginger, as Gabriel's intermediary, 
offers Stanley $100,000 - and the hope of getting his daughter, Holly 
(Carmyn Grimes), back - just to talk to the man. 
Stanley eventually agrees to take the job, for $10 million and his 
daughter, and begins to design the complicated worm program that will 
burrow into the banking system and disperse the billions to Gabriel's own 
secret accounts. Gabriel has a separate agenda, though, and isn't content 
with a covert break-in. The action comes back around to the opening hostage 
situation and Stanley faces death, destruction and the permanent loss of 
Holly. 
"Swordfish" - I can only believe that the filmmakers selected the title 
from the old Marx brothers' speakeasy skit, as in "Whatsa da passaword?" - 
covers some new ground with it's high-tech heist, but mainly borrows from 
other actioners for its substance. "Die Hard" came to mind often, 
especially as the villain, Gabriel, declares his plan to get what he wants, 
then escape using a Houdini-like misdirection. It's another slick Joel 
Silver production that will make money, but keeps the viewer at arm's 
length. 
A leaner looking John Travolta leads the cast of "Swordfish" and adds 
nothing special here. (At least, he avoids a repeat of his perf in 
"Battlefield Earth," thankfully.) Hugh Jackman, too, does not put much of a 
personality spin on his Stanley Jobson persona. Both actors are so closely 
tied to the various subplots they are never able to rise above the shallow 
surface of the story. Halle Berry looks pretty and sexy as Ginger, but has 
little to do but look good. (when she flashes the camera, topless, one of 
the members of the screening audience yelled out, "Thank you!") Most wasted 
is Vinnie Jones ("Snatch," "Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels") as 
Gabriel's chief henchman, Marco. The soccer star-turned-actor has a great 
presence and, with his working-class English accent, can chew dialogue with 
the best. He is almost mute in "Swordfish," but for a brief moment toward 
the end which gave me unfounded hope. Don Cheadle is fine as the avenging 
FBI agent Roberts. Carmyn Grimes is notable as Stanley's daughter, Holly, 
while Sam Shepard does nothing as a corrupt, powerful senator. 
Production values are first rate. The makers avoided using hackneyed 
computer effects, though the super high-tech workstation that Stanley uses 
reminds me, strangely, of the extremely low-tech set design in Terry 
Gilliam's "Brazil." Photography, particularly the action stuff, is ably 
handled by lenser Paul Cameron, who first joined director Dominic Sena on 
"Gone in 60 Seconds." Production designer Jeff Mann, another Sena 
collaborator, gives a slick, glitzy look to the sets. 
The screenplay, by newcomer Skip Wood, has an incomplete feel to it. There 
is sparseness to the story that makes it seem bloated in trying to fill 90+ 
minutes of screen time. Of course, this could also be a product of slash 
and burn editing that left a good deal of the film on the cutting room 
floor. It's hard to tell, but the results are the same. I give "Swordfish" 
a C. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Michael Dequina
        God bless Joel Silver.  While a certain nameless compatriot of
his in the blockbuster game has decided to make a misguided, PG-13 play
for Oscar this summer, Silver is sticking to his guns, delivering a
slam-bang, pretense-free, hard-R-rated action thriller.  _Swordfish_ is
the name, and the game is the same: chases, gunplay, the whole nine.  In
short, all the mayhem that one expects from a Silver Pictures
production--and ultimately as nondescript as that description implies.
        Undoubtedly responsible for that routine quality is director
Dominic Sena, who last summer helmed Jerry Bruckheimer (oops, I said his
name) Actioner #366, a.k.a. _Gone_in_Sixty_Seconds_; and writer Skip
Woods.  After all, the mediocre sum is made up of some distinguished
parts--and no, I'm not just talking about those very healthy ones of
co-star Halle Berry, who reportedly received a (well-spent)
half-million-dollar bonus to go topless in the film's (quite
understandably) most-talked-about scene.  Berry, who plays fiery femme
fatale Ginger, is but one of the talented actors that make up the
top-notch core cast, which also includes John Travolta as the bad guy,
evil secret government agent Gabriel Shear; Berry's _X-Men_ teammate Hugh
Jackman as the hero, ace computer hacker Stanley Jobson; and Don Cheadle
as the token fed, FBI Agent Roberts.
        One doesn't watch a Joel Silver production for the stars so much
as the action sequences, and, as mentioned earlier, _Swordfish_ delivers
the goods in that respect.  A massive explosion that takes the "bullet
time" effect to a new level gets the film off to a spectacular start, and
subsequent set pieces live up to this big bang of an open.  These range
from the fairly standard but slickly done (a central car chase/gunfight)
to the truly original and ranging from a foot chase down a cliff to the
big finale featuring an airlifted bus, do the adrenaline-pumping job.
        For a film like _Swordfish_, the plot is merely connective tissue
between the big blow-ups, and at first Woods seems to have done all
that's required of him.  Gabriel gets the sultry Ginger to entice
formerly convicted hacker Stanley into helping them electronically tap
into heavily protected government funds.  Simple enough, but the script
soon gets lost in convoluted, half-baked twists as well as unconvincing,
half-hearted emotional content--namely Stanley's desire to be with his
young daughter, whom he is forbidden to see.  That this subplot, however
ridiculous it is, is not laughable is a testament to Jackman's charisma
and natural sincerity.
        _Swordfish_ practically invites criticism by beginning with
Gabriel directly saying to the camera, "You know what the problem with
Hollywood is?  It makes shit."  I wouldn't go so far as to call
_Swordfish_ shit, but it certainly is  junk in a nice, glossy package,
and doesn't pretend to be otherwise.  While embracing and celebrating its
lowest-common-denominator aspirations make _Swordfish_ a refreshingly
unpretentious and modestly diverting film, it doesn't make it a good one.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 SWORD FISH (director: Dominic Sena; screenwriter: Skip Woods;
 cinematographer: Paul Cameron; editor: Stephen Rivkin; cast: John
 Travolta (Gabriel Shear), Hugh Jackman (Stanley Jobson), Halle Berry
 (Ginger), Don Cheadle (Agent Roberts), Vinnie Jones (Marco), Sam
 Shepard (Senator Reisman), Camryn Grimes (Holly Jobson); Runtime: 120;
 Warner Brothers; 2001)
An action-packed high-tech thriller, whose best virtues are that it
doesn't take itself seriously and there's plenty of action. If you
forget a little thing like the story doesn't make sense and the theater
you are in supplies you with bon-bons, then there's a chance you might
be lulled into accepting this flashy summertime film at face value and
be pleased by it.
The film has a snappy "Pulp Fiction" like start to it, as a puffy John
Travolta stares into the camera and his first words are: "You know what
the problem with Hollywood is - they make shit." He rants on by
deconstructing the bank robbery in Sidney Lumet's 1975 film "Dog Day
Afternoon," and goes on to relish what if the bank robbers succeeded!
When he gets up to leave, we realize that this cocky guy is heavily
armed and is in the middle of a bank heist, and he's negotiating with
the FBI agents over the tense hostage situation. The bank hostages have
bombs attached to them, and Travolta threatens mass executions if he's
not allowed to escape. When an FBI sharpshooter kills one of the bank
robbers, all hell breaks loose and the film flashes back to 4 days
earlier.
We first see one of the world's best hackers stopped as he tries to
enter L.A. from Finland. When he's questioned by FBI Agent Roberts (Don
Cheadle), he can't tell him whom he works for because he doesn't know.
But when the agent is called away on a phony call, the hacker is
executed by some assassins in a well-executed hit.
In Midland, Texas, ex-felon Stanley Jobson (Jackman), is out on parole
after serving 18 months for hacking into the FBI secret files and
destroying it with a virus. He's now reduced to poverty, living in an
unkempt trailer, and working as a gas station attendant. He's also not
allowed to see his beloved young daughter Holly, who now lives with her
porn-star mother and her new hubby, a porn-filmmaker in la-la land.
When sexy temptress Ginger (Halle Berry) shows up at his trailer and
offers him $100,000 to just meet her boss, all Stanley can say is that
he goes back to the slammer if he even touches a computer.
As soon as Stanley is talked into the deal, because he's promised $10
million and help to get his girl back, the big boss Gabriel (Travolta),
who's in an L.A. swinger's club, begins to work his menacing charms on
him. The film loses its wit and becomes a mindless thriller from here
on, as director Dominic Sena (Gone In Sixty Seconds), a parolee himself
from schlockmeister producer Jerry Bruckheimer, tries to push the
envelope in favor of evil doings and away from making a PG-13 film. He
succeeds in making an amoral film, where none of the characters are all
good or bad (or for that matter interesting). He leaves us with such an
awful feeling, pretty much like this filmmaker left us with in "Gone In
Sixty Seconds." This turns out to be another preposterous flick of his,
but with the trappings that it has something more to say about the evil
in the world than all the violence it pours onto the screen.
The convoluted plot involves Gabriel and his terrorist group, who are
secretly connected with a powerful and still more power-hungry senator
(Sam Shepard). They are planning to break into a secret slush fund the
government has for an aborted drug operation of theirs called
"Swordfish," where the drug money that has been taken from busted drug
lords is kept in impregnable safes. These guys claim to be
super-patriots, who are doing this heist to fund a private army and
their own nuclear arsenal to counter terrorism wherever it occurs with
their own brand of terrorism. They are doing it to make America the
safest and most feared country in the world. Their aim is to break into
the World Bank located in Los Angeles and steal $9.5 billion via an
electronic bank robbery. Stanley's job is to hack into a few encrypted
bank codes and move the money around.
The film has a lukewarm story going for it about an unwilling "common
man" type who is trapped into working for the bad guys, and is tailed by
the FBI because they want the man he's working for. Since he's really a
good guy who has done a few bad things in his life only because he
believes he was right in doing them, the filmmaker wants us to believe
his good instincts will prevail in the end. The film has lots of
expensive gadgets to work with, and they are used as explosives and as
gimmicks to fill in for the words that stop making sense after a while.
There are the usual betrayals and twists in such a story, the maddening
conclusion to the hostage situation, and a dubious ending that is
slickly done. The ending involves a police chase of a bus and a
helicopter lifting the bus airborne to another location, as everything
the film has going for it are invested in these action scenes.
The false morality of the film centers on the battle between Gabriel's
violent actions leading to a better world and Stanley's selfish desire
to be reunited with his little girl, as he could care less about the
world. While the FBI is scorned, because it is shown breaking the law to
get an arrest. With such a dark delineation of morals exhibited by all
sides, who cares who wins! This film is about exploding all the toys the
big-budget allowed for and keeping the action frenetic and the sex as
tawdry as possible. The acting was dreary. Hugh Jackman's performance
was particularly rancid. He was weepy and excitable but without showing
true feelings. He could access encrypted passwords faster than a
speeding bullet, even while having felatio performed on him by a whore.
John Travolta thinks he's Houdini, but he seems more like a guy getting
good money for playing a part that required little acting skills other
than to just look sinister and smile occasionally. Halle Berry is the
sexpot who when she isn't putting on a sexy pose, goes topless in one
scene and shows us that she has the body for it. The question about her
character revolves around whether she's Travolta's partner or a DEA
agent. Her acting problem is that she brought nothing to the screen but
a pair of nice tits (reportedly baring them for an extra million on her
regular contract).
This "Swordfish" has a smell to it, like it's not fresh. But if you're
looking for crass summertime entertainment, this dish of  "Swordfish"
can please those who have a very tolerant palate.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Okay, admit it.  Sometimes movies are so awful, so over-the-top 
ridiculous that they're good and a lot of fun to laugh at.  SWORDFISH, 
directed by Dominic Sena (GONE IN 60 SECONDS) and starring John 
Travolta, is one such film.  And unlike Travolta's magnum opus of 
badness, BATTLEFIELD EARTH, SWORDFISH has so few pretensions that it 
invites you to laugh along with the script rather like the bouncing ball 
of music sing-alongs.
Since the film's buzz has stemmed mainly from Halle Berry's infamous 
naked breast scene, perhaps I should start with the warning that the 
scene is about as exciting as a naked bust in an art museum.  She shows 
them off briefly and rather nonchalantly as she reads.  A later scene in 
which she is in bra and panties, however, will not disappoint those who 
take in the movie solely for the titillation factor.
The story opens with a long, awkward monologue by Gabriel Shear 
(Travolta) about the movies.  During his soliloquy the camera goes in 
and out of focus so many times that your head will feel like it may 
explode.  Speaking of explosions, things that go boom in SWORDFISH don't 
just ignite, they go close to thermonuclear.  
SWORDFISH is the sort of movie that relishes its glorification of 
stupidity.  As a hostage wired with remote control bombs walks around, 
mad bomber Gabriel warns the police to stay away.  The agent in charge, 
A.D. Roberts (Don Cheadle), orders the cops to do what the bomber with 
the finger on the remote control says.  Do they?  Of course, not.  They 
give the hostage the biggest bear hug this side of a therapy support 
group.  
Gabriel is a mysterious criminal who lives a life that would make Hugh 
Hefner in his prime jealous.  "He lives in a world beyond your world," 
we are told.  "What others only fantasize about, he does."
Gabriel pays way more than minimum wage to the hackers that he uses to 
crack the world's electronic banking systems.  Stanley Jobson (Hugh 
Jackman, X-MEN), whom the FBI labeled as the most dangerous hacker in 
America, is brought in by Gabriel for the ultimate test, cracking super 
secure government computers while having oral sex.  Stan, who has a gun 
to his head, must do this, or he will be gone in 60 seconds.  Of course, 
having been named Wired Magazine's "Man Of The Year" in 1996, Stan 
finishes just in time.
The script by Skip Woods is quite educational.  We learn that 128-bit 
encryption is pretty secure stuff unless someone with Stan's skills, who 
kind of intuits his ways through the decoding, is trying to break it.  
But, 512-bit is really tough stuff.  And nobody is up to 1024-bit.  Are 
you taking notes?
You've probably always wondered exactly how superstar programmers work.  
Well, SWORDFISH shows that to do world-class hacking, you need nine 
monitors.  Standing like a rock musician playing a keyboard, Stan, a 
triple espresso man, bounces around while writing his code, which 
appears on multiple screens as both lines of text and spinning 3D 
models.  
In a movie this silly, it's hard to pick a favorite moment.  For me, it 
occurs after Gabriel stands up in his fast, expensive sports convertible 
to simultaneously shoot down sleek, black sport-utes on both sides.  
After he stops his car, he pulls a huge machine gun out of his trunk and 
starts blasting away like he is the last man standing at the Alamo.  
Others, however, may prefer the film's way, way over-the-top finale.  
Actually, the more I think about it, the story's ludicrous big secret 
may be the biggest hoot of all.
SWORDFISH runs a fast 1:37.  It is rated R for violence, language and 
some sexuality/nudity and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 8, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century 
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "SWORDFISH" (Warner Bros.)
  "You know, the problem with Hollywood is that they make s**t," says John Travolta as this enigmatic cyber-crime caper opens. He rants on about how films, particularly "Dog Day Afternoon," lack realism, failing to push the envelope. But you're jarred to ruthless reality when you realize he's holding 22 hostages, wired with explosives, in the midst of a heist at L.A.'s World Banc. Then a flashback reveals what happened three days earlier when he sent Halle Berry to recruit "the most dangerous hacker in America," Hugh Jackman, an ex-con on probation for computer piracy. The only bait he'll bite is enough cash to gain custody of his young daughter whose alcoholic mother has now married a porno-producer. But money's no problem since, in a perverse twist on patriotism, Travolta's determined to pull off a massive cyber-heist, stealing $9.5 billion in a DEA money-laundering slush fund that's code-named Swordfish. Despite a bizarre haircut, Travolta's menacing and manipulativ!
e as "a driven, unflinching, calculating machine who takes what he wants when he wants and disappears." In contrast, Jackman ("X-Men") embodies the reluctant hero, while Berry delivers shifting signals about her motives, along with baring her breasts, and Don Cheadle is a determined FBI cyber-crimes agent. Despite writer Skip Woods' complex, high-tech cyber-babble about decrypting data and hidden worms, director Dominic Sena ("Gone in 60 Seconds") basically loves to blow things up, going over-the-top in terms of shoot-outs, car crashes and shattering glass. But the final spectacular confrontation, involving a Sikorski helicopter and a bus full of hostages, is truly jaw-dropping. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Swordfish" blasts in with an intense, action-packed, fast-paced 7. It's a dynamite thriller!

Author
Eugene Novikov
 "I've heard that the best programmers in the world
can do this in 60 minutes. Unfortunately, I need
someone who can do it in 30 seconds. Go."
Starring Hugh Jackman, John Travolta, Halle Berry, Don
Cheadle. Directed by Dominic Sena. Rated R.
Swordfish begins as an involving heist/hacker thriller
and ends as a muddled, incoherent mess. The movie
ruins its interesting set-up and undermines it's
well-made action sequences by taking a twist too many.
It's full of actors and filmmakers who know what
they're doing, but they have dedicated themselves to
utter nonsense; even if it is, sometimes, guiltily
entertaining nonsense.
Right about here I would usually be giving the curious
among you the film's plot. I pause here, because I
don't know the film's plot. I can give you the set up:
Stanley Jobson (Hugh Jackman) is a world-class hacker
who has retired from the trade and now endures a
pathetic existence, living in a trailer and longing to
see his daughter, who was taken away from him by his
vindictive ex. One day, as he's hitting golf balls off
the top of his makeshift abode, a beautiful woman
(Halle Berry) comes to see him. Apparently, her boss
Gabriel (John Travolta), a rich supercriminal, has
heard tell of Stanley's skills and wants to meet with
him. Stanley goes through the motions, refusing her
left and right, but inevitably goes. It turns out that
Gabriel wants Stanley to help him in a glorified
high-tech bank robbery, for a hefty share of the
profits.
Does that sound like the plot? Like I said, it's only
the set-up, and it's the only part of the movie that's
comprehensible or entertaining. Director Dominic Sena,
incompetent behind the camera of last year's Gone in
60 Seconds, here shows some flair for chase scenes and
action set pieces (the movie's money shot, in which a
camera slowly spins 360 degrees around an explosion in
slow motion, is almost worth the price of admission).
And Travolta, who hasn't made a good movie since A
Civil Action, still knows how to entertain; his
Gabriel is a fun villain for the film's first half.
And then someone decided that Swordfish needed to be
clever. Let's get something straight: well-executed,
competent genre movies are in just as short a supply
as genuinely original alternatives, and it's no shame
to make one of the former if the latter is beyond
one's reach (director Jonathan Mostow, he of Breakdown
and U-571, is building a solid reputation doing
exactly that). This might have been a wonderful movie
had it simply settled down and gotten itself
organized. If you can't execute a good plot twist,
don't do it.
Swordfish doesn't heed that advice. The good guys and
the bad guys switch places at least 526 times, and
after a while I gave up keeping track of who's who.
The ending itself is a total head-scratcher; I don't
want to give it away for those who somehow stay with
the movie, but suffice it to say that a certain
character should have died but miraculously (and there
doesn't seem to be any other explanation) didn't.
What the hell is the problem with a perfectly decent
heist movie? All the ingredients are here, but
Swordfish dumps half of them out. If you see it, see
it for Travolta, who goes back to being a "serious"
actor later this year with some sort of
child-in-jeopardy thriller, and feel free to leave
early. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   One of the strategies used today by Israelis, who have
been inundated by terrorist attacks, is to learn the location of
high-ranking officials in organizations like Hamas, Hezbollah
and Islamic Jihad, fly over their limos in choppers, and fire
missiles at the cars, eliminating the leaders (hopefully without
loss of nearby civilian life).  This is similar to what the U.S.
Central Intelligence Agency did in the old days--eliminating
perceived enemies by assassinating leaders.  The CIA more
or less admitted its role in taking out Guatemalan leader
Arbenz, whom the U.S. perceived to be pro-Communist.  Is
this type of action justified?  While you're pondering the ethics
of assassinating enemies, you may wonder what all of this
has to do with Dominic Sena's explosive picture, "Swordfish,"
which features some of John Travolta's most convincing
action roles and almost redeems his guise in last year's
"Battlefield Earth."  We can't really discuss the relationship of
these metaphysical questions without giving away the store,
but despite the hackneyed car chases, chopper scenarios,
and the usual mayhem with explosives strapped to hostages,
Skip Woods's clever script lifts "Swordfish" well above the
usual action-adventure genre.  While WBAI critic Mike
Sargent rhapsodizes, "If it were any hotter you'd burst into
flames," I prefer to give appropriate accolades to the
imaginative script--which features a couple of interesting
twists ending with a slam-bang revelation that provides the
audience with an excuse to exhale "a-ha!"
   The story opens on the final day of a bank heist, then
retraces its steps to highlight that handsome Aussie Hugh
Jackman in the role of A-1 computer hacker Stanley, out of
jail for entering secret government files with the caveat that he
must not touch the keys to a computer again.  When the
alluring Ginger (Halle Berry) enters his disheveled trailer in
the middle of nowhere to offer a deal he cannot refuse, he
winds up in the caper of his life with debonair multi-millionaire
Gabriel Shear (John Travolta), who impresses Stanley with
his need to make much more money--which he can do if
Stanley would hack into some cool bank accounts.
   The extra million dollars that Warner Bros. paid to Halle
Berry simply to expose her breasts for eight seconds mocks
all the strippers throughout the United States who probably
could not make that kind of money after ten-year careers
spinning around the brass poles, but that sum  in turn fades
when compared to the nine billion dollars that Stanley is
commissioned to find for Gabriel--which could keep Stanley in
Dell computers for several lifetimes and provide Gabriel
with...what?  Ah, that's the 9-billion dollar question that
provides director Dominic Sena with a prize picture.  The
audience, given clues throughout, must wonder: is Ginger
really working for the Drug Enforcement Administration or is
she really Gabriel's numero uno?  Most of all, is Gabriel a
good guy working for the interests of the U.S. government
despite being pursued avidly by Special Agent A.D. Roberts
(Don Cheadle)?  Or is he a villain interested principally in
stashing billions into his numbered accounts around the world
so that he can sail the Mediterranean on a yacht that would
make Ari Onassis' boat pale?
   The babes look like Bond girls and the women in the
audience can't do better, looks-wise, than to gape at Mr.
Jackman, who resembles a young Robert Redford.  Dominic
Sena still pushes the action-ad envelope as he did with last
year's turkey, "Gone in 60 Seconds," but thanks to the
machinations of Skip Woods screenplay he's redeemed
himself along with Mr. Travolta.  The opening scene, a
philosophic chat by Travola about the nature of Hollywood, is
a monologue worthy of the arthouse stage of Manhattan's
Manhattan Theatre Club.  Good show all around.
Rated R.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Gabriel Shear expounds on what's wrong with Hollywood - not enough realism.
An admirer of "Dog Day Afternoon," he believes that Sonny should have 
ruthlessly blown away his hostages, gotten his bus to an awaiting plane, 
and walked away.  As the camera pulls back, we discover that Gabriel's in 
the midst of an Al Pacino moment and he's prepared to follow the agenda he 
just laid out in "Swordfish."
"Swordfish" opens with a bang, with the newly slimmed down Travolta sporting
the most villainous hairdo since Sam Jackson's in "Unbreakable," riffing on
Al Pacino like he hasn't since "Saturday Night Fever."  He's got hostages
rigged out with C4 and ball bearings 'like the world's biggest Claymore
mines,' and when the FBI interferes, one hostage sets off a firestorm that
looks like a 360 degree shot from the British nuclear holocaust film
"Threads."
Now settle down for the mundane and pedestrian as the film flashes back
to the preceding four days.
Skip Woods' script features high tech espionage and an attempt to keep
the audience guessing via the eyes of Stanley Jobson (Hugh Jackman, "X-Men"),
a hacker extraordinaire who's gone straight after a jail stint.  Stanley's 
offered $100K by Gabriel's colleague Ginger (Halle Berry, "X-Men") to just
meet with the man.  Of course he can be tempted, as his beloved daughter is
in the custody of his alcoholic ex-wife (Drea de Matteo of HBO's "The
Sopranos"), now married to a wealthy pornographic filmmaker.  He takes
the $10 million assignment to create a worm that will divert a $9.5 billion
DEA slush fund (code named Swordfish) to multiple accounts funding Gabriel's
anti-terrorist terrorism.  FBI Agent Roberts (Don Cheadle) tries to tail 
Stanley and a rigorous foot chase follows.  A corrupt Senator (Sam Shepard) 
tries to have Gabriel killed and a high speed car chase scene ensues.  This
is pretty much all just filler to get us back to where we began.
With a tip of the hat to "Dog Day Afternoon" again, Gabriel gets his bus,
but the twist is that he has it airlifted by a Sikorski helicopter (Gabriel
makes much of misdirection).  While one must admire the stunt crew who
really flew a bus through Los Angles skyscrapers, much of this segment seems
borrowed from the likes of "True Lies."
Travolta does really good bad guy - a return to his "Face/Off" form.  Young
soap actress Camryn Grimes makes Stanley's daughter Holly intriguing.  The
rest of the cast has little to do and makes little impression.
"Swordfish" just doesn't live up to its protagonist or do justice to his mind
games, but that incredibly complex opening segment and a cool, sleek Travolta 
almost make it worthwhile.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
SWORDFISH (2001)
Rated R; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Action
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.operationswordfish.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0244244
Written by: Skip Woods
Directed by: Dominic Sena
Cast: John Travolta, Hugh Jackman, Halle Berry, Don Cheadle, Camryn
Grimes,
Vinnie Jones, Sam Shepard
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsswordfish.html
Glory be, Halle was actually *good* in this one.  Maybe she should loose
her breastesses more often; removing that sling seemed to have had a
freeing effect on her acting.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
Gabriel Shear (John Travolta) needs a few good men to help him liberate
nine billion dollars from a high-security government computer, to fund a
project which I will not spoil for you [unlike a few of my fellow
reviewers. But that's Another Rant For Another Time].  Enter Stanley
Jobson (Hugh Jackman), a former "hacker" [*cracker*, dammit!] who served
two years in prison for doing Bad Things to a computer that didn't
belong to him, and isn't allowed to see his daughter Holly (Camryn
Grimes) because her drunk shrew of a mother got a court order against
him.
Gabriel sends his assistant, Ginger (Halle Berry), off to recruit Stan
to break into the supercomputer, with promises of helping Stan regain
custody of Holly - not to mention a few million dollars of his own - as
incentive.  But Stan, who could go to prison for simply *touching* a
computer again, must elude the agent who put him away in the first place
- burnt-out cybercrimes supersluth Agent Roberts (Don Cheadle) - and try
to figure out how to survive Gabriel, aka The World's Most Dangerous Spy.
The Upshot:
Oh, I reckon I could kvetch about how SWORDFISH slung around
TechnoBabble like it was going out of style, and how laughingly AOL-ish
Stan's Graphical Hydra was ["You've Got Worms!"], and how Dell is making
beaucoup bux from product placement, and how this movie was chock full
of gratuitous dialogue and shots (and nope, I'm not just playa-hatin' on
Halle's Friends), and ultimately, how derivative SWORDFISH was of any
number of Summer Action Flicks (pick one, *any* one; start with John
Travolta's BROKEN ARROW, mix in DIE HARD, work a little SPEED in
there...you get my drift).
I reckon I could, but I won't - because SWORDFISH was exactly what it
set out to be: a straight-ahead Summer Testosterone Rush wrapped up in
Action Flick clothing.  I can diggit.
I have to admit, too, that Halle Berry really surprised me; she worked
this flick like nobody's business.  Berry and John Travolta left poor
Hugh Jackman in the dust (much in the way Christopher Walken walked all
over doe-eyed Johnny Depp in the similar daddy-struggles-to-save-his-kid
actioner, NICK OF TIME).  None of their characters were all that deep,
though at least they weren't completely predictable, or written wholly
in good/evil tones.  Yes, I gave a bah humbug to Gabriel's Declaration
of exactly who he was, but by that point in the movie, even the blatant
compugeek name-dropping ["Torvalds"? Guffaw!] or the underuse of Don
Cheadle and Vinnie Jones (Marco), didn't phase me anymore.
I do have one true complaint, though: the first 15 or so minutes, set a
"Matrix"-like pace that the next 80 or so minutes lived up to only
sporadically; let's just say that director Dominic Sena blew too much of
his action wad in the trailer (yes, I know; not his fault).  Still,
SWORDFISH was interesting - ok, I'll admit it: fun - even when it was
downright silly.
And the irony of Gabriel's monologue about Bad Movies - especially
considering Travolta's last two contributions to the world of Ugly
Cinema: LUCKY NUMBERS ad BATTLEFIELD EARTH - was completely delicious.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
If you've visited the 3BC "Viewer Voices" webboard lately (and if you
haven't, you should), you'll notice that some of us have been discussing
Halle Berry's decision to bare her breasts, for - as rumor would have it
(a rumor she's since denied) - $500,000 [another irony, considering what
the Stan character was paid to talk to her character's boss.  But I
digress].  Much of the discussion on the VV board centered around a
statement Berry was said to have made as to why she did her first
semi-nude movie scene; a 3BC reader saw an interview in which Berry was
quoted as saying:
   "For the first ten years of my film career, I've always said no
    to nudity. I wouldn't even read a script that called for nudity.
    But a lot has changed in my life...So, I finally feel free to
    explore myself as an artist. Not to say that the minute I got
    that revelation I decided to take my clothes off. But I feel
    free to make choices from an artistic standpoint, and that's a
    very empowered place to be.  But instead of focusing on a role
    you might not approve of, I'd like people to note that this was
    a role written for a white woman, opposite a big star like
    John Travolta.  Doesn't this take us to another level in the
    industry as black women?"
My take on the matter?  First, as long as she's not hurting anyone in
the process, I don't think Halle Berry owes anybody any explanations for
what she chooses to do with her body, on- or off-screen.  Like I said on
"Viewer Voices", if she decides to run around butt naked and pour baby
oil on her knees, that's her business.
But please, Ms. Berry, don't be fooled into thinking that showing your
Perky Tits (tm, alt.tv.homicide) is any Giant Leap For Blackwomankind,
especially as done in the (mostly gratuitous, though still effective)
SWORDFISH scene.  Political Statement, it ain't.  Not that Hugh Jackman
and half the men (and some of the women) in America, mind.  But you go,
girl, and don't sweat about having to Uplift The Race; uplift your
asking salary, even if you have to uplift your breasts to do it.  I
ain't mad atcha.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Call it derivative, call it an homage, but SWORDFISH made me hungry
[nyuk nyuk] for a little DOG DAY AFTERNOON action.  I wonder if
(ObProductPlacement) Netflix's open this late at night...
SWORDFISH (rating: greenlight):
Wanna bet that Halle's Pups'll get nominated for two MTV Movie Awards?

Author
Bob Bloom
 Swordfish (2001) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring John Travolta, Hugh Jackman,
Halle Berry, Don Cheadle, Vinnie Jones and Sam Shepard. Written by Skip Woods.
Directed by Dominic Sena. Rated R. 
At the outset of Swordfish, John Travolta's Gabriel Shear is pontificating about
the status of American cinema today. 
Basically, he says, it boils down to a lack of imagination among the majority of
writers. 
How ironic, as Travolta seems to be describing his latest venture. 
Swordfish is loud, violent and amoral. It has the audacity to justify murder and
mayhem in the name of sustaining our way of life. 
And how does Travolta's Gabriel plan to do this? By robbing billions from his
own government and using the funds to out-terrorize terrorists. 
Swordfish is a very cynical movie. It relies on an audience's perception of our
leaders as ineffectual and duplicitous and on terrorists as non-human, faceless
entities not worthy of compassion or consideration. 
The movie's plot is preposterous with enough illogical leaps that if the film
ever slowed down, you'd actually see how ridiculous it all is. This is a
live-action Road Runner cartoon, moving so quickly that it's over before you can
catch your breath to ask any reasonable questions. 
The storyline revolves around super hacker Stanley Jobson (Hugh Jackman),
recruited by Gabriel to crack the government's computer codes so Gabriel can
gather billions for his anti-terrorist campaign. Talk about whacked-out
patriotism. 
My objections to Swordfish are many. The body count is high, but that is
expected in a movie of this sort. It's becoming a bore watching anonymous
soldiers, police officers and government agents blown to bits. 
Another example is the family dynamics between Stanley, his 10-year-old daughter
and his ex-wife. Stanley, though having served time in prison for hacking, is
shown as a loving and caring father, forbidden by his ex to see his little girl.
Audience animosity is immediately created for his former spouse by showing her
as a drinker and smoker who also sometimes stars in her new husband's adult
films. 
Thus when she is found murdered late in the movie, neither Stanley nor his
daughter are allowed any time to grieve. In fact, subconsciously, many in the
audience are probably glad she was killed. 
Then there is the sequence involving one of Gabriel's henchman holding a gun to
the head of Stanley's daughter to coerce the hacker to download the key computer
program for Gabriel. Children as pawns have become a most unwelcome cliché in
recent films. 
There is enough violence in the real world involving children without having to
make them on-screen victims as well. 
Yea, it's only make believe, but that doesn't mean you have to tolerate it. 
Travolta is cool, deadly charming and flamboyant as the near-crazy Gabriel. His
character is reminiscent of his villainous characterizations in Broken Arrow and
Face/Off. 
Jackman looks dour through most of the proceedings. His only moment of any depth
comes when he finally is able to create the worm to get inside the government
database. His sense of joy and accomplishment is one any computer whiz can
appreciate. 
Halle Berry is decorative and lovely as Gabriel's assistant, while Don Cheadle
is given little to do as the head FBI agent hunting Gabriel. 
Swordfish plays like a comic book with a larger-than-life character in Gabriel.
Viewers align themselves with him despite their uncertainty if he is hero or
villain. And maybe that is the movie's underlying flaw: There is no real hero to
speak of, only those doing their upmost to survive. 
And that is not enough. This is one Swordfish that should have been thrown back
in the water. 
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He can
be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Bloom's reviews also can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 
