Title
Review for Généalogies d'un crime (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Strand Releasing
 Director: Raoul Ruiz
 Writer: Pascal Bonitzer, Raoul Ruiz
 Cast:Catherine Deneuve, Michel Piccoli, Melvil Poupaud,
Andrzej Seweryn, Bernadette, Lafont, Monique Melinaud,
Hubert Saint Macary
   In his latest movie, the Chilean writer-director--who left his
native country for France after the overthrow in 1973 of
Salvador Allende--plays with double identities and meditates
upon a major philosophic and theological issue.  Are we the
captains of our souls with free will to do as we choose, or are
our lives determined for us pretty much at birth?  This is not a
simple proposition, nor does Ruiz treat the matter in a
dumbed-down style.  Collaborating with Pascal Bonitzer in the
writing of the screenplay, Ruiz hints in the very title that he
leans in the latter direction: we are not what we eat or even
how we are raised, but how we are born.  Our genes
determine our fate so strongly that even at the age of five, a
sharp psychoanalyst can predict whether a lad will become a
criminal.  Nor can outside forces do much short of imprisoning
or executing him to arrest this destiny.
   The central character is Solange/Jeanne (Catherine
Deneuve), who takes on a double identity.  In the role of
Solange, she goes about her business as a lawyer addicted
to lost causes.  She has never won a case.  True to form she
assumes the defense of the Rene (Melvil Poupaud), a
dangerous young man who has killed the psychiatrist aunt
who took the orphan into her home, an act which was
foreseen when he was an adorable five-year-old kid.  As
Jeanne, however, Deneuve appropriates the role of Rene's
aunt, complete with a red wig, determined to play out the
guise to see where it leads.  There is little doubt that Rene is
guilty.  A strange psychiatrist, Georges Didier (Michel Piccoli),
comes forward as an eyewitness, asserting that the murder
was committed in the midst of a group psychotherapy
session, as the boy's aunt was determined to see where his
homicidal tendencies would head even to the point of
provoking the horrid deed.
   As though daring his audience to remain seated throughout,
Ruiz introduces a character even weirder than Didier though
he seems on the surface to be the more stable one.  The
mustachioed, bespectacled, and exquisitely dressed Christian
(Andrzej Seweryn) emerges as an opponent of Didier's school
of thought, and at one point when they meet at opposite
tables in a French cafe, he seems to challenge Didier to a
duel.  As if to show that no one in France is balanced, Ruiz
introduces Solange's crotchety mother, Esther (Bernadette
Lafont), who is a patient of Didier and who provokes her
daughter down to criticizing her cooking, even finding
psychological meaning in Solange's use of a vinaigrette
dressing instead of mayonnaise.
   The child in us never loses interest in playing games,
though Solange plays one far more deadly and consequential
than the participants in Nintendo.  As Solange's relationship
with her client grows and Solange realizes that the young
man reminds her of her own dead son, the two often switch
roles, she assuming his identity and he hers.  This
gamesmanship escalates into a full-scale playing out of the
connection between Rene and his aunt, with Deneuve
becoming essentially the vindictive ghost of the murder victim.
   While director Raoul Ruiz is considered a disciple of Luis
Bunuel and Alfred Hitchcock, "Genealogies of a Crime" is of a
piece with Jean Genet, whose play "The Maids" treats a pair
of beings who are concurrently drawn to and repelled by each
another and who, dreaming of committing a murder, assume
the role of maid and servant to play out their fantasy.  
   "Genealogies of a Crime" is heavy going, bound to
exasperate some in its high-brow audience.  While during its
screenings at the Berlin Film Festival some walked out, no
one at a recent critics' screening in New York did so. 
Bewildering and maddening as the movie can become--even
soporific at times despite the cuts it went through at Catherine
Deneuve's request--it features serious acting, a few dollops of
humor, and at least one in-joke (the appearance of cast
members in paintings on the wall of a spacious room).  It
deserves to be seen by an open, curious selection of film
buffs who will appreciate photographer Stefan Ivanov's use of
a tobacco-brown filter to inform its atmosphere, Jorge
Arriagada's eerie music, some splendid off-the-wall acting,
and a vigorous directorial imagination.  Not Rated.  Running
time: 113 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
