Title
Review for S.L.C. Punk! (1999)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
It's hard being a dedicated anarchist and punk rocker in very religious
Salt Lake City.  Even if one abides by one's own rigid set of rules
about creating a society without any, the chaos of a life dedicated to
creating chaos can be challenging.
Set in 1985, S.L.C. PUNK! is a parody of life on the punk side.  Loosely
based on the teenage experiences of its writer and director, James
Merendino, the film is a talkfest.  Most vocal, with his long and
increasingly tiresome and repetitious monologues to the audience, is the
blue-haired Stevo.  Matthew Lillard, an annoying actor with a propensity
to overact, plays Stevo.  Lillard, last seen in the disastrous WING
COMMANDER, is admittedly a little better this time.
The other actors in S.L.C. PUNK! are likeable, even if their lines are
only sporadically funny.  With a black Mohawk hairstyle, Michael A.
Goorjian plays Heroin Bob, who possesses a strong needle phobia and a
vociferous anti-drug attitude.  A nerdy Jason Segel plays Mike, the
punkest one of them all, even without strange hair.  Til Schweiger is
Mark, the capitalistic punk, whose home looks like an electronics store,
thanks to the lucrative settlement from his parent's plane crash.
MYSTIC PIZZA's Annabeth Gish plays a head shop owner whose hair color
changes more often the weather.
In a typical teenage plot, the school contains several stereotyped
groups, including, but not limited to, the mods, the new wavers, the
Nazi skinheads, the poseurs and the punk rockers.  These various groups
fight comical turf and ideological battles.  The mods, for example, are
preppie types that wear ties, drive Vespa motorbikes and buy their drugs
from the punks.
The film's big joke is that, underneath, rebel Stevo isn't a rebel after
all.  He goes off to college and earns top grades, while his father
(Christopher McDonald) expects him to go Harvard Law just as he did.
Stevo, who majors, tellingly, in prelaw, puts down his old man as a big
sell out.  His dad, who claims to have been a radical in his youth, says
that he didn't sell out, he bought in.
With an old hippie style van that has "antidisestablishmentarianism" on
its side and profanities inscribed on its tires, the film just isn't as
funny as it sounds.  At least the picture never makes the classic
mistake of taking itself seriously.  It's an audacious parody from start
to finish even if it suffers from a paucity of good laughs.
S.L.C. PUNK! runs 1:37.  It is rated R for drug use, profanity, violence
and sex and would be fine for older teenagers.
The film is showing as part of this year's San Francisco International
Film Festival (www.sfiff.org), which runs from April 22 to May 9.  In
the San Jose area it will open on Friday, April 30 at one of the Camera
Cinemas.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     James Merendino's SLC PUNK! has something deep and insightful to say
about the nature of youthful rebellion.  Sort of.  Maybe.  I think.  It's
sort of hard to tell through all the bombast of Merendino's hyperactive
period piece, which tries to be a sort of nostalgic BREAKFAST CLUB for the
Dead Kennedys set but misses the point entirely.  It's one thing to make a
film about teens grousing over the sell-outs of adulthood and the trials
of coping with societal expectations, and target it at the teens
themselves; it's quite another to make such a film and target it at those
who've already been through that melodramatic wringer.  The simple
enjoyment that might have come from the time and the tunes instead turns
into a 90 minute wait for the characters to get a clue.
     Our tour guide through SLC PUNK! is Stevo (Matthew Lillard), who --
along with his best friend Heroin Bob (Michael Goorjian) -- is one of the
few true punks in the capital of conservative Utah during the conservative
Reagan era circa 1985.  The tour consists largely of an anthropological
dig through Stevo and Bob's twisted clique, which includes an
independently wealthy and extremely paranoid drug dealer (Til Schweiger),
the lads' respective ladyfriends (Jennifer Lien and Annabeth Gish), and an
acid casualty (Devon Sawa).  Along the way we learn about the various
sub-categories of Salt Lake City youth, the influence of Stevo's 60s
radical-turned-yuppie father (Christopher McDonald), and where to go for
real beer when you need it.
     Like many an independent comedy, SLC PUNK! has enough frantic energy
to guarantee at least a few belly laughs -- notably during Stevo's spin
through a party describing the various sub-plots in action, and a scene
showing our protagonists as pre-punk, "Dungeons and Dragons"-obsessed
middle-schoolers.  Also like many an independent comedy, it often has
nothing _but_ frantic energy.  For every decent gag or clever insight, you
can count on at least two or three self-indulgent uses of direct address
to the camera in which Stevo rails about religious oppression or the
plague of poseurs (i.e., those who son the garb without walking the walk).
Scenes which I'm assuming should come off as either amusing or
wise-beyond-his-years instead come off as merely damp; if spittle were
diamonds, Matthew Lillard's performance would surely be a piece of comic
jewelry fit for a princess.  Once again, a film-maker's attempt to connect
with the audience through narration becomes a lazy failure.
     SLC PUNK! tries to score its major profundity points when Stevo is
hit by the bombshell that rebellious youth are just conformists of a
different kind.  Well, you can file that one under "d" for "duh;" Stevo's
revelation is one with which any audience member over the age of 25 will
already be quite familiar.  It's that kind of pseudo-wisdom that makes SLC
PUNK! far more tiresome than a film built around devotion to the Ramones
should have been.  When tragedy strikes one of the film's significant
characters late in the film, and Merendino tries to play it as a genuine
tragedy, you realize he hasn't remotely earned an emotional response.  SLC
PUNK! blasts through its set pieces with little film-making prowess, then
expects to tie it all together by having Stevo blubber away at misspent
youth.  Poseurs, indeed.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by James Merendino.
Cast: Matthew Lillard, Michael Goorjian, Annabeth Gish, Til Schweiger, 
Jennifer Lien, Summer Phoenix, Devon Sawa, James Duval.
1999 - 97 minutes
Rated R (for extreme profanity, mild violence, and sexual situations).
Reviewed April 25, 1999.
Director James Merendino's debut film, "SLC Punk!," short for "Salt Lake 
City," is said to be loosely based on his own experiences, and the film 
most definately does have an autobiographical feel to it. Although often 
uneven and flawed, it successfully and accurately captures the way of 
life for a certain group of people, as well as a definite time period.
Set in Salt Lake City during the Ronald Reagan era, circa 1985, Stevo 
(Matthew Lillard), a college graduate whose wealthy family wants him to 
continue his education at Harvard Law School, is one of the few 
so-called punks left in the seemingly dead-end town. Boosting short 
blue-dyed hair, Stevo is quick to narrate and talk to the camera about 
his personal views, including why he is an anarchist, and the reasons 
why he has chosen to be a punk, which is due to (1) rebellion, (2) 
individualism, and (3) because it is in his nature. Always with his best 
buddy in tow, "Heroin" Bob (Michael Goorjian) who, despite his name, is 
against all illegal drugs and is terrified of needles, Stevo lives in a 
torn-up, scummy building and spends his nights going to parties and 
punk-rock clubs. He definately has no desire to go to law school, 
believing it makes for a meaningless existence, but also realizing that 
he has no personal plans or goals of his own, and eventually begins to 
learn that he can't be a "punk" forever. Sooner or later, he's got to do 
something, anything, with his life.
Before seeing "SLC Punk!," actor Matthew Lillard's goofball, 
over-the-top persona had already grown tiresome for myself, and with 
such films as 1996's "Scream" and 1999's "She's All That," he 
essentially played the same character and didn't seem to be stretching 
or testing his acting abilities. That has all changed with this latest 
film, which not only makes Lillard the complete star, but also gives him 
a great deal of textural material to work with, thus helping him to 
fully develop into a three-dimensional and likable character whom you 
respect for his firm, individual beliefs, but still hope that he is able 
to make something more substantial of his life. To tell the truth, 
Lillard was the perfect choice for the role, and it's doubtful that 
anyone, not even someone more accomplished, could have pulled it off any 
better. There isn't a false note anywhere in his performance, and when 
he is on-screen discussing his opinions to the camera, he holds and 
mesmerizes the screen, which is something I never honestly expected from 
Lillard. Not only that, but without Lillard, "SLC Punk!" most likely 
would have been looked at as a failure of a movie, and I wouldn't have 
been able to give it a marginal recommendation. Fortunately, I can 
because for whatever weaknesses there appears to be in the writing, much 
of the material is salvaged by Lillard and miraculously has become 
oftentimes effective.
If only the screenplay, written by Merendino himself, had given the 
other various characters as much material to work with, "SLC Punk!," 
which premiered at this year's Sundance Film Festival, might have been a 
great movie, but it unfortunately misses that prestigious mark. Michael 
Goorjian is given a little something to do as the naive "Heroin" Bob 
who, even after meeting and falling in love with a free-willing woman 
(Annabeth Gish), is still unable to see that the road he is hidding down 
is very bleak. Devon Sawa makes a brief, touching appearance as a fellow 
punk who, late in the film, is discovered to have been thrown out of his 
mother's house and is now a bum on the streets. Sawa's character, in 
fact, was wholeheartedly an original and intriguing creation, and it's 
too bad he wasn't given more screen time. Ditto for Summer Phoenix 
(younger sister of River and Joaquin), as Brandy, a young woman whom 
Stevo meets late in the picture and only helps him to see how he needs 
to make a u-turn in his life. The aforementioned Gish is criminally 
wasted, as is Jennifer Lien as a wild gal that Stevo briefly falls for 
before she is discovered to be cheating on him. If the supporting cast, 
whom are obviously a group of talented young actors, had been as fully 
realized as Stevo was, it would have given the film a little boost in 
its potential.
Another downfall that the film has is that the pacing was often in need 
of slowing down, as the near-constant action and noise occasionally 
tended to grate on the nerves. A more deliberate pace, and an increased 
number of scenes where the characters simply talked, would have 
ultimately improved the film on the whole. 
Still, "SLC Punk!" is an assured first feature from Merendino, a 
filmmaker whom I look forward to his next film from. The basic morale of 
the film is eloquently hammered home and it was impossible not to get 
caught up in Stevo, who is one of the most unforgettable film characters 
I've come across so far this year. Greg Littlewood's magnificent 
cinematography paints Salt Lake City as a somewhat uneventful but 
pleasant place to visit, and various stylistic approaches, such as slow 
motion, freeze-frame, and quick editing flashes that give off a 
hallucinatory quality, all work well. "SLC Punk!" might have several 
flaws in its storytelling and writing aspects, which would have 
benefitted from tightening, but the film is an intelligent portrayal of 
a group of "punks" who are basically normal people struggling for their 
own freedom, and it is rare that we get such a realistic look into 
someone's life in today's films.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
There are basically three groups of people that would like this film.
The first would be fans of similar apocalyptic films (anything made by
Gregg Araki).  The second group would be adult males between the ages
of, say, 25 and 32, that were not into `The Joshua Tree' when it came
out.  Lastly, squealing fans of spastic actor Matthew Lillard may also
enjoy the movie.  And, no – I only fit into the first two categories.
The lizard-like Lillard (Wing Commander) plays Stevo, a nihilistic
teenager growing up in Salt Lake City (thus the S.L.C. of the title)
during the mid ‘80s.  He's a punk, but has little to rebel against,
admitting in the film's opening line that `to be an anarchist in Salt
Lake City was pretty hard.'  Luckily, Stevo can still dye his hair blue,
beat up rednecks (the S.L.C. punk's mortal enemy) and hang around with
his best friend, the mohawked Heroin Bob (Michael A. Goorjian, Justin on
TV's Party of Five).  Don't worry, Bob doesn't really do heroin.  He's
afraid of needles and the name is a joke.
S.L.C. Punk!, written and directed by James Merendino (Livers Ain't
Cheap), has a fantastic soundtrack, featuring The Ramones, Black Flag
and Minor Threat.  In fact, the opening credits are a bit of a tribute
to Black Flag, showing all of the band's album covers changed slightly
to accommodate the names of the film's talent.  Especially funny was Til
Schweiger's (The Replacement Killers) album, which was stamped `import,'
as he is German.
Lillard will probably never be better than he is here – a bored, snotty,
upper-middle-class twerp with A.D.D. and parents intent on him going to
Harvard Law School, while he would rather beat the piss out of everybody
in the name of rebellion.  The movie is almost filmed in a documentary
style, with Stevo often narrating to the camera, describing why he and
his friends are doing what they're doing.  He also points out the
different `tribes' in S.L.C., like the Mods, who would be somewhat
equivalent to the Socials in The Outsiders.  But rest assured that
S.L.C. Punk!'s young cast isn't anywhere near the hotbed of talent found
in Francis Ford Coppola's film, although Lillard is often as endearing
as a young C. Thomas Howell.  (1:37 – R for adult language, drug use,
violent anti-social behavior and some sexuality)

Author
Michael Dequina
Structurally speaking, James Merendino's portrait of Stevo (Matthew
Lillard) and Bob (Michael Goorjian), two young punk rockers in 1985 Salt
Lake City, is a complete mess.  Blue-haired Stevo is the narrator; he often
directly addressing the camera and is prone to abandoning points and plots
in midstream in favor of random tangents that almost always never return to
their point of origin.  The chaotic result is unquestionably hard to follow
at times, but that seems to be the point; though this hyperactive
storytelling style, Merendino captures the anarchic spirit that is, as
Stevo eloquently explains at length at various points, the essence of the
punk movement.
Still, with so much--or, depending on how one looks at it, so
_little_--going on, _SLC_Punk!_ would be all sound and fury without a
strong center, and the film does have one in Lillard.  It would have been
easy for him to coast by on pure attitude and ebullience, but Lillard
invests the role of Stevo with genuine humanity, which is essential for the
climactic moment where he inevitably comes of age.  Lillard is supported
well by the able troupe playing the many secondary characters that pass
through the film.  Particularly memorable is Til Schweiger as a
quick-tempered drug dealer; on the other hand, notably underused as Stevo
and Bob's ladies' man buddy Eddie is Adam Pascal, in whose footsteps I will
someday follow as Roger Davis in the musical _Rent_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com________________________________________________________
NetZero - We believe in a FREE Internet.  Shouldn't you?
Get your FREE Internet Access and Email at
http://www.netzero.net/download.html

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
          If you're interested in this satirical film about teenage
defiance, you'd better plan to see it quick because, when I went to
the theater, there were exactly three people in the audience!
Writer/director James Merendino chronicles the early '80s
transformation of Stevo - played by Matthew Lillard ("Wing Commander")
- from a Dungeons and Dragons geek and academic genius to a hard-core,
blue-haired punk, whose ambition in college is to get "a 4.0 in
damage," rather than to follow his former hippie father's example and
go to Harvard Law School. Set in suburban, Mormon-colonized Salt Lake
City, Utah, the chaotic - obviously loosely autobiographical - story
is hard to follow at times but that seems to be the object of
Merendino's hyperactive style. After all, as Stevo explains at length,
the anarchic spirit is the essence of the punk movement. There's much
more talk than action. In fact, there's more talk than even the most
dedicated movie-goer can sit through comfortably. Long, tiresome, and
repetitious talk. As colorful co-starring characters, Michael
A. Goorjean plays Heroin Bob, who boasts an anti-drug attitude and an
aversion to needles; Til Schweiger is the quick-tempered braggart of
the group who has converted his home into an electronics warehouse,
courtesy of a generous settlement from his parents' plane crash; and
Annabeth Gish is the head shop owner whose hair color changes with
each scene.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "SLC Punk" is a
floundering 4 - unless you're really into an aimlessly twisted parody
on the punk side.
