Title
Review for It Could Happen to You (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Kong
It Could Happen To You is a movie with the wrong title.  It's working title
was Cop Gives Waitress $2 Million Tip, which works a lot better.  It Could
Happen To You is a feel good, funny, and enchanting film.  
Nicolas Cage (The Rock, Face/Off) is Charlie Lang, a genuinely nice and
honest cop.  He is content with his job.  He is married to a loud obnoxious
woman, Muriel (Rosie Perez).  Then there's the waitress, Yvonne Biasi
(Bridgette Fonda) who is down on her luck and in bankruptcy.  One day
Charlie and his partner stop to get some coffee from a rundown café where
Yvonne works.  Charlie has enough to pay for the coffee but not the tip, so
tells Yvonne that he'll give her half of the winnings of the lottery ticket
in his wallet if he wins.  Yvonne brushes this offer off.
That night Charlie finds out that his ticket is a 4 million-dollar winner.
He tries to break the news of the $2 million "tip" to his wife Muriel.  And
as you might guess, she's not too happy about it.  Rosie Perez is hilarious
in this series of scenes.
Cage and Fonda are charming onscreen together.  They have a definite screen
chemistry and that carries the film well.  On the other side of the scale,
though, is Rosie Perez.  In some scenes she is hilarious, but in others she
is the epitome of annoyance.
Though not very creative, the film doesn't feel recycled so much as
familiar.  This could happen and it could happen to me.  Heck, it might
have happened to someone already.  And it is this feeling of familiarity
that makes It Could Happen To You so easy to love.  Kudos to Jane Anderson
for writing such a loveable film.
It Could Happen To You is a wonderful movie that in the end will leave you
feeling warm and fuzzy inside with a big grin on you face.  Don't Miss It
Could Happen To You.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU was originally titled "Cop Gives Waitress
$2M Tip" which was a better title, but except for the current blah,
generic title, I have nothing but good things to say about this
wonderful, romantic, and life affirming movie.
     There is a great narrator who appears early and late in the show,
and who shows up some in-between as a speechless observer.  His name is
Angel (Isaac Hayes), and he tells us in the beginning that the movie
"is mostly true." Although it is true, it is told as a fairy tale and,
moreover, a wonderful romance.
     The basic plot setup is that a cop (Nicolas Cage), gives a
waitress (Bridget Fonda) a tip of half of his lottery ticket.  The
ticket turns out to be worth $4,000,000.  The waitress is the classic
bad luck type who has just that day declared bankruptcy.
     The cop has had a long childless marriage to his childhood
girlfriend (Rosie Perez).  Their marriage is one where he muses that
"I'm not sure why we ever got married, but we no longer have anything
to say to each other." Perez is not happy with him either because he is
not making "any serious money".  Her girlfriend advises her to dump him
and marry an electrician.  Early in the show, he wins the lottery, and
then all of the twists and turns begin.  Some are predictable, but many
are not.
     There is an instant romance and visible chemistry between Cage and
Fonda that is a joy to behold.  You see this in the first 5 minutes of
the movie.  It makes you feel good to be alive.  Their acting is
terrific.  Several times, I thought they were going to burst into song.
It is that kind of movie.  Great mood music in it too.
     Small things like the setting in Queens were well done.  How about
a show set in a poor ethnic neighborhood where the kids are nice, play
stickball and no one mentions the word drugs?  Amazing that.
     The movie starts wonderfully, ends great, and has perfect pacing
throughout.
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU is rated PG and has nothing to offend
anyone of any age.  I can not see someone younger than say 9 being
interested in it.  If your kids like romance, then they are probably
old enough to enjoy this movie.  It runs 1:41.  I rate it *** 1/2 and
highly recommend it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nicolas Cage, Bridget Fonda, Rosie Perez, Wendell Pierce,
Isaac Hayes, Stanley Tucci.
Screenplay:  Jane Anderson.
Director:  Andrew Bergman.
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU is nice.  It's about nice people who do
nice things for other nice people, and how nice things happen to them
as a result.  It's also about not-so-nice people who do not-so- nice
things, and how they are similarly rewarded.  It wears its niceness so
baldly on its sleeve that it's impossible to miss it.  Mind you, I have
nothing against niceness; heaven knows there is far too little of it
portrayed in movies these days.  But IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU is so busy
being nice that it forgets to be interesting, resulting in a watery,
flavorless little love story with a good heart.
     Based (oh-so-loosely) on a real event, IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU
tells the story of Charlie Lang (Nicolas Cage), a decent New York beat
cop married to gold-digging beautician Muriel (Rosie Perez).  One
afternoon, Charlie is without sufficient money to leave a tip for
down-on-her-luck diner waitress Yvonne Biasi (Bridget Fonda).  To make
it up to her, Charlie offers Yvonne half of whatever winnings he might
receive from the lottery ticket he is holding.  The ticket turns out to
be a $4 million winner, making Yvonne's cut $2 million.  This
development goes over not at all well with Muriel, who begins to make
life even more miserable for Charlie, and soon Charlie and Yvonne find
they have more in common than their new fortune.
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU was originally titled COP GIVES WAITRESS
$2M TIP, and it was then that I should have smelled trouble.  Tri-Star
clearly wanted to play up the story as a fairly tale, and from the
opening shot of New York City's skyline being revealed through removed
laundry, you know that's what you've got.  There seems to have been a
desire to make a "decent guy fights the system" comedy, something that
would inspire that much mis-used adjective "Capra-esque."  However, one
wonders whether anyone involved in IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU ever saw a
Frank Capra film.  The Capra heroes played by James Stewart, Gary
Cooper and others were not spotless, just basically good folks
struggling to do the right thing.  Nicolas Cage's Charlie, on the other
hand, is too good for sainthood, helping blind people across busy
intersections, playing stickball with neighborhood kids and intoning "a
promise is a promise" at regular intervals.  I almost wondered whether
the nice guy character was being mocked.  Bridget Fonda is nearly as
angelic, though she is given a tough background to overcome and an
endearing fatalism.  She does a lot of interesting things with her
performance, and has a standout scene where she first registers her
good fortune, dispensing free ice cream to all of her customers.  Fonda
and Cage are two likable actors, but ultimately there is not a drop of
tension in their relationship.  They're too perfect _not_ to end up
together.
     That's a real disappointment, because I expect better from Andrew
Bergman.  He has written or co-written some of the funniest and
quirkiest screenplays of the last twenty years, including BLAZING
SADDLES, THE IN-LAWS and THE FRESHMAN, and directed last year's
enjoyable HONEYMOON IN VEGAS.  He is working here with a screenplay by
Jane Anderson, who also showed a sharp wit with THE POSITIVELY TRUE
ADVENTURES OF THE ALLEGED TEXAS CHEERLEADER MURDERING MOM for HBO.
Both of them should know better.  Comedy requires some kind of edge to
get it rolling, whether it's situation or character, and IT COULD
HAPPEN TO YOU has neither.  At its best, it produces a few smiles.
     At its worst, Rosie Perez is on screen.  As the "villain" of the
film, Perez plays Muriel as an unrepentant shrew-from-hell, and it's
the kind of part where she's in the most trouble.  Her voice, somewhat
grating in its most tolerable moments, skyrockets into dog whistle
range when she browbeats Cage.  It is a performance so annoying that
even had IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU been satisfying on all other counts,
she might have spoiled the experience singlehandedly.
     There's nothing wrong with fairy tale love stories; BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST was one of the most romantic film experiences of the decade so
far.  But those animated characters were more real than anyone in IT
COULD HAPPEN TO YOU.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU is claimed to be based on fact both
internally and in the publicity.  In actual fact, just about none of it
is true, but the basic situation of a policeman sharing a lottery ticket
as a tip and then splitting the payoff when the ticket actually wins.
Jane Anderson's screenplay takes that situation as a springboard to tell
a fable about greed and unselfishness.  Surprisingly, the invented story
is not all that far from credibility.
     Charlie Lang (played by Nicolas Cage) is a good, honest cop who
lives the kind of life that a good honest cop can expect to live.  He
has a one-bedroom apartment, a lot of aggravation, and a dissatisfied
wife Muriel (Rosie Perez) who is getting ready to give up on Charlie and
look for something new.  One day Charlie buys a lottery ticket.  Then
getting a cup of coffee he finds he does not have money for a tip so
promises to split any lottery winnings with his waitress, Yvonne Biasi
(Bridget Fonda).  When the ticket wins to the tune of four million
dollars Charlie's wife Muriel wants Charlie to keep all the money for
themselves.  Charlie insists repeatedly that a promise is a promise and
splits the money with Yvonne.
     As Charlie discovers, winning the lottery completely changes who
you are and how people relate to you.  Charlie and Yvonne find kindred
spirits in each other, each wanting to spend much of the money
unselfishly. They also begin getting interested in each other.  Muriel,
on the other hand,  wants to enjoy every dollar spending on herself.
What is more, she wants all four million.  What results is neither
entirely expected or unrealistic.  On top of this is a rather pleasant
love story in which Cage and Fonda work very well together on the
screen.
     And Fonda and Cage are something of a surprise as a screen couple.
Cage has overcome the goopy kid roles he has played in the past and
carries the film reasonably well as a leading man.  He has, of course,
worked with director Andrew Bergman before in HONEYMOON IN VEGAS.  Fonda
is captivating with a winning smile and a more winning acting talent.
Slightly misjudged is Rosie Perez whose grating voice was somehow an
asset when she played the traumatized plane passenger in FEARLESS, but
here, playing a human cockroach, she seems just insufferable on the
screen.  Also disappointing is the limiting of Stanley Tucci to three
scenes as Yvonne's wandering husband.  Tucci is a rubber-faced actor who
proved he had a great deal of comic potential as Alec Baldwin's best
friend in PRELUDE TO A KISS.
     Anderson's screenplay has a lot of what was good in older Frank
Capra films.  Unfortunately Capra films were far from perfect and an
unrealistic turn of events toward the end of the film is lifted straight
from a Frank Capra film.  What is oddly missing is the attention to
well-observed character development that one would find in a Capra film.
It is odd because Anderson proved she was good at creating charactersin
THE POSITIVELY TRUE ADVENTURES OF THE ALLEGED TEXAS CHEERLEADER-
MURDERING MOM for HBO.  Here, instead of developing the minor characters
the screenwriter actually seemed to be working with a checklist to make
sure a wide variety of ethnic minorities were represented in the film.
Also the telling of the story with a narrator seems to be a false move
on the part of the author.
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU is not a great film, but it is an enjoyable
love story and a pleasant change from much gun-blazing summer
entertainment available in the theaters right now.  I would give it a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Charlie (Nicolas Cage) is an unlikely NYC cop: honest and
dedicated beyond the call of duty.  His wife, Muriel, (Rosie Perez) and
he live in the borough of Queens in a very modest apartment house.
Muriel wants to be rich.  Muriel keeps haranguing him to be a little
less honest and pick up some extra money with which she is obsessed.
She also insists he buy a Lottery ticket despite the insane odds
against winning a jackpot.
     On Charlie's beat is a little coffee shop.  One of the waitresses
is Yvonne (Bridget Fonda).  A judge has just given her a break by
having her declared bankrupt when the husband whom she has left has run
up a $12,000 tab on their Master card.
     Charlie and his partner are having coffee when their pager goes
off calling them to an emergency.   He pays Muriel the bill but
discovers he has no change for a tip.  Instead, he promises her if he
wins the lottery he will give her half his winning; if he loses he will
be back with a tip.  This being the movies, he wins ... $4 million.
When he breaks the news to his wife that he is going to give the
waitress half of the winning "because I promised her," she hits the
ceiling.
     Up to this point the fairy tale is funny and easy enough with
which to go along.  Charlie is very nice, Yvonne is sweet and grateful
for the $2 million and wife Muriel is a riot with her tantrums.  But
the movie turns mean when Muriel becomes shrill and vindictive.  The
little fantasy we were enjoying turns real and sordid and all the fun
leaves the film.
     Isaac Hayes has a cameo as the narrator and Red Buttons does a bit
as an attorney.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Those with a cynical bent will not enjoy IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU.
If you don't like happy endings, think Christmas is just for kids, and
feel vaguely ill while watching IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, you would do
well to stay away from this movie.  On the other hand, if you're
looking for a late summer, "feel good" romantic comedy, there aren't
too many around more affable than this one.
     Depth is one thing this film does not have, nor is it especially
strong in the originality department.  It's easy to predict what's
going to happen, especially for those who have seen IT'S A WONDERFUL
LIFE, from which IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU borrows heavily (with Rosie
Perez taking on the Lionel Barrymore role!).
     As every summer is plagued by a new offering from Pauly Shore, so
there's at least one romance.  Often, while not a great motion picture,
it's good enough to capture some favorable reviews and positive
word-of-mouth.  In 1993, the title was SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE.  This
year, if the public finds the attraction between Nicolas Cage and
Bridget Fonda to be irresistible, it may be IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU.
     Charlie Lang (Nicolas Cage) is a New York cop, and a genuinely
nice guy--so nice, in fact, that when he doesn't have the change to
tip his coffee shop waitress Yvonne (Bridget Fonda), he promises to
split his winnings from a lottery ticket with her--if he wins, that
is.  Yvonne, who is having a bad day (she declared bankruptcy before
coming to work), doesn't give the offer a second thought--until
Charlie returns the next day with the news that he's $4 million
richer.  Despite the pleadings of his wife Muriel (Rosie Perez) to
"stiff" the waitress, Charlie lets his conscience guide him, and sticks
to his promise.
     Love is in the air, as the old John Paul Young tune goes.  You
know from the beginning that Charlie and Yvonne are going to get
together.  If you can't figure that out, you've probably gone to the
wrong movie.  The chemistry between Fonda and Cage is tangible--not
the sultry, sexy kind that often characterizes boy-meets-girl stories,
but something cuter and more fanciful.
     Often, relationships in romantic comedies are contentious.  Not so
in IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU.  Charlie and Yvonne are two kind-hearted
people who don't yell at each other.  Instead, all scenes of conflict
are reserved for vain, gold-digging Muriel, who begrudges Charlie every
penny he gives away.  She's the obvious villain of the piece, IT COULD
HAPPEN TO YOU's version of Mr. Potter.
     I'm not sure if Rosie Perez does a great job of acting or not, but
her character is really, really annoying.  The word "shrill" doesn't
begin to do her justice.  Watching most of her scenes is like sitting
in a classroom while someone scrapes their fingernails across the
blackboard.  Screeeeeeeeech!
     IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU is the most inoffensive of motion pictures,
and that's precisely where the core of its charm lies.  Other than a
little suspension of disbelief, it doesn't demand a heavy investment
from its audience.  Of course, you have to enjoy this sort of movie to
appreciate its appeal.  If you do, IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU will convince
you that the magic of Frank Capra isn't dead in Hollywood after all.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
