Title
Review for Escape from New York (1981)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kurt Russell, Lee Van Cleef, Ernest Borgnine, Donald Pleasence,
      Isaac Hayes, Adrienne Barbeau, Harry Dean Stanton
Director: John Carpenter
Producer: Larry J. Franco and Debra Hill
Screenplay: John Carpenter and Nick Castle
Cinematography: Dean Cundey
Music: John Carpenter
U.S. Distributor: Avco Embassy
     1988.  New York City, overrun by crime, is walled in.  It becomes 
the world's largest, most uncontrolled prison, with the inmates 
prevented from escaping by armed guards who man the walls twenty-four 
hours a day.  Those confined within the city are free to live and die as 
they please, creating their own form of government, choosing their 
leaders, and using guile, brutality, and criminal ingenuity to survive.  
The city's world-renowned silhouette, gazed upon from the shores of 
Liberty Island, is familiar, but, without electricity to light up the 
nights, it has become dark and ominous, like the fledgling society 
growing in its streets, alleyways, and sewers.
     Skip ahead nine years to 1997.  The U.S. President's plane, 
hijacked by terrorists, goes down in the midst of the New York City 
prison.  Master criminal Snake Plissken (Kurt Russell), whose chief 
personality traits are a dry wit and an unrivaled sense of self-
preservation, is chosen to enter New York, rescue the President, and get 
out again.  To insure his cooperation, he is injected with tablets that 
have a twenty-four hour life span.  If Snake hasn't done his job by 
then, his head will explode.  So, left without options, he dons a James 
Bond wristband, hops in a glider, and heads for the top of the World 
Trade Center.
     ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK has one of the most ingenious premises of any 
film released during the 1980s.  For this, if nothing else, director 
John Carpenter (HALLOWEEN, STARMAN) deserves some credit.  
Unfortunately, too much of the film's promise goes unfulfilled.  ESCAPE 
FROM NEW YORK isn't really science fiction -- it's an action flick set 
in a futuristic setting.  Epic potential for a masterful, gripping tale 
is abandoned in favor of cheap thrills.
     Action films have certainly come along way in the last fifteen 
years.  In comparison to a DIE HARD, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK has such a low 
level of excitement that it could almost be considered plodding.  
Carpenter peppers the film with bursts of action, but there are long, 
sometimes sluggish, pauses in between.  Also, surprisingly (since 
Carpenter is known as a "master of suspense"), ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK 
rarely generates much tension, and, when it does, it fails to sustain 
it.  Even the big finale, which involves a chase across a mined bridge, 
doesn't really get the adrenaline pumping.  From an action/adventure 
standpoint, describing this film as anything better than adequate would 
be an unwarranted kindness.
     Apologists for ESCAPE (and there are mass legions of devoted fans) 
point out that the film is as much a comedy as it is an action film.  
And, while it's certainly true that Carpenter has infused the film with 
elements of irony and wit, his sense of humor is so dour that it rarely 
sparks more than fitful laughter.  In fact, it's easier to recognize 
that ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK is trying to be funny than it is to actually 
unearth those few moments of comedy that appear more inspired than 
pointless.
     One area that doesn't merit criticism is the film's look.  Although 
shot on a modest budget of $7 million, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK has the 
appearance of a more expensive picture.  The skyline scenes of 1997 New 
York are very impressive.  Matte artists, set designers, model makers, 
and animators all deserve credit for creating a believably futuristic, 
decadent cityscape.  Cinematographer Dean Cundey gets a lot of nice, 
atmospheric shots that go a long way towards atoning for the film's 
faults.  Carpenter's simple score, which is electronically synthesized, 
is the perfect audio accompaniment to some of the more ominous visuals 
(like the scene where the crazies emerge from the New York underground 
to close in on Snake, recalling George Romero's NIGHT OF THE LIVING 
DEAD).
     Kurt Russell is delightful as Snake.  The actor, known at the time 
for his Disney films, makes a better-than-average action hero, 
incorporating aspects of Clint Eastwood's spaghetti western personality 
into his character.  The presence of veteran actor Lee Van Cleef (FOR A 
FEW DOLLARS MORE, THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY), who appears to be 
enjoying himself enormously, reinforces the Eastwood comparisons.  
Donald Pleasence, Adrienne Barbeau, and Harry Dean Stanton turn in solid 
supporting performances.  Ernest Borgnine does a wonderful turn as a New 
York cabby who still remembers the old days, and Isaac Hayes is 
deliciously nasty as the Duke.  Stealing perhaps every scene he's in, 
however, is Frank Doubleday, whose turn as a bit player is so 
exaggerated and over-the-top that it's impossible not to notice him.
     So, considering all aspects of the production, what is ESCAPE FROM 
NEW YORK?  A failed science fiction spectacle that devolves into a 
mediocre action/comedy?  Or an underrated cult classic that functions as 
a ground-breaking adventure film?  Perhaps, as is so often the case, the 
truth lies somewhere in between.  ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK is definitely 
watchable, and, at times, quite enjoyable.  However, when the final 
credits roll, you can be forgiven a vague sense of dissatisfaction, 
because the creativity that went into formulating the premise was never 
extended to the script writing stage.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dragan Antulov
Whether the world today is in a good or bad shape is a
matter of debate. However, many would agree that the world
looks much better than in the visions of film-makers from
late 1970s and early 1980s. The movies that marked the
Golden Age of Science Fiction cinema - MAD MAX, BLADE
RUNNER, ALIEN - painted the near future (and some of the
periods in which we live now) in very dark colours. Among
some of the directors who had joined the trend was John
Carpenter, young but already respectable director, who had
established his reputation with very cheap, but effective
genre films like DARK STAR, ASSAULT ON PRECINT 13 and
HALLOWEEN, who later became cult classics. His futuristic
action thriller ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK, with some 7 millions
US$ in budget, was his first trip into the big budget
territory. Although some of the contemporary critics saw
film as a sell-out, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK became cult classic
too. Even the dreadful sequel ESCAPE FROM L.A. failed to
ruin the reputation of the original. It is somewhat ironic
that ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK marked the critical milestone of
Carpenter's career - after this film, the filmmaker went
mainstream, and his career, same as the world in this movie,
went south.
Among all the post-apocalyptic and dark futuristic films,
that thrived in that era of pessimism, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK
has the most outrageous plot premise. In 1988, the crime in
USA has quadrupled and the government, unable to preserve
law and order by any other means, decided to turn Manhattan
into maximum security prison. The prisoners forced to spend
the rest of their lives behind high walls, surrounded by
machineguns, minefields and thousands of policemen and
soldiers with shoot to kill orders. Into this living hell
falls plane carrying U.S. President (played by Donald
Pleasance), who is immediately taken hostage by the inmates.
Prison warden Hawk (Lee Van Cleefe) decides to rescue
President using the talents of "Snake" Plissken (Kurt
Russell), convicted bank robber and former World War 3
veteran. In exchange for his freedom, Plissken must enter
the prison and rescue the President in less than 24 hours.
His dedication to the job is enhanced with surgically
implanted mini-bombs within his arteries.
For the viewers who see this film for the first time, ESCAPE
FROM NEW YORK might look somewhat silly, considering the
fact that the bleak future, depicted in it, never happened.
It is inconceivable that the US government would try to
solve the crime problem by destroying the nation's top
economic and cultural centre. However, those viewers who
manage to suspend disbelief (among other things, we are to
believe that WW3 wouldn't go nuclear and that the wartime
America would still have efficient leftist underground),
should be rewarded with more than fine piece of cinema.
First of all, unlike many of the films inspired by it (Enzo
G. Castellari's rip-offs), this film has a unique
atmosphere, provided by cheap yet inventive and very
effective production design and special effects. The
Manhattan skyline, seen in total darkness, although matte,
has a very menacing look. The music, again composed by
multitalented Carpenter, is monotonous yet still effective -
sometimes being illustration of the action scenes, but most
of the time serving as some kind of ironic commentary
towards the whole movie.
However, the best icon of this film is the protagonist.
"Snake" Plissken, brilliantly portrayed by former Disney
child actor Kurt Russell, is one of the finest examples of
anti-heroes in modern cinema. With the anti- establishment
look of 1960s rebels, combined with the world-weary voice
that brings memories of Clint Eastwood in his spaghetti
western phase, Kurt Russell created one of the most
effective action protagonists in decades to come. His
character is superbly portrayed with only few lines. Of
course, Russell isn't alone - he shares film with a lot of
great character actors in small but memorable roles. Lee Van
Cleef, playing the warden, with his presence connects this
film with Sergio Leone's classics. Ernest Borgnine is also
very effective in a role of the last remaining New York
cabby, while always reliable Harry Dean Stanton shines in
the role of Brain. Isaac Hayes is great as the charismatic
chief villain, Duke of New York.
Compared with some of the more recent products of action
genre, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK looks somewhat slow. There are
relatively few action scenes, and they don't last long. Some
of the critics tend to see this as a movie's flaw, because
the long pauses aren't used by Carpenter to show more of
apocalyptic New York and its prison society. Others point
out that the most of the movie takes place at night, which
could be explained with Carpenter's budgetary restrictions.
However, despite those flaws, ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK is still
a very good movie. Failed as futuristic vision, it is still
a superb action adventure, movie that makes us nostalgic
towards the times when the future looked bleak.
