Title
Review for Anywhere But Here (1999)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ANYWHERE BUT HERE (director:Wayne Wang; screenwriter: Alvin
Sargent/based on the book by Mona Simpson; cinematographer: Roger
Deakins; editor: Nicholas C. Smith; cast: Susan Sarandon (Adele August),
Natalie Portman (Ann August), Eileen Ryan (Lillian), Ray Baker (Ted),
John Diehl (Jimmy), Shawn Hatosy (Benny), Bonnie Bedelia (Carol),
Michael Milhoan (Policeman), Hart Bochner (Dr. Josh Spritzer), Corbin
Allred (Peter);Runtime: 113; Fox 2000 Pictures, 1999)
The title is taken from the writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson describing
the life of a traveler as 'Anywhere but here.' There isn't one thing
about this mother-daughter relationship melodrama that felt honest. It
relies on a contrived minor character to tell both mother and daughter
what was obvious to do in order to straighten out their dysfunctional
lives, as for some reason they couldn't figure it out for themselves. If
the film looks familiar, that is because "The Slums of Beverly Hills
(98)" went over the same ground but was fortunate to be more comical and
perceptive due to Alan Arkin and Natasha Lyonne performances, in which
they were fortunate to have a much sharper script to work with. Alvin
Sargent's script was weak and annoyingly claustral. Wayne Wang's ("The
Joy Luck Club") inept direction made a weak script even weaker by his
inability to tell the story unfolding without the voiceover relating
what the action couldn't convey.
Pushy mother Adele August (Susan Sarandon) forces her 14-year-old
daughter Ann (Natalie Portman) to leave a small Midwestern burg to go
cross-country with her to Beverly Hills. The daughter resents her twice
divorced, unstable but exotic, schoolteacher mother, bullying her to be
an actress as a means of escaping a humdrum  life. The daqughter doesn't
even like the used gold Mercedes mother buys to drive to LaLa land in
and can't stand the Beach Boys records mom enjoys hearing on the car
radio. So it becomes a question of who knows best, as the ladies fight
it out between them, until the  predictable sweet ending comes in this
yawner.
Adele's dream of greener pastures in Beverly Hills soon doesn't look
that good, as she lands a job in a slum school, has her precious car
scratched by the unruly kids, and settles into a job she hates in order
to financially survive. Daughter pines for small town Wisconsin and her
friends there. During one of many arguments with her free-spirited mom,
they go for ice cream and while mother is being ticketed, she runs away,
only to be chased down by friendly traffic cop (Michael Milhoan), who
offers her wise counsel. With the cop's Zen wisdom passed onto the
daughter, she will survive living in many different addresses in Beverly
Hills until she reaches 17 and then she plans to get way from mom by
using her good grades to go to Brown University instead of UCLA.
During their stay in Beverly Hills, she grows from feeling awkward in
Beverly Hills High to immediately having many high school girlfriends
and even a high school rich boy admirer-- a T.S. Eliot (Corbin Allred)
reader. But the transition of her life into Beverly Hills had no feel of
reality, as everything seemed staged and unemotional. When she learns
her cousin Benny (Shawn Hatosy), who happens to be her best friend dies
in a traffic accident back in Wisconsin, she returns for the funeral and
in those reunion scenes it wasn't clearly shown why she wants to stay
there, and for that matter, it was never made clear why the mother wants
to leave so badly. The film is one big battle of wills between mother
and daughter over their dreams. I guess what the filmmaker is trying to
say, is that mom is a bad dreamer and the daughter is the observant one,
able to recognize mother's faults when not in growing pains and in need
of parenting herself.
Mother has a series of setbacks, like being dumped by her dream-boat
dentist (Bochner) she met on the beach, and witnessing her daughter
mimic her whiny optimistic sayings when trying out for an acting part.
But mother learns that her daughter has grown-up and is independent and
that she has to stop living her life through her. She learns this when
the same wise cop who told Ann what to do, is about to ticket her and
this time will remind the mother of the right thing to do. This of
course results in the corny ending, showing that mom's heart was always
in the right place, only she went about it in the wrong way. This was
just one of those films where you want to be anywhere but in the theater
where this film is showing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Greg King
ANYWHERE BUT HERE (M).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Wayne Wang
Stars: Susan Sarandon, Natalie Portman, Shawn Hatosy, Hart Bochner, 
Bonnie Bedelia, Roy Baker, Paul Guilfoyle, Eileen Ryan
Running time: 116 minutes.
Anywhere But Here charts the tempestuous but often moving and
complex relationship that exists between mothers and daughters.  This
is similar to territory that director Wayne Wang (Smoke, Blue In The
Face, etc) previously explored in The Joy Luck Club.  While that film
was shaped by more specific cultural and ethnic overtones and the
weight of historical antecedents, Anywhere But Here is a more
contemporary tale.  This is the kind of rich emotional territory that
has become the preserve of American independent cinema, but here it is
given the lavish, big budget treatment.  Thanks to a perceptive script
from Oscar winner Alvin Sargent (Julia, Ordinary People, etc), the
film also looks at the dilemmas of adolescence - divorce, moving home
and making a new start, first love, the loss of close friends, and a
troubled relationship with interfering mothers - with broad humour,
warmth, honesty, and surprising flashes of insight.
Bored with the pace of life and lack of opportunities in small
town Bay City, Wisconsin, flighty Adele August (Susan Sarandon) packs
her bags and young teenage daughter Ann (Natalie Portman, recently
seen in The Phantom Menace) into her second hand Mercedes and heads
off for Beverley Hills and a more exciting life.  Ann however is
annoyed at being uprooted so abruptly from her friends and family, and
resists her new life with a passion.  Meanwhile, the ambitious Adele
tries to adjust, making the most of the slender opportunities that
come her way.
The film spans a couple of years and explores the difficult
relationship that exists between the pair as they try to redefine
themselves and their new life in a strange city.  This gives the film
something of an episodic feel, and Wang's direction is occasionally a
little languid.
At the root of their turbulent relationship are some very real
fears and emotional issues that need to be resolved.  Adele is rather
vulnerable and mostly fears the loneliness she will feel when Ann
grows up and eventually leaves her.  Ann on the other hand is often
embarrassed by her mother's overbearing behaviour and erratic ways.
She constantly swears that she hates Adele and that she will leave
her, but lacks the courage and confidence to do so.
The character of Adele is the type of familiar role that
Sarandon plays with consummate ease.  She delivers a wonderfully brash
performance, capturing Adele's recklessness, her optimism and her deep
love for her daughter.  Sarandon is matched every step of the way by
the superb Portman, who seems to grow in stature and maturity with
every film, and again proves why she is one of the best actresses of
her generation.  Wang largely wastes the talents of an impressive
ensemble supporting cast, that includes Bonnie Bedelia and Shawn
Hatosy, in small roles.
Anywhere But Here is an unashamed weepy and a good old
fashioned "woman's film" in the mould of Alice Doesn't Live Here
Anymore, etc, and will mainly resonate with modern female audiences.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
*ANYWHERE BUT HERE* (rated PG-13, 114 minutes, Twentieth Century Fox)- This
new film by Wayne Wang, director of "Smoke" and "The Joy Luck Club", is
sentimental and mediocre, but the touching performances of Susan Sarandon
and Natalie Portman make it almost worthwhile.  "Anywhere But Here", based
on the novel by Mona Simpson, tells the age-old story of a mother and
daughter who go searching for a better life.  In this film, 14-year-old Ann
August is forced by her outrageous mother to leave Bay City, Wisconsin for
the exciting world of Beverly Hills.  Ann doesn't want to leave the life
she's used to, but her mother, Adele, is a dreamer with hopes and
aspirations.  What follows are two years of role-playing, and the lines
between mother and daughter are often blurred.  Ann is often the mature,
sensible one while Adele is the wild-child.  Their coming-of-age isn't
always convincing, but the actresses each make it seem plausible.  
However, not much can be said about the film beyond their relationship.
The outsiders, such as Benny (Shawn Hatosy), Ann's cousin from back home,
are used mostly for sentimental effect, and no real emotion is evident.  As
a showcase for two wonderful performances, "Anywhere But Here" works to a
certain extent, but I expected a better film from Wang, who knows how to
work with strong female characters.  Expect some Oscar buzz for Natalie
Portman, who really fleshes out her character despite a clunky script, but
don't expect anything special from the film itself.


Author
John Sylva
Anywhere But Here (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
Director Wayne Wang (Smoke) and two time Academy Award winning writer Alvin
Sargent (Ordinary People) bring us Anywhere But Here, a touching, powerful film
based on the hit novel of the same title by Mona Simpson.  Anywhere But Here
tells a tale often told, but the actors and masterful screenplay make this one
of the year's best films that succeeds at being moving, without being overly
sappy.   
Anywhere But Here tells the story of Adele (Susan Sarandon) and Ann August
(Natalie Portman), mother and daughter (respectively), and their journey to
find freedom, independence, and success.  The duo lives a simple life in Bay
City, Wisconsin, a quiet, ordinary town in which the majority of residents
don't escape from once growing old.  Fourteen year old Ann is an intelligent,
bright girl who spends her leisure time with her cousin and best friend, the
always happy Benny (Shawn Hatosy), who understands and loves Ann with all his
heart.  When Ann learns her mom as decided to pick up and run off to Beverly
Hills, California with her, she is instantly crushed, as leaving Benny and her
hometown is not an easy transition to make.  The two travel across the country
in their gold colored Mercedes, having their share of laughs, but also their
share of fights. Ann feels constantly unhappy and frustrated during their trip,
as she always has around her mother.  Her mother is a woman who always wears a
gleaming smile, even when her daughter screams, "I hate you!"  Adele is rarely
hurt by Ann's cruel words, as she knows it is just part of Ann feeling
frustrated, and she's simply releasing cruel words, although they are only
somewhat true, to release that anger.  The two can get along better then any
pair of best friends at times, giggling and dancing around with joy, but when
Adele starts bringing in issues of where she wants and expects Ann to go in
life, the smiles fade, and the tears start running.  
The pair arrive in Beverly Hills, and from the get go they realize it's not all
that they were hoping for.  It's hard enough for them to find a place to live,
let alone to make a living there.  As hard as it is, Ann starts a new life
there, making new friends and taking on a new lifestyle.  Adele gets a job
working at a large school, which pays their bills.  They have made it this far,
but how much longer can Ann take Adele's manipulating ways?  
The relationship between Adele and Ann is composed of strong sincerity and
realism.  The mother/daughter relationship is one of the most real, honest
situations in a movie this year.  The dialogue, the fights, the troubles,
everything about the pair is so true to life, it's scary.  I get a kick out of
one of the most real situations in the movie, in which Adele and Ann are
cruising down a long, calm road, listening to the snappy music of The Beach
Boys on the radio.  Adele is tapping and singing happily, and doesn't seem to
have a care in the world.  Ann is slumped in the corner of her seat looking
truly unhappy.  Ann turns the radio off and quotes, "I hate the Beach Boys." 
Adele turns the radio back on, and simply replies, "No one hates the Beach
Boys."  For all us children in the world, this happens day in and day out to
us.  It is wonderful to see such realistic phrases used in a movie about
bonding, as through watching Anywhere But Here, some of that frustration felt
within a child can be released, and that child can find humor in situations
that they are presented with daily, because it is on screen, all part of a
fictional story.  Although Anywhere But Here is fiction, much of the film feels
like reality, in that it captures the parent/child relationship perfectly, and
lets the viewer relate every step of the way.  I often so myself in Ann, seeing
her pain in the exact situations I have been in.  It's astonishing how Alvin
Sargent captures such reality in his script.  
Anywhere But Here tells it like it is, and doesn't make an exaggerated, over
the top metaphor about growing up.  Unlike most teen movies to be released this
year, Anywhere But Here contains lines that teens and parents actually say, and
puts the characters in situations that people are really in- compared to the
teeny bopper movies, where all kids have it perfect, and parents don't care
what their children take part in. 
The relationships between all of the characters are shockingly real, as when
Benny and Ann are together, you'll think that Wayne Wang was videotaping real
teens, catching them in their most natural state.  Unlike how friends are
portrayed in most movies, Benny and Ann share a connection that you can feel
just by seeing them together, as the actors bring their teen characters to life
extraordinarily.  
Sarandon is astonishing as her eccentric, charismatic character, as she
convinces you of her deep, impassioned love for her daughter, and lets you feel
the fact that Adele may seem over the top, or a little nuts at times, but she
just doesn't want to let go.  Sarandon gives her second Oscar worthy
performance in two years, (the other being her role as a cancer diagnosed
mother in 1998's Stepmom) but she has never shined in a role like she does in
Anywhere But Here.  Susan succeeds at being funny without being ridiculous, as
she easily resembles any parent of a child out there today.  At times, you feel
sympathy for Adele, as you understand her cautions of letting go, but at times,
you downright despise her, as she is unnecessarily rude to Ann on numerous
occasions, but in the end, it's easy to understand: It's all out of love.
Although Sarandon is captivating, she is upstaged by Natalie Portman, who at a
ripe 18 years old, is one of my favorite actresses.  Most recently seen in last
summer's Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace, Portman gives an Oscar worthy
performance that I doubt any other actress her age, or even two times her age
at that, could master as well as she does.  Portman's character couldn't be any
more realistic, as the 14 year old has frequent mood swings, feels consistent
conflicted feelings, and is frustrated with her life and where it is going. 
Portman lets the viewer feel every possible emotion with her character, making
you relate, sympathize, and understand her character through every moment. 
Natalie gets her first, largely publicized, leading role here, and proves that
she is going to become a screen legend in the years to come. 
Anywhere But Here features an all star, powerful soundtrack used effectively in
the film.  The right song at the right moment makes you feel more emotion then
the actors do themselves, and this film uses this tactic to the fullest.  In an
especially powerful scene, Sarah McLachlan's "I Will Remember You" is used,
letting you feel unspeakable sadness for the characters.
All in all, Anywhere But Here is remarkably flawless.  You'll laugh with the
characters, you'll cry with them, and you'll change with them.  Anywhere But
Here is a movie of unspeakable realism and power, and should be cherished by
anyone that has ever gone through the troubles of being a kid.  Anywhere But
Here hardly covers any new material, but because the characters and the
relationships between them are so complex and genuine, the film engrosses you
from start to finish.  The message behind the film is an important and real
one, and told in a way that makes Anywhere But Here for boys and girls, of all
ages.  Wayne Wang, Alvin Sargent, and everyone else involved with the film
should be proud of themselves, and realize what an achievement they have
accomplished: crafting one of the year's most memorable, finest, real films.  
The Bottom Line: Like Ann says about her mother... "There is some romance, some
power about my mother," there is some romance, some power about this movie that
gives it a special place within me.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Anywhere But Here (1999)
Susan Sarandon, Natalie Portman, Eileen Ryan, Ray Baker, John Diehl,
Shawn Hatosy, Bonnie Bedelia, Michael Milhoan, Paul Guilfoyle, Corbin
Allred. Screenplay by Alvin Sargent, based on the novel by Mona
Simpson. Directed by Wayne Wang. 114 minutes.
PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars) 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com 
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott 
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Judging by its weak opening weekend box office numbers, it appears
that most filmgoers have little interest in "Anywhere But Here."
That's a shame, because this sharply observed look at the dynamics
between a mother and daughter, based on the novel by Mona Simpson, is
a nice piece of work. Director Wayne Wang ("Smoke," "The Joy Luck
Club") has a gift for character studies and the script provides him
with two very interesting characters. Add superb acting from Susan
Sarandon and Natalie Portman to the mix and you end up with an above
average production that certainly warrants a visit.
At first glance, the premise has a strong "been there, done that"
feel. Sarandon plays Adele August, a flamboyant woman who spirits her
teenage daughter Ann (Portman) away from their home in Bay City,
Wisconsin to seek out a better life in Beverly Hills. Adele views her
actions as noble and brave, while Ann simmers over essentially being
kidnapped by her self-absorbed, overbearing mother. If that sounds
familiar well, it is, but there's a lot more going on beneath the
surface.
First off, there's Adele, who desperately wants to be stylish and
larger than life. She longs to be Thelma and Louise, Holly Golightly
and Auntie Mame put together, but the twist is that she really isn't
very good at it. For all of her theatrical flourishes, Adele is full
of fear: fear of aging, of losing her daughter, of facing a loveless
future, of being ordinary. She masks her terror with impulsive
actions, using glib one-liners as a way of whistling in the dark.
Susan Sarandon is wonderful, using those big eyes and cracked beauty
to express Adele's near-perpetual state of quiet panic. A role like
this is especially difficult; for the soufflé to work, the
character must be over-dramatic, but the actor dare not
overact. Sarandon proves up to the challenge, giving a performance so
good that it almost makes up for her appearance in last year's
insufferably mawkish "Stepmom."
Months after being buried under thick makeup and royal drapings in
"Star Wars: The Phantom Menace," Natalie Portman gets to stretch out
here, reminding us that she is one of the finest actors of her
generation. In the hands of a lesser talent, Ann could easily have
been just a sulky teen, but Portman greatly shades her character. As
angry as she is over being uprooted from family and friends, Ann still
needs her mother as much as Adele needs her. For most of the film, the
characters live in a steady state of role reversal. While Adele has
the authority, she is often more childish than Ann, leaving her
daughter to serve as surrogate mother. The flip-flop works because
Portman and Sarandon are smart enough to play it close to the vest.
Although the film is mostly a two-character drama, a few supporting
players stand out. Shawn Hatosy ("Outside Providence") is a delight as
Ann's cousin and best friend, a young man who is still clearly a kid,
although the stirrings of manhood are strong enough to throw him off
balance. Michael Milhoan has a couple of nice scenes as a paternal
traffic cop, and Corbin Allred projects wide-eyed charm as a classmate
smitten with Ann.
"Anywhere But Here" tries to keep the proceedings relatively light,
but some of its best moments are quite serious. When a
relationship-starved Adele presses too hard and scares off a potential
boyfriend after a one-night stand, her pain is amplified by the
expressions on Ann's face as she watches her mother's dreams once
again sabotaged by her own excess.
Another striking scene comes when Adele sneaks a look at her
daughter's theater audition. Ann is interested in college, not acting,
but finally succumbs to her mother's pressure for her to enter show
business. When Adele peeks in the door, she witnesses her daughter
doing a dead-on perfect impression of her, and the look on Sarandon's
face is devastating.
"Anywhere But Here" is far from perfect. The incessant squabbling
between Adele and Ann grows tedious and the ending of the film, while
emotionally satisfying, seems a little too pat when compared to the
rest of the story. But this mother-daughter portrait, coupled with an
illuminating glimpse at parental motives, rises handily above its
deficits. "Anywhere But Here" is a strong little movie that deserves
not to get lost in the box office shuffle.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Is there a lot brewing within `Anywhere but Here', or does it just seem
that way? There is little depth or inner context to this story of a
feuding mother and daughter, but the actors submit a tremendous amount
of heart and realism. In turn, the emotional impact is multiplied. And
if you don't get misty-eyed during `Anywhere but Here', I'm afraid your
retinas may have detached.
What could have been `just another movie' is given remarkable elevation
by director Wayne Wang (`The Joy Luck Club') and the screen duo of Susan
Sarandon and Natalie Portman. The majority of the film is heavily
reliant on the believability of their relationship, especially when
considering the supporting cast is used sparsely, and even then the
actors are merely background strokes to paint a more attractive portrait
of the central conflict. Both Sarandon and Portman perform wonderfully,
and their emotions never ring hollow. Much like the recent underrated
romance `The Story of Us', the trials and tribulations of this mother
and daughter strike a powerful chord with the audience.
Moving out of Wisconsin and headed to Beverly Hills, Adele August
(Sarandon) and her daughter Ann (Natalie Portman) have already began a
feisty bout of feuding. Ann's occasional narration informs us of the
family background: her father left when she was young, Adele married for
a second time, and now the twosome are traveling to the palm
tree-infested locales of Beverly Hills to try and start over. But Ann
despises her mother in every sense of the word, and is eagerly awaiting
her chance to slip away to college back east and escape the domineering
matriarch who, naturally, only wants the best for her daughter. But even
with her tender care, she doesn't let Ann voice her opinion. It soon
becomes apparent that it is Adele's way... or the highway.
There was a sense of immense gratification as the credits began to roll
after `American Beauty'. What generated this rare sensation was the
realization that we had just experienced the lives of three perfectly
realized characters. The two female leads in `Anywhere but Here' are
hardly the polished characters that one would describe as `perfect', but
they're more than sufficient given the demands of the screenplay.
There's a hefty dose of realism present at virtually all times, and this
effect is improved a notch or two by the impeccable lead performances.
It's a touching and funny tale for anyone who's been in a situation
resembling the emotional challenge that Ann and Adele are facing.
I found myself thinking afterward that perhaps Wang was too generous
with the screen time of the central mother-to-daughter conflict. Once in
a while, a supporting character is given the floor, but mainly all
secondary performers are given the dramatic sidebar in this endless
Sarandon-Portman buffet of emotions. I wanted a far meatier role for
Hart Bochner, who plays a Beverly Hills orthodontist that Adele gets
involved with. It's hard to believe, but Bochner was that snotty,
bearded jerk who cowardly attempted to give Bruce Willis away to the
terrorists in `Die Hard' (yes - he has muscled up since then). Shawn
Hatosy (`Outside Providence') is effective but used sparingly as Ann's
cousin Benny. Corbin Alldred is flat-out charming as a likable doofus
pining for Ann's affection, and Michael Milhoan registers nicely as an
earnest cop who offers some wise to both of the ladies. Both, however,
could have been relied upon more often.
Sarandon is so good at this sort of thing. With her eagerness to bite
right into the role of Adele, there's absolutely no worries from minute
one. But I was pleasantly surprised with Natalie Portman. The young
actress was impressive as Queen Amidala in `The Phantom Menace', but the
role was too stale to warrant any real dramatics. Portman is
surprisingly strong alongside Sarandon, though, shedding tears without
the slightest whiff of inexperience.  After her appearance in `Episode
1', Portman could provide the biggest audience attraction for `Anywhere
but Here'.
I would recommend this film to anyone who thinks female characters have
been unfairly dismissed and underwritten as of late. `Anywhere but Here'
is anything but the case, adding believable emotions and sure-fire
direction to an otherwise tired formula. Bring with you only two things:
a loved one, and some Kleenex.
Your Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Poohbear.  In ANYWHERE BUT HERE, high school student Ann August has to
endure her irritating mother, Adele, calling her "poohbear."  It's bad
enough that her mother is so unreliable that their electricity keeps
getting turned off because her mother doesn't pay the bills.  In a
classic love/hate relationship, Ann barely tolerates her eccentric
mother's mannerisms, but her mother is the only constant in her life.
In an endearing role as Ann, Natalie Portman (who, as Queen Amidala in
STAR WARS EPISODE 1, became this generation's Princess Leia) steals the
show.  With lips that advance and recede like ocean surf and with eyes
that roll like ocean swells, she delivers a sweet and delicately nuanced
performance.
Much less satisfying is Susan Sarandon as Ann's irritating and
flamboyant mother.  The chemistry between them is sometimes interesting
but never quite believable.  Sarandon successfully makes her character
unlikable but has trouble making it credible.
Director Wayne Wang (THE JOY LUCK CLUB) has tonal problems from the
film's beginning.  A hybrid that the press notes describe as a
"comedy-drama," the movie suffers from never being enough of either.
The tone is that of a drama, yet the memorable lines are those of a
comedy.  The result is a drama that doesn't have much emotional impact
and a comedy that produces a few random smiles and almost no laughs.
The plot has the mother-daughter pair (Adele dumps her second husband
for the sin of boredom) leaving a backwater town in Wisconsin for the
flash of an LA lifestyle.  The constantly insolvent Adele manages to
live in a string of unpaid apartments in Beverly Hills so that her
daughter can go to the best school in the country.  (You know the ZIP
code.)
"This is like being kidnapped," Ann complains as they travel west to the
city where everyone wants to be an actor.  "I wish somebody would have
kidnapped me when I was your age," her mother retorts.  "So do I!" Ann
snaps back.  Like an inmate, Ann yearns to escape the clutches of her
mother, whom she finds frequently embarrassing.
"It would be tragic to be wearing the wrong shoes when you meet the
right guy," Adele says after she finally meets a rich, eligible man who
asks her out.  "I'm going to go shopping."  This attitude of spend more
than you make pretty much sums up Adele's philosophy of life.  When you
want to be rich, spend like you are and make up stories about your
wealth.  Don't let not having money get in your way.
Some of the more successful individual scenes include a poignant one in
which Ann calls her father, who doesn't want anything to do with her,
and a humorous one in which an awkward boy drops by for a kiss.
Even if the movie has to be categorized as a near miss, Portman's work
in it is completely satisfying in its subtle emotional depth.  Watching
her work is almost worth the price of admission.
ANYWHERE BUT HERE runs 1:54.  It is rated PG-13 for sex-related material
and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.  The slow-paced
movie, however, will probably bore those less than 13 or 14.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Wayne Wang.
Cast: Natalie Portman, Susan Sarandon, Shawn Hatosy, Corbin Allred, Hart 
Bochner, Thora Birch, Heather McComb, Ashley Johnson, Heather DeLoach, 
Elisabeth Moss, Bonnie Bedelia, John Diehl, Caroline Aaron, Eileen Ryan, Paul 
Guilfoyle, Ray Baker, Megan Mullally, Bob Sattler.
1999 - 114 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for mild profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 13, 1999.
Wayne Wang is a masterful filmmaker who first proved in 1993's "The Joy Luck 
Club" that he has a talent and affinity for telling wonderfully accurate 
stories about female characters, and carries that right into "Anywhere But 
Here," which is one of the most truthful and affectionate films about a 
mother-daughter relationship in many years, and ranks well within the same 
league as 1983's "Terms of Endearment" and 1989's "Steel Magnolias." The 
fundamental ingredients for a manipulative sap-fest are all in place, and yet 
the film never once seems to be pulling at your heartstrings for the main 
reason being to get you to cry. The richly textured, multi-layered 
screenplay, by Academy Award winner Alvin Sargent (1980's "Ordinary People"), 
is too assured to aim for simple melodrama, and the performances by Natalie 
Portman and Susan Sarandon are just about as remarkable as two performances 
could possibly be. They raise the already-winning material to an even higher 
plateau of success.
Based on a 1986 novel by Mona Simpson, "Anywhere But Here" begins as the 
eccentric, middle-aged Adele (Susan Sarandon) is driving through the desert 
with her 14-year-old daughter Ann (Natalie Portman), headed for Beverly 
Hills. Adele, at times a childish and frustrating woman who doesn't listen to 
what others tell her, is set on putting her MA degree in early education to 
positive use and getting Ann into showbiz. Ann, however, wants nothing to do 
with acting, and is distressed to have just been yanked from her hometown of 
Bay City, Wisconsin, leaving her relatives and particularly, her soulmate, 
and cousin, Benny (Shawn Hatosy). Getting a small apartment "outside of the 
posh section of Beverly Hills, but still in the school district," Adele 
easily gets a job teaching, while Ann starts school at Beverly Hills High, 
where she comments, "everyone looks like they're going to the beach." Longing 
to be back east but willing to stick things out for love of her mother, Ann 
quickly makes some new friends at school and catches the eye of a charming, 
poetry-loving classmate Peter (Corbin Allred). 
Refreshingly without a flashy story device, "Anywhere But Here" is that rare, 
perceptive Hollywood film that is about the characters and their emotional 
growth and conflicts. Admittedly, not a great deal happens plot-wise, but 
more occurs underneath the surface than most films would even dream about. 
The fate of the film hinges almost completely on its realism and details, and 
it gets everything exactly right. The relationship between Adele and Ann is a 
complex one, and although the dependent Adele drives her crazy, Ann 
unconditionally loves and respects her, even when she wishes things could be 
more normal for them. Adele has a big personality, and always is using her 
charm to solve problems, sometimes with unfortunate results. Ann often feels 
like the mother between the two, as she always seems to be comforting Adele 
when things don't go her way. As the years pass by and high school graduation 
approaches for Ann, she desperately wants to go to an eastern college, and 
knows that it's about time she branches off on her own, but also fears that 
her mother may not be able to make it on her own. Adele loves her daughter so 
much, and even though she realizes she isn't the perfect, ideal mother, she 
confesses at one point that Ann "was the reason I was born."  
In "Anywhere But Here," every element converges together to create a film 
that is nearly flawless in its authenticity, right down to the smallest 
detail. The delineation of teenagers and friendship, despite being a minor 
element in the story, is perhaps more genuine than in any other film this 
year. When Ann makes several girlfriends, we wisely are not shown when or how 
they meet, because it is a trivial detail. Instead, our first scene with Ann 
and her new friends, set in gym class as they are running around a track, 
captures the exact nuances and conversations that occur between teenagers in 
such a situation. Breaking through the wall of cliches, Ann's friends 
actually act and speak like kids who are 15 or 16 years old, as they do not 
acquire a vocabulary as large as the Webster Dictionary, and are performed 
with an air of naturalism that is wholeheartedly believable, by Heather 
McComb (1998's "Apt Pupil"), Ashley Johnson (TV's "Growing Pains," 1998's 
"Dancer, Texas Pop. 81), and Heather DeLoach (1995's "The Little Princess"). 
They are small roles, but vitally important and commendable.
Another area in which the film excels in is its depiction of how time changes 
things. Spanning a period of four years, one of the most fully touching 
interludes occurs midway through when tragedy strikes back in Wisconsin, and 
Adele and Ann travel to attend the funeral of a relative. At this point, they 
have been gone for two years, and as Ann observes, "the houses seemed 
smaller, the streets more narrow." There is a quiet, powerful scene between 
Ann and her best friend whom she hasn't seen since they left, Mary (Thora 
Birch, 1999's "American Beauty"), and it perfectly shows how people evolve, 
for better or worse, over the years. Thora Birch, appearing unbilled, makes 
quite a striking impression in only two scenes.
The innocence of young romance is also warmly done, and one scene with Ann 
and Peter in which she instructs him to strip, only for them to end up 
embracing in a hug, is purely gratifying without being needlessly 
exploitative. Corbin Allred is charismatic, funny, and virtuous as Peter, and 
works well with Portman. The same goes for the lovely, almost nostalgic, 
friendship between Ann and Benny, likably played by Shawn Hatosy (1999's 
"Outside Providence"), who may be cousins but truly love each other. One 
sequence, in which Benny comes to visit them in California, and he and Ann 
stay up late at night chatting away, is filled with such a sense of childhood 
purity, as they are on the verge of becoming adults, that it easily 
transcends even its aspirations.
Amidst all of the wonderful supporting players, others of which seem to have 
been edited down, such as Bonnie Bedelia and Eileen Ryan, as Ann's aunt and 
grandmother, respectively, the film always keeps its focus on Ann and Adele. 
In a role that could very well be a landmark in her career, Susan Sarandon is 
dynamite as the outwardly headstrong, but insecure, Adele. Early on, one 
wonders what exactly is wrong with Adele, with a possible personality 
disorder looking more and more likely, but we progressively learn that she is 
not mentally ill, but simply enraptured in her undying love for her one and 
only daughter. Sarandon handles each second she is on screen with the exact 
amount of sympathy and idiosyncrasies, and not once allows Adele to appear 
"wacky" or exaggerated.
If Sarandon is a marvel to behold, 18-year-old Natalie Portman is nothing 
less than extraordinary, and with this film joining her other Oscar-caliber 
work in 1994's "The Professional" and 1996's "Beautiful Girls," Portman has 
the chance of becoming Gen-Y's answer to Jodie Foster; she's that good. As 
with most teenagers, Ann is someone who occasionally can be spiteful and even 
a little mean, but whom we grow to care deeply about because she is also an 
intelligent, caring young woman whose mother is the most important person in 
her life, which makes things even more difficult for her when she wants to 
leave for college. In one heartbreaking sequence, she is forced to audition 
for a film, and when Adele sneaks in to watch Ann's monologue, she discovers 
her daughter making an obvious mockery of the way she acts. 
At first glimpse, "Anywhere But Here" may appear to trudge through well-worn 
dramatic territory, and it might have had it been put into lesser hands. The 
meticulous writing, verifiable direction by Wayne Wang, effective music score 
by Danny Elfman, picaresque cinematography by Roger Deakins, and astonishing 
performances from every member of the entire cast (even Megan Mullally, of 
TV's "Will and Grace," leaves a major impression in one late scene), all add 
up to make "Anywhere But Here" an exceptional motion picture that shouldn't 
be degraded by being unfairly labeled a "chick flick." It is a true-to-life 
examination of the bond between a mother and a daughter, and has universal 
appeal for anyone who has ever had a parent. My guess is that that's a fairly 
large percentage of the viewing population.

Author
Michael Dequina
More than anything, teenage Ann August (Natalie Portman) wants nothing
more than to escape the grasp of her kooky, overbearing mother Adele
(Susan Sarandon), who dragged her from Wisconsin to Beverly Hills to
start a new life.  And at certain moments during the film, one similarly
looks for an escape hatch; despite some engaging scenes and situations,
Wayne Wang's adaptation of Mona Simpson's novel cannot help but drag,
given that the film is pretty much a series of scenes with mother and
daughter alternately acting hot and cold toward each other.  What keeps
the film engaging is not Sarandon, who does a characteristically solid
but unremarkable job as Adele; but Portman, who, free from Queen
Amidala's kabuki makeup and upstaging hair design, once again proves to
be a young actress of extraordinary talent and stunning presence.  Her
piercing, layered performance deserves a better film around it.
More effective and affecting is Gavin O'Connor's indie production
_Tumbleweeds_, which bears more than a few similarities to
_Anywhere_but_Here_: long road trip (West Virginia to San Diego) with
mother Mary Jo Walker (Janet McTeer) and young daughter Ava (Kimberly J.
Brown); Mary Jo, fleeing a bad marriage, is an eccentric tart; the
mother-daughter relationship evolves as they struggle to make ends meet. 
But there is a special warmth in this film that is missing from the
other, particularly on the side of the mother.  While she often acts out
of selfishness (mostly her sexual appetite), Mary Jo is gentle and
attentive to Ava, and her love for her is never doubted; she is a more
fully realized character than _Anywhere_'s Adele, who is often so
self-involved that it's hard to care much about her.  McTeer, a British
stage actress, is perfect as Mary Jo, as is the 12-year-old Brown, and
the two share a natural rapport.  O'Connor and co-scripter Angela Shelton
do nothing revolutionary with the traditional mother-daughter story in a
plot sense, but when the film is as lovingly put together as this funny
and heartwarming one is, it is one to be savored.  (_Tumbleweeds_ opens
November 24)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) ANYWHERE BUT HERE has its share of flaws, but it has a
good clear sense of emotion. That probably makes it a chick flick, but
as chick flicks go, this one is very successful.
When I say that it has a clear sense of emotion, I mean that at every
point, the characters' emotions are real, well-expressed, and relevant.
I think it's worth mentioning because in other movies, the emotion is
often dictated by the plot. A character reacts, not they way they really
should react, but the way that the screenwriter needs them to. Not so in
this movie. 
A quick example: After a fight with her mother, Ann (Natalie Portman) is
left on the side of the road and mom drives off. Her first reaction is
to storm off in the opposite direction. When mom doesn't immediately
return, Ann starts to look worried, sad, and self-pitying. Then when her
mom finally does come back, she turns and walks away from the road
altogether, once again stubborn and angry. It shows the movie's solid,
astute sense of how people feel and behave.
ANYWHERE BUT HERE follows the story of a mother and daughter (Susan
Sarandon and Portman). They drive their no-longer new, gold Mercedes
from Wisconsin to California. They've left their old lives behind in
order to set up new ones on the west coast.
Adele (Sarandon) is satisfied and joyful at getting away from small town
life. She's very optimistic about living in California, perhaps a little
naďvely so. She is certain she will get a job teaching in L.A. and that
they will get a nice but affordable place in Beverly Hills, where Ann
will go to school. She also knows that Ann will make a beautiful child
actress, and that they will be the best of friends in their new home in
paradise.
Ann is often sullen and occasionally rebellious. She's not sure why they
had to leave Wisconsin, and she doesn't entirely approve of her mother's
behavior (although she doesn't know quite how to express it yet). She
doesn't share her mother's optimism about the move. That's not to say
she's cynical, but she is more realistic about what they have given up
and what they have yet to gain. To top it all off, she has no interest
in becoming an actress. 
Both Sarandon and Portman give very good, precise performances. Both had
a great sense of character that seemed to jibe with Wang's ideas of how
the movie should play. Their "chemistry" is hard to judge because their
characters weren't supposed to get along -- the inevitable friction
between mother and daughter defines most of their moments together --
but the scenes of them together felt right on target.
For a while, the movie looks like SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS from last year,
in which the family moves in and out of cheap apartments, always staying
just inside the school district. Adele and Ann's apartments are neither
big nor glamorous, nor well-furnished. Sometimes Adele forgets to pay
the bills and the apartment goes completely dark. Technically, they are
living Adele's dream, but only Ann has the perspective to see that it's
a pretty bad life.
A contrived plot device brings them back to Wisconsin, where Ann gets a
fresh perspective on their troubled life in California, and on her
images of home. "The streets are less wide, the trees are less tall and
the house is smaller," intones Ann in voiceover. Ann never thought of
California as home, but now, after returning, she realizes that "home"
isn't Wisconsin, either. "Home" is nowhere. That realization is both
frightening and liberating. It forces her (and to some extent her mom)
to find some roots within herself.
When they return to California, they get a new apartment with nice
furniture. They pick a color and paint their rooms. They are still poor,
but they choose to make their surroundings permanent and stable.
Although mom and daughter still fight, it seems more relaxing, now that
they're not transient. 
The emotional conflict between mother and daughter builds, but never to
too-exaggerated heights. Their differences finally reach a relatively
cool boiling point, and the movie comes to it's predictable but
satisfying conclusion.
What's important to a chick flick -- emotion -- is what works best in
ANYWHERE BUT HERE. Even the man next to me said when it was over,
"that's not really my type of movie but it was better than I expected."
Check out more curreX-Mozilla-Status: 0009tp://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Christopher Null
     ANYWHERE BUT HERE?  A more apt title you will not find on a motion
picture this decade.
     After a witty lead like that, at this point in the movie review, I
usually launch into a brief plot synopsis.  So here goes: A
down-to-earth teenage girl hates her crazy mother.
     If you're waiting for more, you can stop holding your breath.  In a
nutshell, that's it.  Sure, there are some details (the two move from
Wisconsin to Beverly Hills)  okay, there is *a* detail  but someone
really tried to make a movie out of this *shocking* premise.
     So maybe you think there's something to be salvaged by the two
big-name actresses headlining the picture.  Well, there's Sarandon as
the nutty and irresponsible mom, played in one full dimension and with
Sarandon looking indistinguishable from Leslie Ann Warren.  Or there's
the pouty Portman, in what will go down as the most forgettable role
she's ever played.
     But the worst failing of ANYWHERE BUT HERE is the utter lack of any
sort of plot.  For two hours, we drag through one boring and random
tragedy after another.  The characters never change, the film never
matures.  It's excruciating to watch.
     I mean, what is this movie supposed to be about?  An aging woman's
midlife crisis?  The struggle of a teenager who finds herself playing
parent to the real mother?  Outcasts in Beverly Hills?  All of this has
been done, and occasionally it's been done well.  But ANYWHERE BUT HERE
takes these three movies and runs them straight into the ground.
     ANYWHERE BUT HERE is so bad that if I wasn't a film critic, I would
have left the theater in the first 45 minutes.  But as a professional, I
knew I would have had to see the last half sometime.  The prospect of
that, well, the mind reels, the stomach turns, and the ass revolts.
http://www.foxmovies.com/anywherebuthere/
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ANYWHERE BUT HERE" (20th Century-Fox)
In this mother/daughter spin on Thelma and Louise, Susan Sarandon and Natalie Portman, as Adele and Ann August, respectively, take off from Bay City, Wisconsin, for Beverly Hills, California. They're on the road in a 1978 Mercedes, heading for what flamboyant Adele envisions as a better life. Ann's more than reluctant; she's bitterly rebellious about leaving her small-town friends and family. When they reach the promised land, their first stop is the opulent Beverly Hills Hotel where their financial reality dawns on Ann, if not Adele. In fact, reality plays a minuscule part in any of Adele's decisions - the most disastrous of which is a one-night stand with a recently-separated dentist whom she meets on the beach. Over a period of two years, mother and daughter adjust to a poverty-plagued  life in a series of tacky, sparsely furnished, one-bedroom apartments in the flats of Beverly Hills. Ann is the resourceful realist, making friends and adjusting; Adele, ever the dre!
amer, just outside Nirvana, looking in, considering an ice cream cone as the solution to every crummy problem.  Of course, in the end, Ann realizes how indebted she is to her mother not only for her creative juices but also for her spirit of adventure. Directed by Wayne Wang, Natalie Portman delivers a subtle, nuanced performance as a teenager desperate for normalcy, particularly in contrast to Susan Sarandon's persistent, over-the-top kookiness. Alvin Sargent's screen adaptation of Mona Simpson's novel amounts to little more than a series of vignettes, leaving you emotionally uninvolved. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Anywhere But Here is a touching, sentimental 6. Make no mistake - it's a woman's picture. And, if you enjoy it, why not rent last year's Slums of Beverly Hills, a similar but far edgier comedy?

Author
James Sanford
         Most parents eventually understand there's a point at which you
have to let your children go their own way rather than directing their
destinies and dreams. Then you have parents like single mom Adele August
(Susan Sarandon) who cheerfully keep dodging that realization.
 Adele was felt suffocated living in Bay City, Wisconsin and
being married to an ice-skating instructor, so she poured her life
savings into a used Mercedes, grabbed her adolescent daughter Ann
(Natalie Portman) and headed for Beverly Hills. The plan was simple: Ann
would be enrolled in the Beverly Hills school system and begin her
career as a child star. But the real performer in the family was, of
course, Adele. Ann would rather have stayed with the folks back on the
family farm.
 Nothing doing, Adele decreed, adding "I am not going to let you turn
into a nothing girl in a nothing factory in a nothing town."
 So begins "Anywhere But Here," a beautifully modulated
comedy-drama adapted from Mona Simpson's 1986 best-seller. Refreshingly
free of melodrama and calculation, the movie gives Sarandon and Portman
ample space in which to study the mother-daughter dynamic, and the
results are frequently funny and often touching.
 "Anywhere" was directed by Wayne Wang, who previously handled
the big-screen version of Amy Tan's "The Joy Luck Club." Although nicely
made and well-acted, that picture seemed to be one variation after
another on the same theme, that of good women being victimized by
stupid, insensitive or just plain weak men. It might have been a
courtesy to the male audience if ushers nationwide had hung "women's
room" symbols on the doors of theaters playing the film.
 This movie is entirely different, both in its perspective and
in its message. Despite her bravado and lust for life ("it was as if she
wanted to taste the whole world," Ann says of her mother), Adele is a
deeply flawed woman whose ambitions always seem to be greater than her
skills. Even when the world refuses to accommodate her wishes, she plows
ahead anyway, whether her mission is trying to get Baskin-Robbins to
open its doors on Christmas Day or making a series of futile phone calls
to a guy whose interest in her ended the morning after their first date.
         Adele may not be the most multi-faceted role Sarandon has ever
tackled, but the actress throws herself into the part whole-heartedly
and creates a sensational portrait of a sometimes grating, ultimately
poignant child-woman.
 While Adele lives by the philosophy "when life gets rough and
you only have a dime in your pocket, go get your shoes shined," Ann is
the practical voice of reason in the household. She's mystified that her
mom will spend money they don't have on a fancy dress while forgetting
to pay the utility bill or that Adele will walk away from a good job
rather than participate in a strike for better wages. "We did not come
to Beverly Hills to struggle," Adele insists, to her daughter's
consternation.
 Portman, a mesmerizing screen presence whose talents were largely
wasted as the regal Queen Amidala in "Star Wars: Episode One," is in top
form here, lending Ann a gravity and wisdom beyond her years. Rather
than competing for the spotlight, Portman and Sarandon instead
concentrate on trying to discover what makes these women tick, and in
doing so, they enhance each other's performances.
 It's doubtful there will be a sequel to "Anywhere But Here,"
although this is one case in which a second installment might be
welcome. When this tender, affecting film comes to a close, you may feel
the same mix of mild sadness and deep satisfaction that comes when you
finish a terrific novel. That's an enormous compliment to everyone
involved. James Sanford

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 20th Century Fox/Fox 2000 Pictures
 Director: Wayne Wang
 Writer: Mona Simpson (novel), Alvin Sargent
 Cast: Susan Sarandon, Natalie Portman, Eileen Ryan, Ray
Baker, John Diehl, Shawn Hatosy, Bonnie Bedelia, Caroline
Aaron, Hart Bochner
   As I was leaving the theater playing "Anywhere But Here," I
realized that the movie had contributed a personal insight. 
This wasn't an intuition that came on me like an epiphany but
more like one that strengthened a belief I had always had but
about which I needed more convincing.  When I was thirteen
years old, about to graduate from junior high school, I
received an acceptance letter from Stuyvesant High School in
Manhattan.  To this day Stuyvesant is a special place, a
competitive school for kids who pass a rigorous entrance
exam.  I happened to be the only one in my JHS to be so
lucky, so you can imagine my disappointment when my mom
announced that I was instead to go to a different place--a
prep school which she had chosen for me and for which she
and my dad would have to work even harder to afford.  I
didn't particularly rebel against this decision of theirs but
rather felt unable to resist her determination to send me
there.  Years, even decades later, I wondered about her real
motivation.
   Now with "Anywhere But Here" comes a story that clarifies
her resolve.  Like the character of Adele August, she wanted
what was best for me, what might open more doors in my
future.  If this sounds in hindsight like a simple enough piece
of wisdom--the "duh" factor--strangely enough this had
scarcely entered my mind at the time.  
   If a book, play, or movie can clarify some important facet of
our own lives, then that's a big plus for the art form; is it not? 
"Anywhere But Here" may be conventional as coming-of-age
dramas go, but with photographer Roger Deakins's sharp,
wide-lens photography throughout forty locations in Los
Angeles, Alvin Sargent's solid screenplay from Mona
Simpson's novel (and one which avoids excessive
sentimentality), and most of all some absolutely wonderful
performances by Susan Sarandon and Natalie Portman as a
mother and daughter team in conflict, the film is a remarkable
achievement.  Its skillful direction by Wayne Wang, whose
"Joy Luck Club" gives him all the credentials he needs for
helming such a drama, is not the least of the reasons for its
successful, down-to-earth portrayal of family rivalry and
reconciliation.
   The most arresting twist of this comedy-drama is a reversal
of the roles we usually expect from parents and their children. 
Adele August (Susan Sarandon) is the mother of a 14-year-
old girl, Ann (Natalie Portman), but as you watch them driving
across half the country from Bay City, Wisconsin to Beverly
Hills, California, you'd not know from their actions which was
the adult and which the child.  Adele, a bouncy, Auntie Mame
type, turns up the radio to a Beach Boys' rendition of "Surfin'
Safari," bopping along to the music, singing the lyrics lustily,
while her teen daughter mopes on the passenger side
complaining "I hate the Beach Boys."  Ann is furious and
depressed that she is being "kidnapped" by her mom, taken
away from the small town she loves which includes all her
friends and especially the cousin she dearly loves, Benny
(Shawn Hatosy).  In Ann's mind, her mother is selfish, simply
wanting to get away from her second husband, a nice guy but
one whom Adele considers boring.  Not for Adele is a lifelong
partnership with a guy who will always be an ice skating
instructor and a claustrophobic town full of people who look
forward to a life's career as supermarket checkers.  Instead,
Adele wants her daughter to take up a career in acting, one
in which the young woman has no interest.  How's that for
role reversal?
   Director Wang exploits the talents of these two first-rate
performers wonderfully, displaying for us a collage of
episodes that, taken together, elegantly defines the character
of these people.  Adele's vulnerability, hiding only slightly
beneath her bluster, emerges when she confuses a one-night
stand with a dashing orthodontist with true romance.  But in a
great many situations she is on the money.  In one scene,
she is dropping her understandably anxious daughter off at
her new school in Beverly Hills.  "They look like they're going
to the beach," Ann protests upon seeing kids that could have
come out of Amy Heckerling's "Clueless." "The intelligent
ones are inside," comforts her mom.
   Wayne Wang may want us at first to share Ann's belief that
her mom is looking out only for herself each time he shows
Adele grasping for material goods.  In one comic display, the
two are about to check into the Beverly Hills Hotel. 
Discovering that the room would be $1200 a night, Adele
complains that the lodging is too small and asks for a villa,
breathing more easily when she is told that there are none
left that week.  Adele's embarrassment at her lack of funds
comes to a head when the electricity in their ordinary flat in
the unfashionable part of Beverly Hills is shut off.  
   Throughout the film, however, we see that mother and
daughter need each other despite their arguments: that mom
is terrified about losing her, and Ann, for all her whining, both
needs and has a great affection for Adele.  As the picture
approaches its conclusion, we're all aware that this portrayal
of the most basic relationship we have will come to an
optimistic conclusion.  But as we ride along with the duo's
1978 Mercedes from occasion to episode, we realize that this
movie, while perhaps more appealing to women in the
audience (whose male friends would rather see Ms. Portman
in "The Phantom Menace"), is not a chick flick.  We've all had
mothers and none of us can honestly claim an unabashedly
joyous connection with them.  Fortunate is each of us indeed
when we discover, as does the beautiful and talented Ann,
that "when she dies, the world will be flat...too reasonable."

Author
Scott Renshaw
ANYWHERE BUT HERE
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Susan Sarandon, Natalie Portman, Shawn Hatosy, Bonnie Bedelia,
Hart Bochner, Eileen Ryan, Ray Baker, Corbin Allred, Caroline Aaron.
Screenplay:  Alvin Sargent, based on the novel by Mona Simpson.
Producer:  Laurence Mark.
Director:  Wayne Wang.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  114 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For a long time during ANYWHERE BUT HERE, my attention was fixed
somewhere I didn't quite expect. Relationship dramas like this tend to be
all about character and performance -- every scene is an actor's scene,
every moment is an actor's moment. But to my surprise, I became fascinated
with the way the film looked. In this tale of a free-spirited single mom
named Adele August (Susan Sarandon) who moves herself and her reluctant
14-year-old daughter Ann (Natalie Portman) from Wisconsin to Beverly
Hills, cinematographer Roger Deakins does something cinematographers
rarely do in film: he makes Los Angeles look thoroughly unattractive. The
grainy film stock renders everything slightly fuzzy; the bleached colors
suck the golden glow out of Tinseltown. In a film about a woman who
expects her dreams to come true when she moves to a city of dreams, it
becomes compelling to watch it through Ann's eyes as a dreary and very
ordinary place.
    I mean no disrespect to Mr. Deakins or to the craft of cinematography
when I say that, even at the time, I knew ANYWHERE BUT HERE couldn't have
been working the way it was supposed to if I was paying attention to the
choice of film stock. This is, after all, a relationship story and a
character study, an exploration of those complex, contentious years when
mothers and daughters alternately hate each other and are each other's
best friends. It's been done before, of course -- even the kooky mother
and more stable daughter has been done before, in films like MERMAIDS --
but solid writing and strong performances can often counteract 
familiarity. 
     ANYWHERE BUT HERE does come through with the strong performances.
Sarandon finds just the right balance between effervescence and
irresponsibility, her yearning for a better life always winding up just
this side of real life. Portman continues to show strong chops for a young
actress, navigating a similarly complicated path between devotion to her
mother and intense resentment. Their scenes together effectively capture
the perpetual tension between Ann and Adele, and do a particularly nice
job of showing Ann's frustration at being the real grown-up of the two
while never turning her into a wise-ass. There's never a moment when the
nuances of their relationship aren't front and center.
     And that may be why ANYWHERE BUT HERE feels so claustrophobic and
artificial. Director Wayne Wang (THE JOY LUCK CLUB) and screenwriter Alvin
Sargent are so intensely focused on Ann and Adele that there's virtually
no context for their lives. We see Ann walking uncomfortably through
Beverly Hills High on her first day of school, but there's no sense of her
struggle before she's giggling away with girlfriends; a few scattered
scenes of Adele in her job as a speech pathologist/therapist provides no
sense for why this flighty woman ever got into a field that demands so
much patience. Most disappointing, there's far too little background on
their lives in Wisconsin for us to understand why Adele wants to leave and
Ann wants to stay, and far too little development of the potentially
intriguing relationship between Ann and her almost-kissing-cousin Benny
(Shawn Hatosy). There's really not a single strong supporting character
ANYWHERE BUT HERE can bounce off of. It's no wonder these two drive each
other crazy -- they've been hermetically sealed away from the rest of the
world.
     One could argue that such an isolated, in-each-other's-face
relationship is precisely the point of ANYWHERE BUT HERE -- that Ann and
Adele have nothing in the world but each other, crazy-making as they may
be to each other. That doesn't make it any easier to spend two hours with
them -- and only them -- and their conflicts, well-acted though they may
be. I found myself straining for something or someone else to think about
every once in a while: the kindly cop (Michael Milhoan) who offers words
of wisdom for both Ann and Adele; Paul Guilfoyle's few seconds as one of
Adele's eager to please teaching colleagues; Corbin Allred as a nervous
suitor for Ann's affections. And of course there was the cinematography,
which -- while thematically appropriate -- also reminded me what ANYWHERE
BUT HERE was missing. This is a drama too lacking in background color.

Author
Joy Wyse
        Anywhere But Here certainly qualifies as a chick flick.  I doubt that
guys can relate to the main characters.  Susan Sarandon and Natalie
Portman portray Adele and Ann August, mother and daughter living through a
very difficult age, the three years from Ann's 14th. Birthday, until she
heads for college at 17.
        If you're a mother you can identify with all the frustrations that Adele
faces.  She sincerely wants what's best for Ann, although Ann doesn't want
itat the time.  As a typical teen Ann wants her privacy and her
independence, and most of all, she doesn't want to be `embarrassed' by her
mother.  It's difficult for a parent not to embarrass a child.  Either you
dress too drab or too flashy. You're too protective, or you don't care
enough.  That's the basic storyline of Anywhere But Here; mother and
daughter learning to accept each other.  Strangely, their most profound
advisor is a traffic cop.
        Most of the other characters are little more than vignettes but each and
every one is delivered with believability.
        I particularly liked the reference made to grunion hunting.  Yes, there
really is such a thing.  We aren't talking about Snipe hunting or
submarine races.  Some of my fondest childhood memories are the nights
that my family went grunion hunting.  This is a sport limited to the
beaches of Southern California.  During the summer, when there's a full
moon, the grunions spawn on the beaches.  They come in on one wave, spin
into the sand on their tails laying their eggs, and go out with the next
wave.  The trick is to catch them with your hands in between the two waves
without being knocked down by the waves yourself.  Warning!  They are very
slippery.  If you ever have the chance, try it.  As for the movie, you can
try it, too.  It's not bad, but it's not that special.  Because of the
acting, I give it a B.  It wouldn't bother me to see it again, but if I
don'tno big deal.
