Title
Review for Rio Grande (1950)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Rio Grande" was the third chapter of director John Ford's
cavalry trilogy, after "Fort Apache" and "She Wore a
Yellow Ribbon".  Much of the cast and crew from those
features returns, including John Wayne, comic relief
Victor McLaglen, Jack Pennick, and writer James Warner
Bellah.
"Rio Grande" is set at a remote, undestaffed fort near
the Mexican border in 1879.  Lt. Col. Yorke (John Wayne)
is facing an uprising of Apache Indians, who emerge
from protected villages in Mexico for hit and run attacks.
Yorke's young son has failed West Point and enlisted to
prove his manhood, by coincidence assigned to his father's
command.  Wayne's estranged wife Kathleen (Maureen O'Hara)
arrives to claim her underaged son from the Army, and rekindle
romance with Wayne.  Meanwhile, Tyree (Ben Johnson) is wanted
for Manslaughter, and there are several songs from the
impressive 'Sons of the Pioneers'.
"Rio Grande" is better than "Fort Apache" and about equal
to "She Wore a Yellow Ribbon" in quality.  Competently
directed, with a fine cast and cinematography, the film
is surprisingly sentimental but sometimes drags.  As usual
in Ford films, the Indians are faceless Savages, with
audience sympathy intended for the cavalry soldiers.
Claude Jarman Jr. is well-cast for the role of Wayne's
son.  He looks the boy his character is supposed to be,
and conveys the earnest and determined character traits
necessary for the role.  The father-son/commander-recruit/
guerilla-war theme was previously used in "Lives of a
Bengal Lancer" from 1935, another film in which the son
has to perform heroic feats to win the respect of his
father.
Trivia: John Wayne's son Patrick makes his film debut.
John Ford used "Rio Grande" as a bargaining chip for
"The Quiet Man", with Republic Studios willing to gamble
on the latter film only if a sure-winner Western was
made first.  Wayne, O'Hara and McLaglen would star in
the superior "The Quiet Man", which turned out to be
a hit after all.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
