Title
Review for To Die for (1995)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 9/27/95 (limited); 10/6/95 (wide)
Running Length: 1:43
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sex, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Nicole Kidman, Matt Dillon, Joaquin Phoenix, Casey Affleck,
      Alison Folland, Illeana Douglas, Wayne Knight
Director: Gus Van Sant Jr.
Producer: Laura Ziskin
Screenplay: Buck Henry based on the novel by Joyce Maynard
Cinematography: Eric Alan
Music: Danny Elfman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Following the disastrous EVEN COWGIRLS GET THE BLUES (my selection
for the worst film of 1994), it's a safe bet that Gus Van Sant's next
move had to be a proverbial "step in the right direction."  In fact,
with the biting satire TO DIE FOR, the director has made a significant
move towards regaining his reputation.  This movie is no masterpiece,
but it is an electric, colorful production that roasts the media and
those obsessed by it over an open flame.  It also does a far better job
than Oliver Stone's bloated NATURAL BORN KILLERS at satirizing the
American public's unending fascination with the televised glamor of
crime.
     Told in an effectively disorganized fashion that jumps back and
forth in time and includes pseudo-interviews and pieces of "actual"
story, TO DIE FOR gradually unravels the tale of TV weatherperson
Suzanne Stone (Nicole Kidman), who gains national notoriety as the
result of a murder conspiracy rap that she beats.  Her face and story
are everywhere--DONAHUE, USA TODAY, and smaller talk shows across the
country.  For someone with Suzanne's vapid philosophy that "You're not
anyone in America unless you're on TV," this is paradise.
     More than a year before the end of the film (which is also the
beginning), Suzanne is a single young woman in the town of Little Hope,
New Hampshire.  She has the looks, but not much intelligence to go with
them.  Despite that (or perhaps because of it), she catches the eye of
local hunk Larry Maretto (Matt Dillon), an all-around nice guy and the
son of a reputed mobster.  Larry falls head-over-heels, and there are
soon nuptials, with Suzanne wearing an exact replica of Maria Shriver's
wedding veil.  Not long after that, Larry has been transformed from
"Van Halen to Jerry Vale" and is beginning to bore Suzanne with his
desire to become a father, especially now that her career is taking off
with a daily job as the weathergirl at a local cable station.
     Van Sant, whose previous efforts include DRUG STORE COWBOY and MY
PRIVATE IDAHO, is not an accomplished satirist, but his screenwriter,
Buck Henry (adapting from a book by Joyce Maynard), is.  The humor in
this film is more often intellectually tantalizing than laugh-aloud
funny.  Suzanne is the embodiment of the extreme celebrity worship that
has made the O.J. Simpson circus into the biggest TV event of all
time.  In the main, Van Sant and Henry know just how to exploit that
element of their film.  Yet the ending is a letdown.  Unlike THE
PLAYER, which invited the viewer to chuckle all the way to the
fade-to-black, TO DIE FOR abandons parody for a disappointingly
traditional wrap-up (although there is an in-joke for those who
recognize David Cronenberg).  Fortunately, this shift in tone doesn't
happen until late in the proceedings.
     Nicole Kidman does a wonderful job as the vacuous, vicious
Suzanne, and a trio of young actors--Joaquin Phoenix, Alison Folland,
and Casey Affleck--are suitably vacant-eyed as the dunces she
manipulates into murder.  It takes a strong performance to successfully
portray a character with so little mental capacity, and these three
come across as completely clueless.  Kidman, however, steals the film,
playing Suzanne with a seductive gusto that results in her best work
since DEAD CALM.
     TO DIE FOR has its share of truly delicious sequences, and some
biting dialogue worth killing for.  The best moments occur during a
taped interview with Suzanne where she discusses her frighteningly
shallow theories about life, death, television, and keeping her maiden
name for on-air work.  In the end, however, TO DIE FOR doesn't go quite
far enough--there are times when Van Sant stays a little too
conventional, and this causes the picture to have only teeth when it
could have had fangs.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Clarissa Brower
     Summary: TO DIE FOR is a cross between black comedy and
movie-of-the-week formula, starring Nicole Kidman, Matt Dillon, and
Joaquin Phoenix.
     TO DIE FOR starts out promisingly enough, with Nicole Kidman
saying firmly that her name is *not* Suzanne Maretto (her married
name), but Suzanne STONE.  She pauses at just the right beat at the end
of each sentence, sending the theater into laughter.
     Continuing on, Suzanne's husband's sister says that when she first
saw Suzanne, all she could think of was "A four-letter word that starts
with C."  After another snickering pause, she grins and says, "Cold,
that's it--cold!"
     However, the laughs run out in the first half and by the end of
the movie its hard to laugh any longer.  The plot begins with the vapid
newswoman, Suzanne, stating with phony sincerity how sorry she is that
her husband died, and how close she is to her in-laws.  The cutaway
explanatory scenes show how the plot developed, with each character
having a chance to show what happened from their point of view.
     It resembles nothing more than the Holly Hunter movie, THE
ALLEGEDLY TRUE ADVENTURES OF THE TEXAS CHEERLEADER MURDERING MOM.
However, that movie stays funny and biting throughout.  Van Sant seems
to be confused whether he wants to be funny, shocking, or heart
wrenching.
     Unless you've been staying away from the mass media, you already
know going in that Suzanne engineered the death of her husband,
although why isn't quite clear.  Dillon does a great job of playing
sweet buffoon Larry, who just wants a nice girl to settle down and have
his babies.  Clearly he chose the wrong chick, although any woman as
manipulative as Suzanne could have maneuvered a profitable divorce
settlement easier than her obviously doomed attempt to convince and
then blame some neighborhood teens for the murder.
     We see scene after scene showing how low Suzanne will stoop.
After a short time, it ceases to be funny.  While trying to engineer
her television career from a small local cable channel, she decides to
interview some teenagers at the local school for a documentary.  She
ends up with three, Lydia, Nick, and James, clearly the misfit kids of
a misfit town.
     Lydia is supposed to be chunky and unappealing.  This would be
more believable if they had picked a girl that looked like she would
actually fill out a size 12.  While none of these kids are terribly
bright, James is the most vulnerable and pathetic.  Nobody has ever
paid attention to these kids before, so you're hardly surprised when
they fall for Suzanne's manipulative charm.
     The humor is long gone by the time Suzanne begins seducing James.
She seduces all three kids in some fashion, but watching James fall
hopelessly in love with this monster just isn't funny.  Parents of
teenagers should be required to watch this just to see how bad things
can turn out when someone finally pays attention to a neglected
adolescent.
     When the movie ends, there is some justice, in a strange way, but
you can't help feeling ripped off.  This is the movie getting hyped to
the horizon?  Having just seen THE USUAL SUSPECTS two days earlier,
perhaps I had less patience than usual.  While Kidman, Dillon, and the
teen actors do a marvelous job, good acting can't substitute for a
consistent script and choppy direction.

Author
James Brundage
I don't know why I didn't see it before. I saw Natural Born Killers, which I
will go out on a limb
and compare it to (minus excessive senseless violence and profanity and
Oliver Stone's foray into the surreal). I simply am left, in the first five
minutes after watching it, like I was caught inside a whirlwind of activity,
of insanity. Like I just watched a twisted version of the OJ Trial in an
hour and a half.
And indeed, that is the best analogy, for To Die For, Gus Van Sant's
screwball black comedy about a woman obsessed with being on television... to
the point to have her husband killed to do so (they even have the Star
Spangled Banner playing as she walks towards the cameras on the night of her
husband's death). It's just a perfect illustration, a perfect satire of the
black comedy which is violence in America. For an hour and a half it entraps
you in the world you're already in, but in such a way as to make you realize
just how twisted a place it is. Gus Van Sant preaches to the converted and
to the disbelieves and has em all coming out of the theater blinking twice,
doing a double take and wondering ... did this really happen? The answer...
it did.
No: Tom Cruise isnt' dead by the hands of Nicole Kidman (who plays the very
disturbed main character), but dying left and right are the NBKC, The
Natural Born Killers copycats, thrill-killers who seek to be immortalized
for their crimes. Psychopaths inhabiting our world, obsessed with the media.
The violence in film issue, the death of Brandon Lee on the set of The Crow,
Kurt Cobain copycat suicides. All of it shows this film for what it is...
Not a fiction but a mirror. This is not the world according to Gus Van Sant
(which I will stop and watch anyday), but, like Drugstore Cowboy, one of the
director's first and most realistic works, a showing of the world as HOW IT
IS. Watching this movie, I recognize this, and the line pops into my head
from a book in an equal vein of reality, American Psycho : ABANDON ALL HOPE
YE WHO ENTER HERE is scrawled in blood.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TO DIE FOR is the movie that finally proves that Nicole Kidman can
act.  She does the best rendition of an airhead that I can remember.
No, she doesn't just act natural.  In this movie, loosely based on the
outlines of a true story, she clearly works hard at her craft.
Although it sometimes get a bit tedious and monotonous, her performance
never gets contrived or corny.
     The movie opens with scenes of a murdered husband, Larry Maretto
(Matt Dillon), in his living room floor and his wife, Suzanne Stone
Maretto (Nicole Kidman), being accused of the crime.  Many scenes
follow of both sets of parents being interviewed on an Oprah style
television talk show.  We then flash back to happier times when Larry
and Suzanne are meeting each other and getting married.
     Suzanne Stone is an aspiring young TV personality.  What kind of
personality is not important to her, only fame is.  As she puts it,
"You aren't really anybody in America if you're not on TV."  Although
she starts as a gofer in a cable TV station in a small town, her
aspirations are as big as America.  She obsesses with being the next
Connie Chung or Jane Pauley both of whom she thinks she is superior
to.  Jane, she whispers to the audience, has "a tiny weight problem you
know."  By sheer force of will, Suzanne becomes the "weather girl" on
this cable TV channel whose entire staff only numbers three.
     There are many natural moments in TO DIE FOR like when Larry is
bowling with his sister Janice (Illeana Douglas) and looks over at
Suzanne in an adjoining lane and declares that he is going to marry
her.  The cinematography (Eric Alan) of about a third of the movie is a
documentary style of talking heads and with a handheld camera full of
numerous pans and zooms.  In a continuing series, we have an excellent
performance by Janice in her ice-skates talking about Larry and about
how much she hated Suzanne.  This is not hard to fathom since when
Suzanne first meets Larry's sister she tells Janice how much happier
Janice will be if she gets some plastic surgery to make her skin
perfect.  Suzanne then goes on to point out how Gorbachev would
probably still be in power if had had plastic surgery on his
birthmark.
     In an autobiographical monologue that runs through the whole show,
Suzanne pontificates about life.  She is always upbeat and smiling, and
she explains that "It's nice to live in a country where life, liberty,
and other stuff, stand for something."  This is from a woman who gets
away with the murder of her spouse in cold blood.  Coming so close to
the conclusion of the farcical Simpson circus, some viewers may find
this part tragic rather than comical.
     The script by Buck Henry and Gus Van Sant Jr. and based on the
novel by Joyce Maynard is filled with scenes so hilarious that I had
almost uncontrollable laughter.  That is the good news.  The bad is
that there are wastelands of dead time between the laughs.  The problem
with the non-funny parts is that the writers have not created
characters that you care about so that no matter how great Kidman's
acting is and no matter how hard you laughed ten minutes ago, you don't
care if the characters get used, abused, or shot.  Dillon, for example,
doesn't have much of a part, and he certainly does nothing memorable
with it.
     The heart of the story is the murder and how Suzanne seduces three
teenagers to kill her husband.  The lead teenager, Russell (Casey
Affleck) is a cliche of a kid with an demonstrable IQ about the same
number as his age.  In an attempt to become famous, Suzanne makes a
movie of these three losers from the local high school.  The cable
station manager, Ed Grant (Wayne Knight), tells the cops "She must have
shot hundreds of hours with these three dory kids who had a major
problem reciting the days of the week."
     As a director, I find Gus Van Sant Jr.'s style too eclectic for my
taste.  This is not surprising since his last film was that major bomb,
EVEN COWGIRLS GET THE BLUES.  Nevertheless, I do like TO DIE FOR.
Finally, I want to give a special mention to the costume designers
(Else Curtis and Beatrix Aruna Paszter) and the make up artists.  They
do a wonderful job of making Suzanne into an extremely made up woman in
very brief miniskirts and yet they never go over the line and overdo
it.  The pushed her look to the absolute limit, but never made her look
sleazy.
     TO DIE FOR runs 1:40, and I think the editors (Jeffrey Arsenault
and Curtiss Clayton) should have left a few more entire scenes on the
cutting room floor so that the meantime to laugher was much smaller.
The movie is rated R for sex, understated violence, some profanity, and
about one second of nudity from a far distance.  It is a soft R, and I
would see no problem in teenagers seeing the show.  There were
certainly many in the audience where I was.  I give TO DIE FOR a thumbs
up for Kidman's performance, for interesting docudrama style
cinematography, and for some huge laughs, and I award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     TO DIE FOR is an ambitious little flick about the seductive lure
of stardom, the suggestive power of Nicole Kidman's lips, and the
promise of liberation held by a teenage flunky with a handgun who's
willing to lose everything for your love.  The movie is ambitious, and
sounds terrific on paper, but director Gus Van Sant (MY OWN PRIVATE
IDAHO, EVEN COWGIRLS GET THE BLUES) can't pull everything together to
make any impact at all.  It's enough to make you wonder what he's doing
with this script in the first place.
     Nicole Kidman is TO DIE FOR as Suzanne Stone, the small town TV
"weather girl" who makes international tabloid headlines when she's
accused of having her husband Larry (Matt Dillon, doing fine) murdered
by her teenage lover Jimmy (Joaquin Phoenix) and his friends Russell
(Casey Affleck) and Lydia (Alison Folland).  Joyce Maynard's novel is
apparently a fictionalized version of a very true incident in a small
New Hampshire town, but the movie excludes any understanding of that
situation by chasing its own tale, a cautionary comic book painted in
broad strokes and saturated colors.
     Screenwriter Buck Henry and director Gus Van Sant go ga-ga over
their own technique in the first few shots, when Suzanne and other
characters address the camera directly, as though being interviewed for
a TV news special report.  Janice, Larry's lesbian sister, explains
that she knew from the start that Suzanne was a four-letter word
beginning with C (we're left to fill this in from the backs of our own
filthy little minds, but the word she's looking for is cold).  Lydia
holds forth for the camera on Suzanne's philosophy and TV-centric world
view.  Jimmy mumbles half- articulately about how in love he is with
Suzanne.  And the parents of Suzanne and Larry are guests on a talk
show, explaining that they knew the marriage was doomed from the
start.  All of this is intercut, of course, with objective flashbacks
illustrating the events the characters relate.  The novelty of this
approach wears off almost immediately, and the herky-jerky cutting back
and forth from scene to scene becomes tiresome, albeit appropriate to
the movie's theme.
     Maybe it's a shame that the studio has given TO DIE FOR away, both
in the marketing campaign (Nicole Kidman = murderous sexpot) and in the
movie's own title sequence, which runs headlines and lurid tabloid copy
underneath the credits over and over again.  There's really only one
major event in the whole film, and the surrounding material seems
edited by an iron fist wrapped around a machete--Whap! Whap!--no
surprises at all.
     All that's left for the audience is to sit and wait to see the
thing itself happen, and it happens pretty much the way you expect.
You might expect Suzanne's casual cruelty to be shocking, but her
dialogue is strictly rote.  Kidman's performance is perfectly vacuous,
with the corners of her mouth tugging this way and that as she titters
a little over every superficial thing.  Her name is suddenly being
bandied about as Oscar material, suggesting that critics still love it
when a woman can sex it up and play the embodiment of female evil at
the same time.  She's certainly something to look at, but her
performance shares a calculated coldness that turns the movie blue.
     So it's cold, but it's not quite a corpse.  Where is the beating
heart of TO DIE FOR? Well, Van Sant still has style to spare, and his
sympathy is obviously with the kids, who are better drawn than the
other characters.  In a funny way, Lydia is allowed to be the smartest
person in the whole film, reflecting at length on Suzanne's world view
while managing to keep at arm's length, and becoming her own kind of
celebrity.  Pudgy Lydia is the antithesis of Suzanne, who's clearly
Miss America material even if she's not quite wholesome.  And when we
see Susan in her underwear, it's either to make a point of her distance
from Larry or to show her cajoling a promise from her teenaged lover.
Meanwhile, the camera lingers on Jimmy's trembling, naked body,
obviously far more intrigued by the nature of his lost soul than
Suzanne's corrupt one.  More lively is a devilish twist near the end of
the film, and watch out for Canadian director David Cronenberg in a
cameo.
     The real problem is that for a black comedy, TO DIE FOR is
mighty unfunny.  Finally, the movie's own cynicism does it in.  TO DIE
FOR is mainly contemptuous and condescending, with little of the wit or
insight that marks a strong comedy.  Reviewers have been comparing it,
believe it or not, to Pulp Fiction, apparently believing that the two
movies share a hip self-awareness.  But that's dead wrong.  Where
Tarantino worked Pulp Fiction through with an honest, burning urgency
and some kind of moral message that managed to transcend its own
essential brutality (hey, it's more fun than it sounds), Van Sant can't
lift TO DIE FOR out of its own narcissistic meanderings.  Here's a
movie that's very pleased with itself, but doesn't really speak to us.
The message here? Every stereotype you've ever heard is absolutely
true.  If she goes down on you, you'll do whatever she says.  Loser
children with no future live in trailer parks and listen to abrasive
heavy metal.  The world is a stupid, superficial place. (Like we needed
Gus Van Sant to show us that!)
DEEP FOCUS: Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/
bfrazer@panix.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The screen has had a lot of smart and beautiful but cold and
calculating women.  They lurk in films like DOUBLE INDEMNITY, PRETTY
POISON, and THE LAST SEDUCTION.  Gus Van Zant's TO DIE FOR suggests
that most of us in the TV generation can no longer detect smart and it
is enough just to be beautiful.  The film is in large part a portrait
of Suzanne Stone (played by Nicole Kidman), who is a breathtaking but
pompous and clueless woman with the personality of a spider.  The film
opens with the media swarming over a sensational, sex-related crime in
the aptly-named backwater town of Little Hope, New Hampshire.  In
scatter-shot scenes we see a montage of interviews with Suzanne, with
her sister-in-law, and one with her parents and in-laws all discussing
a combination crime and sex scandal.  Eventually we start seeing the
pieces of the story in flashback.  Suzanne, the beautiful daughter from
a WASPy family marries the cutest boy in town (Matt Dillon), the bar-
tending son of a restaurateur.  Both families had misgivings over the
marriage, but Larry is awestruck by the china-doll beauty and Suzanne
is hard to say no to.  When Suzanne gets a job as the weather girl at a
local cable station, she has visions of becoming another Barbara
Walters (whom she slyly puts down for being Jewish).  When Larry, her
husband, starts hinting that it is time to have children, Suzanne
decides she has married unwisely and begins planning how to correct the
situation, perhaps with the help of three scruffy, disaffected teens
she is interviewing for a documentary.
     Nicole Kidman has to play Suzanne Stone as a difficult combination
of stupid and savvy.  She spouts naive pop-philosophy and empty
aphorisms and yet is able to succeed at what she wants, mostly because
of her good looks.  I would hope it was a difficult combination for
Ms. Kidman to play.  Matt Dillon glides through his role as her
husband without much apparent effort.  Standing out considerably more
are Illeana Douglas and especially Dan Hedaya as Larry's sister and
father.  There are few actors who can express suppressed rage (and
occasionally unsuppressed rage) as well as Hedaya.  Also a particularly
good casting decision was to have Joaquin Phoenix, Casey Affleck, and
Alison Folland as the three not-too-bright teenagers.  All three, but
particularly Phoenix, look like real teenagers on the street rather
than actors, and that is a much needed effect to make the story work.
In fact, Phoenix and Folland prove to be actors more talented than one
might expect from their new-comer status.
     The telling of the story starts very strong and its jibes are both
on target and laugh-out-loud funny.  But the tone of the film subtly
alters during the course of the film and while the plot is tied up at
the end, the climax is just a bit quiet and under-powered for the rest
of the film.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     As Jimmy Durante used to say, "Everyone wants to get into the
act."  TO DIE FOR is the story of Suzanne Stone (Nicole Kidman) who
wanted the limelight so bad she let nothing stand in her way ... and
by nothing, we mean just that.
     Suzanne is married to Larry (Matt Dillon) and live in a small
town.  He is madly in love with her, as who would not be; she is
absolutely beautiful.  On the other hand, Suzanne's desire to be
"somebody" moves into an obsession and Larry has become an obstacle.
     Managing by coyness, aggressiveness, and her beauty, she talks a
local TV station into giving her a job as their weather-person.  From
there she embarks on the making of a documentary at a school where the
high school students hear her speak about the world of TV and the
opportunities available to anyone who wants to really go for it.  The
purpose of her talking to her students is in fact to select some losers
to do her a favor: get rid of her husband.
     I must say that I was surprised by Nicole Kidman.  That she was
pretty was obvious but in the film, when she turns on all her sexual
charms, she is stunning.  Her acting in the film is right on target.
That, in addition to the screenplay by the brilliant Buck Henry, make
for a very entertaining film.
     The students Suzanne inveigles into her scheme are played by
Joaquin Phoenix, Casey Affleck and Alison Folland.

Author
Christopher Null
     Gus Van Sant's new, much-hyped farce/thriller is finally here, and
with it arrives the director's best feature and Nicole Kidman's
strongest performance.  TO DIE FOR, the tale of Suzanne Stone (Kidman),
a sexy newswoman wannabe who'll do *anything* to get on television, is
entertaining and funny, but pulls its punches by never taking the farce
of its story far enough.
     Told in half-flashback, half-mockumentary style, the film traces
the events leading up to the murder of the Suzanne's husband, Larry
(Matt Dillon).  We see Suzanne trying to get ahead in the media world,
carving out a career for herself at a low budget cable station.  We
also see large stretches of Suzanne creating a meaningless documentary
about modern teenagers, wherein three kids (including drugged-out
zombie Jimmy, played by an unwatchable Joaquin Phoenix) are interviewed
ad nauseam.  All the while, key relatives try to get to the bottom of
the mystery: who killed Larry, and why?
     Unfortunately, the answer to that question is almost painfully
obvious from the movie's first frame.  As far as the term "thriller" is
concerned, TO DIE FOR is completely off base.  On a comic level,
though, the film is worthwhile.  Buck Henry's smart script and ear for
humor is responsible for this, creating a "nice" story that usually
amuses and overcomes the one-dimensional drama.
     In the end, I was hoping for a whole lot more, given all the buzz
around the film.  With a farce like this, you really have to take the
lunacy almost to absurdity, but Suzanne never even gets out of Little
Hope (get it?), New Hampshire.  Where is Suzanne in Hollywood?  Where
is The Trial of the Century?  Well, I guess those scenes were cut out
in earlier drafts....  The result is a less than satisfying ending that
left me saying, "That's it?"
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Terri Buchman
     In Brief:  Best bleak comedy film since HEATHERS.  Full of
wonderful swipes at the fifteen minutes of fame mentality that feeds so
much of modern American pop culture.  Go see it!
     So, I prepared for this film by watching a moving interview on
"Hard Copy" with Pam Smart, the New Hampshire Media teacher who was
convicted of engineering the death of her husband back in the 1980's.
"Hard Copy"'s Diane Diamond asked Smart what she thought about Nicole
Kidman's fictionalized portrayal of her in the new film TO DIE FOR.
Smart replied that she thought Kidman's character came off as a dumb,
vicious tramp and she thought that the publicity the new movie
generates might just hurt her chances in her latest court appeal.
(Smart was convicted and given a life sentence for her part in the
murder of her husband.)  Smart's got a point.  It wouldn't be the first
time that the public took the better scripted and well-acted movie
version of an event as the absolute truth over the duller and far less
artistic real life version.   However, given a choice between the mass
media 'happening' of the real event and the fictionalized movie, I
would definitely opt for the later.  Real murderers rarely have
dialogue as witty as what Buck Henry has written for this movie and
Smart, while pretty and alluring, is no match for the cinematic charms
of Nicole Kidman.
     TO DIE FOR begins in a town called Little Hope, New Hampshire, the
archetypal dry and intellectually barren American suburb.  The story
concerns the ambitious Suzanne Stone and how she tackles the obstacles
between her and her life long ambition of being 'on TV.'  Of course,
one of those little obstacles turns out to be her dull and unambitious
husband Larry, played by Matt Dillon.  But, with a little imagination,
some charm and raw sex appeal and a rather novel approach to Junior
Achievement, Our Heroine manages to overcome the nay-sayers in her life,
at least temporarily.
     Kidman triumphs in the trashy role of Suzanne.  I have never
really been all that fond of this actress but she shows a wonderful
flair for comedy in this picture.  Her portrayal of the incredibly
shallow and dumb femme fatale resonates.  Kidman knows a star-making
role when she sees it and she plays the conscience-deprived Suzanne as
the ultimate career driven, post-feminist uber-temptress from hell.  She
is ably abetted by wonderfully demented comic dialogue, which Kidman
delivers in a unselfconsciously funny way.  At one point Suzanne is
expounding on her knowledge of world events to her future husband and
sister-in-law.  "You know," she knowingly exclaims, "Gorbachev would
still be the leader of Russia or whatever, if he had just had that ugly
purplish thing removed from his head."  Her husband beams at Suzanne's
profound knowledge of world politics and then proudly proclaims that
this qualifies her to be the next Barbara Walters.  This is very close
to pop culture bashing heaven, folks.
     The other standout performance in the film is delivered by Joaquin
Phoenix.  He plays Jimmy, a burned out teenager who becomes addicted to
Suzanne's sexual favors.  Kidman's character, vapid though she is, is a
sort of suave beacon of success to Jimmy and his lost friends Russell
and Lydia, winningly portrayed by Casey Affleck and Alison Folland.
Phoenix looks like the very embodiment of Gen-X slackerhood (as
envisioned by tabloid TV, of course).  His Jimmy has the dead eyes and
demeanor of a kid who knows that he ain't going anywhere, ever.
Phoenix reacts to the sexy Suzanne with a sort of obsessed amazement
and he makes us believe that a loser character like Jimmy really would
be willing to kill for someone like Suzanne, someone who actually
noticed him.
     Gus Van Sant (DRUGSTORE COWBOY, MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO) direction is
first-rate.  He keeps the pacing in this not-quite-thriller snapping
along.  Van Sant rightly keeps the focus of this movie on the amoral
Suzanne and doesn't stop to proselytize the audience about the
rightness or wrongness of her actions.  Van Sant trusts his material
and trusts his audience to 'get it' without stopping to explain what is
funny about this All-American story.  The screenplay, by Buck Henry, is
absolutely great and includes some of the best bleakly comic lines I've
heard since HEATHERS.  Henry's story is a blast against the shallowness
of the American media and the mindlessness of fame, yet the screenplay
delivers this sharp message by focusing on just a few characters.
Henry ably manages to avoid diluting his story by aiming at too many
targets and the result is a crisp and funny mini-classic.  Danny Elfman
did the original music for this movie and he delivers another
eccentric, loopy score that strongly echoes his themes for EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS.  Either film score would make wonderful background music
for Halloween Trick-or-Treat parties.  All-in-all, a wonderful
production, well worth your seven bucks!
TO DIE FOR: A Columbia Pictures Release
Directed by Gus Van Sant.  Written by Buck Henry  Score by Danny Elfman
Starring Nicole Kidman, Matt Dillon, Joachin Phoenix
Based on the book by Joyce Maynard.
Rated R - for language and mature themes.  (Respect the R, not for under 14's)
Rating -----  9 out of 10 stars.  Go see it.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     As hard as I struggle against the demons of preconceived notion, I
must confess to having expected both the best and the worst this
weekend, with the local arrivals of ASSASSINS and TO DIE FOR.  The
pre-release buzz was polarized: previewers flunked the former, while
critics lavished the latter.  Imagine my surprise, when ASSASSINS
proved watchable and TO DIE FOR a bit of a bore.
     To paraphrase somebody else, ASSASSINS doesn't suck.  The cold,
often humorless story of two rival "contract artists" may not be very
exciting, but at least you can watch it.  Director Richard Donner
(LETHAL WEAPON) seems to be aiming for more than pointless pyrotechnics
and he might've hit his mark with a thinner, less-contrived story.
(These characters do the *dumbest* things.  Such as the absurd
one-door-and-one-door-only finale.) Time passes, though, thanks to the
playful chemistry between Stallone and Banderas.  They're a pair.  The
cat-loving, fur-hating, surveillance-expert love-interest is played by
Julianne Moore, who *must* have something on somebody to be
miraculously spared a love scene with the Italian Stallion.
     TO DIE FOR is also flat.  Curiously flat, given the praise its
raised in recent days.  There's satire to spare in director Gus Van
Sant's pitch-black comedy about tabloid fame, thanks to a wicked script
from GRADUATE scribe Buck Henry, from the novel by Joyce Maynard, from
the real-life incident.  Nicole Kidman does her second star turn of the
year and it's a sizzler.  (Think Alicia Silverstone meets Linda
Fiorentino.) She's backed by a superb supporting cast that includes
Matt Dillon, Joaquin Phoenix, and an unbilled George Segal, who, these
days, looks remarkably like Richard Crenna.  Have we seen these guys in
the same room together?  TO DIE FOR is played in faux-documentary
fashion, with most of the characters speaking into the camera.  And
that's the joke.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I'm sure there was some media case these past few years 
where some beautiful woman seduced a teenage boy and convinced 
him to kill her husband. It sounds like based-on-a-true-story TV 
movie fodder to me and even if I'm mistaken about that, it was still 
a minor subplot in WAYNE'S WORLD 2. But no matter what veteran 
comedy writer and performer Buck Henry's inspiration was in 
scripting this movie (besides, of course, the novel it was based 
on), TO DIE FOR is definitely an entertaining black comedy that 
hovers somewhere between scathing satire and sex-killer thriller 
material.
        Nicole Kidman plays Suzanne Stone, a beautiful woman 
who is prepared to pour all her effort into becoming "the second 
Diane Sawyer" in the TV journalism world. Shortly after meeting 
and marrying a man (Matt Dillon) whose parents are "pillars of the 
Italian-American community" (translation: Mafia), she gets her foot 
in the door at a small public access cable channel, doing midnight 
weather reports before the national anthem comes on, signifying 
the end of the broadcast day.
        By this point we know she really isn't any good at her 
craft, but that's not important. She has an amazing tenacity and 
dedication, from sleeping with TV executives on her honeymoon 
to presenting Wayne "Newman" Knight (the cable station head) 
with a list of impeccable references for a part-time secretarial 
position. She eventually wears down his resistance to where he 
lets her do the weather forecasts and work on a documentary 
chronicling the life and views of three teenage losers.
        Of the losers, one is an insecure, overweight girl who 
idolizes Kidman, another is a juvenile delinquent who was forced 
into participation in the documentary as punishment, and the third 
lusts after her hopelessly (as do we all). Kidman knows exactly 
how to play all three like a fiddle, offering one sex, one money, 
one companionship and all three a future life of luxury with her 
in Hollywood.
        All they have to do in exchange is remove the one obstacle 
standing between her and stardom. That obstacle, naturally, is her 
husband. Kidman's character doesn't have much of a reason to kill 
her husband, who is painted as faithful and dedicated to her success, 
but the ultimate motivation for the murder -- and everything else 
Kidman does -- is her unwavering commitment to success in the 
broadcast field. And the fact that she's nuts.
        The story is told in flashback, mixing in the dramatic 
scenes with footage of Dillon's family on a daytime talk show, 
documentary footage of Kidman telling her own side of the story 
and interviews with the three kids and Dillon's ice skater sister. 
Henry's choice to tell the story of a documentary gone wrong in 
documentary format was a shrewd one. TO DIE FOR, on the whole, 
is an incredibly clever movie. It succeeds as a subtle satire of media 
influence instead of beating us over the head with its message as 
Oliver Stone did in the painful-to-watch NATURAL BORN 
KILLERS.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
