Title
Review for Billy Elliot (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Susan Granger
Beginning with an exuberant title sequence, this charming,
off-beat, coming-of-age story revolves around Billy Elliot, the
younger of two sons of a widower coal miner in Northern England. It's
1984, and the miners are engaged in a long, bitter strike. Following
the family tradition, Billy is expected to learn boxing at the
Everington Boys Club where, instead, the 11 year-old becomes
enthralled by the girls' dancing class, led by a chain-smoking teacher
who recognizes his raw talent. But when his macho father and
rabble-rousing brother discover he's taking ballet lessons, they
ridicule Billy ("Lads do boxing and football and wrestling, not
friggin' ballet."), forcing him to hide his slippers under the
mattress and sneak off to class.  Then come the auditions for the
Royal Ballet School and Billy's joyful, foot-stompin' "I Want to
Boogie" sequence. What makes this heartfelt English import such a gem
is the collaboration of writer Lee Hall, cinematographer Brian Tufano
and director Stephen Daldry, who - despite the simplistic
predictability of the plot - create eccentric, lovable characters and
evocative imagery. As Billy, Jamie Bell embodies awkward
determination, juggling grim reality with a surreal fantasy
world. ("Just because I like ballet doesn't mean I'm a pouf!") As his
father, Gary Lewis is tough-yet-tender, and Julie Walters scores as
Billy's crusty yet compassionate teacher. Jamie Draven and Stuart
Wells lend strong support with Jean Heywood touching as Billy's senile
grandmother who recalls, "I could have been a professional dancer."
While the bleak setting is reminiscent of "The Full Monty," the
energetic mood evokes "Flashdance." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Billy Elliot" is an exhilarating 8. Combining comedy and
poignancy, it's all about being yourself.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Stephen Daldry's BILLY ELLIOT, originally titled DANCER, can be thought 
of as an English working-class version of FLASHDANCE but without any of 
the latter's glitz and production numbers.  Telling the story of an 
11-year-old boy named Billy Elliot (Jamie Bell) who cuts his boxing 
lessons in favor of ballet lessons with a bunch of girls in frilly 
tutus, the movie is a somber production that could stand to lighten up a 
bit.  Set against the grim background of a miners' strike in which his 
dad (Gary Lewis) and brother (Jamie Draven) are participating, the movie 
wants to be as much a morality play as a dance movie.  And, of course, 
its surroundings will remind viewers of the setting for THE FULL MONTY.
Without his father's knowledge, Billy begins to spend his 50 pence not 
on boxing lessons for which they were intended on a ballet class run by 
the tough, chain-smoking and sarcastic Mrs. Wilkinson (Julie Walters).  
After asking her piano player to play "The Sun Will Come Out Tomorrow," 
she remarks, "Fat Chance!"  She almost immediately recognizes Billy's 
raw talent, figuring that he would make a prime candidate for the Royal 
Ballet School.  
The problem with the movie's choreography is that Billy, as he hams it 
up dancing and jumping around, is so awkward that it's hard for us to 
recognize the abilities that his teacher sees.  Moreover, his prancing 
around, which makes up large portions of the story, isn't that 
compelling.  It's rather like watching your neighbor's kids hamming it 
up in the living room.  Most of the picture has the boy leaping about 
joyously but stiffly.  These are heartfelt moments but not particularly 
convincing ones.  
Set in a dirt-poor area of County Durham in Northern England in 1984, 
the accents are so thick that you could cut them with a knife and so 
unintelligible at times that you'll wish that the picture had subtitles.  
The authentic dialog features the F-word in just about every sentence.  
It's a depressing tale with the inevitable light at the end of the 
tunnel, which is another of the film's problems.  No matter how 
depressingly bleak the situation, the story follows too predictable an 
arc.  The widower father is a completely angry caricature until, late in 
the picture, he makes the miraculous conversion that you can see coming 
a mile away.  
The early scene in which the father first finds out that his son has 
been spending the family's little disposable money on ballet lessons is 
dramatic.  Looking so red that he might ignite at any moment, he 
lectures his son, "Lads do boxing, and football, and wrestling, not 
friggin' ballet."
The supporting characters are little more than stick figures, which 
leaves the boy alone to carry the movie.  The young actor does his best, 
and, whereas we certainly root for his character, the movie is just too 
formulaic to be able to recommend it.  
BILLY ELLIOT runs 1:40.  It is rated R for language and would be 
acceptable for teenagers.  Younger than that is the parent's call, but 
since it was rated R only for language, we allowed our son to give it a 
try as he wanted to.  After all, it is a dancing movie about a boy his 
age.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, didn't like much about the movie and gave it * 
1/2.  He found the dialog hard to follow and felt the story got strained 
at several points.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/6f5ab9db67d16af288256948007dca1d?OpenDocument
"Just because I like ballet, it doesn't mean I'm a poof," says
11-year-old British mamma's boy Billy Elliot (Jamie Bell). And that just
about sums up the story of this oddball child prodigy. After all, when a
lad from a northern British mining town forsakes his granddad's boxing
gloves for a pair of satiny ballet slippers, it's more than the
neighbors and townsfolk can comprehend and, therefore, inherently good
cinematic drama.
Beyond the fact that the whole
coal-miner's-kid-has-talent-and-big-dreams genre has been horrifically
overdone from the earliest days of English-language narrative, Billy
Elliot (aka Dancer) is actually a treat to watch. Maybe it's just the
funny accents, but the dialog comes off fresh and surprising, even when
it's just Billy's dad (played by Gary Lewis) saying some stock like, "No
son of mine is going to be dancing ballet." In fact, Lewis conveys an
intense fury through his role as the apparently ignorant father, while
maintaining a sense of depth and dimension that is, at times, endearing.
Debut screenwriter Lee Hall has thrown this film against the backdrop of
the 1984 English miners' strike, adding richness to the otherwise banal
family drama. Yet other attempts at broadening the lives of these
characters fail entirely to be interesting. For instance; the typical
and unsurprising shots at sexual discovery, the completely pointless
presence of a cross-dressing, gay schoolyard buddy as a pretense for God
knows what--it just comes off cheap and stupid--and a happy-go-lucky
ending that made everyone in the audience (except for two fat ladies
directly in front of me) want to regurgitate their popcorn and Kit Kats.
Ultimately, though, Billy Elliot is a funny, charming movie. The cast is
loveable and believable. And the almost-entirely-T. Rex soundtrack
worked magically next to Jamie Bell's subtly awkward dancing to create a
memorable, satisfying film.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Robin Clifford
The coal miners may be in the midst of a tense strike in the northern English
mining town of Durham, but young Billy Elliot still has to take the boxing
lessons his father insists on. Billy would rather dance than fight, so when Mrs.
Wilkinson's all girl ballet class has to share the gym space with the boxers, he
sheds his gloves for ballet slippers in "Billy Elliot."
The simplistic script by first-timer Lee Hall runs a routine path with its
inspirational story about going after what you love to do regardless of the odds
and obstacles. Young Billy has a natural desire to dance and, with the help of
the obligatory muse Mrs. Wilkinson (Julie Walters, "Educating Rita"), overcomes
every obstacle - principally the prejudice his father has toward dancers, who
must be poofters. Inexplicably, dad's fears that his son is becoming a flaming
homosexual are shoved aside with little fanfare and, suddenly, pop is crying,
saying, "Let's give the boy a #$%&* chance!"
Most everything is handled in this perfunctory manner. Mrs. Wilkinson is intro'd
as a dance dynamo and teacher - tough on the outside, but extremely
compassionate inside. She pushes Billy to develop his talent and love for dance,
encouraging him to apply to the Royal Ballet School in London. Mrs. Wilkinson
then drops out of the movie, not even mentioned again, except for a brief coda
when Billy goes off to fame and fortune.
Another problem, maybe with the script or maybe with the film's budget, is the
sparseness of the supporting cast. Billy is a likable kid, but the movie only
shows him having one friend, an obviously closeted Michael (Stuart Wells) whom
likes to dress up in his mother's clothes. Michael heavy-handedly represents the
"gay" lifestyle, but the kid doesn't dance, so I don't get it. The short shrift
given to such background considerations gives the film a shallowness that the
energetic performance by Jamie Bell as Billy can't overcome. Gary Lewis, as
Billy's dad, also has a considerable presence, but is hamstrung by the banal
development of his character's abrupt change of heart.
There is a good deal of visual imagination provided by the camera of Brian
Tufano ("Trainspotting") with tightly shot, energetic dance numbers and tense
movement when the action joins the coal mine strikers. One amusing tracking shot
has Billy's little friend, Debbie, absently dragging a stick along a wall that
suddenly becomes a phalanx of police shields. She continues to drag her stick as
if along a picket fence, without so much as a glance at the heavily armored cops
guarding the strike.
Jamie Bell's Billy is fun to watch as he tramps around in combinations of step
dancing, tap, ballet and plain old foot stompin'. There's a lot of energy in his
performance, making him the reason for seeing the film. The music selected,
especially the nicely used overture from "Swan Lake," complements the story and
the dance. Unfortunately, the earthy language negates the inspirational aspect
of the yarn that might appeal to younger auds and frequent use of the "F" word
may be a turn off. A silly epilogue that features the premier dance of an older
Billy doesn't help. I give it a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When Mrs. Wilkinson (Julie Walters, "Educating Rita") is forced to conduct
her ballet class in the local boxing gym, she attracts a most unusual pupil.
Billy Elliot (Jamie Bell), who's no good at boxing, takes to dance immediately.
Unfortunately, widowed Dad (Gary Lewis III) and older brother Tony (Jamie
Draven), tough striking coal miners, don't like the connotations associated
with the dance in "Billy Elliot."
"Billy Elliot" is a strange hybrid of a movie, part working-class-struggle
reminiscent of the British kitchen sink films, part surreal fantasy.  Well
acted and unusually photographed, it has some major flaws, most notably
that Billy's sudden attraction to ballet comes out of the blue.
Billy's world is a cramped male household in Northern England where he cares
for his apparently senile grandmother (Jean Heywood) when he's not hanging
out with his friend Michael (Stuart Wells).  Older brother Tony is an
aggressive striker, frequently bringing the law to their doorstep en masse.
Dad Jackie's not over the loss of his wife and is struggling to tone down
his older son's machismo while punching up his younger son's.  He can't
be convinced by Mrs. Wilkinson that Billy's Royal Ballet School material,
but a defiant dancing display put on by Billy changes everything.
Young Jamie Bell is a natural young actor, shading Billy with beautiful 
subtleties.  He's a good kid caring for his gran, but won't be pushed around.
The glow that comes from his face as he smiles away Michael's concerns
about outing him (Billy's ballet dancing enables Michael to come out - a
truly silly story idea) exudes mature compassion.  His dancing is energetic
and appropriately unpolished.  
Gary Lewis is dynamic and sympathetic as the tough dad who turns tender, 
supporting his son staunchly once his eyes have been opened (again the script 
betrays a character, as there's no evidence of dad's soft side in the film's 
first half, making his transition a bit startling).  Walters is good as the 
crusty teacher ('I feel like a pussy' complains Billy.  'Well don't act like 
one,' instructs Wilkinson), yet we're given no idea of her dance background 
and she unexpectedly drifts out of the film's second half.  I simply didn't get
enough of Nicola Blackwell as Wilkinson's outrageously precocious daughter 
Debbie.
This could have been such a good film if Lee Hall's script had been given
a major overhaul.  Besides the problems already noted, he has Billy punch
a boy inexplicably after his big audition - this from the kid who couldn't
throw a punch in the ring.  His characters learn to stop thinking of
ballet as an occupation for 'pooftahs,' yet Billy's best friend comes on to
him once he starts dancing.  Billy shows no particular grace until he
espies a tutu.
Visually, the film is often arresting.  Billy dances up the street and hits 
a wall - the camera pans around and the seasons have changed.  Debbie trails 
a stick along a phalanx of police shields as if they were a picket fence.
A coal miner becomes enthralled watching a ballet rehearsal as his son
paces the hall.  Mrs. Wilkinson explains Swan Lake to Billy as they wait
for a drawbridge to close.  These images are accompanied by a radical mixture
of music which ranges from The Clash to classical.
"Billy Elliot" makes a cliched story seem fresh, but one too many bad choices
yank it away from the truly inspiring.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Did you hear the one about the macho coal miner whose
young son wanted to be a ballet dancer?  You did?  Of
course.  Stephen Daldry tells it again in his new movie "Billy
Elliot," but he relates the story in a fresh way, avoiding the
rah-rah American style that inhabits movies like "Bring It On"
and "Strictly Ballroom."  "Billy Elliot," which was featured
at this year's Toronto Film Festival and received a warm
welcome at the recent showing at Cannes, comes on the
heels of a similar, more commercial offering, Dein Perry's 
feature "Bootmen" about a tap-happy dancer in Australia.
   The eponymous Billy, played by Jamie Bell in a startling
yet understated performance as a gifted but oddballish 11-
year-old, is one of two sons of a striking coal miner (Gary
Lewis), a widowed man living in a working-class Northern
English town near Newcastle.  Discovering that his lad is
secretly taking ballet lessons and is in fact the only male in a
class of even younger girls led by chain-smoking Mrs.
Wilkinson (Julie Walters), his eyes glare fiercely and his
entire heads turns russet.  While dad insists that Billy
spend his spare time taking boxing in the local gym and is
backed by his other son, Tony (Jamie Draven), Billy gets
strong support from the idiosyncratic teacher who stands up
to the older man and encourages Billy to do the same.
   Would you be surprised if the most unlikely person
ultimately becomes Billy's chief defender?  Of course not. 
But as Roger Ebert always says, it's not the "what" of a story;
it's the "how."  Stephen Daldry directs Lee Hall's screenplay
determined to show the eccentric and loveable characteristics
of the community, such as the boy's senile grandmother
(Jean Heywood) who states during two of her clearer
moments "I could have been a professional dancer" with the
melancholy determination of a Marlon Brando, and extracts a
particularly comic performance from Gary Lewis--whose
glistened eyes and inflamed features summon a blend of
Kevin Costner and Ben Gazzara.
   While most of the movie's dispatch lies in a study of
contrasting and conflicting wills, "Bill Elliot" comes to
exhilarating life at one point when Billy and her teacher, alone
in the large gymnasium, let themselves go with a bopping, if
awkwardly-danced jazz duet.  To demonstrate the beginning
of Billy's sexual coming of age, Daldry places Billy into
several scenes with the assertively precocious little ballerina,
Debbie (Nicola Blackwell), who, in the midst of a feather-
scattering pillow fight feel strange emotions that stops them
dead in their tracks in wonder.  Daldry broadens the action by
alternating scenes of Billy's growing affinity for the art form
with panoramas of a bitter, year-long strike between the coal
miners--most of whom had probably never traveled to
London--kept in line by a contingent of local police in full riot
gear who protect a growing number of scabs crossing the
lines by bus.  The film is effectively framed with a show-
stopping scene of Billy joyfully jumping up and down to slow-
motion camerawork.  A memorable soundtrack adds luster to
this little gem of a movie.
Rated R.  Running time: 105 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BILLY ELLIOT *** (UK) Directed by Stephen Daldry. Written by Lee 
Hall. Photography, Brian Tufano. Editing, John Wilson.  Choreography 
by Peter Darling. Production design, Maria Djurkovic.  Produced by 
Greg Brenman and Jon Finn. Cast: Julie Walters (Mrs. Wilkinson), Gary
Lewis (Dad), Jamie Bell (Billy), Jamie Draven (Tony) and Adam Cooper 
(Billy, aged 25).A Universal release.  90 minutes.  R (expletives)
The story of 11-year old prole Billy Elliot is set in a small town 
in Northeast England in 1984. It is a grungy place like all the 
mining towns we have seen in British films. The place is not just 
joyless, it is downright depressing. I suspect it always was but now 
things have hit rock bottom.  Margaret Thatcher has ordered the 
closing of many mines because they are losing money. I suppose the 
correct term is "not cost effective" -- like Presidential Elections 
in some countries.
What would a certain, big slice of British cinema --the biggest one, 
the one that deals with the working classes --have done without 
Thatcherism?  One wonders.
The miners, that is, practically all able-bodied men in the place, 
are striking. It's a violent strike which pits them against hordes 
of police, and vice versa.
Billy is a schoolboy (seen just one in his class) who loves all 
sorts of pop music. It makes him kinetic. He wiggles, jumps up and 
down and moves with agility. He lives with his striking miner dad, 
his striking miner older brother Tony, and his vague, senile 
grandma. His mother is dead and sorely missed by all.
Billy is a good kid, takes care of grandma and some household 
chores. He goes regularly to the local (and grungy, of course) gym 
for boxing lessons, This is Dad's will and his preparation of his 
son for a tough life. But the kid is not gifted in that direction.
One day, after messing up his pugilism, as he lingers in the gym 
Billy chances on a lady's ballet lesson for a bunch of little girls 
in tutus. Somehow drawn to that class, he manages to join it, and is 
not only accepted by teacher Mrs. Wilkinson, but quite soon 
encouraged, then specially coached by her. She knows that she has a 
fine dancer-to-be on her hands. And she becomes, sort of, his 
surrogate mom. She is a champion chain-smoker, which strikes an 
overdone note since she could hardly dance with the kid with all the 
stuff he inhales around the clock.
Then again, perhaps the black-lung disease, the scourge of miners, 
may have built up in the atmosphere some sort of immunity to mere 
tobacco. Go figure. 
The movie is discreet and does not push any of its elements. It 
moves at a slow but sensible, natural pace, even  languishing, if 
compared to the  frantic tempo of so many US films.
Dad is puzzled, at first worried that this is a sign of "poofiness" 
but comes to accept that the old status quo has changed.  Especially 
when, after some sturm und drang, Mrs. W. wants Billy to audition 
for the Royal Academy of Dance. Which he does, and which makes him 
officially a dancing apprentice.
In an awkward post-scriptum, 13 years later Dad and Tony see Billy 
dancing what I take to be a major ballet role in London, (pronounced 
Loundon).
Billy is as natural as they come the way he is played by Jamie Bell, 
who began to dance at age six, comes from a Northern town similar to 
that of the movie, and gives to his part a quietly original, modest 
and realistic shape.
He is a real find. The rest of the cast are very good. The movie 
flows quietly like the Don River with no sudden changes, no 
particularly spectacular dances. Yet the violent background of 
miners vs. police is ever present, as is the cul-de-sac future of 
the strikers. 
Curiously, the image that I remember best is that of the 
black-uniformed police, their transparent-plastic shields and their 
ominous sticks forming a massive line -- indeed, a wall--and 
starting to beat the shields in a way that's uncannily like the 
shield-and-spear natives doing exactly the same in "Zulu" and in 
"Zulu Dawn."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 BILLY ELLIOT (director: Stephen Daldry; screenwriter: Lee Hall;
 cinematographer: Brian Tufano; editor: John Wilson; cast: Julie
 Walters (Mrs. Wilkinson), Gary Lewis (Dad, Jackie Elliot), Jamie Bell
 (Billy Elliot), Jamie Draven (Tony Elliot), Stuart Wells (Michael),
 Jean Heywood (Grandma), Nicola Blackwell (Debbie Wilkinson), Adam
 Cooper (Billy, aged 25); Runtime: 109; Universal Pictures; 2000-UK)
A contrived "feel good" film set in a depressed coal mining town of
Northeast England in 1984. It results in a predictable story about
11-year-old Billy Elliot (Jamie Bell) who is forced by his gruff,
striking coal miner father (Gary Lewis) to take boxing lessons. The
striking coal mining town is an armed camp of faceless police covered by
transparent-plastic shields and dressed in riot gear due to Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher's decision to close some mines because they
are losing money. The police are always present on the streets and add a
grim reminder of how the town resembles a police state. Billy's glum
family consists of his embittered, widowed father, his roughneck older
brother Tony (Draven) who is also a striking coal miner and with whom
Billy shares a room, and Billy's senile granny (Heywood), who wishes out
loud that she could have been a dancer.
Billy is no good as a boxer and one day by chance a ballet class of all
girls shares the floor with his boxing class, as their space is being
used by the strikers for a soup kitchen. The chain-smoking, crabby
teacher, Mrs. Wilkinson (Julie Walters), who proudly wears her
middle-class status like a soldier wears his medals and lives in a more
comfortable part of town than Billy. She allows him to join her class
whereby he starts secretly attending on a regular basis, giving her the
50 pence his dad gives him for boxing lessons. In return, she will act
as his surrogate mother and private ballet tutor, encouraging him to
audition for a national ballet school.
When dad discovers that Billy is taking ballet lessons, he goes
ballistic and asserts that only "poofs" take ballet, it's a homosexual
thing and not for real men. This is also shown to be the prevailing
opinion of every other coal miner in town--that it's something only for
the lassies to do. As a result, Billy goes out of the way to indicate
that he's heterosexual but he also shows that he has nothing against
homosexuals.
As an answer to his angry dad, Billy lets his dancing do the talking as
he shows off what he learned in ballet and how excited about it he is,
exuberantly dancing on the red brick project's rooftop of his public
housing complex and down his neighborhood's steep inclined street, which
faces the ocean. This was the most energetic scene in the film and the
only one that kept me fully awake, as the kid convinced me he could
dance with pep.
As the kid stands up to his dad and brother, and they are shown to be
worn-out from the frustrations of the failing strike, the proud father
reconsiders his position and goes to see Mrs. Wilkinson in her home to
tell her he doesn't want charity from her, that he will take care of his
child's expenses and take him to London for an audition to the Royal
Ballet School. It turns out dad is really good-hearted and realizes that
Billy has a good chance of escaping the mines and decides to fully back
him. This is what the audience wants to hear and over the bleak
background of the strike, the most exciting moment in the story is
waiting for the letter to arrive from the London ballet school admitting
him.
In the last scenes it shows Billy as a grown man of 25 starring onstage,
with his proud dad and his brother in the audience watching him leap in
the air to begin the show, as he does it with the same electric charge
he showed as a kid. The film ends showing that the miners have been
forced in humiliation to return to work without a settlement, as their
union caved in. In the final contrived shot, dad is seen going down into
the mine with the other workers. It makes for a story that is all too
familiar to catch my attention, except to note that Jamie Bell was
outstanding as the determined kid who made up his mind to express
himself by doing his thing, that Julie Walters did a good job of showing
the class differences that separates her from the working-class Gary
Lewis, as each tried to give their role breath in the confines of the
narrow straight jacket the script put them in, with Julie baring more of
herself than being just a pushy teacher getting her student prepared for
a more stimulating life, but is someone who has to brace herself daily
for her unfulfilled marriage and for enduring the lack of culture in her
hometown.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Call it The Full Monty 2.  You can even call it Rocky VI - I don't
really care.  Billy Elliot is the `Feel Good Movie of the Year' in a
time when four of the last five Best Picture winners featured main
characters that died in the final reel.  It's just not cool to be the
FGMOTY anymore, and the films that try to shoot for FGMOTY status
usually fail miserably by cramming schmaltz down your throat (i.e., Pay
It Forward).
While Elliot's story isn't particularly groundbreaking, the film manages
to avoid the gimmicky devices and relentless button-pushing that usually
derail FGMOTY wannabes.  Instead, it relies on terrific acting
performances, highlighted by 13-year-old newcomer Jamie Bell, who plays
the titular Elliot.  I haven't found myself rooting for a character this
fiercely in a long, long time, and if this film doesn't put a smile on
your face and a lump in your throat, there's something very wrong with
you.
Elliot is set in a small town in northeast England during a coal miners'
strike in 1984.  The film opens with 11-year-old Billy jumping up and
down on his bed to his brother's record collection (the soundtrack is
loaded with T-Rex tunes).  Billy shares his bedroom with older brother
Tony (Jamie Draven), who, like their father (Gary Lewis, East is East),
spends his time on the picket line throwing produce at the scabs who
have taken their jobs.  Billy breaks up his day between keeping an eye
on his senile grandmother (Jean Heywood) and plunking away at the piano
that his dead mother used to play.
Although money is tight, Billy's father gives him a stipend for weekly
boxing lessons.  He's awful at it, and one night after practice, Billy
sticks around and watches a group of young girls learn ballet.
Infatuated by the dancing, Billy joins in and finds that he's quite good
at it, despite worrying that he'll become `a right sissy.'  The teacher,
Mrs. Wilkinson (Julie Walters, Titanic Town), is a crass, chain-smoking
teacher who could be a cousin to Brenda Blethyn's character in Little
Voice, but she recognizes Billy's talent and suddenly finds herself with
a new interest in her work.
The rest of the film follows a fairly predictable trajectory, with Billy
struggling to perfect his craft for an audition at the Royal Ballet
School in London.  Mrs. Wilkinson becomes somewhat of a mother figure to
him, and his father and brother hit the roof when they find out that
their own blood is dabbling in poofy dancing (these are the kind of
blue-collar Englishmen that think Mikhail Barishnikov is a striker for
Dynamo Kiev).
The film does have a couple of minor hitches, like the inclusion of a
subplot featuring Billy's cross-dressing best friend (Stuart Wells, in
his film debut) and the failure to beef up the sweet but neglected
subplot involving Billy and Mrs. Wilkinson's daughter, Debbie (Nicola
Blackwell a dead ringer for Patricia Clarkson).  But the picture is
held together by a truly inspirational performance from young Bell, who
does an extremely good job of towing the delicate line between childhood
and adulthood.
Elliot is the feature film directorial debut of Stephen Daldry, whose
short film Eight was nominated for a British Academy Award in 1998.  The
script was written by Lee Hall, who is also making his feature film
debut with this film festival favorite that has fared well in the early
rounds of year-end accolades.  Comparisons to the out-of-left-field hit
The Full Monty are going to be inevitable, as each film features
working-class stiffs who become unlikely local heroes.  And I wouldn't
be surprised to see Elliot land a Monty-esque load of Oscar nominations,
either.
1:48  R for adult language, violence and underage drinking

Author
Jerry Saravia
To be honest, I approached this movie with a certain dread. The 
advertisements called it: uplifting! Oscar-worthy! Finally, a bloody good 
film about the human soul and the triumph of the human spirit! Well, a bloody 
good film about the human soul is "Taxi Driver" but I know what people want 
from the cinema nowadays. Sentiment and in equal doses with a touch of heavy 
syrup added to make you feel not so much uplifted but weepy. I resent when 
manipulative tearjerkers exist because there is rarely much soul or humanity 
in them. Think of the countless Lifetime TV movies-of-the-week, or for that 
matter, the absurdly awful "The Evening Star," which led us to believe that a 
huge mortality rate equals emotion. Not so. But I digress. "Billy Elliot" 
could have been a contender for most sentimental hogwash of the year but it 
is not: it is a humane, positively uplifting film guaranteed to at least 
place a smile on your face. 
Billy Elliot (the extraordinary Jamie Bell) is a young boy living in the poor 
section of Northern England with his tough-as-nails father, Jackie (Gary 
Lewis), and Billy's older, rougher brother, Tony (Jamie Draven). Billy takes 
care of his grandmother, who also lives with him, while his father and 
brother are mining strikers. This means they are unemployed at the moment, 
and the last thing they need to hear is that Billy is thinking of becoming a 
ballet dancer!
But the macho ethic of Jackie and Tony does not allow for fairies or swans, 
so to speak. Billy actually takes up boxing but lacks the drive and the 
attitude. One day, he observes a ballet class taking place in the same 
gymnasium where he boxes. Billy is transfixed and decides to learn ballet. 
Why? Even he doesn't know but it does bring some energy and enthusiasm to the 
kid - he feels alive when he dances. The gum-chewing teacher (Julie Walters) 
instructs the boy, despite stern objections from Jackie and Tony. Billy loves 
ballet and the movement of the body swaying to the strains of Tchaikovsky's 
"Swan Ballet" - it is definitely an escape for the boy from the horrors at 
home. The teacher is so impressed with the boy that she tells him to audition 
for the Royal Ballet School in London. 
"Billy Elliot" is essentially the well-traveled road about a kid from a poor 
town who plans to make a difference by following his dreams. The tale is 
nothing new but of course, what matters is how it is told. What remains 
questionable is the amount of time invested in Jackie and Tony's lives, which 
breaks the tension and charisma of watching Billy practice his ballet. Jackie 
and Tony are grim-faced strikers, and they are fed up with life and all it 
has to offer - Jackie is also widowed. This no doubt affects Billy, but the 
movie follows the formula to the hilt without ever following its heart. Sure, 
Jackie is disapproving of his son's artistic intentions but he comes around. 
He has a change of heart and becomes a scab, choosing to go to work to 
support his son's travel expenses to London. The gritty realism we are given 
about a father torn by his love for his long-lost wife and by his desire to 
not work doesn't wash, nor does Tony's sudden change-of-heart (if I am not 
mistaken, he even wears an apron in one scene!) These plot changes do not 
qualify as spoilers because if you've seen "Rocky" or "Flashdance," you've 
seen this same tale woven by many. 
What does wash are the beautifully choreographed ballet scenes - this Jamie 
Bell is one hell of a dancer, and a fine actor to boot (Haley Joel Osment, 
watch out!) He is charismatic, soulful, determined, enthusiastic, and a 
fighter - he will not quit until he gets those dance moves right. It is sheer 
bliss to watch any scene with Bell, and his moments with Julie Walters are 
awe-inspiring (not as good though as the similar tale with Shirley MacLaine 
in "Madame Sousatzka"). There also some wonderful scenes between Billy and 
his best friend, Michael (Stuart Wells), who wears his mother's clothes. I 
also like the tender scenes between Billy and the teacher's daughter (Nicola 
Blackwell). But whenever the film dwells on the mine strike, it is as if we 
were watching another film entirely. One has the grit and the other has the 
fantasy, and the two do not mesh evenly. 
"Billy Elliot" doesn't succumb to the overt sentimentality of typical 
Hollywood fare by reminding us when to weep. It builds on the charismatic 
Jamie Bell, who uplifts us in spite of the cliches and uneven subplot 
surrounding him. He reminds us of how we can follow our dreams wherever they 
take us.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
To be honest, I approached this movie with a certain dread. The 
advertisements called it: uplifting! Oscar-worthy! Finally, a bloody good 
film about the human soul and the triumph of the human spirit! Well, a bloody 
good film about the human soul is "Taxi Driver" but I know what people want 
from the cinema nowadays. Sentiment and in equal doses with a touch of heavy 
syrup added to make you feel not so much uplifted but weepy. I resent when 
manipulative tearjerkers exist because there is rarely much soul or humanity 
in them. Think of the countless Lifetime TV movies-of-the-week, or for that 
matter, the absurdly awful "The Evening Star," which led us to believe that a 
huge mortality rate equals emotion. Not so. But I digress. "Billy Elliot" 
could have been a contender for most sentimental hogwash of the year but it 
is not: it is a humane, positively uplifting film guaranteed to at least 
place a smile on your face. 
Billy Elliot (the extraordinary Jamie Bell) is a young boy living in the poor 
section of Northern England with his tough-as-nails father, Jackie (Gary 
Lewis), and Billy's older, rougher brother, Tony (Jamie Draven). Billy takes 
care of his grandmother, who also lives with him, while his father and 
brother act as scabs - they protest the town's ongoing mine strike. This 
means they are unemployed at the moment, and the last thing they need to hear 
is that Billy is thinking of becoming a ballet dancer!
But the macho ethic of Jackie and Tony does not allow for fairies or swans, 
so to speak. Billy actually takes up boxing but lacks the drive and the 
attitude. One day, he observes a ballet class taking place in the same 
gymnasium where he boxes. Billy is transfixed and decides to learn ballet. 
Why? Even he doesn't know but it does bring some energy and enthusiasm to the 
kid - he feels alive when he dances. The gum-chewing teacher (Julie Walters) 
instructs the boy, despite stern objections from Jackie and Tony. Billy loves 
ballet and the movement of the body swaying to the strains of Tchaikovsky's 
"Swan Ballet" - it is definitely an escape for the boy from the horrors at 
home. The teacher is so impressed with the boy that she tells him to audition 
for the Royal Ballet School in London. 
"Billy Elliot" is essentially the well-traveled road about a kid from a poor 
town who plans to make a difference by following his dreams. The tale is 
nothing new but of course, what matters is how it is told. What remains 
questionable is the amount of time invested in Jackie and Tony's lives, which 
breaks the tension and charisma of watching Billy practice his ballet. Jackie 
and Tony are scabs, and they are fed up with life and all it has to offer - 
Jackie is also widowed. This no doubt affects Billy, but the movie follows 
the formula to the hilt without ever following its heart. Sure, Jackie is 
disapproving of his son's artistic intentions but he comes around. As a scab, 
he chooses to go to work to support his son's travel expenses to London. The 
gritty realism we are given about a father torn by his love for his long-lost 
wife and by his desire to not work doesn't wash, nor does Tony's sudden 
change-of-heart (if I am not mistaken, he even wears an apron in one scene!) 
These plot changes do not qualify as spoilers because if you've seen "Rocky" 
or "Flashdance," you've seen this same tale woven by many. 
What does wash are the beautifully choreographed ballet scenes - this Jamie 
Bell is one hell of a dancer, and a fine actor to boot (Haley Joel Osment, 
watch out!) He is charismatic, soulful, determined, enthusiastic, and a 
fighter - he will not quit until he gets those dance moves right. It is sheer 
bliss to watch any scene with Bell, and his moments with Julie Walters are 
awe-inspiring (not as good though as the similar tale with Shirley MacLaine 
in "Madame Sousatzka"). There also some wonderful scenes between Billy and 
his best friend, Michael (Stuart Wells), who wears his mother's clothes. I 
also like the tender scenes between Billy and the teacher's daughter (Nicola 
Blackwell). But whenever the film dwells on the mine strike, it is as if we 
were watching another film entirely. One has the grit and the other has the 
fantasy, and the two do not mesh evenly. 
"Billy Elliot" doesn't succumb to the overt sentimentality of typical 
Hollywood fare by reminding us when to weep. It builds on the charismatic 
Jamie Bell, who uplifts us in spite of the cliches and uneven subplot 
surrounding him. He reminds us of how we can follow our dreams wherever they 
take us.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
