Title
Review for Better Than Chocolate (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Paul Foley
`Better Than Chocolate' is a sweet and sexy comedy; 
sparkling dialogue and a range of delightful characters
highlight this Canadian independent. Plus, it includes a
finger-painting scene that makes the potter's wheel scene in
`Ghost' look as tame as a church social.  
Set in the Vancouver, BC lesbian community, it's your basic
girl meets girl, girl loses girl, girl gets girl story.  Maggie's
(Karyn Dwyer) life suddenly becomes very complicated when
her mother (Crewson) telephones to announce she's getting a
divorce and needs to come stay with her.  Maggie has yet to tell
her mother that she's dropped out of University, is a lesbian,
and is currently living in the back of the bookshop where she
works.  She finds a loft to sublet in the nick of time, but she
also finds herself involved with Kim (Cox), a free spirited,
nomadic artist.  When the van Kim lives in is towed away and
impounded (with both women inside--passion will not wait),
Kim moves in with her.
The straight mother is hilariously oblivious.  She thinks Ten
Percent Books, the name of the bookstore where her daughter
works, means it's a discount shop.  Maggie makes a last
minute search of the loft, owned by a safe-sex activist,
frantically hiding dildoes; a sweep that is of course not one
hundred percent effective.  No more successful is Maggie and
Kim's attempt to make love quietly in the large but necessarily
open living space they're sharing with her mother and teenage
brother.  Kim, who makes no secret of her sexual orientation,
finds Maggie's desperate efforts to conceal hers ridiculous. 
Then irritating and offensive.  Finally, it leads to a break
between the two.
Meanwhile, the bookstore is under siege by Customs, who has
been seizing its shipments of books as pornographic, as well as
by local skinheads, whose methods are more direct and a good
deal more dangerous.  Frances, the beleaguered shop owner, is
wound as tight as a violin string.  This spells bad news for
Judy, the transvestite man who's in love with her.  All of these
story threads are woven neatly together into one fast-paced
plot.
Although the threats to this tightly knit community are very
real, the film never becomes sanctimonious and even enjoys a
bit of self-mockery.  Maggie, though she's in the process of
liberating herself, becomes acutely uncomfortable when her
mother talks about her own sex life (or rather lack of one). 
Judy is attacked by a lesbian for using the women's restroom
instead of the men's, proving no one has a monopoly on
intolerance.
On the whole, though, the tone is kept light.  Gradually,
everyone either finds, or is restored to, her proper partner. 
There's a sense that if love may not conquer all, it certainly
makes everything easier to cope with.  This makes the ending a
bit facile.  But, hey, this is a comedy after all.
`Better Than Chocolate' is better than most.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Anne Wheeler's BETTER THAN CHOCOLATE, a lesbian, romantic comedy with
an infectiously happy spirit, Maggie (Karyn Dwyer) has just dropped out
of college.
Maggie was going to be a lawyer, or so her mother thought, but now she
works at a tiny bookstore called "Ten Percent Books" -- no, it's not a
discount store.  The store has one run-in after another with the legal
authorities.  It seems that in Canada, where the story takes place,
lesbian books and videos are frequently considered obscene.  (Dildos of
many colors and sizes, which appear in the film in profusion, apparently
are legal, as are the many other sex toys that serve as props in this
sexual romp.)
After Maggie strikes up a romance with an itinerate painter, Kim
(Christina Cox), and invites her to move in, Maggie's mother and brother
show up and move in for a long visit.  Of course, Maggie has never told
her mom the truth about her sexuality, so mom keeps asking her about
various boyfriends.
The plot is actually fairly irrelevant in this character-driven story.
Maggie, with her luscious, curly, reddish-brown hair and her
all-American girl looks, would be a catch for anybody.  But the movie
makes Maggie, rather than Kim, the one that makes the first move.
All of the characters have their little stories to tell.  Maggie's
mother, Lila (Wendy Crewson), turns out to be getting a divorce from her
cheating, lawyer husband.  She has read that a woman's chance of having
sex decreases by eighty percent after age 40, so she has turned to
chocolate, which she says is the next best thing.  A treasure trove of
sex toys that she finds under Maggie's bed serves up one of the funniest
and, for Lila and the audience, one of the most satisfying scenes.
The most unusual character, and one of the best, is played by Peter
Outerbridge as the gentle and soft-spoken Judy, a woman soon to have the
last of her operations to eradicate her original male sex.  Judy
performs at a nightclub, in which the performers sing and dance to a
host of fun numbers -- the best being "Julie Christy Makes Me So Misty."
Thrown in with the light-hearted story is a subplot about anti-lesbian
hatred.  It would have been better left for another movie in which it
could be explored with more depth and seriousness.  It is in the erotic
romance and the quirky comedy that the audiences will find enjoyment and
pleasure in BETTER THAN CHOCOLATE.
BETTER THAN CHOCOLATE runs 1:41.  It is not rated but would be R or
NC-17 for strong, explicit sex and nudity and for language and violence.
The film isn't appropriate for teens, except for the oldest and most
mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Ridge
     The new les-genda romantic comedy łBetter Than Chocolate˛ has 
a good first act, followed by a rather shitty second, then falls 
apart completely in the third and final.  And, with one scene:  Maggie 
(beautiful red-head Karyn Dwyer), who works in an adult novelty shop, 
has met and fallen for Kim (Christina Cox), a caricature artist; 
Maggiešs mother (played by Wendy Crewson) has moved in with them both, 
unaware the nature of their relationship, and finds them in bed together.  
She asks whatšs going on, and Maggie lashes out.  About feeling controlled 
by mom, and how their different, and this is her life; blah blah.  Itšs a 
valid argument, actually - or, would be - except that the mother has not 
once to that moment said a thing negative toward her daughter, or criticized 
her in any way.  So, the scene plays a mite forced and overwrought.  Kim, 
who was waiting for her lover to fess up about them, mopes off with a łfuck 
you˛, and leaves town; contrived.  There should be another scene, here, of 
the girls arguing just a little longer - more than three seconds, I mean - 
before blowing up at one another and going separate ways.  It gets worse:  
the store where Maggie works has trouble with customs, and in protest, she 
stands naked on window display for the press.  Noone shows up, though, 
aside from gay-bashers who throw flaries into the store, so what was the 
point of doing it that time of night?  And, what was she hoping to prove?  
Maggie hasnšt shown much concern, one way or another, for the whole censorship 
issue (save for a book ice sculpture, donšt ask), nor the storešs welfare.  
So, um... why?  Channeling a bit of emotionally-distraught energy through 
anything but pining futilly over lost love?  I donšt know; unclear.  And, 
why do gay-bashers have to make an appearance (twice, no less) at all?  We 
even get an explosion (how very Hollywood, Trimark) in the end to tidy 
everything up - relationships, everything - and you can just hear that Sarah 
MacLachlan song coming on, as everybody stands around, happy, and our lovers 
reunite at the last second.
     Too much, too much.  łBetter˛ has a distinct s.f.w. air about it, 
almost from first frame to last.  The best thing about it, these two girls, 
shouldšve been the filmšs focalpoint, but they're treated as an afterthought.  
Which is a shame, because Cox (who resembles a grown-up twin from łFull 
House˛) and Dwyer make a nice, sexy couple.  Theyšre attractive, good-
natured and totally into eachother.  But, theyšre forgotten; two indisputably 
erotic sex scenes, and thatšs it.  I especially liked the dance club sequence, 
where the one girl gives the other a rose;  and, the body painting.  But, 
itšs hard to compete with such trite filler:  do we care what Maggiešs 
dingbat mom (fine to be the comic stooge, but show a little intelligence) 
will think of her daughteršs lifestyle?  Or, if the drag queen (well played 
by Peter Outerbridge) will win over the neurotic store owner?  Does the film 
have to tell us not everyone with same-sex proclivity is accepted in todayšs 
society; duh, we know that, letšs move on.  
     This is one of the yearšs worst scripts, about so much itšs about nothing.  
Išd keep act one, because the dialogue is smooth and witty, remove everything 
else that happens in the film, leave the sex where it is and start over.  Or, 
no - just take these two young leads and put them in something smarter and 
more serious.  They were certainly ready for it. 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BETTER THAN CHOCOLATE (Canada, 1999) *** Directed by Anne Wheeler. 
Written by Peggy Thomson. Photography, Gregory Middleton. 
Editing,Alison Grace. Music Graeme Coleman. Production design, David 
Roberts. Produced by Sharon McGowan and Peggy Thomson. Cast: Wendy 
Crewson (Lila), Karyn Dwyer (Maggie), Christina Cox (Kim), Ann-Marie 
MacDonald (Frances), Marya Delver (Carla), Kevin Mundy (Paul),  Peter 
Outerbridge (Judy/Jeremy) et al. A Trimark Pictures release.103 
minutes.Not rated (sex but not objectionable to sophisticated adults)
Last week  I saw  Trick, a  gay (merry) gay (sexually) movie. This 
week I saw the lesbian romantic comedy Better Than Chocolate. I keep 
no statistics on film genres, but it would seem that same-sex light 
fare is on the increase.
No doubt, any growing genre entails the creation of its own types of 
cliches. Even the so-called "independent" movies develop formulas. 
But  in the case of gay-lesbian ones, it is rather nice to see cinema 
widening its scope--especially when this is done with total 
un-selfconciousness. If you think of those works as dealing with 
minorities, they could even help to get pictures out of the rut of 
older, mainstream types, by encouraging the making of movies about 
other minorities: vegetarians, atheists, Southern Democrats, 
well-paid teachers, efficient administrators, watchers of good TV, 
good spellers, people who use "whom" instead of "who," foreign-movie 
buffs, and so on. What a reservoir of fresh subjects!
The Canadian Better Than Chocolate is a light, zippy situation-yarn 
which won the top prize at the latest Gay and Lesbian Film Festival 
in London. Actually, it is not very exciting, yet it's not dull 
either, and it has its own charm.
Set in a lesbian milieu of Vancouver, its major focus is on Maggie 
and Kim . Maggie is a 19-year old college drop-out, who wants to be a 
writer and live "real life." She is cute. ( I like this word; it 
means something special and has no precise equivalent in any other 
language I know). By day she works in the lesbian Ten Percent 
Bookstore. By night she performs  (regularly or not, it's unclear) at 
a lesbian club.
Maggie meets the somewhat older Kim, an itinerant artist whose 
drawings and body-painting are not bad at all. Kim lives in her van. 
For the two girls it's love at first sight.  A quick first attempt at 
physical consummation takes place inside the van. It is interrupted, 
to their bewilderment (and laughter) as the illegally parked vehicle 
gets hauled away to the pound. Good gag.
Maggie, on the phone Lila, her mother, learns that she is divorcing 
Maggie's stepfather as that man has been sleeping for a year with a 
younger woman, his partner's wife I believe, but I can't guarantee 
this. Lila, in her upheaval, hears from Maggie that she's not in 
school, but makes no fuss. Instead, she announces that she's coming 
all the way from the distant East of the United States,with Paul (17 
or so), Maggie's hunkish brother.They will  stay (temporarily, I 
suppose) with Maggie.
Metaphorically speaking, trumpets blare and drums beat as Maggie, who 
sleeps in the bookstore and has not fessed up her sexual preferences 
to Mom, rushes to find a place to live in "en famille," which would 
also include "housemate" Kim. From a lesbian lady, she rents, for a 
short time, a large and rather shoddy loft.
Mom and Brother show up.  A charade familiar from hetero-films gets 
going. Lila is     ditzy  and likable. She neither perceives nor is 
told by Maggie of the latter's sex choices. (But on his first morning 
there, Brother catches the girls making love. He takes it with cool 
and naturalness). Semi-complications ensue. These also involve 
30-plus Judy who is also Jeremy, a transsexual in every way except 
that, if I got this right, he hasn't yet had The Operation. He/she is 
very simpatico and strikes a frienship with Mom, who has no clue 
about "her" being a man.
Later at the club Judy performs the song "I'm not a f... drag queen" 
well and with brio.  But how I missed having a youngish Marlene 
Dietrich doing it! There's also a trio of day-glo/black light singers 
who do a lively homage to Julie Christie. (I'll have to find out more 
about her).
There are several small felicities, side events and mini-subplots : 
the Customs impound a shipment of porno (?) books from the United 
States; Judy "outs" her secret love for Frances, the bookstore's shy, 
spinsterish owner; Lila stumbles onto a stash of the loft-owner's sex 
toys and happily experiments with them; Paul gets panting sex going 
with the bookstore's pansexual employee: etc. etc.
The un-rated movie's sex scenes are pretty steamy-hot but ought not 
to annoy a savvy public. The younger actresses are convincing but no 
more. Peter Outerbridge (as Judy) is very good in moods that mix or 
alternate pathos and sophistication. Wendy Crewson (as Lila) all but 
steals the show.
The rub comes in some ways that make the film shaky.The characters, 
beyond functioning as servants to the plot, have really no dimension, 
personality or character. Maggie's efforts to hide her sexual nature 
from Mom are pretty inexplicable, since Lila seems to be receptive. 
And Lila's blitheness or blindness to what is obvious is overdone.
The latter weakness could have been taken care of by clues that Lila 
is so involved in her own problems thats she can't  see the woods for 
the trees; and/or by having her get it but pretend she does not;  or 
by refusing to admit it. Too bad, since Ms Crewson (about whom I know 
nothing, given the lack of press information) is such a colorful and 
dynamic performer.
The film's title comes from a Sarah McLachlan song, "ice cream." Lila 
spells it out : she is a secret chocolate-junkie.  At some point she 
declares to the young ones, with her habitual candor and directness: 
"Since I probably won't ever have sex again, chocolate is the only 
pleasure left me." (That was before she discovered the sex gagdgets).
Let's not get too serious, however. There are side-isssues and 
subtexts about valid, serious matters, but the movie is primarily 
pleasant, good-humored, high-energy  fluff.
