Title
Review for Myth of Fingerprints, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
David N. Butterworth
The imposing New England homestead that serves as center stage in "The Myth
of Fingerprints" also serves as an obvious yet apt metaphor for the
dysfunctional American family that was raised there.  In long shot it's
strikingly handsome, but up close its cracked and peeling paint indicate
the need for repair.
In a wintry November setting writer/director Bart Freundlich weaves his
discriminating, multi-layered story of a family reunion that's wrought with
angst and grief.  On the surface, "The Myth of Fingerprints" might seem
like any old home-for-the-holidays scenery chawfest in which the central
characters get toasted and roasted along with the bird.  But Freundlich's
take is a little different.
Why do people subject themselves to such familial hostility each and every
year?  What causes grown children to revert to infantile behavior in the
presence of their parents?  And do you have to have had a healthy family
life in order to have a successful relationship?
While "The Myth of Fingerprints" is bigger on questions than it is on
answers, it challenges its audience to think.
Bigger, perhaps, and more intimidating than the ancestral centerpiece is
Hal (Roy Scheider), the impassionate, detached patriarch.  He's a little
odd and visibly wrestling some deep, dark secret.  It's Thanksgiving, and
Hal and his faithful, nurturing wife Lena (the dependable Blythe Danner)
are welcoming their four adult children home after a three year absence.
Eldest daughter Mia (Julianne Moore, who's a hot property these days) and
son Jake (Michael Vartan) are bringing along their significant others,
causing Dad to comment "There's more of them than I remember."
The film is almost perfectly cast with performances to match.  Noah Wyle,
who brings the discontent son Warren to life, is a quivering mass of
brooding sensitivity.  Laurel Holloman plays the pesky younger daughter
Leigh to coquettish perfection.  Moore, too, is especially good.  Mia's
bitterness almost single-handedly makes the tensions run high.
First-timer Freundlich resists the easy temptation to bring these tensions
to an explosive, emotional head and instead develops the characters slowly
and with subtlety, drawing us in, exploring their motivations, their
weaknesses, and their desires.
But there is laughter among the tears; the director balances the drama with
humor and pointed observations, lightening the mood with a flurry of eager
bedfellows.  In addition, the film has a palpable sensuality; you can feel
the cold of the New England air and smell the antiquities, the wood smoke,
the oil on a gun stock.  "The Myth of Fingerprints" shows us how families
interact, collide, kiss, and maybe even make up.  It's about lovers and
friends, and how interchangeable these sometimes are.  And how mistakes can
turn a family inside out.
Family gatherings are often fraught with stresses and anxieties and "The
Myth of Fingerprints" skillfully demonstrates that you don't have to use
bombast--just high-caliber acting and introspective writing--to make these
things interesting.

Author
Alex Fung

THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS (Sony Pictures Classics - 1997)
Starring Arija Bareikis, Blythe Danner, Hope Davis, Laurel Holloman,
  Brian Kerwin, James LeGros, Julianne Moore, Roy Scheider,
  Michael Vartan, Noah Wyle
Screenplay by Bart Freundlich
Produced by Mary Jane Skalski, Tim Perell, Bart Freundlich
Directed by Bart Freundlich
Running time: 93 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
Bart Freundlich's feature film debut, THE MYTH OF FINGRPRINTS, is
exciting -- not for the film itself, but for the promise it heralds
for its helmer and screenwriter.  He demonstrates a real gift for
sharp, clever dialogue and has created a series of rich, interesting,
and well-developed credible characters, while his direction of the
film is astonishingly assured for a first-timer, with good comic
pacing and adept camera work.  Although THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS
features a large ensemble cast and a myriad of concurrent subplots,
Mr. Freundlich skillfully juggles his many characters in an evenly
focused fashion where no single storyline inadvertently takes
dominance in the film.
The shame is that THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS doesn't have a terribly
interesting plot: Mr. Freundlich's film is an all-too-familiar tale
of a dysfunctional family reuniting for Thanksgiving weekend, where
closeted skeletons eventually are revealed after much wistful
retrospective discussion by family members over the course of the
holiday.  THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS handles this routine storyline in
a solid fashion -- it *is* an entertaining film -- but it's somewhat
frustrating that such witty dialogue and such great characters as
those Mr. Freundlich have fashioned are used in service of a plot
which is not their equal in terms of calibre or ambition.
Set in chilly New England, the film opens with Lena (Blythe Danner)
and Hal (Roy Scheider) in preparation for the return of their four
adult children after an absence of three years.  In quick succession,
siblings Leigh (Laurel Holloman), Jake (Michael Vartan), Mia
(Julianne Moore), and Warren (Noah Wyle) pass through the front doors
of the family home, with Jake bringing along forthright free-spirited
girlfriend Margaret (Hope Davis), and Mia towing sadsack boyfriend
Elliot (Brian Kerwin).  While appearing on the surface to be a
typical happy American family, eccentricities and quirks are unveiled
and buried secrets are unsurfaced which reveal the deep-rooted
dysfunctionality which has splintered apart the family.
While the pensive moments in THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS register
nicely, the film's greatest strength is in the interaction between
the characters, which come off as easy, amusing and boisterous.  Each
of the siblings have grown up coping with the dour family environment
in different fashions.  Leigh is mischievous and brash, while Mia is
consumed by bitterness and has not a kind word to snap at anyone.
Jake and younger brother Warren appear on the exterior to be
wholesome, clean-cut, well-adjusted young men, but they are fighting
their own interior demons: Jake is nagged by self-doubt, while Warren
is haunted by the loss of his relationship with high school
sweetheart Daphne (Arija Bareikis) and is masking a sense of
overwhelming sadness.  None of them are able to relate on a personal
level to their father Hal, who is decidedly eccentric and unable to
communicate with his children on any level, even skulking off to the
treehouse to avoid discussion.  The family's patient matriarch Lena
is the single common element in these two disparate sets.
Mr. Freundlich benefits from a fine ensemble cast, all of whom turn
in good performances and have good chemistry with one another.  Ms.
Holloman, a rising new star, is particularly good as Leigh, the
playful imp of the family, while Ms. Davis turns in a very funny
performance as Margaret, whose sprightly demeanour and propensity to
speak what's foremost on her mind brings about many embarrassing and
amusing moments.  Ms. Moore's performance is the most interesting in
the group; she successfully depicts Mia's unmitigated rage masking a
well of sorrow, and when she encounters old grade schoolmate
Leonard/Cezanne (James LeGros) during a trip into town, one can feel
her desperation as she listens to his wistful story -- she *wants* to
believe him, and that comes through in Ms. Moore's performance.
THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS marks the first major feature film for Mr.
Wyle since his emergence as a public figure with the success of the
television drama ER.  I first noticed him in Michael Bortman's
CROOKED HEARTS (and subsequently spent several years wondering
whatever happened to this promising young actor), which is extremely
similar on a thematic basis to THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS; the number
of parallels between the two films is striking.  As Mr. Wyle was very
keen on THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS, being the first in the cast to sign
on to the project and even obtaining a credit as an associate
producer, there is ample cause to assume that he has some sort of
predisposed affinity for material of this nature.
THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS doesn't break any new ground with its
routine storyline -- it follows the familiar path tread by all films
of this sort -- but it generates some big laughs and is a solid and
successfully amusing diversion.  The film is a wholly respectable
first feature, and Mr. Freundlich demonstrates a great deal of
promise as a screenwriter and, to a slightly lesser extent, as a
director -- keep an eye out for him: if his next project is built
around a more interesting and ambitious story, it could be very good
indeed.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Man, that was a big spider.  It was so big I thought I saw a small dog
 caught in its web.  We are talking big.  That spider could've kicked
 Charlotte's ass." - Hope Davis, THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 10/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Noah Wyle, Julianne Moore, Roy Scheider, Blythe Danner, 
      Michael Vartan, Laurel Holloman, Hope Davis, Brian Kerwin, 
      Arija Bareikis, James LeGros
Director: Bart Freundlich
Producers: Mary Jane Skalski, Tim Perell, Bart Freundlich
Screenplay: Bart Freundlich
Cinematography: Stephen Kazmierski
Music: David Bridie, John Phillips
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     In the movies, the holidays are times when dysfunctional families 
come together, air their differences, then renew their closeness so that 
everyone can go home happy.  It's frequently a melodramatic and cloying 
process, and, even when there are gifted actors involved (such as Holly 
Hunter in the Jodie Foster-directed HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS), watching 
such a film can be a dull, uninvolving process.  With THE MYTH OF 
FINGERPRINTS, however, writer/director Bart Freundlich has scored a 
coup:  he has created a low-key holiday drama that's refreshing not only 
because it lacks the big discovery melodrama of most similar movies but 
because it's entirely believable.
     THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS begins with the familiar process of the 
family re-assembling at Mom and Dad's New England house during 
Thanksgiving week.  The only one who still lives with her parents (who 
are ably portrayed by Roy Scheider and Blythe Danner) is Leigh (Laurel 
Holloman), the sprightly youngest child who has a boundless well of 
enthusiasm and good cheer.  The same cannot be said of most of the 
returning children.  There's Warren (Noah Wyle, from TV's ER), who 
hasn't been home in three years since breaking up with his high-school 
sweetheart (Arija Bareikis).  The perpetually-cranky Mia (Julianne 
Moore, currently in BOOGIE NIGHTS) arrives with her latest significant 
other, therapist Elliot (Brian Kerwin), in tow. Their relationship is 
clearly on the rocks, and Mia's fascination with an old grade school pal 
(James LeGros) doesn't help matters.  Jake (Michael Vartan) shows up 
with his flighty girlfriend, Margaret (Hope Davis), who amuses Jake's 
Mom by insisting that she and her boyfriend share the same bed.
     At its best, THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS is a sensitive, intelligent 
examination of the dynamics of a dysfunctional family (note:  families 
in movies like this must always be dysfunctional, otherwise there 
wouldn't be much of a story).  At its worst, which isn't often, 
Freundlich's feature debut runs into difficulties with cliches:  the 
overbearing father who has left his "fingerprints" on the lives of each 
of his offspring, the search by various couples to rekindle the old 
flame, etc.  One of the most atypical aspects of THE MYTH OF 
FINGERPRINTS is that it isn't loaded with "shocking" revelations – 
everything is pretty much as it seems and the friction between the 
characters is the result of normal causes rather than motion picture 
contrivances.  Plus, in true slice-of-life fashion, hardly anything gets 
wrapped up over the course of the picture.  We see a few small dramas 
play themselves out, but the larger story, which began long before the 
picture's opening credits, is not cleanly closed.
     Freundlich has a good sense of what makes for absorbing drama – a 
quality that consistently applies to THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS.  Through 
strong, well-focused writing and with the help of a uniformly effective 
cast, the director gets us to care about every member of the family in a 
remarkably short span of time.  The dialogue is also thoughtful and 
insightful, rather than trite.  Examples include Warren's explanation 
for why he's going home this year for Thanksgiving:  "It's been long 
enough that I can't quite remember that I shouldn't go," and Mia's 
observation that family members are "the first people you're supposed to 
be hostile to."
     THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS contains a number of noteworthy scenes, 
including some strangely quiet dinners and awkward moments between 
estranged siblings.  But the best sequence occurs early in the film, on 
the night when everyone has finally assembled under one roof.  One-by-
one, the various couples begin to make love, and the concert of moans, 
thumps, and squeaks creates an atmosphere that is both poignant and 
funny, especially as we observe Warren's reaction to all the noise 
around him.
     Nothing much happens during THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS, but that's 
the point.  For 90 minutes, Freundlich opens a window into the lives of 
a few characters, and our perspective is so clear that we feel we get to 
know them.  So, although the material is not especially challenging, the 
results are among the best for an American film of this genre.  For 
those who appreciate this sort of simple drama, THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS 
is worth a trip to the theater.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS (1997) ** Written & directed by Bart Freundlich.
Photography, Stephen Kazmierski, Editing, Kate Williams, Ken J. Sackheim.
Production design, Lucy W. Corrigan. Main cast (alphabetically): Arija
Bareiikis, Blythe Danner, Hope Davis,  Kelsey Gunn, Brian Kerwin, James
LeGros, Julianne Moore, Roy Scheider, Michael Vartan, Noah Wyle. A Sony
release. 90 min. Rated R (language, sex).
The title of this movie, cryptic and quite forced and precious, seems to
mean that while a person's fingerprints are always the same, people's
natures (psyches, characters) can change. The people in question are the
now grown children of Lena (Danner) and Hal (Scheidel).  For the first time
in three years, the brood join their parents for Thanksgiving, in a rather
luxurious farmhouse in Maine (the film was shot in Bethel and Andover).
Daughter Mia (Moore) brings along her male companion Elliot (Kerwin), a
psychotherapist. Jake brings his girl Margaret (Davis). Warren (Wyle) comes
alone, still brooding over the break, three years ago, with his great love
Daphne (Bareikis). The youngest child, a girl, is Leigh (Holloman).
Mother Lena is sweet. Father Hal is a near-silent, sullen, often unpleasant
patriarch. Mia and Elliot are not a good couple. Jake and Margaret are, and
make love vigorously and noisily, often in odd locations. Later on Warren
and Daphne are reunited. All the couples copulate.
The assembly is one of W.A.S.P.s who are often waspish, with the Pulitzer
Prize for unpleasantness going to Mia. She's lavish with insults, snide
remarks and complaints.
There is a general unease about this household, where spats and repartees
are frequent, where there are times when you think that everyone hates
everybody else. It's more complex than that, however. But the movie does a
peculiarly confusing job of editing at the expense of giving us information
about the characters, and at the detriment of dimensionality. This may be
compounded for some viewers by the plethora of blonde women (all
good-looking), awkward flashbacks, and minimalist dialogue scenes
(sometimes ponderous). You might get the impression that all are deranged,
save for the sensible and natural Leigh.
As per first-time director Freundlich (a product of New York University's
film and TV programs) "When you're an adult coming home, your parents look
at you as if you're still a child. Yet you've been out making your way in
the world, feeling like an adult." Etc.etc. But that's not really shown in
the movie.
Freundlich, about the age of the younger characters, seems to identify with
them, while making them identify with him. This results in a film that has
mature ambitions but an adolescent texture. Among several jejune matters
are the inter-relations of just about all; the basic lack of interest, for
us, of the characters, even though the performances are very good (for what
they are); the humorlessness of the whole thing, in spite of a few funny
lines and in spite of Freundlich's stating that the film is funny; odd
reactions, such as the grown-up children being revolted at the idea that
last night their parents made love; the peculiar affair (if there is one)
between Mia and a fellow kindergartener who now calls himself Cezanne (!).
The new director is promising, but his first feature is more like a
personal settling of family accounts. Been there, done that..
It is nice to get detailed pressbooks for new movies, but in this case, the
fact that the writer-director takes almost 10 pages to explain his film,
makes you wonder if he mistrusts the work speaking for itself. One the plus
side, some bits of the film and the dialogue are OK, and the production
values are most professional in the staging, framing and especially the
excellent photography.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Noah Wyle, Julianne Moore, Blythe Danner, Roy Scheider, Michael
Vartan, Hope Davis, Brian Kerwin, Laurel Holloman, Arija Bareikis.
Screenplay:  Bart Freundlich.
Producers:  Mary Jane Skalski, Tim Ferrell and Bart Freundlich.
Director:  Bart Freundlich.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, drug use)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS is a subtle, restrained film in a genre
crying out for a little subtlety and restraint.  The familiar setting is
the Thanksgiving gathering of an New England family; the issue at hand is
how the children ended up variously damaged by their upbringing.  Yet THE
MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS isn't about raised voices, cathartic confrontations
or healing embraces.  Over the space of three days, we simply observe:
emotionally wounded Warren (Noah Wyle) still coping with the end of a
relationship three years earlier; bitter Mia (Julianne Moore) lashing out
at every available target; commitment-shy Jake (Michael Vartan) trying to
be in love with his effervescent girlfriend Margaret (Hope Davis);
cheerful younger sister Leigh (Laurel Holloman) somehow emerging whole,
healthy and happy; Mom (Blythe Danner) trying to understand everyone; Dad
(Roy Scheider) not trying at all.
     Many viewers might find THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS rather
inconsequential in its paucity of fireworks and dirty laundry.  It has
become so commonplace for such stories to center on Big Revelations -- who
confesses to being gay, who turns out to be a child molester, who's been
unfaithful to whom (or _with_ whom) -- that it's almost disappointing when
they're absent.  Neither are there many resolutions, with some
relationships just as unstable at the fade-out as they were at the
fade-in.  Bart Freundlich's script is about relatively mundane familial
discord, but it's expertly observed mundanity.
     If there is one major stumbling block in THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS,
it's the lack of sufficient time to do justice to its broad canvas.
Freundlich has so many characters and so many relationships to cover that
he inevitably short-changes some of them, perhaps even all of them.  He's
fortunate that he has such a stellar cast to fill in the spaces,
particularly Moore and Davis.  There is an ease to the way the characters
interact, even in their uneasiness, which makes it easy to get caught up
in the simple tensions.  The confidence with which Freundlich directs THE
MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS practically forces you to concede that this story
matters.  To paraphrase Tolstoy, every unhappy family is unhappy in its
own unique way.  This one happens to be unhappy quietly, but its an
unhappiness worth exploring.

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Bart Freundlich
Cast: Blythe Danner,  Roy Scheider,  Julianne Moore,  Noah Wyle, James LeGros,
Brian Kerwin,  Michael Vartan,  Hope Davis, Laurel Holloman and Arija Bareikis.
When I first heard about this film I knew it was a film that I had to see.  
The combination of an excellent ensemble cast and the story of a troubled 
family coming together at Thanksgiving sounded unmissable.  I first heard 
about this film in January when it was shown at the 1997 Sundance Film 
Festival.  How I wished I could have been there to see it ! Luckily the film 
was recently released here in the UK, and I went along last Wednesday  (Dec 10) 
to the ABC cinema, next to Baker Street tube station in London, to see it.  
I often find that films for which I have very high expectations usually 
just fall short of my unrealistic hopes.  This wasn't the case with THE MYTH
OF FINGERPRINTS.  
The last film I reviewed was a little known film called CROOKED HEARTS (1991)
which told the story of another troubled family, and also happened to feature 
a young Noah Wyle playing a member of a family, called the Warren family.  
Is it coincidence that Noah Wyle's character in TMOF is called Warren.  
Probably, but I just felt like pointing this out !  
I can usually tell if I'm going to like a film by the opening sequence.  
If the film has a poor opening sequence it often bodes badly for the film.  
The opening sequence of TMOF was great - wonderful music and shots of an old 
home movie showing the main characters as children with their parents, Lena 
(Blythe Danner) and Hal (Roy Scheider).  
The first member of the family to come home for Thanksgiving is Warren 
(Noah Wyle).  Warren hasn't been home for three years and his early arrival 
causes his father some irritation.  His father Hal moans about it to his wife, 
who is delighted to see her son and having him home one day earlier is a joy 
for her - as it should be.  This is our first hint that all is not well 
between Warren and his father.  Warren  is clearly a man with a lot on his 
mind and from the first moment we see him it is obvious he is going through 
mental torment.  As the film progresses we get to see exactly what is eating 
him up inside.  Warren meets up with his ex-girlfriend Daphne ( Arija Bareikis) 
who dumped Warren three years earlier.  When Daphne explains to Warren why she
left him, it brings to the surface the inner torment that Warren has been 
living with since the breakup.
The only member of the family who is still living at home is Leigh, played by 
Laurel Holloman.  One review I've read described Leigh as a college student who 
was also returning home, but unless I missed something I got the impression she
was still living at home.  Leigh is a very peculiar character, at least to me, 
because she appears to be no younger than her brothers Jake (Michael Vartan) and
Warren, but her behaviour throughout the film is that of a 15 year old - all
naivete and childish giggles.   I would have liked to have gotten a bit more
background on this character who is quite fascinating but very hard to pin down,
because of the ambiguity concerning her actual age.  Was she  meant to be a 
teenager or a  very immature twenty-something ?  If anyone reading this knows,
please drop me a line !
The least interesting member of the family is Jake, who arrives home with his 
girlfriend Margaret (Hope Davis).   We get little depth of character from Jake 
which makes it hard to be interested in him, but at least his girlfriend 
Margaret is very watchable.  She speaks her mind throughout the film and 
manages to irritate Hal and Mia ( Julianne Moore).  When she first arrives at 
the family home with Jake, she is told by Lena that she will be in a separate 
room to Jake. She then proceeds to ask Lena , straight out, if she can 
sleep with "your son" . Her forthrightness immediately impresses Lena !
Alongside Warren, the most interesting other sibling is Mia, played with 
typical excellence by the wonderful Julianne Moore.   Our first sight of 
Mia and her partner Elliot is very amusing, but I won't spoil it for those 
who haven't seen the film !  Mia is clearly a very irritable lady and takes 
great exception to almost everything she hears from Jakes's girlfriend 
Margaret, her sister Leigh,  a hapless bookstore worker and especially her 
partner Elliot.   When Elliot innocently asks Mia what the plans for the day 
are, she snaps back that he shouldn't need to have a schedule.  It seems 
nothing said to Mia cannot be in some way offensive to her.  When Mia 
finds a book, that she has taken from the  family bookshelf, has had the 
penultimate chapters ripped out "for kindling" by her father, she is furious.  
She then storms down to the local bookstore and can barely hide her extreme 
irritation when they don't have it in stock.   When the kind and helpful 
bookstore clerk (played by Pamela Polhemus)  offers to order it for her,  Mia 
scowls at her and asks sarcastically, "Can they have it here in ten minutes?"  
Of course they can't, and she storms out.  You really feel for the bookstore 
lady who is a model of restraint and genuine helpfulness, and is faced with 
the customer who cannot be satisfied !
It is outside the bookstore that she meets Cezanne (James LeGros) who
was also in the bookshop and recognised Mia as a classmate from
kindergarten.   Cezanne is his new name, having changed it from
his original name.   Mia fails to recognise him and only when she finds out that
he has read the same book, that she so desperately wants to know the ending 
to, does she thaw out a bit and treat her old playmate with a bit of civility.  
She agrees to meet him the next day.  It later turns out that her mother has 
found an old handmade card from the infant Cezanne to Mia , expressing his love
for her.   Cezanne is perhaps the most interesting character in the film, 
probably because we learn little about him, but his sweet and very innocent 
nature is a wonderful contrast to the spiky, vitriolic Mia and it is a very 
touching sequence when they meet again at Cezanne's house, where he tells 
her how the book ended.   James LeGros virtually steals the film with his 
wonderful performance as a kind and gentle man who melts the frosty Mia.
The acting by all the cast is magnificent, but acting honours go to Noah Wyle, 
Julianne Moore and James LeGros.   Noah Wyle gives a performance of great 
intensity and greatly impresses.  Roy Scheider as Hal, says very little, but 
creates a heavy and almost menacing presence whenever he is on screen which is
very effective.
This is not a happy family and an air of awkwardness hangs over the whole 
film which is very well demonstrated when the family and their partners, 
plus Warren's very charming "loser" friends , sit down for Thanksgiving 
dinner.   The conversation is stilted and the slightest misjudged remark 
creates a very palpable air of tension.  It's clear that as the head of the 
family, Hal is responsible for the horrible air of tension that pervades his 
family.   We see clearly how his rift with Warren began, but his general 
coldness with the rest of the family is never clearly explained.   It's 
obvious to me that Hal knows that he has  become estranged from his kids
but seems unable to bridge the chasm between them , although I'm certain he 
would if he thought it were possible.
Bart Freundlich's has created a wonderful film that I definitely want to see
again  to savour the great dialogue and powerful performances.    I am
greatly looking forward to his future projects.   
Review written by Vince Deehan on Sunday 14 December 1997
e-mail : vince@deehan.demon.co.uk
http://www.deehan.demon.co.uk

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Bart Freundlich
Starring: Rod Scheider, Blythe Danner, Julianne Moore, Noah Wyle, Michael
Vartan, Laurel Holloman, Brian Kerwin, Hope Davis, James LeGros, Arija
Bareikis
"The Myth of Fingerprints" is the "art house" version of every Thanksgiving
film you've ever seen, complete with a large disfunctional family, long
lost loves, new love found, bickering, sex, and even two parents who aren't
sure what to make of their grown-up kids.  It has everything that other
Thanksgiving films have except a sense of realism, a way of communicating
these fears to the audience, and even a bit of originality.  Hell, I even
swear I saw the house in every other Thanksgiving movie as well.
The story concerns itself with a New England family coming together for
Thanksgiving, and spending a couple of days at the big house with the
parents, and sadly, every child is either a cliche or a stereotype (or
sometimes neither, and not even a person).  There's Mia (Julianne Moore),
who's "the bitch who begins to wisen up thanks to someone else;" Warren
(Noah Wyle), who's "the disaffected guy who doesn't really get along well
with his parents and has a long lost love who's in town for awhile;" Jake
(Michael Vartan), who's just, like, there; and Leigh (Laurel Holloman, from
"The Incredibly True Adventures of Two Girls in Love"), who's the "wacky
child."
And three of them have romances or significant others with outsiders.  Jake
has a girlfriend, Margaret (Hope Davis), who's basically just horny and a
tad too honest.  Warren's long lost love (Arija Bareikis) comes to see him
and they hit it off again.  And Mia has a boyfriend or husband, Elliot
(Brian Kerwin), who spends the entirety of the flick pissed of at Mia's
bitchiness, but ends up falling for an old school chum named Cezanne (James
LeGros), who starts off as being compeltely annoying and overbearing but
takes a 180 degree turn and becomes the intelligent guy she always wanted,
who's willing to discuss a book she tried to read but couldn't finish
because her father used the last 300 pages as kinling.
And last but not least, there's the parents, Hal and Lena (Roy Scheider and
Blythe Danner, respectively), who come out as the reason this film works
even slightly, partly because they're given a shade of mystery, and we
never completely understand them.  The film was obviously written from the
point of view of the younger generation, who are so young they don't yet
understand their parents, and this lack of knowledge actually works because
deep down, our parents are complex and shadowy figures who we will probably
never figure out completely.  Why did Hal kiss Warren's girlfriend when she
began sort of flirting with him?  And why does Lena still love him if not
more than she did before?
It's the parents that I was really intrigued with, partly because the
children were given such shallow roles.  Why should we really care if Mia,
a bitch, finds new love when we could be more intrigued with the parents
who act strangely but still love eachother?  Why should we really be
fascinated with a cliched story like the one about Warren getting aquainted
again with his ex-girlfriend when we see a mother and father dealing with
their kids growing up, and feeling more human instead of god-like beings?
If "The Myth of Fingerprints" had stuck with the concept of parents
becoming equals with their kids yet still remaining mysterious people, it
may have been a really amazing film.  Instead, we get cheap subplots that
were probably chalked up in a second to bulk up the storyline, and we end
up being distracted by them in the long run.  What saves the film from
being terrible is the concepts of the parents, and a good amount of acting
from the entire cast, with special mention going to Moore, Holloman, Wyle,
LeGros, Davis, and Danner.  Roy Scheider actually does amazing, as he's
being kind of bad as of late in films (did you see "Romeo is Bleeding?" 
okay, no one did).  He's actually given a scene where he sits on the edge
of one of his son's beds in the middle of the night, singing a song, and
looking more pathetic than crazy.  Not many actors can pull that off.
The film's final shot is something which makes this film seem more special
than it actually is: it's poetic, unnerving, sad, and realistic, all at the
same time.  When you see it, you'll understand.  If it had not tried to be
so much like a "families suck" picture and instead become a reflection on
kids growing up and parents just getting older, then this final shot would
have been even more meaningful, and probably worthy of the film it's now
stuck in.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
