Title
Review for Tombstone (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TOMBSTONE is an interesting movie with fascinating
characterizations and a true story.  It is about what happens before,
during, and mainly after the gun fight at the O. K. Coral.  Detracting
with this is that the director (George P. Cosmatos), cinematographer
(William A. Fraker), writers (John Fusano and Kevin Jarre), and editors
(Harvey Rosenstock, Roberto Silvi, and Frank J.  Urioste) made it like
a New Age Western or a modern Western opera without singing.
     First, the good news.  Wyatt Earp as played by Kurt Russell and
Doc.  Holiday by Val Kilmer were wonderful.  Everything they said and
even just their facial expressions were interesting.  Unless you are a
real Western history buff, you probably do not know the story, and it
is fascinating.  The short version is that this is about a Wyatt Earp
who wants to be a business entrepreneur with his brothers and get rich.
He gets sidetracked.
     Now for the bad news.  How about dialog like "are you going to
just stand there and bleed or you going to do something?"  Nothing
however could beat the scene when two tough guys with guns get real
angry and end up trading five rounds of insults in Latin!  Many of the
shooting scenes were at night with more lightning that I have seen in
my entire life.  It had a constant strobe effect.  And boy, did this
movie ever have music (Bruce Broughton, Frederic Chopin, and Camille
Saint-Saens).  Dramatic violins were everywhere as were kettle drums,
hence my claim that this was an opera without singing.
     TOMBSTONE runs overly long at 2:10.  Being a typical bloody
Western it gets an R rating.  The movie would be fine for teenagers.  I
had a nice evening at the movies, so I give this flick ** 1/2 and a
thumbs up.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the early 1990s Hollywood saw renaissance of western,
with many of films exploring the dark side of the Old West
and thus serving "politically correct" agenda by painting
revisionist picture of American history. In such
circumstances even the gunfight at O.K. Corral had their
turn, despite the fact that this event had inspired plenty
of filmmakers in previous decades. In 1993/1994, less than a
year, Hollywood major studios produced not one but two films
that dealt with Wyatt Earp. First of them was TOMBSTONE,
directed by George Pal Cosmatos.
The film begins in Tombstone, Arizona in early 1880s. Wyatt
Earp (played by Kurt Russell) is legendary sheriff of Dodge
City who retired from law enforcement in order to lead more
peaceful and profitable life. Wyatt and his two brothers -
Virgil (played by Sam Elliott) and Morgan (played by Bill
Paxton) - arrive in Tombstone where they soon come into
conflict with "Cowboys", gang of local thugs and cattle
thieves led by Curly Bill Brosis (played by Powers Boothe),
Johnny Ringo (played by Michael Biehn) and Ike Clanton
(played by Stephen Lang). As the tensions between Earp and
"Cowboys" rise, Wyatt meets his old friend, gambler and
gunslinger Doc Holliday (played by Val Kilmer). Holliday's
skills would become quite handy when the conflict erupts
into gunfight at O.K. Corral.
Kevin Jarre, original scriptwriter and director of
TOMBSTONE, got himself fired before the end of the shooting,
and producers gave the project into the hands of George Pal
Cosmatos. This didn't help the reputation of the movie,
because Cosmatos' name is usually associated with films that
feature large amounts of action scenes and hardly anything
else. Therefore, with Cosmatos in charge, all attempts to
accurately recreate historical events in Tombstone 1881 were
thrown by the window. Cosmatos was interested for
spectacular action scenes and hardly anything else and the
pace of film reflects his desire to quickly wrap up the
boring stuff like character development or background of the
conflict. Additional problem for the film is large number of
characters and actors, many of them in honorary cameos
(including Robert Mitchum as narrator) - Cosmatos simply
doesn't have the time to deal with them. Many of them appear
for a scene or two, especially Earp's women (with the
exception of Josephine Marcus, played by Dana Delany).
However, even disorganised mess of a movie called TOMBSTONE
can redeem itself with few bright moments. First of all,
since Cosmatos can't work on character development he simply
portrays Clantons and their gang as dangerous psychopathic
killers from the beginning, thus allowing Biehn, Lang and
Boothe to give amusingly cartoonish portrayals of villains.
Then, since the filmmakers abandoned any attempt to explain
Earp/Clanton conflict by presenting social, economic and
political conditions of early 1880s Arizona, their
black/white characterisation resulted in creative approach
to history, which might be seen as fun. For example,
narration explicitly names "Cowboys" as the first form of
organised crime in USA and, afterwards, costumes (which is
together with scenery and props painstakingly recreated from
actual history) and facial hygiene indicate their alignment,
in sharp contrast with "civilised", squeaky- clean Earps.
Later in the film, growing intensity of the conflict is
illustrated with some laughably trite phrases, but nothing
can match campiness of the scene in which Doc Holliday and
Johnny Ringo exchange insults in Latin.
Apart from campiness, TOMBSTONE is rescued with truly superb
acting. While Kurt Russell plays very believable Wyatt and
Sam Elliott still has presence of real westerner in the role
of his older brother, poor Bill Paxton simply can't overcome
his image of fall guy in action films. But the true marvel
of this film is Val Kilmer as Doc Holiday, who gives not
only powerful but also very original portrayal of the
terminally ill gunslinger - his Holliday is not only refined
intellectual, but also a romantic. Kilmer's role in this
film is one of the best in his career. Other actors, many of
them quite fine, only briefly appear, with most of their
roles left on the cutting floor. However, despite many flaws
and plenty of missed opportunities, TOMBSTONE could still be
recommended for all western fans, at least those who want
good old traditional stories about good and evil in these
cynical revisionist times.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TOMBSTONE is an interesting movie with fascinating
characterizations and a true story.  It is about what happens before,
during, and mainly after the gun fight at the O. K. Coral.  Detracting
with this is that the director (George P. Cosmatos), cinematographer
(William A. Fraker), writers (John Fusano and Kevin Jarre), and editors
(Harvey Rosenstock, Roberto Silvi, and Frank J.  Urioste) made it like
a New Age Western or a modern Western opera without singing.
     First, the good news.  Wyatt Earp as played by Kurt Russell and
Doc.  Holiday by Val Kilmer were wonderful.  Everything they said and
even just their facial expressions were interesting.  Unless you are a
real Western history buff, you probably do not know the story, and it
is fascinating.  The short version is that this is about a Wyatt Earp
who wants to be a business entrepreneur with his brothers and get rich.
He gets sidetracked.
     Now for the bad news.  How about dialog like "are you going to
just stand there and bleed or you going to do something?"  Nothing
however could beat the scene when two tough guys with guns get real
angry and end up trading five rounds of insults in Latin!  Many of the
shooting scenes were at night with more lightning that I have seen in
my entire life.  It had a constant strobe effect.  And boy, did this
movie ever have music (Bruce Broughton, Frederic Chopin, and Camille
Saint-Saens).  Dramatic violins were everywhere as were kettle drums,
hence my claim that this was an opera without singing.
     TOMBSTONE runs overly long at 2:10.  Being a typical bloody
Western it gets an R rating.  The movie would be fine for teenagers.  I
had a nice evening at the movies, so I give this flick ** 1/2 and a
thumbs up.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Kurt Russell, Val Kilmer, Michael Biehn, Sam Elliott,
Bill Paxton, Dana Delaney, Powers Boothe, Stephen Lang.
Screenplay:  Kevin Jarre.
Director:  George P. Cosmatos.
     After a few decades when Westerns were about as easy to find as
Jimmy Hoffa, it seems like you can't sneeze at the movies these days
without hitting a horse.  The success of DANCES WITH WOLVES and
UNFORGIVEN has inspired a whole herd of giddyap yarns.  In 1993 we've
already seen POSSE and GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND, and now comes the
first of two Wyatt Earp projects set to hit theaters in a six month
span (a Lawrence Kasdan/Kevin Costner project is due in late spring).
TOMBSTONE is the name, ma'am, and surprisingly lively entertainment is
the game.  While no great piece of art, TOMBSTONE is a real
old-fashioned shoot-em-up, energetically staged and acted and featuring
a particularly memorable performance from Val Kilmer.
     TOMBSTONE opens in 1879 as Wyatt Earp (Kurt Russell) arrives in
Tombstone, Arizona to join brothers Virgil (Sam Elliott) and Morgan
(Bill Paxton).  Although a legendary lawman in Kansas, Wyatt insists
he's retired, content to run a small casino in the booming mining
town.  However, peace and quiet are not in the cards for the Earps.
The wild and violent Cowboys, led by Curly Bill (Powers Boothe) and
Johnny Ringo (Michael Biehn), hold Tombstone in a perpetual state of
lawlessness, and eventually the violence escalates into the legendary
showdown at the OK Corral, with the Earps and gambler Doc Holliday (Val
Kilmer) facing a group of Cowboys including Ike Clanton (Stephen
Lang).  But even that battle is not the end, as Tombstone becomes the
nexus of a blood feud which won't end until one side or the other is
completely dead.
     Director George P. Cosmatos is best known for the ultra-violent
RAMBO, and TOMBSTONE shows many similarities.  There is a great deal of
montage-style violence, and an armory full of bullets fired.  It's
action that TOMBSTONE is about first and foremost, and it delivers big
time.  There are few slow stretches, and they usually build towards
something.  The big shootout at the OK Corral might be the least
effective of the action pieces; it's edited in a fairly confusing
fashion which may accent the chaos of the situation but doesn't always
make it clear who's shooting whom.  Otherwise the action is extremely
well-choreographed, backed up by a Bruce Broughton score a bit too
reminiscent of his work on SILVERADO.
     Fortunately, the action is where the comparisons to RAMBO end.
TOMBSTONE is well-acted by its ensemble cast, in spite of the most
distracting (if authentic) facial hair this side of GETTYSBURG.  Kurt
Russell, never the most versatile of leading men, does bring an intense
and reluctant heroism to Wyatt.  He's particularly good in a couple of
scenes where he uses his reputation to force other men to back down,
burning holes in them with his eyes.  Sam Elliott and Bill Paxton are a
bit more wooden in less-developed roles, but for the stoic and
civic-minded Earps it's not a distraction.  The lead Cowboys are
uniformly good, notably Stephen Lang as the cowardly Ike Clanton and
Michael Biehn as the icy Johnny Ringo.  However, the real star of
TOMBSTONE is Val Kilmer, who has a devilishly wonderful time with the
acerbic, sickly Doc Holliday.  Sure, his lines are campy and
anachronistic, but they are also quite funny.  He drawls out his quips
with a sly confidence, and turns in probably his best all-around
performance yet.
     TOMBSTONE's one glaring misstep is spending any time at all on the
relationship between Wyatt and a traveling actor played by Dana
Delaney.  Delaney is lovely, but her character is just a distraction
(as, unfortunately, are all of the female characters in TOMBSTONE),
never adding anything in particular to the story or to Wyatt's
character.  Their scenes together seem simply to be a nod to the
conventional wisdom that you need a love story to get women into the
theater.  While it's spending time wandering through the flowers,
TOMBSTONE is nothing special, but when it sticks to its guns it
generally finds its target.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     So many films have been made about Wyatt Earp and the famous gunfight
at the O.K. Corral that it almost qualifies as its own subgenre of the
Western.  Films such as TOMBSTONE, THE TOWN TOO TOUGH TO DIE; MY DARLING
CLEMENTINE; GUNFIGHT AT THE O.K. CORRAL; HOUR OF THE GUN; and DOC have
reenacted the gunfight with little respect for the truth.  Almost none agree
on what happened and each is certainly correct that all the others got the
facts wrong.  It may come as a surprise to some that the Earps were no
paragons of virtue any more than the Clantons were and that there were no
crew members of the Starship Enterprise present.  In fact, this dirty little
gunfight lasted under three minutes and was no more dramatic nor much
different in character than gang gunfights that take place in the streets of
New York City frequently.  However, somehow this particular gunfight has
become legend and has been dramatized inaccurately many times.  One of the
problems that films have had is that the gunfight itself is most famous part
of the Earp-Clanton conflict, yet it happened toward the middle of the
proceedings, and it settled very little.  That makes it difficult to build a
film around.  Kevin Jarre has written a script that gets a lot of the facts
right, a lot of the facts wrong, and almost nearly accurately tells what
happened leading up to the gunfight.  Unfortunately, from there on it plays
even more fast and loose with even what is known happened after the
gunfight.  Or at least it gives way to legend, speculation, and to its own
outright fictionalizing.
     The early 1880s was a time of colorful gunfighters in Arizona.  This is
a story that involves some of the most famous.  The plot begins with Curly
Bill Brocius (Powers Booth) and his gang including Johnny Ringo (Michael
Biehn) shooting up a Mexican wedding.  At the same time three Earp Brothers
are settling down in Tombstone, Arizona to find peace.  Wyatt particularly
wants to live peacefully, so he waits until he is in town for at least ten
minutes before he starts making enemies.  One of the ways Wyatt makes
enemies is by renewing his friendship with Doc Holliday and thereby
inheriting Holliday's numerous enemies, but Wyatt was talented at making
enemies all by himself.  Wyatt also meets and falls for Josephine Marcus, a
free-thinking Jewish actress from San Francisco, stealing her from her
lover, the County Sheriff Johnny Behan.  Though under-stressed in the film,
this was also a cause of much of the trouble that was to come.
     Kurt Russell is only a moderate actor but under George Cosmatos'
direction he gives a reasonable and even understated performance as Wyatt.
That means he brings to the role less baggage than does Val Kilmer in the
somewhat more flamboyant role of Doc Holliday.  Holliday was sickly, but
Kilmer is a bit too close to death for a bit too much of this film.  Kilmer
starts being too hard to believe.  Dana Delany is less attractive than the
real Josephine Marcus, based on available photos, but she does exude a
charming spontaneity.  Powers Booth as Curly Bill Brocius and Michael Biehn
as the Latin-spouting Johnny Ringo are colorful but have little opportunity
to be engaging.  Charleton Heston and Harry Carey, Jr., are around as a tip
of the hat to classic Westerns, but neither has a very important role.
Perhaps for the same reason Robert Mitchum narrates the film.
     Moments of this film are genuinely exciting, though more because of
style than plot.  The opening has films of the old West, mixed with footage
of the original THE GREAT TRAIN ROBBERY, and a fake shot or two of Kurt
Russell as Earp, all in scratchy prints and on narrow screen.  Jumping from
that to wide screen and color is an impressive touch very similar to one at
the beginning of ROAD WARRIOR.  It will, however, lose that impact on video.
And the film does have a few dramatic scenes internally like the requisite
sunsets.  But it takes more than style to tell the story and in some ways
the storytelling is muddled.  At times perhaps it sacrifices dramatic effect
for accuracy.  For example, it has not concentrated on the Clantons and
McLaurys until the famous gunfight, so it is not clear why they are so
important as to merit the shoot-out when it comes.
     This is an entertaining retelling of the story, often with insight into
the principal participants.  Director Cosmatos only occasionally raises the
story to actual excitement.  Overall, I would give the film a high +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
FURTHER COMMENTS ON HISTORIC ACCURACY: (Some spoilers follow.)
     A great deal has been written about the event covered by this film and
while the Old West is not a particular interest of mine, I did do some
reading about this famous gunfight and about Wyatt Earp during and after a
recent trip to Arizona.  Similar interests served me well in reviewing the
recent GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND.
     Jarre's script gets as much wrong as right in this story.  But still
that is a far better average than most films about Tombstone.  Wyatt is
shown to be a peaceful man who just wants to retire in Tombstone.  Sheriff
Behan does not even know he is coming.  In truth Earp played either side of
the law that suited his fancy.  He had been a horse thief, a bunco artist, a
card cheat, and worse.  At the time he went to Tombstone it is true that he
had recently basked in a reputation as a lawman.   Actually he was more a
sort of hired thug for the law in a number of cow towns, usually using his
fists more than guns.  But he had little respect for the law itself except
as a meal ticket and was occasionally thrown out of jobs for taking bribes.
The script is correct in that he had been in only one real gunfight before
the events of the story though many were to come.  The film has Wyatt making
the unlikely decision to settle in Tombstone and Sheriff Behan surprised
that he has come.  Actually Wyatt came to Tombstone invited by Behan.  He
came actually hoping to replace Behan as Sheriff, could not, and took the
job of deputy (not just before the gunfight as the film says).  If he could
not steal Behan's job he could and did steal Behan's lover, Ms. Marcus.
     Wyatt more or less abandoned his own common law wife, Mattie, who was
loyal and *not* a drug addict.  She, however, did have to become a
prostitute to support herself after being abandoned and committed suicide
shortly thereafter at the age of 30.  Incidentally, Wyatt himself was part
owner of several whorehouses, as were other members of the Earp family.
     The major historic failure of the film was that there was no mention of
the Wells Fargo stagecoach robbery that Earp accused the Clanton's of and
the Clanton's accused Doc Holliday of.  For that matter the importance of
the Clanton family was understated.  Brocius and Ringo were only loose
allies of the Clantons who were the Earp's main enemies.
     Holliday's lover is called Kate so I presume that she was intended to
be Big Nose Katie Elder.  Apparently they got a much more attractive woman
for the role than the actual person.  That is probably true for all the
women but Josephine Marcus, who was the one woman of the story who really
would still be attractive by today's standards.
     I have been in the Birdcage Theater, now a tourist museum, and they
obviously had a VERY accurate reproduction.  I doubt those scenes were shot
in the real theater, but the reproduction is so accurate it is difficult to
tell.  Similarly the Corral itself looked just about perfect.  This film had
as accurate a dramatization of the gunfight at the O.K. Corral as I
remember.  The dialog is taken from court testimony.  When I get the film on
video I will run it in slow motion and see if the action follows the court
testimony also.
     It is a little difficult to get hard facts on what happened after the
famous gunfight due to the prevalence of liars on each side of the conflict.
That is what makes legends, I suppose.  Many people believe that Johnny
Ringo committed suicide and that was what the court ruled, though there is
good evidence he was murdered.  (Wyatt, years later, claimed he had killed
Ringo, but Wyatt lied *a lot*.)
     So overall, the accuracy could have been *a lot* better and could have
been *a lot* worse.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kurt Russell, Val Kilmer, Sam Elliott, Bill Paxton, 
           Michael Biehn, Powers Boothe, Dana Delany, Stephen Lang
Director:  George Cosmatos
Producers:  James Jacks, Sean Daniel, and Bob Misiorowski
Screenplay:  Kevin Jarre
Music: Bruce Broughton
Released by Hollywood Pictures
     Delving into the legend of Tombstone is nothing new for motion
pictures.  It's been done many times before, perhaps most memorably in
John Sturges' GUNFIGHT AT THE OK CORRAL (with Burt Lancaster as Wyatt
Earp and Kirk Douglas as Doc Holliday).  Usage of the Old West's most
famous shoot-out hasn't been restricted to big screen adaptations,
either.  Numerous television series have presented their version of the
Earp/Clanton confrontation, including a couple of science fiction
programs:  STAR TREK ("Spectre of the Gun") and DOCTOR WHO ("The
Gunfighters").  Coming in the summer of 1994, Kevin Costner will pin
Wyatt Earp's badge to his vest; until then, however, we have
TOMBSTONE.
     Wyatt Earp (Kurt Russell) and his brothers Virgil (Sam Elliott)
and Morgan (Bill Paxton) have come to Tombstone, Arizona as
businessmen, seeking their fortunes.  Wyatt especially wants to put his
lawman's past behind him.  Once in the town, the Earps encounter an old
friend:  Doc Holliday (Val Kilmer), a suave gunfighter who's dying of
tuberculosis (or consumption, as it was then called).  Initially, Wyatt
and his brothers attempt a neutral attitude towards the "Cowboys," a
local band of murderous outlaws, but it becomes increasingly apparent
that there can be no peace with the likes of Johnny Ringo (Michael
Biehn), Curly Bill (Powers Boothe), and Ike Clanton (Stephen Lang).
Following their consciences, Virgil and Morgan become marshals, and
their edict that no one in Tombstone can carry a weapon leads to the
infamous showdown at the OK Corral.
     First and foremost, never expect a history lesson from a Hollywood
Pictures film.  I'm not that well-informed about all the events
surrounding what actually happened in Tombstone, but it doesn't take
much insight to recognize a story that's been doctored in the service
of "better" entertainment.  This era in America's past has been largely
romanticized, anyway, so its treatment in this film isn't surprising,
nor is the fictionalization necessarily a bad thing.
     The first half of TOMBSTONE isn't an example of great filmmaking,
but it is engaging.  There's a sense of growing inevitability as events
build to the shoot-out at the OK Corral.  The melodramatic "serious"
moments are kept to a minimum, and the various gunfights are
choreographed with style and tension.  Then, at the one-hour ten-minute
mark, the Clanton gang and the Earps square off.  From there, things
get progressively worse.
     Not only is the last hour anti-climactic, but it's dull.  Too many
scenes feature lengthy segments of poorly-scripted dialogue and, in
some cases, character motivation becomes unclear.  The gunplay is more
repetitious than exciting.  The result--a cobbled-together morass of
silly lines and shoot-outs--doesn't work well.
     The acting is adequate across the board.  Val Kilmer gives the
most energetic performance, but actors have always played Holliday with
flair.  Kurt Russell does a reasonable job as Wyatt, as do Sam Elliott
and Bill Paxton as the other two Earp brothers.  Powers Boothe seems a
little out-of-place as Curly Bill, and Michael Biehn gives an
emotionally flat rendering of Johnny Ringo.
     The presentation of certain characters is confused.  Initially,
the intent seems to be to apply the "revisionist western" mentality to
TOMBSTONE: the protagonists start out with their flaws exposed.
However, as the film progresses, the negative elements of their
personalities melt away as the Earps become the "good guys" of legend.
On the other side, there aren't many redeeming qualities to be found
for members of the Clanton gang.  Ringo and friends are portrayed as
evil, soulless scum who kill for the sheer enjoyment of it.
     There are also a number of superfluous characters, including an
actress played by Dana Delany, whose only purpose seems to be to
present a strong- willed love interest for Wyatt Earp.  Perhaps Ms.
Delany's role possessed more substance before the editor trimmed the
running length.  The same might be true of Charlton Heston's Hooker,
who has three or four lines in a minute's worth of screen time--barely
more than the venerable actor's WAYNE'S WORLD 2 cameo.
     TOMBSTONE is a passable western, but that's far from what one
might reasonably expect from screenwriter Kevin Jarre, who penned
GLORY.  From the audience's viewpoint, it's difficult to assign
responsibility for the most serious of this film's shortcomings, but
one thing is clear:  somewhere along the way, the creative process
misfired.  Large segments of TOMBSTONE belong buried at Boot Hill.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
