Title
Review for Wild Man Blues (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Barbara Kopple
Starring: Woody Allen, Soon-Yi Previn, Eddy Davis, Cynthia Sayer, Don
Barrett, Greg Cohen, John Gill
I adore Woody Allen's movies more than almost anyone else in the world, and
I can't even explain why.  So a documentary on him that actually follows
him around, that allows us a sneak peek at his life, and shows us a Woody
Allen sans one of his script...well, that automatically appeals to me and
anyone else who watches his movies (all eight-and-a-half of us).  After
all, Woody is a paradox when it comes to celebrities: he's constantly being
talked about on the news for this and that, but no one knows a thing about
him.  Basically no one goes to see his movies, and only about 5 or 10
percent of the American population has even seen a Woody Allen film, but
everyone thinks they can imitate him and whenever you bring his name up to
people, they give you a bad look.  Seeing Woody Allen "unplugged," I
suppose you can call it, is incredibly intriguing to me basically because
I've been watching his movies for years and I couldn't tell you a thing
about his personal life.
"Wild Man Blues" conveniently comes out following Woody's film,
"Deconstructing Harry," a mind-bending, hilarious portrait of the public's
perception of him as an amoral, selfish sonofabitch which ulimately
questioned whether or not that was the real Woody Allen.  And bizarrely
enough, this film questions the same thing.  For about an hour-and-a-half,
we get to follow Mr. Allen as he travels all around Europe, stays at
expensive-looking hotels, plays numerous jazz shows, meets fans, and
finally has dinner with his parents back in Manhattan.  We see Woody
talking with his band, with various people, and even talking with Soon-Yi
herself, and the whole time we have no clue if it's really Woody or just an
act.
Basically, "Wild Man Blues" works on three separate levels: on one, we have
a reflection of Woody Allen, in all his glory, whether it be fake or not;
one another, we have a portrait of a subgenre of music that is almost
extinct today; and on yet another level, we have a subtle, classy rebuttle
to Mia Farrow's scathing autobiography, "What Falls Away," which, frankly,
made Woody out to be Lee Harvey Oswald (and therefore her out to be the
world's dumbest woman for spending over a decade with him).  We see a lot
of each of these, but no real balance of them.  The director, Barbara
Kopple (a two-time Oscar winning documentary filmmaker), at first wanted to
make a film about the band itself, but upon shooting a bit, decided to leak
a lot into Woody's life, and you can actually see this transition.  The
film begins as a nice balance between letting Woody talk to the camera and
showing the band both in front and behind the scenes.
But as the film goes on, we see less and less of the band, and we see more
and more of Woody.  And as we see more and more of Woody, the more
cartoonish he becomes.  When we first meet Woody, he's almost nervous about
talking to the camera, and he comes off as very serious and shy.  He
discusses why he loves staying in Paris, and talks about his music and why
he loves it, and not once does he say any great one-liners.  But as the
film moves along, he gradually adopts his screen persona.  It's hysterical
to hear him do his schtick (his criticism of Italian hotel staffs is
priceless), but which is the real Woody?  Was he at first too nervous, but
then became comfortable with it later on?  It doesn't help that his mother
at the end tells the camera he's nothing like his screen persona, and that
his movies reflect very little of Woody Allen the person.
I suppose the message, as unintentional as it probably is, is that Woody
Allen is someone whom we can never really learn of in depth because he's
different with everyone else.  To his band, he may seem a bit cold, while
to the band leader, he's incredibly friendly.  In his movies, he's whiny
and hysterical and loves to talk, but when performing, he says three words
and they play music.  The film is basically saying that no man can possibly
be the same to everyone, I suppose.
One of the main strengths of the film is, though, is in its moments that it
happens to capture, and those other big things that it shows us.  Some of
Woody's one-liners that he makes up on the spot are as hilarious as the
ones he has written in his movies.  There's the sight of Woody trying to
swim in a pool with Soon-Yi, and even a hilarious bit where Woody and
Soon-Yi continually keep missing eachother in a hotel.  And there's even a
couple moments that are manipulated by Kopple, like one where Woody is
being hounded by European fans of his, and the soundtrack begins to play
Nino Rota's brilliant score from Fellini's "8 1/2," which had to do with a
film director who is plagued by too many problems, like fans and producers.
 There's even a wonderful moment where Woody explains why he doesn't like
awards (hint: it has something to do with Brando...which is also one of my
main reasons for not liking awards).
The real expose in the film is not really Woody, but Soon-Yi, who is barely
shown as nothing more than a horny young girl of his, but here emerges as
what seems like the perfect soulmate for Woody as well as an incredibly
intelligent woman.  Seeing Soon-Yi tell Woody that he has to be more open
with the members of his band is one of the coolest things I have ever seen,
and it makes her out to be an almost maternal presence for him, always
giving him sound advice, and making him calm and pleasant.  Take that, Mia!
If anything, "Wild Man Blues" suceeds in telling us to give up on seeing
Woody as who he really is, and that we may never really see him.  We learn
very little about him in the running time of the film, but what we get is
mouth-watering stuff that makes us want to perhaps just meet the guy and
see what he's like to us.  I know that the fact that I wasn't able to see
what he's really like is disappointing, but for some reason, it doesn't
come off that way.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Kevin W. Welch
Woody Allen has an interesting job: He makes movies which are, to
say the least, interesting. That does not mean that he himself is
an especially interesting person.
We see a lot of Woody Allen in Barbara Kopple's documentary about
Allen's European jazz tour. Mostly, we see one of three things.
There is a lot of footage of the concerts themselves; there is a
limited amount of film of the crowds and their reaction; and
there is an awful lot of Allen backstage, mostly with Soon Yi
Previn.
The concert footage is entertaining up to a point. New Orleans
jazz is niche music in America, but I'm willing to believe that
it's more popular in Europe, where most forms of traditional
American jazz and blues have been better received. Still, I'm not
a fan and I honestly can't say how well Allen plays (his
instrument is the relatively obscure clarinet).  He certainly
seems competent, and he should be, given the length of time he's
been playing, but I simply have no reference. I also have to
admit that by the end the film I'm fairly sick of New Orleans
music. This is my fault, but I found the music, and the concerts
rather monotonous.
Somewhere in the middle of the film, Wild Man Blues concentrates
on the crowds that come out to see Allen's touring unit. They
seem large and admiring. I also understand that, like New Orleans
jazz, Allen is more popular over there. That's worth knowing;
still, these scenes seemed a little too admiring, too
hagiographic, too fannish.
Then there is the behind the scenes stuff that occupies most of
the movie. Wild Man Blues is the diary of Woody Allen on the
road. He is in every scene, mostly with Soon Yi Previn, and he is
almost constantly talking. He's pretty much the way you would
expect him to be--smart, complaining, a little overwhelmed by
everything. The problem is that you almost expect him to launch
into shtick, and he never quite does. He's never very funny;
instead, he strikes you as stressed out.
The heart of the movie is Soon Yi Previn and Woody Allen, how
they get along and what they say to each other. For having such a
great difference in ages, they seem like an almost normal couple.
If anything, Ms. Previn is the solid emotional anchor of the
relationship, the one who makes sure that Allen doesn't fly
apart. She reassures him some, and spends a lot of time
explaining to him what other people think or what they feel,
which seems to mean that Allen himself doesn't have a good grasp
on the feelings of the people around him.
But this is about all we get to see of the two. There is
remarkably little insight about Allen or his relationship with
Ms. Previn here. We learn a few things--music is the love of his
life (which is easy for him to say because he doesn't have to
make a living doing it), he plays the music he does because
that's what he listened to when he was growing up, and he makes
the movies he make for similar reasons, because he liked foreign
films when he was a kid. Nothing remarkable, really. For the
rest, all we see is Allen talking nonstop, making trivial
observations, complaining, worrying, just going about his daily
life.
The problem is that the documentary style here-the informal
camerawork,  the behind-the-scenes approach, the interviews-gives
the day-to-day stuff a weight that it really doesn't deserve.
When you watch a movie like this for 103 minutes, you expect to
learn a little about the subject, and you just don't get that.
The point of this movie seems to be that you get to watch Woody
Allen for an hour and a half.
The questions left unexplored are surprising. There is no sense
of what the band members feel about all this. They are largely
ciphers, as is Allen's sister, Lefty Aronson, who went along on
the tour apparently as some kind of road manager. The movie never
explains just why this tour happened. Was it the money? A
celebrity vanity project? A chance for Allen to get out of the
country and play in front of adoring audiences while picking up a
couple of awards?
And I get no sense for why this movie was made. Let's face it; it
wasn't for the music, because nobody would make a road diary film
about a generic New Orleans band. The movie is about Woody Allen,
and yet it really doesn't have much to say about its subject,
more than just showing what Allen did for a few interesting weeks
in Europe. Wild Man Blues doesn't take a critical enough look at
Allen to yield any insights or new knowledge about the man. Given
the generally admiring tone of the project (we are reminded many
times of Allen's credentials) you wonder whether this was an
attempt to rehabilitate the man's reputation, or simply the
project of an overly enthusiastic fan.
The end of Wild Man Blues shows Allen with his parents, both of
whom are still alive, remarkably. There are a couple of nice bits
here--Allen's mother would have preferred that he had met a nice
Jewish girl.  He spent his adolescence living in his bedroom and
she doesn't seem to remember anything special about his musical
interests back then. She knew he was smart, but she seems
surprised by his success. Still, she doesn't seem to have a
handle on her son, either. There's really nothing here, either.
Overall, Wild Man Blues is a pleasant but ultimately unnecessary
documentary.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Welcome to the lives of the rich and famous.  Today, thanks to
Barbara Kopple's new documentary called WILD MAN BLUES, we visit with
Woody Allen, his lover, his sister, and his jazz band as they tour
Europe in style befitting royalty.  (The band members' unseen
accommodations are undoubtedly less patrician.)
     Kopple had a real challenge in constructing an interesting film
since Woody turns out to be as dull as his movies are exciting.  He
suffers from self-proclaimed "chronic dissatisfaction," which means,
for example, that when he's in New York he wishes he were in Europe and
vice versa.  A hypochondriac, he keeps taking his temperature in the
hopes that it will stop reading normal.
     Woody and his soon-to-be wife - "This is Soon-Yi Previn, the
notorious Soon-Yi Previn," is how he introduces her - make an odd
couple.  She treats him like her pupil, lecturing him on the how to
perform on stage and how to greet dignitaries.  And the supposedly
oversexed Woody acts like they are an old married couple, showing her
little visible affection for her except for a little handholding.
     A typical scene has them in one of their palatial hotel rooms - he
prefers getting 2 large adjoining suites so he can have his own bath -
making small talk at breakfast about subjects from the temperature of
the shower to the lack of toast.  It reminded me of a two-person junior
high school skit I was in, in which I was supposed to be playing "a
member of the elite society," whatever that meant.
     The most striking conclusion from viewing the movie is how
incredibly unhappy Woody is even with millions of fans and dollars.  In
one hotel there are a thousand people in the street below his room,
hoping to get a glimpse of him.  Even when playing the New Orleans
style jazz that he reportedly loves, he looks miserable.  Grimacing
with his eyes closed, he produces music that can be described as, well,
pleasant, but he makes it look less like a labor of love than something
to be endured.
     Woody, although he clearly mugs for the camera at times, seems
fairly natural.  Looking disheveled and rapidly aging, he and his
relatives travel from their private jet to their limo to their next
unbelievable room.  One even has its own large, indoor swimming pool
with elaborate tiled mosaic floors that looks like it was last seen in
an episode of "I, Claudius."
     With enormous doses of Woody's music, the film spends little time
analyzing what attracts Woody to it.  "There's nothing there between
you and the pure feeling of playing," Woody says, giving us some hint
of his motivation.  "There's no cerebral part to it."
     In one of the film's little insights, Woody talks about why
Europeans like his movies better than Americans.  Europeans even love
his films, such as INTERIORS, that bombed in the US.  "The Europeans
like pictures that drone on, and I'm good at making pictures that drone
on," he explains.
     What may surprise Woody's fans is that he is rarely funny in
person and sometimes surprisingly inarticulate.  ("I'm appropriately
animate for a human being in the context in which I exist," is his
retort to Soon-Yi's criticism of his lack of gestures on stage.)
     "He's great," effuses one of his adoring fans.  "He can do
whatever he likes to do."  Actually, the film serves as proof that he
doesn't enjoy anything.
     "You are so happy to be so intelligent," one party guest, whose
native tongue isn't English, tells Woody.  "With intelligence comes
great responsibility," he replies gravely.  You'll never catch him
being happy.
     The sad movie ends in what Woody calls a "lunch from hell" with
his octogenarian parents.  He sets them up and then hates them when
they respond to his taunts exactly as would be predicted.  Perhaps the
metaphor for how he views his life - quite apart from its reality - is
the hall where they were to perform in Venice.  It was completely
destroyed by a fire just before they arrived.
     WILD MAN BLUES runs 1:45.  It is rated PG for a single use of the
F-word and would be fine for kids around twelve and up.

Author
James Sanford
Most documentaries that purport to show you the person behind a celebrity's
image don't work, for the simple fact that most celebrities are so keenly
aware of a camera's presence they're never truly "real" as long as the
lights are on and the microphones are open. Director Barbara Kopple runs
into this wall several times in the course of "Wild Man Blues," a
documentary tracking writer/director/clarinetist Woody Allen on his swing
through Europe with a New Orleans jazz band. After more than 30 years of
being interviewed, Allen is too self-aware to let down his guard, and much
of Kopple's footage shows us the lovable/irritating New York neurotic we've
become accustomed to seeing in movies like "Hannah and Her Sisters" and
"Annie Hall," dropping one-liners and stammering like crazy.
 But every once in a while Allen slips a bit, revealing a more sarcastic and
slightly nastier person than we're used to, someone more along the lines of
the bitter anti-hero he played in "Deconstructing Harry." In these moments,
"Wild Man Blues" is genuinely fascinating; the rest of the time it's
intermittently funny and observant, although in terms of revelations about
its subject it can't hold a candle to D.A. Pennebaker's "Don't Look Back," a
scathing portrait of a young Bob Dylan, or Alex Keshishian's mesmerizing
exploration of the Madonna phenomenona, "Truth Or Dare."
 What will likely intrigue most viewers -- especially those who hunger for
good gossip -- is the film's portrayal of Allen's relationship with his
youthful wife and former ward whom he introduces as "the notorious Soon Yi
Previn." Previn is anything but a groupie, freely admitting she's never seen
"Annie Hall" or read any of Allen's writing. She does, however, have a
favorite among his films, "Manhattan," in which Allen shares his bed with
high school student Mariel Hemingway.
 To judge from the evidence Kopple presents, the Allen-Previn marriage is
one of near-opposites, with Previn emphasizing practicality while Allen
pursues artistic pie in the sky. When he tells her he's planning on
presenting a challenging concert full of hardcore jazz and "esoteric tunes"
to an audience he suspects of being sycophants, she warns him frankly "you
don't want them to get up and leave, do you?". Previn also gently chastises
Allen for only speaking to the bandleader during meetings and shutting the
other musicians out; Kopple doesn't get much feedback from the band,
although we do find out they're amused to learn that Allen actually does
know everyone's name.
 Allen, long a bigger box office draw in Europe than he is in America,
attracts fervent fans everywhere he goes and fills concert halls in Paris,
Turin and London, although it's doubtful most of the patrons are there
solely because of their appreciation for jazz anymore so than theatergoers
lined up to see Madonna in "Speed-the-Plow" expecting to see a virtuoso
performance. As a clarinetist Allen would probably rank as a modestly gifted
amateur, although the conviction he brings to his playing comes through loud
and clear.
 So does his impatience with the paparazzi, especially when they disrupt a
quiet cruise through Venice with Previn. Through a pained grin Allen snarls
to Previn of the photo-snappers, "they won't pay ten cents to see one of my
movies, but passing in a gondola they love it." It's one of those rare,
slightly shocking scenes in which Kopple's eye penetrates the comic mask and
finds the not-so-cuddly guy inside.
James Sanford

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WILD MAN BLUES (director: Barbara Kopple; cinematographer: Tom Hurwitz;
cast: Woody Allen, Soon-Yi Previn, Dan Barrett, Simon Wettenhall, John
Gill, Cynthia Sayer, Greg Cohen, Eddy Davis, Letty Aronson, 1998)
Barbara Kopple was asked by Woody to do a cinema verite documentary on
his 18 city European New Orleans Jazz tour he will be on with his
demonized girlfriend and soon to be wife, Soon-Yi Previn, promising to
let her do her thing without any interference from him. It is a most
relaxed and enjoyable look at the neurotic comic, who appears to be no
different than he is in his films. But what is vividly shown, is how
exhilerated he gets from playing the clarinet and how wonderfully morbid
he is about everything he does, from eating a vulcanized Spanish omelet
in Spain to getting seasick on a gondola in Venice. Woody's trek from
one luxury hotel to another let's us hear the comedian's constant
wisecracks and tune into his idiosyncrasies: when sending out his
laundry in Milan, he says, "I hope it doesn't come back breaded." He
looks into the unintrusive camera and tells us that he always must have
his own bathroom when travelling, this way he can have room for all his
ointments to help him look good.
He seems to be acting natural as he interacts with his sister Letty
Aronson and the ever motherly Soon-Yi, as she relates to the aging
comic's foibles and crankiness and need to be treated with kid gloves,
by voicing her opinion on what he should do, which he either ignores or
childishly follows or comes up with a good one liner for. You can't help
but realize that this is really Woody, it is not a put on, and you
either love him or shy away from him. The relationship between the
couple is what the film turns out to be mainly about, and since he lays
it out there for everyone to see what they are all about, there is no
need to look for gossip columns to know more about the star and the
tabloid headline relationship he has with his step-daughter and now
lover. There seems to be nothing seedy going on between them, except a
relationship based on need and affection, though there relationship does
not appear to be fraught with overt sexuality.
Where he is at his height of ecstasy, we see him playing the clarinet
with the band, as his head bobs up and down and he keeps time with the
music by tapping his feet. Some of the snippets from the numbers he
played included the joyous songs like "Down by the Riverside" and "Home
Sweet Home." If there is any criticism for the film, it could be noted
that we didn't hear enough of the band playing.
Woody seemed to be comfortably aloof from the band, relating mostly to
the smiling banjo player, Eddie Davis, the one who put the group
together. There are good vibes there, as they all seem to be on the same
page. What might be surprising to a lot of people, is how good the band
actually is and how much fun they seem to have playing together. After
the concert Woody and the band go their separate ways, so this
documentary covers Woody fully, giving us a fly-in-the wall look at the
claustrophobic star, as he is mobbed by admiring fans and wends his way
through autograph seekers and those who want to take photos of him, and
his ardent wealthy admirers who flatter the star, but as Woody duly
notes, they won't pay a dime to see my films.
Woody and the band show their mettle in one Italian city, as there is a
power failure and they continue playing. That he receives an engraved
plaque for this, encourages Woody to joke about how it comes easy for
him to be a hero. After a while, seeing one luxurious hotel after
another becomes a déja vu experience-- the trip took him to Paris, where
he was excited about going into a music store that had a historic
clarinet that suited him, and to Geneva and Vienna, and finally to
London, where he quipped that he can fail at last in a country that
speaks his language. Woody comments that he is always wants to be
somewhere he isn't, if he is in Milan, he wants to be in New York, if he
is in New York, he might want to be in Paris.
The travelogue ends on his arrival in New York and the high-rise
apartment of his 96-year-old father and 90+  mother, who treat him to a
neurotic scene that could be right out of a shrink's office or one of
his films. The father would have preferred that Woody had been a
pharmacist. The mother would have preferred if he married a nice Jewish
girl.Woody and Soon-Yi sit there in the kitchen and take in all the put
downs without fighting back. This scene ices the cake on Barbara
Kopple's splendid work; it couldn't get more absurd than this for the
serious maker of documentaries (HARLAN COUNTY, USA), as Allen is reduced
to being a child again in front of his overbearing Jewish parents.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
     If I didn't know this was a documentary, I might easily mistake it 
for the latest feature offering from Woody Allen  that's how 
interchangeable the public personae of the director has become with that 
of the nebbish screen character he always portrays.  In WILD MAN BLUES, 
Allen plays himself, a role he has not previously attempted, at least 
not openly.  But this claustrophobic, neurotic artist bears more than a 
passing resemblance to the protagonist of DECONSTRUCTING HARRY.  Or of 
EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.  Or of HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  Or  Well, you get 
the picture.
     Ostensibly, the purpose of WILD MAN BLUES was to create a celluloid 
record of the whirlwind concert tour of Woody Allen and his New Orleans 
Jazz Band (18 European venues in 23 days).  Allen, who spent years 
nursing his passion for the clarinet at Michael's Pub in New York, 
finally decided to take the show on the road in 1996.  Oddly, as it 
turns out, the least interesting elements of the film are those that 
deal with Allen the musician, and the editing rarely allows us to hear 
more than scattered bits and pieces of a number of great jazz standards.  
Indeed, the most fascinating and illuminating aspect of WILD MAN BLUES 
is its ability to capture the essence of Allen's relationship with his 
then girlfriend (now wife), the "notorious" Soon-Yi Previn.  
     The Allen/Previn liaison, which has been much maligned in the 
United States and once provided daily fodder for tabloids and talk radio 
shows, is subtly explored throughout WILD MAN BLUES.  Director Barbara 
Kopple was provided "complete access," and she used it to capture many 
intimate details of the couple's interaction:  how they use separate 
bathrooms, how Previn foists an unwanted breakfast off on Allen, and how 
they have gradually become less reticent about public displays of 
affection.  The overall image is one of two people that, despite their 
age and cultural differences, are completely at ease with each another.  
There's a lot of affection, albeit without any sense of sexual 
attraction (at times, Allen looks to Previn for almost-maternal comfort 
and assurance).  And, if there's a leader in the relationship, it's 
clearly Previn, whose advice on both business and domestic matters is 
always heeded.
     WILD MAN BLUES is not a concert film, as is obvious from its 
frustratingly brief musical interludes (Kopple repeatedly truncates 
lively performances, including a great rendition of "Down by the 
Waterside"). Neither is it worshipful of its central figure (that was 
one of the chief failings of Jim Jarmusch's dull, lifeless look at Neil 
Young, YEAR OF THE HORSE).  Although Allen is not demonized, he is shown 
to be a deeply flawed human being who is aware of (most of) his numerous 
failings.  
     With two award-winning films under her belt (HARLAN COUNTY, USA and 
AMERICAN DREAM), Kopple has set herself up as one of the country's 
leading documentarians, so it's a little surprising to see her tackling 
such seemingly-light material.  And, although she does a decent job with 
what she has to work with, there's a limit to the variety available from 
following Woody, his sister, his girlfriend, and his fellow band members 
from Paris to Madrid to Geneva to Rome to London.  WILD MAN BLUES has a 
tendency to become repetitious, especially during the final forty 
minutes (although the brilliant closing scene, with Previn and Allen 
visiting his parents in New York, is irreplaceable).  This movie is for 
anyone who wants to learn a little more about the "real" Allen than what 
can be determined from the tabloids and interpolated from his numerous 
semi-autobiographical feature outings.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A few days ago Dame Judi Dench insisted that she would
not allow any more interviews.  The distinguished British
actress, perhaps grouchy about being passed over for the
Oscar for her role as Queen Victoria in "Mrs Brown," contends
that things were better when the audience did not know so
much about performers.  She might change her mind after
seeing the delightful biopic, "Wild Man Blues," which does for
the film industry what "Artemisia" does for painting.  Each
of these movies takes us into the head and soul of one of the
most creative persons of a generation, one about an unlikely
celebrity since she was a woman at a time that women were
not acceptable as artists, the other about an equally unlikely
personality who made it big despite his nerdishness.
   "Wild Man Blues" is a documentary for people who don't
like documentaries.  It comes across like a partially scripted,
partially improvised comedy.  Filmed over a period of 24 days
during Woody Allen's European tour in the spring of 1996, the
movie is essentially two features in one.  The part that will
appeal to jazz fans and to quite a few who didn't know they
were jazz fans until they saw it features Woody playing New
Orleans Dixieland with a band directed by a charming banjo
player, Eddy Davis, who also hired a few others to round out
the company.  The segment that will entice diehard fans of
the great writer-actor-director shows Woody Allen in private
moments in his hotel rooms with his soon-to-be wife, Soon-Yi
Previn, and presents the comic genius as he meets his
substantial, cheering public in cities like Paris, London, Milan,
Bologna, Turin, Rome and Madrid.  Wherever he walks he is
followed by inspired devotees and paparazzi.  When he is in
his private quarters, he appears like any other tourist.  We
must appreciate that not anyone could have filmed the man
letting down his hair, so to speak, and forgetting that the
ubiquitous movie camera even exists.  That awesome feat is
accomplished by director Barbara Kopple, known to select
American audiences for her filming of "Harlan County USA" in
1977, a gripping documentary and Academy Award winner
about the strike of Kentucky mine workers against the
Eastover Mining Company.  Kopple also plied her talent in
filming "American Dream" a decade ago, yet another Oscar
winner about the hows, whats and whys of a labor strike at
the Hormel meat plant in Austin, Minnesota, a Michael-Moore-
like story of a profitable company attempting to reduce wages
and break a union just for the sake of doing so.
   What is particularly sound about "Wild Man Blues" is that it
is not a puff piece but rather presents the man as both flawed
human being and as a man who despite his chief
psychological hangup--by Mr. Allen's admission his alleged
inability to experience pleasure--is nonetheless able to lose
himself when blowing into his clarinet.  Each time he gets
past the fans, the paparazzi, the dignitaries looking for photo-
ops. and begins to join the band in such "primitive" works as
"Ja Da," "The Old Rugged Cross," "You Rascal You" and the
title song, "Wild Man Blues," he is transported.  Eyes closed,
exhaling into his instrument as though he were charming all
the snakes of Benares, he gives you the feeling that he would
rather be doing this than performing in "Annie Hall"--and
certainly prefers this musical activity to acting as regisseur of
such flops as "Interiors" and "Stardust Memories."  While Mr.
Allen considers his music merely a hobby and not something
that he does for money, he insists that he finds time to
practice his clarinet daily and, judging by audiences in major
European cities who probably showed up to see him and only
secondarily to hear his music, he won them over by his talent
with the horn as well.
   The major pleasure of the film is watching the unseen
Barbara Kopple at work, focusing her camera on him for so
many hours each day that he seems to have forgotten she is
there.  Proving that he is a funny funny man not just in his
movies but in his daily life, he knocks off some lines that
you'd swear were rehearsed, but given his wit and
intelligence, they presumably came off the top of his head. 
Facing a lovely Weimaraner in his private plane, a pooch
owned by the movie's producer Jean Doumanian, he effects a
look that will win him no votes among dog owners and
remarks, "I'd rather the dog bit me than licked me."  Not even
a companion's insistence that a dog's mouth is cleaner than a
person's dissuades him from his distaste for canines.  
   While Mr. Allen and Soon-Yi stayed at the best hotels in
Europe including one in Milan which had a private swimming
pool right in his room, he nonetheless frets, "When am I
gonna do my underwear?"  Though he loves the City of Lights
because"Paris has great, gray weather...I don't like the sun,"
he compares that beautiful town unfavorably to New York
where "I know I can get a bowl of duck wonton soup at 4:30
a.m.  I don't do it, because who needs it at that hour?"  And
in one large Italian city he worries, "This being Milan, I hope
the laundry doesn't come back breaded."  Of Bologna: "I
know with a couple of valium I could really learn to love this
city."  In London, especially, he hopes to "put on a good
show...here they can hate me in my own language."  The
principal thing he likes about Europe is that his U.S.-failed
films "Interiors" and "Stardust Memories" did well abroad:
"Europeans like films that drone on."
   Mr. Allen must really like (or dislike) his parents: he
apparently allowed some rather embarrassing statements to
pass the final cut.  After returning to his Manhattan apartment
where his nonagenarian folks awaited him, he heard his mom
whine, "I would have preferred he fell in love with a nice
Jewish girl."  And this in front of Soon-Yi Previn!  For his part,
dad would have preferred that Woody become a pharmacist
and has apparently not seen a single one of his son's movies.
   "Wild Man Blues" portrays its hero winning a lifetime
achievement award, one which might conceivably be
presented as well to Barbara Kopple for a smashing job with
the three principal documentaries she directed.  If Woody
Allen is unable to experience pleasure, he can rest assured
that he continues to give it to his devoted followers.   Rated
PG.  Running time: 104 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
