Title
Review for Destiny Turns on the Radio (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     Quentin Tarantino has made an interesting choice for his first
follow-up to PULP FICTION.  He's chosen to act in a supporting role, as
Johnny Destiny, a mystically supernatural creator of luck in this odd
film: DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO.
     Unfortunately, Tarantino's talents are wasted here.  Instead, the
film focuses on the melodrama/comedy of the relationship between prison
escapee Julian (Dylan McDermott) and lounge singer Lucille (Nancy
Travis), plus their ex-partner in crime Thoreau (James LeGros), and
Lucille's new boyfriend Tuerto (James Belushi).
     Exactly what this film is about is difficult to describe because
the plot is minimal at best.  Basically, they are all in Las Vegas,
trying to change their lives for the better.  But for 100 or so minutes
the movie drones on and on about a bunch of characters we don't seem to
care about or particularly like.  Even the hero Julian is pretty
obnoxious and unlikeable.
     The acting is way over-the-top.  In an attempt to make this a hip,
ultra-cool "magical comedy," the result is simply pure nonsense.  Some
truly funny moments arise, but basically the film drones on and on
without getting anywhere.  Sure, it's unpredictable, but who cares?
     I expect Tarantino fans will rush out to see DESTINY in droves. 
Expect to be disappointed; it certainly isn't up to standard.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Dylan McDermott, Nancy Travis, James LeGros, Jim Belushi,
           Quentin Tarantino.
Screenplay:  Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone.
Director:  Jack Baran.
     Adventurous young screenwriters and filmmakers often have to
walk a very fine line between originality and approachability.
Those seeking financing from sources like The Sundance Institute are
trying to win people over with a creative spirit, but a different
aesthetic is frequently required if the film is lucky enough to make
it into the marketplace.  DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO has already
been branded with the financially toxic label of "cult film," and it
is true that its tone bears more than a passing resemblance to films
like REPO MAN and WILD AT HEART.  But there's more than that to
DESTINY.  Although it is wild and quirky, occasionally to excess, it
is also surprisingly entertaining and grounded in real emotion by an
exceptional performance from Nancy Travis.
     Dylan McDermott stars as Julian Goddard, a bank robber just
escaped from prison after three years.  He is picked up along the
road by an odd fellow named Johnny Destiny (Quentin Tarantino), and
the two men head for Las Vegas.  There Julian hopes to be reunited
both with his partner-in-crime Harry Thoreau (James LeGros), who
should have his half of the bank haul, and with his girlfriend
Lucille (Nancy Travis).  Unfortunately, Lucille has since hooked up
with casino boss Tuerto (Jim Belushi), and the money was stolen from
Thoreau on the night of the robbery ... as it turns out, by Johnny
Destiny.  As Julian attempts to win back Lucille's heart and Thoreau
prepares for another meeting with Destiny, they all discover that
there are some things you just can't plan for in Las Vegas, "a town
of limitless possibilities."
     It would be foolish to suggest that the first thing one would
notice about DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO would be anything but it's
rather off-center characteristics.  A motel with rooms named after
Marilyn Monroe films, a shared dream which results in a pregnancy
and an electrified swimming pool which acts as a gateway to another
reality are not exactly the stuff of your average multiplex picture.
There are occasions when those elements come perilously close to
overkill, or indeed topple into overkill, but they are rare.  The
main reason screenwriters Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone and
director Jack Baran succeed is that most of the strangeness comes
from the characters, and they are well-developed and well-performed
almost to a one.  Dylan McDermott and James LeGros play off each
other well as the two thieves, each with his own ideas about the
strange events of the story, and Jim Belushi is both comic and
menacing as the big shot with a penchant for grabbing is crotch.
The smaller roles are full of winners as well:  Barry Henley and
Richard Edson as two cops in terrible sport coats; Tracey Walter as
Julian's reclusive father; Bobcat Goldthwait as an undercover cop;
especially David Cross as a hyperkinetic talent agent.  Only Quentin
Tarantino, who should be declared legally charisma-impaired, bombs
in his role.  That's a problem, because Johnny Destiny requires
_presence_, not just attitude.
     Though DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO could have been little more
than a loose conglomeration of strange scenes, the film is held
together by the location.  Las Vegas becomes a kind of character in
the film, a real-life mirage of false hopes.  One character (the
comically named recording executive Vinnie Vidivici) describes the
city as "smelling of formaldehyde," and that feeling is part of the
story.  Vegas is where dreams and careers go to die, where doomed
marriages are born, and where chance turns everyone into a loser
eventually.
     It is Nancy Travis who drives that theme home.  For all
practical purposes, DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO really revolves
around Lucille, a casino singer stuck in the place where nobody gets
"discovered."  When Julian and her one big chance at fame turn up on
the same day, Lucille faces some tough choices between her dreams of
happiness and her pragmatism.  It is an intriguing character,
wonderfully played by an actress who has been stuck too often in
minor roles in bad films like GREEDY.  And it's a shame that too
many viewers won't see her performance because of the strange story
surrounding her.  DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO is aimed at those with
a taste for the surreal, but it also has a very real heart which
makes it more than the sum of its parts.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 4/28/95 
Running Length: 1:43 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, crotch-grabbing) 
Starring: Dylan McDermott, James LeGros, Quentin Tarantino, 
          Nancy Travis, James Belushi, Bobcat Goldthwait 
Director: Jack Baran 
Producer: Gloria Zimmerman 
Screenplay: Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone 
Cinematography: James Carter 
Music: Steve Soles 
Released by Savoy Pictures 
     DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO is a noir romance/thriller steeped in 
the bizarre, with the accent on "bizarre."  Take away all the weird, 
ultimately pointless mystical mumbo-jumbo and you're left with a story 
that makes very little sense.  Put simply, DESTINY is a mess.  It's a 
colorful, atmospheric mess polished with a hip, pseudo-intellectual 
sheen, but it's still a mess. 
     The makers of DESTINY should have heeded the lesson of David 
Lynch's TWIN PEAKS.  Early in its run, when the TV series was a 
character-based mystery with supernatural overtones, it was fun, 
fascinating, and quirky.  But, when the more outlandish elements began 
to dominate, the program became self-indulgent and incomprehensible.  
DESTINY is like TWIN PEAKS at its worst--lots of strange goings-on 
that get "explained" by such facile quotes as "The universe is 
expanding... It's beyond man's power to stem the tide of chaos." 
     The story--such as it is--follows the exploits of an escaped 
convict named Julian (Dylan McDermott) who has arrived in Las Vegas for 
two reasons:  to pick up the proceeds of a bank robbery from his
one-time partner Thoreau (James LeGros) and to reclaim his girlfriend 
Lucille (Nancy Travis).  Matters aren't simple, however.  Lucille is 
living with wheeler-dealer Tuerto (James Belushi) and isn't sure she's 
ready to revive a three-year-old relationship.  And the money is gone.  
Apparently, Thoreau was robbed by someone named Johnny Destiny (Quentin 
Tarantino), an ultra-cool dude with perfect hair who has a habit of 
taking swims in glowing pools while little ribbons of electricity kiss 
his body.  But that's because Johnny isn't exactly human--he's the 
embodiment of luck. 
     Aside from a script that doesn't care whether the viewer gets it or 
not, there are several significant problems with DESTINY TURNS ON THE 
RADIO.  In the first place, the film thinks it's funnier than it 
actually is.  A significant portion of the dialogue is delivered
tongue-in-cheek, and there are several failed attempts at broader
comedy.  Straight or satirical, it's difficult to appreciate what
director Baran has put up on the screen, and if there's some kind of
joke going on here, it seems to be on those who venture into a theater
to see this movie. 
     The cast is barely worth mentioning.  There aren't any standouts, 
and we're forced to watch talented performers like James LeGros mix 
ineffectually with those of lesser ability (James Belushi and Nancy 
Travis).  Quentin Tarantino is on hand, but his role doesn't require 
much more than a sardonic grin, something the actor is easily capable 
of.  Dylan McDermott, who has the most screen time, is flat in a role 
that Nicolas Cage probably could have livened up considerably. 
     DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO is swamped with style and atmosphere.  
Often, the visual and audio elements of the film overwhelm the 
admittedly-tenuous storyline and paper-thin characters.  In general, I 
appreciate offbeat pictures, but that's when there's something worth 
searching for beneath the surface.  In this case, once you strip away 
the packaging, all that's left is an empty shell.  Ultimately, the most 
clever thing about DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO is the title. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
