Title
Review for Species (1995)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Marg Helgenberger, Forest Whitaker,
Alfred Molina, Natasha Henstridge
Written by: Dennis Feldman
Directed by: Roger Donaldson
Running Time: 108 minutes
Species was one of the films I was most looking forward to in the
summer of 1995. The summer of 1995 turned out to be very
disappointing.
Species is one of the most intriguing, yet poorly written sci-fi idea
movies I've ever seen. An advanced alien race contacts Earth. In their
first message they send us the formula for a new fuel that will solve
many of our energy problems. This lets us know that their intentions
are friendly. In the second message, they send the code for a new
strand of DNA that will allow us to cross-breed our two species.
Now, my first question would be, why would we want that? Our pesky
scientists apparently do want this, and proceed to make a hybrid of
the two different species. After deciding to terminate the project
based on the alien's nature to want to destroy things, the alien (who
is a young girl at this point) decides that it doesn't want to die so
it promptly escapes (unseen and untouched from a maximum security
compound, mind you). It soon cocoons and evolves into Natasha
Henstridge. Now being in the form of a beautiful young woman, it's
hormones go crazy and it has the primal instinct to mate. Problem is,
it's offspring will evolve quickly, producing more offspring and soon
overtaking the human race.
Who would you send on a mission to destroy an alien that, if
unstopped, could lead to the destruction of everyone on earth?  The
army? The air force? No no, you send a government hitman (Madsen), two
scientists (Helgenberger, Molina), and a "psychic" (Forest
Whitaker). Now Madsen is useful, except for the fact that he uses a
handgun to battle the alien (and while his performance is
entertaining, never once does he seem to take anything seriously). The
other three characters are absolutely worthless. Molina has absolutely
NO reason to be there, except to identify the cocoon early in the
film. The rest of the time he just tries to get chicks. Helgenberger
is just there to provide a love interest for Madsen, and
Whitaker... well he plays one of the worst characters of them
all. We're told he's a psychic, but he's the lamest psychic I've ever
seen. For example, when they discover the cocoon and a bloody mess of
goo, he tells them that he feels that something bad happened. Really?
Later, they've tracked Henstridge's car which has run out of gas. He
examines the car, then informs everyone that "she walked". Really?!
You think so?!?! This happens repeatedly.
Also, just as a little aside here, Species starts out with just about
the most dull, drab, and ridiculously boring credit sequence I've ever
seen. Boy, nothing gets me in the mood for a sci-fi action flick more
than five minutes of slow boring credits with absolutely nothing going
on behind them.
Most folks who enjoyed Species admit that it's retarded, but they just
like the fact that Natasha Henstridge is running around naked for the
entire film. And sure, that's good stuff. But you can have an
attractive naked girl running around and still have a good script to
back it up. And unfortunately, all Species has is the naked girl. [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Gharlane of Eddore
     John Von Neumann, progenitor of the computer age and critically
important mathematician on the Manhattan Project, pointed out long ago
that there is a great way to explore the cosmos, even without recourse
to faster-than light travel. You send out self-replicating robot ships
which explore and radio back information.  It may take decades,
centuries, or millennia, but it can be done with achievable
technology, and doesn't require a magical faster-than-light drive.
     In the Fifties, British astronomer Fred Hoyle improved on this
plan by suggesting that it would be better to radio plans for a complex
computer and a program for it; any civilization capable of receiving
the transmission could build the computer, which would then engage in a
real-time dialog with the aliens, exchanging information and
technologies, and hopefully arranging to send back what it had
learned.
     About thirty-five years ago, the BBC contracted with
astronomer/writer Fred Hoyle and writer Frank Elliot to create the
scripts for a mini-series called A FOR ANDROMEDA.  AFA concerned the
reception of a Hoyle transmission, the construction of a huge computer,
the computer's analysis of life on Earth, and its creation of an
apparently human intermediary to facilitate communication.  She was
played with ethereally inhuman perfection by the then-unknown Julie
Christie.  Audience response was so strong that the BBC contracted for
a sequel, ANDROMEDA BREAKTHROUGH, which played to equally high
ratings.
     Dennis Feldman, whose previous credits include THE GOLDEN CHILD,
has never been noted for coherent, well-structured movie scripts; they
start out great, and then disintegrate into a morass of chase and
action, mitigated only by the presence of the obligatory Beautiful
Girl.  Feldman writes good scenes, but has no idea how to tell a story
or write a movie, even with a previous version to use as a model.
     Now, in SPECIES, we have a mundane retread of the ANDROMEDA
plotline, derailed by a preoccupation with removing the clothes from
the leading lady and further ruined by a mediocre attempt to emulate
several recent horror films in terms of splatter, gore, and chases.
     SPECIES features Ben Kingsley, who is completely wasted in a
badly-written portrayal of a feebly amoral scientist.  Forest Whitaker
and Alfred Molina are also served poorly by the script.
     The SPECIES story is relatively simple; we have been radioing
information about ourselves and our DNA out into space since 1971, and
have been receiving answers for two years.  (Note that, in the 1970's,
we really didn't know diddly about the human genome structure, and were
hardly in a position to radio out a set of blueprints for human
beings.  Even today, all we can do is give information about DNA and
how it works, not a copy of human DNA, because we don't have it
analyzed YET.)
     The answers we get from the unknown alien source are plans for
recreating a member of the alien race, and Doctor Xavier Finch, played
by Ben Kingsley, is placed in charge of the attempt.  The script begins
to go off the deep end at this point, when the result is a beautiful
young girl who can shape-shift into any of several ugly alien life
forms.  The first half of the film has something to offer, as "Sil,"
the alien girl, struggles with her multi-form existence, changing from
Beauty to Lizard to Giant Cockroach and back again, all while trying to
understand her own place in the cosmos.  She seems oddly knowledgeable
about human society, with glaring gaps where her social skills should
be.  Her instincts are to mate and procreate, and some of the best
scenes deal with her attempts in this area.  Escaping from her birth
laboratory in Utah, Sil is pursued by a team of drafted civilians with
orders to find her and kill her.  She goes on an eating binge, spins
herself a cocoon, and emerges as an adult, played by Natasha
Henstridge, who goes a long way toward re-creating the sheerly inhuman
beauty Julie Christie achieved in 1960.
     The pursuers:  Michael Madsen is an assassin/exterminator; Forrest
Whitaker is a convenient empath/psychic, just as though the U.S.
government actually had such people on call.  Neither is able to do
much with the writing and directing provided.  Whitaker's role seems
to be aimed at making Whitaker a male copy of STAR TREK: THE NEXT
GENERATION's "Counselor Cleavage."  The other members of the strike
team are played by Marg Helgenberger and Alfred Molina.
     Kingsley and Whitaker are both consummate professionals, too good
to not work to the best of their abilities; but the performances
Donaldson elicited from the rest of the cast are disappointing and
bland, and it is apparent that the direction was a bit weak.
     H.R. Giger's design for the main form of the alien creature is
actually a bit boring when we finally get to see it, although previous
digital effects were done quite smoothly.
     The main fault of SPECIES is lack of originality; it starts out
with a wonderful, albeit borrowed, premise, and then doesn't live up to
it.   All we get are chase scenes and a few nice sex scenes, with a few
monsters tossed in.  There is no buildup of tension and suspense, no
climax worthy of the name; SPECIES is just a sequence of "scare" scenes
stuck together.
     The movie is carried by its chase and sex scenes, but not rescued
by them.  On the other hand, as an exercise in Sci-Fi action/
adventure, it certainly beats the ichor out of JUDGE DREDD.
     SPECIES earns an extra rating point or two for having Ben Kingsley
and Natasha Henstridge on board, but by and large, it's fun only for
those of us who really like this sort of thing.  My personal rating is
three stars, but knock one or two of those off if you don't enjoy
pretty unclothed ladies and bloodthirsty alien monsters.
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, nudity, sex, language) 
Stars:  Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Forest Whitaker, Alfred Molina, 
        Marg Helgenberger, Natasha Henstridge 
Directed by: Roger Donaldson 
Produced by: Frank Mancuso Jr. and Dennis Feldman 
Typed by: Dennis Feldman 
Cinematography: Andrzej Bartkowiak 
Music: Christopher Young 
Run Time: 108 minutes
Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
from MGM, opens 7 July 1995

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The original title of this one was ATTACK OF THE HORNY 
SUPERMODEL FROM BEYOND, but the director changed it to 
SPECIES when he realized a title like that would doom the film to 
years of USA Up All Nite airings. Still, the horny alien supermodel is 
the main attraction of the movie, despite the top-billing of 
SCHINDLER'S LIST star Ben Kingsley. It's probably the only time in 
film history that bad science fiction has been given the Oscar-quality 
treatment. Of course, in movies of this genre, good acting is the last 
thing we want or expect. We need the bad acting as much as the 
obligatory shots of slimy, pulsing cocoons and drawn-out climaxes in 
the sewer, both of which are featured in SPECIES.
        The acting, in fact, seems to be the only part of the movie that 
makes it seem like an actual movie, not just some showcase for cheesy 
effects and a foreign model to take her top off at the drop of a 
spacecraft. Natasha Henstridge makes her movie debut as half-
supermodel, half-alien. She escapes government surveillance to begin 
a cross-country flesh rampage in an attempt to breed. Yes, she's 
horny--and dangerous. Called in by the government to hunt her down 
are a couple scientists, a hitman (Michael Madsen) and a guy with 
some unspecified psychic power (Forest Whitaker). Good idea. Read 
her palm to death.
        Although the plot dictates that Henstridge be naked half the 
time in her ongoing attempts to conceive a child, most of the time her 
pods (so to speak) are strategically covered, so don't rent the movie if 
all you want is a peek of flesh. Besides that, there's a certain degree of 
repulsion when Henstridge changes back and forth between 
supermodel and grotesque alien. Thankfully, all the nude scenes are of 
the model and not the alien, though some science-fiction nerds would 
undoubtedly be turned on by the nude alien as well.
        SPECIES is for the most part entertaining, if you overlook 
some of the ridiculous plot points and ineffective scenes of 
manufactured tension (i.e. the one where the two scientists are locked 
in the lab room with the growing alien). The climax scene is boring 
and unoriginal, but the rest of the movie is interesting and made 
watchable by the performances from Kingsley, Whitaker and the rest, 
including beautiful yet mostly silent Henstridge. And those gratuitous 
pod shots don't hurt either.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Bryant Frazer
Directed by Roger Donaldson
Starring Natasha Henstridge, Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Forest Whitaker
'Sil' and Ghost Train Design by H.R. Giger
U.S.A., 1995
     Contrary to what you may have heard on the net and elsewhere, the
first half of SPECIES is actually a charming little B-movie. It's not
so much that the film's troubles begin halfway through, but that it
makes a string of bad decisions that forfeit both our goodwill and our
willing suspension of disbelief. Still, if it wasn't MGM's flagship
release for the summer movie season -- say, if Roger Corman had
produced a low-budget version of the same script for his movie series
on Showtime -- I can't imagine it would have taken near the critical
drubbing it seems to have garnered.
     The premise is delicious, if a little incredible: aliens have
responded to our search for extraterrestrial life by solicitously
beaming back a DNA code. Humans being what we are, we decide to
experiment with the stuff, fabricating a syringeful of the otherworldly
stuff and then injecting it into a human ovum and growing a small army
of human/alien crossbreeds. Silly us. A few die, others are frozen for
future study, and one darling little girl, known as Sil, is kept in an
isolation chamber for study (she has grown to an apparent 12 years old
over the course of a few months). This gives her a lot of sublimated
anger, and when the team of scientists led by Ben Kingsley finally
decides to gas the child, she breaks through the chamber's glass and
escapes.  And since this little kid soon grows to womanly proportions
and sets out to fulfill her biological imperative to breed (conceivable
killing off the human race as she makes tiny monsters), Kingsley sets
out after her.
     The early scenes seem to cement our identification with Sil
(Michelle Williams). Her wide eyes establish her as the loneliest
little girl on the planet, and she projects a palpable sense of
betrayal when the cyanide gas is turned on and Kingsley mouths down at
her: "I'm sorry." Even when she kills a transient, she seems blameless,
like a wild animal escaped from captivity.  Before she grows a cocoon
and morphs into an adult, we watch her months-old mind cope with
adolescence. The artist H.R.  Giger, who designed the Aliens in the
original Alien, worked on Sil, too.  The "Ghost Train" that chases Sil
in her dreams is all his creation (funded, in fact, by the artist's own
money), and symbolizes menstruation, which is actually a mild
foreshadowing of the transformation to come.  Along with the grisly
cocooning sequence, these are the only potentially disturbing scenes in
the film.
     Just a little later, Sil is full-grown and played by model
Natasha Henstridge, who is undeniably gorgeous and makes the whole
movie look just a little too much like a cosmetics commercial.  Her
exploits from then on are episodic (in much the same way as producer
Frank Mancuso Jr's films in the seminal Friday the 13th series), as she
seduces and dispatches men in a guileless search for one suitable for
breeding. That's the fun part.  Unfortunately, it's intercut with the
comparably tedious exploits of Kingsley's posse.  Forest Whitaker is an
empath who has the fortuitous skill of sharing other people's feelings
over videotape.  Michael Madsen gets the requisite Michael Madsen role.
And so on, with Alfred Molina and Marg Helgenberger (both perfectly
adequate in undemanding roles) rounding out the team.
     You'd think that one night in L.A. would be long enough for a
sex object of Henstridge's caliber to try mating with about a dozen
men, but the script is too clunky and methodical to let her really have
at it (though she does go shirtless in at least four, maybe five
scenes). A little more development of Sil's character would have gone a
long way toward adding a little bit of weight to the same situations,
since the audience is predisposed to identify with her early on (she's
half human, after all). The less said about the dialogue, the better, I
suppose, though these actors struggle mightily with it. The special
effects, which consist mainly of Sil's varying transformations into
alien form, range from the wickedly effective (early on) to the ho-hum
(the last 20 minutes or so, when less really would have been more). And
the direction is by Roger Donaldson, a competent thriller maker (NO WAY
OUT, THE GETAWAY) who either lacked the clout or was uninterested in
making a more substantial horror story from this material.
     I saw SPECIES at the end of a week which also included
screenings of BELLE DE JOUR, THE LAST SEDUCTION, and the original
ALIEN. I think ALIEN is the best of that lot, and it's a good example
of the kind of movie SPECIES billed itself as (Giger worked on both).
But the thing about all these films is that they are meditations on the
female by male filmmakers, and all of them dwell conspicuously on the
bizarre: BELLE DE JOUR's casual masochism, THE LAST SEDUCTION's
trenchant moneylust, and ALIEN's horrified look at the reproductive
system.  SPECIES exhibits a similar morbid fascination with issues of
pregnancy and the female body.  It's fitting that Henstridge's body is
on display during much of the movie, since her body, with its capacity
to morph and transform, is the really terrifying object that the film
revolves around.
-- 
DEEP FOCUS: Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/ bfrazer@panix.com

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
SPECIES is a forehead-knockingly bad movie. You know what I'm talking about:
that's when you sit there, slack-jawed, staring at the screen, and then just
pound your first into your forehead in total disbelief at what you're
witnessing. It's so awful it's downright charming; it's about as bad and as
*loud* as STARGATE.
Here's the "plot": Scientists recieve a transmission from space that seems
to consist of a genetic code. After synthesizing it and crossbreeding it
with human DNA, they develop Sil: an innocent-looking, wide-eyed girl-thing
who, for reasons too protracted to list here, has to be destroyed. Only
trouble is, they can't simply put a gun to the back of her head and turn her
into dog food -- like a Bond movie, they have to kill her *elaborately*,
which gives her a chance to escape.
The government corralls together a team of "experts" -- mostly at screwing
up, from the look of it: an assassin (Michael Madsen, looking even dopier
than he did in RESEVOIR DOGS), an empath (Forest Whitaker, looking like the
Pillsbury Doughboy), another scientist, and the creator of Sil (Ben
Kingsley, the best thing in the movie). Most of them will of course be
murdered in various creative ways, but not before they get to show their
various "skills". Smithson, the empath, for instance, has the uncanny
ability to just spit out where Sil is and what she's doing. Thanks to the
fact that his skill doesn't have any explicit rules, it leaves us scratching
our heads as to why he doesn't just produce a map and draw an X on it.
Sil, as it turns out, is growing and developing at a furious rate -- which,
of course, requires that she murder several people to feed herself. Which is
nothing compared to the vigor she exhibits when trying to find a mate. The
adult Sil (played by Natasha Henstridge) looks like she just walked off the
runway of a fashion show and has no trouble finding nookie in California,
and the movie gets some good laughs out of everyone reacting to her total
guilelessness. There is also one moment -- maybe salvaged from an earlier,
better draft of the script -- where she tries to to explain who she is, and
can't. But the main purpose of the movie is never in doubt: violence,
gratuitous nudity, ear-hammering sound effects. The last one is really
ticking me off in a lot of movies lately: why, for instance, do we alwasy
have swooshing sound effects to accompany the image of a FLASHLIGHT playing
across the camera lens? Light beams didn't disturb the air much the last
time I checked.

Author
Choo Eng Aun
Starring : Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Alfred Molina, Natasha Kentsridge
Produced by : Frank Mancuso Jr., Dennis Feldman
Music by : Christopher Young
Directed by : Roger Donaldson
`Sil' created by H.R.Giger
Running time : 1hr 40mins (approx)
A United International Pictures Release
     For fans of the ALIEN trilogy, SPECIES would have to do, at least
for now.  It is a good `alternative' ALIEN movie.  The creature, SIL, was
designed by world-renowned artist H. R. Giger who also incidentally
designed the original creature in ALIEN and also the variant in ALIEN
3.  If you simply can't get enough of the ferocious Xenomorph from the
ALIEN trilogy, well, SIL will definitely live up to your expectation,
except its much sleeker and not to mention smarter too.
     The movie does not wait.  SIL, a product of human embryo and alien
DNA is to be terminated due to some complications to the secret alien
research project.  What seems to be a normal young female, escapes the
facility, thanks to her superhuman abilities due to the alien genes in
her veins.  A trail of blood and gore follows from then on, with a
group of researchers, led by Kingsley hot on her trail.  There are a
lot of suspenseful situations (things jumping out etc.), sometimes, a
bit too much for comfort, your truly here did jump a bit on several
occasions so those with pacemakers, keep a backup just in case.
SPECIES also showcases some really good special effects, with Sil
transforming from human to alien and also all those tendrils which
explodes out from inside of her (yech!).
     The characters though, are as two dimensional as they can get but
hey, it is not as if those looking for some action and entertainment
even care.  Ben Kingsley gives his worst performance yet, in this film
(Maybe he's trying to break into the mainstream market in the likes of
DUSTIN HOFFMAN in OUTBREAK).  The star of the show without a doubt is
Sil herself.  The young girl who played her when she was a child was
quite memorable, thought short in duration but it is newcomer NATASHA
KENTSRIDGE who fared the best.  Granted that her role was not exactly a
tough one but she did manage to potray
the-beautiful-woman-with-that-deadly-secret very well.  Her Sil will
make men think twice before making out with a beautiful women, watch
and see!  She looked a bit like Schiffer if you ask me.  I would have
liked it even more if only they dealt more into the human-alien
conflict within Sil.
     Sad to say, the Singaporean version of SPECIES is about ten minutes
shorter, no thanks to the censorship board here.  The PG rating has
really taken its toll on the film.  Much of the explicit killing scenes
were butchered and Sil, who was practically topless 50% of the time,
was 100% clothed in this version.  Damn, should have given it an R(A)
rating; it isn't exactly a movie kids should watch anyway.
Nevertheless, I still found the movie enjoyable and is definitely one
of the better entertainment-film for this summer.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Three boring movies opened in Triangle theaters last weekend.
Sigh.  Perhaps a movie's greatest failure is the failure to
entertain--that single, extraordinary misstep that can never be
recovered.  For once the audience is asleep, the only sound left in the
theater is the surroundsound wail of a fat lady singing somewhere in
the distance....
     The dopey title credits are a warning not to take things too
seriously, and, sure enough, in the very first scene of this Roger
Donaldson (NO WAY OUT) sci-fi feature, covert government scientist (is
there any other kind?).  Ben Kingsley botches an attempt to gas a little
girl.  She escapes from the lab because somebody left a door open,
and, more importantly, because she's a little monster who was grown
from a DNA sequence received via intergalactic e-mail.  Faster than you
can say, "What the hell were you thinking, Hugh?," Little Miss Dangerous
makes it away from the compound, hops a train to L.A. (where else?),
and transforms into a sexy adult terror (Natasha Henstridge)
overnight.
     Meanwhile, Ghandi is recruiting a team of experts that includes a
sociologist, a biologist, an empath (!), and a "specialist." (The
latter is played by Michael Madsen, not Sylvester Stallone.) They're a
fun lot, and though they don't have a lick of common sense between
them, they bring a unique flavor to a film that's already way too
derivative to begin with.  (Think THE FUGITIVE meets ALIEN.)  Of course,
said novelty quickly wears thin as each character grows more stupid the
longer they stay on-screen.
     Prolonged exposure to this movie apparently affects human brain
cells.
     This one fares better, a bit better, because it's more coherent.
Three writers are credited with this retooling of the Arthurian legend
that plays like a pitch from a Hollywood power-lunch.  Connery as
Arthur!  Ormand as Guinevere!  Gere as Lancelot!  Though quite the tidy
affair under the assured hand of director Jerry Zucker (GHOST), the
film is really as uninspired as the title.  (FIRST KNIGHT?  First in
what??) Most of the mythology has been jettisoned in favor of a chaste
love story with action sequences.  Excalibur?  Merlin?  African
swallows??  Forget it.  This is a polite Camelot where the dashing
hero, Lancelot, is an existential wanderer who's better with a sword
and a horse than ye olde English accent.  Think of Eroll Flynn as Roy
Rogers.
     Then there's SMOKE, which unites director Wayne Wang (THE JOY LUCK
CLUB), author Paul Auster ("The Music of Chance"), and a handful of
characters at a Brooklyn cigar shop.  We meet three at the beginning:
store owner Auggie Wrenn (Harvey Keitel), writer/customer Paul Benjamin
(William Hurt), and teen lifesaver Rashid (newcomer Harold Perrineau).
There are other characters, played by other cast members including
Forest Whitaker, Stockard Channing, and Ashley Judd, all of whom lead
interconnected lives with interconnected meanings, and none of which I
paid much attention to while asleep.  The film finally shows a pulse at
the beginning of the second hour, when Ashley Judd makes her appearance
as Wrenn's crackhead daughter.  And that's just about the time that my
date and I decided to leave.  What a drag.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Two years ago Ben Kingsley played in what is arguably one of the
best films ever made.  It is hard to imagine the same actor now taking
a role as an amoral scientist who helps to create what turns out to be
a shape-changing were-alien who cruises singles bars in Los Angeles.
And he is not the only good actor in the film, SPECIES also features
Forest Whitaker and Alfred Molina.  That is a lot of acting talent
marshalled to film a really disappointing script from Dennis Feldman
which borrows from a lot of other sources but more than a little from
the TV play and book A FOR ANDROMEDA by Fred Hoyle.  Feldman's
screenplays--notably GOLDEN CHILD--usually start with good concepts,
but he does not know what to do with them.
     Since the 1970s we have been broadcasting into space signals about
ourselves including some rudimentary information about our biological
makeup.  That much is based on fact, though the information we give
about DNA is as true of a garden slug as it is of a human, so it is not
a lot of information about ourselves.  This film says that we have been
sending a biological blueprint of humans and have been receiving
similar messages back for two years including a biological blueprint
for an alien race.  (That limits the source to the Centauri system,
Barnard's Star, Wolf 359, HD95735, Sirius, UV Ceti, and Ross 154,
incidentally.)  The government has had Dr. Xavier Fitch (played by
Kingsley) build the DNA specified in the message and combine it with
human DNA.  The scientific absurdities then come thick and fast.  The
resulting creature is neither non-viable nor even a crossbreed, but
rather a shape-shifter that can appear to be either a beautiful woman
or one of several ugly alien forms.  The timing is not right for the
twenty-ish were-alien to have matured so we are told that she developed
in a mere six months (reminiscent of the film EMBRYO).  The six months
were enough to bring her to the apparent age of a teenager.  Then she
goes on an eating binge and spins a cocoon only to emerge an adult.
(Incidentally, even the binge does not seem sufficient to provide the
mass needed to build the cocoon.)  The resulting adult (former model
Natasha Henstridge) seems to be both beautiful and an incredibly quick
study at learning how to fit into our society.  It is never clear how
Sil, as she is called--first as "the Sil" and then just as "Sil"--knows
all she does about our society, but she seems to have absorbed the
knowledge someplace.  Meanwhile a task force of private citizens is
drafted by the government to track down the were-alien.  The team
includes some sort of exterminator (Michael Madsen) whom the government
has used before for top secret missions.  And also included is a
psychic empath--as if the government has a ready stock on call.  So
much is left unexplained that while some films call for a sequel or a
prequel, this one could handily use an inquel.
     Director Roger Donaldson has spiced up the film with more than its
share of action and thrills, but all too often the action takes the
form of a chase like any film with a more human quarry.  Or the action
might be someone being skewered through the walls of a restroom.  Then
to add a thrill or two there are false jump scenes thrown in.  I will
not spoil even the false jumps, but one involves a ridiculously
unrealistic piece of animal behavior.
     Kingsley and Whitaker are each too professional to turn in
performances that are not good, but Donaldson must not have been a very
demanding director and nobody else is particularly noticeable.  Oddly
this includes Alfredo Molina who probably would have done more with his
role had it been possible.  The script fails to develop the characters
much at all beyond throwing in a little romance among a lot of sex and
nudity.
     While the design of the alien creature is by H. R. Giger, the
surreal artist who is best known as the designer of the creature in
ALIEN, most looks at the alien creature take place in dreamlike
sequences.  Toward the end we actually see it, but it is a
disappointment.
     While this film could have been an effective exploration of two
species in conflict, too often the script takes an easy and familiar
path rather than explore new science fictional territory.  The
absurdities might have been acceptable with more originality, but what
this film offers is just not what I am looking for in a science fiction
film.  I give this one -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dragan Antulov
By mid 1990s the author of this review has learned not to 
expect much from Hollywood blockbusters. However, despite 
those bitter experiences, disappointments still happen, 
because, sometimes, you simply want certain film to be good. 
Seeing complete lack of truly memorable science fiction 
films in this particular period, I was hoping that SPECIES, 
directed by Roger Donaldson in 1995, might be it. 
The plot begins rather promising - sometimes between early 
1970s and early 1990s an alien civilisation has caught 
signals from Earth. As a result, SETI radio telescopes 
receive transmission with details of alien DNA and 
instructions to splice it with its human counterpart. 
Government scientist follow the instructions, but the 
resulting hybrid, girl named "Sil" grows too rapidly and the 
project leader Xavier Fitch (played by Ben Kingsley) decides 
to pull the plug. Little girl, however, doesn't like idea of 
being gassed to death so she uses her superhuman abilities 
to escape from the secret laboratory. In order to catch her, 
Fitch gathers a small team of two scientists, an empath and 
professional assassin. In the meantime, little "Sil" 
transforms into adult and gorgeous looking woman (played by 
Natasha Henstridge) and slowly discovers her genetically 
programmed mission is to procreate and settle this planet 
with as much of alien hybrids as possible. She comes to Los 
Angeles where her looks could serve her well in her mission, 
while the scientific team races with time in order to find 
her. 
The premise of SPECIES looked like a really promising 
combination of Ridley Scott's ALIEN and Paul Schrader's CAT 
PEOPLE. Even more promising was really interesting cast of 
gifted actors led by "Oscar"-winning Ben Kingsley, as well 
as Swiss conceptual artist H.R. Giger (of ALIEN fame) as the 
designer of "Sil's" alien shape. Unfortunately, the script 
by Dennis Feldman quickly abandoned all interesting 
opportunities contained in its premise (including the human 
civilisation being seen through alien eyes). Instead, 
SPECIES quickly disintegrates into the series of plot holes 
and cliches (including the obligatory and not so plausible 
romance between the members of retrieving team) that 
culminate with the cheap ending more suitable for B-horrors 
than an ambitious science fiction film. Although director 
Roger Donaldson tries his best to fill inadequacies of 
script by nice visuals, his efforts are in vain, partly due 
to rather disinterested cast that fail to create any sort of 
interest for their cardboard characters. The only exception 
and probably the only potentially redeeming thing in this 
film is 20-year old Canadian supermodel Natasha Henstridge 
in her first major film role. She tries her best to give 
some sort of character to the shape-shifting alien monster, 
but the audience, especially male, would probably remember 
only those scenes in which she appears without clothes. 
Unfortunately, those scenes are only a tiny portion of 
SPECIES and not the reason enough to waste almost two hours 
of precious time watching this Hollywood garbage. 
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax 
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
paul@techno.discordia.org (Paul)
     Back in the 70s, a message was sent into space specifying Earth's
location, and its DNA pattern.  In the 90s, a reply was received from
an alien source.  One of the reply was to a technique to graft alien
DNA to human DNA.  The result is a cute blond hair girl Sil.  When the
director of the project decided to terminate Sil.  Sil escaped,
demonstrating inhuman abilities.  Now Sil is on the run, seeking to
escape her captors, and to breed.
     SPECIES is similar to those old sci-fi movies like the Humanoid,
where the alien or monster seeks to breed with humankind.  The twist in
SPECIES is that the alien monster is female, and seeks to be
inseminated.  Due to Sil's lack of social training, Sil's attempts to
breed are humorous, rather than exploitive.
     The pacing of the movie is pretty good.  There was enough action
to keep the story going.  The acting on most part were credible, though
I feel that most of the characters were a little dead.
     The story is the weakest part of the movie.  So Earth finally gets
a message from an alien civilization.  Since communication and
transport over light years are unfeasible, one logical solution is to
grow an ambassador.  In SPECIES, the "ambassador" turns out to be
nothing more than a very cunning predator.  There is nothing more
provocative, just another hunt down the alien before it destroy the
human race.  BORING!
     Overall, species is an okay action film that's worth a look.  It's
not very good science fiction though.

Author
Christopher Null
     On the surface, SPECIES is something like a new version of ALIEN
taking place on Earth.  Once you look *really* closely, though, you
realize it's a movie about one woman getting naked.
     The woman is newcomer Natasha Henstridge, who spends most of the
film in her birthday suit--or her alternative alien suit when the need
arises.  In case you haven't seen the previews, my friend pretty much
summed up his impression of Henstridge by asking me during the film,
"Did you write down 'babe-a-licious?'"  My response:  "One 's' or two?"
     SPECIES starts out with an interesting idea:  that an alien
civilization would radio us a plan to genetically engineer a new (and
far superior) race, which would inevitably destroy us all.  Henstridge
is "Sil," the code name of the first of these creatures, which escapes
from captivity much too easily and begins marauding Los Angeles in an
attempt to mate.  Sil is a femme fatale in the purest sense of the
word.  Believe me, when she says "no," she *means* it, as one guy who
tries to take advantage of her quickly finds out.
     The first half of the film is pretty good.  Here, Sil is unsure of
her identity, and she struggles with her half-human, half-lizard,
half-cockroach existence, metamorphosing from one form to another when
duty calls.  Sil is on the run, but she doesn't know why; as a youth,
her instinct hasn't yet kicked in, and because she's had no
"upbringing," she survives on the street with only raw emotion.  When
the inevitable band of four scientists and hunter Michael Madsen come
after her, Sil panics and must kill kill kill.
     Needless to say, a somewhat thoughtful film was not what I was
expecting out of SPECIES, and sure enough, by the time the second hour
rolls around, the film degenerates into a formulaic search and destroy
movie.  It's never scary.  Even the [insert favorite non-threatening
creature] suddenly jumping at one of the good guys doesn't cause much
of a stir in the crowd.
     The Giger-designed creature is okay, but it's just like the one in
ALIEN.  The main effects problem is the ending, where crummy digital
animation is used in place of models and makeup, effectively negating
any suspense, and making the finale look kind of funny.  Even Marg
Helgenberger, as Madsen's love interest, starts off as pretty cool, but
she ends up as goofy as her compatriots (including
much-better-than-this-film actors Ben Kingsley and Forest Whitaker) by
getting stuck between some rocks.
     Of course, Henstridge steals the show and makes the film nearly
watchable.  She looks almost inhuman as it is ... and some of her
transformation sequences are almost too real.  In fact, I once dated a
girl who ... well, but that's another story.

Author
Jason Overbeck
SPECIES writer Dennis Feldman  is some kind of genius.  He does the most
obvious thing with Species, adding T&A to an alien sci-fi flick.  Now
the 11-25 year old males can have a ball, on the edge of their seats and
saliva drooling from their collective mouths.  Species is good
entertainment that has originality and eroticism to spare.
A signal from the stars told us to mix alien DNA with ours to create an
offspring.  They make the offspring female and name her Sil.  She ages
rapidly and might grow out of control, they decide to terminate the
project with cyanide gas.  Sil escapes with a fury and is unleashed on
the public.  As she caches a train a group of "hunters" are formed to
track and eliminate her.
The "hunters" are a mixed bag of specialists, either scientists or
mercenaries, and have surprisingly well developed personalities.  The
alien, Sil (Natasha Henstridge), looks fresh out of the pages of
PLAYBOY.  She comes to the conclusion that she must find a man and mate,
her looks are definitely not a handicap, but the specialists seem just
one step behind her.
This movie does a fair job of building suspense, especially during an
exciting climax, yet has it's share of cats jumping from trees and false
scares - good only for a shallow jump.  Species doesn't seem too
interested in suspense but instead with gore and nudity, and both are
offered up throughout.
Overall, Species is a fun film that offers some cheap joys and little
brain.  I have a certain loathing for films in which aliens are
disgusting, saliva soaked things with no brains, yet are supposed to be
smarter than us.  After Aliens there have been many copycats and none
have come close.  This isn't the best copycat and doesn't try to be, we
get an original take on the old idea and a certain amount of fun.
There is energy and flare to this film that seems unusual for a sci-fi
film (most of which just go through the motions).  We get a wonderful
climax and some interesting scenes and acting in between.  We also get a
lot of nudity from Natasha Henstridge.  She seems to take it off with
every scene of this film as she tries to seduce men so she can become
pregnant.  I heard one kid say that if human life - as we know it -
depended on him NOT having sex with Natasha Henstridge, we better get
ready for change.  I guess that is part Species is trying to make: Would
you rather watch a living male fantasy, quasi-human, horny as hell,
naked as hell, forever stripping and spilling out of outfit, babe seduce
men or Judge Dredd shout "I am the Law!"  Tough choice.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 7/7/95 
Running Length: 1:48 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, nudity, sex, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Forest Whitaker, Alfred Molina, 
      Marg Helgenberger, Natasha Henstridge 
Director: Roger Donaldson 
Producers: Frank Mancuso Jr. and Dennis Feldman 
Screenplay: Dennis Feldman 
Cinematography: Adrzej Bartkowiak 
Music: Christopher Young 
U.S. Distributor: MGM 
     The villain of SPECIES -- a new science fiction/action/thriller/
gorefest from director Roger Donaldson -- is a sexy young alien named 
Sil (Natasha Henstridge).  For most of the film, her primary problem is 
a massive case of sexual frustration.  Every time she starts to get 
intimate with a man, there's some sort of interruption -- like 
someone showing up shooting off a gun or threatening to kick in 
the door.  There's only so much of this anyone can take.  No wonder 
she's in a bad mood.  As for the men she chooses... well, let's just say 
that Sil bears a remarkable resemblance to the Praying Mantis. 
     Sil's need to mate is fueled by maternal instincts, but it's bad 
news for humanity if she carries a child to term.  Given the fast growth 
cycle of her race, it wouldn't take long before the indigenous 
populations of this planet topped the endangered species list.  Sil is 
actually an alien/human hybrid.  In 1971, Earth sent a message into 
space, hoping for an answer; when, some twenty years later, a response 
arrived that gave a recipe for "enhancing" human DNA, the scientists 
involved in the project didn't know that by acting on it, they were 
possibly engineering their own extinction. 
     Now, Sil has escaped her protective cage in Utah and is on her way 
to the City of Angels, where she's likely to blend in with all the other 
weirdos -- at least when she retains her alluring human shape.  Her 
alternative form, a monstrosity straight out of the imagination of ALIEN 
creator H.R. Giger, would likely provoke at least a few stares.  Hot on 
her trail is a small team of specialists put together by government 
scientist Xavier Fitch (Ben Kingsley):  an empath (Forrest Whitaker) who 
acts like Counselor Troi from STAR TREK THE NEXT GENERATION; a pair of 
scientists (Alfred Molina and Marg Helgenberger) with all the answers, 
and a hunter (Michael Madsen) whose specialty is killing.  Their job is 
clear:  destroy Sil, regardless of the cost in dollars and lives. 
     There are two ways to look at this motion picture.  If you compare 
it to a sci-fi action thriller like ALIENS, it comes up short.  James 
Cameron's picture was masterful at building tension and suspense before 
bringing everything together in a satisfying climax.  SPECIES sticks 
with basic scare tactics -- things jumping out of the shadows to the 
accompaniment of a surge of music.  There are moments of high energy, 
but the pace is basically one of ebb and flow, and there's not much 
atmosphere to speak of. 
     On the other hand, as a tongue-in-cheek homage to body snatching 
pictures, it isn't half bad.  As long as you don't stop to think about 
what's going on, SPECIES is capable of offering its share of cheap 
thrills, with a laugh or two thrown in as well.  The plot is patently 
ridiculous, but that's where a temporary suspension of disbelief is 
mandatory.  Don't bring logic into the mix.  As a high-tech, campy 
action movie, this one beats JUDGE DREDD, hands down. 
     The characters are all types, but this is intentional.  There's the 
strong, silent Preston, played by a laconic Michael Madsen.  Marg 
Helgenberger is the self-assured woman who falls for him, Alfred Molina 
is the smart guy who strikes out with the women, and Forest Whitaker 
plays a truly annoying psychic who is constantly whining that things 
don't "feel right."  Cast somewhat against type, Ben Kingsley is a 
sleazy scientist with no concept of ethics but a great love of 
procedure.   
     Director Roger Donaldson has a lot of fun with his premise.  The 
top-notch special effects, which use a lot of seamless computer 
animation, make the climax look very nice.  The rest of the film is 
essentially one long chase sequence with a couple of nude scenes and 
maulings added to liven up the proceedings.  No matter what genre you 
identify SPECIES as, it's not top of the line, but there's also quite a 
bit of room beneath it. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SPECIES is a science fiction movie about an alien from outer
space.  Regardless of the name, this movie is really ALIENS 4.  The
monster looks and acts just like the one from the ALIENS trilogy.  The
main different is that SPECIES is set in the present and Sigourney
Weaver is not among the cast.
     SETI (Search for ExtraTerrestrial Investigation) has been sending
out signals into the far galaxies.  It seems aliens have finally
responded and sent us the code for a strain of their DNA.  Xavier Fitch
(Ben Kingsley) is the vicious leader of a government team that took the
alien DNA and combined it with a human DNA strand.  The movie starts
with them trying to gas an adolescent half alien and half human girl,
Sil (Michelle Williams), who was the result of Fitch's experiment.  Sil
breaks loose and rapidly grows up with Natasha Henstridge playing her
as a beautiful and sexy full grown woman.  Aliens have never looked
better than in this movie!  The movie is about them chasing her all
over LA while she kills people left and right with great blood and gore
a la ALIENS.  Major nightmares are possible from watching this film
since she frequently reverts to her horrible alien self and demolishes
people by pushing their guts or their brains out.
     The team that Fitch assembles to find and exterminate her has a
hired assassin, Preston Lennox (Michael Madsen), a microbiologist, Dr.
Laura Baker (Marg Helgenberger), a "telepath", Dan Smithson (Forest
Whitaker), and a useless Ph.D. with a skill that I have since
forgotten, Dr. Stephen Arden (Alfred Molina).
     If you realize that you are seeing a film of TV movie quality, you
can have fun watching SPECIES.  Overall, it is predictable, but there
is enough suspense wondering who Sil is going to kill next and watching
her trying to pickup men, that the movie keeps your attention.  The
scenes of her picking up men are alternatively hilarious and scary.
     The quality, especially of the script (Dennis Feldman) and the
directing (Roger Donaldson), is low.  Many lines were ridiculous and
many of the actions were implausible.  Let's say that you are tracking
an alien so powerful that she can break through walls and so invincible
that she can breathe cyanide gas, what weapons would you have your
extermination team carry?  How about a single guy with an average sized
handgun and with everyone else unarmed?  Sure.
     Every time the script started to deal with the duality of Sil's
being, it backed off.  The inherent conflict with her human self and
her alien self was fascinating, but the writer confined this conflict
to her nightmares and daydreams.  I wish the script would have had the
courage to address the problem more fully.
     The acting was mixed.  Kingsley seemed uninterested in doing
anything but collecting his paycheck.  Whitaker was given a one
dimensional role and yet he managed to make the most of it.  Although
neither Madsen nor Helgenberger did much with their main character's
purpose, I did like their little romantic subplot, especially the scene
were she finally wins him over.  When she says "yessssss", it makes for
a great, albeit short, scene.
     SPECIES runs 1:50.  It is correctly rated R for scary, gory, and
bloody violence, sex, and nudity.  It will scare the daylights out of
some people so I think it is appropriate only for mature teenagers.  I
can not bring myself to recommend SPECIES to you, but if you do go, you
will probably get engrossed in the story as I did and learn to ignore
its many flaws.  I give the movie **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Justin Felix
Written by Dennis Feldman.
Directed by Roger Donaldson.
Starring Natasha Henstridge, Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen.
Rated R (contains nudity, violence, and profanity)  108 mins.
Synopsis:  An alien/human hybrid escapes a top-secret government research
installation, transforms into a sexy blonde, travels to L.A., shops for a
wedding dress, and searches for the perfect man to copulate with.  In the
meantime, an anal-retentive scientist assembles a team, including a
dim-witted assassin with a cat and an empath with a penchant for the
obvious, to track her down.
Comments:  With the recent release of SPECIES in a deluxe widescreen
edition on video (labeled a "Contemporary Classic" by MGM) and SPECIES II
currently in production for this summer, now seemed like a good enough time
as any to write a retrospective on this movie.  If one were to critique
SPECIES as an everyday, run-of-the-mill theatrical release, he would have
to conclude that it was a genuine turkey.  On the other hand, if viewed in
the humorous "just-for-fun" way that it should be, SPECIES turns into one
of the best bad science-fiction movies of the decade.  Complete with a
ludicrous plot, laughable characters, ridiculous dialogue, and
not-so-special effects, this film proves entertaining from start to finish.
The cast of SPECIES makes a suitable topic to begin with.  Yes, the
scientist in charge of the project which creates the human/alien hybrid is
none other than the well-respected actor Ben Kingsley.  The man who won an
Academy Award for his portrayal of GHANDI, the man who played superbly in
Spielberg's epic SCHINDLER'S LIST, is reduced, by the end of this film, to
shouting obscenities in a sewer while armed with a flamethrower.  How the
mighty have fallen!  As humorously miscast as Kingsley is, more laughs are
provided by Michael Madsen and Forest Whitaker.  The former plays an
assassin who spouts inane one-liners and constantly looks like he's in need
of Pepto Bismol while the latter stars as a psychic (oh, excuse me, he's an
empath -- whatever) whose insights are highly obvious to anyone with a
brain cell.  SPECIES also marks the debut of Natasha Henstridge, a very
attractive young model-turned-actress.  Though she plays the creature
christened "Sil" (the title character of this movie), she's basically
reduced to stripping naked in every other scene she's in.  This is far from
being a bad thing, of course, but it still seems a rather over-the-top way
to enter the movie industry.  (Unfortunately, SPECIES, to date, is
Henstridge's best film; her other two -- the okay MAXIMUM RISK and the
awful ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH -- are forgetable.  Note to film producers:
give this lady a real chance!)
The plot of SPECIES sounds, and is, bewilderingly dumb.  This alien/human
hybrid grows at an accelerated rate until she's at her beautiful
21-year-old stage, then her aging abruptly halts.  (I guess SPECIES
wouldn't be as cool if Henstridge's character aged to death halfway through
the movie.)  In order to enjoy it, one must leave his intelligence at the
door; the story is full of holes.  Dennis Feldman's script is also full of
some of the worst lines in recent movie history.  It's fun to listen to the
silly dialogue which goes on between the characters of this film.  Perhaps
the best example occurs near the beginning: the team inspects a train
compartment which Sil has recently vacated.  A dead woman lies in a pool of
blood.  Alien gore drips from the walls.  The compartment is in complete
disarray.  Whitaker's psychic (sorry, *empath*), while studying the mess,
receives one of his "insights" which leads him to brilliantly note that
"something bad happened here."
One would expect spectacular special effects from a big-budgeted sci-fi
film from a major movie studio like MGM.  Expectations, perhaps, should be
even higher for SPECIES as it features the talents of H.R. Giger (the
bizarre artist who created the creature in ALIEN, a true science-fiction
classic) and Richard Edlund (the winner of 4 Academy Awards for his work on
the STAR WARS trilogy and RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK).  Despite these talents
behind the camera, however, SPECIES has an undeniably cheesy feel
throughout the film.  Yes, most of the special effects are, at least,
adequate for the film (though hardly "special").  The finale, on the other
hand, looks absurd.  An obviously computer-generated creature who seems to
have stepped out of a second-rate video game menaces the characters in a
setting that is completely unreal.  It's rather funny.
SPECIES receives four stars and not a perfect five due to the fact that it
loses some of its energy right before its laughable finale.  Unlike the
rest of the film, which is fun to watch, this segment resorts to cliches
that have been done time after time before.  The team hunting Sil tracks
her through a sewer system.  Armed with flamethrowers and flashlights, they
shuffle around in the gloom to find her.  Dark tunnels.  Dripping water.  A
creature ready to spring out of the darkness at any moment.  Been there,
done that.  The worst part about this segment is that it is the only
segment which tries to be serious.  Perhaps that is why it seems out of
place and makes the film drag for a while.
Irregardless of the last criticism, SPECIES is one of the best turkeys ever
made.  Considering the various talented people who embarass themselves
through their involvement in the film's production, considering the bad
dialogue, questionable acting, and ludicrous story, SPECIES is a definate
winner.  It's a near-perfect movie for those in the mood to see an "it's so
bad that it's good" type of film.
