Title
Review for Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969)
"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" is one of the most
successful and beloved Westerns of all time.  The
film stars attractive and likeable Paul Newman and Robert
Redford, there are many action scenes and humorous lines,
and there is good cinematography.
Still, I found the film to be somewhat disappointing.
It is a good movie, but the personalities of the
main characters (engaging nice guys) do not match
their actions (ruthless bank robbers).  Many scenes
rely too heavily on the dialogue interplay between
Newman and Redford, which is only mildly entertaining.
The film has some slow moments, such as the series of
still photographs showing Redford, Newman and Katherine
Ross living it up prior to visiting Bolivia.  The comic
relief characters, such as Woodcock (who blathers on
about his loyalty to the unseen Mr. Harriman) and the
Bolivian old-timer (who not only constantly spits, but
keeps up a monologue about his success in doing
so) are charmingly eccentric but not completely credible.
Ross is never wanted by the police in Bolivia despite
participating in robberies there.  They are highly
conspicuous, yet spend much time at restaurants,
taverns, etc.
Newman and Redford are bank and train robbers in the
old west at the turn of the century.  The railroad
hires a team of crack lawmen and trackers to hunt them
down.  Newman and Redford, with their mutual girlfriend
Katherine Ross, flee to Bolivia, where they resume
robbing banks.  But they are soon hunted there, as well.
There are some spoilers in what follows.
Clues to the film's ending are obvious.  A friendly
sherrif tells them that their days are numbered and
that they will die a bloody death.  Ross says that
she doesn't want to be present when they are killed.
I felt that these hints, especially Ross's, were too
heavy-handed.
"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" won the Golden
Globe for Best Picture, and was nominated for Best
Picture by the Academy, correctly losing to "Midnight
Cowboy".  "Butch Cassidy" is also noted for the
Burt Bacharach score.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Phil Lochner
I recently had the pleasure of catching Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
in true widescreen, digitally enhanced color format on the American Movie
Classics cable channel. As I have not seen the movie in many years
beforehand, I figured I'd work on a quick review/retrospective of this
excellent movie.
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid redefined the American expectation of the
Western. Shunning the stereotypical John Wayne classics of years before,
BC&SK showcased two of the greatest outlaws of the American West in a
gritty, humorous, realistic fashion. To this day (with handful of
exceptions, such as the now-corny extended bicycle riding sequence) this
movie stands up to the 90's in terms of wit, realism, violence, and humor.
It's all all around entertaining movie made perfect with the flawless
performance of Paul Newman as Butch and Robert Redford as the Sundance Kid.
Displayed afresh in stunning digitally perfect, color-enhanced DVD, BC&SK is
the paramount Western. Forget the old washed out video store rental VHS
pan-and-scan. This latest widescreen release is more vibrant and spectacular
than ever. Subtely is in the form of Redford's excellent, yet wry facial
expressions, as well as Newman's charming eye-brow raises when he delivers
the perfect wit, and the beautiful southwest landscapes. The viewer believes
they are watching a classic Western epic instead of the late 1960's tragic,
yet humorous escapades of the last two American anti-heroes as they try to
substain their way of life while avoiding both The Law and their own
inevitable last stands in the desolation of South America.
The one-liners are classic, and the characters are both realistic and
genuine. From both character's situationally inappropriate confessions,
(Sundance: "I can't swim"; Butch: "I never shot someone") to their equally
witty responses (appropriately, Butch [laughing as they attempt to jump off
a huge cliff]: "Why you CRAZY? The FALL will probably kill you.", Sundance
[utterly sarcastic when they are surrounded by Bolivian banditos]: "One HELL
of a time to tell me!") to the general unattached yet professional attitude
the characters display in their situations, the movie paved the way for the
cool, root-for-the-bad-guy response the 90's audience has been expected to
see. Forget the fact that Butch is the leader of a gang who is going to rob
a legitimate 19th century railroad of a huge sum of money; instead, laugh
when they underestimate and level of explosive they use when blowing up the
same railroad's safe and the blast skewers the outlaws to the ground.
Instead of a classic hero shooting off innumerable bullets with his trusty
6-cylinder relvolver, you have genuine outlaws panting as they reload and
fleeing from a mysterious unstoppable force made up of the greatest bounty
hunters of the West. It's incredibly satisfying.
The movie was created with realism in mind - showing the audience both the
real names of the two outlaws as well as their inaccurate (yet humorous)
expectations of South America, in Bolivia. Added to the mix is the love
triangle of Butch (as the eternal friend/confidant/womanizer), Sundance
(dedicated yet realistic of his profession) and Etta (Katherine Ross'
excellent portrayal of a pre-feminist-movement caught between feeling for
her two best friends who break the law). It was created specifically to be
historically accurate (the mysterious trackers, the destruction of the
infamous Hole In The Wall Gang, their flight to South America), although
embellished to provide a certain amount of comedic relief.
BC&SK is a wonderful, funnny, almost-family rated adventure/Western flick
rated PG for a couple of swear words and general implications of violence.
The 60's/70's playboy-icons of Robert Redford (sporting a quiet,
side-burned, exasperatted sense of humor) as well as Paul Newmann
(blue-eyed, charming, over-involved intellecutal wit) makes this a film from
two of the most decorated actors in Hollywood not to be missed.
Unfortunately, seeing this movie on the regularly circulated circa 1980,
blue-tone balanced, washed-out VHS is a bad idea - rent it on a digitally
remastered Laserdisc or DVD for the best experience.
