Title
Review for Pelle erobreren (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
A riveting film, a work of art.  From the first frames where out of an
opaque fog there appear the dim outlines of the masts of a schooner,
the film is a masterpiece of photography and story telling.
The time is about the early 1900s.  Huddled on the ship are immigrants
from Sweden who are going to Denmark for work because of bad times in
Sweden.  Among the passengers is an older man (Max Von Sydow), a
widower since a year,  and his 10-year-old son, Pelle (Pelle
Hvenegaard).
The father tells Pelle that in this new land children do not have to
work.  They can spend their time at play.  But we soon see that it is
all bravado.  Father is a loser.  Whether because of circumstances or
of an innate lack of character it becomes apparent that Father meets
each challenge by backing down.  On the other hand one must feel sorry
for this pathetic man because he cannot afford to take risks.
On the dock people are being hired.  Not surprisingly, he is the last
one to be chosen, along with his son.  It appears to be some kind of
indentured servitude;  lodging and food, and after several years there
is the payoff in money and becoming a free man.  Lodging for Pelle and
his father consists of a partitioned portion of the barn, next to the
cattle and the chickens, hardly the life he had described to his son.
Running through the film are several other stories that blend with the
main one, each interesting in its own right.  There is the fascinating
tale of the beautiful young working woman who is in love with a
merchant's son; there is the dream of one worker of being free the next
year and of going to America to make his fortune about which, poor man,
he has no doubts.
Throughout, the photography is beautiful, with scenes that are sheer
Breughel or Millet. Other scenes, with snow blowing icily across the
fields, convey the bitter cold.  And there is the raging sea, the fog,
the broken floating ice floes all interwoven to emphasize the hardships
all must face in that climate.  You will marvel at the nastiness of
adults and children, alike, when they have the power to impose their
will on those not in a position to fight back.  A powerful masterpiece
of man's inhumanity to man.
In Danish and Swedish with English subtitles.
