Title
Review for To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 10/18/96 (limited), 10/25/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:32
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Peter Gallagher, Claire Danes, Michelle Pfeiffer, Kathy Baker, 
      Wendy Crewson, Bruce Altman, Laurie Fortier, Freddie Prinze Jr.
Director: Michael Pressman
Producers: Marykay Powell and David E. Kelley 
Screenplay: David E. Kelley based on the play by Michael Brady
Cinematography: Tim Suhrstedt
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Triumph Films 
     It's bad enough to be ill on your 37th birthday, but Gillian 
(Michelle Pfeiffer) is considerably worse off.  She has been dead for 
two years, but even that impediment doesn't stop her from showing up for 
the party.  The reason she's still around is because her husband, David 
(Peter Gallagher), can't let go.  Theirs was a near-perfect love, and, 
since her death, he hasn't been able to reach a state of emotional 
equilibrium.  So he leads the life of a recluse, doing his best to care 
for his teenage daughter, Rachel (Claire Danes), while steadfastly 
refusing any relationship that looks like it could lead to a romantic 
entanglement.  When he gets especially lonely -- which is almost every 
day -- Gillian's apparition appears to him.  
     Hollywood is often at its worst when attempting to deal seriously 
with issues of life and death.  Since most major motion picture studios 
are most comfortable making "feel good" movies, they become skittish 
when faced with a script that confronts death.  As a result, instead of 
employing the subtlety and keen insight which would generate powerful 
results (see DEAD MAN WALKING for an example), directors typically 
resort to melodrama and manipulation.  That's one of the problems with 
TO GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY.  The subject matter is emotionally-
wrenching, but it's handled unevenly, with the accent on trying to make 
the audience cry rather than feel.
     To its credit, there are times when TO GILLIAN gets things right.  
As a likable man who can't quite cope with his devastating loss, David 
is consistent and believable.  And, for the most part, his scenes with 
Gillian are nicely-handled.  Less sure is his relationship with his 
daughter.  At times, TO GILLIAN strikes the proper emotional chord in 
their interaction -- David loves Rachel, but he's so blinded by his own 
pain that he can't see how much he's hurting her.  Unfortunately, there 
are other instances, such as when David doesn't approve of a boyfriend, 
that play like scenes from a TV sitcom.
     Personally, I would have preferred a lot more interaction between 
David and Rachel, and a few more scenes with Gillian, since Michelle 
Pfeiffer fits nicely into the role.  Instead, we're given a host of 
secondary characters -- Gillian's older sister, Esther (Kathy Baker); 
her husband, Paul (Bruce Altman); a flirtatious neighborhood girl named 
Cindy (Laurie Fortier); and Kevin Danford (Wendy Crewson), a woman Paul 
and Esther have set up as a date for David.  All of these characters 
converge on David's Nantucket home for a few days of singing '70s songs 
and building sand castles.  It's "Gillian's Weekend" -- the anniversary 
of both her birth and her death.
     TO GILLIAN wants to use Paul and Esther as a contrast to David and 
Gillian, but it never really works.  Esther and Paul's relationship 
remains half-developed, and she in particular comes across as a bitter, 
jealous person who insists that there's something seriously wrong with 
David because he fantasizes about seeing his dead wife.  Meanwhile, 
Kevin, David's would-be-blind date, is superfluous.  The film wouldn't 
have changed one iota without her.  Performances also factor into how we 
feel about the characters -- Kathy Baker isn't very good, but both 
Gallagher and Danes are.
     As directed by Michael Pressman and scripted by David E. Kelley, TO 
GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY has the erratic feel of a play adapted for 
the screen, which it is (Michael Brady's award-nominated production 
debuted on stage 11 years ago).  The plot jumps around and there's a 
feeling that certain relationships should be more complex than what 
we're seeing.  There are times when this movie gets on track and 
delivers a series of surprisingly effective scenes, but it doesn't 
sustain the momentum.  In fact, the likability of the main characters 
makes this inconsistency all the more frustrating.
     I've seen some comparisons between TO GILLIAN and GHOST, but, aside 
from the "presence" of a dead lover, there's not much connection -- this 
is a more somber, less metaphysical story.  And, despite its various 
problems, TO GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY occasionally touches a core of 
emotional honesty that makes you wonder how much better it could have 
been had all the extraneous characters been jettisoned.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Bittersweet comedies are tricky at best even under the most expert
guidance.  Director Micheal Pressman, who previously brought the world
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES II: THE SECRET OF OOZE, tries his hand at
a weeper with the mawkish title TO GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY and
ends up with a mess.
     This schmaltzy ode oscillates between comedy and tragedy, but only
the comedy is successful.  The script by David E. Kelley based on
Michael Brady's play has characters in constant banter that puts the
audience in stitches.  As soon as they begin to enjoy the film,
however, it switches back to its maudlin roots, and people just stare
at the screen not knowing what to make of its false sentimentality.
     The acting is equally uneven.  Ever handsome Peter Gallagher is
David Lewis.  Two years ago his wife Gillian, played by ever beautiful
Michelle Pfeiffer, died in a foolish bit of bravado on their yacht
while celebrating her 35th birthday.  Now, normally strange David, is
acting even stranger having long talks on the beach with his dead wife.
Other than looks, neither actor brings anything to the part.  Although
Pfeiffer gives one of the most insubstantial pieces of acting in her
career, Gallagher's acting is not much meatier.  The good news is that
the strong supporting cast, who are given all the comedic lines, almost
saves the film.
     Every year on Gillian's birthday, known to them as "Gillian's
Day", her sister Esther Wheeler (Kathy Bates) and Esther's husband Paul
(Bruce Altman), come to Nantucket Island to share the day with David,
Gillian, and their now 16 year old daughter Rachel (Claire Danes).
Just because Gillian has become an apparition appearing only to David
is no reason to cancel the festivities.
     Exactly two years after Gillian's death, the Wheelers make their
annual pilgrimage to the Lewis's isolated house on the island.  This
year they bring along a surprise blind date for David, a female named
Kevin Danford (Wendy Crewson).  David is taken aback and tells Paul,
"Don't you think it is a little insensitive fixing me up on her
birthday?"  Paul sternly retorts, "Gillian has no more birthdays."
     Rachel is worried about her Dad, but Esther consoles her with, "He
will be all right.  It's just, he really loved her."  Staying with
Rachel is her girlfriend Cindy Bayles (Laurie Fortier), and Cindy sets
Kevin straight with, "He's not going to fall for you.  Live people
can't compete with dead ones."
     Soon the seriousness passes for a bit, and we are into the fun
silliness of Gillian's Day.  As is the tradition, they do wild and
crazy things like break out the karaoke so they can sing old Barry
Manilow songs.  Most importantly, the day coincides with the island's
yearly sandcastle building contest.  David has a plan complete with
elaborate blueprints to build a Gothic castle and unseat the reigning
champion - a nine year old girl.  These scenes are off the wall and
very funny, but the laughter is all guarded because the audience knows
that this film will switch without warning to its somber core.
     Although thankfully not very often, Pfeiffer does show up in some
scenes.  When she does, she gets asinine little saccharine lines
including, "You're okay Mr. Man," and "Go play with the live girls."  I
am not making this up.  In fact, I don't think I am not even capable of
making up such drivel.
     The show is filled with mini-dramas.  One has Esther planning to
go to court to get custody of Rachel since her Dad is flipping out.
Another has Rachel getting drunk and throwing up on her father.  As I
said earlier, only the comedy works.
     There is one exception.  Paul constantly and overtly flirts with
seductive, but underage Cindy.  This subplot appears to be nothing more
substantial than the comedy about sandcastles, but in one intelligently
written scene, the flirting reaches a surprising conclusion.  This is
quite an insightful scene, and one that I had not expected to see in
such a trivial picture.  Most impressive is that once it starts, it
builds to an unexpected ending.
     Reliable James Horner comes through with some excellent music.  It
has all of the genuine romantic and dreamy aspects that the picture
itself lacks.  Similarly, Tim Suhrstedt's cinematography has a
wonderful and beautiful surreal feel.  The best scenes are the
nighttime ones of luminescent blues.
     GHOST is a much better picture that covers the same ground. I am
at a loss to explain why GILLIAN was made. Is the availability of good
looking leads suffice motivation to make a film?
     TO GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY runs just 1:33.  It is now rated
PG-13, but reportedly they made last minute adjustments to get an R
rating removed.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  Gillian's death
is not shown, just the fall.  The show includes a meaningless scene
where David uses the F word several time and argues about the number of
times he has used it.  The picture would have been stronger without the
scene and would have allowed younger kids to see it.  Even so, my guess
is that the show would be fine for most kids over say nine.  You can
make the decision knowing the F words are there.  I laughed a lot, but
was put off by the pseudo-serious parts so I can't quite bring myself
to recommend it.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
          Exactly two years ago, on Gillian's 35th birthday, the Lewis
family, consisting of Gillian (Michelle Pfeiffer), her husband Daniel
(Peter Gallagher) and daughter Rachel (Claire Danes) were out sailing.
Gillian, in a very happy mood, climbed the mast, when a gust of wind
suddenly hit the sail and she was thrown to the deck and killed. Now,
(It would have been Gillian's 37th Birthday) Daniel cannot forget her
for a moment; in fact he has been "seeing" her at the beach and
"talking" with her as if she were still alive.
          As his sister-in-law, Esther, (Kathy Baker) points out to
David, his obsession with his dead wife has estranged his relationship
with his daughter and Esther is going to go to court to obtain custody
of the young teenager unless Daniel can let go of his wife and return
to a normal existence.  Daniel will have to make his move.
         Others in the cast include Wendy Crewson, Bruce Altman,
Laurie Fortier and Freddie Prinze, Jr.
         All the acting is of high caliber and that helps make the
movie believable and touching.
        Directed by Michael Pressman who also directed the 1985
West Coast stage production.  He is the executive producer of the TV
series PICKET FENCES and has directed some of the episodes.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Peter Gallagher, Claire Danes, Michelle Pfeiffer, Kathy Baker,
Wendy Crewson, Bruce Altman, Laurie Fortier, Freddie Prinze Jr.
Director: Michael Pressman Producers: Marykay Powell and David E. Kelley
Screenplay: David E. Kelley based on the play by Michael Brady
Gillian (Michelle Pfeiffer) died on her 35th birthday. This fun,
carefree, high risk taking, radical mother and loving wife climbed one
pole too high before falling to her death. Two years later she's roaming
the beaches outside her home communicating with her husband at night.
They mostly chat, and roll around in the waves, but she's real enough to
touch, kiss and hug but they never do. I guess Whoopi Goldberg isn't
around to help mediate the kiss between the living and the dead. So on
her 37th birthday, Gillian's family and friends gather to remember her
in most unusual ways. With a weekend of karaoke singing, sand castle
building and a feast of family melodrama.
There's a lot of "remember this" and "remember that" banter between
living husband and dead wife who wallow with nostalgia. Michelle
Pfeiffer giggles like an adorable wife, and occasionally throws in a
serious expression to show that she's not a single dimensional ghost.
Peter Gallagher is the forlorn husband who wanders the beaches at night
searching for his dead wife. He doesn't use his thick lips to the best
advantage as he pouts and throws moody tantrums. These lips would look
far better planted firmly on the mouth of Ms Pfeiffer. More kiss and
less talk is needed in this movie. Clare Danes throws in a convincing
performance as the distressed teenage daughter, whose loyalty to her
father is torn by the intrusion of her Aunt (Kathy Baker).
Eventually this movie reaches the conclusion that one has to leave the
past behind before one can progress into the future. It's a good point
to make, but it doesn't save Gillian's birthday party from being a long,
overdrawn droll sit. Without the birthday girl, the party is as dead as
Gillian's corpse. Midway through the movie it becomes evident that the
husband needs to leave his dead wife behind him, if he is to rebuild his
life. The only problem is that the ghost won't leave the poor man alone.
She keeps saying "I won't come anymore if you don't want me to" - yeah
like her love sick hubby is going to tell her not to come. If only
Gillian had been a little more sensible there would be no goodbyes to be
said yet, and if there were goodbyes to be made - it should have been
short, snappy and to the point. That way everyone can get on with their
lives, including the audience.
