Title
Review for Paris, Texas (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Kevin Patterson
Paris, Texas  * * * * (out of four)
R, 1984
Directed by Wim Wenders. Written by Sam Shepard.
Starring Harry Dean Stanton, Dean Stockwell, Natassja Kinski. 
When I had finished watching Wim Wenders's "Paris, Texas", I knew I had just
seen an excellent film, though I find it difficult to articulate exactly why
it works so well. I think its greatest virtue is its low-key tone; this is by
far the best personal drama I have seen in a long time, yet it is almost
entirely lacking in what one would normally consider "dramatic tension." It is
more powerful and poignant than most films, yet there are few tears shed and
almost no harsh words or raised voices. 
"Paris, Texas" opens with the very simple image of a man (Harry Dean Stanton)
walking through a barren landscape by himself along the Texas/Mexico border.
He eventually wanders into the office of a local physician, but literally
refuses to speak. Eventually he is identified; his name is Travis, and he has
a brother named Walt (Dean Stockwell) who lives in Los Angeles. Walt, who has
not seen or heard from Travis in four years, drives across the country to pick
him up, only to find that Travis either cannot remember where he has been or
simply isn't telling. To complicate matters, Travis's wife has also been
missing for the last four years, and Walt and his wife have been caring for
their son ever since. 
>From then on, "Paris, Texas" proceeds as a recounting of how Travis's family
fell apart and an examination of his attempt to forge a new connection with
his son and put right what has gone terribly wrong. Travis gradually emerges
as a man who seems to crave the solitude of the open road; he seems most at
home during his cross-country driving trips with Walt and later with his son.
Wenders makes use of many exterior shots during these segments, which, along
with the folk-guitar score, infuse the story with a sense of melancholy and
longing. Wenders and screenwriter Sam Shepard appropriately manage both to
romanticize Travis's loner tendencies and to point out the shortcomings of
such an approach to life - there are many moments, such as when Travis stops
to give a pat on the back to one of Los Angeles's many roadside prophets, that
are touching and make us admire Travis as a human being, yet in no way does
the film excuse his role in his family's breakup. 
The development of Travis as a somewhat flawed but sympathetic character who
wants to make amends is one of the film's strongest points, but what makes it
most exceptional is its style. It tells a simple, straightforward story in a
way that is quite unconventional at least by movie standards. Rather than
apologizing for its simplicity by heaping up melodramatic outbursts,
gratuitous sex scenes, and the like, it wears it as a badge of honor and
focuses sharply on the characters. It's a shame that more filmmakers don't
realize that their characters and stories are strong enough to carry a movie
and as a result go for flashy sensationalism to cover their backs. But, until
that happens, "Paris, Texas" holds its own as a refreshing reminder that there
are still at least a few exceptions to the rule in the film industry. 
NOTE: The 'R' rating for this film is, in my opinion, quite inappropriate, as
there is literally no violence or nudity, only one use of the "f-word," and
only one instance of implied sexual content. A 'PG-13' rating would have
sufficed. 
Visit my Film Reviews Page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html
