Title
Review for Killer Shrews, The (1959)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD was a standout horror movie of its time, and the 
inspiration for its depiction of characters under siege could be attributed 
in turn to the finale of THE BIRDS, the novel 'I Am Legend', or even those 
Westerns in which characters find themselves fighting off hostiles while 
holed up in cavalry forts.  But ten years before Romero made his celebrated 
horror pic there was this low-budget B-picture, produced by one of its 
stars, Ken Curtis (who, interestingly, does not play the hero), which could 
also have served as inspiration had it been more widely known.  Curtis, who 
played Festus on the TV series GUNSMOKE, collaborated with one of the show's 
writers, Jay Simms, to bring THE KILLER SHREWS to the screen.  They'd 
obviously intended to try their hand at a horror film, but unfortunately, 
it's best known today for its supposed camp value.  The film's pre-credit 
voiceover is laughable, and the opening lines of dialogue not much better, 
but I don't think it deserves its much-maligned reputation.  After its shaky 
start it becomes a decent, economical piece of film-making.  Curtis' budget 
obviously failed to provide him with convincing monsters, but a realistic 
horde of vicious, oversized shrews would have been beyond the means of any 
studio in 1959.  The film-makers tried to get around this problem by 
switching between model heads (for close-ups) and dogs hidden under costumes 
(for long shots), and it's this presentation of the 'killer' shrews that 
earns the film ridicule from viewers today.  Personally, I don't see much 
difference between a dog in a costume or a man in a costume, and for that 
reason the shrews shouldn't come across any more hokey than the rubber suits 
of other 50s horror classics like THE THING or THE CREATURE FROM THE BLACK 
LAGOON. 
The 'siege' element of the story is twofold: firstly, its seven characters 
are trapped on an island that is being used for an overpopulation experiment 
(shrews are being bred to the point of self-extinction), and secondly, they 
are confined to an adobe house which is being weakened by the violent storm 
outside.  I like the way THE KILLER SHREWS overcomes its limitations by 
confining its events to one set, using sound effects (the constant wind), 
lighting, and editing to create atmosphere.  The shrews get a fair share of 
screen time, but move quickly and are never clearly seen (director Ray 
Kellogg may have been taking a leaf out of Jacques Tourneur's book).  I also 
find the motivation of the monsters this time around a lot more believable 
than most other horror pics.  Unlike other 50s creatures, which seemed 
intent only in stealing the hero's girlfriend or rampaging around and 
lowering property values, the shrews are driven by starvation - their 
attempts to bite or claw their way into the house are quite creepy, and 
there's even one good shock effect.  There's also some great moments between 
Curtis and star James Best (who, like the characters in NIGHT OF THE LIVING 
DEAD, can't co-operate despite the menacing horrors outside), and a quirky 
escape plan.  Watch it late at night with the lights out, and you may find 
it's not as bad as you've heard.  I realize I'm probably sticking my neck 
out on this one, but I guess I've always stood up for the underdog, even 
when they're disguised as shrews. 
