Title
Review for Rich Man's Wife, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Hollywood/Caravan)
Starring:  Halle Berry, Peter Greene, Clive Owen, Christopher McDonald.
Screenplay:  Amy Holden Jones.
Producers:  Roger Birnbaum, Julie Bergman Sender.
Director:  Amy Holden Jones.
Running Time:  96 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'm walking on very thin ice as I prepare to discuss THE RICH MAN'S
WIFE, because in order to explain what is really wrong with it, I'm going
to have to reveal some critical plot details.  Sure, I could try to
tap-dance around it, but in so doing the context would probably still make
it clear what to expect, and I wouldn't have the luxury of discussing
particulars.  So I'm going to do something I've never done before:  I'm
going to encourage you not to read this review if you have any intention
of seeing THE RICH MAN'S WIFE.  Please skip to the bottom, where you will
note my less than enthusiastic rating, and avoid my point-by-point
analysis of how a rather mundane thriller can become an actively annoying
one.
     The title character in THE RICH MAN'S WIFE is Josie Potenza (Halle
Berry), the young spouse of wealthy television executive Tony Potenza
(Christopher McDonald).  The marriage is not a happy one, however, and
when Tony bails out on a romantic weekend for business, Josie seeks
comfort with Cole Wilson (Peter Greene), a man she meets in a bar.  Their
conversation turns to Josie's unhappiness with Tony, a problem Cole
suggests solving by killing Tony.  Josie bolts at the suggestion -- and
away from Cole -- but Cole decides to do the job anyway.  When he reveals
to Josie what he has done, Cole makes it clear that they are in this
together -- he demands $30,000 or he will tell the police that Josie, the
person who stood to gain the most from Tony's death, was the one who
arranged it.
     That is a decent enough premise for a psychological thriller, but
writer/director Amy Holden Jones doesn't begin to make it pay off.  After
an interminable opening which takes several trite scenes to show us how
unhappy the Potenzas are when one good one should have done the job, THE
RICH MAN'S WIFE introduces us to Cole, and any chance at originality
vanishes.  To Peter Greene's credit, he does the best he can with the part
as written, which is as a happy-go-lucky sadist.  If Cole is more
well-intentioned and genuinely obsessive in his murderous behavior,
Josie's dilemma becomes a more compelling one, one which might be solved
by brains rather than by gunfire.
     But there was never really any chance for that to happen because --
here's the big revelation, so don't say I didn't warn you -- we discover
in the film's final moments that Josie herself engineered everything, and
has been spinning an elaborate lie to the police.  Even though I smelled
it coming as soon as I saw that the story was set up as a flashback, I
still cringed when I saw Halle Berry smirk in triumph and get in the car
with her co-conspirator Nora (Clea Lewis, in a performance which
jump-starts the film with its only measure of intentional idiosyncrasy).
Not only had I been subjected to a mediocre thriller, but nothing I had
seen mattered at all.  THE RICH MAN'S WIFE is an elaborate cheat, and the
ending is an opportunity to dupe the audience into believing it had been
watching something unusually clever instead of something unusually lazy.
     "Ah," some of you must be musing to yourselves, "but isn't that
scenario he just described remarkably similar to THE USUAL SUSPECTS, a
film widely praised for its cleverness?  How is THE RICH MAN'S WIFE so
different?"  In one extremely significant way:  in THE RICH MAN'S WIFE,
the ending serves absolutely no dramatic purpose.  Too few critics of THE
USUAL SUSPECTS gave it credit for making Keaton's desire to go legitimate
a critical element in the resolution of the story; the final revelations
make him a tragic character, and there is evidence to allow us to reach
different conclusions.  No such evidence exists in THE RICH MAN'S WIFE.
If the revelation that the story is an complete hoax serves any purpose,
it is as an excuse for suspense cliches (see, that's what they would be
_expecting_) or for day to turn miraculously to night for added artificial
tension.
     There is a smug pseudo-feminism in Amy Holden Jones' script, a sense
that we should be inspired to whoops of "You go, girls!" because Josie and
Nora do in the obnoxious men in their lives and dupe more men to get away
with it, or inspired to self-flagellation because we have under-estimated
them.  But Jones denies us the chance to under-estimate them because we're
never allowed to estimate them in the first place.  She isn't playing with
expectations or with genre conventions.  She's playing us for suckers.

Author
Jason Wallis
The Rich Man's Wife is one of those movies like Final Analysis or Body
Double, where the story and characters are so one-dimensional and contrived
that you know you shouldn't be enjoying yourself. But somehow, the movie
just tries so hard that you begin to forgive it and get into the swing of
things. Not that it's bad, it's just that it's been done before; and
better, in my opinion. 
I realize that this is going to sound pretty bizarre, but it's probably the
best analogy that I can come up with right now; you know how when you see a
spider or something in your toilet, striving helplessly to get out, and
instead of just flushing him, you end up kind of rooting for the little
guy? That's basically how I felt about this movie. I mean, it's not very
good, but it's not completely bad either. 
The wife of the title is Josie Potenza (played nicely by Halle Berry). She
is married to Tony (Christopher McDonald...you know, the guy who looks like
Joe Piscapo), a really stressed-out businessman who drinks way to much and
doesn't give Josie the attention she deserves (*cough, cough*). Thus, she
is driven into the arms of another man, Jake Golden (Clive Owen). Near the
beginning of the film, Josie decides to try and work things out with Tony
by dumping Jake and going on a vacation to a remote cabin in the woods. 
Once there, however, Tony has to leave almost immediately due to business
details (I'm still not quite sure what line of work he's in). Making the
best of her situation, Josie stays there and begins making the rounds at
the local bars. One night, she meets a stranger named Cole (Peter Greene,
finally getting a meaty role). They have dinner together, and eventually,
both Josie and the audience start to realize that Cole is homicidal. After
learning that she is not happily married, Cole offers to "take care" of the
problem. 
Managing to escape from the psychotic maniac, Josie returns home and starts
a reconciliation with her estranged and very wealthy husband. But then one
night, Cole shows up... 
And here is where the fun begins. From this point on, it's going to be a
no-holds- barred cliche-fest, ripping off every movie from Strangers on a
Train to The Usual Suspects. This is why most critics panned this movie
when it first came out. And for the most part, they're right; The Rich
Man's Wife has nary one original bone in it's body. But who cares? If
you're looking for good ol' dumb suspense movie, you can't do much better
than this. And if you suspense buffs aren't already sold, it has a killer
of an ending too. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
In probably the funniest summer film this season, Mr
Wormwood and wife, (Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman)  aided by  Matilda
(Mara Wilson) make a most hilariously enjoyable movie for both
children and adults alike.  By all means, this is not to be missed.
Matilda is a very, very bright child whom the parents are
too stupid to notice.  At her very first birthday, with a nice
chocolate cake in front of her, she spells out her name on the
chocolate: M A T I L D A.   The idiot parents berate her for ruining
the cake, never noticing that the one-year-old is spelling.
By the time she is 8-years-old she has devoured almost every
book in the library . . . and we do not mean those that have pictures.
Her father wants her to stop reading and watch TV.  "What can you
learn from a book that you can't learn better from TV?" he demands.
"And, by the way, what book are you reading now; she shows him it's
MOBY DICK."   In a frenzy he tears out the pages and berates her for
reading porno books.
At school, she is sent to an institution that is more
like a jail, with the headmistress, Trunchbull, (Pam Ferris) , more of
a mean old witch than a school principal.   Fortunately, there is Miss
Honey, (Embeth Davidtz) Matilda's teacher, who helps and understands
the child's genius.
Again, forget the summer trash and see a movie worth its
weight in gold.   See the darling MATILDA.
Quirky Eddie (Matt Ross) is a delight to watch in this very
offbeat, funny film.   To begin with, Ed's job is that of a geneticist
who is trying to improve rice.   Ed is shy, naive, and a sweet guy who
has not the faintest idea about how to talk to women.
Ed has just moved to NYC from the midwest.   He finally finds a
place he can share with someone, in this case it is Ray (Kevin Carrol)
a handsome young black man.   Unlike Ed, Ray knows his way around
women.  He has to coach Ed in what to say as he listens in disbelief
to what Ed is rehearsing when a woman friend is about to arrive.
Lee (Callie Thorne) is, among other things, a violinist in a
nightclub quartet.   Ray takes him to the club and Ed falls instantly
in love with Lee. Their romance is something to behold.    The humor
is enchanting as is the wonderful dialog.   It would spoil the review
to tell you more except it is a film you will not want to miss.  The
acting of Ross, Carrol and Thorne are terrific.
There has been very little worth seeing at the movies these
past couple of months.   Many of them look so much alike you would
have difficulty telling them apart.  I am talking about the gore, the
shooting, the psychos. . . the so-called "thriller."
In RICH MAN'S WIFE, Tony (Christopher McDonald) is "the rich
man."   Josie Potenza (the beautiful Halle Berry) is his wife whom he
neglects though it is hard to know why.   Instead he is deep into his
many business deals but finds time to be unfaithful.  When he gets
murdered, Josie is the natural suspect as she has the most to gain,
his wealth.  First she tells the police one story and then she
promises to tell the truth.  What are the cops to believe?
Josie turns to Jake (Clive Owen) for "comfort."  A bad move
as he is a friend of a psycho, Cole, (Peter Greene).  Cole wants not
only to have Josie but to also blackmail her.  Things get real
complicated but stay boring as the film has nothing new you have not
seen many times before.  Only the names are changed to protect the
innocent actors.
Halle Berry is beautiful and Peter Greene is slimy and
vicious.  It takes more than that to make a good movie.
Written and Directed by Amy Holden Jones

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Halle Berry, Peter Greene, Christopher McDonald, Clive Owen, 
      Charles Hallahan, Frankie Faison, Clea Lewis
Director: Amy Holden Jones
Producers: Roger Birnbaum and Julie Bergman Sender
Screenplay: Amy Holden Jones
Cinematography: Haskell Wexler
Music: John Frizzell
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     THE RICH MAN'S WIFE is one of those overplotted thrillers that 
works best if you're unfamiliar with film noir.  Nothing here is 
remotely original (a fact that shouldn't be unexpected), and, for a 
seasoned movie-goer, watching the film becomes a guessing game of which 
movie is going to be "borrowed from" next.  Bits and pieces of 
everything from FATAL ATTRACTION to THE USUAL SUSPECTS appear here, with 
little more than a few capable performances and a silly script to hold 
them together.  As for the ending... well, I'll get to that later, but, 
suffice it to say, it's the biggest problem of all.
     The Rich Man of the title is Tony Potenza (Christopher McDonald), a 
big-wig executive at the PBC Broadcasting Network.  He's a forty-year 
old workaholic who drinks too much and regularly engages in extramarital 
affairs.  Despite all that, however, he loves his young wife, Josie 
(Halle Berry), and she loves him, even though she too is unfaithful.  
When the couple vacations at an out-of-the-way lakeside cabin, things 
turn sour.  Tony is called back to Los Angeles for an important meeting 
and Josie is left behind, bitterly contemplating a prenuptial agreement 
that leaves her with nothing if she files for a divorce.  While on her 
own, she meets the mysterious (not to mention scary) Cole Wilson (Peter 
Greene), and, as they converse in a bar, she casually mentions that she 
sometimes wishes her husband was dead.  Cole takes her a little too 
seriously, however, and soon a pair of L.A. police detectives have a 
homicide to investigate.
     Much of THE RICH MAN'S WIFE is too hard to swallow, especially for 
those who are used to the typical contrivances of the genre.  The film 
opens with Josie being arrested on suspicion of murder.  After she is 
read her rights, she promptly declines the assistance of a lawyer, 
saying, "I don't want to speak with an attorney.  I just want to tell 
the truth."  Now, I don't care how innocent or naive a person is, 
they're not going to respond that way when facing a murder rap.  Such an 
inexcusable credibility blunder, coming so early in the film, 
immediately puts the viewer in a cynical frame of mind.  
     The bulk of the story is told as a long flashback, with Josie 
relating her side of things to a pair of incredibly stupid police 
officers.  Strangely, there are at least a half dozen scenes in "Josie's 
account" that she isn't involved in.  Details are revealed that she 
couldn't be privy to, yet, somehow, they become part of her narrative 
(maybe she's omniscient and we just don't realize it).  This sort of 
sloppy storytelling is evident throughout.
     For the "surprise" ending, writer/director Amy Holden Jones (MAID 
TO ORDER) has taken a cue from THE USUAL SUSPECTS.  However, the major 
difference is that, while everything in Bryan Singer's 1995 feature 
built logically to the big revelation, here, the "shocking" twist feels 
like a cheat -- something intended to throw the viewer off balance and 
obfuscate several of the movie's plot deficiencies.  Believe me, this 
particular device works a lot better with a well thought-out script like 
THE USUAL SUSPECTS than something silly and derivative like THE RICH 
MAN'S WIFE.
     Whatever its faults, THE RICH MAN'S WIFE is nicely-photographed.  
Veteran cinematographer Haskell Wexler (WHO'S AFRAID OF VIRGINIA WOOLF?) 
crafts an effectively dark and edgy mood.  A lot of this film takes 
place at night, and Wexler uses this to his advantage, capturing several 
memorable shots on small, moonlit country roads winding through a 
brooding forest.  Alas, John Frizzell's melodramatic score frequently 
spoils the effect.
     As Josie, Halle Berry is appealing, which is the most desirable 
trait for an "innocent victim" character.  Peter Greene, who has been 
typecast as a sicko/psycho with appearances in CLEAN, SHAVEN, PULP 
FICTION, and UNDER SIEGE 2, isn't required to explore virgin territory.  
There's an unpleasant scene where Cole slashes open his palm then licks 
the blood out of the wound.  Christopher McDonald is suitably abrasive 
as Tony, but, like Greene, the material doesn't challenge him.  Clive 
Owen plays Josie's ineffectual British lover, and Clea Lewis gives an 
intentionally irritating performance as his goofy, betrayed wife.
     THE RICH MAN'S WIFE is the sort of movie that should have gone 
straight to video.  It's not fundamentally all that different from the 
Andrew Stevens/Shannon Tweed thrillers that are popular with the rental 
crowd.  And, although this picture aspires to be a serious film noir, 
all it does is remind us how easily a formulaic premise can be 
transformed into a hopeless mess.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Christopher Null
     There are a couple of rules inherent to the thriller that any
filmmaker should be aware of.  First, you have to keep the pace moving
so fast that the audience doesn't have time to think about whodunit. 
And second, if you kill off most of the cast, whoever's left alive at
the end of the movie is the one who did the killing.
     THE RICH MAN'S WIFE blindly ignores both of these rules, but still
manages to float, thanks to a united effort by an exceptional cast and
exquisite production values.  Amy Holden Jones directs her own
screenplay here, a modern-day reworking of Hitchcock's masterful
STRANGERS ON A TRAIN.
     Hitch's story revolved around a man who took a joke too far -- an
offer to kill the other's wife.  This time, it's wife Josie (Halle
Berry) kills ultra-rich husband Tony (Christopher McDonald) with the aid
of friendly sociopath Cole (Peter Greene).  Jones also throws in some
interesting twists about Josie's forlorn lover Jake (Clive Owen) and his
ex-wife Nora (Clea Lewis from TV's "Ellen") -- the latter who all but
steals the show.
     But the main problem is that despite a tight 100 minute running
time, Jones's pacing is slower than a Yugo headed uphill, primarily
because there's not a lot of story filler off the main path of the film
(this isn't necessarily a bad thing, it just doesn't work right here). 
The other problem is that none of the characters in the film are very
good at being criminals; leaving mile-wide trails for the cops.  (Then
again, this may or may not have been intentional.  Whatever the case,
they're really slow about it.)  This lethargy left me restless during
much of the movie, but it works to great effect when Jones finally revs
into action phase...
     Any time a gun comes out on screen, watch it, because sparks are
about to fly.  The confrontation between Tony and Cole is a powerhouse
of a cat & mouse sequence which almost makes the film worth seeing on
its own.  Jones also uses the mixed-race marriage of Josie and Tony to
explore (on a very limited scale) some of the racial dynamics of their
situation and of society in general.
     The bottom line is that everyone in the film could have stood a
shot of adrenaline, but by the time it's over, the thriller will have
captured the minds of most of its audience.  After all, patience is a
virtue, right?
     P.S. My biggest complaint -- while you find out *who* did it, you
never really find out *how*.  If any of my readers figure it out, please
drop me a line and let me hear your theory.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Ben Hoffman
There has been very little worth seeing at the movies these
past couple of months.   Many of them look so much alike you would
have difficulty telling them apart.  I am talking about the gore, the
shooting, the psychos. . . the so-called "thriller."
In RICH MAN'S WIFE, Tony (Christopher McDonald) is "the rich
man."   Josie Potenza (the beautiful Halle Berry) is his wife whom he
neglects though it is hard to know why.   Instead he is deep into his
many business deals but finds time to be unfaithful.  When he gets
murdered, Josie is the natural suspect as she has the most to gain,
his wealth.  First she tells the police one story and then she
promises to tell the truth.  What are the cops to believe?
Josie turns to Jake (Clive Owen) for "comfort."  A bad move
as he is a friend of a psycho, Cole, (Peter Greene).  Cole wants not
only to have Josie but to also blackmail her.  Things get real
complicated but stay boring as the film has nothing new you have not
seen many times before.  Only the names are changed to protect the
innocent actors.
Halle Berry is beautiful and Peter Greene is slimy and
vicious.  It takes more than that to make a good movie.
Written and Directed by Amy Holden Jones

Author
Michael Redman
There's not much worse than expending mental energy trying to follow and
solve a poorly executed thriller. About the only thing I can think of is
if the film ending lets you know that you wasted your time because it
was all a fraud.
Here we have the worst of both possible scenarios.
Josie Potenza (Halle Berry) is trapped in a loveless marriage  or maybe
it's not: it's hard to tell if even this is true. Because of a pre-nup,
if she divorces her rich husband, she gets none of his wealth and having
his money is an important concern to her. She is befriended by Cole
Wilson (Peter Greene), a creepy psycho, who takes seriously their
conversation in a bar that she could have her husband murdered for the
insurance money. 
Maybe this happened; you never know for sure. Remember that sentence
because it applies to everything I will say about the plot.
Wilson kills husband Tony (Christopher McDonald) in what is the only
worthwhile scene in the film. Filmed at night in the rain, he shoots his
prey repeatedly with a gun that continually alternates firing and
jamming. The victim runs, stumbles, is shot again and again in a
frighteningly desperate spectacle. This appears to be a realistic murder
or at least the makings of a nightmare and is wasted in the middle of
what is otherwise a piece of trash.
After the killing, there rest of the film is a torturous slow-moving
mumbo-jumbo of Wilson stalking Josie who seeks help from her lover while
a couple of the stupidest members of the police force try to solve the
mystery.
None of the main actors offer anything that has not been done better in
many other movies. The only stand-out is the ditzy ex-wife (Clea Lewis)
of Jose's lover who livens up the otherwise gray tale for her three
minutes of screen time.
The film is filled with a zillion twists and turns that, in the hands of
a more skilled director and writer, could have been the basis for
something more interesting. In this film, they are just the foundation
for a "Who cares?" attitude as the plot holes engulf the entire movie.
The most disappointing of all is the ending which is obviously meant to
make the audience feel that something clever has been accomplished on
the part of the plot. Instead it completely invalidates everything that
has gone on before.
A despicable story with a cheat for an ending. If you have any
inclination to see this, do anything else (and I mean __anything__ else:
take the dog for a walk, do your dishes, go to the dentist) and youll
have a better time. When the video comes out in about two weeks; rent
it, fast-forward to the murder scene and watch the five minutes of
decent filmmaking and do not succumb to the temptation to view the rest.
Your life will be better for it.
[This appeared in the 9/19/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]
