Title
Review for Exit to Eden (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Dana Delany, Paul Mercurio, Rosie O'Donnell, Dan Aykroyd, 
           Stuart Wilson, Iman 
Director: Garry Marshall 
Producers:  Alexandra Rose and Garry Marshall 
Screenplay:  Deborah Amelon and Bob Brunner based on the novel by 
             Anne Rice 
Cinematography:  Theo Van De Sande 
Music: Patrick Doyle 
Released by Savoy Pictures 
     Break out the whips and chains!  We're going on a trip to an
island called Eden, where the dominatrix Mistress Lisa hold court and
just about anything (supposedly) goes.  And, judging from the actual
journey, if author Anne Rice has any complaints about the shoddy
treatment her book got in this limp translation, they're probably
well-justified.
     EXIT TO EDEN is really two stories in one, which is this case
means less, not more, for the money.  The film exhibits a split
personality in just about every area, from its views on sex down to its
uncertainty about whether it wants to be a slapstick crime farce or an
offbeat romance.
     Elliot (STRICTLY BALLROOM's Paul Mercurio) is a celebrated
photographer with a penchant for being spanked (developed when he was a
lad in Australia).  He signs up for a trip to an exclusive B&D fantasy
island and, once there, falls hopelessly in thrall to Mistress Lisa
(Dana Delany), the raven-haired resort boss.  Much to her surprise and
dismay, she finds herself responding to this new, individualistic
guest, and certain involuntary defense mechanisms spring into place.
     Taken alone, this particular storyline might have made an
enjoyable motion picture.  If he didn't want to face up to certain
serious issues, director Garry Marshall could have done something
similar to what he did with PRETTY WOMAN.  Unfortunately, this is only
half the plot--and the better half by far.
     Quite by accident, Elliot has taken the only existing photographs
of super criminal Omar (Stuart Wilson).  Since Omar is incredibly
camera-shy, he and his cohort in crime Nina (Iman) follow Elliot to the
island with the goal of killing him and retrieving the film.
Fortunately, a pair of repressed Los Angeles cops (played by Rosie
O'Donnell and Dan Aykroyd) are hot on the trail.  Everyone eventually
ends up on Eden.
     There are a lot of attempts at slapstick in EXIT TO EDEN, none of
which work.  In motion pictures, there are few lamer things than jokes
that fall flat, and this movie is full of them.  Despite the presence
of accomplished comics O'Donnell and Aykroyd, EXIT TO EDEN is almost
laughless.  Worse still, all the failed humor detracts from time that
might better have been spent developing the relationship between Elliot
and Lisa.
     Rather than approaching his potentially-controversial subject
matter with a degree of sensitivity and intelligence, Marshall elects
to adopt a PORKY'S-like, exploitative attitude.  Soft-porn titillation
interferes with story telling, and one wonders whether Delany and
Mercurio were chosen for their roles based on their ability and
charisma, or on the appearance of their naked buns (which get a fair
amount of exposure).
     EXIT TO EDEN has all the ingredients of late-night cable fare.
The film, which invites a decidedly-unfavorable comparison to John
Duigan's SIRENS, isn't so much repugnant as it is disappointing.  It's
"R" rating also raises questions about the basic inconsistency of the
MPAA.  Other, non-mainstream films have gotten "NC-17"s for a lot
less.  Perhaps the Association tempered their rating because they found
EXIT TO EDEN amusing.  If so, they're probably the only ones.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: Garry Marshall
Starring: Dana Delaney, Paul Mercurio, Rosie O'Donnell, Dan Aykroyd
Based on the novel by Anne Rice
     Garry Marshall, who made a Cinderella story out of street
prostitution (PRETTY WOMAN), was the obvious choice to convert Anne
Rice's lurid S&M novel into a routine Hollywood comedy.  His result
with this material is not as good.  Watching EXIT TO EDEN reminded me
of switching between two movies, one a near remake of the Aykroyd
comedy DRAGNET and the other an edited "erotic" film on USA Network's
Up All Night.  I had the feeling that when I switched from one film to
the other I missed whatever good parts there might be.  Both as a
comedy and as an erotic film, EXIT TO EDEN is a failure.
     Rosie O'Donnell and Dan Aykroyd play cops sent to a selective
sexual fantasy resort.  Aykroyd is, of course, a straight-laced prude.
O'Donnell is at first portrayed as streetwise.  Disappointingly, once
on the island she is also a straight-laced prude.  All of their funny
scenes are in the advertisements.  This, mathematically speaking,
leaves over an hour and a half of failed jokes and missed
opportunities.  Early in the film police partners O'Donnell and Aykroyd
make a good comedy team.  For reasons that are never clear, Aykroyd and
O'Donnell are split up on the island.  This leaves them both flailing
around looking for laughs in all the wrong places.  Or in Aykroyd's
case, just mostly looking lost.
     The S&M erotic plotline involves Dana Delaney and BALLROOM
DANCING's Paul Mercurio.  The concept of S&M has been heavily sanitized
for the film.  The slaves perform chores around the island, and if they
are lucky, get ordered to kiss Delaney's foot.  The limp whipping that
a few receive wouldn't make a cat hiss.  There are a few campy moments
of Dana Delaney being carried around by her slaves, but not enough to
make this a camp classic.  The few nude scenes of Mercurio and Delaney,
considering the subject matter, come off as very tame.  Most of the
time Delaney is depicted giving lessons to middle aged house wives on
how to spice up their sex lives.  These lessons are played for comedy,
but wind up, like the whole film, being neither funny nor erotic.  One
lesson has Delaney lead the housewives in how to talk dirty.  An older
woman says, "Put your thing in my thing."  Unfortunately, that is one of
the funnier jokes in the film.
     The most annoying thing about the film is that O'Donnell and
Aykroyd are sent to the island to recover a small object.  All they
have to do is ask for it.  They never do.  I suppose if they simply
asked for it, then the film would have been over in five minutes.  In
retrospect that would have been better for everyone involved.
     Several years ago Gerard Depardieu had much better luck in Barbet
Shroeder's S&M comedy MAITRESSE.  People interested in the subject
matter would do better to seek out that on video.  The STORY OF O was
also filmed by the people that brought you EMMANUELLE, and is at least
better than EXIT TO EDEN, but not much.
