Title
Review for Mortal Kombat (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ann Tschirgi
     This movie picked the right looking people for the roles.  But can
they act?  Well, sort of....  Kano does a solid job and so does Johnny
Cage and Lui Kang.  But Shang Tsung is not as menacing as you think and
Sub-Zero and Scorpion seem to serve the roles only to appear in fight
scenes.  Goro is a special effects reject with a ridiculous voice.
Kitana plays a bit role in the movie but she only offers advice to Lui
Kang.  Sonya Blade tries to be convincing as a woman who is
self-dependent but fails.  But Rayden does an excellent job with a
voice that matches perfectly.  Played by Christopher Lambert this is
the only thing I have seen him in that he does a good job.
     Everyone looks exactly how they do in the game.  Except for Goro
who looks like a tall bunch of green Silly Putty with a ponytail and a
funny face.  And Kitana looks different than in the game....  She looks
better!!  :).
     Shang Tsung holds tournaments against warriors from any planet.
These are the best warriors.  If they lose 10 times Shang Tsung takes
over their world.  Earth has lost 9 times.  This is the 10th time.
There are little sub plots like Sonya wanting revenge on Kano and Lui
Kang wanting to avenge the death of his brother.  But these are not
convincing and the main plot takes over the little ones.
     MORTAL KOMBAT has really great music.  From the stunning opening
piece to the last tune it has you captivated.  Its fits in right with
the fights.
     The sets in this movie were all computer-generated.  About a month
of work was put into places you see for seconds.  Rayden and Scorpion
have cool special effects.  The fight scenes are done well but there is
no blood!!  When someone gets punched 10 times there should be blood or
at least a bruise.
     If you like fight scenes or like the game see this movie!!  A
sequel is coming at some point.  So what do they need to improve?  Plot
and character development.

Author
Thomas Mix
     The one thing this movie had going for it was the intense fight
scenes.  The plot needed a major overhall as it left people hanging as
to what the hell all the fighting was about.  In any case the special
effects were enlightening.  No wonder comming from the prducers of
TERMINATOR 2 and TRUE LIES, both special-effect-dependendent films.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Just plain fun -- no more, no less. Check your brain, and don't
think futzing with a D-pad is going to change the storyline.
I didn't want to see this film. As enamored as I am of video-game culture, I
still went in with gritted teeth. "Okay," I snarled, making it sound like a
dare, "entertain me."
MK is as silly and ephemeral as any trendsploitation movie has ever been
(when do we get the MAGIC: THE GATHERING flick, for instance?), but it's one
of the best made -- certainly one of the best-looking -- and a ton of
lowbrow fun. I've got high standards for most movies, but I can still be a
pushover for a good, silly picture: high production values, yards of action,
nothing that would make the movie seem rancidly exploitive or cynical. MK
fits all three categories nicely.
Based somewhat loosely on the video game that made video games a bad juju
with parents all over again, MORTAL KOMBAT takes three heroes and pits them
against impossible odds -- evil magic, vicious martial-arts masters, demons
with four arms, and everything else the makeup and FX people could plaster
together or digitally synthesize. Do they win? Are movie-theater floor
sticky in summertime? Well... devil's in the details, y'know, so feel free
to read on.
Mortal Kombat, as we learn, is a cosmic karateka that takes place between
our world and some outlying dimension you don't want to get stuck in after
the last bar closes. The best of the best come to fight, and if "we"
(meaning Earth) wins, the world doesn't get overrun by evil for another
generation. Our three heroes, Liu Kang, Sonya and Johnny Cage, all come into
the contest with considerable trepidations and a little emotional baggage of
their own. Their nemesis is the cold-hearted Shang Tsung (played with tasty
nastiness by Cary Hiroyuki-Tagawa, who always gets roles like this), and
their mentor is the god of thunder, Raiden (also hammed up happily by none
other than Christopher Lambert, the best bad actor around).
The movie isn't a masterpiece of story or intellect -- but it does something
few movies of this type do well: it grabs you from the start and keeps you
solidly entertained all the way through. Almost every scene begins and ends
with a spectacularly choreographed fight, and the photography is stylish and
fast-moving. This is the kind of movie where you want to take home the
stills and hang them on your wall.
What else makes the movie work? A sly sense of self-referential humor, which
thankfully isn't overdone. (Watch, for instance, the way the battle between
Johnny Cage and Skorpion ends, and pay careful attention to the very last
shot. It's a howler.) Lambert has great fun as Raiden, and everyone involved
seems to be enjoying themselves. Which, when you think about it, isn't
something you can base on any one thing; it's everything.
I recently saw a movie with similar ambitions -- the uninvolving CRYING
FREEMAN -- and walked out disappointed. Why? Nobody seemed to be really
enjoying themselves. It all looked like one giant slog. MK may not be the
best movie ever made, but it's a gas, and few enough movies are good on just
that level.

Author
Ed Powell
     I'll be honest ... I was truly surprised with this movie.  I
thought that it was going to be a film filled with fighting and special
effects ...  and no plot.  There was plenty of fighting and special
effects, but there *was* a story behind all of it.  MORTAL KOMBAT is
one of the better action films I have seen this summer.
     The story is basically a "good versus evil" structure, where
the best fighters of Earth compete in a tournament that takes place
once a generation.  If the forces of evil win this tournament ten times
in a row, they will take over the Earth.  And they're one win away from
winning.
     The movie was written well, considering that all the writers had
to go on was a video game (or three).  There were some bits that could
have used some refining, and the character of Sonja was poorly
developed.  However, drama and comedy (yes, there were great comedic
moments in the movie), while seeming prefabricated, were well worked
into the story.
     I suppose the martial artistry counts towards acting, so I'll say
that the acting in the film was above average.  All the moves looked
realistic and quite painful on screen.  But if you take out the martial
arts, most of the actors could take a refresher course in acting.
Christopher Lambert, however, did play the part of Rayden (Lord of
Lightning, the "Obi-Wan Kenobi" of this film) quite well.
     The sets and props of the film were excellent.  As of this moment,
I am not sure if the Temple of Light (in China, according to the movie)
was real or computer-generated.  If it was real, it is a magnificent
work of architecture and design.  If it was computer-generated, it was
well rendered and integrated with real scenery.
     Speaking of computer-generation, the visual effects were above
average.  There were a couple of fakey shots (namely, the first time
Scorpion shows the snake-like thing that comes out of his hand ... if
you look close, you'll see that the effect doesn't keep aligned with
his hand), and when the action shifts to Outworld (no ... not
Waterworld), there are a few shots that are painfully obvious that they
are computer-generated.  Still, the effects are close to the
sophistication of BATMAN FOREVER (take that for what it's worth.
).
     Dave Anderson knows how to direct an action film, and MORTAL
KOMBAT proves it.  Pans, zooms, and other fancy camera moves were used
to good effect, and simple shots were used when it was all that was
needed.
     Is MORTAL KOMBAT something that you can take your Nintendo/Sega
"Mortal Kombat"-playing seven year old to?  My opinion: no.  While the
gratuitous blood-and-gore was kept down to a minimum, there are several
disturbing shots and ideas that go with the film.  The PG-13 rating
should be taken seriously.
     I really can't do a review of the music ... there wasn't very
much.  What music there was, was your generic dance track with the
words "MORTAL KOMBAT!!!" screamed in every once in a while.  And to
think that some people actually like that kind of music....   
     Overall, this is a great fight film.  If you are willing to see
around the few noticeable flaws, that is.  If you have a desire to see
people get hit, smacked, punched in the groin, and otherwise hurt, this
is the film for you.
Produced by Lawrence Kasanoff, directed by Paul Anderson.
A New Line Cinema release.

Author
Thomas Wheeler
Presented by New Line Studios and starring Christopher Lambert
     Video-game based movies have never done especially well.  Nobody
wants to talk about SUPER MARIO BROTHERS anymore, and while STREET
FIGHTER wasn't bad, most aficionados of the video game weren't
especially impressed.  I've always felt the reason that such movies
fared poorly was the lack of background information on which to build a
successful movie.  In STREET FIGHTER there were some interesting
characters, and there *is* a fair background to them in their Japanese
incarnation, but really, for a full-length movie, what could you *do*
with them?  There was also a complaint about a lack of *fights*, which
is what the game was all about.
     All of that is easily taken care of in MORTAL KOMBAT.  This isn't a
movie for everybody, and it surely lives up to its PG-13 rating.  Don't
think that this is a kids' movie.  Older kids, yeah, but there are some
truly horrifying scenes, such as the destruction of Scorpion, that are
not appropriate for small children.
     You want fights?  This movie is a cross between a roller coaster
ride and a swift kick in the head.  It is absolute, unmitigated, almost
non-stop slam-bang action that *still* manages to tell an interesting
story, which, for a change, ties in *very* closely with its root concept,
in this case the video game.  Too often, I feel, some producer,
director, or studio takes a concept from some other source; book, comic
book, cartoon, or whatever, and feels the need to twist it around and
put their own mark on it.  This is *not* the case with MORTAL KOMBAT.  If
you like the game, you'll *love* the movie.
     The actor who plays Liu Kang (his name escapes me) is a well known
martial arts actor in various Oriental countries.  Martial arts movies
haven't been too popular in America for a couple of decades now.  We've
gotten used to the types of action scenes that generall involve either
fisticuffs or large heavy equipment.  These fights are truly
choreographed, and the effort put into them shows.
     Then there's the eight-foot tall, four-armed Goro.  This is no
Muppet, folks.  He's one very large, very nasty piece of
audio-animatronics equipment.  The special effects, mostly computer
generated, are truly spectacular.  There's even a bit of humor here and
there, mostly from Christopher Lambert, who plays Rayden and seems to
enjoy playing the least physical role in the movie while everybody else
gets the stuffing kicked out of them at one point or another.
     I went to the first showing, and the theater was *packed*!  This
on a hot Arizona day with school having just started.  Like I said,
this isn't a movie for everyone.  But if you like action movies, and
have even the slightest knowledge of Mortal Kombat, go see this film.
You *will* have a good time.  I'm going again just so I can pick up on
what I missed the first time around.

Author
scatt@scatt.planet.net
     After seeing the trailers for this movie, I thought to myself that
this would finally be a decent video game-to-movie translation.  (note
I said decent, not great).  I never expected much, but for a movie
based on an action packed, bloody game, I would have expected more,
especially since the first ten to twenty minutes were really making me
sleepy.  The characters are lacking any depth, and they all think
they're George Carlin.  The action is a bit weak, but the movie is
still a lot better than STREETFIGHTER.  My advice is to wait for it to
hit video if you must see it.  My only wish is that if they do make a
sequel (as is hinted at the end of the movie) that they hire new
writers, and pack a bit more action into it.
--------------------scatt@scatt.planet.net---------------------------

Author
Jack Forrest
Starring Christopher Lambert as Rayden
and Bridget Wilson as Sonya Blade
        A wicked sorcerer named Shang Tsung has been holding tournaments
called "Mortal Kombat" for nine generations.  Everytime one of the contenders
dies at the hands of his combatants he can take their soul.  He needs a
great number of souls from great warriors to open the portal between the
earth realm and the dark realm so Shao Kahn, the Emperor of the dark realm,
can come to this dimension.  Shao Kahn gave Shang Tsung Goro, a Monster
Prince, to be his champion.  Goro was unstoppable because of his bronze
skin, being eight feet tall, having four arms and being immensely strong.
The main contenders are Liu Kang who is seeking revenge on Shang for killing
his brother, Sonya Blade who is trying to capture Kano, Kano who is working
for Shang Tsung, Johnny Cage who is trying to prove he is an amazing martial
artist not a phony actor, Sub-Zero who is working for Shang Tsung, Scorpion
who is working for Shang Tsung and hates Sub-Zero, and princess Kitana who
is the princess of the outworld.

Author
lord@ix.netcom.com (Bill )
Rating: 2.5/4  (Not nearly as bad as STREETFIGHTER.)
Preview:
     Saw the one hour making of/preview on cable, turns out they shot
on location in Thailand.  The guy who plays Liu Kang is in/famous for
many movies in Hong Kong, and he also helped choreograph a bunch of the
fighting.
     The guy who plays badass Shang Tsung is REALLY REALLY famous,
you'll recognize him easily.
     The documentary was interesting, and the walkthroughs of the sets
were nice--they put a *lot* of detail into 'em, and then you see'm for
30 seconds of the movie.
     Christopher Lambert (McCloud from Highlander) plays RAIDEN.
     Goro was entirely computer generated as every four armed badass
should be, but he wasn't utilized to his full potential.
     The plot kinda dragged, they went out of their way to explain WHY
there is this tournament, and WHY everyone has to kick/punch the shit
out of each other, but who cares right?  Get on with the fighting
already!
     And when it comes time to fight, some of these guys get wasted too
quick....
     I'd seen STREETFIGHTER the movie (rental) and was so thoroughly
dissapointed, but after seeing the previews, I knew this one couldn't
suck *that* bad....
     I guess it helped to be surrounded by a hundred kids yelling
"DAMN!", "Kick his ass! Yeah!" and "FINISH HIM!"
     To its credit, it kept a fairly quick pace, and the *music* really
punched it along!  Check out the soundtrack!
     Go see it *soon*, while the theatre will be full of screaming kids
and they'll have the soundtrack turned up to max and you should enjoy
it.
