Title
Review for Man Who Shot Liberty Valance, The (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The Man who Shot Liberty Valance (1962)
When I was a kid I would hear the "The Man who Shot
Liberty Valance" on the radio.  The song that is, which
was a hit for mawkish singer Gene Pitney.  There were
lyrics somewhat like "When Liberty Valance strode the
town, the folks would step aside, they'd hide".  So
bad it was good, the song has always made me look forward
to seeing the movie and the bad guy Liberty Valance.
Well, the song wasn't in the movie, and Valance turned
out to be Lee Marvin, creating the stumbling, wild-eyed,
cartoonish character put to better use in "Ship of Fools"
and "Cat Ballou".  Director John Ford assembles a stellar
cast, but like Marvin, the actors are given somewhat
stereotypical characters familiar from previous roles.
John Wayne is a good-guy rancher, handy with a gun
("Red River"), Jimmy Stewart is the new man in town,
out of place and unwilling to use a gun ("Destry Rides
Again"), Andy Devine is a comic relief character, the
only man able to talk off-key ("Stagecoach"), Vera Miles
is the headstrong, beautiful woman torn between two men
("The Searchers"), Edmond O'Brien is the drunken yellow
journalist (help me fill in the blank here, folks).
Fortunately, Ford is such a masterful storyteller that
the film can partly overcome the conventional characters.
The story begins with an elderly Stewart and Miles arriving
in a sleepy Western town to attend the funeral of a nobody.
When a nosy reporter asks why, Stewart obliges.  The film
becomes a flashback.  Stewart arrives from the East, and
plans to establish himself as a lawyer in the town.  Since
he is pro-statehood, he becomes the enemy of Liberty Valance,
a crazy, mean-spirited man with two sadistic sidekicks.
Valance is in cahoots with greedy ranchers who oppose statehood.
Aiding Stewart is the one-man newspaper firm O'Brien.  Stewart
is also befriended by good-guy, tough-guy Wayne, whose gal
is Miles.  Miles and Stewart work together in the kitchen
of a restaurant, where they frequently exchange meaningful
glances.  A showdown between gunslinger Marvin and the
ungainly, inexperienced Stewart is inevitable.
Although the film is over two hours long, there are only a
few slow moments.  Miles leads some cute schoolkids in their
recital of the alphabet, while Maxwell Scott has failed to
memorize the Declaration of Independence (ironic that he
stumbles on the phrase "All men are created equal").  Since
lauded as a great film, "The Man who Shot Liberty Valance"
is a good but conventional Western that has become somewhat
over-rated due to its famous cast and director.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
