Title
Review for Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Randy Parker
        When I arrived in Paris in June, 1992, I was surprised to find
France plastered with posters TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME, since the
movie wasn't scheduled to open in the U.S. until late August.  Happily, the
film--the prequel to David Lynch's cult television series--was playing in a
fancy, THX theater.  Unfortunately, the theater was far more impressive
than the movie, which absolutely stinks, much like a French lavatory.
Worse, actually.
        FIRE WALK WITH ME (directed by Lynch) will be completely
incomprehensible to anyone who has not seen the TV series or read "Laura
Palmer's Secret Diary."  For "Twin Peaks" junkies, like me, the movie is
only marginally improved.  The plot is jumbled and illogical, not to
mention excruciatingly sluggish.  The first 30 minutes, which have almost
nothing to do with the main story line, feature Chris Isaak and Kiefer
Sutherland as FBI agents investigating a murder in Portland, Oregon.  The
movie then stops in Philadelphia for a nonsensical cameo by David Bowie and
a BRIEF appearance by Kyle MacLachlan as Dale Cooper.  Lynch then drops
this plot strand altogether and abruptly shifts the setting to Twin Peaks,
Washington--one year later.
        Ah, Twin Peaks: "familiar territory," you think to yourself as
Angelo Badalamenti's distinctive musical score chimes in.  Wrong!  The
movie proves that you really can't go home again, or at least Lynch can't.
Only about a quarter of the characters from the TV series appear in the
movie: Leland Palmer, Bobby Briggs, James, Shelly, Leo, the log lady and a
few others--mostly in meaningless cameos.  The rest of the "Twin Peaks"
cast is nowhere to be seen, and consequently, Lynch fails to recreate the
spirit and flavor of TV's most enigmatic town.  Cast members Michael
Ontkean, Sherilyn Fenn, Piper Laurie, and Richard Beymer are sorely missed,
not to mention Lara Flynn Boyle, who has been replaced by lackluster Moira
Kelly in the crucial role of Donna.
        The movie concentrates solely on Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee) as she
suffers through drug abuse, prostitution, and incest, during her miserable
last seven days on Earth.  The night of Laura's death, which is truly
terrifying, is the film's only remotely effective sequence.  We finally get
to see exactly what happened to Laura after she jumped off James'
motorcycle and ran into the woods at that lonely traffic light in the
middle of nowhere.  Her murder unfolds just as Agent Cooper reconstructed
it in the TV series, which is gratifying for faithful "Twin Peaks" viewers.
But it's an awfully small reward for sitting through a painfully awful
movie.

Author
Robert Chao
     I saw TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME grudgingly, just because a
friend wanted to go.  I felt David Lynch had gotten carried away with
himself lately, as I didn't like WILD AT HEART or the pilot for the
second season of "Twin Peaks."
     I was just speechless after I saw it.  I thought I would hate it.
But I was eating it up, every second of it.  It was extremely emotional.
I felt as though I knew all the characters, and to see them again, on
year earlier, just blew me away.  Especially when the familiar music
came back and you see the girls walking to school.
     What struck me the most was the style of photography.  I was not as
slick and polished as WILD AT HEART or the series.  The film was grainy
and the lighting was kind of naturalistic.  Like the scenes in the
Palmers' house or when Bobby is using the lay phone.  It seemed almost
low-budget at times.  Does anyone know if the film stock was unusual for
a theatrical release?
     I really appreciated the way Lynch didn't pander to people who
hadn't seen the series.  He just stuck to being faithful to his
creation.  And there were *so many* characters from the series in it, even
Leo and Shirley.  The ads are stupid because they mention Bowie.
     All throughout the film I was saying "This is a stupid movie, but
I'm loving every second."  I guess those Japanese are way ahead of us.
I was fascinated with the character of Laura and the emotional high
point was when she broke with James at the very end.  The most emotional
bit in any Lynch film.
     I once saw Lynch's earliest films, THE GRANDMOTHER and THE
ALPHABET, and the scene of Cooper playing with the TV monitors really
reminded me of those.  After the film my friend played me a laserdisc of
INDUSTRIAL SYMPHONY and I hated it.
     I guess a reason I liked this film is that it felt personal, that
Lynch is out to please "Twin Peaks" fans, that he isn't being Ridley
Scott or Oliver Stone, and to hell with everybody else anyway.  It may
sound ridiculous but I can't even remember the last time I enjoyed a
film so much as last night.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
134 min., R, Drama, 1992
Director: David Lynch
Cast: Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, Madchen Amick, Dana Ashbrook,
      Phoebe Augustine, David Bowie, Eric DaRe, Miguel Ferrer,
      Pamela Gidley, Heather Graham, Chris Isaak, Moira Kelly,
      Peggy Lipton, David Lynch, James Marshall, Jurgen Prochnow,
      Harry Dean Stanton, Kiefer Sutherland, Lenny Von Dohlen,
      Grace Zabriskie, Kyle MacLachlan, Michael Anderson
     Most of this movie centers around Sheryl Lee's (as Laura Palmer)
fall from sanity because of parental abuse and drug use.  The film shows
the events leading up to Lee's death.  Much of the movie is spent in
hallucinations and weird dream states.
     TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME is David Lynch's prequel to his
television series "Twin Peaks."  I have been a fan of David Lynch since
I saw his film WILD AT HEART, one of my favorite films.  I unfortunately
missed this film when it was in the theater, and it was just released on
video cassette.  I enjoyed this film very much.  I missed Lynch's series
"Twin Peaks," but since the series is on video, I plan to see it now.
On a scale of zero to five, I give TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME a four.
TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME is rated R for female nudity, explicit
language, adult situations, and violence.
     This film is one of the weirdest movies that I have ever seen.
David Lynch has created a film that leaves sanity behind in the first
ten minutes, at which point it takes you into a dark, strange world
where only Lynch is in charge of your fate.
     Sheryl Lee is great as Laura Palmer who looses her grip on the
world because of drugs.  Moira Kelly (THE CUTTING EDGE, BILLY BATHGATE)
is excellent as Laura Palmer's best friend.  Kiefer Sutherland (THE
VANISHING, 1969) and Harry Dean Stanton (PARIS TEXAS, WILD AT HEART) are
very good as two special agents who appear in the beginning of the film.
Kyle MacLachlan (THE DOORS, DUNE) shows up briefly as special agent Dale
Cooper.  David Lynch, himself, has a brief role as Special Agent
Cooper's boss.  Pamela Gidley (THRASHIN', HIGHWAY TO HELL) can be seen
briefly as a corpse.  One of my favorite characters in this film was the
dream man (listed in the credits as "The man from another world"),
Michael Anderson.  There is no reason for David Bowie (LABYRINTH, THE
MAN WHO FELL TO EARTH) to be in this film, or get a spot in the opening
credits.  All he does is walk down a hall and sit in a seat.
     At some points this film reminded me of Peter Greenaway's films; at
times it seemed more like a psycho drama; and at other times more like
an anti-drug school health film.  This is one of those movies that you
will either love, or find to be a pointless confusing waste of
celluloid.  I happen to have enjoyed this film very much.

Author
sun!megatest!jao (John Oswalt)
2 hours, 10 min., R (violence, nudity, adult situations)
Director: David Lynch
Cast: Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, Kyle MacLachlan, Moira Kelly, plus various
      famous people in cameos.
     TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME is a terrible movie.  I was quite
fond of the television series, but this movie has none its charm I
always suspected that all the mysterious little phrases (e.g., "the owls
are not what they seem") and weird symbolic objects in the series didn't
mean much, but I didn't care because there were so many great characters
to watch.  The subplots were interesting.
     In the movie, there are no subplots.  It is the story of how Laura
Palmer died, and we already know how she died.  The bulk of the movie
consists of Laura Palmer acting weird, crying, snorting cocaine, running
around with her good boyfriend James and her bad boyfriend Bobby, and
turning into a prostitute.  Her friend Donna tries to stop her by going
along with her.  Has David Lynch jumped on the war-on-drugs bandwagon?
     If this were done well, depicting the gradual degradation of
Laura's life due to drug use, the pressures of adolescence, and living
with a nutty father, and showing the parallel development of the evil
forces which eventually kill her, TWIN PEAKS: FWTM could have been a good
movie.  A lot of Stephen King's best stuff is like that.  But there is
no character development.  The scenes follow each other in no logical
order.  Mix them up and you would have the same movie.  Laura acts
pained.  Her father, Leland, acts possessed.  Laura gets over it and
seems okay but meek.  Leland smiles and seems ashamed of his outburst.
Laura hangs out with the wrong crowd.  Shea cries a lot, a weird kid
jumps around in a mask, there is a lot of meaningless, empty symbolism,
etc, etc, and when it becomes time for the movie to end Laura dies.  And
about that title: "Fire Walk With Me."  It comes from an utterance by
Laura in one of here pained periods.  She says, slowly, as if each word
were loaded with significance, "Fire ... Walk ... With ... Me."  It
means nothing.  She could just as well have said "Elvis ... Ate ...
My ... Left ... Foot," and then the title would be "TWIN PEAKS: ELVIS
ATE MY LEFT FOOT."
     Many of the characters from the television series put in an
appearance: the Log Lady, the One-Armed Man, the Midget, the folks at
the diner with the damned good coffee, the bellowing Gordon Cole (played
by Lynch himself), and the young man who never leaves his house.  But
they contribute nothing.  They are in the movie just so we can point at
them and say "look, there's so and so."  Remove them and you have the
same movie.  David Bowie walks on for no apparent reason other than to
be able to advertise that he is in the movie.  I doubt that he spent
more than five minutes on the set.
     Even special agent Dale Cooper, played by Kyle MacLachlan, doesn't
look like he belongs here.  His role is more than the walk-on that the
others I mentioned are, but his part makes no sense, and could easily
have been left out.  It should have been.
    The first reel or so of the movie has some new FBI agents
investigating the murder of Teresa Banks a year before Laura Palmer's.
This gives them a chance to insert Kieffer Sutherland and Harry Dean
Stanton.  But then, abruptly, the words "One Year Later" appear, the
familiar "Twin Peaks" theme music wells up, and all that early stuff is
forgotten, except for the characteristic empty symbolism of a ring.
    What's good about the movie?  Well, as somebody said, "No movie with
Harry Dean Stanton in it is all bad."  He does fine as a trailer park
manager.  In fact, all the performances are good, considering what they
had to work with.  The script is really, really bad.
     We have the usual David Lynch offbeat camera angles and scene
cutting.  When Laura and Donna walk out of her house, the camera follows
them to the door.  One naturally expects a quick cut to them walking
down the front steps.  But the camera stays in the empty room a couple
of beats longer than normal, just long enough for you to get a sense of
unease, of other-worldness, without really knowing why, before cutting
to the outside shot.  I like this sort of thing, but I would rather the
movie was interesting enough so that I could just experience their
effect, and not be reduced by boredom to watching for them.
     Rainier Ale (brewed in Seattle, but I think they've been bought by
Miller or one of the other big brewers) is very visible in one scene.  I
doubt that they paid any product placement money for this.  If I were
president of Rainier Brewing, I would have paid to keep my logo out of
this movie.
     I visited Snoqualmie a couple of months ago to ride the historic
train (one of my hobbies), and it was fun to look for places I
recognized.  Most scenes could have been anywhere, though.
     I rate it 3 on the 0-10 scale, which to me means "Poor.  Not
totally hopeless.  I wouldn't have seen had I known more about it."
Probably about a -2 on the Mark Leeper -4 to +4 scale.  You don't have
to worry about paying full price, because this movie won't last long in
the theater.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: David Lynch
Writers: David Lynch and Robert Engels
Starring: Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, Moira Kelly, Chris Isaak, Kiefer
Sutherland, Harry Dean Stanton, Dana Ashbrook, Kyle MacLachlan, Grace
Zubriskie, James Marshall, David Lynch, Mädchen Amick, David Bowie, Miguel
Ferrer, Jürgen Prochnow, Frances Bay, Michael J. Anderson, Heather Graham
I saw the pilot for David Lynch's cult classic TV show, "Twin Peaks," a
couple of months ago, and the greatest thing about it was the first hour. 
In it, the entire town discovered that a young high school girl, Laura
Palmer, was found murdered.  As the hour unfolded, we saw her parents
discover (both at the same time, and over the phone), her schoolmates, and
we saw the effect it had on the town.  It was like the place had to be
closed because of it.
The second hour, though, dipped into weirdo surrealism, like it was afraid
to deal further with what occured in the first hour.  Bobby, Laura's
boyfriend, became especially crazy, attacking one guy, landing in jail, and
in one of the funniest scenes in anything I've ever seen, threatened a
fellow cell mate by woofing at him.  Sure, it's funny, but it's nothing
else.  I've seen other episodes in the series, and none really owed up to
the promise the first hour of the pilot had.  Most of them just like to
shock you with weird scenes, like one where Special Agent Dale Cooper (Kyle
MacLachlan), the caffeine-addicted guy on the case, has a dream where he's
in a red room with Laura and a dwarf (Michael J. Anderson), who talks
backwards-yet-forwards, and says a bunch of things which make no sense
whatsoever, but are just humorous to listen to.  But do these things hold
any higher purpose?
Well, here's the ill-fated pre-quel to the series, which ended midway
through its second season, and the film tries to make some sense out of the
series, and to reveal the killer of Laura Palmer which we were all
wondering throughout the series (note: I'm not sure whether or not they
revealed who it was on the series).  The reason it's dead-on-arrival is
that the identity of the killer can be anyone in the town.  It's almost
like David Lynch put all the characters names in a hat, picked one, and
said, "okay, there's our killer."  It could've been the freaking Log Lady,
and they could make it work somehow in this film.
The first half hour of the film is almost like a typical episode of the
series: a bunch of really weird scenes tossed together, filled with empty
symbolism, but lots of surreal laughs.  In it, another Special Agent,
Chester Desmond (Chris Isaak - yes, the singer), goes to a town sorta near
Twin Peaks with another agent, Sam Stanley (Kiefer Sutherland), to
investigate the murder of a woman.  They talk to hard-to-get-along-with
local authorities, question a disgruntled motel owner (Harry Dean Stanton),
and then disappear for no reason whatsoever.  This seques to a little bit
with Dale Cooper, who wonders where they went, and then has a bit where
David Bowie walks into the film, and you can see that the film is taking a
wild turn because from this point on, nothing makes sense, least of all the
reason why Bowie is in it.  Or Cooper, for that matter.
Before you can say "Huh?," the film cuts to a "One Year Later" sub-title,
we see the "Twin Peaks" sign, hear the haunting music from the show, and
meet Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee), alive, well, and smiling from ear to ear as
she walks to school.  Little do we know, she has another side.  Over the
course of the rest of the film, she sleeps with a bunch of guys, hits on
her best female friend Donna (Lara Flynn Boyle in the show, but eerily
replaced by Moria Kelly in the film), does drugs, goes to a topless bar,
and all sorts of self-destructive acts.
She also finds discomfort at home.  Her father, Leland (Ray Wise), begins
acting all strange, or maybe he did it before, we don't know.  In the first
scene he's in, there's a really humorous scene where Laura and he fight
over the fact that she sat at the dinner table without (*gasp*) washing her
hands.  Her mother (Grace Zubriskie, who played Susan's mother on
"Seinfeld" for awhile) tries to cease the fight between them, but can't do
anything but scream for them to just stop.
Some critic said that this film showed Laura's gradual descent into
madness, and to her eventual murder at the end of the film (I will not
reveal the killer's identity, but I will say that the identity is so
obvious that it's campy).  This is not so.  We first see her looking all
happy, but we then see her doing all the kinds of stuff she does later on
too.  It seems like she's rebelling against something, and that she has
been doing this for awhile.  She starts out this way, and the only gradual
thing is how insane she becomes throughout the film.
Laura becomes plagued by nightmares, weird dreams, and visions.  She begins
seeing things in everyday life, like an old woman (Francis Bay) walking
around with a boy wearing a white mask.  She dreams of the red room from
the TV show, with the dwarf saying empty sentences.  And her death becomes
imminent not just because the TV show revolved around her death, but
because the film unsubtlely hints at it continuously.  Her sins in the film
become greater by the minute, and it seems that Lynch thinks that she needs
some kind of cleansing, that she was murdered because she was so rebellious
and ill-mannered.
Interesting subtexts like these abound, but are just part of the overall
weirdness that Lynch gives the film.  Along with this idea, there's bounds
of things that happen that have no relevance over anything that happens,
like Bowie's appearance, the red room, or the entire first half hour.  What
connects the elements of the film?  Why are we shown characters, like
Madchen Amick's waitress, who show up for a scene or two, are given a bit
of drama, and then are never shown again?  What is the meaning of the ring,
which seems to be the only thing that connects the beginning and rest of
the film?  And why is Laura haunted by a demon named Bob?
Some fans of Lynch say that he's a genius at work, and that everything
means something.  A friend of mine actually thinks that the TV show is
"brilliant," but when I asked him why he thought he was brilliant, all he
did was stutter.  I've come to the conclusion that David Lynch is a genius
at creating atmosphere and mood, and maybe even pretty competent at
bringing up interesting and complex issues about humanity and what not, but
that he has no clue what to do with them.  He knows that talking about
issues like the underbelly of society requires a delicate touch; he's just
afraid to take a wrong step.
This seems to be why he resorts to meaningless surrealistic banter, which
is exactly what everything in this film is.  Lynch is afraid of digging
deep within the story and issues, and instead just tosses empty symbolism
at us, maybe hoping that the whole pretentiousness of it all will make us
watch again and again to get a message, and also that the humor will win us
over.  For some of us, it does.  I laughed at this film.  I laughed at all
the weird things that went on, and that seems to be what Lynch wants.  Why
do you have a dwarf speaking backwards-yet-forwards if you don't want
someone to get a laugh out of it?
What Lynch could do is express something, anything out of this.  I love
surrealism, but only when it works the way it should.  Luis Bunuel was able
to dig deeper into his films by using surrealism, but Lynch uses it as a
cover so he doesn't have to really expose his film for what it is.  What is
"Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me" even about?  Is it about how
self-destructive behavior will eventually result in death?  Is it about how
underneath a seemingly happy society there's a sick underbelly of perverts
and drug addicts?  What is Lynch trying to convery here?
To put it bluntly, this film is a mess.  It doesn't know what it wants to
do with anything, and it tries to pass off everything in a surrealistic
fashion so that no one can see that underneath, it's just confused about
what it wants to be doing.  Surrealism needs focus to exist, or else it
just meanders off and becomes empty, which is what happens with many of
Lynch's films.  Especially now, Lynch needs to look back at two of his
films: "Eraserhead" and "Blue Velvet."  "Eraserhead" was a really surreal
film, but what it did by creating surrealism is show a character who is
completely alienated in society.  It was basically a stylish nightmare, but
it was great in how it was able to present its protagonist and the misery
he feels.  "Blue Velvet" was probably his most focused film: a film about
how underneath society is something which is hideous, but which is ignored
for the safety of society.  There, he was able to use the surrealism to his
advantage, and create not only an experience, but something with meaning
and even humanity.
"Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me" is an experience, in that several scenes
show mood, but none of them have the emotional or intellectual context to
take them further and make them meaningful.  There's a really long scene
where Laura and Donna go to a topless bar, and a band plays so loud that
subtitles have to appear on the bottom of the screen so we know what
everyone's saying.  The mood is great and the scene is atmospheric as hell,
but when it's over, nothing remains but the though that the scene felt
really weird to watch.  Nothing else holds over from it.
The one good thing the film does is create a little bit of sympathy for
Laura, mostly because she's the protagonist and we know that at the end,
she's going to die and there's no way out of it.  It gives it a Sophoclean
subtext, but this is only used as a cheap gimmick so that we feel bad for
her.  Sure, she's self-destructive, but she's going to be murdered
gruesomely, and there's nothing anyone in this film can do about it.
But why was she killed?  And what is this film, or the TV show about?  I
guess what it's saying is that underneath, everyone's weird.  Yeah.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Kevin Patterson
SPOILER WARNING: This review reveals many of the major plot points of the
"Twin Peaks" television series, including the identity of Laura Palmer's
killer and the ending of the cliffhanger finale.
Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me  * * * *
R, 1992
Written by David Lynch and Robert Engels. Directed by David Lynch.
Starring Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, Kyle MacLachlan, Chris Isaak.
Shortly after the cancellation of the "Twin Peaks" televison series,
co-creator David Lynch announced that he was not ready to leave the story
behind and would make a "Peaks" feature film. Fans were understandably excited
and hoped for a resolution to the show's frustrating cliffhanger ending, in
which FBI Special Agent Dale Cooper (Kyle MacLachlan) was trapped inside an
alternate reality while an evil doppelganger took his place. Then Lynch
decided instead to do a prequel, exploring the events leading to the murder of
Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee) rather than following up on the series. Many "Peaks
Freaks" were disappointed, and some continue to insist to this day that the
film was an artistic flop.
In fact, however, there is a lot to admire in "Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me."
The opening half-hour, in which FBI agents Chester Desmond (Chris Isaak) and
Sam Stanley (Kiefer Sutherland) investigate a related murder, features much of
the goofy humor that made the series so much fun as they encounter, among
others, a hostile macho sheriff ("Cable bends steel!" proclaims a local
headline), a drunken trailer park manager who laments that their investigation
"just means more shit I gotta do now," and a grumpy waitress ("Do you wanna
hear about our specials? . . . We don't have any!"). As the story moves to the
town of Twin Peaks and the final days of Laura Palmer's life, agents of the
supernatural realm known as the Black Lodge appear, and Lynch treats us to
several excellent sequences inside the mysterious "Red Room." 
Many of these elements undoubtedly would seem confusing to someone who did not
watch the series. But there is also a powerfully tragic story to be told here,
that of Laura Palmer's descent into a personal hell of drugs and promiscuity
as she is terrorized by the Black Lodge forces, culminating in her recognition
of her demon-possessed father (Ray Wise) as the source of her sexual abuse and
emotional despair. Lynch and co-writer Robert Engels turn the fact that
everyone seeing this movie knew that it would end with Laura's murder to their
advantage; we honestly want to see Laura somehow escape her horrible fate but
know that she will not. Sheryl Lee gives an engaging and believable
performance as Laura Palmer, creating a character that still deserves our
sympathy despite the fact that a fair amount of her pain is self-inflicted.
The performances of Lee and Wise as well as Lynch's talent for emotional
intensity and for astonishing visuals serve to capture vividly the horror of
her situation and ultimately to produce some very moving moments. Most of
these are soaked in melancholy, but without giving the details away, let me
just say that this film does not end immediately after Laura's death and that
the ending is about as uplifting (and yet un-sappy) an ending as you can have
in a movie in which the main character is murdered. "Fire Walk With Me" is the
rare film that incorporates supernatural elements yet still deals with real
emotions and creates three-dimensional characters that can be taken seriously.
If one accepts "Fire Walk With Me" for what it is - a riveting.
character-driven drama with hints of supenatural mystery - it is ultimately
very rewarding. Many, including myself, might have preferred an extended "Twin
Peaks" episode and a clarification of the TV series's plot threads, but David
Lynch's responsibility as a filmmaker should not be primarily to satisfy fan
expectations but simply to make a competent and powerful film. By that
standard, "Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me" is an outstanding success.
Visit my Film Reviews page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME:  "Prequel" to David Lynch's TV series
"Twin Peaks."
Plot/kick-off: An FBI agent investigates the death of a woman.  FBI
Special Agent Dale Cooper investigates this later on, and then the FBI
aspect is dropped almost completely as we turn up in the little
northwestern town of Twin Peaks, leading up to almost the very start of
the TV series.
Characters/acting:  Sheryll Lee turned in a very good performance as
Laura Palmer.  More than just the "woman in jeopardy," she was complex,
sometimes subtle and sometimes "out there" as the role demanded.  Other
Peaks returning regulars included Kyle MacLachlan as Coop, James, Miguel
Ferres as Albert, Leland, Shelly, Bobby and Norma.  Chris Isaak, Kiefer
Southerland, David Bowie in early scenes.
Cinematography/FX:  Some beautiful scenes, and some really weird scenes.
More of the red-curtained room and "The Lodge."  How do they make
Douglass firs look frightening?  Probably would lose a little on the
small screen.  Again very effective in the blend of supernatural with
reality.
Score/Sound: Similar to series.  New song by Julee Cruise.  Pretty gross
sounds during one autopsy.
Violence/Gore:  Dead bodies, bloody/split foreheads, most kill/scare
scenes imply rather than show directly.
Language: Oh, probably some, nothing really strong that I recall.
Skin/situations:  Lots.  Lots and lots.  Steamy in parts, and
non-traditional in others.  Topless dancing/foreplay, but not actually
much sex per se, not graphically shown anyway.  Not as wild as the
diary.
Analysis:  What *is* it with the creamed corn?  Yep, we're still left with
questions after seeing the movie.  It will answer a few of the ones we
had, but definitely not all.  That's okay with me, but it probably won't
be with some other viewers.  It's hard for me to make a call on whether
anyone who doesn't like Lynch or didn't watch "Twin Peaks" the series
would like the movie, but as a wild guess I will say, "Probably not."  I
thought it was a pretty good ride, though it was less scary as the end
drew near, since I had a better idea of what was going to happen near
the series start.

Author
Chuck Dowling
NO STARS - C:Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, Kiefer Sutherland, Kyle MacLachlin,
Madchen Amick, Dana Ashbrook, David Bowie, Eric DaRe, Miguel Ferrer,
Heather Graham, Chris Issac, Moira Kelly, Peggy Lipton, James Marshall,
Jurgen Prochnow, Harry Dean Stanton, Lenny von Dohlen, Grace Zabriskie,
Frank Silva, Walter Olkewicz, Al Strobel.
I was a big fan of the ABC television series, and most likely the only one
according to the ratings. (Well, my mom watched it too but we both watched
it on the same TV so that really doesn't count now does it?) I was also one
of the first in line the day the film opened. After watching it, I can
safely say that I have never come out of a theater angry, as I did that day.
Not disappointed, but angry. The first twenty minutes of the film were quite
promising, but after that it's one of the worst films of all time,
regardless if you are a fan of the TV show or not.
The TV show was really all about a murder in a small town and the
investigation which followed. The show lasted a year and a half, and the
final episode ended with a cliffhanger. So when It was announced that a
feature film was being made, I was more than overjoyed. Well guess what, the
film turns out to be a prequel to the TV show and just shows in detail (and
I do mean detail) the events that happened the week before the murder. These
are events that we already knew about and were satisfied with the way they
were presented. There was no reason to make this film about those events.
What writer/ director /creator David Lynch should have done is to continue
on with the show from the final episode instead of retreading on familiar
material.
Halfway through this mess, the film seems to jump forward in time, but then
again not really. Anyway, a reference is made to the cliffhanger ending and
you would think that would mean that eventually, before the film is over,
that plot line will be resolved. It's not. It's not even really mentioned
again. I think Lynch slipped that scene into the film so that the audience
wouldn't walk out, that bastard.
Twin Peaks:Fire Walk With Me is loaded with contradictions from the TV show,
and unnecessary language, violence, nudity, and sex. The hero of the TV
series, cool FBI agent Dale Cooper (MacLachlin) is reduced to a mere cameo.
The only good thing about the film is the score. This was easily the worst
film from all of 1992. It was even booed when it was shown at the Cannes
Film Festival, and deservedly so.
There are many other problems I had with the film, but thay are all plot
specific and only people who watched both the show and the film would
understand them. If your interested, email me at chuckd21@southeast.net and
I'll discuss them with you in detail.
Please visit my movie reviews web site at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
You'll be glad you did.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
     I have read only one other review of this movie, and I thought it
was rather rash.  Yes, yes, I know, David Lynch has a reputation for
frustrating a lot of movie-goers into stupors, but I believe they only
fall into stupors because they can't possibly understand what Lynch is
doing, and quite possibly don't want to.  I had never really seen a
David Lynch movie all the way through (a victim of the Cable
Generation).  But I must say, the first one I saw completely (and in the
theater) made me think, if nothing else.  That movie was TWIN PEAKS:
FIRE WALK WITH ME.
     I'm not sure if this movie is getting a lot of flack or whether its
getting rave reviews, but I myself admire *any* movie that will make me
think.  I admit there have been a few movies which have made me think
that I thought sucked, but those are few and far between.  TWIN PEAKS:
FIRE WALK WITH ME is definitely a movie that made me think twice.  I
like it for just that simple little reason.  I can't claim to be a Twin
Peaks fan myself, but I always like the weird and offbeat.  Something to
rock your foundations a little, whether messy or organized, good or bad.
     TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME is the story of Laura Palmer (the
famous corpse from the now cult series TWIN PEAKS) and the events that
led to her death.  In other words, a prequel to the television series.
It is a series of mismashed, surreal images and visions that Robert
Engels and David Lynch have concocted in order to explain why she died,
and if anything, fill in gaps left behind from the TV series.  Or so I'm
told.  This kind of movie-making reminds me a lot of THE DOORS; Oliver
Stone's vehicle.  Not that it's bad, just very subjective to opinion.
     Other than being a prequel, TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME doesn't
get past being any more than a frenzied explanation of what really
happened to Laura Palmer.  It is a perfect vehicle for those who want to
read in anything they like.  There is plenty of symbolism, plenty of
images, dreams, realities, and overt weirdness that even the least
curious of people would want to take a crack at what Lynch is trying to
say.  On the other hand, most of the things that happen in this film
tend to drag, carry on, or make no sense at all (upon first glance).
This is not a movie for people with a short attention span.  You have to
really like ERASERHEAD in order to like this movie.
     But if you're a die-hard David Lynch fan, this movie shouldn't
disappoint you.  If you're just starting out with him, don't expect
wonders on the first try.  It's going to take a few viewings to tell
whether or not you can handle, or at the very least, tolerate this kind
of movie-making.  Not to put David Lynch down, but the man himself is a
little weird, too.
