Title
Review for Baryshnya-krestyanka (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Felix Kreisel
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Baryshnia-Krestianka (Lady-Peasant)
Director: Alexei Sakharov. Script: A. Zhitinsky, Alexei Zakharov. Based on
the short story by A. S. Pushkin. Photography: N. Nemoliaiev. Editor: L.
Shmigliakova. Music: Vladimir Komarov. Sound: I. Urvantsev. Cast: E.
Korikova, E. Rednikova, D. Scherbina, L. Kuravliov, V. Lanovoi. Producer
and Sales: L. Poliarskaia, Ritm Film Studio of Mosfilm Association.
Liza had her eye on her handsome young neighbor Alexei, for some time and
he has had his eye on her. But their fathers, feuding landowners, clearly
aren't about to let the two young people get together. Liza has an idea.
With the help of a maidservant, Nastia, she dresses up as a young peasant
girl and wanders into the forest ostensibly to gather mushrooms. As she
planned, Alexei spots her and the peasant disguise doesn't fool him a bit.
This movie celebrates pastoral Russia of a century and a half ago. It
presents an unchanging society, frozen into a traditional patriarchal
culture (or lack thereof), with both the landlords and the peasants, both
men and women unquestioningly following their paths through life.
   The story is not original, it is a watered down, conformist version of
Romeo and Juliette. Two neighboring landlords conduct a feud which their
offspring must follow. The young man is fresh from a Dutch university, but
the education was wasted on him since he just wants to join the Hussars.
The young girl is dreaming of romance with a tall, dark man with a large
mustache, but knows that her father will decide on a husband. The foreign
words employed by the gentry, their Western dress, tastes in poetry and
music are just a thin veneer, barely concealing the basic idiocy of country
life. Here is one example of the 
   Pushkin satirizes the basic uselessness of the landed gentry when he
quotes one of them lauding the other for discovering how to mortgage their
estates on the London market. The movie director reenacts this scene in the
movie but then celebrates this idiocy by extolling the fathers' taste for
homemade vodkas and liqueurs.
   This is a low budget escapist film, and the viewer is advised to read
Pushkin instead.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html
