Title
Review for Proposition, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Nusair
Starring Kenneth Branagh, Madeline Stowe, William Hurt, Neil Patrick
Harris 
1998 has not been a very good year for Kenneth Branagh.  First he starred
in Robert Altman's pretentious mess, "The Gingerbread Man".  And now he's
in "The Proposition", a well-acted but dull period piece.
The film tells the story of a very rich man (Hurt) who wishes to have a
baby with his wife (Stowe), but is sterile, thus creating a bit of a snag
in his plan.  He decides to hire a surrogate (Harris) of sorts to father
his child, but complications arise when the surrogate becomes emotionally
attached to the wife of said rich man.
Where does Branagh fit into this convoluted scheme, you ask?  Well, he
portrays a priest who is new to the local parish, and who also has a shady
past.  It really doesn't matter, anyway.  By the time all the secrets are
revealed, the viewer has lost interest long ago.
"The Proposition" is a film that can't seem to decide what genre it wants
to fit into.  It's starts off as a run-of-the-mill period piece, but after
about 30 minutes, it begins jumping wildly from one type of film to
another.  In certain cases, this can work (see "Pulp Fiction" for such an
example), but here it just comes of as an unpolished mess.  And, worse of
all, the movie can't even finish what it starts.  It opens with Branagh's
character telling someone the story of what really happened to these four
people, so the film is a flashback.  By the end of the film, one would
expect that the movie would come out of the flashback and into the
present.  This doesn't even happen!  "The Proposition" has gotten totally
wrapped up in it's multpile forays into different genres, that it
completely disregards what has occured at the beginning of the film.
The acting, on the other hand, is quite good.  William Hurt, an actor who
has become quite complacent in his own smugness as of late, breaks out of
that mold with an exciting portrayal of a man who has all the money in the
world, but, in the end, finds that it is completely useless.  And Doogie
Howser himself, Neil Patrick Harris plays a character who is a polar
opposite of that famous TV doc.  Madeline Stowe rounds out the cast as the
woman who is caught in the middle of all three of these men, and she is
very convincing in her self-doubt and constant confusion.
Which brings us back to Branagh, a usually brilliant actor.  Here, as in
"The Gingerbread Man", he seems to be wandering aimlessly throughout his
settings.  There's no spark or energy to his performance; he merely seems
to be cashing in a paycheque.  Let's hope he works himself out of this rut
soon.  It would be a genuine shame if he spent the rest of his career
making unfocused garbage like "The Proposition".

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 PolyGram Filmed Entertainment/ Interscope
 Director: Lesli Linka Glatter
 Writer:  Rick Ramage
 Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Madeleine Stowe, William Hurt, Neil
Patrick Harris, Robert Loggia, Josef Sommer, Blythe Danner,
David Byrd
   Not all propositions are indecent proposals, but cinema
today has less use than ever for affairs freely entered
between consenting adults, the sorts of liaisons that do not
hurt anyone.  In "Indecent Proposal" (1993) Robert Redford
proposed to give one million dollars for a night to remember
with Demi Moore and the audience wondered why HE would
have to pay HER.  In "The Proposition," the issue--one which
would be considered vulgar by some, respectable by
others--is more complex and with a better script could have
been more involving.  Arthur Barret (William Hurt), a
fabulously wealthy lawyer, is sterile, unable to present the
wife he adores, Eleanor (Madeleine Stowe) with the child she
so intensely craves.  Through an intermediary, Hannibal
Thurman (Robert Loggia), Arthur hires a bright young stud,
Roger Martin (Neil Patrick Harris), offering $25,000 if he
would spend a night with his wife so that she would have
what she so desperately wants.  Would you believe that he at
first refuses, even after seeing the beautiful Eleanor?  But
hormones triumph over ethics, and when the youthful Harvard
graduate falls in love with his conquest in just one night
threatening to expose his benefactor for the pimp he
considers him to be, the boy must be eliminated.
   "The Proposition" is an uneasy mix of soap opera and
feminism with an occasional burst of clever humor.  Situated
in the Boston of 1935, the tale is told in flashback by Father
Michael McKinnon (Kenneth Branagh), whose role in the
melodramatic yarn is not entirely priestly.  In typical potboiler
mode, the story focuses on the growing affection between
Eleanor and the priest who turns out to be the nephew of the
affluent Arthur, a man who entered the priesthood to get back
at his father--who was materialistic almost to the point of
treason.  Suggesting Kennedy-style with specific reference to
Joseph Kennedy, Lesli Linka Glatter's production displays the
pomp and palatial splendor of the Barret estate, complete with
a head servant, Syril (Blythe Danner), who is dressed as
elegantly as the woman of the house and who has more than
employee-employer feelings for her boss, adding to the class
politics of the drama.
   For feminist resonance, Rick Ramage's screenplay portrays
Eleanor as a novelist in the style of Virginia Woolf, a woman
who despite her love for her husband has a separate room--
all the more convenient for both the welcome and the
unwelcome trysts.  Despite some droll moments, particularly
in the lovemaking scene between the callow Roger and the
sophisticated and understanding beauty, the performers take
themselves entirely too seriously.  Though he hired the young
man to perform studly services, Barret conspicuously scowls
from his car at the Don Juan has created and later admits
that he hated the boy.  Even worse, Father Michael is
insufferably solemn throughout, displaying his displeasure at
the follies of moneyed aristocrats, particularly when they
invest their money in Germany at a time that Americans are
out of work in appalling numbers.  Despite his rugged good
looks, you wonder how Eleanor could become so animated
over this priggish man of the cloth whose hormones do battle
with his oath to the church, the victor never in doubt.
   David Brisbin's production design is impressive, featuring
the stately autos of the 1930s and Anna B. Sheppard's
costume design seems right on the money.  But the drama
becomes too fogged by suds to offer the clarity of a well-
developed fable.  Rated R.  Running time: 114 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten 1998
