Title
Review for Never Say Never Again (1983)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Klaus Maria Brandauer, Max Von Sydow, 
      Barbara Carrera, Kim Basinger, Bernie Casey, Edward Fox, 
      Alec McCowen, Pamela Salem, Rowan Atkinson
Director: Irvin Kershner
Producer: Jack Schwartzman
Screenplay: Lorenzo Semple Jr. based on the original story by 
      Kevin McClory, Jack Wittingham, and Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Douglas Slocombe
Music: Michel Legrand
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     In 1971, following the release of DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER, Sean 
Connery announced that he would "never again" play the role of James 
Bond.  As a result, the producers brought in Roger Moore, and the series 
continued.  12 years later, in 1983, Connery reneged on his anti-007 vow 
and once again slipped into the role that had earned him worldwide fame 
(the reputed $5 million paycheck probably had something to do with his 
decision).  Fans of the *real* James Bond exulted -- at least until they 
saw the movie.  
     Kevin McClory, the producer and co-writer of THUNDERBALL, won a 
legal battle to make his own Bond movie.  The only stipulation was that 
it had to be based on the characters and situations of the original 
THUNDERBALL.  So, using Lorenzo Semple Jr. (THREE DAYS OF THE CONDOR) as 
his screenwriter, McClory set about updating the story.  The result, 
which has a hokey, jokey feel, is possibly the worst-written Bond script 
of all (barring the satirical mess called CASINO ROYALE).  However, 
McClory did score a major coup by getting Connery on board for the 
production.
     Unfortunately, NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN is a poor excuse for the 
veteran actor's return.  The humor is over-the-top, the direction is 
pedestrian, and the storyline drags.  Were it not for the simple 
pleasure of seeing Connery playing 007 one more time, this film would 
have been nearly unwatchable.  All things considered, it's not a very 
good movie, but at least Connery's charisma salvages parts of it.
     While the skeleton of NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN resembles that of 
THUNDERBALL -- SPECTRE steals two nuclear missiles and blackmails the 
world -- many of the details are different.  In fact, those who haven't 
seen the 1965 film recently might not even recognize the connection.  
Certain character names remain the same, but personalities have changed.  
The main villain, Largo (Klaus Maria Brandauer), for example, is far 
more cultured this time around, and his mistress, Domino (Kim Basinger), 
is astonishingly naive.  Even Bond has changed subtly -- given Connery's 
age, he's better at delivering puns than punches.
     The hallmarks of every Bond film are the big, often-absurd action 
sequences.  THUNDERBALL has several, including a spectacular (if 
overlong) underwater climax.  NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN can boast only one -
- a wild car chase with Bond on a Q-designed motorbike -- and that's 
choreographed without flair.  With the exception of a few isolated 
incidents here and there, like the silly fight that demolishes a health 
clinic, this film fails to generate much excitement.  And the absence of 
the John Barry/Monty Norman "James Bond Theme" leaves a musical hole 
that Michel Legrand's feeble score cannot plug.
     The acting is variable.  Brandauer is effective as Largo and Max 
Von Sydow may be the best Blofeld of all.  Barbara Carrera is suitably 
sexy as the predatory Fatima.  Kim Basinger is a singular embarrassment, 
not exhibiting the slightest wisp of acting talent.  The usual "London 
group" of M (Edward Fox), Q (Alec McCowen), and Moneypenny (Pamela 
Salem) seem like impostors.  It's especially odd seeing someone other 
than Desmond Llewelyn tinkering with gadgets.  
     There was a great deal of hype in 1983 about the "dueling" Bonds -- 
Roger Moore's OCTOPUSSY versus Sean Connery's NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN.  
Ultimately, both entries were duds, with NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN offering 
slightly better entertainment based solely on Connery's presence.  
Nevertheless, it's a major disappointment that, having lured back the 
original 007, the film makers couldn't offer him something better than 
this drawn-out, hackneyed story.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Never say, "Watch this movie," to someone either. Not that anyone 
said that to me. In fact, I wish someone had said the opposite to me. I 
sat through two-plus hours of Sean Connery trying to pretend he was 
still young enough to be James Bond, more than twenty years after 
portraying 007 for the first time in DR. NO. His age makes the multiple 
fistfights and love scenes with beautiful women more absurd-looking than 
usual. I'd say the fact that six years later Sean Connery would start 
playing action heros' fathers (INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE and 
ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THIEVES) should clue you in on what I'm talking 
about. Why Connery couldn't leave the legend as it was instead of 
returning for the most bland Bond movie he's ever done is what puzzles 
me. No, I don't ponder the mysteries of the universe and the mortality 
of life. I ponder this for hours on end. 
     NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN is a remake of 1965's THUNDERBALL, one of the 
more mediocre efforts from the Connery years. (Why they couldn't redo 
GOLDFINGER or DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER is another thing I stay awake
nights pondering.) It keeps the basic premise of that movie--villain 
Largo, owner of an enormous yacht, steals two nuclear devices and 
threatens their detonation on the world if a ransom is not met--but 
changes almost everything else. 
     Bond is reactivated as a double-o agent, only to be shipped off to 
a health farm to purge him of his ancient habits of eating red meat and 
drinking martinis shaken not stirred (when it's so much better for your 
body to have them stirred and not shaken). He does engage in a couple 
other old habits of his--sex with his masseuse and a destructive fight 
with a goon trying to kill him. He also stumbles upon the evil nurse 
(Barbara Carrera) working for Largo. That's conquest number two for 
Bond, who attracts beautiful women like flies... actually, mosquitoes 
might be a better comparison when you think about it. 
     He then ends up playing a high-stakes video game with Largo (They 
had to take advantage of that 80's technology.) and doing the tango 
(vertically and horizontally) with Kim Basinger. Then there's the 
motorcycle chase, laser watch, Carrera's combustion and endless scuba 
diving. But it never seems like a full-fledged Bond movie. Besides the 
fact that Connery is over the action hero hill, British inventor Q. is 
played by a different actor and Moneypenny only has two lines. Wouldn't 
you think if Connery aged twenty years since the first movie that 
Moneypenny would be pushing fifty too? Nope, she's still unexplainably 
thirtyish. That's something else I'll be pondering at great lengths 
tonight.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Three years ago we started out our son Jeffrey, then almost 9, with his 
first Bond film (DR. NO) and then proceeded to see every "official" Bond 
picture in order right up through the latest (THE WORLD IS NOT ENOUGH).  
There are two Bond films that aren't part of the official Broccoli 
family canon -- CASINO ROYALE (1967) and NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN (1983).  
(The Broccoli family, the producers of the Bond series, guard the rights 
like Dobermans.)  We saved these two offshoots until after we had seen 
the "real" Bond pictures.  The two are pretty terrible.  CASINO ROYALE 
was so awful that I still haven't gotten around to writing a review of 
it.  
NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN begs the question of whether we are ready to feel 
sorry for James Bond.  Do we want a Bond who is unsure of himself?  A 
Bond who is a middle aged guy acting like a senior citizen?  And do we 
want Sean Connery, in his last appearance as 007, to impersonate a 
B-movie actor playing the role?  I think not.
This time, a way-past-his-prime Bond is off to a "health farm", sent 
there by M (Edward Fox, all of the supporting cast is different).  He is 
sent there to rid himself of "free radicals" in his system
Director Irvin Kershner can't manage to get a decent performance out of 
any of the cast, but, given how incredibly weak Lorenzo Semple Jr.'s 
script is, maybe it was hopeless.  The by-the-numbers script, which is a 
lame remake of THUNDERBALL, has SPECTRE stealing two nuclear bombs to 
use in a big extortion scheme.
Long, hackneyed fight sequences drag on and on, and the special effects 
are nothing to write home about.  Typical of what passes for a surprise 
in the unimaginative script is a pet snake thrown in the front seat of a 
car in order to cause an accident by distracting the driver.  
Even the Bond film's signature opening title sequence is completely 
missing.  And the dull music throughout isn't worthy of a Bond movie.
"I certainly hope we're going to have some gratuitous sex and violence," 
Q (Alec McCowen) tells 007.  "I hope so too," he replies.  In NEVER SAY 
NEVER AGAIN, we get these standard ingredients but the results are as 
flat as bread without yeast.  Bond movies should first and foremost be 
fun.  NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN is as dull as dishwater.
NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN runs a long 2:17.  It is rated PG for sexual 
situations and violence and would be acceptable for kids around 9 and 
up.
My son Jeffrey, now almost 12 and a big Bond fan, just sat staring at 
NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN.  He gave it ** only, he said, "because it was a 
Bond."  He complained about everything from the horrible music to the 
long, boring fights.  He said that it just didn't feel at all like a 
Bond film.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
