Title
Review for Virtuosity (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 8/4/95 
Running Length: 1:46 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sexual situations) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
     A general rule of summer film watching is to beware any August 
release featuring a major star.  The only reason for a distributor to 
hold back such a production is a lack of faith in the picture's ability 
to succeed in the highly-competitive early season, and that's usually an 
indication of a poor movie.  Denzel Washington is a big box office draw, 
and Paramount's decision to strand his latest, VIRTUOSITY, in the August 
marketplace isn't a vote of confidence.  Their uncertainty is well-
founded.  About the best thing that can be said about VIRTUOSITY is that 
it's director Brett Leonard's most impressive effort to date -- but 
considering that his previous features were the awful LAWNMOWER MAN and 
HIDEAWAY, such a statement is damning with faint praise. 
     The villain of the piece is Sid 6.7 (Russell Crowe), a "nanotech 
synthetic organism" with the combined personality of hundreds of serial 
killers.  Somewhere in his programmed mind are the psyches of Hitler, 
Jack the Ripper, Charles Manson, and the sadist responsible for the 
death of our hero's wife and daughter.  That hero is ex-cop Parker 
Barnes (Washington), who's serving time behind bars because he shot a 
few innocent bystanders in his quest to exterminate his family's 
murderer.  Now, through Sid 6.7, he gets a chance to redeem himself -- 
eliminate Sid and he can clear his record and his conscience. 
     The problem with this film is not the star.  Despite slumming in a 
picture far below the quality of his normal fare, Washington is still 
the best thing about VIRTUOSITY.  In fact, he injects some much needed 
energy into the proceedings.  Australian actor Russell Crowe is an 
adequate bad guy, although his Sid 6.7 lacks the vicious intensity with 
which Crowe imbued his ROMPER STOMPER skinhead.  Kelly Lynch, who plays 
Barnes' criminal psychologist partner, is dreadful -- and I'm not just 
talking about her hairdo.  We could care less what happens to her 
character.  At least we're spared a romance between her and Barnes. 
     VIRTUOSITY's failing is its plot.  What passes for a storyline is 
part recycled formula and part incomprehensible technobabble.  The film 
blunders along, usually making very little sense, waiting for the next 
(of many) action scenes.  Generally, these are well choreographed, even 
though they're familiar:  car chases, rooftop fist-fights and shootouts, 
and a child-in-danger scenario.  There's little in the way of 
originality.  Virtual reality (where Sid gets his start before crossing 
into our world) is rapidly becoming an overused motion picture plot 
device.   
     As was true of Sandra Bullock in THE NET, carrying VIRTUOSITY falls 
on Washington's shoulders.  For what it's worth, he makes the movie 
watchable.  Ultimately, however, he has little to work with in this 
dreary, film-by-numbers flick -- even RICOCHET offered more substance.  
Nevertheless, given Washington's presence and the promise of a virtual 
reality action story, VIRTUOSITY has some appeal -- provided, of course, 
the viewers aren't selective.   
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Theodore Potter
    And so, two more "cyber movies" invade theaters--VIRTUOSITY and THE
NET--really, two more formula action/thrillers.  There has been such a
saturation of action pictures in the last few years that their plots
seem almost irrelevant; the better ones are distinguished by their
style and the performance of the actors.  With this in mind, VIRTUOSITY
is easily the better ride, as THE NET seems satisfied in simply turning
the same ol' screws and plugging in old cliches.
     Denzel Washington and Sandra Bullock each start off as The
Sympathetic Action Hero, the '90's version of the cocky do-it-all
Stallone/Schwarzenegger type we were treated to in the '80's.
Washington is Parker Barnes, an ex-cop now doing time in a
way-too-futuristic-for-1999 prison (the obsession with the end of the
millenium is getting ridiculous!).  Denzel has to Come To Terms with
the murder of his family.  Bullock plays Angela Bennett, a computer
virus specialist who has to Come To Terms with growing up without a
father, with a mother who can't remember her, and with her own social
phobias.  They're both likeable, sympathetic characters, but the
general blandness of THE NET makes it easier to feel the screws being
turned on you.
     Kelly Lynch and Dennis Miller are Washington's and Bullock's
sidekicks, respectively.  While Lynch's character is there to
essentially move the plot along, Dennis Miller does his very best to
inject some fun into the lifeless "Net".  Every scene he was in had me
grinning, but of course, he is dispatched all too quickly by the
villains and the editors.
    As anyone who's seen a James Bond or Star Trek movie knows, these
movies sink or swim on the strength of their villains.  Russell Crowe
makes a real splash with Sid 6.7, a virtual reality simulation who
comes to life to have his brand of fun with Denzel.  Sid is a real
charmer, even while carrying around the combined personalities of some
200 killers, Hitler and Charles Manson to name a couple.  He knows
exactly which buttons to push on Denzel, and in turn the audience.
Crowe has real fun in the role (look for an Elvis leg shimmy in the
climax of the nightclub scene), while still turning in a multi-layered
performance where a lesser actor might have played it as a one-note.
     There are at least three different villains in THE NET, watering
down the already predictable chase sequences. (The obligatory
merry-go-round chase is here, in fine form.) If the script actually
allowed these "professionals" to eliminate Bullock's character (who
comes across a disk which could foil a corporate conspiracy, if you
really care) as swiftly as they dispatch the other nonessentials, the
movie wouldn't last fifteen minutes.  However, they're prone to what
Roger Ebert calls The Fallacy of the Talking Killer, where the hero is
at the villain's mercy, but the villain procrastinates just long enough
for the hero to figure out what's going on and find a way out.
    Neither of these pictures belong with the year's best, but
VIRTUOSITY wins out on its style and street smarts, while THE NET
almost succeeds in making the computers more interesting than all its
human counterparts combined.

Author
Joe Clark
You'd think the creators of a movie featuring both Denzel Washington
and Russell Crowe might have starstruck fags in mind, and in the case
of Virtuosity, you might be right. But prepare yourself for a slap in
the face even as the drool collects in your lap.
Afrikanski-Amerikanski heartthrob unit Denzel Washington plays Parker
Barnes, a murderer/ex-cop sprung from jail to track down and terminate
Sid 6.7, a composite of infamous killers' personality traits created
by a programmer named Lindenmeyer (Stephen Spinella, outfag actor of
Angels in America fame). Sid was devised as a virtual-reality
cop-training tool, but when the Sid project is threatened with
shutdown after a rather nasty software bug emerges, Lindenmeyer sets
Sid loose on the world with the help of nanotechnology, which turns a
virtual Sid into a real one formed from glass.
Sid is the real star here-- amoral and sexy, cold-blooded and
charming, murderous and fuckable. He's animated (literally) by Russell
Crowe, late of The Sum of Us; Crowe's wide-ranging acting talents
continue to impress, and the young Australian brilliantly imparts
Sid's single-minded intelligence, savoir-faire (savoir-tuer?), and
gleeful sadism. And as usual, Australians do better American accents
than Americans.
Sid's a bit of a rake, too-- and since he contains a dollop of Jeffrey
Dahmer, he has a way with the gents as well as the ladies. It's pretty
subtle-- a peck on the cheek; a remark that Denzel Washington is on
Sid's dance card; forcing a guy to strip so Sid can try on his suit--
but lighthearted and far less insidious than the rank aberrance of,
say, Scott Pritchard, the deranged queer military attache in No Way
Out. In a Van Damme-esque frisson of homoeroticism, Washington and
Crowe are both naked in the film (though not frontally); in a
shoot-'em-up movie, that's psychologically significant. (Who's the
main audience for action flicks? Guys. You figure it out.)
Still, Vito Russo is surely whirling in his grave at Lindenmeyer, a
stereotypical Hollywood sissy straight out of the '50s. Lindenmeyer's
faggotry is never stated outright, but we know the signs: Perennially
uptight in his three-piece suit, the friendless geek lives alone,
talks in a "typical gay voice" (is Spinella capable of any other
kind?), and jealously relishes how his creation toys with Madison
Carter (played by Kelly Lynch), a female criminologist who accompanies
Barnes on his quest for Sid. Oh, and he jerks off after conjuring a
naked Sid in the privacy of Lindenmeyer's own lab. This, we assume, is
a sign.
But getting all up in arms at yet another example of filmic homo
slander takes concentration, and Virtuosity's string of cinematic
references are quite enough to distract you. Early on, Denzel
Washington's dishevelment and demeanour recall his role as Steve Biko
in Cry Freedom. (What's more, Virtuosity's anticlimactic ending
mirrors that film's structure.) At one point Washington's fingers
linger over Lynch's as in Silence of the Lambs, but with the added
zing of miscegenation. Virtuosity's plot, editing and soundtrack are
Natural-Born Killers Lite. Saturday Night Fever is blatantly quoted in
a brief but funny vignette. Madison Carter is a science-fiction
reference: Edison Carter had a doppelgaenger named Max Headroom.
High-and-mighty Gitanes-smoking intellectual filmheads might dismiss
those quotations as a hollow pastiche, and indeed this is not The
Player, where the cavalcade of references made sense in a movie about
movies. But contrary to typical Hollywood formula, Washington and
Lynch don't get romantically involved, and for Washington there's no
happy ending. Virtuosity is a perplexing mishmash-- creative,
derivative, homoerotic, and homophobic all at once.

Author
Brian Koller
"Virtuosity" is a campy, action-packed thriller with some
elements of science fiction.  Despite much violence and
a few scenes that are difficult to believe, it is an
enjoyable and interesting film that is underrated and
worth a look.
Denzel Washington stars as an ex-cop with a troubled past:
while seeking revenge on a taunting mass-murderer who
killed his wife and daughter, he made the mistake of
killing some others as well.  He is now a prisoner, and
a volunteer in a bizarre virtual reality experiment
which has him tracking a sadistic and unpredictable
computerized serial killer (Russell Crowe).
A plot device has Crowe placed free in the real world: 
an android with some interesting character traits.  He has 
a massive need for attention, and his murders are intended 
as a lure for Washington, the only human that he has any 
respect for.  Desperate federal officials release Washington 
from prison to hunt Crowe down, a task that Washington 
accepts with reluctance but performs with relish.  He is 
joined by a criminal psychiatrist (Kelly Lynch) who matches 
Washington's humorless and determined disposition.
"Virtuosity" was a very enjoyable film for me to watch,
a definite guilty pleasure.  There are flaws however.
There is much gratuitous violence, most obviously in a
prison fight scene that demonstrates nothing except that
Washington is a tough guy that won't back down from a
fight.
Since I am a software programmer myself, I had trouble with
the fact that only *one* programmer was responsible for
Crowe's software (he would need a dozen engineers at least)
and of course that programmer is stereotyped as an
effiminate "mad scientist".  This engineer not only
frees this killer, but enjoys his subsequent exploits with
parental pride.
Washington's character has amazing resilence and courage,
and is even willing to engage in hand to hand combat with
the much stronger Crowe.  Okay, but can Washington outrun
the bullets from a half-dozen machine guns?
"Virtuosity" also has borrowed much of its plot from
"The Terminator".  Still, it is fun watching Crowe camp
it up, and Washington's intensity is compelling.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
D. Agnew
     Okay, this review is a little late for those who want to hear
about movies the weekend they came out.  Sorry about that.  On to the
review.
     Actually, that about says it all, but since this would be
rather short if it was just left at that....
     In a summer of grade-B action flicks, VIRTUOSITY stands out as a
bad movie.  MAD MAX WAAAAAY BEYOND THUNDERDOME (or WATERWORLD, as the
studio decided to call it) was the kind of movie we would expect to see
from Stallone, Ahnuld, etc.  BATMAN FOREVER was pretty bad, but not a
disaster.  The list goes on.  VIRTUOSITY, however, reaches new lows
even in such a crowd.
     Denzel Washington stars as an ex-cop, now con, who is a human
guinea pig in a virtual-reality experiment.  The "bad guy" is a
computer program amalgamation of 100+ mass murderers, although there
seems to be some confusion between mass murderers and serial
murderers.  In this movie, however, if they even managed to get all
murderers that is quite an accomplishment.  This evil computer program
manages to get a body built--don't ask how, it is one of the sillier
ideas in a movie rife with them--and predictably goes on a rampage.
Equally predicatably, our hero is the only person who can stop the
critter.  There is the mandatory damsel to get into distress, complete
with girl-who-can't-act playing her daughter (do they hold auditions
for bad child actors for these movies?), together with just about every
other B-movie plot device you have ever seen.
     The special effects are well done, and fit the story well.  That's
about the only good thing to say about the movie.  Even for this type
of flick, the holes are awful.  There are few obvious plot holes as
such, so this is not principally a script problem.  Rather, there are
any number of visual problems: things that just do not make sense;
things that obviously cannot work as shown; things that appear done in
a very peculiar way for no reason (except presumably to look
interesting on screen).  To the "You know you're in a bad movie
when..." list, add "when the bandage on the hero jumps location between
two shots of him going through a door."
     What, exactly, does a producer do?  If not the producer, is there
not someone who is in a position to say to the director, "Bob (

     One final note--what the hell was Denzel Washington doing in this
film?  I realize that every actor makes a mistake or two in choosing
roles, but it must have been clear pretty early what a piece of garbage
this was.  At the very least, he should have been told not to work so
hard: "Denzel, stop that emoting stuff.  This is a two-dimensional
character you're playing here, so stop that acting nonsense and let's
just shoot the scene and go for a beer."  God knows it looks like that
was the director's philosophy.
     All in all, I can't really say I enjoyed the movie.  Don't see
this turkey in the theatre.  If you happen someday to win a bunch of
free rentals at the local video store, and you use up most of them
renting every movie in the world in which you have any interest at all,
and still have some left over, and spot this one on the shelf--don't
rent it.

Author
Christopher Null
     In the not so distant future (1999 A.D.), Virtual Reality has
progressed to the point where the Virtual part isn't so clear.  With
the help of nanotechnology (read: really small) machines, VR
simulations can take on a physical form composed of millions of these
teeny robots.  When a semi-crazed engineer decides to bring his
ultimate bad guy VR program to life, he sneaks the chip into some of
this robotic glop.  Thus, Sid 6.7 is born.
     Sid (Russell Crowe) is version number 6.7 of a compilation of 183
personalities: mass murderers, serial killers, and Hitler-types.  The
ultimate villain, Sid is imbued with the ability to regenerate damage
at the touch of glass (silicon), almost superhuman powers, and the
cunning and mental imbalance of history's worst killers.  And who would
have thought ... when you let Sid out of the lab, Sid wants to kill.
Preferably on national television.
     Enter Parker Barnes (Denzel Washington), ex-cop sent up the river
for the accidental slaying of two people.  Turns out that Barnes is the
only one who has a chance of stopping Sid (see also, DEMOLITION MAN),
so out of the lock-up he comes.  Partnered with him is criminologist
Madison Carter (Kelly Lynch), who holds her own as the first lead
female I've seen in ages who *doesn't* get romantically entangled with
the hero.
     Full of wicked, cutting-edge special effects, VIRTUOSITY makes a
strong entry into a summer of lifeless films.  It takes a while to get
rolling, and the early character development is weak, but pretty soon,
everyone's caught up in this innovative take on the cat and mouse
game.  I won't spoil the twists, but the dynamic between Sid and Barnes
is quite interesting to watch.  Crowe, as Sid, is the real star,
playing the megalomaniacal killer with perfect poise and egocentrism,
eerily reminiscent of Malcolm McDowell's Alex from A CLOCKWORK ORANGE.
The only complaint I have is that with 183 professional killers inside
him, you'd think he'd be a better shot with a pistol.
     VIRTUOSITY has its flaws, though.  The main problem is that the
premise of Reality vs. Fantasy isn't taken as far as it could have been
(TOTAL RECALL was the last good example of this).  The filmmakers have
made it very clear which world we're in at all times, mainly because
they're really, really busy showing off what their visual effects guys
can do (expect an Oscar nomination).  Supporting cast is also boring
(even Academy Award winner Louise Fletcher (ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S
NEST) is wasted).
     Director Brett Leonard, who just came off the dismal HIDEAWAY, has
thankfully redeemed himself here.  Maybe the best recommendation I can
give is that VIRTUOSITY is still on my mind as I replay the intriguing
parts, and that's all too rare in Hollywood these days.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     More virtual-reality stuff from director Brett Leonard (HIDEAWAY,
THE LAWNMOWER MAN).  The year is 1999, Los Angeles, and convicts are
being used as test subjects against the VR criminal Sid 6.7 (Russell
Crowe).  Sid--a composite of 183 of the worst serial killers of all
time--was created for law enforcement purposes, but he plays too
rough.  Before the computerized killer can be shut down, he "escapes"
into reality via the body of a nano- machine android.  The only person
who can track him is an ex-cop convict (Denzel Washington) whose family
was killed by one of the aforementioned "psychos."
     There's lots to look at in VIRTOUSITY.  Leonard's hyperviolent
vision of a vaguely Fascist future is pretty cool.  (The LAPD drives
hummers.) The FX and production design are the best, and always
outshine the boring humans.  Without a single concern for
characterization, the old-fashioned story just chugs along merrily,
right up until the overwrought climax that features, yawn, two guys on
a roof with fists.  (Don't expect much suspense.)
     The cast is okay.  Russell Crowe breezes through his part with
minimal scenery-chewing, while Denzel Washington is a strong, bland
presence.  (He was *much* more fun in the underrated 1991
action-thriller RICOCHET, Joel Silver producer.) Other prominent
players include Kelly Lynch, Louise Fletcher (!), and William
Forsythe.  The latter sports a shaggy mustache and slicked hair that
makes him a dead ringer for Nick Nolte.  Or is it Pat Hingle??
CAMEO WATCH:  Yup, that's Traci Lords as a nightclub dancer.
     George Orwell meets E. B. White in this adorable Aussie import
about a pig who thinks he's a sheepdog.  Before you roll your eyes at
yet *another* animal comedy, check out director Chris Noonan's switched
perspective that puts the animals before the humans.  A combination of
live-action and animatronic tricks (from Jim Henson's Creature Shop)
make this barnyard gang appear to talk (via voice-overs).  The main
characters include a plucky pig, a neurotic duck, and a matriarchal
Border Collie. (We could all do without the Greek chorus of
squeaky-voiced rodents, though, who appear at odd intervals to announce
the title cards.)
     Co-produced and co-written by George Miller (MAD MAX), of all
people, from the children's book by Dick King-Smith.  Fine technical
credits throughout, including a delightful score that's based on one of
*my* favorite orchestral works, Camille Saint-Saens' "Symphony No.3 Op
78."
     Called a classic in its day, now, twenty years later, BELLE DU
JOUR comes across as chaste, stiff, and only mildly intriguing.  The
story centers on a young housewife (Catherine Deneuve) whose frigidity
toward her husband--coupled with her lavish, sadomasochistic
dreams--compels her to take a job at a local brothel.  (Apparently,
she's never heard of therapy.)  The silence is the most
disconcerting--director Luis Bunuel includes very little in the way of
incidental music or sound effects.
     We walked out after about an hour.  The slow, uninvolving
story--of an elephant's role in the Vietnam War--is based on a
real-life incident that was probably much more interesting than the
sanitized version presented here.  (This is ABC/Disney, where even
costar Denis Leary has to watch his mouth.)  The cast is agreeable,
though, and director Simon Wincer--how appropriate--finds the correct
tone to balance war and slapstick, which means that OPERATION DUMBO
DROP is probably okay for kids.  Pachydull.
