Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
Number of Reviews
34

Author
Steve Rhodes
RUSH HOUR, regardless of what you may have read, is NOT a Jackie Chan
movie.  Whereas it is true that Jackie Chan, one of the more engagingly
delightful actors around, does appear in the movie, it is not the
typical Chan project to showcase his comedic brand of martial arts
skills.
Director Brett Ratner, director of the widely-panned MONEY TALKS, lacks
much sense of action or comedic timing.  RUSH HOUR drifts aimlessly for
large portions, especially when Chan isn't in the frame.  The script by
Joel Cohen and Alec Sokolow has some good laughs, but it isn't written
nearly smart enough and frequently feels the need to sink to bad racial
humor.  Besides making the cops asinine, a key plot twist revolves
around whether to cut the red, green, or blue wire on the bomb.  As
always, the bomb squad, with a one chance in three of being right, will
cut the right wire.
People who haven't seen the talented Chan in action may not be as
disappointed as those who have become his fans.  Non-fans will
undoubtedly enjoy the few times Chan is allowed to cut loose, but those
who have seen him at his best will likely be frustrated.  Chan's charms
come as much from his sweet cherubic demeanor as his athletic skills and
daring stunts.  RUSH HOUR features Chan as an untypically dour character
whose seriousness gets in the way of his allure as an action hero with
childlike innocence.
The movie's plot concerns the kidnapping of the Chinese consul's
daughter in L.A.  When Hong Kong sends their number one cop, Detective
Inspector Lee (Jackie Chan), the FBI decides they don't want him messing
with their case.  The FBI agent in charge calls the L.A. Chief of Police
to get a cop to baby-sit Lee and keep him out of trouble and out of
their hair.
Philip Baker Hall and many other fine character actors are given nothing
to do in the picture but collect a paycheck.  (THE FULL MONTY's Tom
Wilkinson sleepwalks his way through the movie as a criminal
mastermind.)  Hall plays the L. A. Chief of Police who sends the FBI the
loudmouthed officer who has been driving him and everyone else crazy,
Detective James Carter.  Chris Tucker from MONEY TALKS plays the
fast-mouthed Carter.  Viewers' degree of tolerance for Tucker's brand of
over-the-top, slapstick humor will be a major determinate of how much
they like RUSH HOUR.  At times he is extremely funny.  In the best
scenes, as when he and Jackie share dance and martial arts moves to the
rock song "War," their chemistry clicks.
Most of the film plods along with the audience hoping that Jackie will
finally get some more screen time and be allowed to show off his skills.
The only completely successful part of the film is the series of
outtakes shown during the closing credits.  But any film where the
outtakes are dramatically better than the "intakes" is clearly in
trouble.  If the director had thrown out the script, left the set, and
just filmed the characters ad-libbing, he would have had a superior
product.
RUSH HOUR runs 1:36.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and profanity and
would be fine for kids around ten and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David Wilcock
A standard buddy movie with the added delight of Jackie Chan. The little guy
from Asia is also dynamite on screen, and that's no exception in this
western interpretation of a Chan film. The trailer explains this one's
concept the best; "when the fastest hands in the east meets the biggest
mouth in the west." The biggest mouth in the west happens to be new
sensation Chris Tucker, fresh from The Fifth Element. Chan and Tucker play
Detectives Lee and James Carter, who are both on the case of finding a young
Asian girl who has been kidnapped. The standard buddy movie stuff happens:
big explosions, 'witty' one liners, and a silly plot. Rush Hour is more
amiable than most buddy films, however, due to the chemistry between the two
leads, and Chans outrageously fast action sequences.
This is definitely Chans film, and he lights the screen every time he
appears. His action scenes are much funnier and faster than anything Arnie
or Stallone has done, and they also rely much less on guns. His English is
also very good, and away from action he's still likeable and delivers a
rounded performance. Tucker is more unpredictable, he's a more immature
Eddie Murphy. He's high pitch whine could grate, and he doesn't get the
lines he deserves, but he could be worse. Still, something clicked with
American audiences, as this film was one of the sleeper hits of 1998. The
supporting cast are the usual stereotypical police, and the 'love interest'
is the amusing Elizabeth Pena. If you're an action freak, don't worry: the
film doesn't even attempt to provide any character development (except the
standard scene where the mismatched cops 'bond.') Tom Wilkinson makes an
unexpected appearance fresh from The Full Monty, and an embarrassed looking
Chris Penn also pops up (probably as a favour to someone.)
There's some reasonable action, and some impressive explosions which make
Rush Hour all the more enjoyable, if somewhat predictable. The soundtrack is
good, featuring the usual Def Jam tunes to a funny sequence where Chan puts
Beach Boys on the radio. ("Don't ever touch a black mans radio" Tucker
retorts.) The writers, Ross LaManna and Jim Kouf, have churned off an
average script, but it is somewhat likeable. There's nothing here that
hasn't been seen before, however. Director Brett Ratner also handles things
pretty well, but again it's somewhat average.
Thankfully, Rush Hour, like it's title, never lags, due to Chans quirky
charm and Tuckers "Eddie Murphy" shtick. The plot may be middle of the road,
the character development non existent, and the film does seem to have
nowhere to go about three quarters into the film, but there's nothing
fundamentally flawed with the movie. Jackie Chan fans should certainly take
a look: for everyone else, Rush Hour is an entertaining waste of 97 minutes.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Pena.
Screenplay: Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna.
Director: Brett Ratner.
In RUSH HOUR, we have one of the oddest pairings of action movie heroes
since Lethal Weapon  - and it works! We have partly to thank Jackie Chan
for his gimic humour and Chris Tucker for being overtly hysterical. The
result is one of balance, when east meets west, in a fast paced, comical
action thriller which has both actors showing off what they are best at.
There have been comments that Jackie's hands and feet aren't as fast as
they used to be  give the man a break  he's forty plus! He may be
slower, but his choreography is also smoother and mature. As for Chris
Tucker, there isn't anyone to out speak him in this movie, which is just
as well, because the last thing you want is another smart mouth adding
to the cacophony of noise. Jackie is polite, sincere and nice, finely
balancing the rude, loud, manic Chris. If there was any other paring
outside these two actors, we may not have the success that is RUSH HOUR.
With a reasonable plot, fast action, humour and above all onscreen
chemistry between two unlikely co-workers  we have an assured hit on
our hands. Just watch out for the sequels in years to come, which is
likely to be far inferior to the parent.

Author
Steve Rhodes
RUSH HOUR, regardless of what you may have read, is NOT a Jackie Chan
movie.  Whereas it is true that Jackie Chan, one of the more engagingly
delightful actors around, does appear in the movie, it is not the
typical Chan project to showcase his comedic brand of martial arts
skills.
Director Brett Ratner, director of the widely-panned MONEY TALKS, lacks
much sense of action or comedic timing.  RUSH HOUR drifts aimlessly for
large portions, especially when Chan isn't in the frame.  The script by
Joel Cohen and Alec Sokolow has some good laughs, but it isn't written
nearly smart enough and frequently feels the need to sink to bad racial
humor.  Besides making the cops asinine, a key plot twist revolves
around whether to cut the red, green, or blue wire on the bomb.  As
always, the bomb squad, with a one chance in three of being right, will
cut the right wire.
People who haven't seen the talented Chan in action may not be as
disappointed as those who have become his fans.  Non-fans will
undoubtedly enjoy the few times Chan is allowed to cut loose, but those
who have seen him at his best will likely be frustrated.  Chan's charms
come as much from his sweet cherubic demeanor as his athletic skills and
daring stunts.  RUSH HOUR features Chan as an untypically dour character
whose seriousness gets in the way of his allure as an action hero with
childlike innocence.
The movie's plot concerns the kidnapping of the Chinese consul's
daughter in L.A.  When Hong Kong sends their number one cop, Detective
Inspector Lee (Jackie Chan), the FBI decides they don't want him messing
with their case.  The FBI agent in charge calls the L.A. Chief of Police
to get a cop to baby-sit Lee and keep him out of trouble and out of
their hair.
Philip Baker Hall and many other fine character actors are given nothing
to do in the picture but collect a paycheck.  (THE FULL MONTY's Tom
Wilkinson sleepwalks his way through the movie as a criminal
mastermind.)  Hall plays the L. A. Chief of Police who sends the FBI the
loudmouthed officer who has been driving him and everyone else crazy,
Detective James Carter.  Chris Tucker from MONEY TALKS plays the
fast-mouthed Carter.  Viewers' degree of tolerance for Tucker's brand of
over-the-top, slapstick humor will be a major determinate of how much
they like RUSH HOUR.  At times he is extremely funny.  In the best
scenes, as when he and Jackie share dance and martial arts moves to the
rock song "War," their chemistry clicks.
Most of the film plods along with the audience hoping that Jackie will
finally get some more screen time and be allowed to show off his skills.
The only completely successful part of the film is the series of
outtakes shown during the closing credits.  But any film where the
outtakes are dramatically better than the "intakes" is clearly in
trouble.  If the director had thrown out the script, left the set, and
just filmed the characters ad-libbing, he would have had a superior
product.
RUSH HOUR runs 1:36.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and profanity and
would be fine for kids around ten and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Brett Ratner
Writers: Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna (story by LaManna)
Starring: Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Peńa, Mark
Rolston, Tzi Ma, Rex Linn, Ken Leung, Julia Hsu, Chris Penn, Philip
Baker Hall
The buddy pic is easily one of the most tiresome and overused formulas
for a film we've ever had, but for some reason, the Hollywood machine
pumps a couple out every year, munundating all of us with half-assed
storylines, and mispaired pairs that make for a really unenjoyable
movie.  In theory, then, "Rush Hour" should be no exception.  Chris
Tucker is still a bit iffy, with his helium-affected motor mouth being
occasionally amusing, but never rather funny (do any of you remember how
the film stopped when he came on screen in "The Fifth Element?").  And
Jackie Chan's one of the world's greatest entertainers, a dare devil
comic action hero with the best coordination and control over all bodily
movements I've ever seen.  The pairing of these two just shouldn't work
out, and it should have been forgettable.
Well, yes, it's rather forgettable, but that doesn't mean it's not
actually charming when watching it.  "Rush Hour" is not a great buddy
pic like, say, "Lethal Weapon," and in about a year, everyone will be
wondering what all the fuss was about.  In short, this is no classic,
and I doubt there'll be a successful franchise.  But not every buddy
pic, or any film for that matter, has to do that.  Some can be just
entertaining, and for an hour and a half, it is.  If it's content to be
just good, then there's nothing really wrong with that.
"Rush Hour" takes advantage of the Hong Kong transfer of power in '97,
as a couple films this year have ("Chinese Box" and, most recently and
most appallingly, "Knock Off"), and uses the arrival of the Chinese
Consul in L.A. (Tzi Ma) to bring about an elaborate kidnapping scheme by
an underground villain, dubbed JunTao.  The FBI wants to help out, but
so do the LAPD, but the Consul wants to hire an old friend of his,
Inspector Lee (Chan), to come in.  He does, but the LAPD gives him over
to their most troublesome detective, James Carter (Tucker), a reckless,
goofy, but driven detective who doesn't like for one second that he's
been saddled with Lee.
"Rush Hour" wastes no time in utilizing the old cliches, including the
beloved first meeting where they hate eachother, but slowly growing to
respect their own traits and rub off on one another.  In one scene, they
go into a pool hall for some information, and after an admittingly funny
faux pas, Chan is found fighting the inhabitants of the ghetto hall,
much to the distaste of Tucker, but they gradually like eachother,
bringing about the scene where they swap personal likes and dislikes.
Oh, and the plot still has to be resolved, but you know it'll be handled
without the least bit of care.  You can guess who JunTao is fairly early
on (hint: he's British, therefore he's evil), and the scenes involving
the kidnapping instead come off as comic action sequences without a ton
of suspense, but a lot of joking around.  Tucker says a couple of
sarcastic remarks and his overblown self confidence gets him in some
trouble, and then Chan comes in with his Chaplin-esque comic timing,
then kicks some ass the way only he can.  And so forth.
What's surprising is that though this should be crap, and perhaps it is,
it doesn't come off that way.  The reason is because of Chan and
Tucker.  Their chemistry is extremely good, and they work well together
while still retaining each of their own respective individual traits
(even Tucker comes off as charmingly humorous).  Many buddy pics forget
about chemistry, but this is essential to creating a film that is
entertaining and engrossing, both which "Rush Hour" is, and why so many
people are actually enjoying it.  It's not because of the plot, which is
so arbitrary it's a wonder actors like Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Peńa,
and Philip Baker Hall would sign on for any other reason than an easy
pay check.
But Chan and Tucker aren't the only reason this is likable.  It has a
light feel to it that makes it easier to intake, and allows goodness to
seep in not just from Chan and Tucker, but also from other members of
the cast and other assortment facets of the film.  Although cliched and
not terribly suspenseful, the action sequences are surprisingly adept
and supply entertainment.  I liked some of those added nuances, like the
handling of the kidnapped daughter as a real form of personality (when
saved by Chan, she kicks him for not saving her earlier).  And
Wilkinson, a great actor who's been in everything these days (notably
"The Full Monty," in which he was brilliant), has an icy dignity he
brings to the role of the villain, as if he's being a good sport about
being in his first big American movie ("I know I'm doing this mostly for
money and exposure, but what the hell - I'll have some real fun with
this role.").
But when you really come down to it, it's mostly the buddy chemistry
that keeps this afloat.  It lives and dies with the casting of the
leads, and luckily Chan and Tucker are so amiable apart and together
that the film is a slight success.  It's not incredibly ambitious, but
for awhile, it's mildly distracting, which is more than you can say for
a lot of the films Hollywood is putting out these days, I suppose.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
When you ask someone why they liked 'Rush Hour', the standard answer
will probably be something like: "Lots of action!"  "Lots of comedy!"
"Great match-up of stars like Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker!"
Unfortunately, the film has everything we've seen before and the picture
looks for a new twist and while it comes up somewhat successful, it's
predictable formula doesn't quite pull it off.  'Rush Hour' is for the
movie goer who sees about five movies a year and a movie critic, whether
amateur or professional, always looks for that little extra edge and it
isn't found here.  The film is entertaining on the surface but
eventually you'll be looking at your watch after about the first 45
minutes.
Since Jackie Chan assaulted our senses with his North American
breakthrough film 'Rumble in the Bronx' in 1996, he has been on a roll,
even though film distributors have released some of his other films
since then that have actually been released in his native land years
before and the films, when released here in North America, were actually
six or seven years old.  Nobody does present day martial arts better
than Jackie Chan and I have a lot of respect for him and his ability.
Chris Tucker annoyed the heck out of me in 1997's 'The Fifth Element'
with that high pitched voice of his used in robotic fashion as a talk
show host 250 years in the future.  Tucker is very funny and has a lot
of potential and I see a great future in the movies for him but a new
angle must be found for his success to continue.  'Stakeout', '48 hrs.'
etc. etc.  Films where the cops get together with their colleagues or
other helpful people in order to catch the bad guys.  Let's do it again!
Tucker is an L.A. cop with his own brand of ease on the job who dances
after blowing up a getaway car and after his boss tells him he destroyed
an entire city block, Tucker says:  "That area was messed up anyway."
The Chinese consulate to Los Angeles has his little daughter kidnapped
and he calls upon a good friend of his, a Hong Kong police office played
in classic fashion by Jackie Chan.  The FBI want Chan kept out of the
picture and use Tucker to keep Chan occupied so he won't get in the way
of their domestic law enforcement.  That's it.  That's all.  That's the
whole story, folks!
The film moves well without becoming repetitive in its humour but it
can't escape its formula origins and because of that it fails.  Director
Brett Ratner makes the classic formula movie mistake by allowing his
actors to improvise too much instead of following a strict pattern style
of direction.  The screenplay by Jim Jim Kouf and Ross Lamanna has some
funny moments but it isn't a hard screenplay to write, let alone
execute.
Am I asking you to avoid 'Rush Hour'.  No.  Many of you will find it
entertaining but if your taste is a little high brow for 8 dollars then,
yes, avoid it at all costs.  It's not a bad secondary feature at the
drive-in and will become the perfect Saturday night video movie in a few
months.  It's just that kind of flick.
Visit the new home of FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Brett Ratner
Cast:  Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Pena, Tzi Ma,
Julia Hsu
Screenplay:  Jim Kouf
Producers:  Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman, Arthur M. Sarkissian
Runtime:  97 min.
US Distribution:  New Line Cinema
Rated PG-13:  action violence, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
It's hard to imagine sitting through anything starring Jackie Chan and
not finding at least some kind of guilty enjoyment from the
proceedings.  This has happened recently, as American audiences have
gotten some of his five-year old hits on the big screen.  Some of his
films are mediocre, and some of them are well-made fluff.  Rush Hour is
the first film I've seen of his (and I haven't seen a lot, so don't be
too harsh on me) that actually strikes me as a film with a purpose. 
Sure, it's a buddy-cop movie in the spirit of Lethal Weapon, but it has
all the components for a successful formula:  big laughs and light
action.  It's a hugely appealing film, one that passes swiftly and
leaves you feeling good.
Oh, and I forgot to mention that it also stars Chris Tucker.  Lots of
people hate Tucker; I'm not one of them.  I did find him excessive and
grating in The Fifth Element, but I've found him likable in the numerous
interviews I've witnessed.  And he made me laugh really hard in Rush
Hour.  Here you have a superb combination of comic elements -- Chan,
with his goofy, brilliant physical comedy, and Tucker, with his
obnoxious and perfectly-timed verbal comedy.  Rush Hour works
effortlessly as an elaborate canvas for two skilled comedic artists.
The story, however, is pretty dumb.  I almost let it bother me, but the
film is too skillfully executed to dislike.  I've gotten used to the
idea that most action films are required to have dumb stories, but that
doesn't stop me from wishing otherwise.  Tucker plays James Carter (why
did they pick that name?), a loud-mouthed cop who makes you wonder how
he ever got the job.  A bunch of bad Chinese guys come to the states and
kidnap a young girl named Soo Yung (Julia Hsu), daughter of the Chinese
consul in the United States.  Chan plays Chinese cop Lee, who comes in
from China to help with the case.  
When the FBI assumes control, and Carter is assigned to look after Lee,
the two engage in a culture clash.  It's a well-intentioned culture
clash, with all kinds of nifty themes to keep the audience from getting
too offended.  Naturally, our two heroes have become good friends, and
their main goal is to save Soo Yung.  For some reason, despite their
progress, the FBI doesn't want them helping, and they are forced to work
alone on the case, which ends up a destructive endeavor.  Overall, none
of this is very important.  My irritation with the banality of the story
was fairly intense through half the film, but by the end, I was
successfully diverted.  
When you realize that the story is dumb and deserves no thought, it
becomes clear that Rush Hour is composed of only a few prominent
elements:  the performances of the two leads, and the direction. 
Director Brett Ratner is best described as competent, for though he
doesn't mess anything up and make the film needlessly confusing and
tricky, he adds almost no interest to the story.  It's paced well, which
is a plus, but there's no style in his direction.  It also would have
been nice if he had been a little more consciousness of the silly story,
rather than play it straight.
Nonetheless, Chan and Tucker are the stars, and they carry the mediocre
script with ease.  Chan is very funny when he's speaking English (the
outtakes at the end are really entertaining), and though there aren't a
lot of action sequences (the ones that are present are clearly present
to showcase Chan's talents), he makes the best of all of his dialogue. 
He's just a likable guy to watch, and Rush Hour caters to that quality. 
Tucker, on the other hand, is a surprise:  I expected him to be
irritating, but he's not.  He's funny, his lines are funny, the faces he
makes are funny, and the way he uses his screeching-tires voice is
funny.  
And, because of these two talented men, Rush Hour is funny.  It's a
film that is everything it aspires to be; it doesn't skimp on the story
and direction as much as it simply diminishes the importance of those
elements.  Let's face it:  you're going to see this film to watch two
comedians in action.  And since these comedians are so good at what they
do, there's basically no way you won't like the film.  I certainly liked
the film, and I approached it with a solid sense of uncertainty.  Chan
met my expectations, and Tucker exceeded them -- these two guys are
worth watching in anything.

Author
David Sunga
Directed by: Brett Ratner
Written by: Ross LaManna (story) and Jim Kouf (screenplay) .
Ingredients: Reckless cop teamed with Hong Kong detective, comedy,
pratfalls, kidnapped kid
Starring: Chris Tucker, Jackie Chan, Julia Hsu, 
Synopsis: 
RUSH HOUR is a standard cop buddy plot uplifted by the presence of its
two stars: martial arts funny man Jackie Chan and comedian Chris Tucker.
Tucker plays main character James Carter, an outlandish and narcissistic
Los Angeles cop who is irritating to his superiors. As a result of their
displeasure, Carter is assigned to baby-sit a visiting Hong Kong
detective named Lee (Jackie Chan) whom the authorities want to keep out
of the way as they investigate the kidnapping of Soo Yung (Julia Hsu in
her acting debut), the young child of Lee's friend Chinese Consul Han
(Tzi Ma). But Carter and his new acquaintance Detective Lee don't stay
out of the investigation. They bicker over ethnic misunderstandings and
botch things up, but finally work as a team to solve the case. 
Opinion:
I were a teacher giving grades, Tucker would get a B. He's good and
funny, but his loquacious screeching is sometimes a bit much.
On the other hand, RUSH HOUR is proof positive that America is finally
catching on to the world's appreciation international megastar Jackie
Chan. Longtime Chan fans should be forewarned RUSH HOUR isn't a Jackie
Chan or Hong Kong picture; it's a Hollywood buddy formula where Chan is
merely the co-star. But despite not being the main character, Chan still
gets plenty of chances to amuse us by hanging from dangerous ledges,
climbing, leaping, kicking, or consoling a little girl. Chan gets an A,
and if there's a sequel, I hope he gets more air time.
RUSH HOUR is lively, entertaining, and will appeal to people of all ages
and ethnicities. The bad guys aren't impressive, and the plot is
routine, but Tucker and Chan provide sufficient charisma, comic lines,
timing, and acrobatics to give the formula enough enjoyable moments. I
took my parents to see it, and they loved it. 

Author
Matt Williams
Brett Ratner, the director behind Chris Tucker's surprisingly funny
buddy comedy Money Talks, tackles yet another Chris Tucker buddy comedy
with Rush Hour.  Can lightning strike twice? Yes, particularly when
Jackie Chan gets involved.
James Carter (Chris Tucker) is a fast-talking streetwise cop who only
hates one thing more than authority:  the idea of having a partner.
Hmmm...since this is a buddy cop movie, guess what...he's going to get
one.
That partner is Detective Lee (Jackie Chan), Hong Kong's best detective.
Lee is summoned to the United States when his friend, and former boss,
Consul Han (Tzi Ma) has a problem.  His young daughter, Soo Yung (Julia
Hsu), has been kidnapped by a Hong Kong criminal organization seeking
revenge against Han.
The F.B.I. don't want to babysit a foreign cop, so they draft Carter for
the duty.  However, neither Carter nor Lee are content to stay on the
sidelines, and they begin pursuing leads of their own.
In his first fully American movie (at least the first since his American
"discovery"), Jackie Chan might not have the same volume of stunts as
usual, but the quality is just as good.  When watching the film, prepare
to be awestruck several times.
But Rush Hour takes the traditional Jackie Chan actionfest one step
further by adding something usually missing in his films:  good, quality
dialogue. And this is where Chris Tucker really shines.  His
fast-talking wit is nearly as spectacular as Jackie's stunts.
It's a shame that these two dynamic performers, the excellent stuntwork,
and all the humor are put in the service of such a mundane plot.  There
haven't been any fresh developments in the buddy-cop genre since the
mid-1980s, yet it is this old stalwart that we confront yet again.  And
that's not the only hoary cliche which rears its head here.  No, the
film is chock full of them.  (We even meet a demolitions expert, played
by Elizabeth Pena, whose career has entirely been made by making that
50-50 gamble: the red wire or the blue wire.)
But, still, there's more innovation here than in most of Jackie Chan's
recent efforts, and his pairing with the wildly funny Chris Tucker makes
this one worth watching despite the familiar plotting.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
David E. Smith
Rush Hour (1998) - Jackie Chan, and a bunch of people that aren't as cool
as him
   You have to give Jackie Chan some credit. He's absolutely determined
   to break into the American action-star market, but has he gone too far
   with "Rush Hour"?
   Neither Inspector Lee (Chan) nor Detective Carter (Chris Tucker) are
   used to working with partners, and both have reputations for causing
   more trouble than they're worth at times. So when they're both
   assigned to work on the same case - the kidnapping of a Chinese
   consul's daughter - the FBI agent in charge (Tom Wilkinson) just tries
   to get them both out of the way. They keep getting in the way, of
   course, doing their best to solve the case on their own.
   This new film divorces Chan from many of the elements that made him a
   minor celebrity in the States with a small but devoted following. Gone
   are the rest of the Hong Kong action stars who, like Chan, perform
   their own stunts; gone are the equally famous Chinese directors and
   their sometimes-bizarre camera styles.
   More traditional, and therfore more predictable, American elements
   take their place. The humor is much more pedestrian, dominated by the
   inevitable "fish out of water" humor as the stereotypical uber-hip
   L.A. cop (Tucker) is forced to work with the quiet professional
   (Chan). The fights are more American, with far more gunplay than the
   typical Chan movie.
   Tucker, best remembered for his role as the bizarre, cross-dressing
   reporter from "The Fifth Element," once again flexes his comedic
   muscles to the fullest. His snappy wit is a bit risque at times but
   keeps the movie rolling nicely along. This is contrasted with the more
   subtle, drier humor of Chan, and it makes for a brilliant combination.
   The two play off each other well, helping ensure you'll leave the
   theater with a smile.
   You want action? "Rush Hour" has some of that, too. It's standard
   action-movie fare, nothing spectacular. In particular, Chan's
   incredible talent is underutilized here. (You want real action, go
   rent "Supercop.") But the stunts are all competently done (even if
   most of the cast, save Chan, called for stunt doubles).
   "Rush Hour" is tongue-in-cheek, but so are most of Chan's movies. And
   his "straight man" to Tucker's more overt comedy only helps. Don't
   take it too seriously, and you'll have a great time at this movie.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "RUSH HOUR" (New Line Cinema)
        Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker make like Mel Gibson and Danny
Glover in that they're a mis-matched, odd-couple partners in this cop
caper. Chan, as an ace Hong Kong detective, is big in the martial
arts, while Tucker's weapon-of-choice is his big, bad mouth.
Reluctantly paired with each other, they're assigned to rescue a
Chinese diplomat's 10 year-old daughter who has been kidnapped by
Asian thugs in Los Angeles. Screenwriters Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna,
along with director Brett Ratner, must have watched all the "Lethal
Weapon" pictures repeatedly because there's little that's original
here, except perhaps some Asian ethnic cracks like "I been lookin' for
your sweet-and-sour chicken ass!"  Poor Jackie Chan, a Buster
Keaton-like hero whose screen career once literally went down the
tube, gets only one significant scene in which he fights off a group
of attackers while trying to prop up a fragile, antique vase. "Fifteen
years ago, I really give up the American market," he says, recalling
playing a racecar driver in "Cannonball Run." "At that time, I don't
think the audience really accept me, this kind of fighting, this kind
of comedy, so I went back to Asia, making my Asian films. Now, I give
Hollywood another chance." Chan's big beef with studio movie-making is
their caution with dangerous stunts. "They waste two hours to check
all the things. If I get hurt, the company really scared I'm suing
it." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rush Hour" is a
cliche-filled, copy-cat 4. The funniest bits are the blooper out-takes
at its conclusion but, when I saw it, not that many people stayed in
the theater long enough to laugh.

Author
Brian Takeshita
Okay, let me first start off by saying that Jackie Chan is really a
force to be reckoned with.  I mean, he's funny, he's quick, he's an
action superstar, and the guy legitimizes everything he does because
he, unlike any American tough guy wannabe, does his own stunts.  It's
a wonder that he hadn't migrated from Hong Kong years ago and blew
everybody else out of the Hollywood market.  Since I figured Chan was
the best thing RUSH HOUR brought to the table, I was very encouraged
to see that the movie opened up with a showcase for Chan's physical
talent.  Here's the setup:  Chan plays Detective Inspector Lee, one of
Hong Kong's best special service cops.  He single-handedly foils an
operation to smuggle some of the greatest artistic and cultural
Chinese treasures out of the city just before Hong Kong is handed over
to China.  However, the crime boss in charge, known only by the name
of Juntao, is nowhere to be seen, and his right-hand man gets away.
As much as Lee is an asset to the Hong Kong Police, so is Detective
James Carter (Chris Tucker) a liability to the LAPD.  So when the
daughter of Chinese Consul Han (Tzi Ma) is kidnapped in Los Angeles by
the relocated Juntao mob and held for ransom, Lee is called in from
China by the Consul, while Carter is given the unprestigious job of
keeping him out of the FBI's hair.  When Lee convinces Carter of his
earnestness in returning the little girl to safety, the two of them
embark on their own investigation.
The tagline for RUSH HOUR is, "The Fastest Hands in the East Meet the
Biggest Mouth in the West."  Brother, you're not kidding.  Chris
Tucker really pushes the envelope when it comes to being an obnoxious
loudmouth, but it's done in such an over-the-top way that it works.
You get the sense that the character of Carter, for all his comical
performance, doesn't for one moment doubt that he's "The Man," and
it's that attitude of taking himself seriously and believing he's in
total control that makes him so funny.
Chan, on the other hand, shines when he is out of his element.
Although Lee initially exudes the persona of a calm, trained
professional, he later reveals his innocence in many areas as he's led
around by Carter.  This coping with the unexpected is trademark Chan,
who always seems like he's only just managing to keep his head above
water, whether in dealing with other police officers, or when in a
fight with one of the bad guys.  It's that kind of desperation that
makes you laugh at him, then it's that capacity to deal with the
situation that makes you marvel at his ability.
Luckily, RUSH HOUR has a great asset in the interaction between Carter
and Lee.  This is particularly important because when you break it
down, the film is a very conventional buddy movie, where the buddies
come from very different sides of the tracks.  There's the initial
mistrust, the learning from each other, the revelation by each
character that the other is an okay guy after all, and the climax
where one saves the other's life, cementing the relationship.  We've
been there, done that, but in this case we're given something a little
more unusual to spice up the old formula.  The closest thing I can
think of would be SHOWDOWN IN LITTLE TOKYO with Dolph Lundgren and
Brandon Lee, but it didn't go for the comedy like RUSH HOUR does.
Sure, some of the scenes are pretty corny, like when Carter attempts
to teach Lee to dance, but they are a bunch of gems nevertheless.
You know, it would have been easy to stuff the film with songs like
Carl Douglas's "Kung Fu Fighting," but in keeping with the "cops
against organized crime" motif, director Brett Ratner instead chose to
have Lalo Schifrin write the score.  This is the same guy who composed
the themes for "The Man from U.N.C.L.E.," "Mission:  Impossible,"
"Starsky and Hutch," and the Dirty Harry movies.  Once more utilizing
a lot of hi-hat and scratch guitar, now how cool is that?
Okay, so you've got great talents playing two interesting characters,
Jackie Chan action, good chemistry, and cool music.  What's the
downside?  For one thing, the movie is severely predictable.  If the
main bad guy's identity remains a mystery for a good portion of the
film, it's a good bet he's going to end up being someone everyone else
thought was one of the good guys.  If a criminal played by a decently
famous actor is put away at the beginning of the movie, there's a good
chance we'll see him again before the film is through.  If the bad guy
is climbing to any sufficient height and trying to make his getaway
with a case of cash, oh you know the case will open up and the
contents will fall like confetti.
Worst of all, however, is the fact that Ratner doesn't know how to
effectively shoot Chan's action shots.  Ratner uses quick cuts,
close-ups, a moving camera, and different angles, which would normally
be used to cover up the deficiencies in normal Hollywood action, but
Chan is both such an artist and technician that the best way to shoot
one of his sequences is to stand back and catch everything.  He'll do
it all right before your eyes.  Instead, the conventional shooting
makes Chan's movements less impressive, and it's too bad that Ratner
undermines one of the biggest attractions of the movie in this way,
unnecessarily bringing the film down a few notches.
Even with the aforementioned deficiencies, RUSH HOUR is the best
Jackie Chan vehicle released for the mainstream American audience to
date.  As a bonus, they even include the out-takes over the end
credits, just like in Chan's Hong Kong films.  How can you not like
that?

Author
Scott Renshaw
RUSH HOUR
(New Line)
Starring:  Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Pena.
Screenplay:  Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna.
Producers:  Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman and Arthur M. Sarkissian.
Director:  Brett Ratner.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity)
Running Time:  96 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Life, they say, is all about trade-offs, but RUSH HOUR asks for a
trade-off that just doesn't seem fair:  in order to watch Jackie Chan in
action, you've gotta listen to Chris Tucker in action.  Chan is one of the
most engaging performers in films, a creater of ingenious martial artistry
whose personal charm makes his jaw-dropping stunt work even more fun to
watch.  Tucker, on the other hand, may be the funniest guy on the planet
some day, but I'll never know it until he stops reading every line in the
mellifluous tones usually associated with a circular saw.  Chan is great;
Tucker is grating.
     RUSH HOUR balances the two nearly perfectly, creating a synthesis
that is pure cinematic mediocrity.  The premise, squeezed through the
Play-Doh Fun Factory of buddy-action plotting, casts Tucker as LAPD
Detective James Carter, a loose cannon perpetually aggravating his
straight-laced captain (as though there were any other kind).  When the
kidnapping of a Chinese diplomat's daughter prompts the diplomat to bring
in his old friend, Hong Kong Detective Lee (Chan) to help with the case,
the FBI looks for a sucker -- er, volunteer -- to keep Lee out of the way
of the "real" investigation.  Thus fish-out-of-water Lee ends up cruising
the L.A. underworld as Carter tries to get out of trouble by solving the
case himself; thus more-mouth-than-method Carter needs Lee's fast hands
and feet to save his skin again and again.
     I suspect Tucker might have been thinking of RUSH HOUR as his BEVERLY
HILLS COP, a chance to play the street-wise rebel with a badge in an
action comedy setting.  There's no question that he has his adherents --
the folks in the theater who were howling with glee and stomping their
feet at his every bug-eyed shriek -- but I can't see Tucker crossing over
into the kind of broad popularity enjoyed by Eddie Murphy.  The reason is
quite simple:  where Murphy generally seems amused by the foibles of his
on-screen foils, Tucker seems perpetually irritated.  Every canned insult
he spews makes him that much more unpleasant to spend time with -- not
exactly the vibe you're looking for in a leading man.
     He should take a few lessons from his co-star, who virtually defines
"pleasant to spend time with."  Director Brett Ratner may not have the
visual flair of Chan's frequent collaborator Stanley Tong, but he's smart
enough to get out of the way and let Chan do his thing (some sloppy
editing choices notwithstanding).  A Jackie Chan fight sequence still has
the ability to dazzle the way no other fight sequence can, mixing silly
bits of business with lighting-fast choreography.  RUSH HOUR is nothing
but fun when it's nothing but a showcase for Chan, whether he's fighting
bad guys while trying to protect a priceless piece of Chinese pottery from
harm, or scaling walls and trees in a manner more feline than human.
     On paper, the collaboration between Chan and Tucker probably looked
like an ideal match of opposites -- one the self-deprecating physical
comedian, the other the self-aggrandizing verbal comedian.  Their styles,
unfortunately, collide where they should commingle.  RUSH HOUR is less a
Jackie Chan/Chris Tucker film than it is a Jackie Chan film alternating
with a Chris Tucker film, each performer taking turns yanking the
predictable material into his preferred comfort zone.  If you're a fan of
both lead actors, you'll probably get the double-barreled rush the makers
of RUSH HOUR were aiming for.  If you're like me, you'll find it misfiring
as often as it hits its target.  Only when Chan was in the spotlight could
I ignore the mundane plot points, including an absurdly obviousl
"revelation" of the villain's identity and an oh-by-the-way sub-plot
involving an inexperienced bomb squad cop (Elizabeth Pena).  Only then
could I safely and happily suspend my disbelief.  Only then could I forget
what I had been forced to endure from the other half of the star tandem.
Trade-offs can be so cruel.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Let me get this off my chest before we go any further: I hate
Chris Tucker.  I mean it.  I'd love nothing more than to wrap my
hands around his goofy little neck and just SQUEEZE, giggling with
maniacal laughter as his face contorts into an expression even more
spastic than the one he usually wears.  I'm not a violent person by
nature, but there's just something about his "fingernails on a
chalkboard" voice, coupled with his jittery "let me get right in your
face" attitude, that grates on every fiber of my being.
        By contrast, I adore Jackie Chan; his sunny screen
personality and hilarious physical humor can win over even the most
jaded critic.  Rarely seen without his trademark grin, Chan is one of
those rare celebrities (like Leslie Neilsen, during his heyday) whose
mere appearance on the screen can cause you to smile: even if he's
not doing anything funny, your face feels the need to prepare itself
for the laughter it knows is forthcoming.  Chan's secret: he plays UP
to the audience, going so far as to perform all his own stunts because
(as he claimed in a recent interview), "that's what the fans expect."
Now THAT'S dedication to one's craft.
        The pairing of these two vastly different comedians is an
intriguing concept, one that could've succeeded brilliantly or failed
miserably.  Did director Brett Ratner channel Chan and Tucker's
conflicting comedic styles into a coherent film?  Happily, yes.
"Rush Hour" is a wild ride, a pleasant, giddy marriage of mirth and
action, with Chan's physical humor serving as a nice counterpoint to
Tucker's loud, verbal comedy.
        James Carter (Tucker) is a Los Angeles cop with a penchant
for annoying his boss, his co-workers, and pretty much everyone else
he encounters.  After his latest undercover assignment ends in
disaster, Carter's superiors are looking for an excuse to get him out
of their hair for a while.  Their chance arrives when the daughter of
a wealthy Hong Kong politician is abducted.  The politician, Mr. Han
(Tzi Ma), distrusts the American law enforcement agencies and wishes
to bring in one of his own men: Detective Lee (Chan).  The American
authorities instruct Carter and Lee to partner up, intending to keep
the bumbling pair busy with grunt work, and thus out of the way of
the "real" investigation.  Our heroes, naturally, have other plans.
        "Rush Hour" crackles with energy and spirit, and director
Ratner extracts great performances from his two leads.  Tucker is
more restrained here than his hammy appearance in "The Fifth
Element," but nowhere near the level of his fine (borderline serious)
work in Tarantino's "Jackie Brown"; nonetheless, he's entertaining
enough that I tended to find myself laughing rather than wincing.
(Incidentally, Tucker gets the film's funniest line: after his
supervisor angrily announces that Tucker's shenanigans have resulted
in the destruction of police evidence, Tucker meekly retorts: "We
still got a little bit left.")  I think I know why he didn't really
bother me this time around: he's playing a character who's SUPPOSED
to be obnoxious and annoying, and he performs the role with gusto.
I guess I only find him infuriating when he's injecting that kind of
attitude into a part that doesn't really need it, such as his "Fifth
Element" character.
        Chan is also in top form: his stunts are as impressive as
ever, though perhaps less frequent than we've come to expect
(reportedly at his insurance company's insistence); still, what's
here is wonderful.  The two finest moments for me were the pool hall
fight sequence, and the surrealistic art gallery battle.  And yes,
like all of Chan's films, we're treated to a hilarious collection of
outtakes and bloopers at the end of the final reel.
        One of the reasons "Rush Hour" is such marvelous fun is the
fact that the film is steadfastly unconcerned with anything other
than telling its story; therefore, it does so with great flourish.
Granted, the plot is nothing new: we have two mismatched cops who
intensely dislike each other, but must nonetheless work together to
solve a case.  Over the course of their investigation, each will
naturally develop a mutual respect and admiration for the other.
Toss in the standard "guess which of the good guys is really the
villain" plot, as well as the cliched "kidnapped daughter" storyline.
The final cherry on top: the mandatory scene in which someone has to
decide which wire to cut in order to defuse a bomb, a scene we've
witnessed in "Armageddon" and countless other action movies.
        Is "Rush Hour" breathtakingly original?  Hardly.  Is it a
whole lot of fun?  Very much so.  The laughs are frequent, the action
is first-rate... and Jackie Chan's passionnate rendition of the '60s
rock anthem "War" is worth the price of admission by itself.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Rush Hour (1998) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker.
 The good news, especially for fans of Jackie Chan, is that Rush Hour again
spotlights this international favorite's athleticism and sly humor.
 However, this is all offset by having Chan work with the equally obnoxious
and grating Chris Tucker.
 Tucker is supposed to be a comedian, but he's as funny as a case of
hemorrhoids. His bug-eyed, fast-talking shtick is supposed to be hip, but
it's nothing but juvenile blathering.
 In fact, Rush Hour would have been a much better action flick if Tucker
had been eliminated all together.
 As it is, this story centering around the recovery of a Chinese diplomat's
kidnapped daughter works well when Chan is on the screen. What Fred Astaire
and Gene Kelly were to movie dancing, Chan is to the martial arts. His
choreographed movements are like a ballistic ballet.
 Chan always brings a sly sense of humor to his roles, as if winking at the
audience to let them know he's in on the joke, that it's only a movie. He
is disarming and appealing.
 Tucker, on the other hand, reminds me of that old John Belushi Saturday
Night Live sketch about the guest who wouldn't leave. Whenever this
bug-eyed, motor-mouthed moron is on the screen, you want to grab a fly
swatter or other utensil and shoo him off or else run out to the concession
stand.
 Tucker is trying to copy the early Eddie Murphy, but he not only lacks
Murphy's charm, but Murphy's intelligence and charisma.
 One of Rush Hour's biggest questions is how did a big-mouth screw-up such
as Tucker's James Carter ever become a cop - even the Los Angeles police
department must have some standards.
 But Rush Hour, for the most part, rises above Tucker's antics. And while
it is cartoonish, it also is fun, and that is due mostly to Chan. Without
him, Rush Hour, even at about 90 minutes, would have been a broken-down
Edsel in a long line of stalled traffic.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
I seem to be in a minority of one, but Chris Tucker's outrageous mannerisms
are beginning to grow on me.  When he appeared in THE FIFTH ELEMENT as an
over-the-top radio DJ, my senses misfired: my brain wasn't properly able to
compute what I was seeing until I relaxed and had a good time.
The same thing applies to RUSH HOUR, a sprightly cop-buddy movie that works
by being cheerful and engaging instead of cruel and mean-spirited.  Don't
expect it to be an immortal piece of cinema, and you'll be fine.  It is also
the best of the Jackie Chan vehicles to be produced in English so far -- it
outstrips MR. NICE GUY by a fair margin, since that movie was little more
than a weak clothesline for various action pieces.  RUSH HOUR is funner and
more sustained, and puts Chan up against someone who is a terrific foil.
The plot is standard-issue.  A Chinese diplomat's daughter is kidnapped by a
gang of criminals.  The diplomat wants to enlist the help of Lee, an old cop
friend of his from pre-1998 Hong Kong days.  The FBI refuses to allow this,
so they have the LAPD send over one of their own to "distract" him.
Carter (Tucker) catches on fast to the sleazy runaround he's been given, and
tells Lee off: He doesn't want to babysit a cop; he wants to go out there
and find these slimeballs.  Funny thing is, Lee feels the same way, and
before you know it, they're up to their elbows in suspects and explosives.
All of this is, of course, sustained and interleaved with Tucker's wild-man
motormouthing (which gets funnier and funnier the more you watch it) and
Jackie's typically remarkable stuntwork.
What makes all of this stand out is primarily the tone and attitude.  Most
movies in this genre tend to be cold-blooded and unpleasant; this one's very
much a romp, with good timing and pacing, and a lot of good laughs.  I'm
betting Jackie himself is the main reason for that, since he's professed
repeatedly that he wants to make more family-oriented movies rather than
John Woo-style blast-fests.  Barely anyone gets shot, and most of the
martial-arts stunts are about timing, object juggling, or Three
Stooges-style slapstick.  (There is one stunt involving an antique vase
that's vintage Jackie -- although the way the stunt climaxes is a bit of a
cheat.)
There is also the byplay between Chan and Tucker, much of which seems
improvised (or at least minimally scripted).  At one point during a
stakeout, Edwin Starr's "War" comes on the radio, and Jackie attempts to
sing along -- only to have Tucker coach him on how to sing with soul.  In
turn, Jackie teaches Tucker how to do the snatch-the-other-guy's-gun trick
(and the payoff for THAT gag is a howl).
My main criterion for a comedy is simple: Did I laugh?  I walked into RUSH
HOUR in a terrible mood, and laughed all the way through.  I don't think you
can reasonably expect much more than that.

Author
Robert Workman
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
So what's the problem with 48 Hours clones these days?  They always try
for the same thing that Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte had.  That was the
problem that plagued these clones, not to mention the actual sequel:
Another 48 Hours, a complete waste of film.  But, at last, someone has a
different take on the matter, and it's director Brett Rainer.
Rush Hour features Jackie Chan in his first U.S. action movie, playing a
Chinese detective who's being flown to the US to investigate the
kidnapping of the Chinese Consulate's daughter.  Of course, the FBI is
upset that he'll be interfering in their investigation, and stick him
with an LAPD office with a big mouth- of course, that's Chris Tucker.
What makes Rush Hour work so damn well is the chemistry between the
energetic Chan and the absolutely hilarious Tucker.  Tucker mouths off
to Chan at every given opportunity ("I'm Michael Jackson, you Tito."),
and Chan delivers a few zingers of his own, as well as some terrific
fight scenes.  The story's pretty much your average fare, but with a
decent twist involving the main villain, a highly clouded figure named
Jun Tao.
At least it's entertaining, and the concept is excellently realized.  A
particular fight scene in a Chinese office, where Chan and Tucker duke
it out with the bad guys, is funny and energetic at the same time.  And
the finale's a real treat as well...Chan delivers yet another fantastic
stunt for the fans with a 10-story drop.
Rush Hour is just the sort of film you'll get a kick out of on any night
of the week.  Just make sure you don't look for anything culturally
different and you'll be fine- Drunken Master II this ain't.

Author
Vince Yim
In some respects, Rush Hour is the ultimate exercise in cliched
filmmaking.  The hero is the renegade cop that prefers to work alone.
The cop in question cannot solve the case until he gets in trouble.  All
Chinese people are somehow involved in the criminal element.  The duo
must always be completely mismatched.  The hero has to say some
smart-assed comment before (and after) shooting someone.  However, that
doesn't necessarily make for a bad film.
Rush Hour is Jackie Chan's first major Hollywood film since the dismal
The Protector (1985).  Proving once again that Hollywood can learn many
things from foreign film markets (ie: Hong Kong), Jackie Chan is given
much more free reign than before.  Still, some die-hard Jackie Chan fans
may be disappointed, as even Chan himself has voiced displeasure over
the length of the fight scenes (which he views as too short, according
to one interview).
This film takes a familiar theme of east meets west.  Jackie Chan is
Lee, the straight laced inspector who is imported to help deal with a
kidnapping case, while Chris Tucker is Carter, the loudmouthed,
destructive cop that is `promoted' to the FBI to help him.  Or, at
least, so he thinks (also another classic notion in action films: the
FBI must always get in the way of our heroes).
Despite the necessary conventions of action films, Rush Hour is some of
the most fun you'll spend and hour and forty minutes watching.  Jackie
Chan continues to be one of the most exciting martial artists on the big
screen, continuing to perform his own stunts and dazzling audiences with
his flashy kicks and punches.  Chris Tucker, familiar from his whiny,
annoying role in The Fifth Element is more palatable, complementing
Jackie Chan's straight-laced character.
However, Jackie Chan still maintains his comic-slapstick edge, as
expected of him and his films.  Perfectly downplaying the
`fish-out-of-water' routine through his character's attempts at mixing
into American culture, he makes up for the down time his character
experiences.  When he is in action, however, you'll be amused and
dazzled.  Still being inventive in the use of objects to beat people up
(in this case, a steering wheel, a serving tray, and a barstool), Jackie
Chan proves to be THE pioneer of slapstick kung fu.
Chris Tucker's character may come across as irritating, yet is also
humorous.  Since he's not a physical actor to the level of Jackie Chan,
he uses his main weapon: his mouth (hence, the tagline, `Fastest hands
in the east meets the fastest mouth in the west').  While dialogue is
not necessarily Shakespeare, it is appropriate for the film and still
very funny.
While not necessarily poignant, attempts at character development and
growth between characters come off surprisingly well.  Lee's `knowledge'
of American pop culture (`That's the Beach Boys!') when contrasted
against Carter's lack of knowledge of Chinese culture makes for an
interesting scene where Lee teaches Carter the kung fu disarming trick,
while Carter teaches Lee hip-hop dance moves.
While Rush Hour is not at the same level as Police Story 3 and 4 (known
in North America as Supercop and Jackie Chan's First Strike,
respectively), it more than makes up for the poorly received films
Operation Condor and Mr. Nice Guy.  With its appropriate mixture of high
kicks and lots of laughs, it makes for a fun film.  As well, it is a
true departure from Jackie Chan films, as it is missing one common
element: a whiny female co-star.
Rating: 8/10
--

Author
Homer Yen
The words "fun" and "Fall" don't usually go together.  We're done with
the mega-productions of the summer and we are approaching the time
period that is heavy on movies that are vying for Oscar's attention.  It
gets harder to find a true piece of popcorn fare that is consistently
pleasing and exciting to watch.  But "Rush Hour" manages to be just
that.  Although familiar in formula, this action-comedy is enormously
entertaining.
When the daughter of a wealthy Chinese consulate is kidnapped by a
Chinese crime organization, the FBI quickly take on the case.  The FBI
agents, however, don't want help from other people whom they think will
interfere with the successful return of the consul's daughter.  They
certainly don't want help from a foreign detective (Jackie Chan) who the
consul has personally requested.  And, they don't want help from the
local police.  So, to keep them out of the way, they tell the assigned
police officer (Chris Tucker) to babysit the arriving Chinese detective
and to stay out of sight until the case is solved.
When they first meet, it looks like a match made in Hell.  Both like to
work alone, and hate having a partner.  While driving around, Chan wants
to listen to the Beach Boys over the radio while Tucker insists on
listening to Hip-Hop.  But despite these and other oddball differences
(watch Tucker walk into a pool hall whose clientele are tough-looking,
black men and greet them saying "what's up, my ni**er" and then see what
happens when Chan does the same thing!), they both have one thing in
common.  They both want to save the consul's feisty and precocious
daughter.  To do so, they need each other.  Chan needs Tucker to show
him around LA.  Meanwhile, by taking Chan around, this will earn Tucker
brownie points with his boss.  During their investigation, they both get
to showcase their unique skills.  Tucker uses his soprano-ish,
mile-a-minute mouth to talk his way in and out of locations.  And when
trouble sparks, Chan steps up and we are treated to some terrifically
choreographed fight scenes featuring the Asian's gravity-defying martial
arts.
Rush Hour does two things very well.  First, it let's Tucker and Chan
showcase what they do best.  Tucker is genuinely funny especially when
he gets to make fun of his new partner.  Meanwhile, there's no denying
Chan's affability.  He's sweet, innocent, and packs a mean chop.
Secondly, the film has some strong performances from its supporting
players that elevates the suspense level, which is something that's hard
to do in a buddy cop comedy.  The Fall movie season certainly gets off
to a funny start.  This film offers a crowd-pleasing mix of comedy and
action that makes "Rush Hour" anything but slow.

Author
Jamie Peck
RUSH HOUR
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
For the record, I don't mind Tucker much at all. Sure, he can be as 
irksome as fingernails on a blackboard at times, but so could Jim Carrey 
back in his pre-"Truman Show" days. Rather, the problem with him in 
"Rush Hour" is that his squealy self and frantic antics just don't sit 
well with the role he's playing - a rogue LAPD detective named James 
Carter. Check out the opening scene (which genre fans know has 
ultimately _very_little_ to do with the rest of the film), in which 
Carter takes part in a sting operation to trap an explosives dealer. Um, 
could he or his cop-endangering shtick be any harder to swallow?
"Rush Hour" becomes a little more palatable once Jackie Chan enters the 
picture, cast as a Hong Kong inspector who teams up with Carter to crack 
the kidnaping of the Chinese Consul's 11-year-old daughter, a case that 
spans their respective countries. Chan fans might be disappointed by how 
little the master martial artist gets to simultaneously display his 
flair for physical comedy and killer moves; a scene where he battles bad 
guys while protecting the priceless exhibits in an art museum is classic 
Chan, a scene where his Carter-inspired use of a racial epithet gets him 
in trouble in a bar full of African-Americans is not. 
That bit aside, "Rush Hour"'s humor of choice seems to be disparaging 
quips directed at Asians ("I've been lookin' for your sweet-and-sour 
chicken a--!" Carter screeches to a Chinese bad guy); it wouldn't be 
funny if it were the other way around, and it's not funny the way it is. 
Much more successful is the film's comedy when it plays up the culture 
clash between Chan and Tucker; this star and star-on-the-rise have a 
nice rapport both on-screen and off, the latter evidenced by the 
now-notorious Chan tradition of showing outtakes over the end credits. 
Here, it's good stuff worth sticking around for, especially when the two 
slip up together. 
The title must refer to a gridlock of cliches instead of cars -- not 
only do we get the mismatched-buddy-cop story, we also get the 
fish-out-of-water and renegade-man-of-the-law angles and a climactic 
red-wire-or-blue-wire moment to top everything off. Though nobody will 
presumably accuse "Rush Hour" of breaking new cinematic ground, it's a 
tad on the disheartening side that this match made in odd couple heaven 
fails to enhance the familiar plot motions to memorable lengths. If 
you're a praying person, get on your knees - then, maybe Chan and Tucker 
will get a screenplay that's up to their collective speed in the 
inevitable "Rush Hour 2."

Author
R. L. Strong
NEW LINE CINEMA PRESENTS AN ARTHUR SARKISSIAN AND ROGER BIRNBAUM
PRESENTS A BRETT RATNER FILM JACKIE CHAN CHRIS TUCKER "RUSH HOUR" TOM
WILKINSON WITH CHRIS PENN AND ELIZABETH PEQA CASTING BY MATHEW BARRY,
C.S.A. AND NANCY GREEN-KEYS COSTUME DESIGNER SHAREN DAVIS MUSIC
SUPERVISOR GARY JONES MUSIC BY LALO SCHIFRIN EDITED BY MARK HELFRICH,
A.C.E.  PRODUCTION DESIGNER ROBB WILSON KING DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY
ADAM GREENBERG, A.S.C.  CO-EXECUTIVE PRODUCER LEON DUDEVOIR EXECUTIVE
PRODUCER JAY STERN CO-PRODUCER ART SCHAEFER PRODUCED BY ROGER BIRNBAUM
ARTHUR SARKISSIAN AND JONATHAN CLICKMAN STORY BY ROSS LAMANNA
SCREENPLAY BY JIM KOUF AND ROSS LAMANNA DIRECTED BY BRETT RATNER
He does his own stunts. He has broken almost every bone in his
body. He has survived hardships that no one can imagine. But for the
past 18 years, Jackie Chan has not survived the importation to
America. While his previous films have been enjoyable (some are
classics of the genre), their inherent foreignness has left Middle
America with a lukewarm appreciation of the man and his
abilities. Compiled with the fact that all of his previous films have
been severely edited for western consumption, have left most viewers
with only a glimpse of what Jackie Chan is.
Jackie has tried to enter the U.S. market before. Back in 1979 with
the release of "The Big Brawl" which while amusing was a half baked
concoction of ideas, that never really let Jackie's abilities shine
through. Add to this, the embarrassing "Cannonball Run" films and you
can pretty much appreciate why no one out side of the coasts knew who
this funny looking Asian was. A pitiful attempt to mold Jackie into a
'Dirty Harry' character in the James Glickenhaus directed
embarrassment "The Protector" did nothing here stateside, in fact
almost becoming a direct to video release.
In 1996, New Line Cinema released "Rumble in the Bronx"
nationwide. The film opened at # 1 in the box-office becoming the
first dubbed in English foreign film in history to do so. It stayed on
top long enough to make over $30 million. Jackie was now a star in the
U.S. But there was still a problem. American studios still felt that
his films were too foreign for the multiplexes in North Dakota and
Wisconsin. So all of Jackie's subsequent releases have been truncated,
reprocessed and re-imagined for the American Market. Now after all of
this tampering and off-handed redesigning of who is called the modern
day successor to Buster Keaton, we have New Line's latest release
'RUSH HOUR'.
"Rush Hour" starts off in Hong Kong on the eve of the British handover
of the Island colony to mainland China. Detective Inspector Lee
(Jackie Chan) busts a smuggling operation in the harbor, recovering
millions of dollars worth of Chinese art and historical artifacts from
the criminal mastermind Juntao. Detective Lee reports to his superior
Consul Han (Tzi Ma) during a celebratory dinner in honor of his new
position as American Consul to the U.S. for the new government. Upon
arriving in America, Consul Han's daughter, Soo Yung (Julia Hsu), is
kidnapped and held for ransom.
We cut to downtown Los Angeles where Detective James Carter (Chris
Tucker) is undercover making a buy of illegal
explosives. Unfortunately, everything goes wrong and Carter is on
reprimand until the FBI request his aid in retaining Detective
Inspector Lee who is on his way to Los Angeles to help his friend
Consul Han and his unofficial goddaughter Soo Yung.
As the plot develops, it seems that the villain, Juntao is responsible
for the kidnapping. The constant bickering and animosity between
Carter and Lee creates more confusion than help, until the two men
grudgingly decide to work together, outside of the official
investigation.
The plot of "Rush Hour" is workable if not too demanding. There are a
couple of surprises, but nothing that we haven't seen before. As
written by Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna the plot moves along at a fast
clip making for an enjoyable diversion. What makes the film work is
the casting of Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker as polar
opposites. Tucker's character is a voracious self promoter, always
ready to spin his destructive procedures into positive ones by coning
his way through reprimands. Jackie's, on the other hand is an
honorable policeman, upholding his duty and his responsibility to both
his title and his friends. The humor that develops through these
situations is what makes 'Rush Hour' so enjoyable. Chris Tucker is
from the same mold as Eddie Murphy in the '48 hours' films, fast
talking and always ready to prove himself in a foolish attempt of
machismo. It's the inclusion of Jackie Chan (who is reigned in here,
not so much by the script but by insurance concerns), that brings this
film up to a higher level. As the two characters conspire against each
other, it's Jackie that takes center stage with his trade make fight
choreography (absolutely some of the most startling and inventive
fight scenes in an American film). A fight in a seedy pool hall is a
tour de force of jay dropping amusement.
Unfortunately, Brett Ratner's direction is rather flatly
handled. Everything is standard framing with nothing to enliven the
action or emphasize the drama. In most cases the camera is locked down
with little or no movement. The cinematography by Adam Greenberg
(Terminator, Terminator 2) is acceptable in as much as this film is
produced with the video release kept close at hand. Everything is
framed within the center of the frame with very little moving off to
the outer edges. This is the most maddening essence of the film and
one of the damming situations that the video entertainment industry
has left us with. Very few filmmakers now, film for the theatrical
screen.
But all that aside, how does "Rush Hour" fit into the overi of Jackie
Chan? Well to be honest, this is less a Jackie Chan film as it is a
Chris Tucker film. But that being said, Jackie is anything but window
dressing in the film. This is no where as unimpressive as 'The Big
Brawl' or as insulting as "The Protector". Jackie's character while
being a harder edge man than is usual in his films, still manages to
apply his light hearted approach to action. Also, the handling of
Jackie's accent and difficulty with the English language is used to
remarkably humorous result (wait till you hear his rendition of the
rock classic "WAR.. what's it good for"). There are some scenes of
racial insensitivity, but those are in keeping with the stranger in a
strange land essence of Jackie's character and Chris Tucker's
loudmouth fast-talker. There is nothing here that is meanspirited or
offensive in and of itself.
And Jackie does get two or three great scenes to show of his daring
do, and since most Western audiences have yet to witness Jackie at his
most intense (check out "POLICE STORY" or "DRAGON'S FOREVER") for some
hair-raising action), "Rush Hour is a fine introduction to the man and
his mania.
Despite it's short comings "Rush Hour" delivers a solid two hours of
entertainment. While some of the language is harsh, this is much more
friendly than any other buddy cop movie that's come down the pike in
the last ten years.
On a scale of 5 stars. 'Rush Hour' rates 3 and one half.
A fun and enjoyable piece of escapism that serves both stars well.
Now.. when does Jackie get to direct?!
Copyright 1998 R.L. Strong.
Nothing in this article may be reprinted, copied  or altered without the expressed written permission of the author.

Author
Steve Kong
Rush Hour is a prime example of how a mediocre script is made fun by the
addition of great actors and a good director.
Jackie Chan is a guy that I like. He's an atypical action hero actor. He's
charming, funny, and he does all his own stunts. Chan just feels
personable; when he's having fun onscreen, so are we. Chris Tucker, billed
on Rush Hour movie posters as the biggest mouth of the West, truly lives up
to the billing. He is hilarious with his bug-eyes and his non-stop mouth.
A Chinese consul's daughter is kidnapped and the FBI is on the case. The
consul, though, trusts only one person, and that is Inspector Lee (Chan)
from Hong Kong. Lee is flown in to help with the investigation, but the FBI
doesn't want his help. The FBI decides to call the LAPD for some
"assistance." They get the loud and renegade Detective Carter (Tucker) whom
they promptly assign to baby sit Lee while the investigation is going on.
The script is your basic odd-couple police partner story.
Both Lee and Carter are not happy with the situation that they are in.
Carter desperately wants to be an FBI agent and sees this as a prime
opportunity lost. Lee just wants to find the daughter of the consul. And as
the mediocre script would have it, it's Carter and Lee who get all the
leads and the action, not the FBI.
Rush Hour was written by Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna. It is a serviceable
script that dips into mediocrity. The saving grace for the film is the two
actors and a director who knows how to pace the film. There are some
laughs, and there is a good mix of action and comedy in this script.
Brett Ratner (Money Talks) directs Rush Hour with a steady hand. He knows
what he's doing and it shows on screen. He never lets the action stop and
masterfully mixes in the comedy. He keeps Tucker in check also. Tucker, who
sometimes gets out of hand with his personality, is held back a bit in Rush
Hour, which is definitely a benefit for the movie. Having seen Tucker in
both Money Talks and The Fifth Element, it's good that Ratner had Tucker
restrain his outrageousness for Rush Hour.
Jackie Chan is what Rush Hour is all about, though, and we get a lot of
Chan. He and stunt coordinator Terry Leonard put together some exciting
action sequences. There are also some nail-biting fight scenes, the kind of
fight scenes that we've known to come from Chan, with excitement, fun, and
laughs all mixed together. Watch for the sequence that starts Chan off on a
double-decker bus and ends up in a taxi. This was a spectacular sequences
showing his graceful moves. There are scenes in a Jackie Chan film that
just stick with you. The one that is memorable is the scene where Chan's
character is in a pool hall.
Worth mentioning is Julia Hsu as the daughter of the consulate. She is not
only cute but her part in Rush Hour allows her to be more than just the
pawn for the bad guys to take. When they kidnap her, she puts up a hell of
a fight. Also worth mentioning is the score by Lalo Schifrin. The music
fits the movie like a glove.
Don't Miss Rush Hour. After failing to break into Hollywood with an
American made film for the longest time, Rush Hour will be Chan's big hit.
His Hong Kong to Hollywood films (Rumble in the Bronx, SuperCop, First
Strike, and Operation Condor) were good, but limiting in the audience that
they could reach. Rush Hour changes that. Rush Hour has a wide audience
appeal and it proves to be a great vehicle for Chan to make it big in
Hollywood.

Author
John Carroll
Rush Hour, starring Chris Tucker, Jackie Chan, Elizabeth Pena, Tzi Ma, Julie
Hsu, Philip Baker Hall, Tom Wilkinson, Ken Leung and Chris Penn.  Directed by
Brett Ratner.  1998.
   The action genre had really gone sour ever since Terminator died out.  Stars
like Jackie Chan and Jean Claude Van Damme had basically made carbon copies of
their previous hits and re-released them under different names.  However,
starting in 1998 with Rush Hour and moving on to hits like The Matrix, the
action genre is gaining new life with unique mixes of stars and plots to add
life to the mindless action that has plagued the genre in the past.
   In Rush Hour, Jackie Chan comes back to the action genre, but brings a
sidekick along for the ride.  No, not some Chinese action king who provides two
lines of dialogue and mindless kicks and punches.  This co-star is one of the
loudest and fastest talking on the silver screen today: Chris Tucker.  Tucker
is a unique choice to co-star in a Chan movie, which adds the thrill.  Tucker's
fast talking and quick humor sharply contrasts Chan's usual dull style.
   Rush Hour starts off fast, and to the naked eye, looks to be the same old
Jackie Chan styler.  Enter Tucker.  Enter fun.  Tucker adds life to Chan. 
Tucker plays Officer Carter, an obnoxious LAPD officer who is cocky enough to
not work with a partner.  Tucker adds explosiveness through his quick wit, an
aspect lacking in most action films.  Instead of relying on the film's action
sequences, director Brett Ratner relies on his duo's compatability, which is
why Rush Hour is so successful.
   Tzi Ma plays Consul Han, who travels to be an ambassdor in the United States
when Hong Kong is relinquished by Britain.  However, when Tzi Ma's daughter,
Soo Yung (Julie Hsu), is kidnapped by Chinese terrorists, crisis strikes and
the plot is set.  When the Consul is upset with the FBI's work, he asks to
bring Agent Lee (Chan) in to aid the investigation.  The FBI does not want the
help, so they get Tucker from the LAPD to figuratively "babysit" Lee and keep
him out of trouble.  However, their contrasting styles will undoubtedly lead to
investigating the case.  The plot may seem mundane, and it indeed is, but Chan
and Tucker are so likable that their personalities overshadow the mediocre
plot.
   The rest of the cast is virtually insignificant.  Sang, the main rival, has
the most significant screen time compared to Chan and Tucker, and if you see
his amount of screentime, you will relaize how dependent Rush Hour is on its
two main characters.
   Comedies like Rush Hour sink or swim based on their attempts at humor. 
Going to watch Rush Hour, the obvious thought is to expect crude minority humor
with the two contrasting ancestries of Chan and Tucker.  While Rush Hour does
play off their differences, it is able to do it with class, taking no low
blows, just connecting with smart humor and the big mouth of Chris Tucker.
   Rush Hour is an action-comedy, so it is not an entire love fest with Chan
and Tucker.  While Ratner's inclusion of action sequences is not completely off
base, it does not completely gel with the fast humor between Chan and Tucker. 
However, when watching Chan perform his stunts, you will still question how
nuts the guy is to do some of the stuff he actually does.
   The action-comedy hybrid may have been at a loss for some time, but Rush
Hour pumps some new life into it.  While it is not a classic that will redefine
the genre, Rush Hour still provides tons of laughter and a few "Whoas" at the
sight of Jackie Chan's stunts.  Chan has found a way to reinvent himself, and
that is the central focus of Rush Hour's success.  What's next?  Maybe the
"Muscles from Brussles" with David Spade?  You never know.
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Mark O'Hara
The funniest moments in Jackie Chan's American movie Rush Hour happen 
when cultures clash.  
There's a scene in which impetuous Detective Carter (Chris Tucker) 
points his pistol at wise Hong Kong Inspector Lee (Chan).  Watching the 
gun-happy could-be crooks, a cabbie pulls out a gun of his own and makes 
them freeze.
There's Lee's conflict with FBI agents, who get Carter assigned to 
actually keep Lee off the case.  The premise of the film, of course, 
relies on the failure of Carter's baby-sitting;  the action becomes 
hilarious when Lee gets away from Carter and outwits a houseful of 
federal agents.
Finally, there's the running joke of the Chinese detective who is 
repeatedly confused by African-American culture.  The audience gets many 
chuckles from the initial tension between the two cops.  Whatever 
egotistic ruse Carter tries out, Lee thwarts or shames or betters him.  
Chan is at his best when his comic skills run on naiveté;  it's even 
better when his innocence gets him into big trouble, as it does in a 
pool hall.  Oh, how quickly Chan charms us with humor and veers into 
well-choreographed violence!
The reason Inspector Lee visits the States is to assist in a kidnapping 
case: the daughter of the Chinese Consul Han (Tzi Ma) has been taken. 
What's moving is that Lee takes the crime somewhat personally; he's like 
an uncle to her, good-naturedly taking punches from the girl as she 
departs China.  It is Lee's connection as strong family friend that 
motivates his relentless battling of kidnappers as well as other 
officers.
Tom Wilkinson does a passable job in his role, though his character 
could have been made more round.  As the evil Sang, Ken Leung combines 
the right amount of sour stares and shakiness;  he's also a horrible 
shot with a machine pistol.  It's unclear why Elizabeth Pena appears as 
a partner - and sometime foil - to Tucker's loud-mouthed Carter.   She 
is always likable, but here fails to convince us she is a demolitions 
expert.
Jackie Chan's closing credits usually show out-takes from the shooting.  
Once again we get an idea about how rigorously the cast worked to 
produce the slick and athletic mayhem that is a trademark of Jackie 
Chan.  How many takes were needed to produce the fight in the Chinese 
restaurant?  In the abandoned building?  Did Jackie break or sprain 
anything during the shoot, we wonder?  
Originality is the key element in these slugfest sagas; let's face it, 
plots in Chan films can be found in Kojak or Beretta episodes.  But 
director Brett Ratner has created a film with smooth transitions and 
spots of characterization that actually make us care about Lee and 
Carter and some of the people they work with.  In seeing Rush Hour, what 
gave me my money's worth?  First, my son and I had the theater to 
ourselves.  OK, it was a small auditorium, but still it was like viewing 
a video on an extra large private screen.  Bottom line, I laughed out 
loud at Jackie's over-the-top stunts and martial arts gimmicks.  The man 
knows the power of exaggeration, and he knows that the audience is smart 
enough not to take him too seriously.


Author
Ryan Davis
Jackie Chan  has been in well over 60 movies, so what makes this buddy cop
movie special? Not much. Sure it has some funny scenes, but they are much to
spaced out to really hold your  interest in what's going on during Rush Hour.
Jackie Chan plays Detective Inspector Lee, who is flown from Hong Kong to
America, to assist in a kidnapping investigation. The missing kid  is the
daughter of Consul Han (Tzi Ma), a wealthy Chinese diplomat. The problem is
the FBI doesn't want Lee messing up their investigation, so they get a cop
from the Los Angeles Police Department to baby-sit Lee while he's in town.
That babysitter is the flamboyant, egotistical, and mildly amusing Detective
James Carter (Chris Tucker). Carter is a loner and he doesn't like having
people interfere with his investigations. He definitely doesn't like a baby-
sitting assignment and decides to do some investigating without the FBI's
permission, with the help of Lee.
Rush Hour's gimmick is far from original. It's just a buddy movie, with the
usual "two unlikely friends" theme. Chris Tucker and Jackie Chan have pretty
good screen chemistry, unfortunately the script fails to supply them with
enough funny scenes to use it. When you add the predictable plot and mediocre
directing, Tucker & Chan become the best thing about Rush Hour.
By now Chan is a master at comedy martial arts films, so he is just along for
the ride. Chris Tucker gives the best performance here. Tucker, who was
unbelievably irritating in "The Fifth Element" and "Friday", tones down his
style and actually makes his character work.
Unless you're a huge martial arts fan, I don't see why you would want to see
Rush Hour. As a comedy it fails to deliver enough laughs and as an action film
it is nothing but karate rehash.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Peńa, Tzi Ma,
Julia Hsu, Philip Baker Hall
Director: Brett Ratner
Producers: Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman, Arthur M. Sarkissian
Screenplay: Jim Kouf, Ross LaManna
Australian theatrical release: January 14, 1999
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
Rush Hour's advertising posters read "The fastest hands in the East meet
the loudest mouth in the West," and that's probably the best description
of this film that you can get.  Chinese spectacle Jackie Chan is given
yet another action vehicle to revel in, but this time his partner is
comedian Chris Tucker, who often steals the show.   The Chan/Tucker
combination is a memorable screen partnership, and is sort of a mix
between the buddy relationship of Tim Robbins and Martin Lewrence in
Nothing to Loose, and the dynamic John Travolta/Nicholas Cage chemistry
in Face/Off.
The only difference here, of course, is that Chan's character is from
the East, and Tucker's the West.  That is emphasized emphatically by
director Brett Ratner, to the point where Rush Hour becomes a humorous
look at a clash of cultures with action scenes to boot (rather than the
other way around).
The calm and constructed Inspector Lee (Chan) and the loud, obnoxious
James Carter (Chris Tucker) form an unlikely partnership after being
brought together by a kidnapping case.  They are both cops - Lee from
China, Carter from Los Angeles - but have very contrasting ways to work.
Lee and Carter soon find themselves in all sorts of trouble, as they
bumble through the streets of LA, trying to find an eleven year old girl
and bring her kidnappers to justice.
Like most Jackie Chan films, Rush Hour relies largely on choreography
and physical stunts.  Chan's screen maneuvers are once again
spectacular, and even after more than thirty years of work, he hasn't
shown any signs of slowing down.  Ever since Rumble in the Bronx and
First Strike exhilarated Western viewers, it seems that even in
Hollywood nobody quite does action like Jackie does action.  That's why
it was just a matter of time until Chan signed on to a big budget
blockbuster.  In doing so, he has made some notable sacrifices: Rush
Hour does not take full advantage of his physical capabilities, and
Chan's subtle comic work is overshadowed by Tucker's loud presence.
When there are so many good reasons to see Rush Hour, it's a pity that
there are also quite a few reasons to give it a miss.  Brett Ratner
never knows exactly how to handle his two exceptional actors, so neither
of them are able to effectively develop on their stereotypical
characters.  Give Chan most of the action and Tucker most of the comedy,
and you have a great partnership, right?  Wrong.  When both actors could
be comedians, and both the action stars, it seems a bit of a cop-out
that their roles are pretty much limited to one or the other.
Fortunately for Ratner, he is far from incapable of making 90 minutes of
solid entertainment.  In fact, occasional moments of Rush Hour seem
almost magical and remind us of the film it could have been.  One scene
in which Lee and Carter share their different skills with each other is
a wonderfully high moment; a time when character and culture are
explored without viewers even noticing.   Most of Rush Hour's other
great moments do not rely on Ratner's direction, but rather the energy
that his two protagonists generate.  A memorable screen partnership is
usually enough to make a passable action film; and in the case of Rush
Hour, it is - although the finished product is not the classic it should
have been.  With any luck a sequel will be made, and Rush Hour 2 will
feature Jackie Chan and Chris Jackie at their best.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: September 18, 1998
Starring: Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Pena, Tzi
Ma, Julia Hsu
Directed by: Brett Ratner
Distributed by: New Line Cinema
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (sequences of action/violence and shootings,
language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/rushhour.htm 
It's no secret in the motion picture industry that the relationship
between a script and the actors involved often makes or breaks a movie
at the box office. A poorly-written script can be bested by a superb
acting corps, and a well-written piece can be mangled by a group of
amateurs. In directing his latest action-comedy, Director Brett Ratner
(MONEY TALKS) takes a relatively mediocre piece of standup comedy and
turns it into a funny as all get-out buddy cop movie. In addition, RUSH
HOUR serves as a first-class example of directing a movie with
conservative attitude - a feature that is sure to draw in crowds of all
types. 
The two lead names share equal screen time here, mostly because they
spend it together. Jackie Chan, in his first completely American
production, makes an impressive debut by mixing dialogue with martial
arts. The other martial arts flick from a few weeks ago, KNOCK OFF,
stands no chance against the content of this one. Chan manages to make
every fight scene exude grace and poise, and there's no doubt that a
large percentage of video sales for this movie will come from viewers
who couldn't believe their eyes the first time. Chris Tucker, on the
opposite side, relates a hilarious comedic approach which smoothes out
the rough edges to Chan's performance. He works perfectly with the
script, and it's quite likely he lent scribe Jim Kouf a hand with some
of his lines. 
Almost essential to the action genre, the plot is nonexistent. We're
quickly introduced to Detective James Carter (Tucker) is a maverick
officer for the LAPD. Cut forward to another scene where the daughter
(Julia Hsu) of the American Chinese Consul (Tzi Ma) is kidnapped by a
gang of swarthy characters. The FBI is quick to the rescue, but the
consul insists that one of his men, Detective Inspector Lee (Chan), be
brought on the case to help. The FBI resists, but then requests that
LAPD send a man over to babysit the Chinese detective. It's here that
Carter and Lee hook up, and the two unwittingly solve the case while the
FBI rushes in to back them up. 
Rattner does a fine job of going the extra mile to get his movie to move
a step up, but it doesn't quite reach the top tier of action-comedies
like last year's GROSSE POINTE BLANK. There are moments where the plot
strays too far off the straight line it sticks almost exclusively to,
and if not for the comedic interactions between Tucker and Chan, this
might be a major drawback. Also, some supporting characters are almost
entirely along for the ride, and others are there simply to look
menacing. However, none gives a standoffish performance and they mostly
mesh into the background. Almost every member of the cast displays some
reservation at one point or another - whether it's Tucker's toned-down
routine or Chan's tight rein on his action sequences - and that
contributes greatly to this being a watchable movie for all types. A
recommendable visit to the theater, indeed.

Author
James Brundage
It's Jackie Chan. You either love him or you hate him. Personally, I love
him. After all, it's this same taste for Jackie Chan as you have for any
kung fu movie, seen chiefly by comic book fans and social misfits, in which
reality is thrown out the window like a ticking bomb that explodes the
moment it has left and the debris that flies in is a brand of dark slapstick
comedy. In other words, he makes people getting beat up look funny.
When you pair him with someone like Chris Tucker, you come up with a bizarre
chemistry seen only once before, when Nick Nolte met with Eddie Murphy for
48 Hours. It just doesn't happen too often that two people can work together
so well on screen. That the both of them can muster enough wit to make
things work.
I suppose you could say it's an east-meets-west story, with a backdrop of
guns and Hong Kong crime family. A few shots here, some street humor there,
some slapstick there. The scenes just make you laugh, chuckle, or smile your
way through the movie until the nice payoff of seeing the mistakes at the
very end DO NOT LEAVE WHEN THE CREDITS START. Those alone Those alone make
the movie worth watching. Of course the rest is just as good, but everybody
has their cup of tea.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Rush Hour (1998)
Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Tom Wilkinson, Elizabeth Pena, Philip Baker 
Hall, Mark Rolston, Tzi Ma, Rex Linn, Ken Leung, Chris Penn, Julia Hsu. 
Screenplay by Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna. Produced by Roger Birnbaum, 
Jonathan Glickman and Arthur M. Sarkissian. Directed by Brett Ratner. 96 
minutes
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Jackie Chan is one of the biggest movie stars on Earth, except in the 
United States, where he has only a fiercely devoted cult following. 
Determined to achieve the mass-market success that offerings like "Rumble 
in the Bronx" and "Mr. Nice Guy" failed to provide, the 44-year-old Hong 
Kong native put himself completely in the hands of Hollywood for his 
latest shot at becoming an American superstar. "It's not for the money. 
It's for the face," he said in an Associated Press interview. "You know 
Chinese, always face." 
His current efforts to save face include fighting less and allowing 
himself to be plugged into the formulaic mismatched-cop action/comedy 
"Rush Hour." "Now, if it doesn't work," said Chan, "that means American 
audience do not accept my kind of action, or my kind of personality, or 
me." 
Luckily for Chan, it works. "Rush Hour" is a lot of fun, thanks to flashy 
action scenes, sharp one-liners and the chemistry between Chan and 
motormouth comedian Chris Tucker. Sure, it's just another cookie-cutter 
cop flick, but this particular cookie tastes pretty good.
Like "Lethal Weapon 4," "Rush Hour" uses the cop movie format merely as 
an excuse to showcase its stars and pyrotechnics. "Every so often we have 
to let the general public know that we can still blow shit up," says one 
cop, perfectly voicing the mind-set of most Hollywood producers. Unlike 
"Lethal Weapon 4," "Rush Hour" has a plot which, while not particularly 
original, is at least coherent. 
The story begins on the eve of the historic 1997 transfer of Hong Kong 
back to the Chinese (it's a miracle the filmmakers didn't trip over the 
electrical cables of other movie crews, since both "Knock Off" and "The 
Chinese Box" are also set in the same city on the same day). Detective 
Inspector Lee (Chan) raids the lair of a legendary crime lord, recovering 
a huge cache of stolen artwork.
Cut to Los Angeles, where LAPD Detective James Carter (Tucker) annoys 
every officer within a ten mile radius with his reckless techniques and 
non-stop babbling. When the Chinese consul flies in Lee to assist in the 
search for his kidnapped daughter, the FBI asks the LAPD to provide a cop 
to ''baby-sit'' Lee so that he doesn't hinder their investigation. 
Carter's chief happily assigns him to the task and, quicker than you can 
say "movie cliché," a maverick mismatched cop team is born.
But it works, because Chris Tucker and Jackie Chan really click together. 
Tucker slightly tones down his hyperactive, helium-voiced, in-your-face 
chatter, making his character humorously abrasive rather than 
insufferable. He's actually quite fun to watch as he talks his way in and 
out of trouble, periodically breaking into a bizarre urban-Egyptian form 
of dance and using leering effeminate movements to challenge other males. 
I have no idea how Tucker developed his alien-on-amphetamines shtick, but 
he's certainly one of a kind.
The wonderful Jackie Chan, a martial arts hybrid of Buster Keaton and 
Gene Kelly, is the absolute master of ingenious escapes, and he displays 
some of his remarkably adroit artistry here, scrambling up walls and 
trees, skittering across a very high beam, disarming bad guys and 
tumbling from great heights in dazzling style. He has less stunts than 
usual, but remains a wonder to behold. As always, his physical gifts are 
complimented by his comedic skills and geniality. Chan is one of the most 
likable performers in the business and it's a pleasure spending time with 
him.  
Together, Chan and Tucker are an appealing sweet and sour team, with 
their contrasting personalities providing a lot of laughs, even as 
culture clash jokes fly fast and loose in all directions. Personally, I 
found a number of Carter's Asian one-liners to be borderline racist, but 
if Jackie Chan didn't find the jokes offensive, I suppose I can be a good 
sport about it as well.
With its tired premise, superfluous supporting cast, cheesy dramatic 
moments and painfully obvious plot twists, "Rush Hour" should have been 
just another buddy cop throwaway, but instead the film is light, fast, 
breezy fun. It just goes to show that the right stars can make even the 
most pedestrian material shine. If this film doesn't finally make Jackie 
Chan a major star in the United States, blame the American public, 
because Chan is certainly delivering the goods.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Line Cinema
 Director:  Brett Ratner
 Writer: Jim Kour, Ross LaManna
 Cast: Stephen Blackehart, Jackie Chan, Philip Baker Hall,
Julia Hsu, Jim Jenkins, Rex Linn, Tzi Ma, Elizabeth Pena,
Mark Rolston, Christ Tucker, Tom Wilkinson
   In the ecumenical spirit, police dramas traditionally pair up a
black cop and a white cop, a match best exploited in the
"Lethal Weapon" series.  In scripters Jim Kouf and Ross
LaManna's take on the pairing of distinct ethnicities
and personalities, Jackie Chan is braced with Chris Tucker. 
As Lee and Carter, two such talents could not be more
disparate.  Per the usual formula, the duo rub each other the
wrong way at first and gradually come to depend on each
other and to share a genuine measure of affection.  To
director Brett Ratner's credit, their growing affection is
believable.  No matter that Lee (Jackie Chan) is modest and
altruistic while Carter (Chris Tucker) is egocentric and motor-
mouthed.  Each prefers working alone to operating with a
partner. Their very differences open both up to new
experiences that enrich their lives.  Lee, who is from Hong
Kong, will teach his reluctant partner something about
Chinese food and martial arts; in return, Carter will have Lee
speaking about his crib and his Hong Kong hood and singing rap with
abandon.  
   Nothing is less than lighthearted in this otherwise routine
action film which features moderately witty dialogue, a
hurricane of bullets, some nifty explosions, and super stunts
which are noteworthy particularly because Jackie Chan 
continues to do his own at the age of 44.  "Rush Hour" shows
how Lee and Carter get into each other's hair, irritate the FBI
and the LAPD, and rankle bad guys Juntao and a British
collector, Griffin (Tom Wilkinson).  
   The story begins in Hong Kong in the days before the
British bow out of their crown colony.  Detective Lee
singlehandedly crushes a smuggling operation but the leaders
successfully run to the United States where they abduct the
daughter of the Chinese consul in Los Angeles.  Consul Han
(Tzi Ma), a wealthy individual who is debating whether to
meet the kidnappers' demand for a cool $50 million, wants his
family friend, Detective Lee, to pursue the case.  The FBI and
the LAPD have other plans.  To distract Lee, they commission
screw-up cop James Carter to be his partner, in effect, to 
keep Lee out of the investigation.  Seething under this
boondoggle, Carter nonetheless takes on the chore while Lee
does what he can to get away from his unwanted tour guide.
   While Chris Tucker cannot match his best role--as a fugitive
and hustler in Brett Ratner's "Money Talks"--he is reliably
comical while delivering an endless stream of patter that
would delight operetta lyricist W.S. Gilbert.  Even
when speaking slowly he can evoke laughs from the
audience, as when he meets Lee and loudly and carefully
asks him whether Lee speaks English:
"Do...you...know...what...I'm...saying...?" he implores, his huge,
expressive eyes flashing with incomprehension.  This movie,
though, belongs to Jackie Chan, who has just published an
autobiography "I am Jackie Chan" in English, surely not the
language in which he is most at home.  In a Harold Lloyd-
style stunt on a double-decker tour bus which he is compelled
to take under Carter's watchful gaze, he suddenly leaps up
and holds onto a "to Hollywood" directional sign overhead,
somersaults into a city bus and dances his way into a taxi in a
series of gestures that would impress Martha Graham.  When
he attacks the gangsters in the pool hall using the cue as a
weapon and his powerful legs as a missile, his actions look
more authentic than all those phony martial arts movies that
rely on the eyes of the editors more than on the appendages
of the heroes.  The high point of Chan's acrobatics occurs
near the conclusion as he loses his grip on a beam in a
conventional hall atrium while his partner saves his life by
extending a silk streamer to break the fall.
   There will always be martial arts movies.  "Rush Hour"
signals this by underscoring the role of eleven-year-old Soo
Yung (Julia Hsu) as the consul's daughter and prize student
of detective Lee, who during captivity is anything but passive. 
Though she fails to gouge out eyes as her master has taught
her to do, she is a persuasive young woman who pulls her
weight in making "Rush Hour" as whimsical as it is routine. 
   As with other Jackie Chan movies one of the best parts is
the outtakes which play along with the final credits in which
the lead actors deprecatingly show the audience the
bloopers--the missed stunts, the failed dialogue.  When Chris
Tucker fails in his intial efforts to say sheh-sheh (thank you) to
the hostess from his first-class seat on a United Airlines flight,
you've got to appreciate Mr. Chan's surprising skill with the
English language, which he tackles with the dexterity of a
seventh-degree black belt.  But then, Jackie did not come by
his abilities easily.  As a kid he spent ten years in physically
demanding and abusive training for the Peking Opera, which
included mime, acrobatics, and martial arts, after which he got
work as a child actor in more than twenty films.  With that sort
of history, he should be doing his high kicks well into his
sixties.  Let's hope so.

Author
Marty Mapes
Before I knew much about Chris Tucker, I found his schtick
(high-pitched, super-fast trash talking) annoying. His sense of
self-deprecation has allowed him to grow on me, and he is now one of my
favorite comics.
Jackie Chan's schtick is, and always has been, amazing. His graceful and
daring stunts always entertain.
Combining the two seems more like a cheap Hollywood gimmick than a
stroke of inspiration. But whatever the motive, the outcome works. The
two look like they had a great time with each other, and that genuine
energy makes this otherwise-formula movie into something worth
remembering.  
Tucker is James Carter, an LAPD cop. He's not very good, but his ego
doesn't know that. Carter ruins an undercover operation, blowing up the
evidence in the process. True to Tucker's schtick, Carter can't even
acknowledge the mistake. He has a million excuses and they are unleashed
fast and furious. He's a nuisance to his boss and a laughing stock to
his colleagues, yet he remains egotistic and cocky.
Meanwhile, the FBI is investigating an international kidnaping in L.A.
Their Chinese counterparts insist on sending their own agent Lee (Chan)
to help with the investigation. The FBI sees Lee as more of a hindrance
than a help, so they ask the police for someone to keep Lee busy. The
LAPD is all too happy to get Carter out of their hair for a while.
Turns out Carter isn't too pleased about the babysitting job, and
neither is Lee. The two team up to solve the crime themselves, with or
without the support of the FBI or the LAPD.
The movie, thankfully, makes no pretense about why the audience is in
the theater. It's not because of the plot or the conflict, it is only
because of Chan and Tucker, and the filmmakers know it. The movie
doesn't put us through any more plot than is necessary, and it gives us
plenty of Chan's amazing stunts.
Most of Chan's so-called "American" movies of late (Mr. Nice Guy,
Supercop, Rumble in the Bronx) were actually made a few years ago in
Hong Kong, so if Chan seems to have aged a lot since his "last" movie,
he has.
That doesn't mean he's lost his touch.
One of Chan's more amazing moves comes early in the film as he hops
between vehicles in slow-moving traffic. The stunts don't look as
physically challenging as some of his earlier ones, but they highlight
the grace with which Chan can still move.
Tucker is funnier than ever. As I said, his sense of self-deprecation
makes his annoying persona palatable, even tasty at times. His strutting
ego won't hesitate to broadcast a victory or explain away a defeat. But
his strutting is always an order of magnitude bigger than the actual
accomplishment. You can't help but laugh both at Tucker and at all the
other loudmouth braggarts in your life.
The two aren't a natural duo, but they do have some good scenes
together. While waiting at a stakeout, they teach each other their best
moves (to the tune of "War"). And in the tradition of Jackie Chan
movies, there are outtakes at the end that show just how much fun Tucker
and Chan had together.
And that's why this movie is worth seeing. Don't kid yourself. You're
not going for the plot or the suspense. You're going because Jackie Chan
kicks ass and because Chris Tucker is hilarious, and because the
combination is sure to be entertaining.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
John Smyth
As the outgoing Hong Kong chief of police, Han (Tzi Ma) celebrates
his appointment as Chinese consul to the United States, his most
trusted detective, Lee (Jackie Chan), leads a raid against a top
crime boss, Juntao. The raid is successful but the crime leader
escapes. Meanwhile, Los Angeles police detective James Carter (Chris
Tucker) is in trouble. Though he successfully apprehended Clive
(Chris Penn), a dealer illegally selling explosives, he managed
to cause an explosion, and his captain is about to suspend him.
Soon after Han arrives in Los Angeles, his daughter is kidnapped
in a violent ambush. The FBI takes charge of the investigation,
and is not happy to hear that Han has asked his friend Lee to fly
to the States to help with the investigation. They resolve to
ensure that Lee is kept well away from the investigation, and
ask the LAPD to supply a detective to act as a nursemaid for
Lee - Carter gets the job (thinking he has been promoted to the FBI).
The reason people go to see movies with Jackie Chan is neither to
see subtle character studies or hear reams of dialogue. No, the
reason people pay to see Jackie Chan movies is to see Jackie do
his martial arts thing. Chan's movies usually thin on plot but
compensate with spectacular stunt work and martial arts skills.
Chan plans and executes most of the stunts, which are generally
breath taking and done with a great deal of humour and skill. I
have to confess to having a soft spot for Jackie Chan - his movies
hark back to a time when actors such as Buster Keaton and Charlie
Chaplin invented exciting and complex stunts and didn't use doubles
for the dangerous stunts. Chan's Hong Kong movies have had a cheap
and cheerful feel to them, and he has yet to make a breakthrough in
the English-speaking market, particularly the United States.
The decision to put Chan with brash, wisecracking comedian Chris
Tucker seems to be a good idea - let Tucker do the talking and let
Chan do the high kicking. Alas, there is far too much talking.
Tucker made his mark in The Fifth Element as the voluble DJ with
the outrageous coiffure who helped Bruce Willis save the universe,
and followed it up with a small role in Jackie Brown. He gets far
more screentime in Rush Hour but he doesn't seem to know what to do
with it. It becomes obvious after a few scenes that Tucker hasn't
much to say, and his allegedly comic presence soon becomes tiresome.
He seems content to pass off a tired pastiche of Eddie Murphy (circa
48 Hours and Beverly Hills Cop) rather than carve out a distinct
persona of his own. Unfortunately, Tucker's prominence means there
is less of Chan and his acrobatic antics. The action sequences that
do appear are strangely subdued, and are not exactly awe-inspiring.
All in all, this film is incredibly pedestrian - it certainly doesn't
capture Chan at his best, and it proves that too much of Chris Tucker
is definitely not a good thing. You would be much better served by
renting a video of Supercop(1996), which stars Chan and Michelle Yeoh
(of Tomorrow Never Dies fame) - it is much more fun.


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Another action/comedy-buddy flick pits Hong Hong sensation Jackie Chan
aside Hollywood's latest Eddie Murphy wannabee Chris Tucker. Director
Brett Ratner, who directed Tucker in his "break-out" comedy, MONEY
TALKS (6/10), helms this melange of the original 48 HOURS (7.5/10) and
the original BEVERLY HILLS COP (8/10).
PLOT:
A Hong Kong businessman's daughter is kidnapped for ransom. The FBI
attempts to solve the case, while the Hong Kong man brings in his own
private agent to help (Chan). The FBI wants to keep the new guy out of
their hair, and delegate this task to one of their lowliest LAPD cops
(enter Tucker). Stuck with each other, the unorthodox duo attempt to
solve the case for themselves. Fun and action ensues.
CRITIQUE:
Funny movie chopped full of action, lacks an original concept and plot
line, but comes through with hilarious banter from Tucker and fun fight
scenes with Chan. I found this film's main point of interest to be
Chris Tucker's verbal potpourri of mild profanity and humour, but
appreciate the fact that folks who don't enjoy the man's abilities may
be turned off from this film. He reminded me a whole bunch of the young
Eddie Murphy before the fame went to his head...vibrant, original and
voracious for laughs! 
Chan is also a great combo for Tucker's motormouth, with his lack of
English pronunciation, swift moves and graceful stuntwork. Chan is
considered the straight man in this film, and works on that level. Some
of his fans may be put off by the fact that he doesn't joke around as
much as his other flicks, but all in all, the duo clicked for me, and
that's what led this film to the recommendation arena. Some low points
include the ho-hum story line, the obvious use of "hip" songs to pad
some retarded scenes, and the lowly, and I do mean lowly, appearance by
Chris Penn as a fat-ass con-man (es tu Penn?). How this man's career
went from RESERVOIR DOGS (9/10) to playing fourth banana in Chan movie,
I'll never know!
Overall, I will suggest this film to all those who appreciate the work
of Chris Tucker (I liked him in most of his films, except FIFTH ELEMENT
(6.5/10), in which I thought his wild animation was terribly out of
place) and Jackie Chan. At the same time, I must say that if you are
not a big fan of either star, and/or if you are looking for an
interesting story line, skip this sucker and go back and rent either
one of the Murphy movies that I mentioned earlier. One more thing, as
per usual at the end of every Chan movie, this film includes goofs
during the credits, which are just as (if not funnier) than most of the
humour in this film. Stay tuned!  
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
As of September 1998, this film held the greatest box-office opening
weekend of any other September release ever ($31 million.)
Director Brett Ratner is engaged to actress Rebecca Gayheart.
Jackie Chan's real name is Kong Sung Chan, which means "born in Hong
Kong". In the act of performing his own stunts, he has broken his nose
three times, his ankle once, most of the fingers in his hand, both
cheekbones, and his skull. He stands 5"7.
Chris Tucker was born in Atlanta, Georgia, with three older brothers
and two older sisters. He was voted as the "Most Humorous member" of
his high school graduating class.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, PG-13, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
Starring: Chris Tucker (James Carter), Jackie Chan (Detective Lee), David
Warner (JunTao), Tom Wilkinson (Thomas Griffin); written by Ross LaManna, Jim
Kouf; produced by Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman, Arthur M. Sarkissian;
directed by Brett Ratner.
Seen October 3, 1998 at 6:30 p.m. at the Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6,
(Rotterdam, NY), theater #3, with my brother John for free using my Sony/Loews
critic's pass. [theater rating: **1/2: okay seats, sound, and picture]
        If it's true society is losing its attention span, and appreciation of the
finer things in life then it makes perfect sense a film like `Rush Hour' would
be a big hit. It has two big stars, a classic premise and promotions that
promise both comedy and action, and yet there's almost nothing to it. It's
Hollywood's definition of productivity - to put in the least amount of effort
as possible and be successful with it.
        This film capitalizes on what I refer to as `the dead weekend monster,' a
film that wouldn't succeed during the war of the special-effects-summer-movies
or during the holiday seasons. A smart Hollywood exec knows when movies make
money and when they don't, it's all a matter of timing and the right timing
can anything look good.
        Let's look at the facts: it's a `cop-buddy,-but-not-really' movie starring
two semi-big celebrities who have become quite popular due to starring and/or
co-starring in several smaller films. Chris Tucker seems to be marketed as the
next Will Smith while Jackie Chan, who is a legend in overseas martial arts
flicks, is just now getting the attention he deserves. Neither have a thing to
lose by being in this film, no matter how bad reviews it gets it's guaranteed
to win at least a few weekends' top gross. Everyone involved with this film
will most likely go on to do just slightly better next year and every year
until they reach the top. In the meantime, we'll just have to stick it out.
        To say the film is paint-by-numbers is an understatement to be sure. At least
it tries to have a little fun with the hand it's dealt. We start out in Hong
Kong, the last day of British rule where the basic plotline is set up and some
of the main characters are introduced. There's a little action on Chan's part,
he plays a Detective named Lee who's been tracking a notorious villain named
JunTao (Warner) for years. We never learn much about JunTao except that he's a
really mean guy and has a bad reputation, whether he's into a specific vice
such as selling drugs or weapons or the whole mob scene isn't quite clear.
What is clear is that he's the one who always gets away from Lee and follows
his friend, a Chinese diplomat named Han (Tzi Ma) to Los Angeles and kidnaps
his daughter for a hefty ransom (dut dun duh!)
        At least the film is consistent in its flaws. The Chinese aspects are
portrayed as quite serious with the whole system of honor and everything and
immediately we cut to the American counterpart - LAPD Detective James Carter
(Tucker), who's a trash-talking, hyperactive, loose canon that isn't afraid to
break the rules, risk lives and property damage, but that's what cops in L.A.
in the movies do (you don't think they actually find clues and follow leads do
you?).
        And then there's our friends the Feds, who are supposedly the smartest
criminal-catchers in the world and have access to advanced technology, but
still can't figure out how to get out of unusual personnel moves. After Han's
daughter is kidnapped, the FBI steps in but the feds are almost outraged when
they learn Detective Lee is on the way to help them out, so they somehow get
Carter to `babysit' him because `he'll just get in the way' while they handle
business.
        Naturally the first act is concentrated mostly on the comedic aspect with
Tucker doing his spiel while Chan handles the action. The film wastes a large
chunk of time with a chase scene in which Lee runs from Carter all the while
making for comedy and action with the mix of stunts and one-liners and
slapstick. Eventually the two start to work together towards solving the case,
even though it's quite clear they've been asked not to and don't know where to
start.
        Throughout most of the duration of the events, as silly as they often seem,
they're at least consistent and full of energy. Tucker can be funny, as his
appeal lies in his delivery and attitude, not the script. The said can be said
of  Chan, who has almost nothing to do, he's either getting into fights or on
the verge of tears when he spits out rhetoric at the villains. Watching his
fight scenes are more interesting on a mathematical level than they are as
pure adrenaline excitement. He uses everyday objects to disarm his enemies and
always has perfect timing. No matter how by-the-book the story is, Chan's
action always seems spontaneous and improvised.
        Eventually the film does begin to concentrate a little harder on the more
taxing elements such as the plot and the mystery of where the little girl is
and how Carter and Lee are going to find her when the feds can't. A few
interesting detective skills are thrown in that give the film a ray of hope
every once in a while, but they all end up following the same lead - ending
with zany fight scenes. Not to say the fight scenes are all that bad, it just
seems repetitive after a while.
        And what's an action film without a major action-packed finale with a twist
of the ol' timebomb and the villain-almost-gets-away and the hero-almost-dies?
Surprisingly, the ending here is quite weak. Throughout the film the action
had always been coupled with comedy, but here it's mostly just chaos.
        There's just not much of anything of any value to `Rush Hour.' Will anyone
think much of it a year from now? There's nothing insightful or innovative to
it, and yet it's just part of a trend. Movies shouldn't be made as fast food
for the eye.

