Title
Review for Jian hua yan yu jiang nan (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the last years of former Yugoslavia, emerging video
market became the battleground in the war between video
pirates and legitimate video distributors. The latter, being
underdog from the start, tried to win the upper hand by
delivering less popular, but more exotic and better
catalogued merchandise, usually ignored by their pirate
competition and missed by those who wanted something else
than standard Hollywood material in their video stores. Such
policy pleased those who wanted to watch former Yugoslav,
European, Indian, Turkish, Russian films or those films
belonging to genres unpopular in early 1990s like spaghetti
westerns, Italian historical spectacles or kung fu movies
from Hong Kong. One of such video collections was made of
twelve titles, covering early career of Jackie Chan in
1970s, mostly belonging to the genre of kung fu. I watched
them all and, among them, THE KILL WITH INTRIGUE, 1976 kung
fu melodrama directed by Lo Wei, was one of the better.
Plot of the film begins when young master Cao Le (played by
Jackie Chan) chases away Chin Chien, his pregnant girlfriend
and one of palace maidens. Cao Le's cruel act is actually
motivated with the desire to save her life, since vicious
gang of "Killer Bee" bandits is about to attack Le's family
estate. They arrive, led by Chin Chang Yin, woman who had
her face scarred as a child by Le's father, and kill
everyone. Life of Cao Le is spared and he goes on the long
and perilous journey in order to re-unite with Chin Chien,
who had met his friend Chin Chun. While Cao Le tries to
reach both of them, he is constantly tormented by Chin Chang
Yin, which took unusual interest in his plight.
For some people, kung fu films are by definition formulaic,
with cardboard characters and plots being nothing more than
cheap excuse for totally unrealistic fight scenes. For me,
kung fu is a specifically national (Chinese) genre, and, as
such, it has specific genre rules that, nevertheless, allow
their makers precious creative freedom, the very same way
different authors make different westerns. TO KILL WITH
INTRIGUE, with simple yet complicated plot that deals with
romance, friendship, unrequited love, betrayal and revenge,
is one of such example. Completely devoid of humour, script
by Kung Lu, gives opportunity to Lo Wei to engage in
straightforward drama with believable characters. It is also
opportunity for us to see Jackie Chan, actor almost always
associated with comedy, in a serious dramatic roles.
Dramatic scenes in this film are powerful, compensating
sometimes overlong and unrealistic fight scenes, plagued
with bad editing and even worse special effects. Musical
score is sometimes corny, as well as some romantic scenes,
but as a whole, film works, giving those accustomed to kung
fu films, more than average quality entertainment. Greatest
disservice to this film is done by poor English dubbing and
even worse pan & scan editing.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
