Title
Review for Neco z Alenky (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     This astonishing reworking of ALICE IN WONDERLAND was the first
feature to be made by Czech surrealist animator Jan Svankmayer after
two decades of producing short films.  He served his apprenticeship
well, employing all he had learned with his previous experiments to
fully realize this combination of stop-motion animation, live action,
and puppetry.  Lewis Carroll's classic story has always been too
erratically-paced and episodic to be successfully translated to film,
but Svankmajer makes the text completely his own.  It is his audacious,
subversive interpretation of Carroll's ALICE that makes this film so
fascinating.
     The Wonderland of Svankmajer's imagination is set entirely within
the confines of a series of connecting rooms.  We watch Alice
journeying down shabby stairwells and riding an industrial elevator,
and wonder if she is descending into some kind of Hell. At any rate,
the characters inhabiting it do that concept justice.  The denizens of
Wonderland are outcasts - they are assembled of leftovers (bones,
sawdust, furs ... the Caterpillar is merely a sock!) and do not inhabit
Wonderland so much as squat there. They're like the homeless and
down-at-heel of Wonderland, who have found a deserted building to
occupy.  Their faces are immobile and emotionless - the White Rabbit (a
scary character) has the same wild, fixed stare and clacking teeth
whether he's handing Alice an envelope or throwing plates at her.
Kristyna Kohoutova, who plays Alice, takes a neutral stance within
everything she encounters.  Svankmajer does not allow her much
expression - he even has her cover her face the only time she laughs -
and at several points in the story she actually becomes a puppet
herself.
     Svankmajer has gone on record as saying that all of his films are
political, but surely this comment is more appropriate to his short
subjects.  If what he says is to be taken literally then it is possible
to see a similarity between ALICE's Wonderland and the entropy of
postwar Eastern Europe.  There are cockroaches and nails in food, there
are re-animated animal corpses everywhere, rooms are littered with
debris, every door is locked and requires a key - it is certainly
barren and oppressive.  Is Svankmajer making a comment on his own
childhood?  It's certainly not for all tastes.  Cultists of the book
will find many of its familiar icons dramatically reworked in the film
(the Cheshire Cat is truly invisible - he's not even in it!) but should
bear in mind that as an animator, Svankmajer has adapted the story
primarily as a visual experience.  Hence the wordplay and verbal
conundrums of the book are gone, although there is the occasional
visual pun (e.g. socks in holes instead of holes in socks).  His unique
vision may be the most accurate representation of the mood of the books
since Tenniel established his original illustrations over a hundred
years ago.  A must-see - but definitely not with the intrusion of
television advertisements
