Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Number of Reviews
76

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Confession time:  I have never, ever seen Gone With the Wind.  I don't
know why, really.  Haven't wanted to check it out on video, haven't been
at home the nights it was on network TV, and it was too far to drive the
last time it was on the big-screen.  So right up front, I'll admit that
I don't know what the heck I'm talking about, but here goes...
Is Titanic the Gone With the Wind of the 1990's?
Maybe that's going a little bit too far.  As good a job as Leonardo
DiCaprio and Kate Winslet do in this movie, they're no Clark Gable and
Vivien Leigh.  But...  the parallels are there.  GWTW was the first
movie to take real advantage of the most revolutionary technology
available -- Technicolor.  Titanic takes revolutionary steps forward in
seamlessly integrating computer graphic design with actors.  GWTW places
America's greatest tragedy in the background of a classic love story,
Titanic does the same with the Atlantic's most legendary tragedy.  They
both have strong-willed redheaded heroines, they both exploit the class
differences between the aristocracy and the slaves/steerage bums, they
were both incredibly expensive and popular...  OK, maybe that's not
enough parallels.
So Titanic's not in GWTW's league.  No matter.  Titanic is a great movie
in its own right, complete with spills, thrills and (especially)
chills.  Much has been made of the humongous cost of the production, and
all of the care than went into making the huge luxury liner come alive
again.  The money was obviously well-spent.  The costumes look great,
the sets look great, the CGI graphics look great.  I especially liked
the expensive little touches, like spending tons of money on authentic
Titanic china only to break it all on the floor as the ship sinks.  But
writer/director/producer James Cameron's real challenge in
writing/directing/ producing Titanic wasn't just costuming and set
design and special effects.  Cameron's major headache was keeping the
audience interested in a tale where everybody knows the ending going
in.  He succeeds masterfully.
Cameron does two things that work incredibly well.  First, he shows us
modern-day salvage operations on Titanic (that's just "Titanic", not
"the Titanic", mind you).  The first glimpse we get of Titanic is the
ship in its present state, corroding slowly away under the hammering
pressure of the North Atlantic, from the window of a minisub piloted by
treasure hunter Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton).  Television coverage of the
exploration of Titanic intrigues 101-year-old Rose Calvert (Gloria
Stuart), who survived the wreck in 1912.  Stuart does a phenomenal job
in a brief role, narrating the story of her experience to a stunned
Paxton and his roughneck crew.
Secondly, Cameron keeps the storyline focused almost exclusively on the
Rose character, and the romantic triangle between Rose (Winslet), her
bastard millionaire fiancee Cal Hockley (Billy Zane) and the
irrepressible young artist Jack Daswon (DiCaprio).  The way that
big-budget disaster movies usually go wrong is to have an all-star cast,
so we see the impact of the disaster on a wide group of people.  Cameron
wisely chooses to stick with Rose and Jack, while paying scant heed to
the celebrities on board.  The supporting cast is professional, but
mostly anonymous -- other than Kathy Bates as the Unsinkable Molly
Brown, there's no moment when you stop and say, oh, yeah, I know him,
what's he been in.  (Although I would like to have seen Colm Meaney in a
White Star uniform, or even as the ill-fated engineer.)
The love story itself is rather conventional.  I think some reviewers
found it weak, and that may be a fair criticism.  The performances are
the key here.  Zane has the meatiest part in the movie, and he plays the
arrogant, condescending steel millionaire to the hilt.  He's smooth, he
looks great in a tuxedo, and he's a convincing enough jerk that the
Winslet-DiCaprio relationship looks plausible.  At the moment when he
sees a little girl too frightened to get aboard a lifeboat, you can hear
the wheels in his mind turning, saying not "Can I save this little
girl?", but "Can she help me get on a lifeboat?"
DiCaprio is a revelation.  I hadn't seen him before in anything, and
didn't know what the heck to expect, really.  (Honestly, I expected a
bad Irish accent, but Cameron evidently decided that was a bad idea, so
DiCaprio plays a poor American artist who wins a ticket in a poker
game.)  DiCaprio exhibits an infectious joy at being alive, and being on
the Titanic, that it's hard not to like him.  From the moment that the
ship leaves port until it hits the iceberg, DiCaprio has to carry the
movie and keep our interest, and he never falters.
Winslet's character grows up a lot during the movie, and so does her
performance.  At first, she's not required to do anything but wear
period clothing and look drop-dead gorgeous.  We know from the narration
that she's monstrously unhappy with her arranged marriage to Zane, but
there isn't any expression of these feelings until she encounters
DiCaprio.  Winslet and DiCaprio develop a chemistry that manages to
propel the movie along until the ship hits the iceberg.
It's at that moment where Winslet's character really comes alive.  Faced
with real danger, she drops her spoiled-rich-girl mannerisms and does a
splendid job.  As  Rose and Jack race around the doomed ship, looking
for shelter from the freezing water and Cal's fiery temper, Winslet
turns in a superb acting performance, mixing courage and compassion and
anger with sheer shrieking terror.
Of course, the most interesting character is the ship itself.  Cameron
has clearly fallen in love with Titanic, and shows her in every mood --
as a deserted wreck, down in the boiler room, up on the bridge, down in
the hold, at the captain's table, down in steerage -- and manages to
bring the great ship back from the dead.  Cameron's greatest gift is
that he allows us to fall in love with Titanic as well.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
Brandon Stahl
There's a moment in Titanic that illustrates what James Cameron is trying
to create with his giant epic.  It's not a special effect or a computer
animation or an explosion of any sort.  It's a simple scene:  Jack Dawson
(amazingly played by Leonardo DiCaprio) sits and draws Rose DeWinter (Kate
Winslett).  It's amazing because you actually believe that Dicapprio is
trying in earnest to create a portrait of Winslett.  His love for her is so
grand, that he only wants to create a picture that illustrates his love. 
It has to be perfect, you can see it his eyes.  It's a great moment
between the actors in a movie that could have so easily ignored them and gone
out to be a big budget disaster movie.  Cameron isn't after a disaster film
or gimmicky effects, he's after an emotion that he wants from his
audience: sympathy, maybe even tears.  He wants you to cry at the tragedy of the
sinking Titanic.  And in this movie, we do.  
Does Titanic live up to the hype?  I think it's better than the hype; It
is one of the best movies of the year.  A gigantic sprawling masterpiece
from James Cameron, who emerges as one the two or three best director of
epic movies of our time.  Here he has created a movie that is not only
amazing to look at, but amazing to feel and to be a part of.  As a friend of
mine said after the show, "I need a box of Kleenex."  
A lot of people have criticized the love story between Winslet and
DiCaprio, but I think that's what makes the film so good.  Unlike other films
that rely on special effects, Titanic is centered around a beautifully told
story.  The doomed ship is merely the backdrop that makes the story so
powerful.  Kind of a supporting character (a $200 million supporting
character) rather than at the fore front.
With big budget movies these days, there is no story.  It's all just an
excuse for special effects (Starship Troopers, Con Air, The Lost World,
Spawn, Batman and Robin, etc...) Titanic, however, is so much more. 
Cameron's use of story telling, letting us know how the boat will sink so that we
can watch for it at the end was brilliant.  From that point on, we forget
about the sinking and concentrate on the story.  After all, you know the
boat will sink.  In the meantime, we get to see some of the most beautiful
cinematography that I have seen in 10 years.  Yes, it is three hours, but
you don't notice it.  Instead, I was absorbed with the show that Cameron
puts in front of you.  It's grand entertainment; a documentary, a love
story and an adventure rolled into a movie that's bigger than life.
I don't know if Titanic will earn back the money it spent, but it
deserves to.  I think we need to praise Hollywood and Cameron for going out on
the line and making a big budget movie with a heart and characters that we
care about.  When people are dying at the end, we feel bad because they
somehow seem real.  We relate to them; we wonder if we would act like them as
they struggle to live.  
I think what makes it so good is that you feel like you're part of an
event.  Thirty or fourty years from now Titanic might be on TV (or whatever
we have as an equivalent by then) and we can tell our kids, "I was there
when that movie opened. I got to watch that in the theaters."  It's the kind
of epic that transcends generations and will probably be remembered for a
long time.  
"Titanic" (**** out of four) Directed by James Cameron.  Starring
Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslett, Billy Zane, Bill Paxton and Kathy Bates

Author
Boyd Petrie
Titanic (1997)
Rated PG-13 for disaster related peril and violence, nudity, sensuality, and some language.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, Gloria Stuart, Danny Nucci, Bernard Hill,
David Warner, Bill Paxton, Frances Fisher, Jonathan Hyde.
First off, I have been waiting for TITANIC to be released into theaters ever since I first heard they were
making it.  Hearing James Cameron would direct, I was a little worried that he would turn it into an action
film.  I felt that the maiden voyage of the R.M.S. Titanic had more going for it than action, and it deserved
more respect (not that I'm saying the action genre isn't respectful... or maybe I am).  Upon seeing the first
previews of the film (over a year ago), I realized that Cameron had created something that has to be seen.  It
wasn't going to be an action film, but a romantic love story revolving around the Titanic's disastrous voyage.
And then, come July, and I heard the worst news of the year--TITANIC was being pushed to December.  I was
incredibly disappointed, but the film's trailers still loomed in my mind.  December 19 was approaching fast,
but it seemed to take forever.
And then it hit theaters.  I bought tickets the night before, just to make sure I had them.  The film's title
appeared in big, bold letters against an oceanic background.  I let out a small cheer for myself and the film.
For over three hours, I sat in my seat, spellbound.  There really are no words to describe it.  This is an
experience one must see to believe.  The trailers make it look like an action-packed, visual-effects filled
story that had a romance story as a subplot.  Instead, the sinking of the Titanic is the subplot, while the
romance becomes the film's center.  On exiting the theater (and wiping away the tears), I overheard comments
from an audience member who thought it was going to be a disaster film filled with peril and death.  This was
a rather tasteless remark, and I wanted to turn to him and ask him if he had ever seen any of the previews.
However, he was partially right... it is filled with death and peril.  But only for the final hour or so.
TITANIC begins deep under the ocean (over two and half miles below the surface).  The dark blue surrounds the
camera's view, and then a light in the background appears.  Several small submarines move in the darkness
(reminiscent of Cameron's THE ABYSS) and the light shines upon a "ghost ship coming out of the darkness."
What's so remarkable about this scene is that these shots are actual footage of the real Titanic.  Cameron
shot this footage, taking shots from inside the ship with small vessels attached to cables.  The head of these
excursions into the Titanic is led by Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), an explorer hoping to find a valuable
diamond which was believed to be aboard the ship.  Instead of finding the diamond, they find a safe full of
drawings and other rotted paper.  One of these drawings is of a nude woman, who happens to be wearing the
diamond, appropriately called The Heart of the Sea.
Showing the picture on the TV, Lovett receives a phone call from Rose Calvert (Gloria Stuart), who claims to
be the woman in the picture.  She is flown in, where she begins to tell a story about a woman, Rose DeWitt
Butaker (Kate Winslet).  Rose is a 17 year old girl being forced to marry a man she does not love.  This man
is Cal Hockley (Billy Zane), a rich eccentric with more love for his money than Rose.  Calvert's story begins
with these two arriving at the farewell of the R.M.S. Titanic, nicknamed "The Unsinkable."  The first class
members board with pets and luggage, while third class members need to be checked for lice and other diseases
before boarding.  A poor artist, Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), wins a ticket for third class during a poker
game.  His friend, Fabrizio De Rossi (Danny Nucci), also boards in order to escape to America.  Shortly after
the ship leaves the dock, Jack spots Rose standing on the first class level.  Rose is so miserable with her
engagement that she runs to the edge of the boat to commit suicide.  Jack stops her, and the two begin a
friendship which later turns into a passionate affair.
As all this is going on, the ship itself is being pushed to its limits.  Considered to be the fastest and
largest moveable manmade object, one passenger, Bruce Ismay (Jonathan Hyde), wants Captain E.J. Smith (Bernard
Hill) to break the speed record.  Against fair warnings, the Captain complies and pushes the ship to full
power.  This, of course, leads to the demise of the Titanic.  The sinking of the Titanic is by far the most
exhilarating moments I have ever seen on screen.  The awesome grandeur of this sequence is perfect film
making.  Sure, there may be a couple moments where the special effects waver, but that is not important to the
story or to Cameron.  The incredible suspense that amounts is more than any other film this year, surpassing
the terrific CONTACT's transportation moment.  I thought I had seen everything, from the White House
exploding, to the destruction of an entire city.  But I had never seen anything like this.  The energy this
scene creates alone would power any other film.  But TITANIC has much more to offer than any other film.  It
combines humor, romance, action, suspense, and sex into one incredible motion picture that defies explanation.
Of course, TITANIC's central aspect is the love story between Jack and Rose, and the crush it has on Cal.  The
romantic story isn't original, but this is not a bad thing.  Cameron re-invents the story to fit the time
period and its characters.  Everything fits perfectly, with nothing ever seeming contrived or awkward.  Jack's
immediate interest in Rose, and Rose likewise, is completely understandable.  She is suffering emotionally,
and Jack is there to support her.  Themes from Romeo and Juliet are included, such as Rose being an
upper-classman, and Jack being lower class.   But the emotional connection between Rose and Jack is almost
palpable, and this fuels the film's first two hours.  We watch the trials of Jack and Rose, and as they
overcome them, the ship comes closer to destiny.  With a ship as large as the Titanic was, it was destined to
crash.  And of course, the ship isn't stocked with enough lifeboats to accommodate the 2,200 passengers.  In
the end, over 700 people survive, while the rest drown, freeze, or commit suicide.  
The resolution of the film, after the ship's gone under, is just as powerful as anything else in the movie.
It ends rather surprisingly, with a touching symbolic conclusion.  Most films end predictably, or
inappropriately, but TITANIC ends just on the right note.  In fact, the symbolism of the final scene is so
perfect, that many people will contemplate over the meaning for months.  The film does end rather
depressingly, and unexpectedly, but when you think about it, it couldn't have ended any other way.  All the
questions are answered, and we are left with a weak smile due to the intense situation we were just put
through.  The Titanic sinking is an emotional roller coaster, with many more realistic deaths than any
INDEPENDENCE DAY.  The death scenes are so realistic, that you find yourself caring for every single
passenger.  Cameron never compromises the integrity of his film, and the deaths of the passengers is never
overemphasized.  He doesn't linger on each death, but takes it as it comes to show us the realism without
trying to force emotions out of the audience.   But emotions do show, and almost anyone will find themselves
wiping away a few tears.
TITANIC's technical effects are the most impressive of any film this year.  The production design, by Peter
Lamont, is so meticulous in the small details, that we never realize the impact it has on the overall
production.  Everything, from the silverware to the enormous furnaces and engines, is perfectly in place.  The
cinematography, by Russell Carpenter, is incredibly rich.  The detail in each shot is quite exquisite, and the
visuals are very impressive without seeming too much like artificial visuals to make us gawk.  What we gawk at
is the realism.  The pistons that spin the propellers are huge, but the visual impact is even stronger.  Since
TITANIC is a period piece, the costumes, by Deborah Lynn Scott, had to be perfect.  And they are.  Nothing
seems like it doesn't belong in the early 20th century.  And then, there are the special effects.  Combining
the power of Industrial Light & Magic with Cameron's Digital Domain (as well as a couple other companies),
TITANIC contains the most impressive special effects this year, and ever.  Most special effects come across as
effects, and nothing more.  TITANIC uses special effects to enhance the realism of the story, not the other
way around.  The ship is brought to the screen via visual effects, models, and a near full-scale model.
Watching people fall from the ship is incredible, and the death scenes were too realistic for some people in
the audience.  When the ship splits in half and lands back on the water, a gasp is heard from almost everyone
in the audience.
Cameron, as a storyteller, is among the best ever.  His technique is perfect for these kinds of expensive
motion pictures.  But Cameron always makes good movies, no matter what kind of a budget he may have.  Perhaps
the biggest downfall of TITANIC is its enormous budget.  Somewhere around $200 million, TITANIC easily
surpasses WATERWORLD as the most expensive film to date.  But while watching TITANIC, you can see where the
money went.  And you also don't care what it cost.  You want to thank Cameron for giving us a film like this
one.  Cameron had major control over the production of this film, taking the directing and screenwriting into
his own hands.  He also co-edited and co-produced.  Cameron's screenplays are typically well written, with
smart dialogue, funny humor, and great action.  But TITANIC contains an emotional element last seen in
TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY, and elevates it even more.  This is a beautifully written screenplay, with
terrific humor and very dramatic situations.  Thankfully, Cameron opted to focus the story on the adventures
of two fictional characters, instead of many different ones.  We get to know them, and care for them.  By the
time the ship begins to sink, we actually care that the people on the ship live, instead of watching the
mayhem swallow faceless victims up.  
TITANIC's cast is among the best this year.  Leonardo DiCaprio is not one of my favorite actors (he was in
last year's horrible WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO + JULIET), but here, he sheds the cocky image (more than
likely a result of Cameron's control over his actors).  DiCaprio gives his best performance to date, never
seeming like an actor portraying a character.  However, it is Kate Winslet's performance that steals the show.
Her impressive resume of work has made her one of my favorite actresses, and this just adds to it.  Winslet
portrays all the confusion and love and hate that any other actress couldn't do as effectively.  The scenes
with her and DiCaprio are emotionally charged, and the connection between the two reminds us of what good
chemistry can do for a film.  Billy Zane has proven to be a reliable actor, but again, he tops himself as the
villain of the film.  Zane adds just enough love and warmth to the role in the beginning, but as Winslet
begins falling in love with DiCaprio, he sheds that image until the final moments of the film.  He shows an
evil and jealous side to his personality, but it's never artificial.  Gloria Stuart gives a remarkable
performance in a role that marks her return during a long dry spell (her last film was in 1986).  Stuart's
Rose is old, but she still has the spirit of when she was 17.  Her face glows with love.  Bill Paxton also
does a very good job, though his character is mainly there in order to begin the story.  Kathy Bates gives yet
another terrific turn as the real-life Mrs. Molly Brown.  This ensemble cast is quite good, but it is DiCaprio
and Winslet who shine on screen.
TITANIC is rated PG-13 for disaster related peril and violence, nudity, sensuality, and brief language.  The
nudity is not inappropriate, as it is done tastefully.  Winslet appears topless, but Cameron never exploits
the nudity.  If we do manage to see her topless, it is not because Cameron wanted to, but because the camera
happened to be there.  TITANIC is a grand epic motion picture which is sure to sweep the Oscars.  This is the
first film since SCHINDLER'S LIST that I have wanted to win Best Picture, and has a good chance at doing it.
Let's face it, James Cameron deserves some recognition for all his hard work.  In fact, this is the first film
since the 1993 epic that I have wanted to sweep the Oscars (which is unfortunate because I want CONTACT to win
a few too).  TITANIC is by far the best film of the year.  TITANIC will be remembered as an instant classic,
going down in history as the most expensive film ever made, but also as one of the best films ever made.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: James Cameron
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher,
Kathy Bates, Gloria Stuart, Bill Paxton, Suzy Amis, Bernard Hill,
Jonathan Hyde, Victor Garber, David Warner, Danny Nucci
With all the hype surrounding it, it's a shock "Titanic" isn't
anti-climactic.  I mean, with a budget bigger than that of
"Waterworld"'s, a very simple if not tired premise, and a film that has
been worked on for around three years now, it's a shock I wasn't let
down.  Thankfully, "Titanic" is the old-fashioned epic I had hoped for -
a passionate, emotional tragedy on the level with any of the great epics
of the fifties and sixties.  One would have to be pretty cold-hearted
not to at least feel a little sad at the finale of this one.
First off, "Titanic" has the most amazing special effects I've ever
seen.  Really.  The ship looks realistic, the action sequences are
exhilerating (yet never overwhelming), and every shot is authentic. 
When we first see the ship, it looks as grand as it probably did when it
was first unveiled to the world.  A giant ship that was arrogantly
declared "unsinkable," even seeing a recreation of it isn't
anti-climactic.
And when it begins to sink, it looks absolutely frightening.  Thanks to
a long running time, we get the feeling of every single second of the
ship's descent into the cold Atlantic waters.  Every single shot of the
water spilling into the ship is creepy and ominous, even after we've
seen it hundreds of time.  There are brilliant shots on people about to
be killed as a result of the flooding, most notably a shot of an old
couple on a bed that is about to be swept away with water.  And when the
ship's rear is sticking way up in the air, still carrying hundreds of
passengers who are hanging on for dear life, it's one of the most
shocking sights these eyes have ever seen, that includes all the things
I've seen in real life.
The film is also incredibly authentic, acting as an exact example of
what it was like to live back in that particular time period.  I mean,
the film gets every single facet of the boat correct, probably all the
way down to the kind of china they used to serve the upper class. 
Watching "Titanic" is like taking a literal time warp; you feel like
you're one of the passengers on this boat, and when the boat is sinking,
we either feel like the people in the boat watching this horrendous
event, or we feel like one of the people still on the boat...depends
where we are.
And the special effects are astounding.  The reason it's the best I've
seen in a long while is that it doesn't understate the storyline, and
doesn't look like a special effect.  The ship looks realistic, and it
looks absolutely frightening every time we see the water slowly creeping
into rooms.  The film uses special effects in a way that most films
don't use it: intelligently.  Even before we journey back in time, we
learn exactly how the ship sank, thanks to some great special effects in
the beginning.  Of all the films I've seen this year, "Titanic" is the
best to look at.
Then there's the story...just kidding.  The story's actually excellent,
working flawlessly with the special effects.  Sure, the premise sucks
(Romeo and Juliet for the first half, "The Poseidan Adventure Part Deux"
for the second), but writer/director James Cameron fuses it with so much
passion, that by the finale, this is truly a tragedy.  Not many people
could pull this off without making it incredibly corny and
melodramatic.  But we care about the characters that inhibit the
storyline, and by the end, even I was kind of choked up.  If you know me
at all, I hardly give any deep emotions for any film characters, but in
this, I cared about the two protagonists as people, not characters.
If you've seen the tell-most-of-everything preview, you know that the
story revolves around the present day search for a valuable piece of
jewelry believed to have sunk with the Titanic.  Grungy-looking Brock
Lovett (Bill Paxton, who has finally found a good look for himself)
heads an operation that goes down to the sunken ship with a small remote
control boat (hysterically called "Snoop Dog"), and takes pictures, much
like Cameron did in real life (these are real shots of the Titanic). 
Seeing it on the news is a survivor of the sinking ship, 101-year old
Rose Dawson (Gloria Stuart), who claims to be the naked girl in a
drawing they found, wearing the jewel.  She's shipped out to the ship,
and begins to tell the anecdote we see on screen.
Being forced to marry an arogant ass (but a rich arrogant ass) named Cal
Hartley (a surprisingly effective Billy Zane), the poor Rose (Kate
Winslet) is on the ship with her fiance, her mother (Frances Fisher),
and Cal's entourage, including his respectable henchman, Lovejoy (David
Warner, who was just in "Scream 2" as the theater director). 
Incessantly melancholy, she tries to kill herself, and runs into Jack
Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a third class guy who won himself a ticket
from a game of poker.  They instantly click, and are soon parading
around, and falling in love.
After several complications (mommy doesn't like him, and Cal is getting
jealous...not to mention he's poor), they are soon officially sneaking
around, and by the time the ship (which was going too fast on purpose)
has collided with the iceberg, we are really rooting for them to get
married.  Some may call this an unoriginal and simple relationship.  It
is.  That's the beauty of it.  Because of its simplicity and universal
relation to any star-crossed love affair (even that of Romeo and
Juliet), we identify with them and/or care about them incessantly.  And
since Winslet and DiCaprio have wonderful chemistry together, and
possess such charisma individually, we love them as people.  By the time
they're in the water, waiting for the lifeboats to come and pick them
up, we're already in tears.
Apart from a wondeful tragedy of epic proportions, the film works
brilliantly as simple satire.  Cameron takes a negative approach to the
Titanic, as well as a sweetly positive one.  He shows the horror of
classes, as they are divided, and that the first class (or "better
half," as one character puts it) is saved while the lower classes get
gypped.  But by the end, both classes are suffering in one way or
another: the lower classes suffer by mostly dying, and the upper class
suffers by having to watch this and feel emotionally ravaged (well, most
of them do).
The film is also about man's arrogance.  Why anyone could think they
could build a ship that "God himself couldn't sink" is truly moronic,
and God (if he's there...) makes them pay for it.  Not to mention, some
of the more stupid people running the ship decide to not put enough
lifeboats on the ship for fear of "cluttering."  The Captain and the
Designer of the ship (Bernard Hill and Victor Garber, respectively) are
thankfully put in a good light, as they were merely pawns in the game,
ruled by the arrogant of them all, Bruce Ismay (Jonathan Hyde), the
administrator, who wants to blow everyone away by arriving in New York a
couple days before scheduled.
Thankfully, this film isn't one-sided.  The best thing about the Titanic
seems to be that it brings two people together, even if it's not
historically possible (apparently, the upper class would have no way of
even getting near the lower class).  Even at the end, Jack is happy that
he came on the ship, since he got to meet his true love.  At least some
good came out of the ship, even if it was one of the few rays of light.
The acting is amazing, especially from the two leads (who won
well-deserved Golden Globe nominations).  DiCaprio has never been
better, and Winslet is amazing (even if she has been better - she's a
better actor than DiCaprio after all).  Also notable is Gloria Stuart,
as the older Rose, Bill Paxton, Bernard Hill as the Captain, Victor
Garber as the Designer of the ship, Billy Zane (who does a great job,
despite the fact that his character is one-dimensional), and Kathy Bates
as the noveau riche (not to mention, unsinkable) Molly Brown.  A fine
job from everyone.
At over three hours, "Titanic" is lenghty but never boring.  Cameron has
made several long films in his career, most of them director's cuts. 
Thank god he wasn't afraid to release a long film, because this film
needed to be long.  No important elements of the story are missing, and
he directs with such passion.  Sure, his writing in some places is a tad
corny, but he never lets the film seem melodramatic or forced.  Even the
star-crossed lovers plot is not forced (thank god once more).
"Titanic" may actually be the best film Cameron has ever done (maybe). 
Of all his films, this one has the most undaunted passion, biggest
emotions, and grandest themes.  It's an all-around powerful film, an
epic that never gets corny, never seems like a disaster film, and is
never boring at all.  It deserves to be ranked along with the best films
of the year, a wonderful masterpiece of a film.  I loved every minute of
it.
homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Walter Frith
     Despite popular belief, director James Cameron's first film was not
'The Terminator' (1984) but was in fact a lousy and ultimately
forgettable effort in 1981 entitled 'Piranha II: The Spawning'.
Although 'The Terminator' did put Cameron on the map as a major player
in the motion picture industry, his progress was swift and captivating
and his vision was clearly that of a perfectionist attempting to better
himself with each project.  His heart pounding sequel to 1979's 'Alien'
had the same title but was cleverly billed in plural fashion entitled
'Aliens'.  A subtle little message that struck the public as sounding
better than the original and it was.  His films that followed included
'The Abyss' (1989) which was technically efficient but now has dated
special effects with a pretentious ending and 'Terminator 2: Judgment
Day' which had superior technology compared with 'The Terminator' but
had less edge.   'True Lies' (1994) was a ridiculously smug film with a
midsection that dragged in a manner unsuitable for a Cameron film.
James Cameron is no longer measured only as a director caught up in the
advancements of movie technology but has struck a nerve with his ability
to measure and balance academic creativity, emotion and tremendously
chilling special effects in 'Titanic'.
     A landmark film in every sense of the word, 'Titanic' will do
several things to revolutionize film after having done things that have
already made history.  To date, it is the most expensive film ever
produced at a cost of 200 million dollars.  It was criticized heavily by
the mainstream media as being too much for its own good to be successful
but Cameron insisted on nurturing the film drastically and avoided the
planned release for the summer of 1997 and has instead held off until
the Christmas season.  The computerized visual effects are brilliant and
are the best to date in any film using them.  I saw 'Titanic' in a brand
new movie theatre built in my area recently and witnessed it on a 65
foot screen and I couldn't spot one crop mark in the computer
enhancements of major scenes.  To its advantage, much of the movie takes
place at night so spotting the crop marks is hard but it does things new
in blending computers, reality and good old fashioned elbow grease on
the part of the film's crew.  It will also make superstars out of its
two leading characters played by Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet and
it will put Cameron on the map as a serious director of stamina and
sheer talent who has the potential of  holding his own with Steven
Spielberg, Oliver Stone, Martin Scorsese and other important directors
and creative artists of his generation.
     Also written by Cameron, 'Titanic' is a film that is so attractive
and mesmerizing simply because it thrives to visualize detail in every
capacity of the famous historic tragedy.  It is a true story.  Dubbed as
an unsinkable vessel by its creators and promoted through the corporate
arrogance that built it and eventually destroyed it through sheer
excess, on April 15, 1912, the luxury liner 'Titanic' on its maiden
voyage hit an iceberg in the North Atlantic Ocean, cracked in two pieces
down the middle and sank, killing 1,500 people while 700 survived.  The
breakdown of law and order, the display of cruelty sheltering the
wealthy to safety first while middle class and lower class passengers
die in larger numbers and the reigning chaos of the overall climax make
'Titanic' a classic film destined for a special place in film history.
It looks and feels like nothing Hollywood has ever produced before.
It's historical accuracy and significance are mixed with a fictional
story taking place in the mix of things.
     It begins in the present day with a salvage team attempting to
recover some of the ship's preserved treasure.  Among their find is a
drawing of a beautiful woman posing nude on a sofa.  Parts of the
picture suitable for television broadcast are made public and a 100 year
old survivor of that fateful night (Gloria Stuart) comes forward
claiming to be the woman in the picture.  She meets with the salvage
team and its leader (Bill Paxton) and tells them her story of the events
leading up to her encounter with history.  The film then flashes back in
time as she is shown as a young woman (Kate Winslet), getting on the
ship as a lady of high society with the man she is planning to marry
(Billy Zane, the film's villain and rich snob you want to see die).  She
meets a peasant with a heart of dignity and splendidly down to Earth
qualities (Leonardo DiCaprio) with whom she falls in love.
     And that's the key to the film's success.  A love story with real
impact and credible shades of passion, it is the most important blend of
movie making since the love story in 1965's 'Doctor Zhivago' set against
another historical event, the Russian revolution of 1917.  At a running
time of 194 minutes (3 hours and 14 minutes) 'Titanic' does something
uncanny and something I've never seen before.  It begins its climax at
exactly the 100 minute (1 hour and 40 minute) mark which is
approximately only halfway through as the ship hits the iceberg with the
results that follow.  It is impossible for an audience to be put to
sleep at anytime as the film spends every minute of its running time
telling the tale that needs to be told and leaving nothing out and
including nothing irrelevant.  It is all set to an incredible and moody
music score that is deeply moving courtesy of James Horner who has done
some of his best work that ranks with his classic scores of 'Field of
Dreams', 'Apollo 13' and 'Braveheart'.  Momentum is built slowly and in
an eerie manner that plays out like a nightmare with moral choices being
made every step of the way by the film's characters.
     'Titanic' has an emotionally crushing and yet strangely
satisfactory conclusion which is memorable and avoids the status quo.
It is an early and very serious contender for the Best Picture Academy
Award and its recognition in that category would be significant as it
will find a positive place with historians, film critics and both
general and rabid movie patrons and that appeal is hard to ignore.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jonathan Williams
Written and directed by James Cameron
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio (Jack Dawson), Kate Winslet (Rose DeWitt
Bukater), Billy Zane (Cal Hockley), Kathy Bates (Molly Brown), Frances
Fisher (Ruth DeWitt Bukater)
Titanic: Small, Thoughtful Hollywood Movies Goes Down with the Ship
In his book Adventures in Screen Trade, William Goldman identifies two
types of movies: real, and comic book. Long before the end of my review
you will guess which one I think Titanic is. 
I initially didnšt want to see the Titanic. I figured I knew what was
going to happen, so why bother?  And I had heard stories about how it was
three hours long, and that you had better go to the bathroom first, etc.
Eventually I was forced to give in and this review is the result. 
Since so much has been said about the moviešs plot, I will confine my
comments to my immediate reactions. First, I liked the movie more than I
thought I would. Second, it didnšt seem as long as it was, so it certainly
held my attention. But third, although I liked the movie, the longer it
has been since seeing it, the more disappointed I am because of its little
flaws. 
First, the story of the young, star-crossed couple (you knew they were
star-crossed because they fell in love on a boat that you knew would sink)
was not entirely believable, although there was enough energy there to
draw you into the show. That this love story works in spite itself is less
a testament to the script or the casting, both of which were flawed, than
to the power of a good old fashioned love story. Leonard DiCaprio (Jack
Dawson) looked too young, and Kate Winslet (Rose DeWitt) too old. His
dialogue was filled with anachronisms and had a modern day smart-aleck
sound, and even though there was some chemistry between the two, their
union seemed improbable. I found it hard to believe, for instance, that
after her motheršs plea to stick with the rich fiance Cal Hockley (played
by Billy Zane), Winsletšs character would abandon her family and go after
a penniless young boy. Chase your own dreams to your own detriment if you
will, but abandon dear old mom to creditors? Only in storybook romances
are rich girls that impractical and willing to abandon their parents.
Also, casting an older-looking MAN (versus boy) than DiCaprio might have
helped their relationshipšs credibility. As I watched the movie I found
myself wondering whether the formula story book romance between social
unequals may be getting a bit hackneyed for our post-modern sensibilities.
Then there is the old woman. She is allegedly the young woman eighty or so
years later. For some reason her character irked me. Perhaps itšs because
she wasnšt a character but a plot contrivance. She didnšt look 100 plus
years old or enough like I would imagine Kate Winslet would look like as
an old crone. And I couldnšt see how she could have lived this long and
not have told anyone this incredible story. Add to that her possession of
a pricless diamond necklace, which she even wore around her neck while
doing the gardening, that no one knew about? At times, these and other
features of Titanicšs story book plot kept nudging me to remind me that it
was just there to make the rest of the disaster a little more palatable.
And that was another problem too, the jarring juxtaposition of dime store
romance novel plot with real life tragedy. The sinking of the Titanic was
a real disaster, an historical event with all sorts of amazing
coincidences and instances of both sacrifice and utter selfishness, and
most of that went ignored so that a plot that would have barely sustained
a made for TV movie could take center stage. Without the magnificent
special effects (mostly magnificent, occassionally you could tell that the
people walking on deck in the long shots were computer generated), would
this be a movie? Which leads me to summarize what both these flaws
signify: that the plot and character were secondary to the spectacle. And
a comic book movie is nothing if not a great spectacle.
This raises a disturbing question: Are we still able to make and watch
movies that arenšt comic book? There are still a few of them made, but
their numbers seem always to be in decline. Special effects are here to
stay, in part because people expect them, but also because they allow film
makers to get away with contrived plot and shallow characters. (Consider
how flat and comic book-like both the Jurassic Park moviesš characters
are.) And now that movies are made on a scale so large that most have to
succeed in foreign markets in order to turn a profit, the comic book movie
is easier to translate and export, with its easily distinguishable good
and bad guys and its shorter more declarative sentences played atop an
obvious spectacle.
Of course, few people notice the decline of the small movie anymore
because most of us have been weaned on a diet of flat, convenient
characters in movies and tv. In the end, the Titanic will make a lot of
money and inspire a few fond memories, but little more. It is not a movie
that we can revisit to mine for hidden meaning or allegory. Thatšs a sad
memorial for a disaster that needlessly claimed the lives of so many
innocent victims. But at $200 million, you canšt risk making a
sophisticated movie since you need half the population of the US to watch
it just to break even. Such is the legacy of the Hollywood blockbuster,
starting with Jaws and Star Wars through the Jurassic movies and down to
Titanic, that the studios, greedy for the outrageous profits to be had
from them, all want a blockbuster of their own. The small, thoughtful
Hollywood movie, once almost extinct but making a slow comeback, may at
last have been dealt a final death blow. We now hear that Titanic may now
be the only movie to gross over a $billion worldwide. The Titanic took
down with it more than its 1500 plus brave souls.
Again, donšt get me wrong, this is a movie I enjoyed, but as soon as it
was over, I had a nagging sensation of not quite being satisfied, a
sensation I have sadly gotten used to. As I walked to my car after
watching the Titanic, I thought I could hear a bell tolling.  It wasnšt
tolling for the brave dead from the Titanic, but for a new casualty, the
small, serious Hollywood movie. I got in and drove away as fast as I
could, hoping to avoid the funeral.

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
OK, a whole bunch of things.  Yes, James Cameron, one of the foremost
action directors of this day (and we won't mention the Academy Awards
last year), had apparently spent some $200M to make a teen romance
featuring that well-worn theme of carpe diem that's been threaded
through what feels like every other American movie of the past decade
or two.  This is serious chutzpah.  The results are stunning.
The plot is simple: young, upper class woman in an arranged marriage
meets starving artist on a boat trip, falls in love and is redeemed,
her spirit is set free.  She doesn't marry into arrangement and
strictures, but instead seizes the day.  The choices are black and
white, without shades of gray or moral choices.  We've seen this fable
any number of times, and there really are no surprises in how this
story is told.  There are no twists; the ending is expected; the
acting, Kate Winslet excepted, sucked.  But Cameron tells this story
reasonably well.
And he weaves this story into that of the Titanic, and gives this theme
of carpe diem prominence over all the other stories and fables that you
can extract from the sinking.  "Titanic" is mythological: there are the
morals of hubris, of class confrontation, of one's conduct in facing
death, of dilemnas and choices of survival and survivors.  These themes
are present in Cameron's film, but they're secondary threads.  The love
story between Winslet and DiCarpio is primary, and many of these
subsidiary ideas can be interpreted through it.
So, just to hit the points, the working poor stuck in Third Class, on
their way to America to make a new life, have the noble poverty thing
going for them, an exubrence and freedom in simple things.  In contrast
is the self-appointed royalty in First Class, who air kiss, wear
corsets, and are merely on seasonal migration between Europe and
America.  They're no fun.  You can imagine where DiCaprio has a cabin,
and where the bad guys come from.  (Interestingly, we don't see Second
Class passengers, who presumably would be middle class, perhaps
returning from a once in a lifetime tour of Europe.  I suppose this
would have clouded the issue.  Oh, random semi-ironic fact: the largest
cruise ship in the world today, which I think makes Titanic look like
an overgrown tug boat, belongs to Carnival "Kathie Lee" Cruises, making
circuits of the Carribean, a sea free of icebergs.  Presumably, the
people on this ship may be exclusively middle class.)  The hubris bit
with Titanic is obvious, though it's extended to First Class
passengers, when he men retire to cigars and cognac after dinner --
their illusions of power are as fragile and as vulnerable to strokes of
fortune as the ship itself.  And so on.
The theme of carpe diem is built through two main motifs: time and
luck.  Clocks and reminders of time are everywhere in the film.  The
ship departs at a specific time, and the collision with the iceberg is
noted with due percision.  DiCarpio meets Winslet next to the clock,
the ship is due to sink in an hour, the Carpathian won't reach the
wreck for four.  The Titanic's architect, while waiting for the ship to
go down, spends a moment to correct a clock's time against his watch.
And the distance between now and then is 84 years.  Time is fleeting,
permanence is an illusion, so seize the day.  Similarly, luck manifests
by itself, and you can't presume to make your own.  DiCarpio gets on
board through a lucky hand of poker, changing his life and Winslet's.
Cal the Evil Fiance presumes to make his own luck, but this is
silliness.  The moral is almost Taoist: let Fortune take charge, live
day by day, and attempts to control your own fate are futile and
counterproductive.
A few moments that may seem cheesy in any other film somehow works in
this one: Winslet and DiCaprio at the ship's prow, flying over the
ocean through belief and a strong breeze; the dolphins escorting the
Titanic as she heads to the open ocean.  These images are used
earnestly, without irony, and Cameron invokes a strong enough illusion
to make them work.  Most amazingly and most effectively, the
superimpossion of the corrupted wreck at the bottom of the ocean with
the bright, shining ship in life.  Cameron evokes ghosts in these
transitions.
In addition to these scenes that walk the fine line between cheesiness
and wonder, Cameron is able to vividly invoke disaster and hell.
There's the majestic scene when the stern rises up and then breaks
apart from the rest of the ship.  The law of gravity clearly hasn't
been revoked.  And perhaps most haunting is this vision from Dante, as
a lone lifeboat goes back to look for survivors.  Bodies bob on the
ocean, suspended by their life jackets.  And the life boat picks
through this grotesque flotsam, guided only by flashlights.  It's a
surreal image, very stark and invocative of the Inferno's ninth
circle.
I think I've meandered about this film enough.

Author
Rory Mackay
_In Brief:_ This film needs no introduction. If you haven't heard of it,
then you must have been up in space on a sabbatical, and if you haven't
seen it -- well, I suspect you're in a small minority! First thing's
firstis it all it's hyped up to be? Well, yesand no. It's a good film,
and there's a lot to like about it, but it's not without its problems.
When I saw the first trailer for "Titanic", it was when I went to see
"Bean" last Summer, I think, my intial reaction was -- ain't that downright
sick to make a disaster movie out of such a dreadful, real-life tragedy?! I
mean, what's happened to Hollywood's script-writers, have they run entirely
out of new ideas? Gads, whatever next, I asked myself, how about an action
film based on Hiroshima starring Jean Claude Van Damme? I was not entirely
filled with anticipation, but then I wasn't alone in that respect.
It's when it came out in the cinema, to rave reviews (well, mostly) and
anyone who'd been to see it seemed disturbingly obsessed by it that I
started to take notice! I didn't see the film until several months after
its release (by which time my sister had seen it about four times!), so I
went with a slightly more open mind, but I still didn't think I'd enjoy it
much. Did I? Yes and no. 
Mainly yes, I'm happy to say. The first hour or so was beautifully done,
not so much because of the scripting (I'll talk about that later) but
because the re-created ship and sets were stunning to look at, as was
Cameron's directing, and the performances of the principal cast were so
strong that the "human" aspect of the story, the romance between Rose (Kate
Winslet) and Jack (Leonardo DiCaprio), was enchanting.
The film is told via flashback, with Gloria Stuart playing the elderly Rose
in the modern day (you knew that, a' course! :-) ). Well, it's an often
effective device to use in storytelling -- though sometimes it can fall
flat. Does it work here? In script form it doesn't add all that much to the
story. What does add a lot to the story is Gloria Stuart, whose stunning
performance is the strongest, most moving of the film. Her presence brings
a much deeper level of passion, and depth to the story, and though her
appearances are relatively brief, the film would have suffered without her.
Also impressive are DiCaprio and Winslet, who wholly succeed in rising
above the often poor dialogue, and the bond they form is both heartfelt and
moving. It's an old story, you know -- forbidden love ala Romeo and Juliet
-- but it works, and Jack's "rescuing" Rose (in both literal and figurative
senses) and teaching her to live life for what counts was pointed and
touching. In fact, I enjoyed the first half of the film a lot, largely
because Winslet and DiCaprio bring such and charm, energy to the romance.
It's engaging, touching and very enjoyable. There's more than a tinge of
poignancy to it as well, simply because you know it's not going to be a
happy ending. 
Which leads us to the second half of the film. We all knew it was coming.
I'm sure director Cameron was looking forward with eager anticipation to
it, because as he's stated in interviews, the real thrust of the story (for
him) was the sinking, and the Jack/Rose romance was a merely a manipulative
plot device to get you emotionally into the film. I think that understates
the importance of the romance, as I found it far more enjoyable than an
hour of watching people die. The iceberg arrives, and the Captain announces
that Titanic will have sunk in about an hour. And it is an hour. My
goodness, we don't miss a second of that hour 
Gratuitous? Well, perhaps not by today's standards, I'm sure there's been
far worse produced under the banner of "entertainment" in other films. But
I certainly wasn't prepared for how shocking and graphic the last hour or
so would be. Not that I'd expect the word "understatement" to be part of
Cameron's vocabulary (he who brought us such, umm, vivid films as
"Terminator 2" and "Aliens"). Is it overdone? I thought so. Understatement
can sometimes work wonders in conveying tragedy. No, no one expected a
happy ending, but I didn't quite expect the horrendously shocking and
powerful scenes we were bombarded throughout the film's second half. Still,
whether it was overdone and heavy-handed or not, if it was the shock-factor
Cameron was after it worked, because I was shocked and moved, in fact I
spent most of the last hour in tears!
You really couldn't help but get emotionally involved, whether it was
wishing someone would knock that dreadfully psychotic fiance of Rose's
overboard or desperately hoping that Rose would rescue Jack, or that Jack
would rescue Rose, or that they would both survive. Perhaps the most
harrowing scene was when the ship has sunk, and those that sunk along with
the ship freeze to death on the water surface. The bit where Rose lets go
of Jack's hand, while promising she'll never let go in her heart was
particularly heart-wrenching, and the sight of rescue boats sailing amid
the ocean of corpses was a pretty powerful image, to put no fine a point on
it. I loved the ending, however, which was both moving and slightly
uplifting following the horror of the past hour and a half.
So, we've established that the film is powerful and moving, if the last
hour was rather excessive. Haven't mentioned the script. Plot-wise it's OK,
though the Jack/Rose relationship was beautifully developed, but I've a
feeling that's to the actors credit if anything. As for the dialoguewell,
Titanic is set in 1912. It's a period drama. But I saw very little
indication of period in so far as the dialogue is concerned. Did they
really use phrases like "Goddamn it!" back in the turn of the century? I
doubt it. Would someone talk like this: "Do ya love the guy or what?". I
doubt it. Is such dialogue as "I saw the iceberg, and I see it in your eyes
now" not just a bitclumsy? Yes it is. A little more attention to dialogue
would not have gone astray, and Cameron himself is to blame (he wrote the
script). Stick with directing, dude.
But its more than redeemed by the acting, with DiCaprio and Winslet on fine
form, ably supported by a strong cast. Star of the show was Gloria Stuart,
though -- why didn't she win that Oscar?! After all, they were throwing
Oscars at "Titanic" left, right and centre, but Gloria was perhaps the most
deserving nominee. Directing-wise Cameron does a spectacular job. Like I
said, his vision was a bit excessive, but at least he directed it well. I
haven't even mentioned James Horner's beautiful score. Utterly heavenly,
though when your Dad and sister play the soundtrack a lot you do start to
get a bit bored with it! ;-) 
I've finished my rant, which lasted a lot longer than I thought it would!
Just leaves a couple of questions; was it worth all those Oscars? Hell,
don't talk to me about Oscars. Bloomin' farce. It was deserving in a number
of departments, though. Last question; is it, as some suggest, one of the
best films of all-time? Nope, I don't think so. It's certainly one of the
most powerful and memorable films I've ever seen, but I don't think it
quite ranks as one of my all-time favourites. And as for the fact they're
reportedly making a "Titanic 2"well I guess that's typical Hollywood for
you! 
For the regularly updated TV and Film Reviews, check out my new website
"The Cool Critique" -- http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
(best viewed with Internet Explorer).

Author
Duncan Stevens
"The most expensive movie in history" isn't really that exciting a crown
to wear these days, since the mark is surpassed every other year or so,
seemingly, but the distinction does mean that your film is going to get
some attention. And James Cameron's Titanic is different from some past
blockbusters in a few ways; the money appears to have been spent somewhat
wisely, and the results are evident on screen. More than that, though,
Cameron's screenplay attempts to include an actual story along with all
the impressive effects.
"Attempts" is operative here, though, because the love story in Titanic,
though a noble effort, doesn't quite work. The fault is due more to the
screenplay than to the actors; though your reviewer is not a Leonardo
DiCaprio fan, he didn't do anything particularly wrong, as
struggling-but-ever-so-charismatic artist Jack, besides take the part. And
Kate Winslet is convincing as ever as society girl Rose locked into an
unwelcome engagement with a guy she (drum roll) doesn't love. The script
is not at all kind to them, though; again and again, they're stuck with
guy-from-the-wrong-side-of-the-tracks or girl-who-has-never-really-lived
platitudes, and your reviewer was often distracted by a sudden urge to
smack his forehead. (No, no, his own, not Leo's, though that was tempting
too sometimes.) Cliched scenes include snooty upper-class types trading
snide remarks about Jack's background, a
you're-not-to-see-that-unsuitable-young-man lecture, an exchange where
Rose is really intrigued by Jack but feels like she has to be offended at
the things he says...the screenwriter had clearly been perusing his 101
Fave Scenes From Romances when he wrote this stuff. And some of the things
that do feel original aren't particularly welcome--a spitting contest?
Showing that they're both art lovers at heart by trading notes about an
"unknown" (uh, no, not in 1912) named Picasso?
The romance merits this much attention because Cameron devotes much of the
first two hours to it; after the iceberg enters the scene, development of
the romantic angle is mostly set aside. And there are things to enjoy in
those first two hours, certainly; a party on the third-class deck
contrasts effectively with an icy cocktail-lounge scene upstairs, and
Winslet's exuberance feels real. A nude drawing scene (Winslet nude, of
course; this is Hollywood) is convincingly done, with shyness on both
sides and a sense that the scene does try to dramatize a trust between
them (rather than serving as a device for gratuitous nudity, usually a
safe assumption). The scene afterwards is not a highlight--your reviewer
simply cannot see the appeal of losing one's virginity in a car--but there
are certainly effective moments. It's just that there aren't enough to
make the romance really work.
When the iceberg hits, though, the second plot--the sinking of the
ship--kicks in, and it can fairly be said that this was remarkable. The
appeal doesn't actually derive from already knowing the lovers' story and
from following them around, because their part feels rather predictable;
even when DiCaprio is chained to a pipe in a room filling up with water,
it's hard to actually doubt that he'll be rescued. Similarly, the lovers
go through several more perilous escapes, but they're less interesting
than the fate of the ship in general. Rather, Cameron focuses on several
minor characters in turn and follows them as the ship sinks, in order to
avoid the faceless-people-dying element common in disaster movies.
Prominent are the ship's designer, one of the crew guarding the lifeboats,
and, particularly, the ship's captain; their stories are compelling
because they feel like something that actually might have happened on the
ship, not a Hollywood romance. And when we do go back to Leo and Kate, we
can easily forget the earlier bad moments, since daring escapes lessen the
need for acting, and the couple becomes more plausible than it had been
earlier. A computer-generated reproduction of how the ship actually sank
appeared early on in the film; watching it played out in full color is
mesmerizing. It is a credit to Cameron's direction that the sinking,
though spectacular, is not chaotic; the breakup of the ship and the
general panic progresses gradually enough to build the suspense. And
though there are anonymous people dying left and right, Cameron keeps
enough focus on the stories we know and care about--and limits the time
and space spent on horrible deaths--that the effects are not in danger of
taking over.
The class element would feel overdone if it weren't true; the image of
third-class passengers locked below decks while the first class boarded
lifeboats would feel gratuitous in a fictional account, but it's simple
fact here--and Cameron, to his credit, doesn't beat the audience over the
head with it. Nor, for that matter, are the moments of pathos--a father
telling his daughter that he'll have a seat in the "lifeboat for daddies,"
in full knowledge that there will be no such thing, for example--sprinkled
in too heavily; the action moves too quickly for the various tragic
partings to feel maudlin. When Cameron does stop the show, as it were, to
let us watch things fall apart, it's strikingly effective; a string
quartet that quixotically stayed on deck to the bitter end plays "Nearer,
my God, to thee," and that sound drowns out everything else. There may not
be a more poignant moment in film this year.
There is a third plot, not particularly interesting or effective;
latter-day fortune-hunters are looking for a diamond that went down with
the ship, they discover the drawing, and 101-year-old Rose tells the
story. The themes-- greed and callousness--parallel those of the film
nicely, but it doesn't work very well as a story in itself. It does,
however, provide a rationale for including perhaps the most impressive
part of all: actual footage from the actual ship, shot on the ocean floor,
that give dramatic contrast and illustrate just how precisely the scale
model that the movie built mirrors the original. Gloria Stuart is adequate
as the older Rose, but it is to the film's credit that it doesn't bother
with flashing forward too often once the real plot is underway.
If there is one thing that can be said of Titanic, then, it's that it
could have been far worse than it is; Cameron does very well to tie all
the stories together into a reasonably coherent 3.5-hour whole, without
any feeling that the plots give way to look-at-these-neat-effects.
Winslet's acting does carry much of the film--she plays the most
interesting part, and gives DiCaprio credibility, no small feat--and it is
her role that ties together many of the disparate plot elements. After
all, it's she who breaks the class barriers by turning her back on the
first-class lifeboat, and it's she who confronts the shallowness of the
assumption that a diamond is a substitute for love. And hokey though it
is, it's her character's maturation, more than the romance, that the movie
depicts, and Winslet makes it reasonably plausible; we don't quite believe
her more capable at the end than at the beginning, since she played her
society girl with just a bit too much spirit to be an ornament, but her
belief in herself at the end does convince. DiCaprio tries, to be sure,
and when he's supposed to be a free-spirited kid he does fine; when he's
supposed to be strong or comforting or otherwise inspire confidence, no.
But he's just good enough to keep from distracting from Winslet, and once
the ship starts to sink, that's all he needs to do.
Titanic, in short, is not a good movie that could have been great so much
as a good movie that could have been dreadful with a less compelling
performance from Winslet and less restraint from Cameron. A better script
might have improved things, true, but the first half does what it needs to
do despite bad dialogue, and the sinking is spectacular enough to make
glitches forgivable. Though far from flawless, Titanic is a thoroughly
enjoyable spectacle.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Author
Lawrence Mixson
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Juliet Winslet, Billy Zane, Danny Nuccie,
Kathy Bates, and Bill Paxton
        Titanic is, without a doubt, the best movie I've seen all
year.  And believe me, I'm not an easy critic to impress: The English
Patient was too long, Men in Black was over-hyped, and several of the
"big summer releases" were dead in the water. Thank God this film got
delayed until December. It's my Christmas present.
        Titanic is in the tradition of the old Hollywood epics of
years-gone-by, and it is truly a stunning film. While watching this
picture you are completely mesmerized, never taking your eyes off the
screen, nor checking your watch to see how much longer it's gonna
last, despite its 3 hour plus running time. As a friend of mine,who's
a true Titanic-buff, said "If someone doesn't like this film, it's
because they didn't want to." Truer words are hard to come by.
        Of course, it doesn't hurt that this film comes from one of my
favorite directors, James Cameron, who is unarguably the greatest
action director of all time. If you wish to argue that point with me,
look at his list of credits: The Terminator, Aliens, The Abyss,
Terminator 2, True Lies, etc. Still care to disagree? Not only has
Cameron helmed the directorial duties of this film, he also wrote,
produced, and edited it.  And to show his true faith for the project,
he renenged all directing fees and percentage points to ease the
budget costs. It's obvious he truly loves Titanic.
        The film opens with footage, both real and fake, of an
underwater excursion by special submarines to the bottom of the
Atlantic, where a team of explorers lead by Bill Paxton are searcing
for a diamond called the "Heart of the Ocean", which, according to
Bill Paxton's character, would be worth more than the Hope Diamond
today. Their search turns up, dissapointly, no diamond, but instead a
drawing of a young woman wearing the diamond.  This picture is
broadcast on CNN and is seen by a 101 year old woman named Rose, who
claims to be the girl in the picture. She is flown out to sea to meet
Bill Paxton and to tell them about the diamond. Almost all of the rest
of the movie is her narration of the past.
        Rose's narration shows us how she was an unhappy young girl,
engaged to a rich man named Cal Hockley(Billy Zane) that she didn't
want to marry.  Her mother is pushy and obnoxious, and Cal Hockley is
arrogant. They are boarding the Titanic, which is sailing to America,
and this is where she is to marry Cal.
        Meanwhile, a young man named Jack Dawson(Leonardo DiCaprio)
and his Italian friend(Danny Nucci) win two 3rd class tickets aboard
the Titanic in a poker game. They are overjoyed, and rush aboard just
as the boat is leaving.  For them, this is their ticket to America, to
a better life. For Rose, she is sailing to her doom.
        The first hour and a half or so of Titanic tells the story of
how Rose DeWitt(Kate Winslet) and Jack Dawson fall in love. It's the
classic wrong-side-of-the-tracks story, and does sometimes resort to a
few cliches.  But as I said above, the love portion isn't sappy and
doesn't "weigh the film down", as some critics have said. It's sweet,
and it didn't make me restless at all, despite the fact that I usually
hate love stories.
        Of course, it might help that Cameron introduces some pretty
interesting characters to help keep our eyes glued to the screen. Most
of these people actually were passengers on the Titanic back in 1912,
including the enigmatic Molly Brown(played by the talented Kathy
Bates), the Captain of Titanic(Bernard Hill), and so on. All of these
characters add an extra depth to the film, and make it that easier to
watch.
        Of course, things really start to get going after the hour and
a half mark, where the Titanic strikes the iceberg and begins a slow
sink to the bottom. The sinking is depicted realisticly, and the
effects are truly amazing. It is not told in a heroic fashion sense
either, as people are portrayed as panicking, pushing others aside to
get on the limited lifeboats, and drowning and dying horrible deaths.
        The best part of the movie, in my opinion, comes at the very
end, when we flash back to the future. The crew, who at first had been
skeptical of Rose's story, now are totally aborbed by her. Rose goes
out onto the ship's ledge, and we then learn a secret about her that
catches us off guard.  We then see a dream of Rose's, in which she
returns to the Titanic and is dancing with Jack Dawson. Most people I
talked with after the movie saw this as only a dream. However, I think
it symbolized more; I think it meant that Rose had died, and is going
to a sort of heaven, which would be the happiest part of her life: her
and her one true love, Jack. If anyone has seen the movie and would
like to voice an opinion about this, e-mail me at venom8@hotmail.com.

http://www.geocities.com/~fullyloaded

Author
Alex Bryson
Once in a while a movie arrives that is capable of appealing directly
to the nobler emotions of the viewer, and succeeds in embedding itself
in the popular consciousness. I'm pretty sure this is one of those
movies. As a piece of cinema Titanic suffers from any number of highly
visible flaws but for some curious reason as a whole it proves to be a
triumph, offering an exhilarating and affecting three and a quarter
hour experience few will forget quickly. Cameron expresses himself on
the largest and most expensive canvas ever but there is still intimacy
and subtlety in the film at its best.
Titanic is a cinematic brain bypass operation, but I don't mean that
in a disparaging way: the best films find a way to communicate their
themes: love, sacrifice, tragedy in this case without you noticing.
There is an examination of class and society in the film, as well as
the familiar notions of arrogance and greed so often associated with
this subject, but that is secondary to the main purpose of Titanic,
which is to tell the tale of a doomed romance. Categorising Titanic is
difficult: it is an uneasy combination of traditional disaster movie,
epic romance and James Cameron's other action flicks, almost as if it
had been decided that something for everyone should be included in
order that its eventual success be certain, but I think it is clear
that it is the second element he hopes we will concentrate on.
Whether it captures the full horror and scale of the tragedy is
debatable, but we are certainly given a privileged position to observe
an awesome recreation of that night in 1912. The events of that
evening are so familiar to us that making a picture with impact on the
subject must be doubly difficult: the film succeeds, but whether this
is due to the sheer immensity of the enterprise as it is presented to
the cinemagoer is unclear. Whatever the explanation, Cameron has
created a stunning movie. The budget has been the focus of much
debate, but I think it would be true to say that we see where it all
went. It was well spent.
The film chronicles the story of Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet),
an upper class Philadelphian returning to America to marry the wealthy
Cal Hockley (Billy Zane). She is not wholly convinced of the merits of
this arrangement, and on board she meets Jack Dawson (Leonardo
DiCaprio), a penniless artist, with whom she falls in love. Dawson is
the catalyst for her to break free of the restrictive conventions and
blinkered thinking of her 1st class companions, and she develops
independence and some real spirit. The sinking as well as incidental
stories like the present day search for a valuable gem in the wreck,
are interwoven with the main love story. Veteran Gloria Stewart makes
an appearance as Rose in the present day.
Now I mentioned there were problems. I will begin with the most
serious, the script. Titanic is the product of James Cameron, and the
script though hugely effective in terms of its grand thematic sweeps
does not maintain the high standard at a close-up level. It seems at
times that the film has been constructed from a mass cull of old
Hollywood romances, and most of the film seems familiar in some way,
but frankly this is not worth moaning about when the end product is
this impressive.
All the themes are there: love, self-sacrifice, honour: apparently the
film was pitched to the studio as 'Romeo + Juliet' aboard the doomed
liner. Guess who plays the hero? This type of thing is repeated a
number of times: Frances Fisher basically reprises the Charlotte
Bartlett role from "A Room with a View" as a stern matriarch for
instance. Some elements actually seem to have jumped straight from A
Night to Remember. The characters are familiar from hundreds of other
pictures, but at least Cameron has an eye for what sort of characters
work. I think he misses one cheap trick in failing to emphasise the
name of the elderly Rose when it occurs early on however.
Dialogue is clunky for the most part, but that is not to say Cameron
does not structure the narrative well. The flashbacks are hugely
effective - a scene where the ghostly wreck briefly returns to its
former glory is testimony to the storytelling flair of the director.
Cameron also presents us with a computer simulation of the sinking
early on which means we understand fully what is going on later. The
cinematography is superb, and visual effects have to be seen to be
believed. I think this could justifiably be called Cameron's best
work.
The performances are perhaps what keeps the film afloat: Leonardo
DiCaprio is an impressive spirited Jack, and he has shown again that
he has vast potential. I think I would be right in saying this is his
first leading man role, and he deports himself well as the resourceful
- though perhaps too boyish - hero. Winslet carries the film however,
yet again stunning in a role that suits her perfectly. She is perhaps
not at her best, but her transition from repressed aristocrat to
liberated heroine is a joy to watch, and marks a possible Oscar
contender even in this tough year. The chemistry between the two
lovers is almost tangible, and may offer the key to understanding the
film's effectiveness. Kathy Bates, Bill Paxton and Jonathan Hyde
amongst others offer solid support
The way it has been filmed results in the last hour feeling almost
like real time, but the sinking is surprisingly less successful than
the romance of the first part of the film. Cameron is revealed as a
closet romantic despite his fascination with cyborgs and heavy
machinery, and I'm not sure his heart is in the action sequences set
in flooded corridors with sparking lights and groaning metal. After
this the story does revert to its original type, but curiously I found
the final 1912 scenes not particularly moving: perhaps the problem was
the fact that the stories are already is so well known, or that I had
heard the Celine Dion song so had a fairly good idea which characters
would draw the short straw. The impact is subdued - more could have
been wrung from the characters at this point, but as I said before,
the film has flaws.
James Horner's score is one of his more impressive: elements of his
1995 Braveheart and an Enya like sound have been fused to create a
haunting and effective soundtrack: his interpretation of the action
sequences are not quite as good as the rest, but then I don't suppose
the action sequences themselves were. Fortunately Dion is kept for the
end credits where she belongs.
There really is little reason to dislike Titanic - certainly it is at
points trite, cliched and poorly developed, but at its best it has a
vitality and spirit that make these faults pale into insignificance
beside the awesome grasp of its ambition. I would be surprised if
Titanic does not come to be considered alongside the great historical
epics, though maybe it is not a Lawrence of Arabia. Admittedly the
same people who are saying this now probably said it about The English
Patient last year, or Dances with Wolves before that, but the
effectiveness of Titanic and this same ambition will surely secure its
place in that pantheon.
What critics struggle to communicate about this film is the ability it
has to involve the audience in its story and the sheer power the
visuals and narrative exert on the viewer - analysed separately the
script would suggest a fairly disappointing film, but Titanic has a
strange quality that allows it to overcome all its limitations. I
can't express what makes Titanic so special either - no doubt every
studio executive is asking precisely this question. In any case see it
for yourself.
(Review by Alex Bryson  - this review is also
available at http://www.balmyle.demon.co.uk/ReelTime/)

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
TITANIC is one of the most infamous movies of our time, hugely glorified long
before it even hit theaters. When the budget hit $200 million, TITANIC created
a buzz that would put an entire beehive to shame. Two questions stuck out in
people's minds. One: Will it ever make back the money spent on creating it?
And two: Is it as good as it is expensive? At least now the latter question
can be answered . . . with a resounding "YES!"
In the year 1912, one of the largest ships ever to set sail, left port in
Ireland en route to New York, carrying over 2200 passengers. This ship, named
Titanic, was the most luxurious and supposedly unsinkable vessel ever to hit
the seas. As history would go on to prove, this would merely remain a dream
and a hope in the eyes of those who designed and constructed the Royal Mailing
Steamer, as only 705 of all the passengers and crew who boarded the Titanic
would survive.
James Cameron tells this tale using a pair of destined lovers who come from
two completely diametric social backgrounds. Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate
Winslet) is engaged to marry the overly well-to-do Cal Hockley (Billy Zane),
more to her mother Ruth's (Frances Fisher) accolade than her own. Rose seems
stuck in this pompous, overly eloquent lifestyle, and unlike her snobbish
peers, despises it rather than lavishes in it. On the other hand (and quite a
few decks below) is artist Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a nobody in the
eyes of society who lives a carefree vagabond lifestyle, taking each day as
its own, unchartered and clean to be preserved and cherished to its fullest.
One night, after closely examining her life, past, present, and future, Rose
finds herself hanging over the railing of the ship, ready to plunge into the
sea. She will put an end to the inevitable - a life of drab, superficial
socializing and false happiness fueled by greed. At this point, Jack comes out
of the shadows and talks her back onto the deck, saving her life with his
charming personality. Instead of being grateful, her fiance and mother are
repulsed by the disreputable savior. Their condescending view of the third
class results in loquacious bashing of Jack, who merely won his way on board
Titanic through a lucky hand of poker.
Despite unremitting threats from those of her own "class", Rose finds herself
charmed by Jack's lightheartedness, whether she wants to be or not, and the
two visit often, all the while falling deeper in love. The sharp parallel in
the classes is excellently presented as we watch Rose and Jack try to carry on
a building love affair of which no one approves. What's funny is how easily we
forget the imminent fate the Titanic will face. We become so engrossed in the
forbidden romance that we forget their love may very well be doomed to failure
regardless of social politics.
The two hours that transpire before Titanic hits a doom-sealing iceberg is in-
and-of itself a marvelous love story. Of all the love stories I've ever seen,
never has one rang out with such conviction. If you don't believe Rose and
Jack are soulmates by the end of this film, you don't have a heart. *True*
love has never been so wonderfully presented - so eloquently, so convincingly,
and so passionately - as it is between these two. This is by far the best
onscreen romance - and maybe offscreen - I've ever known. In fact, in a
beautifully presented moment, Jack draws Rose's nude portrait. It is one of
the most sensual, erotic, and yet heartfelt scenes I've ever seen.
TITANIC can't be acclaimed enough, and surely this is one to be seen and
revered on the big screen. The way Winslet and DiCaprio's eyes gaze upon one
another is so compelling of *true* love that you can't fathom it isn't real.
Best acting nominations? Definitely should be. I can't remember such
emotionally charged visuals as the ones this film embodies. Should Russell
Carpenter receive a Best Cinematography nomination? Hell yes. Some of the
sweeping shots of the Titanic being pulled down into a watery grave brought
tears to my eyes! If TITANIC doesn't receive Academy Award nominations in
*every* applicable category, I'm boycotting the Oscars! I'm talking
screenplay, acting, supporting acting, visual effects, sound effects, art
direction, James Cameron for Best Director, and of course, Best Picture. It
deserves to sweep each and every one of these!
I had a hard time writing this review because all my words are so futile when
trying to describe one of the best done films of all time. James Cameron
should be patting himself on the back until death does he part. Never have I
seen such a *complete* work of cinema art, and if this one doesn't go down in
history, then the Titanic itself shouldn't have either. Even though it runs
over three hours long, there isn't *one frame* of film that should have been
cut. Would you take *one* brush stroke out of the Sistine Chapel? Didn't think
so - and the three hours pass so quickly you won't have time to complain.
Now that I've had the chance to at least *try* and express what a masterpiece
TITANIC is, forget everything I said and go see this movie for yourself. It's
truly a masterpiece in all senses of the word. It will be quite a while before
another movie comes along that can eclipse this one. James Cameron has peaked
with TITANIC, and this will be the one he is remembered for. The 1990's have
peaked with this epic motion picture. In fact, this very easily could be the
peak of 20th century cinema. What a way to top of the century that made movies
a mainstream method of art and entertainment - three cheers and four stars for
TITANIC.

Author
Nigel Bridgeman
With Titanic, writer/editor/producer/director James Cameron has hit his
peak; nothing he can come up with next will be able to match the adrenaline
rush and emotional wallop one receives after seeing this masterpiece.
Cameron has always been that rare filmmaker, one who can make a big-budget
special effects feast with an emotional core, and he doesn't disappoint
here. While it definately is a visual spectacle in the last half, the
entire film is dominated by the rivetting romance between the two central
characters, Jack Dawson and Rose DeWitt Bukater. Titanic is definately a
film that has something for almost everyone.
Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), while on an expedition through the wreckage of
the eponymous ocean liner, discovers a drawing of a young woman wearing
what he has been searching three years for, an extremely rare and fabled
diamond, the Heart of the Ocean. Upon seeing Lovett on a news report one
day, Rose Calvert (Gloria Stuart) contacts Lovett, telling him that she is
the woman in the picture. He has her flown to his ship, where she tells her
version of what happened on the fateful night of April 14, 1912.
The younger Rose (Kate Winslet) is travelling across the Atlantic back to
America with her mother (Frances Fisher) and fiance Cal (Billy Zane) to an
impending marriage she'd rather do without. Feeling trapped in her
lifestyle among the high society and unable to see an escape route from a
loveless marriage with Cal, she tries to leap to an icy death from the back
of the ship when she is rescued by Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a poor
drifter who won his third-class ticket in a lucky hand of poker. They
strike up a friendship and soon discover that they are both lost souls who
belong to each other. Fate has other plans, however.
Titanic is as close to being a perfect Hollywood film there has been in
fifty years. Visually, the film is stunning; the production design is among
the most authentic I have ever seen. It may seem cliched, but it is easy to
believe that Cameron & Co. really filmed on the decks of the ship. The
special effects, while iffy in places, are nonetheless amazing. There is no
doubt that the $US200 million budget was money well spent.
The film would be nothing, however, if it didn't have a story one could
care about, and in this department Cameron does not disappoint. DiCaprio
and Winslet are perfect in their roles, generating an onscreen chemistry
that brings the film a heart and soul unseen in recent Hollywood films.
Both actors are terrific; DiCaprio brings youthful charm early on, but in
the later scenes dominates with the determination and maturity required.
Winslet, however, is extraordinary. Whether casually flirting with
DiCaprio, standing up to her mother or floating helplessly in the middle of
the Atlantic, she is absolutely rivetting. Another Oscar nomination (her
first being for Sense & Sensibility) will not be a surprise in the least.
She could very well become my favourite actress in the near future.
Gloria Stuart, as the older Rose, is fine in her return to film. I was
completely unfamiliar with her before the release of Titanic, but now I am
very tempted to check out some of her earlier work. Even though she is very
subdued and without any phony theatrics, she keeps you glued to the screen
whenever she appears. An Oscar nomination is only a formality.
Most people know about Titanic because of it's budget and, realistically,
Paramount and Fox may never see all of their money back. It's a testament
to both studios, however, that they were willing to put so much money into
such an emotionally involving film. Titanic is the best film of the year,
despite its minor flaws, and I doubt I'll see a better example of how to
make a great movie for a long, long time.
---
Nigel Bridgeman (nigelb@powerup.com.au)
The Movie Pages - a movie page: http://www.powerup.com.au/~nigelb/movies

Author
Alex Ioshpe
Probably the most popular and praised film of all time, turned out to be a
primitive and predictable costume drama with a dose of social criticism.
Everyone knows about the greatest and most famous shipping disaster of all
time. And the actual catastrophe is masterfully crafted by director James
Cameron, combining visual -and sound effects, he re-creates the frightening
atmosphere of the sinking ship in the middle of nowhere. I liked very much
the emotional and brutal contrast between the first and the third classes.
While their cabin is slowly filling up with water, a mother is telling her
children a fairytail -- "..and they lived happily ever after..". And then
the ship goes down and the few survivors are left alone under the stars and
the chilling air.
However, the actual disaster is happening almost at the end of the movie,
while the first two hours are just beautiful sets and bad dialogues.
In the present day, the RMS Titanic is explored by Brock Lovett (Bill
Paxton), a treasure seeker looking for the Coeur de la Mer diamond, lost
during the sinking.
Somewhere inside the ship, Lovett's crew discover a sketchbook of an artist
long dead. Here, in the shape of a nude young lady, is a window into the
distant age of 1912. Lovett is extremely surprised when he get's a phone
call from Rose Dawson, claiming that she is a model. She is immediately
helicoptered onto the vessel, and she gets the first glimpse of the fated
ship in 80 years. As the memories come flooding back, she once again becomes
Rose DeWitt Buketer (Kate Winslet), the fiancée of wealthy Cal Hockley
(Billy Zane) and daughter of Ruth DeWitt Bukater (Frances Fisher). On board
there are rich and poor, everyone trust in the ship's designer (Jonathan
Hyde) and her master, Captain E.J. Smith (Bernard Hill).
On board the ship, Rose, unhappy and restless meets Jack (Leonardo
DiCaprio) - a young American artist, poor, brave and attractive. A love
story slowly emerges and the two lovers must not only experience the
difference between the social classes, but also face the greatest power on
earth - death.
Cameron could as well have called his picture "The Never ending Love" or
"Love at First Sight", as he concentrates all his energy on the young
couple, and not on the disaster itself.
The plot is anything but original and the dialogues sometimes resemble a
television soap-opera. The director doesn't even try to overcome his empty
script.
Because of its primitive and predictable plot, Titanic is totally depending
on the visuals that truly are breathtaking. Russel Carpenter's rich,
majestic and incredibly detailed cinematography is certainly award-worthy.
Everything from art direction to visual and sound effects are a top notch.
But it doesn't help much when the costumes are more convincing than the
actors who wear them. The actors are not to blame, because their characters
are more like caricatures, in other words - fake. Jack is a man with many
talents: he is a talented artist, handsome, brave, honest, strong,
funny...you name it. He doesn't have any dark side, he doesn't make any
mistakes, that for a second would make him human. Jack is perfect, but he
is - poor. On the other hand we have Cal. He is a bastard that treats Rose
as an odalisque and not as his wife-to-be. He lacks everything Jack
possesses, but he is -- rich. This childish contrast between the social
classes is one of those things that makes Titanic nothing more than a
mediocre picture.
Cameron knows precisely what we want to see. His film therefore contains
certain minimums to draw an audience - attractive actors, a "tragic love
story", beautiful visuals (including expensive special effects), a dose of
social criticism, a fascinating historical event (we love true stories) and
last, but not least - an incredible media support, which proclaimed an
average picture the "greatest film of all time".
On the outside Titanic looks perfect, but behind that sparkling curtain of
incredible visuals - is emptiness - nothing to think about. The main
weakness of this film, which ironically became its success, is simplicity.
Cameron enables our basic and if you wish - primitive emotions: love, hate,
fear and helplessness.
Everyone understands the power of love and the threat to our beautiful
couple is likewise imaginable - a sinking ship.
Titanic is a typical Hollywood production, totally and completely dependent
on visual perfection to hide its primitive plot. It's a good picture, but
absolutely not a masterpiece. It's among hundreds and thousands good films
released every year, not better or worse than the average American film.

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
TITANIC carries with it the hype of being the most expensive film ever
made. With a whopping US$200 million price tag on it, the hype surrounding
the movie was immense. Like WATERWORLD, people would like to see it; mostly
to see how bad it would sink. It proved otherwise. Rather than sinking with
its immense budget and hype or merely floating along with most mediocre
Hollywood films, it jumped straight out of the water and flew beyond
expectations.  People who watch this movie with or without a pre-set
thinking will be pleasantly surprised with what TITANIC has to offer, in
terms of a well-balanced movie.
I could not begin to agree that it was money well spent. After all, US$200
million is a LOT of money for a movie. Too much in all aspects of
movie-making. James Cameron commissioned ILM (Industrial Light and Magic),
which did all those superb effects in THE LOST WORLD, STARSHIP TROOPERS and
MEN IN BLACK to re-create the ship in computer graphics and mixing them
seamlessly with live-action footage. The set designs were very good, and so
much money was spent that there are rumours going about that they auctioned
the sets off after the movie was shot to cut back this over-budgeted movie.
Even the carpets used in the film was made by the original manufacturer for
those in the real Titanic way back in the early 1900s.
TITANIC revolves around the love-story between two characters; Jack Dawson
(DiCaprio) and Rose Calvert (Winslet). Jack, a care-free drifter who seizes
life by the day, wins a 3rd class ticket for the maiden voyage of the ship
over a hand of poker. Rose, on the other hand, hates everything about her
life although she is to wed a rich aristocrat (Billy Zane). Rose's feeling
of being contained is only reinforced with all the pressures put upon her
by her mother, so as to save their family name and status. Her unorthodox
meeting with Jack presented her with the opportunity to run away from her
emotional predicament and to allow herself to discover what she really
needs out of life. 
This film does not possess the complexity in terms of style and
story-telling like say, L.A.CONFIDENTIAL but ironically so, this is also
one of its greatest merits which actually makes this film highly watchable.
The idealistic love-story between Jack and Rose crosses into the `fantasy'
region almost all the time throughout the film and the dialogue exchanged
during such moments are not quite easy to swallow as real-life situations.
It is the innocence and pureness in their relationship which actually make
tragedy more enthralling and extreme. With all the special-effects and
great action surrounding the film, audiences will definitely feel that
TITANIC is close to the ultimate tragedy love-story. This sets TITANIC much
higher than other `disaster' films due to this central focus on their
relationship.
Director James Cameron has come a LONG way since his first movie, a
well-forgotten low budget flick called PIRANHA 2 : THE SPAWNING. Since
then, he has moved on to direct box-office hits like THE TERMINATOR,
TERMINATOR 2, ALIENS and TRUE LIES, making him one of the most bankable
action movie directors of all time. We can still see him flexing those
well-respected skills in action sequences in TITANIC. What really impressed
was this action-based director was actually using his skills to support a
love-story rather than to allow action to be the central-focus of the film
and best of all, how he managed to pull it off successfully. Watch out for
this film in the upcoming Academy Awards. James Cameron may be on of the
top contenders for best director. 
Despite its long running time (over 3hrs!),  audiences will not feel that
it was draggy or slow. The last film which I felt the same for the running
time was for BRAVEHEART. The film was never a moment uninteresting nor
slow; there is always something to keep audiences `occupied'. Highly
Recommended.  

Author
Jerry Bosch
Perhaps somebody way out in Patagonia is seeing TITANIC for the first time
today, but for the rest us it is a memory threatening to dissolve in the
mist of passing, prematurely distant, weeks.
I remember TITANIC as a sleek and glossy film which in a way is just as
phony as the society beetles that infested the doomed ocean liner on its
maiden and only voyage. That is not to say that it is not a triumph of
technique and virtuosity, polished to a high sheen and  resplendent from
start to finish. The seeming dichotomy brings home the realization that a
movie can be devoid of any trace of imagination and all suspicion of
originality and still be a tour de force. TITANIC represents a triumph of
the stereotype; it is the epitome of cliché elevated to dogmatic
proportions. (For another example of unadulterated cliche risen to the level
of virtue one is reminded of Kramer Versus Kramer). And yet, despite its
phoniness and brainlessness, it is still a damn good movie because it
entertains pleasantly and is beautiful to watch. That one of the most horrid
maritime disasters of all time can be transformed into a pleasantly
entertaining film which is more beautiful than disturbing is an interesting
commentary on the virtuosity of the Hollywood alchemists.
But I overstate my case. The juxtaposition of the contemporary with the
historical was indeed a fine creative touch (albeit not astoundingly
original); but standing by its lonesome outside of the story, it is
insufficient to save the rest of the film from the rap of wall to wall
cliches and lack of imagination. Beyond that, I searched my recollection for
flashes of originality and came up with nothing more than the whistle scene.
Even the touted device of spiriting out an old survivor to tell the story of
a long-ago disaster is hardly an immaculate conceptus.
Still TITANIC succeeds splendidly as a fairy tale. It is De Caprio's second
crack at the Romeo and Juliet thing, and this time he gets it right. I can
understand why he boycotted the Academy Awards; he was robbed. It is not
often that an actor can flesh out a cardboard character and make it vibrant
and compelling. Leo unlocked the usually unrealized power of cliches; which
is based on the fact that nothing which is not profoundly human can ever
become a cliché. It may be that TITANIC was unsinkable, but without Leo it
would not have floated as majestic; it would have been just another well
made superproduction. Kate was nominated and she was a fine Juliet, but it
was Leo, not Kate, who stirred the juices of TITANIC and gave a heart to the
tin man. His failure to get even a nomination is a travesty. How often does
one get to see a flawless piece of work?
James Cameron deserves full credit for steering TITANIC past a plethora of
icebergs, some of his own making; but in proclaiming himself King of the
World he went clearly overboard. I also fail to understand the wisdom or
merit of carrying the authenticity concept beyond the simulation of
splendor, which is all that the camera can see. The camera doesn't care if
it's real mahogany; it just wants it to look like mahogany. Cameron could
have saved a bundle by simply growing up. After all, his crown and scepter
ARE phony.
TITANIC is not an important film the way GONE WITH THE WIND and GHANDI are.
It is important only as a big, well made film; it is another triumph of
style over substance. Not that there is anything wrong with that. If one can
not be both skillful and original, mere skill can still deliver a worthy
product.

Author
Ruediger Landmann

It was with a certain amount of doubt that I fronted up to Titanic. It's
simply not the kind of film that I usually enjoy, not being much of an
admirer of American cinema, or of romances either. Combined with the fact
that Leonardo DiCaprio, whom I disliked so much in Romeo and Juliet, was
starring, I could barely will myself to the cinema.
I wanted to see the ship. I've had a lingering interest in the Titanic
since I was entranced by Robert Ballard's photos of the wreck in _National
Geographic_ years and years ago. Having heard that the film incorporated
actual footage of the Titanic as she is today, I was determined to see it
on the big screen. Besides, having liked some of James Cameron's work (the
first Terminator film, and Aliens), I wondered if it could really be that
bad.
Titanic is really three stories in one: the framing story set in the
present, the story of the romance between Jack Dawson and Rose DeWitt
Buckater, and the story of the Titanic sinking. These three tales are
skilfully interwoven by Cameron, but are told with varying degrees of
success.
For me, the romance was the least satisfactory. I can attribute part of
this to my reaction to DiCaprio, whose style I personally find irritating,
but most of the blame must be attributed to Cameron, for a very weak
script. Although I didn't care for Kate Winslet's performance as Rose much
either, I found myself feeling very sorry for her having to deliver such
trite and cliched lines. This was really by-the-numbers stuff: rich,
uppity (but inwardly dissatisfied) girl meets boy-from-the-wrong-side-of-
town who teaches her that there's more to life than she's ever known.
Unfortunately, Cameron was not able to disguise how tired the formula is,
and the only surprise is the cliche that it manages to avoid: had it been
revealed that Rose ended up carrying Jack's child, and that Jack was Lizzy
Calvert's (Suzy Amis) real grandfather, the cheese would have been
unbearable. Fortunately, Cameron somehow managed to restrain himself. 
The supporting cast isn't treated much better by the script: Billy Zane
as Rose's fiance, Cal Hockley, lacked only a black cape and a moustache to
twirl to make him into the archetypal melodrama villain, and Frances
Fisher as Rose's mother never quite succeeded in her valiant attempt to do
something with what she had been handed by Cameron. Nowhere is this
more obvious than the scene where she is lacing Rose into her corset, and
sympathy for the character is asked of the audience. By then it's far too
late. Where Fisher fails, David Warner as Cal's valet, Spicer Lovejoy,
enjoys a marginal success, succeeding perhaps because he had the luxury of
playing a character from whom no real depth is required, nor for
whom sympathy is expected.
Fortunately, as the film continues, the love story is gradually eclipsed
by the much larger drama unfolding around Jack and Rose as the Titanic
strikes the iceberg and begins to sink. Cameron is in his element now,
masterfully building tension and suspense, and providing that sick feeling
in the pit of the stomach that something really, really awful is 
happening. It's the same feeling that he was able to use so successfully
to underpin his science-fiction projects. Comparing Titanic to The
Terminator and Aliens, one can find a strong parallel between small, weak,
and insignficant humans pitched up against forces that are inexorable,
unstoppable, and deadly. The horror of knowing that the Titanic is going
to sink and that nothing can stop it (stated so quietly and effectively by
Victor Garber as the Titanic's builder, Thomas Andrews) is the same horror
faced by Sarah Connor (Linda Hamilton), knowing that the Terminator will
not give up until it has tracked her down and killed her, and the same
horror faced by the Marines cornered behind their own barricades by the
aliens which they know will inevitably swarm in and overpower them. Not a
shot is wasted as Cameron tells this story that he knows and tells so
well, with the tension being kept at boiling point for a solid half-hour
or more. Again, as in The Terminator and Aliens, he uses the
claustrophobia allowed by his setting to work to full advantage. There
isn't a moment's let-up until the Titanic finally sinks completely. Best
of all for me, the constant movement of this part of the film releases
DiCaprio from the need to act, and Winslet from her apalling lines. 
Unfortunately, what comes next - Jack and Rose afloat and awaiting rescue
not only returns to the inanity of the first part of their love story, but
forms an over-long and conspicuous anticlimax to the James Cameron action
film woven into Titanic.
Amidst all of this, the other supporting players are given a chance for
some fine work. Garber's performance has already been noted, and Bernard
Hill as Captain E. J. Smith performs with a simple and understated dignity
that evokes great sympathy as well as serving to underscore the unfolding
tragedy.
What of the framing story? This was an excellent device for Cameron to use
to anticipate the drama that was to come. His audience all know that the
Titanic is going to hit an iceberg and sink. Cameron opens his film by
telling them that he knows it too and is not going to insult their
intelligence by asking them to forget this little fact for an hour or so.
Having said that, the story itself is completely disposable, and would
also be completely unremarkable except for the fine job that Gloria Stuart
did as Rose at age 101, once again, in spite of a script that worked
against her all the way. 
In the end, the sheer power of the story of the Titanic sinking, coupled
with the breath-taking special effects and the silent poignancy of the
images of the wreck lying miles under the Atlantic made me forgive Cameron
completely for his misguided scriptwriting. As I said, it was these
elements that had convinced me to see the film on the big screen, and I
didn't go away disappointed.
Titanic is not a great film, but it is a profoundly powerful and moving
one. Because I feel that it has so many great things about it, and so
many awful things at the same time, I don't feel comfortable or
confident in giving it a score of any kind - especially because I know
that my personal dislike for DiCaprio's acting has coloured my impressions
of it. Instead, I'm voting with my feet - I'm going to see it again
tonight. 

Author
Jun Yan
Written and Directed by James Cameron
Music by James Horner
Actors: Kate Winslet, Leonardo DiCaprio, Gloria Stuart, Billy Zane, Bill
Paxton, and about a couple of thousands of extras and stunt people.  
When the budget of this movie went seriously over the expected number, its
creator Jim Cameron offered the studios (Paramount and Fox) to give up his
8 million dollar directing fee and only take the wage for the screenplay
that he wrote, as he claimed, in six weeks.  Well, in my opinion, he made
the wrong offer.  The studio should give him the directing fee, but take
away his writing fee, and even maybe fine him a couple of thousand dollars
for his script.  
Meet Rose, 101 years old (played by Gloria Stuart), brought onto a Russian
submarine by the treasure hunter played by a blond Bill Paxton, to
discuss the whereabouts of a huge diamond neckless, said to be lost in the
famous tragedy of the sinking of Titanic 84 years ago.  Rose, then 17,
went through physical and emotional heaven and hell, and lives to tell her
story on that "unsinkable" ship which sank during its first voyage across
the Atlantic Ocean.  The story unfolds through old Rose's narration.  
Meet the young Rose (played by Kate Winslet), unhappily engaged to Cal
Hockley (Billy Zane), the heir of a billionare.  The first sight of her
tells the audience that she is a free soul underneath the restrictive
dresses. She's your typical bird in a cage, imprisoned by her snobby and
greedy mother and her ignorant, arrogant fiance.  She is surrounded by a
bunch of evil rich people, who don't know the names of Picaso or Freud.
In her desperation, she tries to commit suicide by jumping off the ship,
and, sure enough, is saved by a young man of her destiny.   
Meet Jack, the young guy who saves Rose from suicide.  He's free-spirited,
fun, brave, open, nice, and in case you still don't think it's cliched
enough, he's also a poor, undiscovered but talented artist.  Is there any
question that Rose will be swept off her feet by this adventurous young
man of lower social class, who won the ticket on Titanic from a poker
game?  Is there any question that she will be charmed the daylight out of
her by the fun-loving, care-free, romanticized poor people living
underneath the first class passengers who party all night?  Is there any
question on who's going to be the villains but the evil rich people in her
life, who are determined to keep the lovers apart?  
Like another exceptionally long film, the last year's "Hamlet".  Titanic
is an extremely uneven film with some genuine brilliance and some
unforgivable flaws.  OK, maybe there is only one hole about Titanic, but
it's big enough to sink the entire ship, no matter how big it is -- The
screenplay.  
I had doubts about this film long before I saw it.  It is difficult (no
kidding) to write a teenage, first-love kind of romance, the "boy meets
girl" kind of romance (Cameron's own words) and make it work.  But then
it's doable, as Robert Louis Stevenson had written so neatly, or as
Cameron himself has done so touchingly in his earlier "Terminator" (1984).
So I had hopes that it might just work.  Boy was I disappointed!  For two
days, since I saw this film, I have been thinking just what went wrong.
Could it be the much too cliched plot, borrowed from much too old romances
written by the idealistic rich people of the 19th century who romanticized
the poor?  Could it be the incredibly shallowness of the characters, who
are given as much depth as a piece of typing paper?  Could it be the
laughable villains, who are so cartoonish that they are hardly evil?
Above all, I think it's the dialogue throughout the film, that completely
wipes out its chance to become a good movie.  "To me, it was a slave ship,
I was being dragged to America in chains."  "I'm like a tumbleweed in the
wind."  "It's unfair to put this burden on MY shoulders."  "Promise me, 
you'll never give up."  (like "Promise me you'll come back for me." in
the "English Patient.")  The ghastly lines made me cringe every time the
two leading characters open their mouth.  When Rose says "I was screaming
inside, and nobody cares."  I was also screaming inside "STOP IT!!!  STOP
SPEAKING!!!"  
The dialogues seem to be lifted directly from a paperback romance.  But it
seems to be the writer's intention to be so.  He says, "Jack is a 90's
guy."  Yet, he misses the point that being contemporary is not the same as
being bland and inappropriate.  So many lines, so many jokes are
completely out of place that they bring out embarrassment rather than
laughter.  Most of the romantic words coming out of DiCaprio's mouth to
express his affection are contrived, unrealistic, and even laughable.
Neither in the 90s, nor the teens, would anyone speak like that, except in
Danielle Steel's books.  There is so much cheese in it that I almost
choked on it.  
Cheesy as it is, there are plenty of wonderful moments throughout the
film.  Almost every silent moment ranges from likable to beautiful.  There
is chemistry between the two leads, even though not as strong as it ought
to be.  When the young lovers stare at each other as she standing in the
descending lifeboat, when he draws a sketch of her in nude.  Yet, whenever
one opens his/her mouth, the moment is ruined instantly by the unbearable
dialogues.  Other characters' lines are no better, and none of the
character is memorable; none has enough depth to stand on its own.  Over
and over again, I was let down by the simplistic portrayal of the
villains.  Rose's mother had only one chance to develop a tiny bit of
complexity, in the mean time, Rose's agony and struggle could be much more
profound, yet the chance is gossly missed.  There is more that one time,
that depth could be given to Cal, the fiance from hell, and the writer
could have at least speculate just why he is so obsessed with his
disobedient Rose.  But they are also dismissed.  I could almost visualize
how the story and dialogues could be rewritten to be better.  There is
nothing more frustrating than a potentially good story being told
incompetently.  
On the other hand, the production design of this film is nothing short of
incredible.  There are plenty of filmmakers can turn piles of money into
mediocre visual effects, but Cameron's films are always successful in
make-believes.  Everything is painstakingly done to perfection.  The
second half of the film is filled with extremely realistic visuals.
Throughout the entire film, this huge creation, the ship, and its reckage,
cannot be more convincing.  It looks chillingly real.  So is the scene in
which 1500 frozen bodies floating on the silent black sea.  It is one of
those powerful moments that almost make your heart stop.  There are plenty
of interesting fragments that border on great images, and they all contain
NO dialogue.  
The sinking of Titanic on screen reminds me of "Braveheart".  Both films
are able to explain some very complex processes.  It is to the director's
credit that the audience are able to follow the steps of events that
happened and know how and why.  The usage of computer models helps to
clarify the things happened after Titanic hit an iceberg.  The audience
feel as if they were looking at the real footage of Titanic sinking, and
knowing clearly what is going on.  It is ironic that the ship becomes more
interesting than any of the humans on board.  
The music is very beautiful and haunting.  The cinematography is
absolutely gorgeous and powerful, perhaps the year's best.  Almost every
scene in this 3-hour-plus long movie would be good, if only there was no
words spoken.  It is a paradox for me, always, about both Mr. Cameron and
Hollywood today in general -- how can so much talent, so much money and so
much blood, sweat and effort be spent into a project, without spending a
tiny fraction of that into writing a script with complex characters, deep
(not bloated) emotions, intelligent dialogues and realistic human
situation?  Is it that hard?  Is a good script more expensive than $200
million?  Is the map to the human heart more difficult to draw than a
rebuilding of the biggest ship on earth?  Is human minds so deep that even
those who dive into the sea where Titanic sleeps, cannot reach?  Is it
impossible?  
If it were a silent film, if there were no dialogue at all, "Titanic"
would probably get an A- from me, but as it is, it's B- to C+.  I simply
cannot recommend it to those who do not read paperback romance novels.  

Author
Kristian Lin
I don't hate TITANIC.  Not now, anyway.  The last hour of it is
terrifyingly excellent.  It's not a hateful movie.  It's just that the
critics have gone overboard praising it, and bestowed something like
artistic respectability on it.  Come Oscar time, it'll get a few awards
it doesn't deserve.  It'll probably win Best Picture and defeat a movie
that deserves it more, like L.A. CONFIDENTIAL or DONNIE BRASCO or ROMY
AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION.  And then I'll hate it.  I'll be
unhappy with the Academy voters for the fourth straight year.
TITANIC chronicles the romance between Philadelphia socialite Rose
DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet) and Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a
roustabout in third-class.  Rose feels trapped by her engagement to 
millionaire Cal Hockley (Billy Zane), and Jack shows her that the poor
live much better than their snooty counterparts in first-class. 
Unfortunately, the tub they're on has a date with an iceberg.
What is it about romantic tragedy that makes movie critics swoon? 
They're sane, intelligent beings who are paid to have a keener B.S.
detector than the rest of us.  The same people who went gaga over the
well-made but diffuse THE ENGLISH PATIENT have pulled the same act for
this movie.  THE ENGLISH PATIENT, though, was at least consistently
well-acted and -directed throughout.  TITANIC, on the other hand, gives
us scene after scene of rickety drama for two hours.  Writer/director
James Cameron's previous film, TRUE LIES, was two-thirds great action
and one-third failed romance.  The ratio is reversed in TITANIC, and the
good parts aren't enough to justify one's time investment.
The picture may have all the period details right, but its tone is all
wrong for its 1912 setting.  James Horner's pallid, New Agey music
immediately dates the movie as a 1990s period piece.  More seriously, 
Cameron has no sense of how to write these characters and make them
sound convincing.   Leonardo DiCaprio is a gifted and terribly likeable
actor, and not once did I believe him as a child of the 1890s (true,
he's young, but Winona Ryder was younger when she did THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE, and was much more idiomatically 19th Century).  Chained to a
pipe in a room filling with water, Jack says, "This is bad," with the
same offhand detachment we've seen from hundreds of other movie heroes. 
When they aren't speaking in the telegraphic sort of dialogue that marks
out most Hollywood action thrillers, Jack and Rose are advancing all
sorts of enlightened notions that prove they're ahead of their time. 
Rose quotes Freud - a neat trick, since he hadn't been translated into
English yet.  Jack advances his philosophy of "making every day count." 
The two admire Monet and Picasso, but Jack's sketches (which Rose
praises so highly) are hackwork.  Rose and Jack may be unconventional
for their time, but you'll find people talking like them in any high
school today.
The dialogue is strictly purple prose, yet the other aspects of the
script are even worse.  One can admire Cameron for making poor people
the heroes of his megabudget movie, but when the characters are 
stereotyped this baldly, he doesn't do anybody any favors.  The villain
never opens his mouth except to say something offensive; it's actually a
relief that Billy Zane is so bad in the role, because you'd hate to see
a good performance wasted in it.  Jack teaches Rose to spit.  She gives
Cal the finger as she makes her getaway.  Though Winslet looks tough
enough wading through icy water, you still can't reconcile Rose's 
action heroine's resourcefulness with her hothouse-flower upbringing. 
Her attempts to extricate themselves from below decks belong in TRUE
LIES or THE ABYSS.  If Cameron had just put this movie on a modern-day
cruise ship, it would have fixed many of his script's problems.  Of
course, no studio would have bankrolled his picture (at least not to the
tune of $200 million) and had him end the movie unhappily.  But if only
TITANIC had had a dash of SPEED 2, it would have been far less
fraudulent.
In retelling the ship's sinking, TITANIC is a compelling disaster flick,
partly because the ship sinks so slowly. Most movie disasters like
earthquakes, floods, and the destruction of the world by aliens happen 
relatively quickly.  Killer viruses, on the other hand, are too slow to
make for exciting visuals.  The Titanic's eventual progress to the ocean
floor means that the passengers are calm and businesslike at first, 
and then panic gradually sets in as the boat tilts further and further
into the water.  Amid the rising chaos, there's a nice touch: a tiny
shot of a tiny ship sending out a tiny signal flare, capturing the
futility and hopelessness of the passengers' predicament.  As Rose hangs
on to a railing for her life, her eyes meet those of a girl next to
her.  It's a marvelous moment of clarity; even before the girl plummets
to her death, you know their brief, wordless acquaintance will never
leave Rose's memory.
There's also an interesting chemistry between the oddly matched DiCaprio
and Winslet.  Maybe he isn't convincingly 1910s, but despite his youth
he exudes the cool confidence that only movie stars seem to have.  It's
no wonder that Rose is attracted to Jack - he's not of her world, but he
slips into it with such ease that you don't feel that she's slumming. 
The two leads give the illusion that their romance isn't old hat.  Kathy
Bates, who's always welcome, gives her part as "Unsinkable Molly" Brown
a good dose of spice.
Cameron has the right idea in framing a love story within the ship's
sinking.  He's smart enough to know that a special effects movie without
a human interest will turn off an audience (witness the fate of STARSHIP
TROOPERS and many others like it).  But his script is so thinly
ontrived, the result is the same.  It's right for us to praise TITANIC
for its technical wizardry and the very real filmmaking skills of 
its director.  But we should recognize that the movie's human elements
are entirely stale, however appealingly packaged.

Author
John Sylva
TITANIC a capsule review by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A+
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
James Cameron directs this stunning film based upon the ocean liner Titanic,
which plummeted to the Atlantic Ocean floor in 1912 after striking an iceberg. 
Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet star as Jack and Rose, two passengers aboard
Titanic, who fall in love after Jack talks Rose from flinging herself off of
the massive ship.  Jack gambled his way onto Titanic, while Rose is the rich,
sophisticated type who is aboard Titanic with family, and fiancee Cal (Billy
Zane).  
All actors put fourth their best effort, especially Kate Winslet and Gloria
Stuart (playing an elderly Rose), who both deserved the Oscars they didn't win
at the 70th Annual Academy Awards.  Leonardo DiCaprio seems miscast as Jack,
but DiCaprio gives a top notch performance as he rehearses his witty, hilarious
dialogue with emotion and believability.  The screenplay gives each character
their deserving screen time, so each character is developed to the point where
we could almost write a book about them.  
The Titanic ship's exterior and interior are marvelously crafted, not for a
second looking fake.  After researching the actual Titanic, and viewing
numerous photos, the ship looks identical, thanks to cinematographer Russell
Carpenter. Adding to the 1910's feel are the beautiful costumes which are shown
off mostly by Kate Winslet, and  designed by Deborah Lynn Scott.  
All of the elements of Titanic work, as in the three hour running time we are
told one of the saddest stories of all time, a well developed, believable love
story, and informed about the wreckage and afterschock of Titanic.  The three
hour running time goes by in a flash, as Titanic had me deeply involved with
its developed characters and massive settings, as James Cameron directs and
writes his film to perfection, and the United States must agree with me, as
Titanic went on to gross 601 million dollars at the box office.  
After the film's emotional opening credits, in which we see actual footage of
those aboard Titanic in 1912, I knew this film would stand among the greatest
of all time. Titanic contains some of the most memorable, heartbreaking scenes
I have ever been witnessed to, which make up the entire last hour or so of the
film.  Titanic is a titanic of a movie, a haunting, chilling film, as I feel
the pain of those aboard Titanic as they held on for their lives.    
The Bottom Line- Legendary filmmaking.  One of the most dramatic, memorable
movie experiences ever.

Author
Clay Homerton
TITANIC is not only one of the grandest spectacles ever committed to
film (only William Wyler's BEN HUR comes to mind as a comparable
benchmark), it is also a wonderfully told story.
You already know what's going to happen. The largest and most lavishly
appointed luxury liner in the world is going to sail across the
Atlantic towards New York, and is going to strike an iceberg. The
"unsinkable" vessel will fill with water from compartment to
compartment, tip forward into the icy water, and sink.  Fifteen
hundred people are going to die in the water, because the ship's
designers provided lifeboats for only half the manifest, so as not to
clutter the deck.
You know that, but you're still not prepared for the devastating
impact of watching it happen, while people you've come to care about
are right there in the midst of the disaster. You're not prepared for
what James Cameron is going to put you through when you watch his
masterpiece.
I use that word, masterpiece, with care. Certainly, not all directors
ever create any work that can be offered such an accolade. But Cameron
has done it here. Sure, he spent over $200 million. Yes, he took
five-and-a-half months after the scheduled release date of the film to
finish editing it, and it turned out over three hours long. Okay, so
he was demanding and tough on his cast during the difficult shoot
(didn't he learn any lessons from his other water- centric epic, The
Abyss?) Nevertheless, all those dollars show up on the screen, in the
form of the most unobtrusive, seamless effects that allow an utterly
convincing recreation of a documented historical episode. Those extra
months of editing ensured that not one of the film's 194 minutes is
wasted, and they all fly by too quickly. And whether or not Kate
Winslet will ever want to work with him again, Cameron will be the one
to whom she's most endebted when she someday reflects on her
superstardom.
I could not say enough good things about what James Cameron has
accomplished here, with both the spectacle and the story. So I'll just
encourage you to go see this movie, and hope that Mr. Cameron is now
resting from his labor, preparing to accept some nice little statues
from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
I strongly recommend TITANIC to all movie lovers. And to Twentieth
Century Fox, I strongly recommend they give James Cameron whatever he
requires to make his next film; they'll get every penny's worth.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Titanic (1997)
Kate Winslet, Leonardo DiCaprio, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, Bill Paxton, 
Gloria Stuart, Frances Fisher. Directed by James Cameron. 197 minutes
Rated PG-13, **** and one half stars (out of ***** stars)
Late at night, a beautiful young woman clinging to a makeshift raft looks 
up into the distance. The sky over the Atlantic Ocean is cloudless and 
her tired, desperate eyes gaze at the stars, glistening in the heavens so 
very far away. The scene is simple, elegant and haunting, nicely 
illustrating why "Titanic" works. Director James Cameron uses a grand 
sweeping backdrop to tell an elementary love story, and he tells it very 
well. "Titanic" contains some of the most spectacular visuals ever to 
appear on screen, but despite the jaw-dropping special effects, it's the 
human story that lingers after you leave the theater. Cameron has crafted 
an epic that triumphs because he remembered the crucial fact that affairs 
of the heart are far more compelling than any special effect.
"Titanic" received massive press coverage for production delays, clashes 
on the set and, of course, its record-breaking $200 million dollar budget.
 Over the last decade, we've become a nation of media insiders, receiving 
tremendous amounts of behind-the-scenes information from the 
entertainment world. At the end of each weekend, movie buffs study the 
box office results as if they were football scores, measuring the success 
of a movie by how much money it takes in, rather than by evaluating the 
actual substance of the film. It's an absurd mindset; one that needs to 
be put aside in order to best enjoy "Titanic." Production and budget 
information may be intriguing, but the only question that really matters 
is whether or not the film is any good, and "Titanic" certainly is. 
The story begins in the present, as an explorer (Bill Paxton) and his 
crew search the wreckage of the Titanic for a legendary diamond called 
"The Heart Of The Ocean." Framing the historical saga with present-day 
scenes is more than a gimmick. Cameron uses the conceit to give the story 
an almost fairy-tale quality. Additionally, the crew presents a computer-
graphic simulation of the precise mechanics of the Titanic's sinking, 
making it much easier to follow what's happening when the disaster 
finally occurs. 
Rose, an elderly Titanic survivor (Gloria Stuart) joins the group after 
recognizing some personal possessions from a news report of the 
expedition. Peering into the glass of a hand mirror recovered from the 
ship, she quietly says "It looks the same as it did when I last saw it, 
but the reflection has changed." Her ancient eyes grow distant as she 
recounts her tale to the crew.
Cut to April, 1912, as the Titanic prepares for her maiden voyage. The 
opulent ship is magnificent, a paean to Victorian excess. Cameron 
provides a leisurely tour of the vessel as the passengers board and we 
meet the two central characters. Young Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet) 
is desperately unhappy. She dreads her pending marriage to wealthy snob 
Cal Hockley (Billy Zane,) but can't break off the engagement. Despite 
their upper crust trappings, Rose and her mother (Frances Fisher) are 
broke and need the financial security the marriage will provide. In a 
moment of panic, Rose climbs over the rail of the ship, contemplating a 
suicidal dive, when penniless artist-at-large Jack Dawson (Leonardo 
DiCaprio,) who won his ticket in a poker game, intervenes and romance 
blossoms between the two.  
James Cameron states adamantly that "Titanic" is not a disaster film and 
he's right. Disaster films generally take 10-15 characters and try to 
tell all of their stories. The result is typically a jumbled mess of 
clichés. Cameron instead chose to take the very basic story of one 
representative couple and keep his focus there. Jack and Rose are just a 
couple of kids experiencing the awkwardness and exhilaration of first 
love, but they matter. Against the backdrop of a doomed vessel, these two 
young lovers come alive, and we feel all the poignancy of their situation.
 The magic Winslet and DiCaprio generate underscores the tragedy 
befalling everyone on the ship. 
Winslet is splendid, by the way. Her wonderfully nuanced performance is 
among the years best. And DiCaprio, one of the most annoyingly smug 
actors in the business, is warm and winning here. 
And then there's the wreck. Despite some occassionally shaky special 
effects, Cameron's realization of the Titanic's crash and collapse is 
flat-out breathtaking. He fills the screen with images of devastation on 
a scale unlike anything ever seen in a movie before. By putting the human 
story ahead of the effects, the nightmarish scenes carry an emotionally 
resonance far beyond mere spectacle. Tragic, beautiful and haunting, 
"Titanic" uses 90s technology to create an old-fashioned Hollywood 
blockbuster. It's three hours and fifteen minutes long, but the time 
flies by, and you can't pay a movie a higher compliment than that.

Author
Sridhar Prasad
Titanic
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, Gloria
Stuart, and Bill Paxton
Written and Directed by James Cameron
    After months of speculation and delays, Titanic was quickly becoming
1997's Waterworld.  Incredibly overbudget, and hopelessly ambitious
(accroding to the insiders), this film had no chance, with no A list stars,
and all that money spent for a 3 hour, 15 minute love story.
Forget the negative hype: Titanic almost lives up to its price tag, and
its one heck of a great film.  From the beginning, this film grips you like
no other modern-day romance has.  It literally begins from the end, as we go
through Titanic, now at the bottom of the ocean.  We are looking through the
eyes of fortune-hunter Brock Lovett, who hasn't experienced Titanic, until
he meets actress Rose Calvert (Stuart), who claims to be a passenger.
Rose tells her story from the very first day.  She was a woman named
Rose DeWitt Bukater (Winslet), whose family fortune is gone, and who is
being pressured into a marriage she doesn't want with a rich, powerful, and
unpleasant playboy named Cal Hockley (Zane).  Cal obviously wants Rose as a
trophy, and stops at nothing to get her.  He offers gifts by the dozen, he
gives her everything he has.  He courts her mother even more aggressively,
and the marriage is all but a done deal.
We also see our other main character, Jack Dawson.  Jack is a poor
artist, who manages to win his ticket onto the Ship of Dreams via a poker
game.  He is going home, to America.  Leonardo DiCaprio, in a role that
vaults him into stardom, plays this with an irrestible blend of charm and
exuberance.  We feel Jack's happiness, his dreams, and his life.
Rose, on the other hand, is a melancholy, depressed woman who is being
pressured into a world she doesn't want.  She makes a fateful attempt to
commit suicide, only to be stopped by Jack.  The two become close, and
during the course of a day fall in love.  Rose is trapped by her emotions,
and finally succumbs to Jack's charms.  On the fateful night, they are
together, and Rose declares her independence.
However, after the ship hits the iceberg, Cal, who is determined not to
lose his trophy, arranges for Jack to be arrested, and for Rose to come with
him.  As the ship sinks, Rose and Jack meet again, and they try desperately
for an escape, as both of them look to live and prosper together, as free
souls.
This may all sound like hackneyed Hollywood.  Believe me, it is.  The
dialogue is brilliant at times, and completely lousy at other times.
Cameron's writing is inane duirng much of the romance, and you get the
feeling this shoudn't work as a movie, despite a winning story.  But
DiCaprio and Winslet are irresistible.  Winslet gives the performance of a
lifetime.  She is brilliant, even better than the outstanding DiCaprio.
Zane plays his role with a nasty relish, and Kathy Bates, as the Unsinkable
Molly Brown, rounds out the superb supporting cast with a memorable
perfomance.  The cast makes the dialogue into gold.  You believe their
stories, you believe their fantasies.  So what if the character development
is lousy?  The acting makes up for it.  The details are so meticulously
drawn, the parties, the fun, the sheer pleasure of being young, of being in
love so much that nothing else matters, all of this contributes to a very
solid, very good romance.
Even then, the first 2 1/2 hours aren't great: they're merely very, very
good.  But Cameron becomes an inspired director at the end.  He is
frenetically brilliant, he directs with a passion, a fury, he crams an two
hours of anguish into one unforgettable hour of sheer fury, as he takes his
200 million dollar ship and violenty plunges it into the sea, taking 1500
people with it.  He matches his fury with the perils of the main characters,
blending in James Horner's beautiful music, contrasting the tragic beauty of
the supporting cast with the violence of the sinking.  The pity, the tragedy
hit the heart like nothing else. The little details, the playing of the
band, the children, the third class passengers, the commotion of the
sinking, all combine into a harrowing hour like nothing ever been done
before.  The emotional anguish of the sinking is still difficult to
describe.  The subtle touches, marked by brilliant performances by Victor
Garber and Bernard Hill as Thomas Andrews and Captain E.J. Smith are
wrenching.  The ending is simply devastating.  Nothing in film has prepared
you for this ending.
Cameron has created an epic that will live for a long time.  If only his
dialogue avoided cheesiness during the romance, this film could have been
one for all time.  As it is, the film is one of the best of the year.  Kudos
go again to DiCaprio, who will most certainly get an Oscar nomination, and
Winslet, who is the odds on favorite for best actress.  Horner's music is
something so emotionally captivating, it deserves best score of the year.
Bates and Stuart and marvelous, as is the underappreciated Billy Zane.
Frances Fisher, in her role as Rose's mother, is also very good.  Kudos also
to Jim Cameron, who had the will and the audacity to do something this
brazen and make it work.  This film is amazing.  Its not the best of the
year (L.A. Confidential's superb characters and plot are better), but damned
if its not the most emotional, and the most heart-wrenching.  This is
Hollywood entertainment at its very best.

Author
Ronald Epstein
     This Sunday afternoon I had the priviledge of
attending a private screening at the Sony Astor Cinema
in New York City, of James Cameron's most heralded
film, TITANIC.
      Postponed from last Summer, with an escalated
budget that makes it the most expensive movie in
history, this was one film I was eager to preview.
     So, is this movie going to sink or swim this holiday?
My best guess....it will sink, though with many awards
attatched to its hull.
      No doubt, TITANIC is the most elaborate disaster
movie ever made.  It boasts the most amazing effects that
I have ever seen done to date.  To see a ship fall apart,
with actual people running across the ship, flying across
the deck, and falling to the water, is just amazing to look at.
The effects are so stunningly realistic, you would swear you
were looking at actual footage.
      But TITANIC is more than a disaster movie, and that's
where the problem lies.  There is a love story attatched that
nearly ruins the entire premise.
      I'll give a capsule summary of the story without spoiling
anything for you:
      The film begins with a modern day excavation of sorts
of the sunken Titanic.  We see actual footage of the sunken
ship, as Cammeron had set up special cameras to film the
wreckage on the ocean floor.
     Bill Paxton leads the expedition, in search of sunken treasure.
What he finds instead, leads him to a mysterious old woman
who recounts her tale of the Titanic voyage.
      We meet Rose (Kate Winslet), a young woman,  who comes
from an upper-class family.  Rose is to be wed to a man she
does not love.
       We meet Jack (Leonardo DiCaprio), a young man, who
comes from a poor financial background, and wins a ticket aboard
the Titanic, in a poker game.
       The two meet under interesting circumstances, and the
love story begins.  Add in a jealous fiance, and a not-so-nice
law officer played by David Warner, and you have a story that,
well, gets a bit overplayed and oversappy.
       I must add, at this point, that the most likeable character
in the movie is played by Kathy Bates, as a woman with
"new money" who is a lot less uptight than the other rich folk
on the ship.  She is a pleasure to see on screen.
       When the ship does hit the Iceberg at exactly 1:40 into
the film, and eventually sinks, you never really feel for any of
these characters.  The film is just loaded with unlikeable rich
snobs and other folk you never really get a grasp on.
       The effects are tremendous.  From the roars of gears and
pumps in the engine room, to a doomed ship cracking at the
seams, this is an effects picture that looks and sounds
like no other.
       We saw TITANIC in Dolby Digital surround, and by far, it
is the best sounding movie I have ever seen.  My friend
commented it was the best sound mix he has ever heard.
When people are in the water, at film's end, you are surrounded
by the voices of lost soles.
       TITANIC runs far too long.  The movie is 3 hours and 15
minutes in length.    And, while most of the first 2.5 hours runs
very fast and well-paced, the final 45 minutes almost comes to
a sudden stop, and you realize that this sappy love story has to
finish itself out before the movie finally ends.
       Don't get me wrong about TITANIC....it's not a bad as I
am making it out to be.  It really is an exceptionaly well-made
film.  The costumes and sets are incredible, and true to the time
period.  The ship is painstakingly created exactly true to form,
as we see actual pictures of the modern-day wreckage, transformed
into the movie depiction.  This film will certainly win on effects,
costume, set design and sound.  Cameron has certainly made his best
film to date.
      Unfortunately, Titanic is not a Best Picture candidate.  It
just doesn't have a strong supporting story.  It's an exceptional
disaster film with sappy filler inside.  It just doesn't have the
emotional impact that I suspect Mr. Cameron was shooting for.
       I predict that Titanic will open to likeable reviews.  It is
a film worth seeing.  I predict that it will only do moderately well
at the Box Office.  With its extreme running time, and lack of
enough robust to get substantial word-of-mouth, I expect that it
will do even better on Home Video.  This will certainly be the
definitive AC3 movie for all you Home Theater enthusiasts.
      Titanic opens December 19th, and is released by Paramount
Pictures and Twentieth Century-Fox.
riginally posted in HOME THEATER FORUM ===

Author
James Brundage
Two words, are you listening, Best Picture.
I know, I've put it off. I'm a procrastinator. I always wait until the last
minute to name the Best Picture hopeful that I have (although its more like
sure-fire with "Titanic"), but, when I do, I'm not often wrong (I've nailed
em three years straight)
To describe the movie "Titanic" is to try to describe light to a blind man.
It's one of those movies that isn't seen, it's absorbed, engraved into the
viewer's brain. Tears stream down your cheeks as you realize the disaster.
Smiles like ripples in a lake start whenever the 22-year old acting duet
(Lenoardo Dicaprio of the Gen-X version of "Romeo & Juliet", Kate Winslet of
"Hamlet") light up the screen with there romance.
To say what it is isn't enough. To say what it's not: it's not badly done,
it's not stupid, it's not extraordinary in the supporting acting but the
ship is the story, the special effects the tale, and they are done so well
that everything bends to their wills.
Dicaprio doesn't disappoint me in this one, giving a subtly good
performance, portraying the lower class well. He doesn't overact, which was
what I was expecting from him, and doesn't underact, either. Plus, since the
dialogue was cleaned up so well, he doesn't have to worry about that
hampering him. Winslet didn't surprise me, if only because of the fact that
she is one of those actresses who are naturally good. She turned up the
romantic charm in "Sense & Sensibility", as well as persevered past the
verse in "Hamlet" (something which DiCaprio ended up tripping over in "R &
J"). The only actor that doesn't do well at all is Billy Zane, who really
needs to control his face (he looks like a little child through half the
movie).
As far as the directing it reaches a new level of perfection, Cameron's
camera points on the ship of Titanic and we all light up our eyes at the
magic, and the impact of it hits us all.
The movie's point is that of discrediting the aristocracy, of putting down
the upper class and their pretensions, as they are all cast as the villains
in this flick. Its other point, as sad and true as it may be, is to show the
complete horror of the Titanic disaster (as best displayed with scores of
bodies floating in the water after the ship has sunk). But the movie is well
beyond a disaster film. It is a miracle. A diamond in the rough. An
entertaining work of art.
Get ready for three and a half hours of your life you will never forget.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: You already know the whole damn list
Directed by: James Cameron, Written by: James Cameron
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for disturbingly realistic violence, nudity,
sexual situations, and strong language - in other words, it should've
been an R
It's hard to say something about this movie that hasn't already been
said.  Yes, it's brilliant.  Yes, the performances are all excellent. 
It's very well-written, and expertly directed.  What else needs to be
said?
Well, since you know that this film is an epic of excellence, maybe some
of its flaws should be pointed out for a change.  I'm not saying that
it's not excellent.  But somewhere, in the shuffle, we forgot that it's
not perfect.
There's little things, like the fact that the special effects, usually
excellent, also have clear flaws (obvious stunt doubles with
texture-mapped Leo and Kate faces in some scenes, obvious CGI people in
some daytime overhead shots).  There's big things, like the fact that
Billy Zane's Cal Hockley and David Warner's Spicer Lovejoy, who act as
the villians, are ridiculously one-note and depicted as having no
redeeming qualities.  It's even taken so far as to have Lovejoy put Jack
in a James Bond-style slow-moving death trap, where Spicer mocks Jack
briefly and then leaves him to his fate, just as someone like Goldfinger
would have done to Sean Connery.  You almost expect the dialogue to go:
 "Do you expect me to talk? - Jack Dawson
 "No, Mr. Dawson, I expect you to die!" - Spicer Lovejoy
That's never said, but the dialogue that IS there does sound a little
cheesy at times.  However, it's usually excellent, the stuff that
Cameron's legacy is made of.  All of his movies have dialogue that
always sticks with us, from the emotional union between Ripley and Newt
in ALIENS (1986) to the simple one-liners like "Hasta la vista, baby" in
TERMINATOR 2: JUDGEMENT DAY (1991).  
But perhaps the problem with the farthest-reaching implications is the
destruction of moral standards.  Why does Hollywood feel the need to
always depict marriage as a trap?  Is it because Hollywood marriages so
rarely last?  Maybe Cameron wanted to justify his own three marriages? 
And why do we always promote teen sex in Hollywood films?  We give
teenagers everywhere a license to have sex even when they feel nothing
for their partners.  We tell them to do what feels right, regardless of
how they feel about the person they use to get it.  When you see Jack
and Rose in this film, they're like a latter-day Romeo and Juliet -
star-crossed and doomed lovers, who fall in love with their idealized
images of each other rather than the truths.  Like Romeo and Juliet,
they believe that they've found love, but they barely know one another -
they've found infatuation, a temporary, yet powerful feeling that leads
them to do anything in their power to protect their relationship.  Only
as the years go own, and Rose grows older, does she realize that, yes,
Jack was someone she will always cherish for all that he did for her. 
But it's pretty doubtful that she could've understood that at her young
age on that Titanic voyage, after having only two days with the boy.
Some of these problems sound serious, but Cameron's narrative is such
effective storytelling that it doesn't matter very much.  It's the thing
of legend - an epic in the style of Hollywood's golden age.  It can
leave you disquieted, or it can leave you uplifted - or, more likely,
both at once.  Today, parents look at their children and smile, telling
them how it felt to see STAR WARS (1977) in it original theatrical
release.  Years from now, the youth of today will have their own movie
stories to share, and surely TITANIC will be one of them.

Author
kota@poboxes.nospam.com (kota)
Disaster movies are viewed these days in the same light that horror
movies were viewed in the 80's: tastes great, less filling.
Dismissing James Cameron's Titanic as a disaster movie would be a
grave mistake however. With a budget exceeding $200 million, this is a
love story of shakespearean proportions in disguise. While the movie
does take place on the infamous ship, the story revolves around a
young couple, Jack (DiCaprio) and Rose (Winslet).
Jack Dawson and Rose DeWitt brings a level of poignancy to a sad
moment in history. Out of the 2200 plus passengers on the Titanic,
only about a third survived. This inevitable fact hangs in the air
like the dark clouds of an impending monsoon. Early in the film, we
are made aware that there are only enough boats to carry about half
the people on the ship. The arrogant director ignores the
recommendations of a more knowledgeable captain. The pompous
well-to-do passengers boast that the ship is unsinkable. Furthermore,
we have two powerful adversaries, Rose's mother and her fiance are out
to crush Jack. The deck is stacked against Jack, and he must make do
with what he was dealt.
Throughout the film we are made aware of the strict social structure
that divides the classes. The Titanic upper level is for the rich, and
the lower level is for the poor. The upper deck is lit by sunlight,
while the lower engine room is burning a hellish red from the fire
stacks. This dichotomy is ironic, since the poor are portrayed as
simple, fun loving do-gooders, and the rich are portrayed as
pretentious people in love with their own technology.
This movie is the epitome of the big-budget Hollywood movie. It has it
all; a love story, a social critique, and technical pyrotechnics that
must be seen to be believed. Ideally, you want the pieces to fit into
the mosaic, so that the seams are undetectable. Cameron's expert hand
has crafted a movie in which the audience is mesmerized until the very
end.
--
Please remove "nospam" to reply
http://www.poboxes.com/kota

Author
Scott Renshaw
TITANIC
(Paramount)
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher,
Kathy Bates, David Warner, Bill Paxton, Gloria Stuart.
Screenplay:  James Cameron.
Producers:  James Cameron and Jon Landau.
Director:  James Cameron.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, violence, profanity)
Running Time:  195 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     TITANIC, the $200 million budget.  TITANIC, the perfectionist
auteur's baby which missed its summer release date.  TITANIC, the
production where the catering table was laced with hallucinogens, sending
several cast and crew members to the hospital.  TITANIC, the mega-event
which has two studios holding their breath as though they were actually on
the fated ship.  TITANIC, the entertainment industry headline.  Not
TITANIC, the movie...TITANIC, the _story_.
     It's hard for a film to crawl out from under that kind of baggage, so
give James Cameron all the credit in the world:  for nearly half the
film's running time, I forgot that I was watching _that_ TITANIC.  I was
too caught up in the story of two fictional passengers on the April 1912
maiden voyage of the largest, most luxurious moving vessel ever created by
man.  Itinerant American artist-at-large Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio)
winds up on board when he wins a ticket in a poker game; upper class Rose
DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet) travels with her mother (Frances Fisher) and
fiance, million-heir Cal Hockley (Billy Zane).  Unfortunately, Rose hates
her imperious fiance, the snobbish mother forcing her into the marriage,
and the whole circumstance of her socially prescribed life.  She is
preparing to leap from the Titanic's railing when Jack saves her, and
begins to show her another world.  Only the jealous Cal -- and an
inconvenient iceberg -- can stand in the way of their love.
     That central romance -- framed by a modern-day sequence in which the
100-year-old Rose (Gloria Stuart) recounts her story to a salvage team led
by Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton) -- is captivating from start to finish.
DiCaprio and Winslet share an extraordinary chemistry, two charismatic
young actors with mischievous eyes who create a tangibly passionate
pairing.  Though most of the characters around them are more functional
than fleshed-out, particularly Billy Zane's sneering patrician, the two
stars likely would have overwhelmed all comers regardless of their
multi-dimensionality.  This may be the year's most effective and
consistently entertaining love story.
     Oh, and it's also about a big boat going belly-up.  Those who come
for the sinking rather than the swooning aren't likely to be disappointed
with the spectacle Cameron offers.  His obsession with historical accuracy
begins with the dazzling duplication of the ship's lavish decor and ends
with a virtually real-time re-creation of its journey to the bottom of the
Atlantic.  The chaotic evacuation keeps tensions high, and even mixes in
potent understated moments like the ship's designer Thomas Andrews (Victor
Garber) mournfully correcting the dining room clock while his creation
collapses arount him.  The sinking ship, while awe-inspiring, also becomes
a distraction from the focal romance.  TITANIC is an impressively-mounted
disaster movie during its second half, but it's still basically a disaster
movie.  Once the ship is down, and the lovers once again have time to
share a powerful, quiet moment, it becomes clear that the large-scale
drama can't match the small-scale drama.
     People will want to go see TITANIC simply to see what a $200 million
movie looks like.  And it looks great, rich in period detail and sweeping
views of Cameron's massive scale-model Titanic.  More important than how
it looks, though, is how it feels.  It feels like it has a heart, real
emotion powering the narrative in a way dollar signs can't.  Somewhere
past the headlines, the gossip, the turmoil and the accounting details is
a magnificent piece of epic film-making.  It's time for TITANIC, the
movie, to sink or swim on its own impressive merits.

Author
Berge Garabedian
As of March 22, 1998, the movie "Titanic" was unanimously declared the
number one biggest money grossing movie of all time! Its domestic
ticket sales sailed through the $492 million mark, leading the old
box-office champ, Star Wars, to a darker side finish in second place.
It just gathered eleven Academy Awards to add to its incredible
success, and appears to be headed towards a worldwide box-office gross
of close to $1.5 billion worth of ticket sales. So why has this movie
turned into the biggest money-making film of all time? Hmmm...let's
investigate.
A mere six months ago, Titanic was being nastily compared to another
great water-based film that was over-budgeted, ran long and over-rated,
Waterworld. That film cost Sony Pictures close to $175 million to
produce, with dire financial results across the world. With Titanic's
enormous budget cradling the $200 million mark, many studio executives
had also begun to shake in their soggy boots, and hope for a miracle
from above. And as the movie's shooting schedule continued to go past
its original set date, the studio begrudgingly had to settle the film
into its late fall release schedule. This was not a decision it wanted
to make, as the summer season was without a doubt the greatest
money-making season for all Hollywood studios. But the director of this
ambitious film, James Cameron, would not succumb to the studio's
pressures, and even surrendered his own salary for the project, in
return for more time to film the movie that he had intended. 
And the rest, as they say...is Hollywood history.
Released on December 18, 1997, Titanic immediately gained the top spot
in the box-office ranks of that weekend, and has stayed in that
position ever since. It's currently in its 14th week of release, and
its prime spot at the head of the charts has yet to be rivaled
(Leonardo DiCaprio's other film release, The Man in the Iron Mask, was
the closest rival to Titanic last weekend, as it grossed only $300,000
less than Titanic). The Titanic album is also at number one on the
music charts, and the Titanic book has consistently remained in the top
ten since it embarked on its literary sendoff back in December.
Worldwide movie grosses are forecasted to balloon past the $1.5 billion
mark by the time the movie ends its run in theaters, and only then,
will the home video market begin to cut into its share of the Titanic
money pie. Titanic is no longer just a movie, it's a phenomenon.
But as I gathered my facts and figures about this triumphant film, I
started to ask myself about the reasons behind this movie's phenomenal
success. I personally saw the picture as nothing more than a decent
movie with some great special effects and a good love story. But that
was all. Why were others going ga-ga over this "big boat movie"? Why
had many gone to see all of its 197 minutes over and over and over
again? I had to know. The answer ran deeper than I had anticipated.
The nineteen-nineties began with the average budget of a film being
shot around the meager $20 million mark, and ended with Titanic's
gigantic cost of over $200 million. This rise in budgets led Hollywood
into a new genre of film-making that relied more on its special
effects, explosions, big name stars, and superb action sequences,
rather than the actual plot line of the film. When you look at the
highest grossing pictures over the past few years, Men in Black,
Independence Day and Jurassic Park, you will notice a singular thread
that passes through each of these films. 
That thread is firmly tied to the fact that each of those stories
lacked any kind of real emotional plot line. The special effects were
always good. The sound effects were monstrous. Even the creation of
these new and wonderful fantasy worlds left many of us in awe. But the
obvious lack of humanistic feelings and values had become openly
acceptable, common and regrettably absent.
With Titanic, director James Cameron was able to successfully mesh the
two worlds of special effects and human emotion, as to make this
picture unique within the sea of heartless big-budget movies that had
been propagating themselves over the past few years. People have liked
this movie because they liked the special effects, they liked the
story, but most of all, they liked the characters of Jack (Leonardo
DiCaprio) and Rose (Kate Winslet). They liked the love story.
Within the great, big, so-called technological advancement of the 20th
century, the Titanic, two socially incompatible people were able to
fight all odds, overcome all obstacles, and find one another. And as
the end of this century nears, and the dawn of the next millenium
creeps up and into our mental horizon, it is obvious that many people
have begun wondering about their own places in this highly
technological world of ours. 
The fast-paced lifestyles of so many North Americans has reached such a
mechanical stage at this point, that many have blindly adopted the
anti-social tools of this technological age. They've readily accepted
the notion of communicating via electronic mail with their friends and
family, researching their hobbies and interests in front of a 17-inch
computer screen, and even shopping by a click of a button. These events
used to exemplify the pinnacle of human and social interaction when our
times were simpler, but nowadays...they're just more tasks to add to
our Personal Digital Assistants. 
Are people happy travelling through this web of technological
advancements from year to year? Not according to the APA (American
Psychiatrists Association), which has claimed a steady rise in the
number of depression cases in the 1990's, and predicts an even higher
number as the new millenium approaches.
And when you superimpose the "Titanic" experience with many of the
anxieties that people from this decade are currently experiencing, the
answer to my original question, becomes a whole lot easier to solve. 
People see hope. They see love. They see the need to appreciate every
day to its fullest. They see Titanic, and they recognize these factors
as the most important things in their daily lives. Forget the daily
planners. Forget the emails still sitting in your inbox. Forget the TV
show that you felt you "had to" tape. See your family. See your
friends. See the love and hope and dreams that inhabit your mind from
day to day, and from month to month. Subside your disillusionment of
this crazy world we're living...just for a moment.
I believe that director James Cameron's timing was impeccable with this
project in regards to the times in which we are now living. People see
the future and they are scared. They aren't sure if they are going to
sink or stay afloat. The optimistic destiny that falls upon the two
main characters in this film, is a fate to which every audience member
would love to subscribe. And as the world's day to day operations
continue to retract us from the more important aspects of our lives as
human beings, this film allows us to breathe a certain air of optimism
into the future of our society. The hope and love that's resolved by
the characters in this film, allows everybody in the audience to
believe in their own chances of survival in this unpredictably,
evolving world of ours, and restore some of their own lost faith in
humanity.
These lessons are the ones that the next few copycat producers should
mimic as they attempt to cash in on similar movies over the next few
years. They shouldn't zone in on the Leonardo DiCaprio factor, the
gigantic budget, or even the great special effects. The real human
emotions is what they should be studying. The lost emotions of an
audience that has long been ignored by Hollywood movies. Movies that
exemplify hope, love and humanity. Movies that have a meaning to their
audience. Movies with a heart... 

Author
Jason Overbeck
Titanic is a good film that was catipulted into becoming a great, best
picture winning film.  The film which cost 200+ million dollars came
along and blinded critics and audiences alike into being overcome with
gitty delight that a smart action film can be made.  It was great,
Titanic T-Shirts, posters, soundtracks, calenders, documentaries,
truth-telling interviews became the rage.  Divorce yourself from that as
you watch the movie and you may feel the uneven film that you have on
your hands.
This is an emotional epic of romance and love on a doomed ship. You know
that one character survived and you hope with all your heart that there
are two.  You might cry in Titanic.  You will watch many scenes with
your heart warming inside of you.  Meanwhile Jim (Egocentric of the
World) Cameron is spitting in your face with stupid characters made of
cardboard, lame dialogue that sits on screen begging for you to laugh it
down and moral righteousness.  You sit back and notice the great love
story of Jack and Rose and find it romantic escapism because Rose's
FIANCEE is such a jerk.  Why is he presented that way?
If he was presented as a nice but weak man the story would have had more
dimintion to it. Another key problem is Jack's character.  He is
presented as a character with no past or future, but instead a
rebellious object for her to fall in love with, his character is
cardboard. What do You learn about him? And he is the center piece of
the film.
The relationship is also not that well developed compared to better
films.  Look at this years BOOGIE NIGHTS or CHASING AMY and you will
notice that both have real emotions, not REEL ones.  It is more
refreshing to have a film that has character relationships mean
something.  The end scene of Titanic is a tear jerker but it could have
been more straining if the characters were aloud to be the people not
the cardboard statue of them.
All this may sound very negative but you will notice that I give the
film a positive review.  Some critics have called the Titanic screenplay
a horrible one.  I don't agree. The characters and dialogue is bad and
distracting in some scenes but the film is very touching and easy to
like , if not love.  Some scenes are so good that you feel as though you
would like to forgive the other bad moments to give the event the credit
it deserves.  I am giving the review a mild recomendation, for the three
that haven't seen it, and I am writing this not just as a review but a
registered argument against the film that shouldn't have even been
nominated for best picture.  By the way see LA CONFIDENTIAL instead. It
is more heart warming to see a great film than a good one!

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Bill Paxton, and
Gloria Stuart.
     I really wanted to hate this film.  It is part of what I call the
Forrest Gump syndrome, you hear a film hyped, you hear Oscar Buzz before
it is even released, and you think in the back of your head, for these
reasons I want to hate this movie.  I was wrong with Forrest Gump, and I
was wrong with Titanic. 
     Much of what has been said about this film is absolutely true, at the
end of the film, it does not seem that you've been sitting there for over
three hours, and if the ship were not on the bottom of the Atlantic, it is
quite possible you would want more.
     The film is a story within a story.  The framing story concerns a
treasure hunter (Bill Paxton) who is being bankrolled by several
"interests" to find what is thought to be the most valueable diamond in
the world.  It was last known to be aboard Titanic in the possession of a
Pittsburgh Steel Tycoon.  In navigating the wreck he finds a safe which he
believes holds the diamond, however upon opening it, all he finds is muck,
water, and a packet of drawings, one of which of a naked girl wearing the
diamond.  He shows the picture on TV, knowing/hoping someone is going to
know the person.  A elderly woman (Gloria Stuart) phones him and claims
she is the woman in the picture, identifying the diamond by its name.  She
is flown out to the ship and tells the story of the diamond, and her
voyage on the Titanic in a flashback.
     Her flashback is the meat of the movie.  We are introduced to Rose
(Kate Winslet) a young woman who is promised to be engaged to, you guessed
it, a steel tycoon, played by Billy Zane (Phantom).  Also, proclaming this
is the luckiest day of his life, artist Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio)
wins a third class ticket on the Titanic and runs to get to the ship
before she sails.  It is obvious that Rose is not conent with her match
and we later learn that her mother is bankrupt and must insure their class
status.  Class is one of the major themes here, and there is a clever
duality where it refers to not only one's position in society, but ones
position in the ship.  Literally, the first class people were on the top
of the ship, and the lower class, were on the bottom.  Rose is not a usual
girl of high breeding and feels a slave to her class rather than a part of
it.  She is so distressed that she would rather die than marry.  She is
about to throw herself off of the boat when Jack saves her.  They have
instant chemistry, but it is obvious that she is still slightly bound by
her class strictures, and slowly but surely (but not too slow) she begins
to loosen up even more as she moves closer and closer to Jack.
     Her fiance and his Valet (David Warner) see her relationship with
Jack blooming and seem to do all they can to stop it, including handcuff
him to a post when the ship is going down.  
     It is difficult to expound futher on the plot without giving too much
away.  The acting in this film is top notch especially with people in the
smaller rolls.  Victor Garber (Godspell, Sleepless in Seattle) is
brilliant as the cathartic Andrews, the designer of the unsinkable ship.
He is a tragic figure of Greek and Shakespearian proportions.  A man who
thought he could question the gods, indeed, someone does say that even
"God couldn't sink her" when referring to the ship.  The leads, DiCaprio
and Winslet were good, but could have been better.  DiCaprio will forever
seem 12 years old, and it is difficult to see him as an adult in any role.
Winslet was facially brilliant, so many of her expressions conveyed
emotions and sometimes I could almost imagine fire behind her eyes, and
sometime great sadness.  Zane oozed smarmy evil, as he has done in so many
other films, and did it with style too.  Rose's Mother as well, conveyed
her personal terror at having to work and losing her position.  Kathy
Bates as Molly Brown showed us what new-money is, and what it meant to the
other people with money.  Finally, I cannot say too much about Gloria
Stuart, she has been absent from film for several years, and she is what
sucked me into the film emotionally before we even had a single flashback.
Her ice blue eyes held an incredible amount of emotion, laughter, pain,
and in a way, I looked forward to her appearances in the film.
     Now on to Cameron's direction.  It was pretty good.  He created
several short moments in this film that were very moving.  The string
quartet as the ship was going down, was something that could have been
played as a comic moment, in fact, some people in the audience laughed.
However, these four melancholy gentleman, no one ever listens to them, why
do they bother, but they sit down and they play and they play and they
play knowing that they are most likely going to die.  The fades from Rose
and Jack "flying" on the front of the ship to the wreck, and later from
Young Rose's eyes to Old Rose's eyes, during the sketching scene,  I sat
back in my seat and said wow, it was such a little thing, but it seemed to
powerful, it locked the framing story into the other in a way that is
stronger than most films and even books ever do.  There was obvious,
strong, connections between the two.  Finally, one of the most simple
shots was just of an old couple in bed as the ship was sinking and it was
a short, but extremely moving moment in the film.  Even though nothing is
said about them, they are not characters we have met, but we see them
there and we immediately think that is love. 
     I have gotten to the bottom of my review and I have not even
mentioned special effects.  That is a surprise in a Cameron film, because
his name is often synonymous with them.  In this case, however, you aren't
seeing a special effect, you are seeing THE TITANIC, the real one.  The
CGI effects are superior in some cases, and only the very carefully
watching eye can catch them.  Only the daytime shots of the ship betrayed
the special effects, at night, the shots were spectacular.  Same with the
shots of the engines turning, it was exciting, it was loud, and it was
powerful.  
     The only thing I found a bit weak in this film, was the writing of
dialogue.  It is a difficult thing to do in any film, some writers have a
gift for it, some do not.  In this case, though, considering the rest of
the film, it is often easy to forgive.  It did bother me a bit, however.
Other than that, this is an excellent film.  It was far better than I
would have expected, and I am glad I saw it.
Of the $3.50 I paid to see it, it was worth $6.25
--

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1997, PG-13, 194 minutes [3 hours, 14 minutes]
starring: Leonardo DiCaprio (Jack Dawson), Kate Winslet (Rose DeWitt Bukater),
Billy Zane (Cal Hockley), Gloria Stuart (Old Rose); produced by James Cameron,
Jon Landau; written and directed by James Cameron.
Seen February 13, 1998 at 8 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18, theater #4, by
myself, using Hoyts Cinema Cash. [Theater rating: ****: excellent seats,
sound, and picture]
        One thing all films considered to be "epics" and/or "classics" have in common
is that they weren't made with the intention of being crowned as such. What's
so remarkable about "Titanic" is that it seems as if it was made with such a
goal in mind - a nearly unreachable, almost pompous level of greatness, and
does manage to fulfill and even surpass its expectations. 
        The legend of the Titanic disaster is a story we've heard about for years,
but does anyone really know the whole story? Director James Cameron spent
years researching the material for this film, and his effort is clear from the
get-go. We're introduced to Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), a modern-day scientist
exploring the wreckage who is looking for a diamond necklace worn by one of
the passengers in a drawing dated the night the ship went down. When this news
is broadcast on television, an old woman named Rose (Stuart) contacts Lovett
to tell him she is the girl in the picture and proceeds to tell her story.
        The first hour does an excellent job in establishing the reality of the
situation. Cameron makes full use of the actual wreckage, sending robots and
probes into the cracks and crevasses no one has seen in over 80 years. As the
explorers and their submarines reach the ocean floor and turn their lights and
cameras on, the sheer site of it all is awesome and yet frightening because it
is real. Lovett's line, "Seeing her come out of the dark like a ghost ship
gets me every time" accurately reflects the feeling all viewers will think.
What's also fascinating is the use of modern technology to tell the story, and
I don't mean special effects alone. One of the film's best scenes involves a
computer-animated simulation of the ship hitting the iceberg and sinking while
one of the explorers narrates in lighthearted, plain English, conveying the
tragedy of it all and still creates for a moving moment.
        But the film is not simply about the sinking of the ship, or even the ship
itself, it's a humanistic drama about all the people involved. The Titanic was
meant to be all things to all people - for the rich it was the ultimate form
of elitism, but for the poor it was simply an escort to a better life. Rose
was a member of the former group, a society in which she never felt a part of,
and Kate Winslet's portrayal as 17-year-old Rose DeWitt Bukater is quite
convincing in this aspect. She's engaged (somewhat against her will) to Cal
Hockley, a multi-millionaire who epitomizes the image of the snobbery and
elitist imagery associated with the type, especially as played by Billy Zane
with just the right accent, facial expressions, and cold attitude. But of
course where there's the uptight rich, there must also be the free-spirited
poor, and this class is represented by the American teenage bounder Jack
Dawson (DiCaprio), who gains entrance to the Titanic by winning a ticket in a
poker game.
        Taking these basic elements into consideration it's easy to tell where they
will go and how the film will use them. Jack and Rose will of course get
together and the differences in classes will be played up and used to develop
character and plot. One thing will lead to another and Jack and Rose will
completely fall for each other while Cal will become extremely jealous and
retaliate. This sounds cliche and it is, but taking into account the scope and
premise of the film, there doesn't seem to be much else that could be done.
Epics such as this aren't exactly known for their idiosyncratic observations
and terrific chemistry. I think Cameron realized this and carried out the film
the way he did to spite the situation, not to work with it. However, he does
manage to squeeze in just the right amount of one-liners and comedic
situations to keep the mood easy-going (my favorite examples include: a
situation in which Rose must hit something with an axe in just the right place
before the water rises, but Jack suggests she take a few practice swings
first; after the ship has sunk Jack says, "I don't know about you, but I
intend to write a strongly worded letter to the White Star Line about all
this!").
        This is not a dialogue-driven film, nor is it too concerned with plot, it is
a complex drama utilizing dozens of characters and showing how all of them
relate to each other. Most of the second act focuses on Jack and Rose, but the
script works perfectly to allow their "adventures" to take place throughout
the ship in a wholly believable, realistic manner: from the first-class suites
and ballrooms, to the third-class barracks; from the clean, precision of the
captain's deck, to the dark, dirty, hellish boiler room with engines as big as
houses. How the film manages to incorporate everything, and be so well-paced
at that is amazing.
        In the last few years we've been inundated with disaster films which work
mostly as eye candy, not as the believable, suspenseful joyrides they intend
to be. The first two hours are so intriguing by themselves, at times it's easy
to forget where the ship's destiny lies. Throughout the film hints are dropped
that perhaps the ship's executives have been too arrogant in their ways, and
had they been more cautious the disaster might have been averted. The entire
third hour of the film takes place in real time from the moment the iceberg is
spotted to the last inch of the ship going under water. Cameron is a veteran
when it comes to action and special effects, but usually with sci-fi movies,
not dramas, so the payoff is even more impressive. Here he is able to create
for gripping suspense as the ship sinks slowly at first but later breaks in
half, speeding up the action tenfold. 
        What's most impressive is the reality of it all: the authenticity to the set
of the ship; the people screaming and running for dear life; the atmosphere of
panic and chaos. Never before have I felt such a connection with such horrific
events taking place on a screen. The plausibility is vivid, giving one a
shocking sensation, especially when we consider that this actually happened.
One of the last scenes, involving a search for survivors, is more frightening
than any horror movie I've ever seen.
        "Titanic" accomplishes what it set out to do: to be an epic film in all ways
possible. At first glance it seems to be trying too hard, but upon close
inspection we realize it is everything a great film can and should be.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Frank Ochieng
starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart, Kathy Bates,
Billy Zane
Director: James Cameron
TITANIC is James Cameron's 150 million plus water-logged extravagant
epic set afloat to a tremendous tune involving a touching love story
amid the devastating consequences that dictate this tragic footnote in
history--the sinking of this incredible vigorous vessel. What Cameron
does is essentially give us a history lesson in an empowering, emphat-
ic, entertaining way. This extraordinary flick feels like a big event
with a litany of emblematic scope and impressive visual
vitality. Cameron wants to lose the audience in his elitist approach
to this lavish production.
TITANIC stars Oscar-nominated heartthrob Leonardo DiCaprio as Jack, a
wandering artist who captures the attention (and eventual love) of
Rose (Oscar-nominated actress Kate Winslet), a young socialite who
happens to be involved with a vain suitor (Billy Zane). This early
2oth century love story is as opulent and glossy as the whole film
itself. We digest every elegant nostalgic nuance that is provided in
this breathtaking period piece. The romantic bond that is cemented
between these two lovers serves as an eerie irony because it is their
attachment that proves to be the only thing considered durable,
reliable, indestructible, and resillient...not the mighty ship that
was used as the catalyst to encourage their lovelorn union in the
first place.
TITANIC is perhaps the first 100 million dollar plus film in quite
some time to actually carve a niche for letting its magnificent
special effects and big-budget billing match its human dimensional
heart.  Cameron's effort here is not all plastic and ponderous; he
delivers a humane scale of hope, beauty, and passion. TITANIC does
have that sinking feeling, and it's not because of the iceberg--it's
because of our emotional impulse for this exceptional film.
http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
Is it really the critic's province to concern himself with how much it
cost to make a movie and/or what is the likelihood the film will turn
a profit.?  I am inclined to think not.  Let, in the instance of
TITANIC, 20th-Century Fox and Paramount worry about it.  It is not as
if they did not know of James Cameron's reputed perfectionism.  Before
he was tapped to direct, they knew that how the movie turns out is
Cameron's one and only concern.  Based on that, I would say they and
viewers got their money's worth.
>From the opening scenes of the round "submarines" (built in Russia and
manned by real-life Russians) as they entered the openings in the
ship's hull, the barnacles and eroded parts of the ship bringing the
disaster close, it was obvious that Cameron was giving us some
excellent special effects with the 90% to scale of the original
Titanic.  And later, when the ship goes down like a monstrous whale
diving beneath the surface, more magnificent footage.
What the explorers entering openings in the hull were seeking was the
safe which surely contained untold wealth as the ship's passengers (in
First Class) were in the multi-millionaire class.  To capture the safe
would be a treasure.  As it turned out, Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton) was
in for a great disappointment when the safe which was brought on deck
of the mother ship revealed nothing but soggy papers.  Not exactly,
though.  There was also a photo of a young woman, Rose (Kate Winslet)
wearing what looked like a valuable locket with a blue diamond When
the picture was shown on TV news, the real Rose, (Gloria Stuart) , now
101-years-old, came forth to say it was she in that picture taken a
long time ago, just before the Titanic, billed as "unsinkable," hit
the iceberg and sank in the icy waters of the Atlantic Ocean on April
15, 1912.
This is the thread on which the script hangs.  As the aged Rose starts
to describe the fanfare and excitement of the boarding of the ship and
what transpired until the disaster, director Cameron allows us to see
that about which she is talking.  It tells of how the young and
beautiful Rose met Jack, (Leonardo DiCaprio) a "nobody" with an
artist's soul and fell in love with him to the great dismay of her
social-climbing mother (Frances Fisher) who worries that Rose will
lose her very wealthy fianc, Cal Hockley (Billy Zane ).
Great effort went into the ship's interior with its dining room and
ballroom and the wealthy patrons on upper decks living it up as if in
a grand hotel.  Drinking and dancing away the days and nights, waited
on hand and foot by the stewards, oblivious to the disaster that lay
ahead.
When it became obvious that the ship was going to sink, it was the
first class "women and children" who were lowered into boats
. . . about which there were insufficient number . . .followed by the
men.  Those in steerage were not allowed into the boats until all the
first class passengers had been evacuated . . . if indeed there were
still boats left for them.
The film brings out that the ship was going at a faster than safe
speed because the Captain (Bernard Hill) was prevailed upon to set a
record.  It was J Bruce Ismay (Jonathan Hyde), a newspaperman who
urged "The maiden voyage of the Titanic must make headlines."  It sure
did!
One bit of carping.  The film implied that the two lookouts on the
forward deck were diverted by Jack and Rose kissing on the deck below.
Had they had there eyes searching the darkness ahead, perhaps they
would have seen the iceberg sooner and been able to alert the helmsman
to veer away.  After trying so hard for verite, Cameron should have
skipped that bit of make believe.
In any case, a most significant and entertaining film.
Others in the cast included Kathy Bates as "The Unsinkable Molly Brown." 

Author
Michael Dequina
Over $200 million in production costs; a problem-plagued shoot; a missed
release date; a cast without a major star; and a three-hour-plus running
time.  A recipe for disaster?  Not in the hands of writer-director James
Cameron.  His much-talked-about, much-anticipated Titanic has finally set
sail, and unlike the ill-fated oceanliner that lends the film its name,
this absorbing, moving cinematic spectacle not only floats, it soars.
It is ironic that so many modern dollars were spent in service of what is,
at its core, a very old-fashioned romantic epic.  Set mostly aboard the
titular cruise ship during its singular voyage in 1912, Titanic documents,
in flashback, the forbidden romance between penniless artist Jack Dawson
(Leonardo DiCaprio) and the well-bred Rose Dewitt Bukater (Kate Winslet),
who is quite unhappily betrothed to wealthy snob Cal Hockley (Billy Zane).
The nature of Jack and Rose's relationship is fairly
conventional--free-spirited Jack enables the constricted Rose to come
alive--but the simple purity adds to the couple's charm.  Cameron wisely
takes his time to build this romance; by devoting the first couple of hours
(and a very fast-paced two hours at that) to its development, he allows
DiCaprio and Winslet (both terrific in what should be star-making turns) to
develop a natural, affecting rapport with each other and, more crucially,
the audience.
One can use all the superlative adjectives--"extraordinary,"
"spectacular," et al.--to describe the centerpiece crash-and-sink (which
comprises the bulk of the film's final hour), yet no words can ever come
close to accurately capturing the truly awesome experience of watching the
Titanic take its final plunge.  Unlike the previous high-budget record
holder, the inane would-be action "epic" Waterworld, every last dollar
spent on Titanic is visible on screen, from the 90-percent-to-scale model
of the ship and rushing torrents of water to the ever-so-subtle visual
effects that multiply a cast of hundreds into thousands.  But for all its
technical achievement, what gives the disaster (and the entire film) its
powerful charge is the emotional investment the audience has with the
people--not just Jack and Rose but also the minor players, a number of whom
manage to carve out distinct, endearing identities during the course of the
film.  A sinking ship is just that without characters the audience cares
about on board; by the time the ship makes its fateful collision, the film
is no longer so much about a ship that sinks than it is about living,
breathing human beings who, as one of the film's taglines goes, "collide
with destiny."
The enduring and healing power of love, the strength of the human will,
living for the moment--these are a few of the themes Cameron covers, but
instead of coming off as blatantly preachy (which, in some of his previous
films, he comes dangerously close to), he addresses these issues with
careful subtlety, expressing them mostly through the characters and their
actions rather than explicitly written dialogue (with the exception of a
few words of wisdom dispensed by Jack).  One of the best examples of this
is the framing device for the main on-ship action: modern-day scenes in
which an aged Rose (Gloria Stuart) tells her story to an expedition crew
(led by Bill Paxton) searching for a legendary blue diamond called the
Heart of the Ocean.  A lesser filmmaker would use these scenes as little
more than decorative bookends, but in the end Cameron molds them into a
relevant subplot about man's selfish and greedy nature.
Steven Spielberg and Robert Zemeckis earned long-overdue respect from the
Academy and critics alike with 1993's Schindler's List and 1994's Forrest
Gump, respectively; with Titanic, a sumptuous epic as emotionally powerful
as it is technically phenomenal, fellow hitmaker James Cameron is now set
to receive his just due.  (opens December 19)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio; Kate Winslet; Billy Zane & Kathy Bates
So the question is -- is this the greatest movie of all time? Well, it's
certainly the most successful. Maybe not the best movie of all time in my
books, although I would have to say it comes pretty darn close. That's quite
an admission coming from me, since I've never seen a love story that I
didn't hate or fall asleep before the 1 hour mark. Titanic is just that a
love story, even with the multimillion dollar sets and special effects, it
is just a movie about the love two young passengers have for one another. I
will have to admit, as love stories go, this was a very compelling one.
Certainly, the best one I've ever seen. Although I still can't figure out
what all the excitement is about regarding Leonardo DiCaprio. I guess I
would have to be a teenage girl to figure out that one, but I digress. I
went to see titanic not for the love story (I planned on tolerating it) but
for the special effects. Believe it or not I actually found my cold-hearted
self actually enjoying the romance between Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio)
and Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet). While, as I've already said, I don't
see what the fuss is over Leo, after seeing this film I couldn't imagine it
being made with actors other than DiCaprio and Winslet in the lead roles. A
fact that I think speaks volumes about their performances. There was truly
no doubt, in my little mind at least, that by the end of the movie the
characters of Jack and Rose were deeply in love. Heck, I actually even
started to care about their romance. (I think I'm getting too soft.)
Anyway, as they say, time flies when your having fun, and since I went to
see the special effects, that is what I wanted to see. Now to get off topic
for just a second, I was one of those who asked the burning questions before
the movie came out. Who in their right mind spends 200 million dollars to
make a film? Better yet on a film that everybody knows the ending to? If you
are crazy enough to spend such huge amounts of cash, why wouldn't you cast
some big name actors in the lead roles, so we the audience would have some
reason to go? A whole lot of people asked those same questions. If they are
anything like me, after seeing Titanic they had to ask themselves -- Why
would I have ever asked such stupid questions? Why? Well, because critics
are not filmmakers, and while we like to comment on films, and are
relatively knowledgeable on the subject, for the most part we don't know as
much as the people who make them. This is abundantly true with regard to
Titanic's director James Cameron. The same man who many considered would be
run out of Hollywood just a few short months before the film opened, is now
being recognized as being among the greatest directors of all time. I really
don't think that anyone can say enough about the job that this guy did.
This brings me back around to the reason I went to see this film -- the
special effects. The movie opens with breathtaking shots of the real Titanic
on the bottom of the Atlantic, shot specifically for this film by director
James Cameron. Although that almost pales by comparison to the special
effects used during the last half of the movie as the ship is sinking. The
200 million dollar price tag is certainly evident on the screen. Both in the
long shots where we get to see the great ship break up, and in the interior
shots that were done in giant flooded tanks. If, like me, you go to Titanic
for the special effects, I promise you will not be disappointed by anything
that appears on the screen.
A funny thing happened as I was watching the Titanic in its final minutes
above the water. As much as I was in awe of the effects, and the complexity
of the production, something else happened. An eerie feeling came over me.
Unlike other disaster movies, this one really happened. All too often, when
we think of the real Titanic sitting there on the bottom of the ocean, we
forget something. Oh, we remember the tragedy of the situation and that hund
reds of lives were lost, but most of us never stop to think what it must
have like to be there on that ship as it was going down. James Cameron has
captured those last moments, in a way that will make you think wonder why
you never thought about it like that before.
As spectacular as the special effects were, they could not overshadow a
simple love story and the tragedy associated with one of the worst disasters
of all time. A truly remarkable film, it is no wonder that so many people
have gone back to this masterpiece several times.
One of the greatest films ever made.  10/10 - I would give it a higher
rating if I had one.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TITANTIC, writer and director James Cameron's much anticipated and
sometimes ridiculed $200,000,000 epic, arrives shortly into the
theaters so the question naturally arises, whether the film is worth
it?  As a business proposition, it seems hard to see how it can ever
break even, but as a movie it is nothing short of wonderful.
     If you've already neatly categorized it as yet another disaster
movie a la VOLCANO or THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE, think again.  The movie
is both a great love story told with the disaster as a backdrop and a
portrayal of one of the world's most memorable disasters made real and
personal by seeing it through the eyes of two young lovers.  In either
case, it is filmmaking at its best.
     When we entered the press screening, my wife asked the publicity
rep if there would be an intermission since the film runs three and a
quarter hours long.  He said no but that the time would go by so fast
she'd never notice the length.  Amazingly, he was right.  TITANIC is
one of the few long films that doesn't suffer because of it.
     The lush picture, filmed by Russell Carpenter in 70mm, opens in
the present with two diving subs exploring the wreck of the Titanic on
the bottom of the ocean.  Fortune hunter Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton)
leads the expedition looking for the world's most valuable diamond
necklace that went down with the ship, known back then as "the ship of
dreams."  The necklace's hundred-year-old former owner, Rose DeWitt
Bukater (Gloria Stuart), finds Brock to tell him her story.
     Although almost all of the movie happens in flashback, one of the
engineers shows the elderly Rose exactly how the ship was sunk.  Using
a computer simulation, the movie takes the time to explain what will
happen later, which adds immensely to making a lucid story out of what
would have otherwise been hopelessly confusing.
     After twenty minutes, the story makes its jump to the past as the
Titanic leaves on her maiden voyage.  In a classic movie theme, the two
parts of the ship, first class and steerage (third-class) exist in
sharp contrast.  The strength of the script is the way it paints the
differences between rich and poor without excessive moralizing.
     Entering the ship on its day out is Rose along with her
millionaire fiance, Cal Hockley, played with perfect snobbishness by
Billy Zane.  And thanks to a last minute winning poker hand, an
itinerant artist named Jack Dawson gets himself into a little shared
cabin in third class.  Even with her own promenade deck, Rose feels
trapped on the ship, what with an upcoming marriage to a man she
loathes.  In contrast, Jack can barely contain his euphoria at being on
board.
     After Jack saves Rose from committing suicide, they start a brief
but impassioned love affair.  Never tawdry and rarely explicit, their
romance has the power to sweep the audience into the story.  Leonardo
DiCaprio in his best performance ever plays Jack with confidence and
charisma.  In so many ways, small and large, he makes all the right
decisions in his approach to the part.  When he confronts Cal, for
example, he remains composed and polite and yet subtly undermines every
one of Cal's supercilious put-downs.
     Kate Winslet gives a wonderfully captivating performance as young
Rose.  The chemistry between these two Academy Award nominees, him for
WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE and her for SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, is
nothing short of astonishing.  From the scene where he embarrasses her
by repeatedly asking if she loves her finace to the beautiful one of
them hanging off the ship's bow to the one where she embarrasses him by
asking him to paint her nude, they dazzle the screen with a pair of
mesmerizing performances.  If the film breaks after an hour and a half,
which is how long Cameron wisely waits to have the iceberg show up, you
will still get one of the best films of the year.
     Peter Lamont's sets are more than authentic.  One scene, for
example, starts with the planning-to-retire captain, played with
insouciance by Bernard Hill, having his tea on deck.  It then shifts to
the ship's massive gears and then to the bright-hot boiler room filled
with sweating muscular men shoveling in the coals.  The handsome
interior common rooms of the ship resemble a palace more than an ocean
liner.
     Easily the most fascinating part of the story is what happens
after the iceberg hits and before the battle with the water begins in
earnest.  At first, since the iceberg tears a series of little gashes
in the hull, not some big gaping hole, the passengers view the hit as
more of curiosity than anything else.  What a lark.  We've struck an
iceberg.  Now let's get back to our brandy and cigars.
     The ship's musicians play like troopers through it all, even after
the panic sets in.  After all, they see it as their duty to calm the
passengers.  When the musicians are about to die, they politely thank
each other for the pleasure of being able to play together, and they
mean it.  Their civility borders on insanity, but it is touching
nevertheless.
     The story is so rich that my description has merely touched the
surface.  There are more than enough characters to love and to hate,
and all of the casting is dead-on.
     Special effects work best when their presence becomes almost
undetectable.  In TITANIC, for which he created a nine-tenths scale
model of the entire ship, Cameron strove for accuracy at all costs.
The most dramatic moment in the film happens when the ship breaks in
two, and the front section becomes vertical in the water.  People are
flung like ants either into the water to be shortly frozen to death or
into other parts of the ship to be crushed immediately.
     Besides being romantic and dramatic, the script includes liberal
doses of humor.  From the many deliciously subtle verbal put-downs to
the physical comedy, as when Jack teaches Rose to spit like a man, the
show elicits laughter in addition to perhaps a few tears.
     "It's good-bye for a little while," a less than confident father
tells his little girl since it was indeed women and children first.
"This boat's for mommies and children.  There'll be a boat in a little
while for daddies."  Basically there was a design decision to have
fewer than half of the necessary life boats -- it made the decks look
too crowded otherwise.
     Perhaps the sinking is best summarized by one of the Guggenheim's
on-board the ship.  In the dining room with the lifeboats gone and the
ship certain to sink, he is offered a life jacket by one of the crew.
"No thanks," the elegantly attired Guggenheim replies.  "We're dressed
in our best and would prefer to go down like gentlemen.  But we would
like a brandy."
     TITANIC runs 3:14.  It is rated PG-13 for tastefully and
delicately presented sex and nudity and would be fine for kids twelve
and up.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
TITANIC (director: James Cameron; cast: Leonardo DiCaprio (Jack Dawson),
Kate Winslet  (Rose DeWitt Bukater), Gloria Stuart (Rose Dawson
Calvert), Billy Zane (Cal Hockley), Kathy Bates (Molly Brown), Frances
Fisher (Ruth DeWitt Bukater), Bernard Hill (Capt. E.J. Smith), Victor
Garber (Thomas Andrews), Bill Paxton (Brock Lovett), David Warner (law
officer), 1997)
An unconscionable clinker for those who are more impressed with
intellect in films than with special effects, for a film costing 200
million dollars to make, while doing a dutiful job in recreating the
grandeur of the ship and its ritzy atmosphere, but failing in everything
else, except in the gall to think it has created a masterpiece. If there
is anyone out there who stills believes there is such a thing as an
unsinkable ship, you'll believe Leonardo DiCaprio's innocuous portrayal
of an artist on board the ill-fated ship and that the soap opera story
told is tantamount to a work of art. This epic disaster film of the
Titanic's sinking upon hitting an iceberg on April 15, 1912, is all
gloss, high-class trash, something that is so opulently Hollywood, so
much so that it deserved to win an Oscar and set box office records for
the audacity to perceive itself as the official version of what happened
to the Titanic, while even in its quest for accuracy, it still does not
play up the fact that a near-by ship refused to come in time to save
those who were in the water freezing to death, thereby causing the
unnecessary deaths of hundreds of the 1500 hundred that were found to be
dead out of the two thousand and two hundred passengers on board. Films
backed by big money like this one, rarely ever go after controversy,
much preferring to steer a trouble-free course, with a clever eye to the
bottom line.
This three hour and eleven minute disaster film opens with a team of
deep sea explorers, led by Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), looking for the
Titanic's treasures and the valuable jewels it had on board. These slick
treasure hunters are disappointed that their found booty has turned to
mud and that the only thing they have come up with, is a nude picture of
a woman with the world's most valuable blue egg-shaped diamond necklace
(Le Coeur de la Mer) around her neck. But to their surprise, they
receive a call from the lady who posed for that picture, who is now a
101 years-old. And the film begins its flashback of what happened to the
Titanic, narrated through the eyes of Rose (Gloria), who in real-life,
is an 87-year-old former actress who appeared in the Gold Diggers of
1935.
Immediately we see this is going to be a class war struggle piece, with
the haughty rich boarding on first class passage and the lower-class in
steerage, and they are shown to be living their lives in starkly
different worlds. The first one we see to board from first class, is the
gorgeous and well- plumed Rose (Kate), with her snooty mother (Francis),
and the man she is soon to be married to, the wealthy scion to his
families business, Cal, but the catch is that she can't stand him, as he
is played hideously and one-dimensionally by Zane. By way of steerage
comes our boy Jack Dawson (Leonard), who wins his ticket in a card game.
All the lower-class people are the salts of the earth, while all the
upper-class people are snobs. There is one exception, "The Unsinkable
Molly Brown," who represented the class of  "new money," she is played
without creating any further interest in her character, by Kathy Bates,
who seems to be going through the motions of what the character is like.
I think any actress on board that ship could have played that part. It
is hard to believe how trite and contrived this story was, and how
everyone in this film had no depth of character. Everyone was a wooden
stereotype of what their class status was supposed to be like. What gave
this film watch ability, was the way the ship was recreated down to its
last details, giving one the romantic feeling that one was on the real
voyage. At least, the money spent for visual effects went to some good
usage.
The love story begins when Jack stops Rose from jumping overboard, as
she is apparently confused about her situation and contemplates suicide.
The remainder of the film is about these star-crossed lovers, trying to
get together but being opposed by her mother and her future husband, who
acts in a pompous manner, becoming the ready made villain of this story,
never changing his intonations for one moment.
The other part of the film focuses on the ship's management telling the
captain to speed things up, and the intrepid captain against his better
judgment is obliging to that wish, supposedly for the publicity the ship
would get if it docked in New York ahead of schedule. What was
ultimately unforeseen, was that the weather created conditions that made
it impossible to detect icebergs, which the ship rammed into at full
speed.
The photography was great. The costumes were terrific. The sound system
was as good as it gets. Everything about the special effects was
first-class. If you judge a film by those standards, then you will be
more than pleased with this film. If you are looking for a cruise into
deeper water, then I'm afraid you boarded the wrong film, this one will
only leak all over you. I waited a long time to see this film, choosing
to watch it on TV and not on a big screen theater; I have no regrets why
I waited so long. By the way, I saw A NIGHT TO REMEMBER (1958), and
thought that version of the Titanic to be just grand, not cluttered with
a trivial story, just sticking to the suspense of the historical event,
which was fine and dandy by my non technical cerebral standards.
Dennis Schwartz: "Movie Reviews"           http://www.sover.net/~ozus
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Titanic" represents both the best and the worst of current Hollywood
filmmaking. At its best, "Titanic" is a lavish, thrilling account of one of the
biggest disasters of the 20th century. At its worst, the movie is flawed in the
screenwriting department, and presents numerous cliches and particularly bad
acting. Nevertheless, this is one hell of a movie and it should not be missed. 
"Titanic" tells its tragic tale via the only survivor of the actual sinking of
the ship - a 102-year-old woman (Gloria Stuart) who recounts the vivid tale to
a group of research scientists led by a marine scavenger (Bill Paxton). This
scavenger is looking for a jewel aboard the Titanic's ruins, but instead he
finds a sketch of a nude girl wearing the long-lost jewel. The nude girl is, of
course, the elder woman, Rose Dewitt Bukater, who is played as a 17-year-old
girl by the stellar actress Kate Winslet. 
In luminous photography and sweeping visuals, "Titanic" quickly takes us back
to that fateful day in April, 1912 when the first of the Titanic's 2,207
passengers began boarding the ship in Southampton, England. Here we are
introduced to the major characters such as the itinerant-artist Jack Dawson
(Leonard DiCaprio) who wins a steerage-class ticket in a poker game, the
aforementioned Rose, along with her assertive mother (Frances Fisher), and
Rose's snobbish fiancee, Cal Hockley (Billy Zane). We also meet the shrewd,
unsinkable Molly Brown (Kathy Bates). 
Director James Cameron spares us no expense in showing us the elaborate decks
of the ship, the ballrooms, the pretentious bedrooms, the tiny steerage
compartments and the hot and heavy boiler room. We also see the differences in
the lifestyles and treatment of the haves and the have-nots. These differences
are further exemplified by the forbidden teenage romance between the
near-suicidal, potentially wealthy Rose and the clever, destitute Jack who
awakens a new sensibility in her by teaching her how to spit, and sketching her
in the nude. This causes problems between Rose and the violent, spiteful Cal
who orders his thuggish partner (David Warner) to keep an eye on Jack. Before
you can say romantic soap opera, the ship hits a big iceberg. According to the
ship's builder Thomas Andrews (Victor Garber), this will cause the ship to sink
within an hour. The lower levels of the ship gradually start to sink, including
the boiler room, forcing the stewards at to shut off the boilers and begin
evacuation. Unfortunately, there are only a limited number of lifeboats
available for the thousands of panicked passengers.
 "Titanic" is at its best during the last hour and a half where we see the
destructive nature of the sinking of this massive ship. At this point,
Cameron's main theme comes forth - man's technological advancement (and
arrogance) spells death for humanity itself. Thousands of lives are lost, and
we see how the stewards lead the first-class passengers into safety first.
There's also a terrifying scene where one of the stewards threatens and kills a
couple of eager passengers. We also see Rose trying to rescue Jack who's locked
away in one of the lower levels by Cal's partner. This whole section is so
stirring and emotional that you're not likely to leave the theater with dry
eyes.
Cameron's weakness is in his writing. The romance between Rose and Jack
certainly evokes a passion and sense of love that is unlike most other tragic
love stories. Cameron's main fault, however, lies with some of the supporting
characters. Billy Zane as the cocky, snobbish Cal is laughably oafish emitting
numerous cliches - he seems to have drifted in from a bad Harlequin romance
novel. The same can be said for the predictably cold character of Rose's mother
who does not approve of Jack because she wants her daughter to marry Cal for
the security he can provide. There's also too little of the boisterous Kathy
Bates as Molly Brown who brightens the screen whenever she shows up, and too
much of Cal's gun-toting partner who seems to have drifted in from an Indiana
Jones adventure.
Other bland characters include Titanic luminaries such as the worrisome
Captain Smith (Bernard Hill); the Whites Star Lines executive (Jonathan Hyde)
who insists that the ship travel at full speed so they can arrive in New York a
day early; and a couple of other forgettable wealthy passengers. 
Another lesser weakness is the movie's obligatory framing device of having the
elder Rose tell us her story of that fateful night - it's interesting yet
unnecessary in its own way because the power of the film is the compelling
story itself that we need no guidance in following.
 Still, this is among Cameron's best technical work by far, and it is a
tribute to him that we don't actually notice any of the special-effects. In a
sense, he makes us feel we are aboard the ship, before and after it sinks.
"Titanic" is an awesome spectacle and perversely entertaining, but its
narrative style and characters are less than stimulating. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with comments, suggestions or arguments at Faust667@aol.com or
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Rob Strong
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart,
Kathy Bates, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher, Bill Paxton, Suzy Amis, 
Danny Nucci, Victor Garber, and David Warner
Once every so often a film is made that transcends all bounds,
breaks all records, shatters all conventions, and then makes
new ones.  The last movie to do so was STAR WARS.  Twenty
years later, one has been made again.  It is TITANIC.
Clocking in at 194 minutes, you would never know it from
the way it is paced and presented.  The film is absolutely
astounding.
A brief plot summary will follow.  Brief, because if you
don't know it by now, you've been living in a cave on 
Mars with your eyes shut and your fingers in your ears.
A penniless artist (Leonardo DiCaprio) falls in love 
with a high-born rich girl (Kate Winslet).  She is
unhappily engaged to a snob (Billy Zane) and has a
shrewish mother (Frances Fisher).  They are all passengers
on the famously huge, but ill-fated, ocean liner Titanic.
The film also has modern day pieces, of Rose, now
100 years of age (Gloria Stuart), telling her story to a 
sleazy treasure hunter (Bill Paxton) who is looking on
Titanic for a fabulously expensive jewel that Rose once wore 
on the ship.  Clear?  Great.
The performances are all uniformly excellent.  The 
characters are real and vibrant.  You know them and 
feel sadness and joy as they do.  Of particular note
are DiCaprio, Winslet, Stuart, and Bates.  Director James
Cameron really has created a triumph.  All the pieces
fall into place beautifully.  He has wisely kept the
ship and all the effects that go with it in the background,
rather then make them the main characters.  Still,
they work, and work well.  Plus, Cameron injects some 
moments of humor to keep the movie from becoming flat
out depressing.
But, what I liked best about TITANIC were the little 
touches.  The exquisite attention to detail.  The
shot of the ship's designer, Andrews (Victor Garber), 
as he winds the clock as his creation falls apart around 
him.  The priest giving absolution as the ship turns 
upright and people fall away all around him.  The
mother putting her children to bed and the old couple
together as water pours in around him.  Benjamin
Guggenheim, one of the richest men on earth, putting
on his finest clothes and asking for a brandy as
he and his manservant prepare "to go down like men."
And, of course, James Horner's hauntingly beautiful
score.  The shots of the Titanic as it sinks, in the middle
of the big, black ocean, even it dwarfed by the water 
around it.  All of these are extremely powerful images
that only add to an already wonderful movie.
I can't end this review without commenting on the last
scene, which is my absolute favorite.  It is so haunting
and beautiful that it will stick with you long after you
have seen it.  If you are unclear as to when I consider
the end scene to begin, it is when the camera begins to
show all of Old Rose's pictures.  
Now, I will list the film's flaws.  Several moments of 
bad dialogue and some effects that you can tell are 
effects.  Some people have criticized the plot as being
formulaic, but as Roger Ebert said, "...you don't use
the most expensive movie in history as your opportunity
to reinvent the wheel."
But, then again, CITIZEN KANE had flaws too.

Author
Jeff Walters
           Ahh.....how do I start this review? I could start with
saying it's the best movie I've ever had the pleasure to see in
 my life. Or maybe I could start by saying that if you haven't seen
this movie you should turn off your computer right now and get your
butt over to the cinema of your choice. Yeah, one of those two would
be a good place to start. 
               This was not a movie I'd been anticipating. I'd heard
test-screenings were positive, but it just didn't grab me. I was much
more anxious to see a movie that opened here a week after Titanic -
Alien Ressurection. I only went to see Titanic because a) It's James
Cameron (nuff' said?) and b) well, I see every movie that comes out.
               Titanic opened here a day earlier than anywhere else,
but stupid me didn't take this oppurtunity to see it early. It was
actually a week after it opened that I decided it was time to take a
look. Sold Out? Huh? A movie in Penrith selling out? And a week after
release? Whoa. Dissappointed and intruiged at the same time we decided
to buy tickets for the one of the later sessions. 
               'Why the hell did I waste a week before seeing this?',
echoed around my head as we staggered out of the theatre
 after a 3 1/4 hour emotional roller-coaster. My brother, Chris, (an
amateur film-maker) walked from the theatre shaking his head and
muttering incomprehensively. All I heard was the occasional snippet -
'......wow...cinematography'. Me and Chris usually see every movie we
can and then drive everyone else nuts by talking about it endlessly in
the car home from the cinema. Strangely this time not a word
 was spoken on the way home, oh...except for -
'stop....need...food...service station', but that hardly counts.
        After that night, I honestly couldn't have cared less about
seeing Alien Ressurection. It couldn't possibly have topped this. And
as I discovered a week later - I was right. Titanic is the best movie
I've ever seen. Said it before and I'll say it again - best! You may
be sitting there thinking - 'but it's 3 1/4 hours long and it's a love
story! Not my thing'. That's what I  thought too....but I didn't
notice a second pass as soon as T I T A N I C  appeared on the screen.
Even though the ship doesn't start sinking till the last hour, the
first half is so intruiging, enjoyable and beleive or not -
even funny. 
         The story of the two main characters - Jack and Rose, is so
engaging that I could have happily sat in that movie  theatre for way
longer than 3 1/4 hours. 
               The movie's best scene is without a doubt the very
final scene. I'm not going to give ANY details about this part,
because it's easily my favourite scene in any movie I've seen and I'd
hate to ruin it for those who haven't seen it yet. The funny thing
about this movie is that the images and scenes that make the biggest
impression on you are not the big budget sinking parts (though
impressive) - it's the scene's following the actual sinking that haunt
you most. 
               I'm not going to go into any more detail about this
movie at all, I just basically wanted to convey what a powerful
 impression it made on me, not ruin it for those who have neglected to
see it. If you have not seen this movie, then please do so. You will
regret not seeing this movie on the big screen. I have seen it three
times so far and plan to see it many more times. It was just as
powerful on viewing #3 as it was the first time, which is definitely
saying  something. If you have already seen it, then do what I'm going
to do and see it again and again and....... 

Author
Joseph Toscano
        No movies are really perfect. They always have flaws, and things that
just irk me the wrong way. Sometimes a movie can be close to perfect, in
my opinion. Titanic is one of the movies that is close to perfect in a
technical sense.
        One thing that many critics have been raving about is if the $200
million pricetag of Titanic can be paid off, or even if the movie was
worth that ammount of money. In my opinion, this shouldn't be the main
issue. The main issue should be wether the movie was simply a good movie
or not. But if I am to answer that question of wether it was worth that
hefty ammount, I'd have to answer with a resounding "YES!"
        First let's discuss what kind of movie Titanic is. Titanic is not an
action movie. Titanic is a well made love story that has elements of
classic Cameron suspense woven into it. After all, when a boat is
sinking, everything isn't okay. Things go wrong, and thus you have
suspense. But don't look at the movie as if it were a simple action
movie, because it's not. It's many things woven into one. A love story,
a comedy, and a thriller. One of the strengths of Titanic is how it's
many things at once.
        Titanic is also three stories at once. The story of Brock Lovett (Bill
Paxton) searching for the lost diamond that Rose Bukater (Kate Winslet)
wore back in 1912. It's also the story, being told in flashback,
regarding two lovers torn because of class destinction and a jealous
fiancee who wants nothing but to win. It also chronicles the sinking of
the Titanic, which is wonderfully portrayed through amazing special
effects.
        DiCaprio and Winslet work together seamlessly on the screen, and there
couldn't have been a better match-up for this movie. They both performed
wonderfully and are definate Oscar contenders.
        James Horner does perhaps one of his best scores yet with this movie,
incorperating nice vocals to make the mood explode into a colorful
experience. Without the music, Titanic would have gotten perhaps only a
6/10 on my rating scale. You don't know how much music adds to a movie
until it's taken out.
        All in all, this movie is a masterpiece. Although corny at times, it
soars with all of the elements that Cameron has masterfully arranged. It
really makes you think they went back in time and captured the whole
thing happening.
        Titanic is one of my favorites, but rates low on the scale of them,
simply because it's so highly depressing. But it is a very well made
movie. I'd reccomend it to anyone.
        -- Joseph Toscano (January 6, 1998) scarjt@buffnet.net

Author
Chris Webb
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher, Bill 
Paxton, Gloria Stuart, Kathy Bates, Bernard Hill, Jonathan Hyde, Victor 
Garber, Suzy Amis, Ewan Stewart, Eric Braeden.
Written and Directed by James Cameron
Music by James Horner
Cinematography by Russell Carpenter
Costume Design by Deborah Lynn Scott
Art Direction and Set Decoration: Peter Lamont and Michael Ford
        With an epic love story touched by disaster, a three hour running 
time, and great early press, I feared that "Titanic" was going to become 
this year's "The English Patient."  After all, that horribly 
disappointing picture was touted for Oscars long before it hit wide 
release.  Happily, after three viewings, and I hope one more next week, 
"Titanic" has proven my skepticism completely wrong.  Alongside "Good 
Will Hunting," this is the best film of 1997 and deserves many of the 
accolades and awards it has been given.
        Some people are losing themselves to the spectacle of effects and 
editing.  Certainly these were some of the best effects Hollywood has 
witnessed, but the true splendor comes in the storyline.  A vagabond 
sketch artist, Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), and young rich poseur, 
Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet), become embroiled in a forbidden love 
affair on board the R.M.S. Titanic.  Rose is engaged to Pittsburgh 
businessman Cal Hockley (Billy Zane) as arranged by her mother Ruth  
(Frances Fisher).
        This story is told through the eyes of a 101-year-old Rose 
(Gloria Stuart) after she has seen a news report of divers led by fortune 
hunter Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton) searching for a priceless diamond necklace 
aptly called "The Heart of the Ocean" that she  still owned since the 
ship's sinking. The old Rose takes us back to 1912 for the maiden voyage of 
the Titanic, when she, a miserable teenager, was heading home for a wedding 
that would keep her family out of debt, while sucking away her life.  Here 
she met Jack after a botched suicide and quickly falls for him.  In this 
relationship, there are no pretentions, just casual flirtation followed 
by deep emotions: the type of love we would all like to have.  This meets 
the scorn of Cal and Ruth. 
        Foreshadowing (though we know what will happen) of the disaster 
about to occur is hinted at throughout the first half of the picture.  
The mystique of the ship is that it is deemed unsinkable by all involved 
in its creation.  In spite of Rose's concerns about the limited 
amount of lifeboats, builder Thomas Andrews (Victor Garber) assures her 
they will not be needed.  Guided by fate, pressure, and human error, 
Captain E.J. Smith (Bernard Hill) turns the engines to full speed.  With no
moonlight and no speakable wavecrests around the iceberg, the Titanic 
became history's most famous blunder.  For over an hour we watch as the ship 
sinks, and Jack and Rose's love grows deeper and stronger as their time 
runs slowly out.
        Everything in this film deserves mention and praise, so here 
goes.  The Oscar nominated Kate Winslet tempers naivete with strength, 
while DiCaprio plays Jack with youthful exuberance.  Their romance is 
believable and heartwrenching.  Gloria Stuart is wonderful as the old 
Rose, conveying eighty years of repressed emotions.  Her role might have 
been too slight for an Oscar nomination (though her age, 87, will endear 
her to the Academy) and it could be a recognition of her longevity.  
Kathy Bates does not show up on screen long enough, though she nails the 
nouveau riche and brave Molly Brown on the head with gusto.  
Billy Zane, all caked up with eyeliner, is the biggest jerk on the 
screen.  We are not supposed to like him and he never gives us any 
reason to.  Frances Fisher, as Rose's icy mother could have received her own 
Oscar nomination.  
        James Cameron is lucky he was given such free reign on this film, 
because he has made one of the best films of all time.  His direction 
and eye for detail makes this film worth viewing many times, and has 
given the world a gift with "Titanic."  The hardest workers, though, 
have to be the stunt men and women, as well as the extras, who might never 
see more than their names in small print in the credits.
        Cheers to James Horner for his haunting score and to Wilbur Jennings 
(lyrics) and Celine Dion for "My Heart Will Go On."  Her voice has become 
synonymous with soundtracks and this year she should take home the big prize.  
If you see one movie more than once this year, make it "Titanic."  You will
not be disappointed.  I have not gotten up in the nine hours and forty-five 
minutes I have watched of "Titanic."  Watch it for the effects, watch it 
for the love story.  If "Titanic" does not move you, I don't know what will.

Author
Philippe de Saussure
- "Can you imagine ? 200 millions !"
- "What a beautiful romance !"
- "...class consciousness..." (said a european critic on
http://www.webdo.ch/cineweb/titanic.html)
And though... Cameron tried hard : he shot his little "Metropolis" in the
engine room (including the ambiguity of the social connotation), he evoked
the working class in the lower stories (no rudeness, don't be afraid), he
shot the powerful scene of the life-boat slowly moving past the frozen
corpses... Several moments get close to good movie-making in his "Titanic".
And now, your opinion ! You meet a director who introduces a movie in which
:
1) he uses for the 100'00th time a romance between the rich girl and the
poor boy (ok, so far !), without any intention to renew it;
2) the deceived fiancé is evil (who would dare betray a gentle person !),
and plays the complete evil repertoire (conceited, then miserly, then
indifferent, then violent, then cruel, then cowardly, etc. - no hitches);
3) implausible details abound (why not !), only to make the narrative frame
more readable (example : all the lights remain on even when the ship is
half-sunk, making it so much easier to shoot the lovers swimming 30 minutes
in ice-cold water);
4) the evil characters all have a british accent, whereas the "good ones",
like the handsome proletarian (but clean, and artist !) or the
down-to-earth, friendly milionnaire have an all-american speaking...
- "Why, this is Hollywood filmmaking, but... so beautiful !"
- "A great movie may lack of taste now and then, the greatness is not
altered..."
The lovers are locked in a tender embrace, on the tip of the bow, across
the wind, in front of the setting sun... the scene is PERFECT. But... maybe
the audience will be frustrated if no more is disclosed ? So : the girl
then offers her nudity to the eyes and the pencil of her lover (remember
this french movie with Emmanuelle Beart ?). But... will the audience really
understand ? Thus we will not get away without the final, clear-cut scene
of lovemaking in a car ! Fortunately Cameron remembered to use a nice and
shiny old-timer instead of the usual Chevy !
Why should we forgive the taste flaws ? Did Kubrick or Orson Welles indulge
in any ? While he was shooting "Titanic", Cameron probably sensed the
presence of a masterpiece, snooping around outside the studio. But
masterpieces are so elusive, particularly when you must make absolutely
sure that you will pay back the celebrated 200 millions, and that you
CANNOT afford to be disliked !
Clumsily translated from the french - obviously reflects a european
opinion. Thank you for sending you comments. 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     What to say about James Cameron's TITANIC?  Well, you certainly get
your money's worth.  $200 mil is right there, right up on the damn
screen, with a lavishly, expertly, meticulously recreated and nearly
full-size version of the great lady herself.  However it succeeds (or
fails) as a narrative, by golly Ms. Unsinkable Molly, you *do* get to
take that once-in-a-lifetime time-machine tour.  Up and down and around
we're guided, from stem to stern, in and out of staterooms, ball rooms,
dining halls, cargo holds, and even the boiler room.  (And, geez, will
you ever forget the sight of those massive pistons in the engine room?)
These endlessly fascinating period details are the film's greatest as-
set, guaranteed to hold your interest, no matter how expertly (or poor-
ly) Cameron handles both the characters and the story.  Well, that is,
*both* stories.  Not counting the curiously flat framing device-- a
modern-day deep-sea treasure hunt, starring Bill Paxton and featuring
Cameron's own footage (!) of the wreck itself-- TITANIC is actually
*two* movies in one.
     The first is a breezy but embarrassingly juvenile love story, about
a Third Class boy (Leonardo DiCaprio) and a First Class girl (Kate Win-
slet) and the forces that conspire to keep them apart.  (One of which is
her well-to-do but narrow-minded fiancee, Billy Zane, doing Snidely
Whiplash sans mustache.) JAMES CAMERON'S ROMEO AND JULIET runs about an
hour and a half and, if the teen romance doesn't strike a chord, you're
probably doomed to dwell on some of the worser aspects of the film:
corny dialogue, repetitive shots, weak supporting characters, a cloying
Celtic/New Age score, and, on most of the daylight exteriors, an odd and
presumably special effects-induced "haze." And, yet, even if you can't
believe it and run with it, those ninety or so minutes pass pretty
quickly because there *is* so much atmosphere to take in.  (Cameron
pulls out so many stops and delivers such an embarrassment of riches
that you really have to step back from stepping back to get cranky about
the stuff that sucks.)
     TITANIC-- not *The* Titanic.  Just Titanic-- is also a disaster
movie.  Perhaps the granddaddy of all disaster movies.  (Or, at the very
least, the granddaddy of all POSEIDON ADVENTURE remakes.)  Using compu-
ters and models and moving sets, Cameron successfully, believably,
astonishingly recreates *the* great failure of 20th Century technology.
Whatever the liabilities of the script-- and, oh God, there are so many
of them-- the images speak for themselves:  an elderly couple preparing
to drown together in bed, the ass end of a great ship rising higher and
higher into the air, the pained, pale expressions of lifeboat passen-
gers, wincing at the distant screams of the dying.  It's an hour of film
that has to be seen to be believed and, perhaps, be ultimately disap-
pointed by.  (In particular, the death throes are drawn out to an almost
comic extreme.  If you're in a sarcastic mood, comparisons to the for-
ever-and-a-day finale of SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL won't be far behind.)
But when we've returned to present day, our tears dried and the pains of
a poor script promptly forgotten, the likely reaction of any paying cus-
tomer will be, well, that they got their money's worth.  And, really,
isn't that the name of the game?

Author
Thomas Glebe
For the first time in a long time, I was literally blown away by a
movie. I don't actually see movies in theaters that often, for various
reasons, and it's actually been over a year since I saw a film on the
big screen. I had heard for months all the hype about this movie, and
I'm not much for hype in general, but ALL the hype about this particular
film is justified. It is simply put, a stunning cinematic masterpiece. 
The last time I had such overwhelmingly positive emotions (and a lot of
intellectual ones also) about a film was when I saw "Forrest Gump" for
the first time, although the "experience" of seeing "Titanic" went much
further. I recall feeling so strongly positive towards only two other
films in my life after seeing them initially, and those moments were
after seeing "Apocalypse Now" back in 1980 and "Close Encounters" back
in 1977. "Titanic" is an instant top-ten for me, and that's saying a
lot, since my list of all time favorites numbers somewhere near 1000
films. I had to fight tears several times during this movie, and the end
was simply overwhelming. In a weird sort of way, though I had no idea
exactly how the film WOULD end, it lived up to my actual hopes of how it
SHOULD end. In fact, the last few moments of "Titanic" are probably the
most poignant and fervent ones I've ever experienced in ANY film. 
I would be shocked that anyone could watch the end, and NOT have an
extremely moving personal reaction, unless perhaps their blood was
indeed pure Vulcan, and "emotion" was a concept they did not understand.
What's so amazing about the end, and other such moments throughout the
film, is that for all of its budget (over $200 million) and hype, in
many ways, this is a very "personal" film from director James Cameron
(Terminator 2, The Abyss, Aliens, etc.), and never do the eye-popping
special effects (of which there are plenty) get in the way of the very
special "love story" being told. That utterly and unashamedly romantic
aspect, despite what some may think of such a blockbuster "disaster"
movie, is at the heart of "Titanic," and it is as powerful, convincing,
and passionate, as the actual representation of the sinking of the ship,
which only begins halfway through the movie itself. One may think that
the real pleasures to be had are in seeing some of that (well spent)
money up there on screen in the form of such state-of-the-art effects,
and that one might feel a bit bored or cheated UNTIL those parts come. 
But the truth is, the first half of the movie, which has nothing to do
with the sinking, is JUST as hypnotic and gripping, as the latter half.
In fact, even if the ship had not sank, and Cameron had simply told us
the love story of Jack ((Leonardo DiCaprio) and Rose (Kate Winslet),
completely uninterrupted by the tragedy which we all know beforehand IS
coming, this STILL would've been a great film. In other words, for all
the power and spectacle of the film after the ship hits the iceberg (the
second half), the first half is no less compelling and involving for the
viewer. Add the two together, and what you've basically got is over
three hours of absolutely spellbinding entertainment. To see "Titanic"
in a way, is not so much like watching a movie, as it is to "experience"
the best that cinema can possibly offer. "Suspension of disbelief" kicks
easily in some 10 minutes into the film, and for over three hours, one
is literally "experiencing" a whole other reality. The length of the
movie seems quite short, in this respect. It is THAT good. 
I will not attempt to summarize the plot here (ship sails, ship sinks,
okay?), to list various technical aspects of the production, nor even
dwell on the historical event this fictional film uses as a backdrop for
the story it tells. Such information can be found elsewhere. What I
would like to do is simply share my own individual feelings and
reactions, after having been so astonished by a movie. As it has already
won so many awards and plaudits, and has already become the most
popular film ever made (at least in terms of money earned), I know that
my own reaction is not an isolated one. It has been said that a helluva
lot of money went into advertising this movie, but this could've easily
been saved. For in all ways, this is a word-of-mouth film if there ever
were one. Once you've seen it, once you've been blown away by it, you
can't wait to share that reaction with others. THIS is what made
"Titanic" so popular, why it has earned so much money and applause. I am
certain that millions were/are enthusiastically saying basically the
same thing to their friends and family, after seeing the film for the
first time. "I've just seen one of the most wonderful films ever, let me
tell you about it"
I went in expecting to be kind of disappointed, but left in a daze. The
movie was a real thrill on so many levels. At this length, it was
consistently fascinating and moving, never a lapse of interest at any
time. The technical qualities are impossible to describe. Cameron takes
the viewer ON the ship. Everything is as real and detailed as one could
get, and the final hour and a half of the ship's sinking is really just
as frightening and real as if you were there. The film's techniques are
just so extraordinary. There are at least a dozen different little
points which are totally unexpected, and done so fluidly and
beautifully. For instance, during the middle of this extended scene of
havoc and confusion near the end when the ship is going down, Cameron
throws in this short little ten second snip which shows the ship very
tiny all alone on the dark ocean, with the stars shining above, in
totally calm waters, and it shoots off this little meaningless flare.
For all its glory and mammoth proportions, at that moment, this
technological wonder (even by today's standards) of man's creative
abilities, is seen as totally impotent and meaningless when compared to
nature.  Then there's another short scene where the camera does this
massive and continuous sweep from a close up of the front of the ship,
all the way above and down the length of it, past it, and behind it. How
this was done, one can only guess. Computers and money? Still, the
overall effect, given the sweeping romantic moment this one single shot
deals with, is simply staggering. 
There are moments such as these throughout the picture however. When the
101 year old woman (Rose, who tells her story via flashback) is first
shown video of the sunken ship's remains by the crew of a salvage ship
in present day, her aged, feeble hand reaches out to the television
monitor, and she gasps with emotion. The crew of this salvage ship, who
are basically greedy and unsympathetic to the plight of the ship's
passengers and their real ordeal, do not really understand the emotion
Rose feels. They show her a brief computer simulation of how the ship
sank, and are all quite casual and flippant about her experiences and
memories. At one point, the captain of the ship asks her to tell them
her own story, then interrupts her almost immediately.  She sternly
looks at him, and says something like, "Do you want to hear my story or
not?" As if being scolded by an elder, the captain and the rest remain
quiet, and Rose begins reminiscing.  Cameron does a slow zoom into the
very eye of the woman, and soon we are transported back to England, in
1912, at the launching of the ship. Surely, this technique has been used
before, but never so powerfully and effectively. 
When the ship does finally get under way, the scenes of the interior of
the engine room, are equally remarkable. Though nature will eventually
have her way with this technological invention, one easily gets the
feeling that, at the time, this ship was the height of mankind's
industrial age achievement. Massive gears and pistons of iron and steel
move and roar on multi-leveled decks, and white-hot boiler rooms filled
with sweating, muscular men shoveling coals, give the viewer the clear
impression that the notion of this, mankind's most intricate and
complicated mechanical accomplishment, was truly "unsinkable." These
interior engine scenes are quite powerful, as they immediately establish
a sense of the immense nature of the ship with the audience, and at the
same time, create an empathetic and identifying camaraderie with the
characters and their state of mind throughout the rest of the film. The
opulent and lavish sets onboard and the marvelous camera techniques
sweeping gloriously and continuously throughout the film, also add to
this instant audience identification and sympathy. For at all times,
Cameron is totally successful at creating a totally realistic
atmosphere. So much so, that when the ship does finally start to
flounder, the shock and disbelief which must have bewildered and
traumatized those onboard, is equally shared by the viewer. By this time
however, there is an added element, the love story between Jack and
Rose. We are caught up so totally in that also, that the coming,
inevitable catastrophe seems all that more effective. I fully believe
this was Cameron's intent all along, in devoting so much of the movie to
the romantic allegory. Great care was obviously taken to make this
aspect as mesmerizing as possible, so that the audience would feel that
they were not just watching a demonstration of the physical disaster
itself, but a very personal glimpse into the real lives of real people
who lost their lives so unexpectedly. In this sense, for all the praise
and acclaim the special effects of "Titanic" has received (all fully
deserved), without the extra care and touches Cameron devotes to the
story and characters, this film would've easily sunk at the box office
more quickly than the ship itself. Throughout, Cameron's techniques seem
flawless. It really does seem as if every piece of film, every scene,
was carefully shot and edited in as stirring a manner as possible. In
addition, James Horner's brilliant music (in many different styles to
boot) gives virtually every scene, regardless of the content, extra
depth, feeling, and romance. 
The movie is fascinating and completely involving from start to finish
and even its three hour plus length is something almost unnoticed,
unless one has to go to the bathroom half way into it.  In this sense,
since there is no intermission, I suggest all DO this before entering
the theater.  Only a few minutes in however, one is easily caught up in
the characters, the suspense, the beauty of the cinematography and sets,
and the lavish and achingly romantic theme throughout.  One can use all
the premium adjectives--"extraordinary," "spectacular," "breathtaking,"
and so forth to discuss the sinking, which is virtually done in real
time (another achievement of the film), but mere words can ever come
close to explicitly describing the awesome visuals of watching the
Titanic take its final plunge. The effects utilized to depict this seem
totally real, virtually indistinguishable from the scenes on board in
various interior locations. As is typical from beginning to end, Cameron
obviously took great care to interweave various shots into an almost
seamless whole, imparting upon nearly each shot a balance and semiotic
completeness which only adds gloriously to the story, the motivations
and emotions of the various characters, and the true meaning of the
historical event itself. Though the story of Jack and Rose is
undoubtedly almost entirely fictional, Cameron's film is a tribute to
the real survivors in a very real way, for by concentrating so much on
the characters in addition to the technical aspects, he has beautifully
ingrained in the viewer that this tragedy involved more than just this
technological behemoth's collapse, it involved real people. By its end,
we have come to care for such people as almost real, not just as
fictional movie characters.
One of the most intriguing aspects of the movie, which previous films on
the subject have seemed to overlook, is the plight of those who found
themselves swimming about in the icy Atlantic after the ship finally
disappears beneath the surface. Cameron is smart not to simply end the
film at the sinking or very shortly afterwards, which I pretty much
expected. He shows us clearly and in a devastatingly effective manner,
the horrible, albeit short-lived fate of those unfortunates who were not
lucky enough to make it into a boat, but found themselves very much
alive and suffering in the icy waters for their last minutes of life.
After all that we have already seen and experienced, once the ship does
sink, one might feel some sort of a letdown coming, but amazingly the
film again soars in various little, quite subtle but powerful ways.
Other films on the event have often basically ended the film quite
abruptly after the sinking, and have paid basically cursory attention to
this mini-story within a larger one. Not so at all with this version.
For example, and there are just so many, when Rose and Jack "go down
with the ship," they suddenly find themselves under the murky water,
desperately trying to hold onto each other's hands, which nature itself
and the violence of the churning ocean makes impossible. For example,
Cameron throws in a short shot of these hundreds of people flailing away
at each other and the sea from high above, making them all appear as a
huge school of hopeless fish caught in some fishing trawler boat's net.
For example, as Rose releases Jack, who has frozen to death, his body
slowly sinks into the darkness of the ocean beneath, filmed in a strange
way not as if he were sinking, but as if he were "fading." For example,
as Rose, half alive and dying from the cold, lays on a piece of
driftwood, she gazes up at a crystal clear, starry sky, the Milky Way
itself quite evident, and for a moment, we get the feeling that the cold
and the horror of her impending death has suddenly become almost
trivial, next to the wonder and mysterious universe above her. For
example, as one of the surviving life boats comes back to the dying
survivors and the masses of already dead bodies, they pass by a still
barely alive Rose, who summons up some sort of last ditch strength to
whimper "Come back, come back." When this occurs, she is still holding
onto a dead Jack, but releases him (based upon her promise to him that
she would try to survive), and swims with all of her remaining
life-force to find a whistle hanging on the neck of a floating corpse,
blowing it with her last breath to summon the life boat. There are so
many examples such as these, and the truly amazing thing about the film,
is that so many such brilliant, evocative, and magical moments are just
too numerous and frequent to mention. They surprisingly and exquisitely
appear in almost each shot and scene.
The most astounding thing about the film however, is the power and
almost cosmic taste Cameron gives to what amounts to a simple,
old-fashioned (and done before), "love story." Imparting a positive,
life-affirming attitude on the whole concept of romantic love itself,
which is something sorely lacking in so many "modern" movies, the film
often takes on an almost surreal tone on passion and desire many times
throughout. None of it however, comes off in any way as "preachy" or
sugary-sweet and phony. True love and its mysterious veneration for the
mundane and ordinary, is treated with reverence, understanding, and
subtlety by Cameron in so many small ways. For example, at one point, as
the upper class Rose is "instructed" by the lower class Jack on the
finer points of "spitting," what is essentially a rather revolting piece
of behavior, is given a quirky, fun, and "living for the moment" feel to
the budding romance. In this sense, romance itself is seen and presented
as an adventure in its own right, which it most certainly can be. Few
films today seem to impart such wisdom however. "Titanic" revels in this
whole sentiment. It also seems to demand its audience do the same, in
scene after scene.
At one point, for instance, upper class Rose sneaks down to a raucous
third class party which Jack is at. Free spirited music, laughter,
drinking and games abound, and Rose reservedly (at first) watches Jack
dancing wildly with a little girl. Sensing that "little adventurous
girl" in Rose, Jack takes her hand at one point for the next song and
dance, but gently tells the small child "You're still my best girl."
This mix of innocence and the blooming of romantic, sensual love, in
just this one short scene, is what the entire movie seems full of.
Cameron's discerning touch is everywhere when it comes to the romantic
and sexual aspects however. For instance, when Jack and Rose first meet,
Jack describes his artistic, earthy adventures in Paris drawing the
portrait of a prostitute, and the repressed and uptight Rose immediately
jumps to the conclusion that Jack's experience was a sexual one. He then
describes the prostitute, who had only one leg, and imparts to her that
his interest was art, not sex. Later, while drawing a nude Rose, Cameron
skillfully conveys the romantic aspect of sexual tension with a beauty
and grace I've rarely seen in any other film. Likewise, the innocence of
the pair and the consummation of their love is demonstrated by their
behavior shortly before and after the act itself, in delicate and
playful scenes of the two who have found in each other, the adult-child
which each actually is. By showing us the birth of this love affair, and
within context of the tragedy which is about to befall it, the film
soars time and time again into this almost unworldly area, which is
rather hard to describe.  It all invokes a reverence for love and sex,
and the two seem quite inseparable in a way. As in earlier scenes where
Jack and a friend thrill to the adventure they have embarked upon by
boarding the magnificent liner, romance/sex in "Titanic" is seen as an
"adventure" in its own right, and one not too distant from the innocence
and exuberance of inexperienced youth itself.
Jack and Rose's brief love affair is also the allegory and metaphor
behind the larger story itself, both real and fictional. For in a sense,
the sinking of this "unsinkable" ship, was also the end of a kind of
innocence and an age and the beginning of a deeper realization about
life, love, and what "it's all about." From beginning to end however,
the film seems to shake an angry fist at any negative connotations of
the enduring, healing, and magical power of life and love. This despite
the tragedy and horrible loss of life (and love). A neat trick, and I
can honestly say I've never seen another film even attempt such a thing,
let alone pull it off so brilliantly and convincingly.  For all the loss
of life, for all the horror explicitly shown in so many outstanding
ways, "Titanic" is one of the most positive comments on life I've ever
seen. Like any great film, its various components and ideas stay with
you long after you've left the theater. There is so much real food for
thought and contemplation here about so many related themes and ideas,
that it is no wonder so many feel compelled to see it again and again.
In this movie's case, once is clearly not enough.
The feeling I got mostly from my "experience" of seeing this wonderful
film however, is that of a real confirmation that we, as human beings,
are somehow "more" than just these bodies, these pieces of matter and
chemicals all interacting and that there definitely is "meaning" in our
lives, or can be. It seems like something that must be taken and
accepted however, more in a spiritual kind of "faith" than reason. This
very dualistic concept is mentioned more than a few times in the film
itself, and is especially evident in the personality of Jack and the
strength and courage which he eventually brings out in Rose. I think the
subject matter, this horrible death of so many, was a perfect vehicle in
a way, upon which to tell this particular "love" story, which is almost
entirely fictional. In sum and substance, it's sort of a more generalist
love story, which I can't imagine anyone being left untouched in some
way by (unless their heart is made of stone).  At its core, "Titanic" is
a love of LIFE story, and not necessarily in the way one might think. 
Sure, when the ship is sinking, Cameron shows us that all aboard
desperately want to hang onto life. It's much more than this however. At
one point, Rose is being safely lowered in a life boat, her future
seemingly assured. But she struggles like hell to get OUT of that vessel
of safety and security, to go search for and try to help her love, Jack,
who is chained beneath by villains to die like some drowning rat.
Cameron knows, and we know by watching his film, that life is much more
(or should be) than mere "survival." At another point, near the end, the
aged Rose (played flawlessly by Gloria Stuart), calmly, casually, and
quite assuredly, tosses a diamond necklace worth millions, into the sea.
It is meaningless, physical, material. It has nothing to do with her
experiences, with her love, and with her life. Strangely enough, for all
the money and hype, the film's "heart" is squarely in the right place,
and this is the film's ultimate promise and revelation, magnificently
realized. 
I have a feeling it will be many more years before we see such cinematic
gold like this again from the studio system. However, I do hope that if
and when Hollywood (as it inevitably must) tries something like this
again, it will remember that the real power behind this particular film,
has little to do with the effects or the money. For "Titanic" is nothing
without the story, and without the real meaning and importance Cameron
lovingly devotes, in almost every scene, to using uniquely filmic
techniques to tell such a story in the way only the art of cinema still
seems capable of doing. "Titanic" is, in the highest sense of the word,
not merely great entertainment, but great art. In a strange sort of way,
the director of this utter masterpiece has essentially shot himself in
the foot. It's almost unimaginable that he, or any other director, could
"top" this. It will be quite interesting however, to see if he can. I
wish him all the best, for in a very deep sense, with "Titanic," he has
unmistakably given the audience a piece of his own heart, openly and
unselfishly inviting the viewer to dwell not only in the magic of
filmmaking, which he obviously loves with a passion seen in a scarce
number of other industry directors, but in the unsinkable human spirit
which dwells deep within us all. It is well known, or should be, what a
"gamble" this film was for him personally, and this movie could've
easily went the way of other such mega-epics like "Heaven's Gate" and
"Waterworld." But in so many ways I've hardly even touched upon,
Cameron's "gamble" has paid off in spades, not so much monetarily for
himself or those involved in the production, but in the sense that film
audiences everywhere have been given a treasured gem in this
transcendent, immediate classic, one which has already been and will
surely in the future, be placed close to people's hearts for years to
come, and deservedly so.

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Geregisseerd en geschreven door James Cameron.
Speeltijd: 194 minuten.
Hh hh, eindelijk! Na vier maanden getreuzeld, getwijfeld en gewacht te
hebben, is het me gelukt "Titanic" te zien. Terwijl ik daar in die volle
zaal zat, vroeg ik me af of deze film niet al ti lang duurt. Drie uur en
een kwartier is natuurlijk niet niks. Maar toen ik eenmaal in het
verhaal zat, vlogen de uren voorbij. En dat geeft wel aan hoe goed de
film is. 
Het jaar is 1997. Onderzoeker en schatgraver Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton)
zoekt met moderne apparatuur naar waardevolle voorwerpen in de Titanic,
die al 85 jaar op de bodem van de zee ligt. Lovett heeft z'n zinnen
gezet op 'Het Hart Van De Zee', een zeer zeldzame diamant 
die zich ergens op de Titanic bevindt. Na lang zoeken vindt hij een half
vergane kluis, die meteen naar boven gehaald wordt. Lovett hoopt dat er
veel sieraden in liggen.   
Helaas vindt hij alleen maar een paar tekeningen in de kluis. Ondanks
deze ietwat kleine vondst wordt de expeditie op nationale televisie
uitgezonden. Een van de kijksters, Rose Calvert (Gloria Stuart), herkent
zichzelf op iin van die tekeningen. Samen met haar kleindochter (Suzy
Amis) gaat ze naar Lovett om over de tocht van de Titanic te vertellen.
We gaan terug in de tijd. Het jaar is nu 1912. Jack Dawson (Leonardo
DiCaprio) heeft bij een spelletje pokeren een derdeklas-ticket gewonnen
voor de Titanic. Op dat schip bevindt zich ook Rose DeWitt Bukater (nu
Kate Winslet), een jonge vrouw opgegroeid met veel sieraden, geld en
verveling. Ze ziet haar saaie leven niet meer zitten en besluit
zelfmoord te plegen door van het schip te springen. Jack ziet dit en
weerhoudt haar hiervan. 
Langzaam maar zeker leren Jack en Rose elkaar beter kennen. Ze brengen
meer tijd met elkaar door en Rose begint een steeds grotere hekel te
hebben aan het rijkeluisleven. Helaas krijgt haar verloofde Cal Hockley
(Billy Zane) dat in de gaten en besluit stevige maatregelen te nemen. Ze
krijgen het echter nog moeilijker nadat het schip op de ijsberg gebotst
is. 
Er is geen twijfel over mogelijk. "Titanic" is een meesterwerk. Al vanaf
de allereerste schne heeft de film je in de greep en laat je niet meer
los. James Cameron heeft alles levensecht uitgewerkt, waarbij hij de
prachtige special effects goed heeft kunnen gebruiken. De 200 miljoen
dollar zijn, zo te zien, goed besteed. De Titanic die aan de haven ligt,
is niet van echt te onderscheiden. 
De film heeft prachtige, goed doorgedachte schnes. Hoogtepunten zijn de
droomschne, het vertrek van het schip en de climax, die wel meer dan een
uur duurt en de beste is die ik ooit gezien heb. Toegegeven, het verhaal
is niet echt origineel en de dialogen kunnen beter, maar dat is bijzaak.
"Titanic" is namelijk meer dan een film. Het is kunst. Met een
hoofdletter K.

Author
Steve Kong
This is the first time that I will recommend a film in the first paragraph
of a review. Don't miss Titanic on the big screen. Forget all the politics
and events surrounding the making of the film and just go see it. Titanic
is easily the best film of 1997.
James Cameron has always been a brilliant technical director. His films
featured great special effects and were technically perfect in that
respect. Along with this Cameron has always populated his movies with
characters that bring us into the stories (unlike Roland Emmerich who
creates movies with eye popping special effects but surrounds this eye
candy with fluff). What Cameron has not done though is make a movie that is
full in the range of emotions that bring a technically good film up to a
brilliant film. With Titanic, Cameron tries to put this range of emotions
into a film and it works out very well. He shows us that he can not only
make a technically perfect film, but can also make a film that makes us
laugh, cry, and scream.
The Titanic was the ship that couldn't be sunk. It was the largest ship
built at the time that it set sail on its maiden -- and as history tells,
last -- voyage. The tragedy of it was that the builders of the ship were so
confident of the design of the ship that they only outfit the ship with
enough lifeboats to save half of the people on the ship. Some time in the
early morning of April 15, 1912, Titanic struck an iceberg and sunk in the
North Atlantic. There were 2200 people onboard the ship -- 1500 of them died.
Cameron does not hide the fact that the Titanic sinks, how could he? He
uses a good way to introduce us to the story and to get us up to speed
quickly. The movie opens in the present with some stunning footage of the
actual Titanic underwater. As we come back up to the surface we find out
that an expedition led by Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton) is trying to find the
"Heart of the Ocean". The "Heart of the Ocean" is a 56 caret diamond that
was lost with the sinking of the Titanic. When Lovett is unable to recover
it he is disappointed. What he does find is a sketch of a beautiful young
woman wearing the diamond. In a coincidence, the woman, now 101, sees the
sketch during a news broadcast. The 101 year old woman, Rose DeWitt Bukater
(Gloria Stuart), comes forth to tell the tale of what happened on the
Titanic's final voyage.
>From here on Cameron moves the film back in time and the story is told,
mainly, from young Rose's (Kate Winslet) point of view. Along with this is
the point of view of a free going gambler and artist Jack Dawson ( Leonardo
DiCaprio). And this portion of the film, almost two-thirds of the films
running time, we watch and are engrossed by the love story that is spun
between Rose and Jack on the ill-fated Titanic.
Cameron keeps the movie focused on only Jack and Rose. Rose is a rich girl
marrying Cal Hockley (Billy Zane) because of his money. She finds herself
in a precarious situation while trying to run away from the marriage. From
this situation she meets Jack, who saves her from death. The chemistry
between Jack and Rose are instantaneous and we are pulled into their story
immediately.
What is surprising with Titanic is that Cameron is able to move the focus
of the movie from the tedious disaster film that Titanic could have been to
a character and story driven story that Titanic is. And for almost two
hours we forget about the sinking of the ship and we are with Jack and Rose
following what happens to them and not worrying about the iceberg that sits
somewhere off in the horizon waiting to puncture the ship.
The first two hours or so of the film moves quickly, mainly because of the
good pacing and the great writing of Cameron. But, if you think that
Cameron lets things slow down in the third act (and third hour) you're
wrong. Cameron is actually able to pick up the pacing for the third hour
and the third hour flies along well because of this. This third hour is the
actual sinking of the ship. And this could have been all eye-candy, but
Cameron is again able to put more into this portion of the film. And for
this last hour we are constantly biting our finger nails in trying to find
out if both Jack and Rose will survive the sinking of Titanic. And this
shows how well done the film is. The sinking of the Titanic is visually
awesome, but in all of this chaos we are still focused on Jack and Rose.
As for the Titanic itself, Cameron builds an almost scale model of the ship
to shoot the film with and then sinks it. The visuals all through the film
are awesome and have to be seen to be believed. There are many "how did
they do it" special effect shots in this film. Cameron proves once again
that he can push special effects to its limits and still maintain
characters that are believable and dimensional.
DiCaprio does a good job as Jack, but the shining star of Titanic is Kate
Winslet. What sets the two lead performances apart is the range of emotion
that the two can achieve. And Winslet clearly has a larger range that
DiCaprio. She does a great job as Rose and I hope that she wins the Best
Actress Oscar for her performance in Titanic.
The supporting actors and actresses also do great jobs with their roles.
Worth mentioning is Billy Zane as the callous Cal, Bernard Hill as the
Captain of Titanic, and David Warner as Cal's bodyguard of sorts.
The running time seems long (at three plus hours) but the movie is paced
well and moves along quite quickly. This is the best film to date from
James Cameron and is the best film of 1997. The studio heads save the best
for last. Don't Miss Titanic on the big screen.

Author
Shane Burridge
It's a safe bet that you have by now seen TITANIC.  Going by the size
of attendances it would seem that everyone is seeing it.  Of course,
the size of those attendances is probably one reason why many people
have been purposefully avoiding it.  Understandable, but that is not
to say the immediate cinema experience is not without its own quirky
merits.  Try going when the tickets are half price, for example.  I
did.  In the school holidays.  If the mob of passengers that was
trying to get to the lifeboats was half as big as the throng trying to
get into the cinema then my appreciation of what the survivors of the
Titanic went through was well assured.  We sat in the queue for an
hour and a half, which would have been enough time to see another
movie, and the doors opened to admit the rush.  It didn't end there,
because once inside the cinema our vicarious suffering was augmented
further by the incessant sub-polar breeze of the air conditioning
system, thus ensuring that by the third hour our empathy for the
passengers floating in the Atlantic was at a state approaching
Nirvana.  By the time the credits rolled I had barely enough
circulation left to get out before Celine Dion started singing.
So, how good is TITANIC?  Firstly, it comes as no surprise that
director James Cameron came to choose it as a project.  A glance at
his earlier work will tell you why.  This man makes the bluest looking
movies around.  THE ABYSS, ALIENS, THE TERMINATOR.  If his next film
isn't set in the North Pole I'll eat my hat.  Secondly, if you're
going to see this movie, then it has to be in a cinema.  If you'd
rather wait for the video release, then you might as well stick a toy
boat in the bath and watch that instead.  In the spirit of the old
Hollywood epics, TITANIC - no tautology intended - is big.
Cameron is to be applauded for resuscitating the Hollywood epic, but
what does he have to offer that's new?  I'd like to think it was more
than a budget blowout on huge-scale models and state-of-the-art
special effects.  This story, after all, has been told many times
before.  His film is definitely more engaging than the turgid 1953
TITANIC with Clifton Webb (after 45 minutes I was rooting for the
iceberg) but doesn't have the emotional edge of the classic A NIGHT TO
REMEMBER.  In fact, it's due to the latter that Cameron's TITANIC
failed to hit me at gut level.  I'd already seen the class divisions,
the injustice, the incompetence, the unlucky coincidences.  I was more
interested, this time around, to see how Cameron would transport me to
the scene of the disaster; how he would make me empathise with that
tremendous sense of loss and fear.
But instead, he backs off.  All the manipulative moments you would
expect never arrive: the panic for the lifeboats, the noble
self-sacrifices, the sudden topsy-turvy devaluation and re-evaluation
of human lives.  When I saw two silky Afghan hounds boarding the ship
early on I filed the scene away for later reference: Future Camera
Shot - Dogs Struggling Helpless and Bewildered in the Water.  A
sympathy-grabbing moment for sure.  He doesn't let it happen.  Cameron
is more interested in recreating the disaster, not reliving it, so
distils the humanity of the story into two characters.  You've seen
the promos so you know the rest - TITANIC is a love story between
third-class Leonardo DiCaprio and upper-class Kate Winslet.  And it
would not be a proper love story if it were not a triangle, which is
where Billy Zane comes in.  We know straight away that Zane is
completely wrong for Winslet (let's face it, after DEAD CALM who's
ever going to trust this guy on a boat again?) but it takes two hours
of screen time before he gets the message, by which time the ship is
sinking already, and the real reason we all went to see the movie
finally gets underway.  But even here the tragedy of the event is
absent - the story merely shifts from a romance on a floating ship to
an adventure on a sinking ship, and Cameron's throwaway moments of
comic relief prevent the terror from properly crystallising.
The sinking itself is certainly a spectacle, and you can see where all
the money went, but it seems that the whole thing is just too big for
Cameron to really enjoy himself with.  He isn't directing so much as
orchestrating, and even though he's tipped to win an Oscar for TITANIC
it's annoying that it doesn't have the same flair of his other films. 
A lot of TITANIC isn't original, and the ending, which has been a
staple of sentimental finales since the silent days of THE THREE
MUSKETEERS, is terribly cliched.  But TITANIC is still well worth your
time.  For three hours running time it has a terrific sense of pace,
and there is at least one moment that captures the essence of the
disaster perfectly: the camera switches its viewpoint to that of the
survivors in the lifeboats, watching the now nearly-vertical Titanic
from afar with incredulous horror.  By itself, this moment would be
nothing.  But placed as it is, amid an ocean of 194 minutes of film,
those few seconds become the only connection Cameron needs to make. 
It works because it taps into the one level on which we moviegoers can
truly empathise: not as participants in a tragedy, but rather as
observers of that tragedy.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Easily the most anticipated, most delayed film release of 1997, James
Cameron's $220 million "Titanic" steams into theaters with a slew of
questions to answer, most notably was it worth the wait, the hype, and all
that money?
Well.  "Titanic" is big, that's for sure.  The size and scope of the
production are evidenced by a massive, detailed replica of the White Star
liner, impressive visual effects, countless extras, and a love story
transcending the Atlantic ocean itself.  That, plus the fact that the
storyline is played out over three and a quarter hours, and we're talking
epic proportions here.
"Titanic," alas, doesn't quite live up to its promise or its
much-ballyhooed pricetag.  But it's an entertainment on a grand scale
nonetheless.
Water-bound dramas are rarely without their production problems.  Cameron's
own "The Abyss" had its fair share, and those dogging "Waterworld" (prior
to "Titanic," the most expensive movie in Hollywood history) are legendary.
On "Titanic," it's clear that Cameron the get-it-right-and-budget-be-damned
director fairs far better than Cameron the sounds-about-right screenwriter.
While the ship sinks convincingly and spectacularly enough, leads Leonardo
DiCaprio and Kate Winslet get saddled with lots of cornball situations and
dialogue.  Cameron's trump card was to make "Titanic" first and foremost a
love story.  However, his straightforward approach to that fateful night on
April 15th, 1912 lends itself better to his visual overtures than his
romantic undertones.
DiCaprio plays Jack Dawson, a freewheeling, penniless (are there any other
kind?) artist from steerage who's smitten by Winslet's Rose DeWitt Bukater,
a stifled society damsel from the upper decks.  Cameron paints the haves
and the have-nots a little too black and white--the rich are all stuffy,
boring snots while the poor are the only ones who really know how to have
fun--but on the darker side, Billy Zane is particularly good as Rose's
suave, callous fiancé Cal Hockley.
Of the innumerable versions of this ocean-going tragedy, this one might be
the first to imply that the Titanic hit the iceberg because its lookouts
were distracted by a couple making out on deck.
However, even at its epic length, "Titanic" is never boring.  Time skips by
quickly, and there are more than a few decent supporting performances to
enjoy, including Frances Fisher (as Rose's disapproving mother Ruth) and
Bernard Hill, in an underwritten role as the ship's ineffectual captain.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the film occurs during its
present-day setup, when a rugged salvage expert (played by Bill "We're
toast, man!" Paxton) has one of his staff explain, via a fascinating
computer animation, how the ship went down in the icy waters of the North
Atlantic, sending 1,500 of its 2,200 passengers and crew to their deaths.
All this, of course, is represented in larger-than-life Cameron-a-rama
later in the film, when the tragedy of 1912 is stunningly recreated.
At this point in "Titanic," DiCaprio and Winslet take a back seat to the
spectacle and, like the rest of us, hang on for dear life.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher, Kathy
Bates, David Warner, Bill Paxton, Gloria Stuart. Screenplay: James
Cameron. Director: James Cameron.
This movie will be remembered as James Cameron's ultimate labour of
love. With nothing denied the unborn child from conception to delivery.
Described as both meticulous and a perfectionist, Cameron the doting
father, has doted, doted, and doted 200 million away. Now the big fat
Turkey is ready for Thanksgiving. Slaughter it and serve it with lush
sauce and amaze those who are the most ready to applaud or shun the big,
fat juicy bird. Fortunately, the critics and the public are pleased with
the offering, and TITANIC is on its way to scooping a big mouthful of
titillating praise and a big handful of golden awards. Cameron seems to
have played his hand just right.  Delaying the monster's release from
mid-year to end-year, away from the other monster child releases ready
to take away attention from his spoilt offspring.
The December winter can only be as cold as the sinking water's of the
TITANIC. This will only warm the hearts of audiences as they watch
enough tragic love erupt on screen to melt ice caps. Throw in fine young
actors like Leornado Di Caprio and Kate Winslet, who both know how to
deliver a thoughtful script and whose undeniable screen presence,
transforms this otherwise ordinary disaster movie into the biggest love
story of the decade. The story is central, and without it TITANIC would
have been that sinking disaster SPEED 2 was. These young lovers engage
us with their hopeful tale of love, which transcends social class and
breeches cultural differences in order to find each other. As their love
blossoms, they are faced with challenges uncommon to young couples in
love. Shot, chained, trapped beneath flooded decks, only the icy waters
of death itself can separate these two young lovers. Cameron knows that
these characters are vital to this movie's survival, and wisely brings
them to the forefront of the picture before breathtakingly sinking the
big ship. That way we actually care about what happens, and in many ways
separates this adaptation from the other 101 TITANIC versions of the
same over told story.
There is also much else to compliment besides saying that the baby is a
joy to watch. Namely, the soundtrack the vital thread of heartbeat
sewing pieces of an epic together, carries with it the same breath of
emotion ready to sweep you away with tears of sorrow and mirth. The
costumes and sets have been lifted straight from the pages of late
nineteenth century living, and neither can be faulted or criticised for
the time period believability factor. Cameron has spared no expense in
this department, as has exerted himself to bring the TITANIC back from
the grave as realistically and gloriously as it was first envisioned.
The 全hip of Dreams' it was called, and Cameron has had to work damned
hard to make this dream come true.
My final comments are well done James. There is little to fault about
this movie except that it is a long sit, and if this is my only
complaint about this carefully crafted masterpiece, then I have only
myself to blame for being a overtly impatient person.

Author
Homer Yen
In 1912, the Titanic would set sail on it's first and only voyage across 
the chilly North Atlantic.  History has well-documented its inevitable
doom, and expeditions have just recently discovered the remains of the
Titanic resting peacefully in its watery grave.  But, what must have
it been like to be a passenger on board the greatest and most
luxurious ship of its time?  What stories are hidden deep beneath the
Atlantic?
For one particular passenger, Rose (Kate Winslet), the Titanic was
nothing more than a prison ship escorting her to America, where she
will marry an odiously snooty but terribly wealthy Cal Hockley (Billy
Zane) in order to help her cash-poor mother.  But to Rose, the
engagement is the equivalent of a slow death.  One of the passengers
that she eventually meets up with is an artistic drifter, Jack Dawson
(Leonardo DiCaprio). While his social status is far beneath that of
hers, a romantic bond begins to develop as she begins to identify with
his sense of freedom.  Soon they're gallivanting through the
corridors, cargo holds and steerage sections - all the places that a
proper lady ought not to go.  Her mother is furious, her fiancé is
madly jealous, and all attempts are made to thwart their continued
relationship.  It may take an act of God (or an iceberg) to tear these
two apart.  Can a relationship work out on a 'ship of dreams' even
when doom is imminent?
This is just one of the terrific elements that makes this movie
unsinkable.  Through an ingenious storytelling technique, Camerron
allows the audience to absorb ourselves with the developing romance
without being distracted by the ship's fate.  Oscar-worthy Winslet is
charming and strong as the free-spirited socialite.  DeCaprio is also
appealing as the young vagabond that introduces her to the ways of the
wicked world.  Their tale is engaging and is a terrific, all-around,
old-fashioned love story.  But this movie is more than a fictional
account of two lovers from dichotomously different backgrounds.
That's just the tip of the iceberg.
It's also an eye-popping historical piece.  No doubt, much of the
purported $200 million spent on making this movie was used to recreate
an almost-full-scale Titanic.  Director James Camerron gives us little
peeks into an era that was dominated by class and social distinction
and into the Titanic, a symbol of the times.  We see the luxury of
first class, replete with ornate rooms, fine crystal and china.  After
dinner, the tuxedo-clad men retreat from their wives to smoke fine
cigars and sip fine brandy amongst themselves.  In the engine room, we
feel the sweat of the men that furiously shovel coal into the furnaces
that power the steam engines.  We revel with the people in steerage
who dance among themselves and drown themselves in beer.  But the most
impressive sequence comes in the latter part of the movie just after
the Titanic runs into that fateful iceberg.  Not only is the technical
production of the Titanic's sinking spellbinding, but we get a further
glimpse into the panic, chaos and brief moments of courage displayed.
Steerage passengers are forced to wait as first class passengers are
allowed to evacuate first; lifeboats can only accomodate less than
half of the passengers; and Rose and Jack desperately try to cling on
to each other, their love and their lives.  Despite the pandemonium,
Camerron's Oscar-worthy direction skillfully manages to keep our
attention focused on Rose and Jack, never for a moment allowing us to
stray from the central love story.
This movie is a 198-minute epic that successfully brings history and
drama into proportion.  And if Camerron had the time to tell us more,
I would have gladly sat and watched for another 3 hours.  Visually
stunning, intelligently constructed, and thoroughly engrossing, this
film is a wondrous achievement about an era and a ship that was
equally so.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 20th Century Fox/Lightstorm/Paramount Pictures
 Director:  James Cameron
 Writer:  James Cameron
 Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zen, Kathy
Bates, Frances Fisher, Gloria Stuart, Bill Paxton, Bernard Hill,
Jonathan Hyde, Victor Garber
   Few people under the age of forty have even heard of the
legendary folk singer, Pete Seeger, who in his heyday had a
tendency to attach Marxist ideology to his strains and ballads. 
In one of his major melodies, "Titanic," he strums his banjo
and intones, "The rich refused to associate with the poor./  So
they put the poor below,/ They were the first to go,/ It was sad
when the great ship went down."  Committed to the left wing
even in his insistence on once stating that Franco was a
bigger villain than Stalin, Seeger could well be expected to
cut one of the world's great disasters with a strong
political edge.
   What larger point can be made from this insight?  Simply
this: in converting life to art, visionaries have the power (within
reason) to impose their interpretation on events, to highlight
those aspects of a true story which they wish to underscore
and ignore those which they consider of little relevance to
their imagination.  What James Cameron did in his smashing
direction of "Titanic"--whose screenplay he wrote as well--is to
emphasize four angles in his epic work about the fate of the
world's most celebrated cruise ship which left Southampton,
England, in April of 1912.  Foremost is the love story between
an upper-class, somewhat spoiled 17-year-old, Rose DeWitt
Bukater (Kate Winslet) and a lower-caste, self-confident and
handsome lad, Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio).  Jack
intuitively senses the girl's rebelliousness, her unhappiness
with what she imagines will be a high-society life of endless
cotillion balls and inane conversation.  His own spirited style
becomes the anchor which is hungrily grasped by the
despondent young woman.   Cameron is obsessed, also, with
re-creating much of Titanic's actual dimensions, in effecting a
verisimilitude between the vessel of 1912 and the ship
designed for him in this film.  Given his $200 million budget--
which makes "Titanic" the most expensive movie of all time--
it's no wonder that he is able to hire the original manufacturer
of the vessel's carpet, reproducing the actual weave for an
audience which would hardly put much concern with such
literalness.  Thirdly, Cameron nutritiously feeds his public with
the disaster spectacle for which it has an insatiable appetite,
devoting the final forty percent of the three and one-quarter
work on the mayhem which follows the craft's collision with an
iceberg.  Finally Cameron deals with the political reality; that
snobbery and a fairly rigid class structure is alive and well not
only in Europe but in America as well.  "Titanic" never stops
beating up on the tuxedo-clad, corset-imprisoned crowd with
the money not only to ride first class but bring along maids,
bodyguards and even their favorite paintings to decorate their
staterooms.  Even in a film a lengthy as this one, fulfilling all
four missions is an imposing task, and Cameron rises to the
occasion so well that his audience is likely to accept without
sardonic laughter even the corniest playing-out of the
romance between Winslet's and DiCaprio's characters.
   To avoid the structure of a museum piece, Cameron wisely
opens his story in the present day, basing the scenario
around the actual discovery in 1985 of the body of the boat
deep beneath the surface of the North Atlantic Ocean.  Brock
Lovett (Bill Paxton), an American explorer who is not adverse
to capitalizing on the riches which may be found within the
wreck, is particularly interested in recovering a diamond
necklace said to have been owned by Louis XVI allegedly lost
in the wreckage. To his dismay he locates not the diamond
but a reproduction of the jewelry on a painting around the
neck of a nude woman who had posed for a sketch during the
ship's maiden voyage.  When news of this find hits the
airwaves, a 101-year-old woman who claims to be Rose
DeWitt Bukater (Gloria Stuart, actually 87) and the owner of
the necklace phones Brock expressing her willingness to tell
the story of the ill-fated voyage.  Cinematographer Russell
Carpenter hones in on the wreck which he is videotaping and
we are suddenly transformed into the glittering pre-war era of
1912 society as the Southampton-based craft labeled
unsinkable takes on passengers from the fabulously rich
to the penniless immigrants.  The first-class compartment is
lavishly appointed and filled with both "new money" and the
"old money" types who look down on the upstarts.  When
Jack Dawson wins a steerage ticket after a lucky hand of
poker just minutes before the ship is to leave the dock at
midnight, his life becomes so intertwined with that of the
lovely but suicidal society girl whose life he saves that he and
his Rose become as inseparable as Romeo and Juliet.
   Though the dialogue leans far more to the cornball and
inane than to the witty and scintillating, and while Cameron is
intent on exposing his audience to the most opulent and
profuse display of humanity yet recorded, the romance and
class struggle portrayed in "Titanic" is, curiously enough, of
greater interest than the disaster sequences--which, by the
way, have been chronicled in almost real time.  Jack and
Rose take their time to get to know and love each other, with
Rose torn between breaking her engagement to the
fabulously rich Cal (Billy Zane) and thrusting aside her humble
but relaxed and confident new beau, Jack.  Rose's resistance
to the penniless artist is overcome in the most predictable
way--she bolts from the asinine conversation of her peers to
join Jack at a "real" party of indigent immigrants dancing a jig,
taking part in hand-wrestling and generally have a rowdy
good time for themselves.  Her decision to pose in the nude
for the talented young man who has been earning his living
sketching women through Paris is the key moment of the
movie.  The chemistry between the two is so palpable, so
believable, that we are swept along despite our inclination to
dismiss the scenes as so much mawkish folderol.  We are
willing even to believe that Cal, the man whom Rose's mother
Frances (Ruth DeWitt Bukater) has chosen for her daughter
because her own wealth had been depleted, can be one
hundred percent Edwardian villain.  So scheming and
snobbish is this Cal that he seems unable to commit a single
ethical act throughout the entire film.  If he finds himself
outmaneuvered for his fiance's love by a member of the hoi
polloi he will stop at nothing, planting jewelry on him and
claiming robbery, even shooting at him as Jack skips around
the deck with his fair maiden.  The steerage people are all
fun-loving, sincere, authentic: the first class passengers--with
the exception of Molly Brown (Kathy Bates) who enjoys being
the comic center of the movie--are obnoxious almost to a
person.
   Even as Titanic hits the fateful iceberg, Cameron takes his
time in introducing the tragic nature of the collision.  At first,
the incident appears minor.  Yet like an early-stage cancer
that is operable, we are made to believe that the ship is going
to sink within two hours and that half of its population will die
because the owners, to avoid an appearance of clutter, did
not provide a sufficient number of lifeboats.
   Film critic David Thomson once said of James Cameron--
known for his off-the-wall sci fi films like "The Spawning,"
"Aliens," and "Terminator 2" that "no one did so much to
redeem the eighties genre of high-tech threat through the
overlay of genuine human interest stories."  Even given the
awe-inspiring technology that treats us to the mayhem on
board as the water seeps, then flows dramatically into each
compartment, Cameron does not smother his interesting,
romantic story with effects and apparatus.  "Titanic" is as
likely as not to sweep the Oscars, given the love of the
Academy for movies of epic grandeur.  It is perhaps the best
example in 1997 of a film which is pure, simple melodrama,
the sort which many Hollywood producers steer clear of
because of their perception that a modern audience will hoot
and holler at the screen, and yet one which works on us by
achieving an end-run around our intellectual defenses.  Rated
PG-13.  Running Time: 194 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
David Sunga
Starring: 
Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates
Ingredients: 
Large sinking ship, two lovers from different economic backgrounds 
Synopsis: 
In this film, which is part romance and part disaster movie, an old lady
remembers, through flashbacks, how she found true love and tragedy while
aboard a luxurious ocean liner that unfortunately struck an iceberg and
sank over eighty years ago in 1912. TITANIC begins with an exploration
submarine recovering a piece of paper from the sunken wreck of an old
ocean liner. The paper turns out to be a sketch of a woman, and soon
enough, an old woman named Rose shows up, claiming the sketch is a
picture of her in her youth. She then reveals her story: as a young
woman Rose is originally aboard the ship Titanic as the fiancee of an
arrogant rich man named Cal (Billy Zane). But she doesn't love the guy;
she's being forced by her mother to marry Cal for economic reasons.
While aboard the ocean liner, Rose meets a penniless artist named Jack
Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio) and truly falls in love. Their romance,
however, is cut short when the ocean liner begins to sink into icy water
after striking an iceberg. The lovers must be ready to make the ultimate
sacrifice for each other.
Opinion:
TITANIC is similar to a Disney cartoon. You know the drill: a spunky
lovely heroine must choose between two men. The odds-on favorite is a
jerk, while the underdog has a heart of gold. The only difference is
that TITANIC is a little more tragic, and there's no singing. And
instead of using cartoon effects, it spends 200 million dollars on
special effects. All in all TITANIC is a good romance with superior,
believable effects for the most part. The acting is solid and dependable
as well.

Author
Jason Bacon
On April 12th, 1912, the most astonishing shipwreck in the history of
the world occurred. On that fateful night, the Titanic sunk. Now, more
than 50 years later, a film has been made. And what a film that is.
 James Cameron's newest movie is a landmark in storytelling, emotion,
and special effects. It starts in the present, where Bill Paxton and his
band of scientists explore the depths of the ship's wreckage. Exploring
an old chest, PAxton comes across a nude drawing of a young woman. the
drawing is televised and the woman (Gloria Stuart) whose portrait the
painting is of comes forward and slowly but surely, the ship's story is
told.
 Leonardo DiCaprio stars as Jack Dawson, a young man with a sketch book,
a heart of gold, an intelligent mind, and not much else. he wins his
ticket aboard Titanic in a poker game, and is the perfect match for Rose
DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslett). She grows to love Jack, but seems unable
to escape the slimy clutches of her arranged fiance', Cal Hockley (Billy
Zane). the film takes its time, and by doing so, makes us care about its
characters, and shows us the full aspects of human emotion.
 The leads shine; there is no bad performance; in fact, these do not
seems like performances at all, but genuine people, trapped on the
doomed vessel, facing certain death. Watching this film, I was amazed at
how vivid and real these situations feel: The time Rose and Jack spend
together at a third-class-party; the naivety that Jack feels when he
skecthes Rose nude; the terror felt by all onboard, as certain doom
turns people into both cowards and heroes.
 This, the most expensive movie ever made, $200 million, is destined to
make its profit back, and then some. It also has more emotion and warmth
than any other film this year..even this decade.
 it is also yet another first: the first $200 million dollar romance,
and every critic in this country will agree that it was indeed, money
extremely..VERY ..well spent.

Author
Matt Petras
        In 1912, a ship set sail on her maiden voyage across the
Atlantic for America. This ship was built to be the largest ship in
the world, and she was. She was also build to be one of the most
luxurious, and that she was. Finally, she was built to be unsinkable
and that unfortunately she was not. To get a ticket for this voyage
you either: spent a life's savings to get to America to start life
anew, were part of the upper class and had the money to spare, or
finally were lucky enough to have a full house in a poker match by the
docks like Jack Dawson. Jack Dawson makes the trip, and happens to be
at the right place at the right time. Rose DeWitt Bukater, a first
class passenger, climbs the railings at the aft of the ship with
thoughts of jumping. Thus is started a tale of romance and intrigue,
and a tale of death and tragedy...
        This movie is about a tragic event that took place a great
many years ago, an even that should not be taken lightly as any other
bit of historical trivia. The movie Titanic shows what happened, maybe
not with a 100% degree of accuracy, but it still shows it very
realisticaly. Now the Titanic is both a story on its own and a
backdrop for a story. It serves as both admirably, brining forth an
interesting story that although simple in its most simple premise is
very captivating. This movie is very emotional simply because of what
it is, but that alone is not enough. The story is brought out with a
certain style that makes is so much more emotional and so much more
effective. Movies such as this will not be forgotten all too quickly
and unfortunately then are not something that is produced by Hollywood
with any great frequency. The attention to detail that was paid is
remarkable. The whole premise for the telling of the story is
interesting, with the showing of brand new footage from the wreck of
the Titanic adding much flavor to an already good movie. 
        Part of the magical chemistry behind this story is the acting,
and for this movie its extremely good acting from the whole cast. The
performances put in by the main stars is something to be admired. The
characters were played out so memorably that both Leonardo DiCaprip
and Kate Winslet should receive at the least nominations for their
roles. Looking at the acting done in the movie it seems as if they
aren't acting but are actually the characters in the movie. The
casting for the movie could really have been better, in my humble
opinion that is. One character that will most likely not be mentioned
by any other review or commentary about this film is that of the ship
itself. Yes, you read correctly, the ship is a character. How is the
Titanic a character? you ask well simple, a ship had a certain
character about it and as most sailors and boats men will tell you.
This character is everything about the ship from its specifications to
its luxuries and the Titanic was no stranger to this. Mr. Cameron
brings the ship to life in an almost literal sense. All this adds to
the movie in a certain way that most Hollywood productions cant seem
to grasp. 
        Now, to produce the effect that I mentioned above and to sink
the ship itself are feats that are accomplished by special effects
wizards. The effects in this movie range from marvelous costumes to
beautifully rendered scenes of the ships sinking. In some respects you
cannot tell that the effects are there, you simply think that what you
see is what happened or what is happening(if your imagination is
good). The technical wizardry done in this movie is just spectacular
and actually getting new footage from the wreck of the Titanic is
unique. The movie will leave you amazed at the effects, and that is a
feat since there is no monsters or aliens in this movie, just humans
and an oversized ship. 
        The movie will amaze you and it will pull on your emotions,
the theater that I went to had a few people leaving with tears in
their eyes. Now that is not a feat accomplished by most movies, now
the fact that the tragedy actually occurred is brought home with
something of a punch, I wont spoil the ending and say what happens
regardless it is an interesting movie from beginning to the very end.
The historical value of this movie is quite high, and honestly is
something that should be watched for the sake of seeing it and seeing
the tragedy, for it is extremely well done. The method of telling the
story is also good, maybe not totally unique but effective none the
less. Regardless of anything mentioned above this movie is a grandiose
production and the sheer size of the project undertaken is something
to be marveled at. The simple fact that the movie is smashingly
successful at what it aims to achieve is just astonishing. If you get
the chance to see this movie GO!!! it might not be the best movie in
the world.. but it ranks fairly highly and is well worth the time
spent watching it. During none of the 3 hours and 13 minutes of the
movie are you bored nor does your attention wane from the movie. 


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: James Cameron
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Bill Paxton, Kathy
Bates
Rated PG-13: Language, disaster violence, nudity
I've been watching films for roughly half of my natural life. I would
like to think that I have seen a lot of them--more than most people.
Until this day, however, I have never seen anything like Titanic. This
film makes me want to invent new words just to describe it, because most
of what I've witnessed here is truly unfathomable. It is impossible to
speak of Titanic and not gush with excitement, but my words are not
hyperbolized--James Cameron's masterpiece is the very best film of 1997.
This picture is the closest I have ever seen to perfection, a love story
filled with real human emotions, and a disaster epic more real,
shocking, and intense than anything ever shown in film. I'm sure someone
at some point has made a checklist of everything that goes into a great
film. Every box would be checked for Titanic. This film fails in
absolutely nothing: the love story is one of the most moving I have ever
experienced. The disaster is flawlessly depicted on screen. The
integration of the two is not only smooth, but ultimately the central
meaning of the film.
And yet, at the core, the story is so brilliantly simple and direct:
Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio) is a drifter who wins a ticket for the
Titanic. On board, he meets Rose (Kate Winslet) who is engaged to a rich
man named Cal Hockley (Billy Zane). Rose is unhappy, both with her
engagement and with her new-found social climate. She and Jack fall in
love, and then the Titanic hits the iceberg. This story is actually in
the middle of another story, in which deep sea explorer Brock Lovett
(Bill Paxton) in modern times is searching the wreckage, looking for a
lost diamond. He finds a picture of a woman instead, and this woman
turns out to be Rose, who is now one-hundred one years old. She tells
the story of her experiences on the Titanic to Brock and his crew.
Titanic is what I'd call a religious experience. I didn't pull my eyes
away from the screen. I was mesmerized. Cameron spent years making this
film, and well over 200 million dollars, and every bit of his effort is
right there for audiences to feel and experience with wonder and
amazement. The list of positives could be endless.
At the top of this list is Kate Winslet. Now, most people would agree
that liking an actor or actress will enhance the viewing of the film in
which he or she stars. Kate Winslet is the most talented young actress
working in the business today. Her ability to convey emotion, especially
in this film, is unmatched by any other actress of her generation.
Watching her on screen, I feel the kind of strength and presence that I
see in powerful women like Sigourney Weaver and Linda Hamilton, but
Winslet has even more than these women do--a gleam in her eye, an edge
in her voice. There is something almost inexplicable about her presence
that makes her so supremely wonderful in any film that no film graced
with her performance could ever be bad. Titanic, which would have been
great without her, manages to exceed greatness because of her. And
though I hesitate to say it, I must admit that she is--without a
doubt--the most attractive woman I have ever seen. This obviously
doesn't hurt.
Even though the other actors pale in comparison to Winslet, they all
turn in superb, memorable performances. DiCaprio, as always, is great as
Jack. This is a more grown-up role than I'm used to seeing him in, and
so I was impressed with his progressive talents. He makes this strong
character believable and likable. One speech he gives while in the
presence of a group of rich individuals at a dinner is particularly
convincing, and he carries this kind of aura throughout the film without
fumbling it. I actually believed that Jack's strength is what gives Rose
such a powerful drive to live.
Billy Zane plays the evil, sneering Cal with that kind of evil, sneering
attitude that only Billy Zane can portray. Not unlike his portrayal of
the hopelessly psychotic antagonist in Dead Calm, Zane can be
particularly evil while still managing to convince us that there is
something human buried inside of him. He does everything for his own
good, but the reasons for this are evident from watching the film, and
he isn't a one-note bad guy intended simply to instigate an insurrection
from Rose. He is an unusually genuine antagonist, one that, although he
is bad, the audience can understand.
Cameron's script is astounding. Here we have a love story in which the
man teaches the woman how to live, but their situation is inherently
ironic given their placement on the doomed ocean liner. Without giving
away too much, I must mention the profound and brilliant metaphor that
Cameron has created here--the Titanic is the love between these two
people. The scale is so grand that the love story does not subside when
compared to the sinking of the ship; in fact, it actually outshines the
disaster in many ways. What I'm left with are, of course, the images of
the ship sinking, but what has left a more significant impact on me are
the implications given here by the two main components of this film and
the way they work with one another.
I imagine most of the box-office draw to this film will be from the
obvious fact that it's about a sinking ship. Although I hope most people
will get out of it what I have, there is no way disaster and action film
fans will be disappointed by Cameron's spectacle. He recreated the
disaster down to the last detail. A more convincing film could not have
been made had the sinking ship been filmed this year by a professional
camera crew. The line between models and digital is not noticeable, and
the shots of the vast ship travelling in the lonesome ocean are
breathtaking--the best special effects one could hope to see. When the
ship is sinking, there isn't a moment that doesn't scream pure realism.
Even the physics behind the water rushing down the corridors appears
real. Aside from all of this, Cameron has mastered the nearly-impossible
task of making the incident real-time in its execution. The ship sunk in
about an hour, and that's how long it takes on screen.
Cameron's heart and soul went into this film. I can see from the outcome
that it is exactly what he wanted--every shot, every word of dialogue,
ever nuance between the characters is intentional and meaningful. Films
as completely spectacular as Titanic come about once every few years,
but I doubt any of them had or will have the kind of hype that surrounds
this one. Titanic doesn't just live up to its hype: this film exceeds
everything I could have imagined it to be, and the result is something
that you must see for yourself to believe. And when the film is over, it
may take you a little while to return to reality, but you're just going
to want to get right back on that ship again, even though you know what
happens. But then again, that's the trick, isn't it?

Author
Brian Takeshita
I was pleasantly surprised by this film.  With a budget topping $200
million, I was quite skeptical about whether throwing all that money
toward one of the twentieth century's greatest tragedies would make a
film exciting enough to see.  How much could you dress up the sets?
How many models and computer effects could you use?  How much more
action could you pack into a ship that sinks?  Oh, if I've just given
away part of the plot for you, go back to school.  After having viewed
TITANIC, however, I found it to be a well-paced, well-designed, and
overall well-made movie.  There have been many films made about the
maiden and final voyage of the ocean liner Titanic, but this latest
offering from director James Cameron is the best I've seen.
TITANIC tells its story in two time periods.  It starts out in the
present, when ocean explorer Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton) and his team
are exploring the wreckage of the Titanic on the floor of the
Atlantic, searching for a priceless diamond necklace which supposedly
went down with the ship.  What they find instead is a drawing of a
woman wearing the necklace, which is broadcast on the news.  The woman
in the picture recognizes herself and phones Lovett, who has her flown
out to his exploration vessel on the high seas.  There she tells her
story to Lovett and his team.
In 1912, Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslett), a young lady belonging
to society's upper class, boards the Titanic for the ship's first
Atlantic crossing, from Southampton, England to New York.  She is
engaged to Cal Hockley (Billy Zane), an heir to old money, and a snob
in every sense of the word.  On board, Rose feels the stifling
trappings of high-society's expectations, and resolves to escape from
it all by throwing herself off the Titanic's stern, but is saved from
her self-proclaimed fate by Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a
passenger in third-class ("steerage", as it's referred to), who talks
her out of jumping.  Although for Rose the attraction is not
immediate, a love affair soon develops between the two, which
endangers Rose's social standing as well as her engagement to the
jealous Cal.
The story sounds very simple, and perhaps even unexciting, but through
solid performances by the leads and good direction by Cameron, a good
movie comes through.  DiCaprio is marvelous as the young, but
worldly-wise Jack, playing the role with the confidence usually found
in older actors.  His is a character that is immediately likable, as
he knows what he wants out of life and is charmingly able to handle a
variety of situations.  Girls are going to swoon over him.  Winslet
also proves herself a good actress, delivering her lines convincingly,
and the quality of performances between Winslet and DiCaprio makes the
relationship believable.  The only problem with Winslet is that she
does not carry herself in accordance with her character's upbringing.
Simply by judgment of her gait, I was distracted from the fact that
she was supposed to be an upper-crust debutante.  Rather than
demonstrate the poise one would expect her character to possess, she
sometimes looks positively clumsy, and it unfortunately detracts from
her otherwise great acting.
Billy Zane is cast well as the aristocratic snob Cal, since he has a
certain look that immediately makes you want to hate him.  His
features are such that even when he smiles, there's something
mistrustful about him, and when he scowls, he is evil incarnate.  He's
something like a porcelain version of Peter Gallagher, but a cheaper
model.  Like DiCaprio and Winslet, Zane slips comfortably into his
role and plays it well.  Backing up Zane is David Warner as Lovejoy,
Cal's personal assistant (or "man" as they said at the turn of the
century).  No matter who else is in the cast, you can always count on
a good performance by Warner, who seems to be made to play the
distinguished gentleman with a gaze of steel and will to match.
Additionally, there are a number of smaller fictional and
non-fictional roles thrown in for color, such as Kathy Bates as "The
Unsinkable" Molly Brown, Danny Nucci as Jack's friend Fabrizio De
Rossi, Eric Braeden as John Jacob Astor, and even Bernard Fox as
Colonel Archibald Gracie.  Nice to see Dr. Bombay getting work.
Also scattered about are some of the other steerage passengers who are
basically in the movie so you can feel sorry for them when they die.
This by itself may have been largely compulsory in a film about the
Titanic, but it transcends this status by putting these characters in
direct conflict with the ship's crewmembers who strive to maintain
order and assure that the first-class passengers are placed aboard the
lifeboats before anyone else.  In this way, TITANIC possesses a depth
not usually found in action pictures.  You don't just get a love story
with a tragedy as a backdrop, but a very real account of class
struggle as well.
As I mentioned before, the budget for this film was tremendous, and it
certainly showed in the set dressing and special effects.  The
interiors of the Titanic are nearly breathtaking with their elaborate
trimmings and intricate detail, and one has very little doubt that the
layouts are authentic.  With regard to the exteriors, I would dare
anyone to point out a film in which a vessel has been recreated with
such meticulousness or on such a scale.  Cameron actually built a
scale model of the Titanic in a water tank, but only had room for 90%,
and therefore had to computer-generate the remaining 40 feet.
Could've fooled me and everyone else in the theater, as the splicing
is seamless.
Also of note in this film is the way the audience is presented with
the anatomy of the disaster right at the beginning.  We are told of
where the iceberg struck the ship, how the flooding occurred, the way
the ship sank, and why it did so in that manner.  These technical
details serve as a guide for later on when the action starts
happening, and allow us to view the sinking with informed analytic
detraction, in addition to the more conventional placement in the
midst of mayhem and confusion.
In all, James Cameron's TITANIC is a good blend of love story,
history, and action.  The fact that the film runs longer than most at
about three hours is almost unnoticed as the viewer's attention is
held alternately by those three main elements, from the movie's
intriguing beginning to it's satisfactory ending.  In box office
receipts, TITANIC the movie will undoubtedly live up to the unsinkable
expectations of Titanic the ship.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, 
      Frances Fisher, Gloria Stuart, Bill Paxton, Bernard Hill, 
      David Warner
Director: James Cameron
Producers: James Cameron, Jon Landau
Screenplay: James Cameron
Cinematography: Russell Carpenter
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Short of climbing aboard a time capsule and peeling back eight and 
one-half decades, James Cameron's magnificent TITANIC is the closest any 
of us will get to walking the decks of the doomed ocean liner.  
Meticulous in detail, yet vast in scope and intent, TITANIC is the kind 
of epic motion picture event that has become a rarity.  You don't just 
watch TITANIC, you experience it -- from the launch to the sinking, then 
on a journey two and one-half miles below the surface, into the cold, 
watery grave where Cameron has shot never-before seen documentary 
footage specifically for this movie.
     In each of his previous outings, Cameron has pushed the special 
effects envelope.  In ALIENS, he cloned H.R. Giger's creation dozens of 
times, fashioning an army of nightmarish monsters.  In THE ABYSS, he 
took us deep under the sea to greet a band of benevolent space 
travelers.  In T2, he introduced the morphing terminator (perfecting an 
effects process that was pioneered in THE ABYSS).  And in TRUE LIES, he 
used digital technology to choreograph an in-air battle.  Now, in 
TITANIC, Cameron's flawless re-creation of the legendary ship has 
blurred the line between reality and illusion to such a degree that we 
can't be sure what's real and what isn't.  To make this movie, it's as 
if Cameron built an all-new "Titanic", let it sail, then sunk it.
     Of course, special effects alone don't make for a successful film, 
and TITANIC would have been nothing more than an expensive piece of eye 
candy without a gripping story featuring interesting characters.  In his 
previous outings, Cameron has always placed people above the 
technological marvels that surround them.  Unlike film makers such as 
Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin, Cameron has used visual effects to 
serve his plot, not the other way around.  That hasn't changed with 
TITANIC.  The picture's spectacle is the ship's sinking, but its core is 
the affair between a pair of mismatched, star-crossed lovers.  
     TITANIC is a romance, an adventure, and a thriller all rolled into 
one.  It contains moments of exuberance, humor, pathos, and tragedy.  In 
their own way, the characters are all larger-than-life, but they're 
human enough (with all of the attendant frailties) to capture our 
sympathy.  Perhaps the most amazing thing about TITANIC is that, even 
though Cameron carefully recreates the death of the ship in all of its 
terrible grandeur, the event never eclipses the protagonists.  To the 
end, we never cease caring about Rose (Kate Winslet) and Jack (Leonardo 
DiCaprio).
     "Titanic" sank during the early morning hours of April 15, 1912 in 
the North Atlantic, killing 1500 of the 2200 on board.  The movie does 
not begin in 1912, however -- instead, it opens in modern times, with a 
salvage expedition intent on recovering some of the ship's long-buried 
treasure.  The expedition is led by Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), a 
fortune hunter who is searching for the mythical "Heart of the Ocean", a 
majestic 56 karat diamond which reputedly went down with the ship.  
After seeing a TV report about the salvage mission, a 101-year old woman 
(Gloria Stuart) contacts Brock with information regarding the jewel.  
She identifies herself as Rose DeWitt Bukater, a survivor of the 
tragedy.  Brock has her flown out to his ship.  Once there, she tells 
him her version of the story of "Titanic"'s ill-fated voyage.
     The bulk of the film -- well over 80% of its running time -- is 
spent in flashbacks.  We pick up the story on the day that "Titanic" 
leaves Southampton, with jubilant crowds cheering as it glides away from 
land.  On board are the movie's three main characters:  Rose, a young 
American debutante trapped in a loveless engagement because her mother 
is facing financial ruin; Cal Hockley (Billy Zane), her rich-but-cold-
hearted fiancé; and Jack Dawson, a penniless artist who won his third-
class ticket in a poker game.  When Jack first sees Rose, it's from 
afar, but circumstances offer him the opportunity to become much closer 
to her.  As the voyage continues, Jack and Rose grow more intimate, and 
she tries to summon up the courage to defy her mother (Frances Fisher) 
and break off her engagement.  But, even with the aid of an outspoken 
rich women named Molly Brown (Kathy Bates), the barrier of class looms 
as a seemingly-insurmountable obstacle.  Then, when circumstances in the 
Rose/Cal/Jack triangle are coming to a head, "Titanic" strikes an 
iceberg and the "unsinkable" ship (that term is a testament to man's 
hubris) begins to go down.
     By keeping the focus firmly on Rose and Jack, Cameron avoids one 
frequent failing of epic disaster movies:  too many characters in too 
many stories.  When a film tries to chronicle the lives and struggles of 
a dozen or more individuals, it reduces them all to cardboard cut-outs.  
In TITANIC, Rose and Jack are at the fore from beginning to end, and the 
supporting characters are just that -- supporting.  The two protagonists 
(as well as Cal) are accorded enough screen time for Cameron to develop 
multifaceted personalities. 
     As important as the characters are, however, it's impossible to 
deny the power of the visual effects.  Especially during the final hour, 
as "Titanic" undergoes its death throes, the film functions not only as 
a rousing adventure with harrowing escapes, but as a testimony to the 
power of computers to simulate reality in the modern motion picture.  
The scenes of "Titanic" going under are some of the most awe-inspiring 
in any recent film.  This is the kind of movie that it's necessary to 
see more than once just to appreciate the level of detail.
     One of the most unique aspects of TITANIC is its use of genuine 
documentary images to set the stage for the flashback story.  Not 
satisfied with the reels of currently-existing footage of the sunken 
ship, Cameron took a crew to the site of the wreck to do his own 
filming.  As a result, some of the underwater shots in the framing 
sequences are of the actual liner lying on the ocean floor.  Their 
importance and impact should not be underestimated, since they further 
heighten the production's sense of verisimilitude.  
     For the leading romantic roles of Jack and Rose, Cameron has chosen 
two of today's finest young actors.  Leonardo DiCaprio (ROMEO + JULIET), 
who has rarely done better work, has shed his cocky image.  Instead, 
he's likable and energetic in this part -- two characteristics vital to 
establishing Jack as a hero.  Meanwhile, Kate Winslet, whose impressive 
resume includes SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, HAMLET, and JUDE, dons a flawless 
American accent along with her 1912 garb, and essays an appealing, 
vulnerable Rose.  Billy Zane comes across as the perfect villain -- 
callous, arrogant, yet displaying true affection for his prized fiancé.  
The supporting cast, which includes Kathy Bates, Bill Paxton, Frances 
Fisher, Bernard Hill (as "Titanic"'s captain), and David Warner (as 
Cal's no-nonsense manservant), is flawless.
     While TITANIC is easily the most subdued and dramatic of Cameron's 
films, fans of more frantic pictures like ALIENS and THE ABYSS will not 
be disappointed.  TITANIC has all of the thrills and intensity that 
movie-goers have come to expect from the director.  A dazzling mix of 
style and substance, of the sublime and the spectacular, TITANIC 
represents Cameron's most accomplished work to date.  It's important not 
to let the running time hold you back -- these three-plus hour pass very 
quickly.  Although this telling of the "Titanic" story is far from the 
first, it is the most memorable, and is deserving of Oscar nominations 
not only in the technical categories, but in the more substantive ones 
of Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, and Best Actress.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Stephen Rowley
It is with some surprise that I come to write this review. For, eight
months after it opened, it's a little disorientating to remind myself
that I actually did very much enjoy James Cameron's epic "Titanic."
That's because, somewhere in that time period, the unrelenting
crudfest that has surrounded this film has made me hate the film and
everything about it. I hate Leonardo DiCaprio. I hate James Horner.
And surely I can't be alone in wishing that Celine Dione's heart would
just *stop*?
But I want to be objective. So, having acknowledged my qualms, I'll
try to set them aside. And let's get at the question that the hype has
all too often obscured: is the film any good? If so, why? And if not,
why not?
The key to this question is to situate the film within the correct
genre. James Cameron, let's remember, is an action director; he is
probably America's most talented (Spielberg at his best is better, but
Spielberg's problems of late are a whole different issue). He made
"Aliens" (my vote as the best sci-fi actioner of the eighties), both
"Terminator" films, "The Abyss," and "True Lies." He is not known as
director of romances. True, one thing that was notable in his best
films ("Aliens" and the first "Terminator") was an attention to
character. But this was never a feature that could stand on its own,
and until "Titanic" I don't think Cameron ever harboured illusions
that it could. The beauty of Cameron's work was that he could create
serviceable, yet affecting, emotional subplots and integrate them
fully into the thrust of an action narrative (think how well Ripley's
maternal instincts are played upon in "Aliens"). We must see the plot
of Titanic in these terms. Do we really believe that Cameron conceived
the love story between these two characters and then decided the
perfect backdrop was the sinking of the Titanic? I don't. I'm pretty
sure Cameron started with the thought of how exciting the sinking
scenes would be and then grafted Jack and Rose into the events
afterwards. 
The film bears this out. As a good old fashioned disaster movie,
"Titanic" is superb. The special effects, while not as flawless as
some would have you believe, are extremely impressive. This is even
truer when you consider how many involve water effects, which are
notoriously difficult: they become expensive when done full scale
(think "Waterworld") and tend to look very fake when miniaturised
(think of the breaking dam in "Superman"). Cameron has the advantage
of making his film after the rediscovery of the ship's wreckage. This
has opened up a great deal of new information, which happily points to
a sequence of events considerably more visually exciting than the old
image of the ship sinking intact under the waves. And Cameron is
ingenious at working his characters into the right places to witness
all the best action. The imagery here is stunning, from the creepy
bits as icy water chases rats through the hull to the showstopping
final scenes as the stern sinks underwater. Cameron delivers all the
highpoints like the skilled craftsman he is; the flawless framing,
editing, and choreography of action should be taken up as an example
within the industry (take note Michael Bay). These scenes get about an
hour devoted to them, which is about the time the ship took to sink,
but Cameron isn't after some "High Noon"-style exercise in real time
editing. He's showing off his mastery of the medium, his gorgeous
production design, and his astonishing visual effects. On this level
the film is an enormous achievement, and I came out of the cinema more
excited than I have for quite a while. ("Face/Off" was probably the
last film that gave me such a buzz).
Yet I quickly came to begrudge the film its success. Why? Because
people seem to enjoy the film at a level on which it isn't any good.
It was the love story that seemed to be drawing the repeat business,
and the film's success at the Oscars was based, presumably, on the
belief that the film was (or could be passed off as) a work of
important, substantial, serious drama. After all, you don't give
Oscars to action films (though they sometimes get nominations, as
several of Spielberg's have). And this aspect of the film is a bare
minimum effort: as I have suggested, it is subservient to the action.
As drama in its own right it has considerably less integrity than
Sarah Conner's plight in "The Terminator" or even Ripley's affecting
angst in "Aliens." Essentially we have a familiar, hackneyed class
conflict romance such as we have seen hundreds of times elsewhere,
told with less flair than usual. Cameron doesn't add any surprising
notes to the cliched story, and his representation of class oppression
is very schematic (I'm inclined to think a British or Australian
director might have brought out the logic of class with more subtlety
and appreciation). Many of Cameron's character moments are oafishly
clumsy and obvious (think of the business with the loogy, or the
sequence with the Picassos, or the way Rose immediately spots the
lifeboat shortage).
The performances are nothing to write home about. Kate Winslett is
strong and well cast, but the flat material gives her no character
nuances to try and draw out. Leonardo DiCaprio is all wrong: I've
liked him in several previous roles (I thought he was excellent in Baz
Luhrmann's superb "Romeo and Juliet"), but Jack is not his finest
moment. DiCaprio looks all out of place in this time period, and there
are none of the rough edges to his character that a life of poverty
would likely produce (this is the kind of thing I mean when I say
Cameron doesn't get the true workings of class). He's too
unrelentingly perfect: it's like watching Winslett get seduced by a
cherub. Billy Zane is a lot more entertaining, mainly because he seems
to have realised how preposterous his part is and decided to ham it
up. He has a blatant caddishness that is actually extremely funny: if
Cameron was a little more appreciative of this we could have had an
interesting film that explored Winslett's sly appreciation of his
antisocial behaviour. But Cameron seems to take him seriously, and
indeed seems to accept David Warner's henchman as a real character
too. (Warner actually played the romantic lead in an earlier, less
carefully marketed version of the story). Ultimately the stuntmen and
CGI virtual people come off as more convincing: they at least know how
to die.
So I can't go along with those who gave this film a Best Picture Oscar
(against an unusually strong field, too) or think that it's the modern
"Gone with the Wind." Let's just all get ourselves large screen TVs
with hi-fi stereo sound and watch the final hour over and over again.
Only then will sanity prevail.
_____________________
Review (C) 1998 Stephen Rowley. All rights reserved.
Please do not reproduce in whole or in part without my permission.
I can be contacted at cinephobia@Not!yahoo.com
(Remove the Not! for correct address).
For more reviews and essays, check out Cinephobia:
http://www.werple.net.au/~lerowley/cinephob.htm

Author
Brian Koller
"Titanic" has the highest box office gross of all time:
over one billion dollars.  It is also the most expensive
film ever made, at two hundred million dollars.  And it
was one of the most successful films ever at the
Academy Awards, winning eleven Oscars.  So, what is wrong
with this picture?  Plenty.
Has a film ever before received fourteen Academy nominations
without one for the screenplay?  While direction, casting
and cinematography are important, the key component of a
film's quality is usually the script.  The 'Titanic' script
is burdened with lame and unlikely dialogue between the
romantic leads (e.g. "I'll never let go") and loaded with
one-dimensional characters.
While the 'Titanic' story lends itself to class conflict,
this feature is over-emphasized.  The 'rich' characters
are either half-embalmed snobs or despicable jerks,
excepting only gregarious hero Molly Brown (Kathy Bates)
and spoiled, passionate love interest Rose (Kate Winslet).
The film begins with a current day Titanic salvage operation.
For dramatic purposes, Rose (Gloria Stuart), now 101 years old,
is brought on board the salvage ship.  She tells her
increasingly dubious story to the rapt crew.
Rose is pressured by her mother to wed abusive Cal
(Billy Zane).  Her friends are so shallow, and Cal such a
jerk, that Rose is driven to tears and makes a suicide
attempt.  With 2200 passengers, you'd think that more than
just Jack would be on deck to save her, and he doesn't look
strong enough to pull her back onboard.  Of course, they
soon have a romance, which of course is disapproved of
by Mom and the surprisingly jealous fiance.
The film is late in its second hour before the Titanic
finally gets around to hitting the iceberg.  "Titanic"
then begins to lift scenes from the vastly superior
"A Night to Remember" from 1958, mixing them in with
long sequences of Rose and Jack repeatedly rescuing
each other from deepening and near-freezing water.
The film ends with more silliness.  Survivor Zane
is unable to find Rose during the long voyage to
America, despite Rose's mother being on board
(conveniently, her character disappears during this
time).  Rose doesn't find the blue diamond in her
coat pocket until she reaches New York!  There is
also a dream sequence which has Jack and Rose enter
the Titanic's gigantic ballroom to incongruous massive
applause from the well-to-do guests, who were so
maligned for their shallowness in the film's
first half.
Since director James Cameron is at his best during
action scenes, "Titanic" can be entertaining at times.
The story is dramatic, and the special effects are
convincing.  But given the dubious script, characters
and events, "Titanic" may be the most over-praised
film of our generation.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Chris Chaberski
TITANIC, a review by Christopher Chaberski
Director: James Cameron
Writer: James Cameron
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Bill Paxton,
Gloria Stuart, Kathy Bates, Suzy Amis, Bernard Hill, Francis Fisher, and
Victor Garber
Cinematographer: Russell Carpenter
Composer: James Horner
SYNOPSIS:  James Cameron's epic TITANIC is a superb film.  The
tremendous story is, basically, a third-class boy falls for first-class girl,
wrapped around the sinking of the greatest ship of all time.  Mr.
Cameron's film is aided by top-notch performances from its leads. 
Leonardo DiCaprio finally sheds his arrogant punk image and performs
wonderfully, while Kate Winslet shines brighter than ever, as her
character experiences the full range of emotions.  The supporting cast is
also noteworthy, though nothing overshadows DiCaprio and Winslet. 
There are some minor weak points, but they do not bring the film down
noticeably.  Cameron splits the film into two halves, one prior to the
iceberg and one afterwards, each an example of superior filmmaking. 
Together, they comprise a full epic adventure, but more importantly, a
magnificent love story, which ends in a climax sure to be embedded in
viewers' heads long after leaving the theater.  TITANIC is the best film
of 1997.
MAIN REVIEW (There will be some spoilers at the very end, but there
will be a warning beforehand.):
        James Cameron's list of credits towers above most of his peers. 
Though I have not seen THE SPAWNING, his first film, I have no
problem in saying that his filmography is more than just a little
impressive.  THE TERMINATOR, ALIENS, and THE ABYSS (the
director's cut, that is) are all phenomenal.  In the 1990's, I believe he
took an ever-so-slight dip with T2 and TRUE LIES, both of which
lacked the emotional sharpness of his 1980's films, but they are still
grand entertainments.  With TITANIC, he has his masterpiece.  His
other films have flirted with greatness, but never achieved the
spellbinding feats of TITANIC.  Up until now, it was as if Mr. Cameron
was more concerned with the machines in his films (and all of his films
seem to indicate a great big great-big-machine fetish) than with the
people who created them, though he never lost sight of the importance
of those people.  
        More than any other action director/writer, Mr. Cameron has
maintained strong relationships between his characters.  He has become
famous for writing strong female parts, though that could be questioned
with Jamie Lee Curtis' character in TRUE LIES.  Linda Hamilton may
as well re-name herself Sarah Connor; Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio's
performance (opposite the equally-sharp Ed Harris) in THE ABYSS
brims with fiery rage one moment and then tender femininity the next, a
rare feat anywhere, much less in an action film; Mr. Cameron's finest
female remains Sigourney Weaver's Ellen Ripley. When was the last
time a female action lead received an Oscar nomination? I cannot think
of one, ever. Ripley dominates ALIENS, even with the army of H.R.
Giger-inspired nasties chasing her and her tough space-marine cohorts,
wielding heavy artillery and simultaneously rediscovering her maternal
instincts with the lost child she takes under her wing.
        In TITANIC, Kate Winslet's Rose DeWitt-Bukater is no
exception.  She does not get to handle M-16's or underwater oil rig
equipment, but still she proves to be one tough woman.  As I said
before, Rose runs the emotional gamut in this film, and Winslet handles
it beautifully.  An Oscar nomination, especially in this year of rare strong
female parts, is definite, and deserved.  Not for one moment did I not
believe what Rose was doing.  It would have been easy not to like Rose. 
Face it, she is a prissy, spoiled, ignorant rich girl.  But Winslet makes
Rose irresistible.  She exceeds her fabulous performance in
HEAVENLY CREATURES by being completely vulnerable, yet never
out of control.  Rose wants to experience things, things which her
mother and, more specifically, her class forbid her to experience.  Who
can blame her for despising the upper class experience?  It is depicted as
boring, repetetive, and adventure-deprived.  She wants to change her
life, and finally, finally receives the opportunity, in the form of Jack
Dawson (DiCaprio).
        Jack is a travelling artist who wins his ticket back to America
on board Titanic in a poker games, just five minutes before the great
ship leaves.  I must admit, the thing most preventing me from wanting
to see this film beforehand was that I knew Leonardo DiCaprio was the
male lead.  In all of his prior performances (save MARVIN'S ROOM),
he perpetually irritated me with his cockiness and whining.  Thankfully,
he does not whine or act cocky for one moment during TITANIC.  He
shows full capability of bringing great force to a "straight" character, as
opposed to his previous array of quirky ones.  Here, he has no physical
or mental handicaps to aid his performance, yet is stronger than ever. 
DiCaprio sparkles as Jack, fully embodying the carefree, poor, young
artist who falls for the first class beauty he spots on a higher deck.  This
is a magical moment, as Rose comes into his sight, almost glowing with
light.  Jack is smitten.  His friend Fabrizio (Danny Nucci) waves a hand
in front of his mesmerized eyes, to no avail.  As fate would have it, Jack
and Rose do meet later that night, when Jack finds her hanging off of
the back of the ship, in a suicide attempt.  
        For the first 100 minutes, Mr. Cameron allows the relationship
between Jack and Rose to develop realistically and poignantly.  Thank
God for this.  So many films rely on huge climaxes to titillate audiences. 
Mr. Cameron realizes that huge climaxes can do more than titillate if the
audience is entranced by the characters in that very climax.  Feeling
titillated wares off; feeling truly moved lingers.  A film cannot truly
move its viewers without devoting proper time to its characters.  The
first half of the film relies on more than just a developing romantic
drama to drive itself.  So many other flavors are at work here.  First and
foremost, comedy.  The spit lying unbeknownst on Jack's chin as he is
presented to the first class ladies; Jack's lack of silverware knowledge at
the dinner table; Cal's dismissal of Picasso; these moments, among
others, comically underscore the development of Jack and Rose's
romance.  Other factors at work during the first half of the film to keep
the entertainment level high:  the marvelous cinematography, with
sweeping shots of the monumental ship; exquisite period detail in sets,
costumes, language and mannerisms; colorful supporting characters,
such as Kathy Bates' Molly Brown; and the unforgettable score by
James Horner.  Every bit of music is impeccably paired with what is
onscreen.  Its greatest accomplishment is that the music never seems out
of place, so rare in film today.  It is never obvious, yet omnipresent. 
This is yet another category for which TITANIC deserves Oscar
recognition.
        The developing romance is filled with so many magical
moments, both visual and emotional.  The film's finest moment, in my
eyes, is the nude drawing scene.  For such a seemingly outrageous
concept, the scene fits perfectly into the framework of the characters
and the film.  After Rose has conceded her evident affection of Jack, to
Jack, she brings him back to her suite to be drawn like the women she
has seen in Jack's other drawings--nude.  For the occasion, she wears
only the 56-karat Heart of the Ocean diamond necklace her fiance Cal
(Zane) had previously given her.  It is the only time she wears the jewel. 
After dropping her robe, a speechless Jack positions her on the couch. 
During this scene, this behemoth of a film achieves a scarce level of
subtle, cinematic poetry.  Little dialogue is exchanged, but the scene
swelters with eroticism.  Seeing Jack's eyes peering over the paper at
Rose is to see artistic determination, the search for perfection-- Jack
wants to capture Rose's very essence in one drawing.  
        The halfway point of the film is preceded by a physical
manifestation of Rose and Jack's growing love for each other.  This
could be the finest-executed example of a teen love scene since 1989's
SAY ANYTHING... The scene exemplifies the youthful exuberance of
Jack and Rose, but also the universal and timeless experience of falling
in love.  The few words that are spoken during this scene are the film's
best dialogue.  In this scene, Mr. Cameron whittles down the feelings of
Rose and Jack into just the minimal number of words, an appropriate
and deft maneuver.
        When the iceberg hits, it really does not seem like something
that could sink Titanic.  This was, after all, an "unsinkable" ship.  The
blind arrogance of its creators is humbled by a tiny-in-comparison chunk
of frozen water floating in the North Atlantic.  The damage is done. 
The ship will sink, proclaims its builder and staunch admirer, Mr.
Andrews (a brilliant Victor Garber).  Mr. Cameron hits another high
note with the dumbfounded reactions of the various crew members upon
finding out that the unsinkable is indeed, sinking.  
        The second half of the film defines the capacity of the
cinematic art.  Describing the sights Mr. Cameron unleashes is next to
impossible.  It is here where parts of TITANIC become simply ineffable,
where one can  truly understand and accept the medium of film as
unique from the other arts.  There are certain things that only novels can
do best, and there are certain things that only poems can do best.  No
novel or poem could hope to better the second half of TITANIC for
what it is.  And that is a visual magnum opus.   Seeing the great ship fill
with water, slowly dip head-first into the water, and finally ending up
straight in the air, only to slowly ease into the Atlantic ocean...all of this
is an utterly remarkable visual experience. 
        But TITANIC aspires beyond this.  The eye candy is only half
the story.  After spending so much time with Jack and Rose's building
romance, the film certainly does not forget them.  Because the audience
has invested so much into them, their numerous subsequent separations
are that much more heart-wrenching.   The actual sinking appears to
unfold in real time, which is a definite plus.  The gradual tension plus the
feeling of inevitability allows for moment by moment changes from
intensity to pathos.  One cannot forget the humbled Mr. Andrews
leaning against the dining room mantle, gently fixing the clock as a half-
empty brandy glass slides off the mantle.  There are so many of these
tiny, poignant moments, which hardly ever fall into sentimentality.   Mr.
Cameron captures so many characters' feelings during this time of
desperation.  But he never loses focus on Jack and Rose.  They are the
main story, always. 
        There are, however, minute scratches on this diamond of a
film.  Some of Cameron's dialogue is mediocre at best.  And there are
moments when the central romance becomes cheesy.  But what needs to
be considered here is that Jack and Rose are kids!  There is ALWAYS
cheesiness in a youthful romance (as well as older romance).  That is 
really the way that kids in love speak to each other.  Also, the
perhaps-too-sharp contrast between rich and poor often comes out in
unnecessarily harsh lines spoken by Rose's mother and, especially, Cal
Hockley.  Thankfully, though, these weaknesses are easily eclipsed by
the prevailing positives evident throughout.
        Along with DiCaprio and Winslet, so many other actors
perform splendidly.  Kathy Bates is always delightful as the Unsinkable
Molly Brown; Frances Fisher nails her role as the class-aware mother,
who is actually given a small dose of humanization (rare for the upper
class in this film) when she explains that the family fortune is depleted;
Bill Paxton and Gloria Stuart each do very well during the present day
bookends, with Stuart especially showing Rose's undying fire.  But there
are two supporting performances of special note:  Victor Garber as the
honorable Mr. Andrews, and Billy Zane as the oh-so-evil Cal Hockley. 
Garber deserves an Oscar nomination for his earnest, intense
performance as the ship's main designer.  He is, at first, rightfully proud
of his ship.  But when the iceberg hits, he is the first to accept that "the
ship will sink."  When he walks up the grand staircase, and Rose
inquires about why everyone is being made to wear their life-vests,
Garber's eyes (and watch his extraordinarily expressive eyebrows here)
burn with guilt, shame, and fear as he explains to Rose of the inevitable.
        The other performance worth discussing is Billy Zane's
portrayal of Cal Hockley.  As performed, Hockley is completely
unlikable, and unfortunately one-dimensional in that respect.  It is
difficult to say whether the blame should fall more on Zane or on Mr.
Cameron, for writing lines that could not really be taken very far. 
Surprisingly though, Zane does very well with what the character ends
up being.  Occasionally, there is even some subtlety gracing his
performance (!).  It is easy to hate Cal, but impossible to feel anything
else, which is a weakness in any character.
        Beyond characters and performances, the technical
achievements of this film are beyond astounding.  The visual effects are
quite simply the best effects in cinema, not only for their visible
attributes, but also for the way they bolster the story, rather than
supercede it.  Also, the sound is perhaps the clearest and most skillfully
utilized I have ever heard.  So many tiny conversations, sound effects,
and background noises come across so clearly without ever getting in
the way.  This is the way technical aspects of a film should work.
        After all is said and done, one question remains:  Why is
TITANIC such a great film?  Yes, the acting, the tragic story, and the
technical marvels are all executed wonderfully, but what really pushes
TITANIC to the top of the heap?  Perhaps it is the film's massive
ambition, only equalled by the size of the actual Titanic.  The immense
ambition plus the near-flawless execution amount to the complete
cinematic experience.  This, in a nutshell, albeit a rather large and
expensive nutshell, is the true power of film.
TITANIC--rating:  **** (out of four)/ alternative scale:  9.6/10.0
        I found the scene where the 100-year old Rose throws the
diamond into the ocean to be a misstep.  It was especially irritating that
this scene happened after so many brilliant moments.  I did find her
gesture, symbolic as it was, necessary.  Why not leave the idea open to
audience interpretation?  The fate of the diamond could have been much
more tantalizing had it been left ambiguous.  I can understand the
reasons Rose has for letting the diamond fall to rest along the ocean
floor, with the rest of Titanic.  However, I still feel that it was a poor
choice, and at such an inopportune moment, too!
        However, I thought the following scene was perfect.  After one last beautiful
visual transition from present-day-sunken Titanic to the majestic, original
Titanic, Rose's dream of being with Jack one last time fulfilled my passion to
see Jack one last time as well.  Some have said that this scene was corny and
cheesy, and I can see why they get that impression.  But, Mr. Cameron, if
you're reading this, just know that I, at least, think you hit just the right
note.  Allowing Rose and Jack one final embrace was absolutely the best way to
cap the greatest film romance in years, in my humble opinion.

Author
George Jung
The movie is a technological triumph. Real footages of the
Titanic wreck were used to make for a breathtaking scene.
Computer animation were used throughout to portray the
Titanic in all its past glory. Unfortunately, it was painfully
obvious that the scenes in which the camera panned away
from the Titanic were computer generated. The power of
computer animation shined through in the actual sinking of
the Titanic. I couldn't believe my eyes as I saw the huge boat
sank into the ocean. I wasn't able to tell where the computer
animation began and where the live action shots ended.
The acting for the most part was good. I have new found
respect for Leonardo DiCaprio as an actor. He truely
convinced me that he was a young man named Jack with
nothing but a pocket full of dreams on his way to a new life in
America. Kate Winslet, who plays Rose, was somewhat
unconvincing as a member of the upper-class at first, but
came through at the end.
The directing and the script was incredible. The story flowed
beautiful throughout the whole movie.  Although each scene
contains a wealth of details, they do not overwhelm the
sences. I was thoroughly convinced that I was on the great
Titanic. Although the movie is titled "Titanic" the actually
sinking of the ship isn't the focus of the movie. The movie
centers around two people in love. Don't be fooled into
thinking that such a simplistic plot would bore you, because
this movie will grab your attention from the beginning and will
never let go till the end.
The movie is truely a classic love story. A poor young man,
Jack, meets a young upper-class woman, Rose. The two
gradually fall in love but many things prevent them from
being together. Jack and Rose are from totally different
classes and completely different worlds. Rose's domineering
fiance is incredibly jealous of her feelings for Jack and does
everything to keep them apart. Rose's mother forbids her
daughter from having anything to do with Jack. Although
numerous things tested Rose's and Jack's love for each
other, their love would be tested to the breaking point by the
inenvitable tragedy of the Titanic.
In the last half of the movie you wonder just how will Rose
and Jack survive the tragedy of the Titantic? Will the two
make it to America? Will they be able to go to Connie Island
and ride on the roller coaster until they get sick like they said
they would? Will they marry and have many children? Will
they live happily ever after? You'll just have to see for
yourself.
To sum it up "Titantic" is a life time of love in about 3 hours.

Author
Chris Loar
Written and directed by James Cameron
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio (Jack Dawson), Kate Winslet (Rose DeWitt
Bukater), Billy Zane (Cal Hockley), Kathy Bates (Molly Brown), Frances
Fisher (Ruth DeWitt Bukater)
_Titanic_ is twice the film it should be and only half the
film it wants to be.  It's a strange piece of work, half
_Gone with the Wind_, half _Poseidon Adventure_, half
_Pygmalion_, half _Shawshank Redemption_.  That's a lot to
pack into a single movie, even one that runs as long as
this one.
All this to say:  Cameron has tried to make the film of his
career here, and it shows.  He has succeeded, to the extent
that this film has entertained tens of thousands of people,
and to the extent that it will make him rich beyond imagining.
He has failed, though, to the extent that the film he has made,
although impressive and adventuresome, is some distance from
being his best work; in spite of its strong cast and its much-
vaunted special effects, the film is hardly as taut and exciting
as, say, _Terminator_, and in a lot of ways has less substance
and moral weight as well.  You should go see _Titanic_ (if,
indeed, there is anyone left who hasn't).  Go see it -- you'll
have a good-to-great time watching it, for despite its many
failings, its story hangs together better than any blockbuster
project of recent years -- so far beyond _ID4_ and _Jurassic
Park_ as to be almost incomparable.  But Cameron's film is
also a serious disappointment.  Its opening sequences hint
at, threaten us with, even promise us something like artistic
achievement, a meditation on time and memory and loss.  In
the end, we're left with a disaster flick -- maybe the best
disaster movie ever, but a disaster movie nonetheless.
The story is told in flashback.  We open in the present day,
with actual footage of the wreckage of the real-life _Titanic_.
These first scenes are the finest in the film.  We're shown
images of once-luxuriant rooms, and there's something haunting
about the image of this sort of luxury fallen into decay.
Cameron plays on this effect by recreating these same rooms in
lavish detail later in the film.
The explorer who shows us this wreckage (played competently by
Bill Paxton) soon meets up with a survivor of the wreck -- Rose
DeWitt Bukater (played in the present day by Gloria Stuart and
in flashback by Kate Winslet).  Rose is in the present day
something of a bohemian artist, but once upon a time was the
only child of a financially-troubled aristocratic family.  Her
mother (Frances Fisher) sees the family's only hope in marrying
her child to the affluent, arrogant Cal Hockley (Billy Zane)  --
a match for which Rose displays something less than enthusiasm.
Our flashback commences with Rose, Cal, and their entourage
arranging to have their immense array of luggage placed aboard
the ship; we then cut to a sharply contrasting scene, where
the adventurous, impoverished, seat-of-the-pants Jack Dawson
(Leonardo DiCaprio) is busy winning his passage to America in
a high-stakes poker game.  He and his companion win just as
the ship is disembarking, and scurry aboard carrying a single
bag.
These two scenes really tell you everything you need to know
about the two social worlds that Cameron presents here.  The
one, symbolized by Hockley and his class, are affluent, complacent,
sterile, and completely unreal; the other, on display below
decks, is poverty-stricken but very much alive.  Our story here
revolves around Rose's disenchantment with the first world, and
her attraction to the second.  For she looks forward to a life
with Hockley as one might look at a prison sentence; it's only
when she meets and begins to fall in love with Jack Dawson, who
sees life as a gift to be appreciated anew each day, that she
starts to imagine that life might hold some pleasures after all.
Kate Winslet is really just heartbreakingly good as Rose.
She's left me a little cold in the past -- especially in her
recent appearance as Ophelia in Kenneth Branagh's _Hamlet_ --
but perhaps that's just because she's never been used quite so
effectively before.  If Cameron is good at anything, it's in
seeing the ability of his female leads to project strength, and
Winslet projects it here, in a much more convincing and human
way than, say, Sigourney Weaver.  And DiCaprio isn't bad either;
what he lacks in presence, depth, and real charisma, he more
than makes up for with his energy and his winning smile.  He
doesn't really need to portray a character here, anyway; Jack
Dawson is really more of an idea than a real person.  He is
the embodiment of freedom and risk, a symbol of the American
dream, and icon of everything that Cal Hockley is not, of
everything the rich in general are presumed not to be.  In
any case, he and Winslet are fun to watch on screen together;
their chemistry is rather low-wattage, but it has a kind of
pleasant flirty sparkle, and they have a few sequences together
that are genuinely moving.
The rest of the tale unfolds rather like a road map, without
much in the way of real surprises.  This isn't a bad thing; it's
pleasant and intermittently exciting watching Jack and Rose
fall for each other, and it's especially fun watching Rose lose
her inhibitions and let her hair down a little.  Winslet uses her
face very effectively in this transition, moving ably from a
stiff, unsmiling British mask to a face that's unreserved and
laughing out loud.  But while there are a few surprises in the
performances, there aren't any in the plot; the pair fall in love,
Hockley learns of their relationship and becomes enraged, and the
powers that be separate the two by force.
It's at this point in the story that the _Titanic_ strikes that
infamous iceberg; and, at this point, both the ship and the film
start sinking rapidly.  For Cameron can't seem to resist letting
the physical drama of the sinking ship drown out the emotional
drama of what is unfolding between Jack and Rose.  There are
some fine moments between the two even in this final hour, and
the entire sequence works pretty well as a simple disaster movie
sequence, but the two types of action don't harmonize especially
well.  Ultimately, and inevitably, the more delicate dynamics of
the love story sink along with the ship.  The balance is restored
during some fine, quiet moments after the ship goes down, but by
then, for me, it was already too late.  The audience I saw the
film with agreed with me, I think; the theater, which had been
largely silent and absorbed in the story for the film's first
two-thirds, started to erupt in giggling at inappropriate moments
and began to offer snide comments to the corpses on the screen.
Cameron's handling of this whole sequence breaks the spell that he,
Winslet, and DiCaprio have managed to cast, and so my attention
wanders, leaving what could be a lyrical moment at the film's end
looking slightly maudlin, even ludicrous.
The film's other serious disappointment comes in the form of its
much-touted special effects.  I know I'm in the minority here, but
I simply have to say that _Titanic_ is not a better film for having
indulged itself with a bloated FX budget.  Any number of computer-
generated effects in this film could have been created less
expensively and more convincingly with other means.  Many of the
effects in this film look, to me, cheesy or downright shoddy (check
out, for example, what passes for a night sky in the North Atlantic;
whether computer-generated or not, it wouldn't convince anyone who
had ever left the confines of Los Angeles).  And even the best effects
don't really have much in the way of visual artistry.  Cameron is a
skilled director of people; he made his reputation with his innovative
and almost subversive use of Arnold Schwarzenegger in _Terminator_,
and throughout his career I've continued to admire the way he's used
all sorts of performers -- whether straight-up, like Ed Harris, or
ironically, like Jamie Lee Curtis.  He's much less impressive when he
doesn't have actors to work with; it's therefore a painful irony that so
much of his reputation rests on his lavish use of effects.
On the other hand, the score that Cameron has chosen is unusually good
for an epic romance -- varied and energetic, without seeming intrusive.
And he does back up his leads with a very passable group of supporting
performers (though Kathy Bates is really not at her best as the
Unsinkable Molly Brown).
_Titanic_, then, is twice the film it should be and only half the film
it wants to be.  It's at least twice as good as any historical disaster
epic has any right to be, with its occasionally powerful performances
and likable story.  But it never quite reaches the majesty of what is
hinted at in the opening sequences -- the haunting images of the ship's
wreckage dissolving seamlessly into the living, breathing decadence of
the early twentieth century.  Those images will stay with me; and, if
I'm unhappy about what Cameron has done here, it's perhaps only
because he has promised so much more than he actually delivers.

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) Modern-day treasure hunter Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton)
hears the story of one survivor from the sinking of the Titanic. When
her story is done, Brock says that even though he's been working on the
Titanic for 3 years, he never got it. Until he heard her story, he never
saw past the wreckage on the bottom of the Atlantic. 
The same might be said of the audience after seeing the movie. Without a
good story, the sinking of the Titanic could have been just another
special effects movie, more interested in the ship itself than on how it
affected lives. Instead, Cameron made the Titanic the BACKGROUND for his
story. 
Titanic is great. The melodramatic love story is the perfect foreground
for the sinking of the largest passenger ship in history. The film is a
technical marvel, and even without the spectacular sinking, the story is
engaging. 
The melodrama involves Jack (Leonardo DiCaprio), a poor boy who wins a
ticket to America on the Titanic in a poker game, and Rose (Kate
Winslet), a young socialite who is traveling to America for her wedding
to Cal. Though Rose doesn't love Cal, she must marry him because she and
her mother are penniless, unbeknownst to the rest of high society. 
Jack falls for Rose as soon as he sees her and is determined to win her
in spite of the class barrier. Rose doesn't even know Jack exists until
he comes along as she contemplates throwing herself into the Atlantic.
Not only does he talk her down from the ledge, but when her handlers
suddenly arrive and assume the worst of Jack, he keeps his mouth shut,
protecting her. 
The two fall deeply in love and talk of how they might escape together
when the ship lands. If this were any other ship, the conflict of two
lovers fighting class barriers would have been interesting enough to
make a movie. Instead, their relationship faces an even bigger conflict
. . . . 
There is a love scene in the movie that, for me, is one of the best in
quite a while. The two lovers don't have sex, or even touch. Rose knows
that Jack is an artist, so she insists that he sketch her in the nude.
Both are just shy enough and just eager enough to make the amorous
tension wonderful. 
DiCaprio is great in the male lead role. Ever since his astonishing
debut in WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE, his presence brings high
expectations. Not all of his films have been great (THE BASKETBALL
DIARIES,for example) but he shines in TITANIC. His character loves life,
and DiCaprio "lets his heart soar," as Cameron aptly put it. 
Kathy Bates was good in a small, sympathetic role: the unsinkable Molly
Brown. In Jack and Rose's story, Molly was a bridge between their social
classes. She had new money but started out poor, so she was interested
in seeing Jack succeed among the upper crust. 
The biggest flaw for me is the inexcusable 2-dimensionality of the
movie's "villain," Cal (Billy Zane). I have already called the story a
melodrama, and in melodramas, the villains are made of evil. But when
Cal had already lost the girl, and a chance for redemption presented
itself, he continued to be a prick. 
The special effects of the launching and the sinking of Titanic are
fascinating. Roger Ebert even called them seamless, but he was wrong.
Some scenes are clearly made of computerized cartoons and composites.
For example, when the ship launches and the camera flys overhead, some
of the figures on deck move very artificially. These effects may be more
elaborately made than ever before, but they are still not seamless. 
No amount of computer animation can yet pass for reality, which is
probably why Cameron chose to build a huge set that could actually sink.
The investment was worthwhile, for if the entire sinking only happened
on a computer, the effect would not have worked. The reality of the wood
and metal and water needed to be felt and seen. (See the last plane
crash in AIR FORCE ONE for a "realistic" cartoon that just isn't real
enough.) 
Because everyone knows the fate of the Titanic, Cameron (who also wrote
the script) included some ironic foreshadowing. There's almost too much
and it distracts in parts. Nevertheless, I found myself rooting for the
lovers to make it in America, in spite of their certain fate. 
And because the previews tell you where the lovers are when the ship
goes down, one would expect a predictable ending. But one doesn't need
surprise to create tension, as Cameron deftly showed. The slow march of
floodwaters, the violent cracking of a doomed ship, and the
unpredictable human response to certain death add to an incredibly
tense, emotionally draining experience. 
In fact, some might say that there is no best "part" of the movie; that
the best thing about it is the entire experience, the spectacle of it
all. The daunting length and melodramatics of the movie ask a lot from
audiences, but that contributes to the sense of TITANIC being more an
event than a movie. Also, the sheer size, not just of the subject
matter, but of the length, the cast and the cost of the film makes it a
once-in-five-years movie.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Alex Fung
TITANIC (Paramount - 1997)
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates,
  Frances Fisher, Gloria Stuart, Bill Paxton
Screenplay by James Cameron
Produced by James Cameron, Jon Landau
Directed by James Cameron
Running time: 194 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Well, it finally made it.  After wreaking havoc with summer film
   release schedules by missing its original release date, after
   overshooting its target and achieving notoriety as the most expensive
   film shoot in history, after bizarre mishaps and calamities during
   production (how often is it that the catering's laced with PCP,
   anyways?), James Cameron's mega-epic TITANIC has finally sailed into
   dock.  While in the months leading up to its release many curmudgeons
   decried its four-plus minute trailer, replete with soapy
   sentimentality and gun battle, I couldn't have disagreed more -- I
   found that the promotional footage splendidly whetted my appetite for
   the film with the promise of grand old-fashioned melodrama of the
   first order amidst a faithful re-creation of one of the most
   spectacular disasters in modern history.
   The first impression the film leaves is a striking one: as is
   typically the case in Mr. Cameron's productions, TITANIC is visual
   eye-candy.  The film's re-creation of the mighty R.M.S. Titanic is a
   stupendous achievement, convincingly colossal and breathtakingly
   majestic.  The sheer magnitude of the ship is immediately conveyed,
   and from the vessel's grimy, hellish, coal-ladened bowels to the
   lavish sets and extravagantly grandiose interiors of the stately
   ballrooms, the net effect is never less than stunning.  From the
   dazzling period costumes right down to minisculars like the woodwork
   and even ashtrays, the film's faithfulness to authenticity is
   impressively persuasive; it's if we're truly back in 1912 on board
   the ship's maiden voyage -- fine praise indeed.  The verisimilitude
   and grandeur of the finely-observed vessel is a marvel of modern-day
   filmmaking.
   No doubt about it -- the ship looks terrific, and the awesome
   duplication is emphasised by repeated matching dissolve shots between
   the sunken rusted carcass of the real-life boat and that of Mr.
   Cameron's cinematic creation, tiny people scurrying about on its
   deck.  Employing this technique, the splendour of his vision is
   dazzling, contrasting the submerged, dead vessel with the shining
   lustre of his Titanic, but soon wears thin after multiple match
   dissolves.
   Of course, as spectacular as his ship may be, it's not enough to
   cinematically resurrect the Titanic simply in order to sink it, and
   Mr. Cameron has consequently grafted a simplistic tale of romantic
   fiction onto the film, focusing upon two young characters:
   devil-may-care drifting artist Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), who
   won his steerage-class ticket back to America in a last-minute poker
   game (a silly but fairly effective plot device), and upper-class Rose
   DeWitt Butaker (Kate Winslet), onboard along with her domineering,
   class-conscious mother (Frances Fisher) and haughty, prosperous
   fiance Cal Hockley (Billy Zane).  As one can expect, the lovely Rose
   feels stifled by her mother's officiousness and is miserable about
   her engagement with the insufferable Cal -- so much so that only
   Jack's unexpected intervention prevents her from diving overboard one
   fateful evening.  The two begin an affair.
   While Mr. Cameron did weave a set of fictional characters for the
   ride on the Titanic, he didn't give them much depth; there's a lot of
   one-note characterization in the film, which is surprising coming
   from him given his impressive track record of creating involving,
   thoughtful characters in genres where it's usually considered an
   afterthought.  In TITANIC, villainous Cal Hockley is a snooty
   aristocrat who's, well, a snooty aristocrat, while our dashing hero
   Jack is hopelessly lovable.  Meanwhile, the film depicts all of the
   third-class passengers as the salt of the earth, while the
   first-class people are impossibly pompous and arrogantly
   class-conscious, except for the irrepressible "unsinkable" Molly
   Brown (Kathy Bates), whom, it is pointed out, is a third-classer at
   heart and in spirit.  Aspects of the Edwardian class struggle
   inundate themselves so fully into the film that by the time
   star-cross'd lovers Jack and Rose reject a dull first-class dinner
   party for a third-class romp in steerage (complete with fiddler), the
   point has already been clearly driven home.
   The characters in the film are essentially tired, cliched archetypes,
   but that's not necessarily detrimental, particularly in this case;
   indeed, such uncomplex characters lend themselves most handily to
   melodrama, where the more sharply-defined the division between good
   and evil, the better.  Let's see: we have the winning, scruffy,
   poor-but-good-hearted young hero with the spirited, beautiful heroine
   at his side; the hissable, sneering rich villain (with the haughty
   accent to boot) -- perfect, right?
   By all rights it should be, and yet the film is lacking that little
   extra push to drive it into full-fledged, unabashed melodrama; it's
   timidly toeing the water rather than plunging right in.  There's an
   intimate scene shared by Jack and Rose on the apex of the bow railing
   where she excitedly gasps, "I'm flying!"; it should be a
   spellbinding, dizzying moment, yet it somehow lacks a sense of
   rapturously wondrous magic that symbolises their passion.  Throughout
   the film, the score by James Horner fails to lend the emotional punch
   it so sorely requires; consider the effectiveness of his score in the
   last big-budget melodrama brought to the screen, LEGENDS OF THE FALL,
   and contrast with his nautical New Age hodgepodge here.
   One can certainly make an arguable case that Mr. DiCaprio and Ms.
   Winslet are the two best actors of their generation -- I can't
   imagine too many filmmakers frowning at the prospect of them in a
   cast list -- and landing them both for the film was a bonafide coup.
   Still, their performances in the film are at times somewhat tentative
   and reserved amidst all of the unblushing romanticism that Mr.
   Cameron's screenplay churns up; the melodrama of the piece is best
   served during the moments where they throw all caution to the wind
   and simply embrace the brazen sentimentality pervasive in the
   dialogue; I couldn't help from mentally coaxing "More ... more ...
   play it bigger!" during scenes where a more naturalistic acting
   stance was adopted.  Obviously, their respective performances remain
   more than serviceable, but I can't help from wondering how much more
   grand the net effect would be had the characters been portrayed as
   larger-than-life.  At one point, Rose gasps "This is where we first
   met!"; there should be an overflowing of emotion, pathos, and
   poignancy at her utterance, but the actual associative sentiment is
   rather hollow.
   The entire 1912 saga is framed by present-day intrigue involving
   Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton, a veteran on Mr. Cameron's films) and what
   appears to be the insufferable team from TWISTER transported
   underwater (when one yahoo quipped, "Oops, somebody left the water
   running," I hoped someone would toss him overboard) in search of an
   invaluable diamond.  The pursuit of Le Coeur de la Mer is a decidedly
   hokey plot device, but at least it brings the refined grace of Gloria
   Stuart, who plays Rose at age 101, and who narrates the flashbacks
   which comprise the bulk of the film.
   Although the film is primarily set over eighty years ago, Mr. Cameron
   takes great pains to ensure that it's not a stodgy period piece.
   There are dubious anachronisms incorporated in the story which
   blatantly serve to cater to present-day audiences: Jack and Rose
   engaged in spitting lessons, and lady Rose issuing The Finger, as
   well as crowdpleasing moments such as throwaway references to Picasso
   and Monet, Jack strutting faux-haughtily in a new tuxedo, and the
   utterance of various seriocomic one-liners.
   It takes a while for the iceberg to finally down the mighty ocean
   liner, but when it does, it's a one-of-a-kind spectacle and a triumph
   of visual effects.  Breathtakingly played out in approximate
   real-time, the cataclysmic death throes of the Titanic are
   astonishingly realistic.  To his credit, Mr. Cameron ensures that the
   logistics of the vessel's demise are clearly handled via the
   presentation of a computer simulation at the beginning of the film,
   removing any uncertainty about the technical manner of the sinking,
   and, if anything, adding a layer of dread to the entire affair.
   While the Titanic's swan song is undoubtedly the showstopping
   centerpiece of the film, the romance of the first half isn't left
   neglected; indeed, despite the fact that the troubles of our heroes
   are dwarfed by the magnitude of the ongoing catastrophe, the film
   resolutely continues to cut back to them.  More than any of the
   previous films which have dealt with the tragedy of the ship, this
   film specifically focuses on a small core of characters, and
   questionably shares equal amounts of screentime with the craft's
   apocalyptic destruction as it does with the fictionalized below-decks
   escape plot, involving handcuffs, blazing pistols, and countless
   shots of corridors flooding with water.  I felt that the balance
   should have been somewhat swayed; the interesting goings-on outside
   involving the boarding of the lifeboats, the barricading of the
   steerage-class, and the rapidly emerging realisation of the
   situation's gravity was far more fascinating.  (Mr. Cameron also
   continues to play out the class card well into the sinking, depicting
   many of the snooty rich people as being mildly irked by the
   inconvenience of being put on alert and even sending their assistants
   for tea.  Those dumb rich people.)
   The most earthshattering moment in the film is when the ship cracks
   apart and plunges perpendicularly into the icy depths of the
   Atlantic.  ("This is it!" shouts one character in a tone which rather
   distractingly belies excited anticipation more than fear.)  As the
   camera cranes up, revealing passengers vainly struggling to hold onto
   something -- anything -- and others sliding down the now-vertical
   deck of the ship, plummeting into the darkness of the churning water
   below, the vision is truly nightmarish.  There are a lot of terrific
   shots during the film's latter half -- a quick glimpse of a group of
   people floundering in the water like thrashing fish is particularly
   memorable -- but there's plentiful usage of easy sympathy devices --
   women clutching crying little children and the like.  In some
   respect, Mr. Cameron's helming of the human effect of the calamity is
   literally Spielberg-esque in its calculating nature.
   The film reaches emotional resonance in the wake of the disaster,
   which finds the two leads hitting their stride and acting their
   hearts out in a stirring scene of remarkable tenderness and
   poignancy.  It's a heartbreaking moment, and a fantastic payoff to
   the romantic angle in the film.
   TITANIC hinges upon the performances of its two leads, who are
   front-and-centre throughout the flick.  Ms. Winslet, sporting an
   excellent American accent here, has had a remarkable film career to
   date; save for her first Hollywood production, she's turned in one
   award-calibre performance after another.  She's good here, although
   she sadly lacks the vivacity which have marked her previous turns.
   (One is left wondering if her alleged unhappiness during the shoot
   drained her zeal.)  Mr. DiCaprio is saddled with a difficult role in
   the film -- a flawless, dreamy caricature; the man of every girl's
   dreams, and the man that every guy would like to be: dashing,
   handsome, adventurous, spirited.  He pulls it off well, but he's at
   his best in the film's dying moments as his character struggles to
   guide Rose to safety, displaying a remarkably steady and calming
   presence that belies his youthful vigour.
   When the concept for the project was being developed, it was pitched
   to the studios as "Romeo & Juliet onboard the Titanic" (and, to that
   ends, how incredibly apt it was that the most recent film incarnation
   of the Montague spawn was eventually cast as the dashing hero, wasn't
   it?).  TITANIC has the latter part down pat; if the former section
   were nearly as assured, we'd really have something.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"There was a six-year-old girl sitting near me, and she piped up 'That's
 Harvey Keitel' within seconds of the film's start.  I want to know what
 that kid's been seeing." - Charles Odell

Author
Kevin Patterson
Titanic  **** (out of four)
PG-13, 1997
Directed and written by James Cameron.
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Bill Paxton.
I must admit that I was more than a little skeptical when I first heard about
"Titanic" and its numerous production delays and its $200 million budget. I
wasn't sure how well the Hollywood Happy Ending Factory would handle a tragedy
like the sinking of the Titanic. The laborious effort that reportedly went
into the film made me think, more than anything, that this was another case of
a studio wasting an enormous amount of time and money trying to make  a
mediocre movie into an epic. In other words, I expected a way-overdone and
probably irritating disaster movie.
Fortunately, I turned out to be wrong on all counts. For one thing,
writer-director James Cameron doesn't flinch from the unpleasant facts of the
story, namely that hundreds were killed in the boat's sinking. More
importantly, he doesn't make the mistake of having all the sympathetic
characters survive so as to dull the audience's emotional reactions. Titanic
is a disaster movie, but it has none of the triteness and cheap thrills
normally associated with that genre because we actually care about the
characters as people rather than as one-dimensional elements of suspense.
Cameron spends most of his time focusing on the story of Jack (Leonardo
DiCaprio), a young, rootless American who wins his ticket on the Titanic's
maiden voyage in a card game, and Rose (Kate Winslet), a wealthy young woman
who is betrothed to the cold-hearted, domineering Cal (Billy Zane). This is
clearly a marriage of financial and social convenience for the two families.
Rose dreads the life that awaits her so much that she is about to throw
herself overboard and die when Jack stumbles upon her and talks her out of it,
and of course we all know what happens next. Yes, the ensuing love story
between the two and the resulting disapproval of Rose's family is predictable,
and yes, it's a bit melodramatic at times, but it still works pretty well and
adds the necessary human element to the story.
The love story and character development occupy roughly the first half of the
film; then comes the infamous collision with the iceberg and the resulting
slow destruction of the ship. Uniting the two halves is a pointed social
commentary about the mentality that led to the Titanic disaster. The decks of
the ship were divided by social class, for example, with the result being that
the crew evacuated the wealthier passengers first. Due to some cold-hearted
publicity snobs' desire to avoid "cluttering up the deck," there were not
enough life boats, and as a result more than half the passengers, all of them
of "lower" social status, were left to drown.
Throughout the film, all of the aristocratic types casually refer to the
Titanic as "unsinkable," as if it were somehow a fact that did not even
deserve to be questioned. Some of the crew seem to share this confidence, and
this seems to be at least part of the reason that the iceberg was not spotted
earlier: no one was watching very closely. Cameron never addresses the issue
of why the ship was thought to be unsinkable, but I think (or at least I hope)
that this is intentional: the real tragedy, as the film rightly points out, is
not so much that a supposedly unsinkable ship ended up sinking, or that the
collision might have been avoided, but that anyone could be so stupid and
arrogant to presume to have constructed an "unsinkable ship" in the first place.
The film runs over three hours long, but it is never tedious or boring, and as
a result I could go on for quite a while about all the different things it
does right. I will, however, limit myself to mentioning a few other elements
which I liked. One is that Cameron creates some truly loathsome characters
among the aristocrats, but he resists the temptation to send them to the sort
of gruesome demise that has become commonplace for movie villains nowadays; he
is content simply to expose them as narrow-minded and selfish. Another is the
sometimes disturbingly funny gallows humor that pops up occasionally without
undermining the fundamentally serious quality of the film ("Great drowning
music!" exclaims a passenger to the ship's band, who, true to popular legend,
do in fact continue playing to the bitter end.) Finally, he frames the story
in a flashback as Rose, now 101 years old, recounts the story of the Titanic
to an underwater explorer (Bill Paxton). Since the story and time period are,
I imagine, completely alien to almost any viewer, the presence of the
modern-day characters helps to ease the audience into the story, but manages
not to take up unnecessary time or distract from the film's focus.
I don't know if "Titanic" is exactly flawless, but it does so many things so
well that any minor missteps (such as the dumb Celine Dion song that played
over the final credits) are excusable. It is certainly the most successful
"epic" film that I have seen recently, and it seems fairly likely from the
recent buzz that Cameron, DiCaprio, and Winslet may be receiving some
well-deserved Oscar nominations pretty soon. The increasingly "bottom
line"-oriented movie industry does not let $200-million epic masterpieces
happen often, so don't miss "Titanic."

Author
Fred M. Hung
I was sitting in a conference room during a late night in December. 
Tired, and not really focused, I asked a colleague what exciting
Christmas movie he was waiting to see.  He answered, "Titanic."  I
immediately smirked.  I likened Titanic-hype to another Ishtar,
Waterworld, and all their runaway budget sisters.  My friend said he
wanted to see what a $200 million movie would look like, especially the
cutting edge effects by Industrial Light and Magic.  Still, I was
hesitant.  Effects alone are not the hallmarks of a superior film.  I
have always been cynical of Hollywood producing superficial,
eye-catching films that are pleasing to look at but lack a real story.
Well, several months later, and a billion dollars later, on a very
boring Sunday night last weekend, I decided to give in examine the
Titanic hysteria for myself.  Everyone and their cousins had seen the
film by then.  Critics were giving kudos to director James Cameron and
female cast Kate Winslet and Gloria Stuart.  Moreover, as people in my
office will tell you, I was driven insane by the radio play of Celine
Dion's "My Heart will Go On."  Still, I was very biased against it. 
After all, I thought, it's still about a giant boat sinking to the
bottom of the ocean, right?
Aside from the enormous budget, the very uncomplicated story line
(nomadic working-class boy meets sophisticated spoiled socialite girl)
is not that original, which probably explains why Titanic was never
nominated for best screenplay.  And like Apollo 13, the audience is
aware of the fate of the ship, and some 1500 of her complement.  Titanic
could have easily been a titanic failure.
The fact that Titanic has been such an amazing success for James Cameron
and his producers should be a resounding vindication for her earlier
detractors.  In addition to breathtaking special effects, the critical
success factors to Titanic can be broken down to a simple but endearing
story, solid performances from both lead and supporting actors, and an
unforgettable soundtrack.  
An ABC critic said it best, "We know that at least one lives to tell the
story, and for the next 3 hours, we're hoping that both survive."  The
romance between DiCaprio and Winslet is doomed from the start. 
Cameron's then has the difficult task of telling a fated tale where the
audience still has to remain optimistic despite all evidence to the
contrary.  Perhaps that is Titanic's greatest achievement.   
DiCaprio, despite a very youthful appearance, manages to deliver a solid
performance but much of Titanic's success must be attributed to Kate
Winslet.  Kate is absolutely stunning, giving a near flawless
performance as an anachronistic turn of the century feminist, refusing
comport to the customs or prejudices of the privileged.  Kate delicately
balances her character with strength and vulnerability.  
DiCaprio and Winslet are supported finely by Kathy Bates, a Southern
commoner whose husband struck riches through oil, and Frances Fisher,
Winslet's elitist mother who wants to secure her place in aristocracy
through Winslet's marriage. 
Last, but certainly not least, Titanic has an amazing score by James
Horner.  Horner has traditionally been inconsistent, composing tepid
tracks in the Star Trek series, to rousing themes in Clear and Present
Danger and Glory.  Here he has mapped the emotions of  Titanic to music,
from a triumphant march in her launch to mournful requiem in her death. 
Batman's Danny Elfman, who is nominated twice in the same category this
year, has already graciously conceded defeat.
There are some lines in Titanic that could be reworked, namely the
horrible "I was like tumbleweed in the wind" and "Don't ever let go!" 
It is difficult to determine whether Titanic is good enough to warrant
the attention she's receiving, but it is good.  The mass appeal of the
film is a direct result of  its ability to evoke the universal themes
love, humanity, and at times courage.  Look for a superbly intellectual
film like Primary Colors to be crushed this weekend by the Titanic
juggernaut.  Also look for Best Picture, Director, Actress, Original
Score, and Song to all go to Titanic, effortlessly.  Cameron has created
a film of epic splendor, if not story.  For his audacity and faith, he
should be commended.

Author
Gary Pollard
Titanic - The Most Expensive Curate's Egg
"Titanic" is, like the famous curate's egg, "good in parts", but uneven
overall.
Firstly, I like the idea of the framing story. I like it because it adds to
the sense of the transitoriness of life. It's rather like seeing someone dig
up the remains of an Egyptian mummy when you have just been seeing a movie
about the love life of the Egyptian. I think the two era plot structure is
one that works well.
Secondly, I do like much about the romance. Class was an important part of
the times. It has been said, and not only by the publicists, that the
sinking of that ship marked the beginning of the end of a certain idea of
society. It's not a bad idea to use a cross class love story to do that. I
also like the idea of her feeling stifled by convention and feeling she
wants to escape. I like the idea that Jack liberates her to lead the life
she wants. All this was POTENTIALLY excellent.
Thirdly, I liked the time machine element of the film. That it places us ON
the boat, with many people whose fates we care about (even though not - for
me - the lovers). Most disaster movies have a big problem in that we don't
get time to learn anything about anybody, or to care about them. It was
fascinating to walk that boat, looking exactly as it did look (there's a
computer game that is also very good for this - the art direction matches
absolutely). Cameron did me a favour in introducing me to the real
historical characters. All that stuff fascinated me.
Fourthly, I loved that James Cameron fell in love with his material and got
obsessive over it. I think that when it came to dealing with the reality
this showed. He did not take too many liberties with it.
Fifth. The scale. The sheer scale of the movie. It took a lot of ambition
and determination to get it done. I admire Cameron for that.
Sixth. The engine room and the furnaces. A glimpse into the hell of the
manual labourer. The movie showed well how one class slaved to make life
pleasant for another. There was a WORLD on that ship. It's a strong metaphor
for an entire society. I'd like to have seen more middle class though.
Seventh. Transitions. Past to present. Life to death. The feeling that we
all love in the face of death, and because of that we should love as fully
and as well as can in whatever time is allotted to us.
Eighth. Tragedy. The film makes us more aware of something that existed in
our consciousness but that had not really been brought home to many of us.
The scenes of the ship going down were disturbing and breathtaking. As they
should have been. We had time to see who was dying and how they died. We had
time to see the bravery and the cowardice. And I, for one, loved the
musicians. Incredible to have had that kind of courage. Not the kind that
gets you publicity or does you any good. Just a devotion to duty. The stern
crashing down on survivors, the boat rowing through the dead. These are
images no-one who has seen them will ever forget. Even an image of crockery
falling off a dresser had power.
Ninth. Aftermath. Even in Ismay's face, as he sits in the boat of survivors,
we know this is a man who is aware he is ruined. There are stories that go
beyond the boundaries of the movie. Everything is not wrapped up, but hints
are there. I liked how she hid from Cal too. Much better than the
conversation in the first draft, although that conversation had made Cal a
bit more sympathetic.
There's more too. When I reviewed this movie I told people they had to go
see it. Maybe it is worth half a dozen Oscars, as before. I have been
telling people they should see it all week.
So, yes there is much to be grateful for. I talk about this movie, because
almost alone of movies I've seen lately it deals with big subjects, and big
ideas. If only it had raised the central story to this level I would have
found it perfect. And there aren't many movies you can say that about.
So much about the film is good, very good, even excellent, that it's a pity
that other things let it down so badly.
When Cameron is dealing with reality, as with the sinking itself, I think
it's terrific. But the problem is that Cameron is a good director but
a bad scriptwriter. Billy Zane's character is a melodramatic pantomime
villain complete with evil henchman. At no point in the movie does he rise
above being a one-dimensional bad guy.
It's this black and white sense of morality,  that , in my view, brings the
movie down. Zane is so vile that the mother might as well sell her daughter
into white slavery as force her to marry him. There'd have been other,
better prospects.
In this movie, poor people are all good. Rich people are all bad, unless
they were poor people originally.
Much about Titanic is great. I think it brings home the event far better
than I'd ever have expected, but if that central love story had been about
real flesh and blood people, with their mixture of good and bad, it would
have been better. It could have been one of the greatest movies ever made,
but in its attempt to pander to today's audience (Kate Winslet giving
someone the finger, as an example) it is less.
Review after review, has noticed clunky dialogue, stupid anachronisms, the
unsuitability of diCaprio, and a willingness to pander to contemporary
audiences. In other words the script is immature and aimed at today's
immaturity of audience attention.
The "defy authority" stuff turns it into Titanic meets Porky's. Of course,
audiences liked "Porky's" too. Fine. More people buy pocket romances than
Tolstoy. It does not make them better.
It was embarrassing in old period movies where people said: "There's that
young Beethoven. He's going to be great some day." It's just as embarrassing
when Cameron does similar things with Picasso and Freud. It's a plain
stupidity to put Picasso's "Les Demoiselles D'Avignon" on the ship. Unless
he's trying to suggest the girl was stupid enough to buy a forgery.
James Cameron almost had a great work of art on his hands. He did not. He is
a clumsy scriptwriter. The movie would NOT have been made worse had the
characters been more credible. It would have been better. It was set  in
Edwardian times. That does not mean the script has to be Edwardian
melodrama. In fact "The Age of Innocence" or any Austen adaptation can see
more complexity in their characters.
There are things in this movie that are great, yet at the end of the movie I
cared more about the Captain than the lovers. Almost every character based
on a real person was better drawn than the fictional ones.
Why did we have to sit through clunky lines like Bill Paxton's "I never got
it before. I get it now"? Or "A woman's heart is a deep ocean of secrets"?
If the film is already good, what would Cameron have lost by making it
better? And a good script collaborator with less of a tin ear and more of a
sense of period would have helped.
This film deserves several Oscars. But not best script. The cheapest thing
to fix, in all that budget, would have been the script.

Author
Jason Wallis
"Titanic": the two hundred million plus sink-or-swim epic with a boring,
tired, overwrought romance for a storyline. Doesn't sound too promising,
does it? I didn't think so either; I thought it was going to be just
another big-budget bomb in the vein of "Waterworld" or "Speed 2: Cruise
Control". It looked as though the film would sink faster than the ship.
That is, until I read some of the rave reviews this has been getting by the
public and critics alike. So I decided today to see what all the fuss was
about. 
Well, I definently found out. James Cameron's epic love story has got to be
one of the most brilliantly crafted, beautifully filmed and wonderfully
executed movies I have ever seen. And even with all the hype, the drawn-out
story (I mean, honestly, how long can you really watch a romance involving
Leonardo DiCaprio?) and long running time, Cameron has pulled it off. 
At about three hours and fifteen minutes, this is by far the longest flick
I've ever seen at a theater. Usually after about the two-and-a-half hour
mark, you tend to get a little ancy and your ass starts to hurt, but not
here. Oh, no. As soap operay (?) as the love theme may seem, it somehow
manages to completely hold your attention for the full running time. And,
as all truly great films do, it leaves you wanting more. 
Just one of several things that makes the movie so worthwhile is that is
works on many levels, a quality often missing from many modern films. On
the surface, you have the best disaster pic of all time. You also have a
wonderful romance that is the first truly moving pure love story since
"Frankie and Johnny". A little deeper still, you have an excellent example
of the class systems; the difference between the way the rich are treated
and how the less fortunate are. "Titanic" is definently brilliant
filmmaking at it's best. 
The plot revolves around (of course) the sailing of the Titanic, the ship
that was so callously refered to as "unsinkable". But far more intricate to
the story is the relationship between Jack Dawson (Leonardo, in the best
performance of his career thus far), a wandering drifter who won aticket
aboard the Titanic in a poker game. He has barely anything in the world but
is a pretty jolly guy anyway. On the other side of the coin, you've got
Rose (Kate Winslet - shwing!), a poor little rich girl type who has it all;
money, servants, a fiancee, everything. Except happiness. 
Fed up with her miserable existence, Rose contemplates throwing herself off
the ship. Jack saves her and the two instantly fall in love. Only she
doesn't quite know it yet, so she takes some convincing. It doesn't help,
either, that her jerk fiancee (Billy Zane, who deserves more credit for his
performance in this film than he has gotten) is onboard, as is her snobby
mother who needless to say does not take an instant liking to Jack's
advances. 
So the two start a heated love affair and in the middle of it all, the ship
goes down. And that's basically all there is to the plot. But it is the
attention to detail that Cameron puts into the picture that makes that film
so worthwhile. Not to mention the actors, who put so much charisma into
their characters that they help us feel like we are actually on that ship;
that we are not merely watching a movie. They are just as important as the
set pieces (which are amazing enough by themselves. 
"Titanic" is a great film, to be sure, but it is also something more. It is
a piece of art that hits you at just the right places and at just the right
times that it makes you actually become extremely emotionally involved in
it's characters. They hardly ever make movies like this anymore. 
And one other thing. This movie should not be missed in a theater. Because
of the beauty of the cinematography and the sets, you really should see
this on the big screen. Several times, too. It's that great a film. 
Even at it's mild pace (until the last hour, that is), "Titanic" is one of
the rare flicks that carry you away to another place and another time. It's
quite an experience. And though I am of the opinion that the absolute best
film to come out of 1997 was Kevin Smith's beyond-brilliant "Chasing Amy",
I just know that the Academy is too stupid and old-fashioned to get a movie
like that any nominations, let alone Best Picture. So this is the one that
I will be rooting for come Oscar time. In short, see this movie at all
costs. 
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Christopher Null
     So here I am, newly engaged, and the subject of honeymoons comes up.  I
hate the sun, and I don't like flying, so naturally, I say: Cruise!  How about
Alaska?  This is the best idea we've come up with so far... and then we go to
see TITANIC.
     Well, I can't think of anything that would change my mind faster than the
sight of 1500 ice-covered dead bodies, bobbing up and down in the ocean, after
the sinking of a luxury liner.  Let's jump right on the boat, huh?
     And maybe that speaks to the power of the film.  When the ship is
launched on its maiden voyage, you can feel the splendor in the theater.  When
it bangs against the iceberg and starts to sink, you can feel the death in the
air.  When all that's left is ocean and darkness, you shiver in your seat with
the dying.
     The point I'm getting at is that this is a movie about *atmosphere*.  The
Titanic itself is the star--the only star--and the only reason to leave your
house.  Leonardo DiCaprio as a third-class drifter?  Forget it.  Kate Winslet,
one of my favorite actresses around, as a first-class dreamer who falls for
the lug?  She's fine, but sounds like she belongs in the Valley.  Billy Zane
as her betrothed?  Puh-leeze.  These parts could have been played by anybody
and then forgotten.  The movie would remain the same.
     Don't even think about waiting for video or cable with this film.  You'll
hate it.  I also think it's safe to say you can arrive 90 minutes late and
still see the good stuff (the rest is Cameron's sappy love story that is both
exceedingly phony and wholly unoriginal, not to mention the scenes from "the
present.")  Then again, lots of sobs in the audience attest that the film is
both an effects extravaganza *and* a chick flick (and a dessert topping, I guess).
     Whatever it's pigeon-holed as, you're going to love the movie, even if it
is 3 1/2 hours long.  But I've rambled too much.  I've got a honeymoon to plan.
Director: James Cameron
Producer: James Cameron, Jon Landau
Writer: James Cameron
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, Bill Paxton
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Michael Redman
TITANIC DEFINATELY NOT A DISASTER FILM
People tend to drift through their lives living their parent's dreams until
they experience a major personal crisis, connect with an inspiring mentor or
become so filled with desperation that they are moved to change their path.
Rarely do all three happen at once. Even more rarely do they happen as
dramatically as they do to Rose Calvert on the Titanic.
Director James Cameron ("Aliens", both "Terminator"s), in the biggest gamble
of his career, has come out on top again. At $200 million, "Titanic" is the
most expensive film ever made and you can bet that both Cameron and the studio
were holding their collective breath when the movie opened. Now they can
inhale again: it's a winner.
The tale begins in present time as a salvage crew is searching the wreckage
miles beneath the ocean surface looking for the legendary 56 karat Heart Of
The Ocean blue diamond. They attract the attention of 101 year-old survivor
Rose (Gloria Stuart) who flies out to their ship. Most of the film is a
flashback as she tells her story.
The 17 year-old Rose (Kate Winslet) boards the ill-fated "unsinkable" vessel
with her fabulously wealthy fiancee Cal Hockley (Billy Zane) and their
entourage on their way to America for her fate as a member of the moneyed
crowd. Before he died, her father lost the family money and her mother has
effectively sold her into slavery to Hockley to maintain their status. It
doesn't take long to discover that he is an overbearing controlling rich boy
insistent on getting his own way. Her future looks filled with cash but no joy.
Several decks, below in steerage, is the penniless artist Jack Dawkins
(Leonardo DiCaprio), a drifter who won his ticket in a poker game minutes
before the ship sat sail. Late that night Jack charms Rose away from the edge
where she is going to kill herself rather than face her life. 
After a stuffy party on the upper level that Jack attends as a reward for
rescuing Rose, he takes her to an all-out blast below where the Irish
immigrants are partying up a storm. The die is cast: she can see where the
passion is. Later as he is sketching her nude wearing the diamond, the sexual
tension drips off the screen.
Wisely Cameron has chosen to make Jack and Rose the focus of the film. As
magnificent as the re-creation of the Titanic and her sinking are, they are
the back-drop to the real story. Unlike other disaster films where the effects
are the star, here we have two human beings.
By all accounts, the depiction of the events is remarkably historically
accurate. Although the main characters are fictional, the account is right on
target. The ship looks so real that you would swear that you are there
witnessing the early morning of April 15, 1912. Some of the underwater footage
of the wreck are authentic. The film crew spent a few weeks diving with a
specially designed camera. Cameron built a 775 foot replica of the Titanic,
accurate even down to the carpet from the manufacturers of the original. And
then he sank it.
The sinking itself will delight fans of action films. The hundreds of
computer-generated shots pay off and couldn't look more real. (Oddly enough,
the only scenes that seem artificial are the too-smooth long shots of the ship
underway before the disaster.) The movie brings home the deaths of 1500 people
out of 2200 aboard. The overwhelming spectacle as the behemoth goes under is
breath-taking. Yet in the forefront of it all are Jack and Rose.
There are horrific situations aboard, mostly because of the ship's management.
Only half as many lifeboats exist as are needed because they wanted to avoid a
cluttered look. As the ship goes down, the poorer passengers are locked down
below until the affluent board the boats.
An hour after the Titanic disappears beneath the water, the crew of the
lifeboats (some of which are only half-filled) finally attempt to rescue
survivors. The image of the boats rowing through a sea of frozen corpses
bobbing in their lifejackets is one that will stay with you a long time. The
catastrophe is made real, no longer just a historical event.
The only major problem I have with the film is the physical appearance of the
two leads. Both are supposedly in their late teens, but Rose could pass for 30
and Jack looks almost pre-teen. DiCaprio's youthful allure works against him.
He looks a bit too unruffled for his role. Luckily the film is long (well over
three hours) enough that the flaw disappears as the you become involved with
the couple.
To nit-pick, it is beyond me why the filmmakers would show one of the world's
most recognizable paintings (Picasso's "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon") as being
on the ship. It was obviously not and the appearance jars the audience out of
the movie momentarily.
There are rumors of an over-five-hour version to be released on laser disc.
This is one of the very few films that I would be willing to spend an entire
afternoon with and I can't think of much higher praise.
The tears at the end of the film are almost unavoidable. Several scenes are
guaranteed to bring feelings to the front. My daughter walked into the
restroom afterwards and the place was filled with sobbing women. Especially
effective is the panning of photos of incidents in her life that the elderly
Rose keeps with her when she travels. Her life has been full because of Jack.
Rose's encounter with Jack changed her as have events in our all of our lives.
The emotions that the audience feels are there because everyone can identify
with lost loves and many carry those wounds with them forever. Some thrive and
others sink and, as on the Titanic, the band plays on.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years and wishes everyone
a joyous holidaze. Redman@bvoice.com will get the electrons to him.)
[This appeared in the 12/24 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana. Michael
Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 195 minutes (3 hours 15 minutes!)
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet and Billy Zane
Written & Directed By James Cameron
Titanic is so close to being the perfect movie it's upsetting that it
isn't. The film, which cost $200 million+ to make and could of put
20th Century Fox into a lot of finicial trouble if it 'sunk' (pun
intended) is a labour of love for Cameron, who wrote and directed
the film. We all know that big budget dosen't mean great film (see
Waterworld (1995)) but Titanic is far superior to Kevin
Costners waterlogged epic. But sadly, Titanic just misses the
mark of masterpiece (although it is one of Cameron's best films)
The film starts with present day explorers searching the runied
Titanic. They find a safe, and inside a picture of a woman. The
woman in the picture (an old Winslet) tells the explorers that the
picture is of her. The explorers invite her over, and she then tells
her story of Titanic. In the flashback, DiCaprio plays poor boy
Jack Dawson, who, after winning a poker game, wins two tickets
to board the grand ship Titanic, leaving Liverpool to go to
America. Also boarding the ship is rich woman Rose DeWitt
Bukater (Winslet) who is being forced into a marriage with a man
she dosen't love at all, Cal Hockley (Zane) so her family can
remain rich. She nearly commits suicide on the ship, but Jack
comes to the rescue, saves Rose, they fall in love, and Cal gets
jealous and eventually tries to kill them. Oh yeah, and the ship
sinks.
And that is the main problem with the film, and which stops it from
being a work of genius. The story and script (both by Cameron)
are both weak. The story is full of cliched characters, (the creepy
man who the nice girl has to marry, the poor boy with heart, the
stuck-up mother) and poor dialogue (the script consists of lots of
in-jokes of how the boat won't sink, and most of the dialogue is
pretty basic) It's a shame really, as the audience does have to sit
through 3 hours of this film. Without good dialogue, a film could
become a very long, very boring film (like Camerons own
Terminator 2, 1992) But, luckily, there are some redeeming
features that make the story and dialogue problems just disappear.
Firstly, there's Cameron's direction. There are some great
sweeping shots of the Titanic, and some clever fades between the
flashback Titanic and the ruined Titanic. But the scenes Cameron
directs especially well are the disaster scenes at the end. There is a
lot of mayhem and panic, all done very well by Cameron. It's a
scary sight, watching bodies fall from great heights into the watery
depths below. Thanks to Cameron's direction, then, the audiences
attention is held for the full 3 hours 15 minutes.
To support the directing are the excellent cast, working very well
with their underwritten characters. DiCaprio is good, although he
only looks 16-17 years old. His performance of a over excitiable,
yet also well mannered boy is excellent, and he also has some
funny lines. Winslet is great also, and her transistion from a well
mannered rich girl to a rebelous young adult is pretty smooth. Zane
is deliciously evil as Cal, saying every line with a sneer and a flicker
of the eye lash. The audience really does come to hate him. He
may be playing the same character he plays in every film he's in
(like Dead Calm, 1988) but he does it really, really well. Also
worthy of note is Kathy Bates (Edward Scissorhands, 1990) as
a loud mouthed American. 
Finally, the icing on the 'great things' cake are the special effects.
Cameron is a whiz with effects (just watch Aliens (1988),
Terminator 2 and True Lies, 1994) and they are used very well
throughout. The sweeps of the ships are awesome, although Digital
Domain, who did the effects, cannot animate human movement too
well. The humans seem to move to 'smoothly', there's just
something odd about them. You can tell that they have been
animated on a computer. Of course, the ship sinking scenes are
awesome, with bodies flying all over the place, and the scene
where the ship splits in half has to be seen to be believed. Titanic
is one of the only films where effects have reinforced the film. 
Titanic, then, is a wonder of directing, acting and CGI, but not
writing and story. Again, like most of Camerons films, the editing is
loose (Cameron edits himself), and the film could of come in under
three hours with a few more cuts. Titanic, then, although not the
Godfather of movies it could of been, is a wonderful attempt at
creating a work of genius. Enjoyable, scary, and even sad, Titanic
is a film cinema was invented for, filling the screen with incredible
images, and assaulting the ears with awesome sound. A superb
film, but sadly not perfect.
OVERALL RATING= ****1/2 out of ***** (4 1/2 out of 5)

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 25 December 1997 with Tony for $8.75 + 1.50 Teleticket at the
Loews Astor in Times Square.
In ancient Rome, big spectacles kept people entertained. Sometimes, they
even recreated great naval battles, like the one at Actium, sinking a ship
if necessary. An artificial lake would be made, and a mock battle would
ensue, ships sinking, etc., all to the delight of the crowd.
*Titanic* is the most expensive movie made to date--more than $200
million. Director James Cameron has been captivated by the worst maritime
disaster in history. He built a replica of the ship 90 percent to scale.
He waived his own fees to get it made.  It endured audience testing and
re-editing after a stalled Summer 1997 release. I saw many previews and
anxiously awaiting my chance to see it.
So why did James Cameron raise the most dramatic story of the sea, only to
weight it down and sink its true potential with a teen romance,
action/adventure moves, and misrepresentation of what happened?
But before I go into all that, here's what's great about the movie. As
spectacles go, *Titanic* delivers one that is first class. The lush
opulence of the Titanic is recreated in great detail. The special effects
are absolutely stunning. Watching the great boat sink is something you
won't soon forget. From the moment the boat hits the iceberg to the the
time the lifeboats go back to find survivors and drift through the
bobbing, lifejacketed, frozen corpses or the "Unsinkable's" passengers,
you will be absolutely amazed at this recreation. Also, the scenes of the
ship enjoying its maiden voyage on the open sea is a real treat also,
because you get a good sense of how mammoth the Titanic was, and why it
was called the "Ship of Dreams."
The movie, however, revolves around the fictional love story of
first-class passenger Rose DeWitt Bukater and steerage vagabond Jack
Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a world-traveler who has never shaved. Rose is
engaged to wealthy American snob Cal Hockley (Billy Zane, in too much
make-up) so she and her mother Ruth (Frances Fisher) can stay in the life
to which they are accustomed.
The Titanic's real passengers, the collision with the iceberg, the
sinking, and the aftermath are all much more compelling, and better
covered in a wonderful three-hour documentary on A&E cable TV. Also,
Titanic has several inaccuracies, like when the ship splits in half. Of
course, who wants to spend $10.25 to *not* see the ship split in half
above the waterline? In reality, it happened below the water's surface. No
one knew the ship split in two until the 1980s, when the sunken vessel was
finally found.
Because the audience testing clearly indicated that teenagers are the
target audience, the love story becomes paramount, and none of us are
spared the sort of action-adventure we are used to seeing from Cameron in
movies like *Terminator 2*. It is very hard to believe that the two young
class-crossed lovers would have as much energy as they do, what with
running through flooded passageways, breaking down gates, fleeing the
scorned fiance, etc., escaping *every* conceivable peril. In fact, it is
unlikely that these two passengers, one first class the other steerage,
would ever have met; class-conscious British boats like this kept people
firmly in their place. 
Also amusing and improbable is the framing device of the story being told
in flashback by a 101-year-old Rose (Gloria Stuart) to Brock Lovett (Bill
Paxton) and his crew, who have located the submerged wreck and have found
her through a sketch Jack had made of her and a gigantic diamond, a sketch
retrieved via robotic arm in a safe her old stateroom from the ocean
floor. Real footage of the ship on the ocean floor is used, and the
computerized dissolves from the embarnacled ship's railing to the brand
new ones on the maiden voyage are very well done. 
Many opportunities are missed to capture the real dramas that unfolded. It
also seems as if some key scenes wound up on the editing room floor. For
example, we see an old couple on a bed together as their room fills with
water, but we never really saw them before. Undoubtedly these are the
famous Strauses (owners of Macy's); the wife refusing to get on a lifeboat
when she had the chance, to stay with her husband of 40+ years of
marriage. Also, there is no sort of epilogue, no text telling us how the
disaster resulted in international laws ensuring lifeboat space for all
aboard ocean vessels; nothing of the inquiry into the disaster, nothing of
the press sensation and how the media pilloried the White Star Line's
executive, Bruce Ismay in print.  Ismay exhorted the captain to make
headlines by pushing the engines to the limit; instead, the ship hit the
iceberg with no chance of avoiding it.  Apparently, it was going too fast,
and the lookouts had no binoculars, and there was no time to turn the ship
in time.
So, for all the money it cost to make this film, it ends up being a *Jerry
Maguire* at sea, with romance for the ladies and action for the guys and
little or nothing to do with the White Star Line's push to get noticed in
the press or with the many preventable disasters that befell the ship. 
As for the performances, the most spirited one, for as much as we get to
see her is Kathy Bates as the down-to-earth American millionnaire--the
"unsinkable" Molly Brown. The principal actors of the love triangle do
what they are supposed to do, but I was not really moved by them. The best
performance in Titanic is the ship itself, and it is so well done, you
won't be disappointed.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There are really two approaches to making a film about the sinking
of the Titanic, and both were tried in the 1950s.  The 1953 film
TITANIC had passenger Clifton Webb reacting to discovering that his son
was illegitimate.  Impending death as the ship sinks changes his
attitude for the better.  On the other hand, the 1958 film A NIGHT TO
REMEMBER is a dramatization of passengers' accounts of the sinking of
the great ship.  They had some false ideas about the sinking, but for
the most part they were trying to accurately portray events that
happened that night.  The 1953 TITANIC is a pleasant old film and fun
to watch; A NIGHT TO REMEMBER is a cinema classic.  As one might
imagine, there were a large number of very dramatic stories going on at
the same time when the Titanic sank.  It just is not necessary to
invent a fictional story to take place at the same time, and it is an
irritating distraction from what most of the audience considers the
real story they paid to see.  The 1997 TITANIC, written and directed by
James Cameron, is about a very one-sided love triangle set on the
Titanic.  At 194 minutes, the film also has time for some detail about
the sinking including some that has never been filmed before.  But
overall it has less historic detail than the much shorter and lower-
budgeted A NIGHT TO REMEMBER.  That is in part because James Cameron
takes almost two hours of screen time to get the Titanic to the iceberg
and even after it does hit, he still cannot bring himself to believe
that the audience is more interested in the sinking ship than in his
banal love story.
     Visually, the 1997 TITANIC is by far the best version, but for
historical detail, I think the real enthusiasts about the sinking will
probably prefer the 1958 telling.  Cameron seems to accept this by
borrowing many scenes almost intact.  Some of these may be from
historic accounts, but the similarities go beyond the content of the
borrowed scenes.  The incidents are simply re-filmed using the same
style.
     The film begins with some intrepid young explorers, led by Brock
Lovett (played by Bill Paxton dragging along memories of his too
similar role in TWISTER), exploring the recently found sunken hull of
the RMS Titanic and in particular looking for a (fictional) diamond
that supposedly went down with the great ship. They do not find the
diamond itself, but they do find a drawing of a nude woman wearing the
diamond. When the drawing is shown on television, a woman calls the
team to say that not only can she identify the picture, she is the
woman.  (Hey, would you believe the elderly woman is Gloria Stuart, who
played opposite Melvyn Douglas and Boris Karloff in OLD DARK HOUSE and
opposite Claude Rains in THE INVISIBLE MAN?)
     As the old woman tells the explorers her story, we drift back to
the sailing of the Titanic.  Rose DeWitt Buketer (Kate Winslet) is from
a family of old money and new debt.  Her mother has arranged a marriage
between her and Cal Hockley (Billy Zane, played as quite possibly the
most obnoxious American man then alive).  This part is extremely over-
written, with Hockley making judgments that Pablo Picasso will never
amount to anything in the art world and that lifeboats are a waste of
space on the unsinkable Titanic. Having to watch him on the screen for
a few hours is painful; a lifetime with him would have to be worse than
death.  At least that is what Rose decides and is ready to cast herself
into the cold ocean when Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a young
artist from the lower classes and the lower decks, steps forward and
convinces her to live.  Of course he is everything that Cal is not,
including poor, unfortunately.  But of course the two fall madly in
love.  And of course the angry and spoiled Cal plots revenge.  Even
after the Titanic strikes an iceberg--sorry, was that supposed to have
a spoiler warning?--the film still concerns itself too much with this
love triangle and not enough with the sinking ship.  Earlier we have
seen parts of the ship behaving perfectly.  We should revisit the
engine room and its machinery with grasshopper-like legs kicking fly-
wheels and see what flooding is doing to it.  One wants to return to
the radio room and see what is happening there as the operator
desperately tries to find help.  Instead we follow a fictional Cal
hatching nefarious plots at Jack's expense.  It is class warfare at its
most obvious.  This is one time when truth would be a lot more
interesting than fiction.
     Frightfully underutilized is Kathy Bates as the unsinkable and
likably straightforward Molly Brown.  Also misused is David Warner as
Cal's one-dimensional thug and bodyguard.  And why bother casting Eric
Braeden/Hans Gudegast as John Jacob Astor if you do not intend to use
him?
     What we do see of the ship's problems, and in so long a film that
is still quite a bit, is enough to make this the most visually
impressive rendition of the sinking, at least in other ways.  We might
expect that from a film produced by both Paramount and Fox, costing
$200,000,000--making it the most expensive American film ever, perhaps
beaten only by the Russian version of WAR AND PEACE.  (The original
ship itself cost about $7,500,000, incidentally.)  Camera shots flying
us the length of the ship are jaw-droppers even if they do have the
feel of digital images.  Seeing dramatized the contortions of the ship
as it breaks up is new to cinema and pretty scary.
     TITANIC does make the mistake that every version of the sinking
makes, something that could be called "angular continuity."  Until it
breaks up at the very end, the Titanic was a rigid ship.  This means
that if one stateroom is tipped at a 27-degree angle, at the same
instant of time every room, every deck, every walkway is also tipped at
a 27-degree angle.  During the sinking every scene should show a room
tipped at just a bit more of an angle than the previous scene.  No film
version has ever paid close enough attention to angular continuity.  It
means, for one thing, that before shooting one has to know exactly the
order of the shots and that order cannot be rearranged in the editing
(well, perhaps only minimally).  The angle of tipping varies wildly
from scene to scene.  A room will be shown tipped at a high angle, but
in the next scene dishes will fall off shelves that should have fallen
considerably earlier.
     TITANIC is a lot of movie for the same priced ticket as anything
else at the multiplex.  This is a big film with a lot to like as well
as a lot to not.  For this budget and with digital technology the story
could have been told with supreme accuracy and been a much more
compelling film at the same time.  Overall I give it a 6 on the 0 to 10
scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
After all of the rumors, the negative press, the calamity on the set
and the endlessly upward-spiraling budget, the executive nail-biting
and the snip-and-fret editing, James Cameron's TITANIC is nothing
short of a total success. It does not enhance Cameron's reputation to
the status of a Kurosawa -- which I don't discount, it just hasn't
happened here -- but he's certainly on the level of a D.W. Griffith.
It's the fastest-moving three hours you're likely to spend in a movie
theater, and some of the best.
Why this project? I asked myself that -- at first with dismay, and
then with mounting anticipation -- when Cameron first announced his
intentions to go down there and film the hulk of the ship itself. Now
I have a theory: Cameron's TERMINATOR movies were, in a way, about a
gigantic paradigm shift. the sinking of Titanic was the beginning of
the end of an era, the era of total social stability, of man's
certainty of his domination over nature. Now we are a little more
cautious, if no less ambitious; just more aware that we can be smashed
down quite easily when we're not looking in the right direction. But
neither Skynet nor Titanic are themselves to blame -- they're just the
agents of man's shortsightedness writ large. (There are various
apocalyptic overtones which I'll save for another essay.)
But if the movie's wrapper is Titanic's hulk at the bottom of the
Atlantic, the core is a buoyant love story which unfolds during the
course of Titanic's one voyage partway across the ocean. And to make
the whole thing work, Cameron made some fairly hard storytelling and
directorial decisions early on. He could have opted for a more
"Altmanesque" approach, in which a whole congeries of lives
intertwined and wove through each other on that day, but he shirked
that device in favor of a fistful of tightly colliding
characters. Everyone wants something from everyone else, and they are
going to have a hell of a time getting it: your basic ingredients for
good drama.
Winslet's character, both in the past and future, is a solid addition
to the roster of Cameron heroines: a stubborn woman with a mind, who's
often despised by the men around her. When she first begins to speak
of the ship, Cameron very wisely holds back on showing us exactly what
she's talking about. "The sheets had never been slept in," she says;
"the china never eaten from. The paint was still fresh." Her words in
our minds evoke images by themselves -- and then Cameron takes over
and shows us what images her words are evoking in the minds of the
salvage crew. This is just a tiny example of the movie's directorial
genius.
The characters themselves are Damon Runyan stock figures, but again,
they're ennobled and made interesting through a unique marriage of
writing, acting and direction. They're interesting to watch, just to
see what happens next. Jack Dawson (Leonardo Di Caprio) is a young
roustabout who wins a ticket onboard in a poker match, and Kate
Winslet plays the younger Rose as an upper-class beauty who is never
less than uncomfortable in a whalebone corset. Billy Zane is greasy
and hateful as her husband-to-be (his love for her seems to be an
unholy cocktail of equal parts sadism, masochism, and desperation),
and the supporting players (especially the proverbial Titanic deck
band) fill out the story's hollow corners and give the movie the
feeling of an ongoing slice of life.
Both floating and sinking, we are never less than convinced that
Titanic is there, on screen, in front of us. The movie earns such a
total suspension of disbelief from the audience that we feel we could
walk around the ship in our minds after leaving the theater. There's a
requisite amount of repetitiveness in the final hour of the movie --
the ship is sinking, sinking, *still* sinking, etc. -- but all of that
is underscored with the terrible tensions of the main
characters. We've come to give a damn about them; they make the hoary
cliche of the sinking ship into something new.
There is no end of wonderful moments: The part where Jack shows Rose
how to spit -- and how to fly. The scene in the car in steerage. The
elderly couple on the bed.  The aforementioned deck band, playing
until the bitter end. And the incredible sight of that ship snapping
in half like a stepped-on twig.
It's hard to speak modestly of a movie like TITANIC, which has ungodly
huge ambitions. It wants to entertain; it wants to be romantic and
moving; it wants to thrill. It does all of those magnificently. Not
only that, but it was definitely all worth waiting this long for.
