Title
Review for One That Got Away, The (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
It was sporting of Rank studios to film this true story, which shows
Germans in a sympathetic - even heroic - light, only a dozen years
after WWII had ended.  It also makes for an interesting exercise in
the power of cinema.  Despite bitter postwar feelings it must have
been hard for Allied audiences not to root for the `enemy' POW trying
to escape back to his homeland.  And how many British films of that
time would have gambled with a German actor as its leading man?  As it
happened, this was a star turn for Hardy Kruger, who gives a
charismatic performance as Lt Franz von Werra, a Luftwaffe pilot
forced down over Kent and then shipped to a POW camp in the Lake
District.  His tenacious escape attempts throughout the remainder of
the film make for compelling viewing.  He tries so hard that you'll
really want him to succeed, especially by the end (in a sequence I
find quite surreal) when he is half-frozen and can't seem to manage
another step.
Picture succeeds because of two reasons: the humanization of
individual struggle negates the political ordinance of war; and
regardless of race, color, or creed, we always like to see someone
beat the odds.  For those of us who have seen many an escape story
featuring Allied heroes it comes as a breath of fresh air to see a
story told from the other side.  Film also shows us the reason for the
lack of such stories - how exactly do you escape from an island
nation?  But Werra has several plans.  His initial breakout is
absurdly simple - he runs when the guards' backs are turned - but his
efforts to remain free become increasingly audacious: he may be
fulfilling a desire or responsibility to live up to his flamboyant
(but largely fabricated) public image.  Film stays on its toes the
whole time.  I especially enjoy the way civilians are obliging, a
little bemused, and polite whenever they encounter Kruger's character
- I wonder if director Roy Ward Baker took some perverse pleasure in
showing easygoing Britishers being duped by Werra's confident
fast-talking and dashes for freedom.  This is the one subgenre of war
movies that makes it okay for us to view the antics of the characters
as if they were schoolboys larking about and dodging the headmaster:
the one type that doesn't demand we concentrate on the tragic elements
of war.  It acts, of course, as `escapism'.  Werra's escape is indeed
epic in scale - in reality he traveled nearly half a planet to make
his way home (the film stops about halfway through).  The fascinating
footnote contains enough material for another whole story.  
