Title
Review for Little Princess, The (1939)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Little Princess" was Shirley Temple's first
technicolor production, and was her last successful
film as a child actress.  It is probably her
best film, edging "Wee Willie Winkie" for the
honor.  The enduring quality of the story is
evident by a recent version, "A Little Princess"
from 1995, which is even better than this 1939
version.
"The Little Princess" is based on the novel by
Frances Hodgson Burnett.  Set in Victorian
England during the Boer war, Temple is placed
in a luxurious girl's boarding school by her
doting father (Ian Hunter), who is to serve in
the war.  Temple, aided by her charm and father's
wealth, soon becomes the most popular girl in
the school, earning the enmity of classmate
Marcia Mae Jones.  Temple aids a romance between
implausibly idealized teachers Richard Greene and
Anita Louise.
But after her father is reported killed, and
his wealth confiscated, Temple can no longer pay
for her schooling.  Harsh headmistress Mary Nash
turns Temple into a servant, and her only friends
are an Indian servant neighbor (Cesar Romero),
comic relief and dance partner Arthur Treacher,
and fellow servant Sybil Jason.
Although the film clocks in at only 91 minutes,
there is room for three short Temple dance
numbers.  Temple's character is a supposedly a
British-born girl raised in India, but in fact
she is again playing herself.  Which she does
well: Temple has a winning positive attitude,
and she is eager to please.  Unlike most child
actors, she is completely natural in front of
the camera.  It can be argued that Temple was
the most successful of all child actors, although
Ron Howard and Macauley Caulkin had their day.
Temple was credited with saving Twentieth Century
Fox from bankruptcy, although the studio dumped
her after "The Blue Bird" laid an egg.
Romero's ingratiating Indian servant lacks the
magical powers of his counterpart in the 1995
film.  But Romero still gives a fine performance,
as he did in the 1937 Shirley Temple vehicle
"Wee Willie Winkie."  Romero is probably best
known today for playing the Joker character
in the 1960s Batman TV series.
Even Temple's best films are not taken seriously
today, probably because their target audience
was little girls (of all ages), rather than men.
Still, "The Little Princess" is better than most
if not all of the James Bond films, demonstrating
that warmth and charm compete well with dramatic
tension and action.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
