Title
Review for Amos & Andrew (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Pimmel
Starring Nicolas Cage, Samuel L. Jackson, Dabney Coleman
Rated PG-13 for language, adult humor
     Andrew Sterling (Samuel L. Jackson) is mistaken for a burglar in
his own home and is shot at by the police.  Upon discovery of the
truth, Sheriff Tolliver (Dabney Coleman) brings in Amos O'Dell
(Nicholas Cage) for spin control, putting him up as an armed assailant
who really did the shooting.  Of course, all good plans go astray.
     This film seems to suffer from confusion about what it is trying
to accomplish.  It drifts between slap stick, dark comedy and social
satire.  The end result is that it doesn't seem to get anywhere.  There
are some real funny bits and also some real interesting serious parts,
but in the end I was left wondering what was the point.
     Nicholas Cage is one of my favorite performers because he seems to
always pick likable losers to play.  Here he steps into the same role
again and brings very little new to it.  He seems to be going through
the motions more than giving it his all.  Jackson is much the same
way.  Coleman provides some of the best parts of the film while
simultaneously providing some of the most unoriginal and uninspired
work of the film.  Don't get me wrong there are some very interesting
parts to the film.
     Now that I've said what is wrong I would like to mention some of
what is right about the film.  The parts dealing with social satire
work very well.  At its core this is a film about a supposedly liberal
white community not wanting to integrate.  The scenes involving the
stuffed shirt local couple were my favorite in the film.  Here the film
is a success.  The slap stick humor doesn't work nearly as well, being
on one occasion, painfully uninteresting.  But the social satire is
dead on target.
     In summary, while the film is very uneven, at certain points it
hits very strong highs.  Unfortunately the pendulum swings both ways
and there is an equal number of things that don't work or are
uninteresting.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Andrew (Samuel L. Jackson) is a black Pulitzer Prize-winning
author/activist (with a personality loosely based on Spike Lee) who has
just moved into a house in a wealthy, predominantly-white neighborhood.
When a couple of nosy neighbors (Michael Learner, Margaret Colin)
believe him to be a burglar, they call the police.  Led by an inept
chief (Dabney Coleman), the cops proceed to trap and nearly kill Andrew
in his own house.  For damage control, the chief calls in Amos (Nicolas
Cage) from the town jail.  The deal: if Amos pretends to hold Andrew
hostage (thus making it look like all of Andrew's problems were caused
by Amos, not the police), he can go free.
     There's a lot to talk about regarding AMOS AND ANDREW.  The film
contains social commentary, stereotype role reversals, satire of a
number of American "institutions," and an almost-manic performance by
Nick Cage.  However, over and above all, this is a very funny movie.
Unlike most comedies, it is consistently amusing, except perhaps in the
concluding ten-to-fifteen minutes, when it runs out of gas.
     First-time director Max Frye shows that he can tell a story with
pictures as well as with words.  His debut, working with his own script,
is impressive.  The veteran screenwriter previously penned the
early-eighties film SOMETHING WILD, which had much of the same unbridled
action and craziness present in AMOS AND ANDREW.  While Frye is no
Jonathan Demme (director of SOMETHING WILD), he knows what will work on
screen.
     A film of this sort, which bases some of its humor on racist
attitudes and stereotypes, could easily have been offensive.  It isn't,
because Frye turns all of these elements upside down.  Racists like
Phil, Judy, and the police chief are shown to be complete idiots (not
since Joe Pesci's character in HOME ALONE has there been a bigger clod
than Coleman's officer).  Also, going against the Hollywood grain, it's
Cage who plays the down-on-his-luck poor guy with all the zany
one-liners, and Jackson who's the smart, wealthy, educated,
straight-as-an-arrow citizen.
     AMOS AND ANDREW makes fun of all sides.  The police are portrayed
as bumbling idiots and there are a few scenes involving them that could
have been extracted from a Monty Python movie.  Also receiving a
satirical roasting are the Al Sharpton-type activist/preachers.  Now,
admittedly, these two groups are not difficult to poke fun at, but they
are not Frye's only targets, and what he does with them, he does well.
     Amidst all of the lunacy and well-timed physical humor, AMOS AND
ANDREW still has an opportunity to get across its simple social message
about the perceptions of the Black Man by too much of White America.
The movie certainly doesn't hammer the audience over the head with the
point, but you would have to be terminally dimwitted to miss it.  The
jokes, puns, and satire of AMOS AND ANDREW are effective because they
underline, rather than undermine, that premise.
     The greatest problem with AMOS AND ANDREW is a fault that numerous
other movies are guilty of: a poor ending.  With about ten to fifteen
minutes left, the film starts to fray at the edges.  It probably should
have ended earlier, because the last few scenes are no longer funny, and
are something of a let-down following the upbeat energy that
characterized the rest of the picture.
     There is a brief and rather insignificant post-credit scene for
those who enjoy looking out for such things.  As director/writer Frye
puts it, "One more yuck for your buck."  This last scene was among the
least amusing of the movie's jokes, however, and not worth staying to
watch if that's your sole reason for sitting through the credits.
     So, while AMOS AND ANDREW may not be a master of traditional movie
strengths, it presents a couple of characters the audience can grow to
like in a number of utterly outrageous situations.  The film gets its
laughs at the expense of a lot of different groups and people, but never
in a manner that trivializes the issues it represents.  Equally as
important, the jokes, most of which are funny, keep coming.  This is one
of the most genuinely funny pictures to come along in a while.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
