Title
Review for Schreckliche Mädchen, Das (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE NASTY GIRL is a German film by Michael Verhoeven and stars Lena
Stolz in the title role.  The story concerns a young woman in a small
town in Bavaria who begins to research the town's history during the
Third Reich.  When she encounters roadblocks and hatred, she digs in and
eventually uncovers the whole, buried past.
     Stolz is a wonder, fresh, impish, wise, knowing, innocent, and
very, very beautiful.  Her performance makes me impatient to see her
again very soon.  She is supported by a large cast of character-type
actors; I particular commend the man who plays her husband and the woman
who plays her grandmother.
     I was interested in the story and the characters, but I was also
intrigued by the mix of styles used to make the film.  It is alternately
and sometimes simultaneously a conventional movie, a TV-style
documentary, and a stage play.  The mix is smooth and seamless, although
at times it appears arbitrary and without any dramatic justification.
Still when you see the title character on camera with a mike narrating
her own dramatic actions or when a court scene is presided over by a
fat, coughing, blue statue of blind justice, I am charmed by the
audacity of the film-making and challenged in ways that I seldom am by a
movie.
     I hope you get to see this movie.  What it has to say is both comic
and important and the way it says it is intriguing and successful.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE NASTY GIRL (DAS SCHRECKLICHE MAEDCHEN) (1990) got an Academy
Award nomination for best foreign film that year.  The film is a most
unusual German comedy about a young woman doing an historic essay about
her village.  It is based on a true story and is a fictionalized
account told in quasi-documentary style.  The woman, Lena Stolze, who
plays the lead of Sonja is simply marvelous; she is wide-eyed,
innocent, and as persistent as they come.
     As the story unfolds, Sonja tells of her fairly idyllic childhood.
The innovative cinematography by Axel De Roche has the present done in
bright primary colors and the flashbacks all in black and white.  The
sets are interesting in that some of the backgrounds are fake backdrops
like you might see used in a play.  Sonja is brought up in a strict
Catholic school where both of her parents teach and where her mother
has to stop teaching when she is pregnant lest one of the children ask
questions about how she got that way.  The school, although religious,
is highly corrupt and the kids whose parents donated the most get shown
the questions to all of the quizzes in advance.
     One day, the German President announces an essay contest with
"Democracy in Europe" as the theme.  Sonja wins first prize in all of
Germany.  She is a hero in her little town, and the local doctor tells
her, "If I'd known you'd be famous, I would have preserved your
appendix in alcohol."
     When the President announces the essay contest for the next year,
everyone tells Sonja she must enter and win again.  This time the theme
is "My Hometown during the Third Reich."  Everyone assumes Sonja will
write a sweet little fluff piece about them, but when she starts
digging into records, they all put up barriers in her way and she can
find out nothing.  It seems the only Nazi supporter in the whole town
was ex-mayor Zumtobel who is now conveniently dead and buried.
Everyone else claims to have spoken up against the Nazis, were freedom
fighters, etc.  When she begins to question their credibility, they get
angry and turn on her.
     Rather than doing this as some pedantic and morose work, great
writer and director Michael Verhoeven instead does it as a funny,
albeit sometimes serious, comedy.  The lies people invent to cover up
their cover up are hilarious.  In a sentence, the film works.
     Well, the townsfolk's stonewalling forces her to blow the deadline
on the essay, but this is not the end.  She goes to college and decides
to write a book on the subject.  She views her quest simply and tells
reporters, "You have to know where things come from to know where they
are going."  After many twists and turns, the way the story is wrapped
up is quite imaginative.
     THE NASTY GIRL is a fast paced movie running only 1:32.  The film
is in German with easy to follow English subtitles.  It is rated PG-13
for a little violence, a single bad word, and no sex or nudity.  The
show would be fine for any kid old enough to be interested which I
guess would be around 9 or 10.  I liked the film, and if you like
bizarre little comedies that take risks, I think you may like it too.
I give the film ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
When Anja Rosmus researched her hometown's past during the Nazi era she
was subjected to all kinds of harassment and death threats, the least
of which was being referred to as "that terrible girl". . . or as
translated for the film's title, "that nasty girl."
Based on her story of her research and the town's reaction we are
treated to a most wonderful film which despite its very serious subject
contains much humor.  Lena Stolze does a great job as Anja growing from
a teenager early in the film to a mother of 2 children.
It starts with Anna's teen years in a Catholic school, her winning a
national essay contest and her decision to enter another essay contest
picking as her subject, in all innocence, the people of her home town
during the Nazi period.
When she begins the research she is surprised to find that she is being
thwarted in her every attempt to read the town's, the library's and the
church's archives of that period.  As she digs into whatever
information she can gather she discovers that many of the present day
respectable citizens behaved despicably to the Jews, confiscating their
property, accusing them of crimes and allowing them to be sent to
concentration camps.   Although one never hears any talk of that
period,  Anja discovers that the town even had its own concentration
camp.
Very much in a documentary fashion but with a very effective twist, the
film's characters will frequently turn to the audience and explain what
is happening and the circumstances surrounding their actions.   That
all of this is done with a light touch to make its point is
attributable to the talents of its director.  And the point of the film
is to show that 50 years later there is still much hidden in the hearts
of many Germans, and that among many of the young, Hitler is still an
idol.
Masterfully directed by Michael Verhoeven

Author
Myra VanInwegen
     This is one of the best movies I've seen - as good as (just to name
a few of my semi-recent picks) CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS or Imamura's
BLACK RAIN.  It is the only movie I have ever seen that has a heroine
whom I would very much like to be, or to try to imitate.
     Basic plot (no spoilers, unless you think any plot description is a
spoiler):
     This movie tells the story of Sonya, a girl whose intelligence and
willfulness make her hard to control.  However, despite the title of the
movie, she is a very nice girl, a good girl, who excels in her classes
and is the pride of the town.  That is, as long as the town's definition
of "good" matches her own.
     This movie is really two films in one.  The first part is
wonderfully light and funny, recounting the mishaps of a girl growing up
in a Catholic family in a small town in Bavaria.  The other part begins
as she starts doing research for an essay on "My Hometown During the
Third Reich."  The film rapidly grows serious, and the humor of the
first half is replaced by frustration, hatred, and even danger as the
film progresses.
     Technical notes (you might want to skip this if you want to be
surprised by the structure of the film):
     The film is told as sort of a flashback, with the present-day Sonya
narrating.  Color, or the lack of it, is used to show time periods here.
Black-and-white is used for Sonya's childhood, color for the present,
and, in one brief sequence, sepia for "way back when."  If I remember
right, the film turns from b&w (the past) to color (the present) about
when the Third Reich essay is announced, that is, when the film changes
mood from funny to serious.  This marks the transition from childhood to
adulthood for Sonya.
     The sets used when Sonya is dealing with the "establishment" - the
locals who continually try to thwart her - use a minimum of furniture (a
desk, a chair) with a painting or slide behind to suggest the rest of
room in which the action takes place.  Perhaps this suggests the
illusions on which these people have based their power.
