Title
Review for Indian Summer (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Seth Bookey
(1997, released in the UK as Indian Summer)
Seen on 27 July 1997 with Tony for $8 at the Quad Cinema.
Indian summer can be defined as either an unexpected warm period in the
early Fall, or the last stage of someone life "usually regarded as
tranquil and serene." The latter is not quite true if you're dealing with
AIDS and its fallout.
The movie opens with Tonio (Jason Flemyng), a dancer, literally jumping up
and kicking a wall, and eventually falling flat on his back. This is an
apt visual metaphor sets the tone. Tonio and his fellow dancers have spent
a lot of time at the hospital, visiting loved ones and friends who have
died there of AIDS. The other problem looming is Tonio's future visit to
this hospital, as he is HIV+ himself. As he turns down his doctor's
suggestion of AZT (film is set in 1995), "My lover died last year, and my
best friend is sick right now, I haven't had time to worry about the
third." (She doesn't get the quip.) He would rather throw himself into
dancing. 
After his teacher and best friend, Ramon (Anthony Higgins), dies, the head
of troupe considers calling it quits, but not before performing one last
piece, "Indian Summer," with Tonio as the lead.  At Ramon's funeral, Tonio
literally runs into Jack (Anthony Sher), who is HIV- and was Ramon's HIV
counselor. They later meet at a disco where Tonio, surrounded by gorgeous
flirtatious young men, and he runs into Jack again. He forgot meeting
Jack, who is stocky and older;  Tonio is pretty bitchy to him until Jack
reminds him where they met. Then, he is very interested. The film then
enters the "unlikely romance" phase. 
An outpouring of HIV-related angst, and life angst, ensues. Will Jack be
around when Tonio is dying? Would Tonio even consider being with Jack if
he was not HIV+? Are they a couple? How come Tonio is so calm while Jack
is drinking to forget all the trauma he gets to hear as an AIDS counselor
in the age of defunding. The demented, aging choreographer, Luna (Dorothy
Tutin), comments that she forgets, remembers, and then forgets what she
remembered. She tells Tonio he'll be lucky not to suffer old age.
Pondering one's mortality abounds.
A lot of breast beating goes on. Luckily, it is balanced with a lot of
humor and a lot of heart. At one point the audience laughed so hard that
two whole minutes of dialogue were drowned out. A full spectrum of
gay-related issues is covered. A rather nice scene between Tonio and
Duncan (Phillip Voss) shows how far gay liberation has come, allowing the
younger generation to be themselves. In Duncan's day, he showed a "public
life" by marrying Luna and pursued his true feelings surreptitiously. 
Luckily, life is not all that difficult if you make the most of your
opportunities. This is one of the reasons Jack pursues the "unlikely
romance" with Tonio. He hears people complain of what they might have
done, and he decides plunge ahead and be insecure later.
Alive and Kicking is thought-provoking and funny, with characters that
ring true. It can even sustain two climaxes. It makes optimism look
possible, and not just a serving suggestion. There is a lot of uncertainly
at any age; you might as well enjoy yourself along the way in spite of it.
P.S.: Made by British television's Channel Four. Why are the better gay
films coming from England?  Why can't we do better than Kiss Me Guido?
More reviews by Seth Bookey are at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com
