Title
Review for Hu Du Men (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Hong Kong, 1996
Running Length: 1:38
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/2/97 & 5/4/97
Cast: Josephine Siao Fong-fong, Anita Yuen, Daniel Chan, Chung King-fai,
      David Wu, Waise Lee
Director: Shu Kei
Producer: Ko Chi-sum Productions
Screenplay: Raymond To Kwok-wai from his play
Cinematography: Bill wong Chung-piu
In Cantonese with subtitles
     Who says soap operas can't be fun?  Shu Kei's fifth feature, STAGE
DOOR, has all the elements of a sudsy melodrama, but with one key
difference:  the film's lightly comic rhythm dares us to do anything but
smile our way through the story.  STAGE DOOR makes some telling points
about sexual and national identity without ever abandoning its disarming
tone in favor of the soapbox. 
     The film centers around the actors comprising the Shining Sword
Troupe, a group of performers who put on nightly shows of Cantonese
Opera.  The lead actress, Sum (Josephine Siao Fong-fong), who has played
male roles in operas and martial arts productions for decades, is
preparing to emigrate to Australia with her husband and step-daughter. 
As Sum's final performance approaches, minor dramas swirl around her. 
Her husband fears that his daughter may be a lesbian.  One of her co-
stars is in love with her.  Certain members of the troupe are on the
verge of rebelling against the director's attempts to modernize their
work.  Sum's pretty, young protege shows signs of emotional and physical
abuse.  And a figure from the past arrives in time to make Sum question
her decision to leave Hong Kong.
     Currently, Hong Kong is undergoing an identity crisis as the reigns
of power are transferred from England to China.  By having Sum and her
family wrestle with the decision to move to Australia and start a new
life, Shu addresses the matter in an oblique, nonthreatening way.  He
also touches on issues of gender and female empowerment.  Despite
continually playing a man, Shu is very much a woman.  She is also the
most independent-minded individual in the film, yet is willing to
sacrifice her successful career for the good of her loved ones.
     STAGE DOOR is exuberant and entertaining -- a comedy that creates
believable characters and allows us to laugh with them, not at them. 
The lead performance, by legendary Hong Kong actress Josephine Siao
Fong-fong, is masterful.  She crafts Sum into the kind of character that
it's worth spending some time with, and the film crackles with energy
whenever she's on screen.  STAGE DOOR radiates warmth and joy, but
there's a measure of substance to go along with the confection, and
that's what makes this a rewarding motion picture experience.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Pedro Sena
Gosh, this film is about so many things at the same time that it is a wonder
that it comes around to an end, that is satisfying and helps define the film
is important and valuable.  If this sounds like too much, then the film is
full of stuff that is very enjoyable and truly nuts ... and one could hardly
expect for more in a film.
Story.... let's see, where do we start. It has to do with a Cantonese Opera
singer that has become a star. But for her to get there she has needed to
get various bits and pieces of help for her to be able to do her work. And
she plays men's roles in the opera.
In the middle of it all we find out that she has had to let go a child,
which her sister has raised, so she could concentrate on the stage. The
title is a word in Cantonese Opera that refers to the invisible line that
actors cross between real life and acting. And this film makes sure that it
does not mix the two for a moment, but towards the end, it is obvious to us,
not the opera's audience, that this line has been crossed, although it is
crossed in a nice way, rather than one that hurts a performance, or hurts
the personal life that each character has.
In between are the craziest of actors and people speaking at the same time,
and always on an edge.
We really do not find out very much about the characters, except the lead
one, and the past. Like there are hints that the real father of the child
that she has is actually an actor in the troupe who is now gay. And on top
of it all, the family situation at home is getting desperate.. the husband
is losing his business and the daughter is becoming very gay. For the
character of Lang Kim-sum this is not a problem, since she has been around
this stuff for years. But for her husband, this is a terrible
predicament.... until it all crumbles in the end for him, when he finally
becomes a nice man.
The really nice thing about this film is that it is hard and harsh and
heavy, but it is also a lot of fun. Lang Kim-sum has her share of problems,
but she always manages well ( with great expression a la J. Maguire ) to
sidestep the problem and come up with a solution. And if this mess is not
enough, the suitor to the girl that is being forced into her troupe happens
to be her son, which she can not tell him, or admit to anyone else. Only her
sister, who brought the boy up knows it.
Well, if you are into fun films that are crazy, really do not wish to be
saying very much on its own, then this film is for you. The film speaks
bundles, but it is all in the undertones, and in the style with which it is
handled. We know there are problems, but somehow things work out and "the
show goes on". This film follows that saying truthfully, and magnificently.
Excellent performance by Josephine Siao, as the lead, in what is really a
very difficult role to balance out without being melodramatic or trying to
be funny. She manages it excellently well.

Author
Lisa-Marie Tan
Directed by: Shu Kei
Cast: Josephine Siao Fong-Fong, Anita Yuen Wing-yee, Chung
King-fai, David Wu Tai-wai, Waise Lee Chi-hung, Daniel Chan Hiu-tung
Literal Meaning: Entrance from the Platform Side
Cantonese: Futomoon
Mandarin: Hudumen
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
Run Time: Approximately 110 minutes
HU DU MEN is one of those shows which does not attract the critical
attention it deserves just because it is not a blatantly art-house
movie, directed by a fascinating artistic and political 5th generation
mainland Chinese director. No, rather, it is produced by and within
commercial mainstream, Hong Kong cinema. Nevertheless, this is a
thematically-satisfying effort which touches, subtly, on issues as 
limited
stardom, family obligations, personal priorities--all outlined against 
the
backdrop of theatrical developments in Cantonese Opera.
(This art form, by the way, is a form of street/popular opera only
superficially related to the highly-stylized Beijing opera seen in
FAREWELL TO MY CONCUBINE).
Director Shu Kei attempts some Brechtian alienation effects (after all,
didn't Brecht himself borrow his ideas from Chinese opera?) by inserting
semi-documentary explanations and stuff like the concept of "Hu Du Men"
itself, or at the end of the movie when the philosophies of  Josephine 
Siao's
character are summed up in similar playcard-like subtitles.
If you're looking for a simple, threading theme to explain this movie,
then it's probably about *dislocations* -- the dislocation/ 
disorientation
as Siao nears her unwilling retirement at the height of her career; the
dislocation of emotions when the son which she had chosen to give long
before re-appears--in the guise of her protegee's (Anita Yuen's) suitor.
The dislocation of her own voice and responsibilities in her family
(she is the stepmother to her husband's daughter, who has her own
alternative sexual preferences)...
The greatness of this movie must be in its subtlety in treatment of
subjects. Amidst the more recognizable, repressed turbulences in
Siao's life is the modernisation of the traditional art form of opera.
David Wu plays an un-enthusiastic (but still cute!) theatre-studies
type whose idealism aims to effect radical changes to the staging
practices of Cantonese Opera. It is precisely the story-telling
lyricism of Director that enables the juxtaposition between cultural
and personal change to be dramatized so effectively and subtly.
Director Shu Kei and Josephine Siao more than save the movie
from the hands of bland performances of Anita Yuen and
others. Watch this if you want to see what Fong Sai Yul's has been up to
ever since those Kung Fu days.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

