Title
Review for Zero Effect (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Zero Effect gets its title from the main character, Daryl Zero (Bill
Pullman), although we don't understand what it truly means until the
very last line of dialogue in the film.  Zero is a private investigator,
perhaps the best private investigator who ever lived (at least he'd like
to think so).  However, he's a socially inept being, and eccentric in
every possible way -- this fact certainly makes his talents as a private
eye even more bewildering than they already are.
Zero's accomplice is Steve Arlo (Ben Stiller), a "normal" guy who does
the business side of the job -- he's the one who actually speaks to
clients and explains Zero's greatness as an investigator.  The opening
scene has Steve explaining the many virtues of Zero's talents to
soon-to-be client Gregory Stark (Ryan O'Neal).  It turns out that Stark
has lost a key to a safe deposit box, and is now being blackmailed for
something that he apparently knows nothing about.
Zero takes the case, and the plot thickens.  His path leads to a young,
pretty paramedic named Gloria Sullivan (Kim Dickens).  Despite her
luminous and seemingly-harmless presence, she turns out to be the one
blackmailing Stark.  Through his investigations, Zero learns why, but
not without developing feelings for Gloria -- feelings that, because of
his reclusive behavior, are new and confusing to him.
I have no particular affinity towards the mystery genre of film.  I can
idly enjoy movies about private investigators, and, every once in a
while, a film like Chinatown comes a long that blows me away (actually,
no private eye film has ever reached Chinatown's greatness).  Zero
Effect, which is Jake Kasdan's first effort as writer/director, is a
film about a private investigator that succeeds in all attempts:  it's
an original, funny, and completely involving motion picture.  With so
many cliches available to this genre, I find it amazing that Kasdan
avoided all of them.  But he didn't just successfully avoid flaws:  he
has created a great film here, one that had me interested and fascinated
from the first shot to the final moment.
Take, for starters, the great cast of characters.  Pullman is terrific
as Zero, showing a comic flair that I really haven't seen from him since
Spaceballs.  Zero is the kind of guy who seems at ease switching
personalities so frequently as he does here; the fact that he's an
almost exaggeratedly twisted, emotionally unstable man outside of his
profession is not at all difficult to believe.  Pullman's performance is
much more layered than it might seem at first glance, and the occasional
voice-over as he's going through the motions of his job are insightful
and often hilarious.
Ben Stiller is also a very funny individual; he's the kind of comedian
who makes normal lines sound funny.  "I'll shoot you," he says to Stark
at one point.  "I have a gun, and everything."  His character is also
well-drawn, with an interesting subplot involving his girlfriend (Angela
Featherstone) who is not happy with the extensive amounts of time he
must spend away from her due to the unpredictability of his job.  O'Neal
also gives his character a bit of depth; and Kim Dickens, last seen (and
underused) in Mercury Rising, gets a chance to show us her talent here,
giving Gloria the realism this kind of character really needs.
I find Zero Effect to be an immensely funny and witty film.  Kasdan's
humor is of the best kind -- soft spoken, and mostly dialogue-driven
(though there are some great visual jokes).  It's the kind of humor
that's funny even after you've seen it five or six times.  There's one
scene in which Zero talks about how detached he is, an how that makes
him such a great detective.  What we see during this narration are
various shots of him sitting on a bed, or standing motionlessly, with
his hair destroyed and an utterly blank look painted on his unshaven
face, his eyes pointing to something off camera, but obviously to
nothing in particular.  I can't convey to you how funny this is, but
what makes it great film making is that it has a point -- scenes like
this are frequent, and they provide solid characterization of Zero.
As a side note, I don't consider myself an average viewer when it comes
to comedy (not to sound elitist) -- I find things funny that many do
not, and vice versa.  There was a clump of people near me in the theater
laughing uproariously through this film, and the rest of the theater was
relatively silent through most of it.  I have a feeling the humor here
won't appeal to everyone, but there's certainly enough story and
character development to keep anyone's interest.  
Jake Kasdan, son of writer/director Lawrence Kasdan, is only 22 years
old.  I found this out after seeing the film, and I can't remember ever
being so impressed with a film maker.  His direction is stylish without
being pretentious, and his writing is mature, full, and developed.  Zero
Effect is the kind of film that I'll buy for my collection -- smart,
original films like this are rare as it is, but this one actually has a
heart and a soul.  At the end of the film, I was involved in the
characters, and I was satisfied with the outcome.  And, with Kasdan's
undeniable talent at such a young age, all I can do is hope to see a lot
more from him in the future.

Author
James Berardinelli
     ZERO EFFECT is a perfect example of how the medium in which a story 
is told can affect one's opinion of it.  As a made-for-TV movie/series 
pilot, ZERO EFFECT would hold a great deal of promise:  it introduces 
offbeat characters like Daryl Zero (Bill Pullman) and Steve Arlo (Ben 
Stiller), who, over time, might become viewer favorites.  And the 
premise -- a modern-day Sherlock Holmes -- while not tremendously 
original, has at least as much promise as COLUMBO.  But there's a 
problem:  ZERO EFFECT is not intended as the forerunner of a weekly 
television program; it's designed as a theatrical motion picture, and, 
in that category, it turns out to be disappointingly ordinary.
     Just in case there's any confusion, let me state at the outset that 
there's no doubt that writer/director Jake Kasdan (son of Lawrence) 
intended this to be an homage to (that sounds so much nicer than "rip 
off of") Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's famous fictitious detective.  Zero 
shares several key characteristics with Holmes:  both are loners by 
nature who avoid emotional entanglements and base their seemingly-
miraculous deductions on objectivity and observation.  The relationship 
between Zero and Arlo isn't unlike that of Holmes and his faithful 
assistant, Watson.  And Kasdan has lifted elements from Doyle's "A 
Scandal in Bohemia."  In that story, Holmes meets Irene Adler, the 
female who will forever be known to him as "the woman."  In ZERO EFFECT, 
the protagonist meets Gloria Sullivan (Kim Dickens), who will forever be 
known to him as "the woman."
     That said, ZERO EFFECT isn't a direct re-writing of "A Scandal in 
Bohemia" -- the details are different.  For a mystery, the plot is 
suitably convoluted, and there are a few surprise twists (most of which 
can be guessed by a seasoned fan of the genre -- the script is 
competent, but not excessively clever).  The basic premise has Zero 
pulled out of his reclusive existence to investigate the blackmail of a 
prominent businessman (Ryan O'Neal).  Of course, he isn't told the 
entire truth and it's up to him to uncover the hidden facts.  In the 
process, Zero, who is brilliant at his work but inept at interpersonal 
interaction, finds himself fascinated by a woman, Gloria, whom he meets 
at a gym.  But is she involved in the case, or just an innocent 
bystander?
     Lately, actor Bill Pullman has been making a conscious attempt to 
change his "Mr. Nice Guy" image -- a personae that was solidified by his 
portrayal of the too-good-to-be-true President in INDEPENDENCE DAY.  
Since then, Pullman has played a couple of sleazy characters in bizarre 
movies (LOST HIGHWAY and THE END OF VIOLENCE).  Now, he adds Zero, a man 
who can be "tactless, inept and rude," to his resume.  It's a role that 
Pullman pulls off with aplomb.  Ben Stiller is adequate (although no 
more) as the put-upon Arlo.  Not surprisingly, some of the funniest 
moments of the film involve Stiller, but the actor and his character 
all-but-vanish after the film's first half-hour.  The casting flaw is 
Kim Dickens, who fails to imbue Gloria with much life or passion.  Worse 
still, her interaction with Zero doesn't generate more than a few fitful 
sparks.  As essayed by Dickens, this woman hardly seems like the type 
who would interfere with the world's greatest private investigator's 
practice of the "fine art of detachment."
     For its first thirty minutes, ZERO EFFECT is actually quite 
enjoyable -- it's funny, off-beat, and fresh.  The script has some 
moments of near brilliance (consider the security measures Arlo has to 
go through to gain entrance to his boss' abode), and, for a while, ZERO 
EFFECT looks like it could be headed in the direction of a satire.  
However, time proves this not to be the case and, as the plot moves more 
into the arena of the traditional mystery, the proceedings drift into an 
auto-pilot mode with generic story elements and predictable plot twists.  
Ultimately, the film seems like it's about fifteen minutes too long, and 
there are enough scenes that don't work that it's not hard to pick out 
candidates for deletion.  Kasdan maintains a light tone throughout, 
which is fortunate, since it prevents the movie from sinking into 
ponderousness.  ZERO EFFECT is a mixed bag, and it's sure to look a lot 
better when it eventually reaches HBO than it does playing on the big 
screen at the local multiplex.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Kevin W. Welch
The thriller is one of Hollywood's go-to genres and has been ever
since Hitchcock and film noir. The thriller has it all--action,
violence, a little sex and desperate characters who provide the
occasion for a medition on the evil that men and women do. The
thriller can be formulaic, of course, but the genre has a lot of
life in it, as Fargo and A Simple Plan show.
Zero Effect is not a thriller.  Instead, it belongs to a related
genre that you don't see that much of these days, the detective
story. It's short on atmosphere and action but very, very long on
quirky characters and elegent puzzle plotting. It's not L.A.
Confidential or The Usual Suspects by any means. Rather, it's a
well- constructed mystery in the literary tradition of Sue
Grafton or Donald Westlake.
Actually, the literary source for Zero Effect is Rex Stout. Daryl
Zero is the greatest private investigator in the world. Honestly.
He's also a paranoid lunatic without any social skills at all,
who spends all his time in his heavily secured apartment solving
mysteries from his desk and writing terrible love songs. He lives
on Tab and tuna fish eaten straight from the can, and behaves
rudely whenever he does have occasion to meet people. He only
goes out in heavy disguise. He's Nero Wolfe without the orchids
and the gourmet cooking and the clas and the general good taste.
(Zero even rhymes with Nero).
Steve Arlo is Zero's long suffering Archie Goodwin. He's a former
lawyer who hates working for Zero--his extreme quirkiness is just
too wearing--but apparently he finds the money good. Besides, he
feels needed in some deep way. Unfortunately, his fiance wants to
feel needed, too.
Zero and Arlo are hired by a Portland businessman named Gregory
Stark. Stark is being blackmailed by someone who gives him
incredibly baroque instructions for each money drop. Stark feels
strongly that has something to do with a lockbox key that he lost
a year earlier. What's in the lock box he refuses to say. The
ever-observant Zero knows something smells here.
Zero actually identifies the blackmailer early on--it's not
giving much away to say that is is a young woman named Gloria
whom he met at Stark's health club. Zero has a number of axioms,
though, one of which is that any moron can figure out who or what
or when but you need research to figure out why, and research
means following the passion, which Zero does for the rest of the
movie. He solves the key puzzle. Stark gets desparate. Arlo tries
to get out of the life. Zero falls in love with Gloria. By the
end, everything falls into place as a twenty-five year old family
mystery is solved. It's almost worthy of Ross MacDonald.
Bill Pullman plays Zero not as a figure of fun but as a human
being of surpassing skill and terriblle flaws. It's one thing to
say that Zero is the greatest P.I. alive, but it's another thing
to show that he is. The script uses tricks as old as Arthur Conan
Doyle to show Zero's omnicompetence, and Pullman pulls it off
perfectly. At the same time, he makes it plausible that the Super
Detective is also a sad little emotional cripple.  Ben Stiller is
the conflicted yuppie Arlo, aware that Zero needs him but equally
aware that he has to leave Zero if he's going to have any life
for himself. Ryan O'Neal give a weak performance as Stark. He's
not really evil, he's just a rich person who thinks he can get
away with things because he has a lot of money. Kim Dickens
brings intensity to the role of Gloria. She's had a rough life,
as we find out, and she is very serious about what she is doing.
Zero Effect is aware of the mystery genre and shows this by
gently spoofing some of the conventions of the detective story.
It pays tribute to the genre by constructing an elaborate plot
that has no holes, where everything is wrapped up at the end, and
where there are plenty of surprises, even if you've been watching
closely. You should watch the movie carefully, because everything
is significant; the well-written script uses every detail to
convincing effect. Zero Effect is short on action and menace, but
the plot and some of the well-drawn characters make up for that.
This is definitely a movie that any fan of well-written literary
mysteries ought to see.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
ZERO EFFECT (director: Jake Kasdan; cast: Bill Pullman(Daryl Zero), Ben
Stiller (Steve Arlo), Kim Dickens (Gloria Sullivan), Ryan O'Neal
(Gregory Stark), Angela Featherstone (Jess), 1998)
An offbeat look at how a somewhat reclusive genius and socially inept
private eye (Pullman), as he goes about solving a very odd case,
involving blackmail and a missing key to a safety box. Stiller is the
loyal underling to Zero (Pullman), around mostly for the comic effect,
but, who is unfortunately not given more time on screen to do his thing,
who meets the client, the wealthy businessman, Stark (Ryan), and
explains to him how eccentric and fantastic his boss is, and how his
boss will not meet him under any circumstance. Like Sherlock Holmes's
dictum: "observation and deduction, and no emotional entanglements,"
Pullman follows in the same footsteps as the great master detective, and
like Sherlock, needs his loyal worker as a security blanket.
By a chance encounter in the gym, where he is stealthily observing
Stark, he meets a paramedic, Gloria (Kim), who becomes the only woman he
will ever know intimately (just like Sherlock), and again, like
Sherlock, his romantic interest is not followed through, as his work
becomes his only reason for living.
The trail to this bizarre case begins to get hot as he gets to know
Gloria and she turns the tables on him and starts to observe him. From
there, he uses his powers of deduction to find out what is really going
on. The story is funny, somewhat romantic, though at times resembling
more a TV series like Columbo than a movie, but in the end turns back to
the private eye genre it started out in. I thoroughly enjoyed this
uncanny and inventive caper, except for the unconvincing acting between
Pullman and Kim (She was too lethargic) -- which made it difficult for
me to get involved with their relationship. Nevertheless, Pullman was
able to pull off his part of the deal; he was magnificently outrageous;
he easily became the character he was portraying.
Zero had a light heartedness about it that was endearing and worthy of
that mind solving Sherlock Holmes genre it so alluringly wanted to
emulate, but too lacking in overall integrity to achieve more of an
original tone to it, than turn out to be a reasonably witty film,
achieved under the direction of the young son of the famous film
director.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Jake Kasdan
Starring: Bill Pullman, Ben Stiller, Kim Dickens, Ryan O'Neal, Angela
Featherstone
Daryl Zero lives on the secluded top floor of a high-rise hotel, sealed
behind metallic doors with six separate locks, surveillance in every room,
a station of several computers so that he can work efficiently, and a
refrigerator full of Tab sodas, which I thought went out of business but I
guess I was wrong.  He's unlike most detectives in many ways, but the chief
difference between him and anyone else is that he never communicates with
his clients: he was a kind of lawyer helping him out who goes to see
potential clients, and gives them updates while Daryl uses disguises and
aliases to dig deep and find out the answer to whatever job he's hired for.
 He's a master of illusion, he's the best detective in the world, and he's
a total freak.
The weird thing about "Zero Effect" is that it's not really the quirky
thriller nor the plug for a TV detective like it may seem to be at first. 
It creeps up on you where you least expect it, and in the last movie you'd
think to have a heart, you find one.  Before you know it, you're feeling
something for all the characters, and you're more involved in their lives
than you are the mystery that this film poses.
The story revolves around one case of Daryl's, played wonderfully by Bill
Pullman (whose talent seems to decrease as the budget of a film starring
him increases), where he has to find a set of keys to a safe deposit box
for a millionaire named Gregory Stark (Ryan O'Neal, trying to find work),
and subsequently find out who's been blackmailing him for large amounts of
money.  Daryl never meets him, but he begins to sneakily find out things by
posing as other people, namely a millionaire accountant in town for the
weekend and working out at the same health club Gregory does.  There's a
fascinating set of scenes where he confronts him as an anonymous person,
and then goes back to show how he got amazing amounts of information just
by mincing a couple words with him.
The running joke in the movie is that Daryl is incredibly observant about
physical and psychological things, but that he comes up snake eyes when
actually dealing with the emotions of other people he deals with.  His
long-time partner/lawyer, Steve Arlo (Ben Stiller, showing that he's one of
the best comic actors around), detests everything about him, and is
desperately trying to find a way to break it to him that he doesn't want to
work for him anymore so he can marry his girlfriend (Angela Featherstone). 
And he seems to never really notice that he's annoying and rude and selfish
to everyone around him when he tries to do his bizarro detective work,
which makes him completely antisocial.
Instead of the film going on like this, mocking everything that makes up
Daryl, and giving us a mystery we are never really blown away by anyway, it
gives us something better: a love story, in the weirdest movie.  It does
this by introducing another character, a woman named Gloria (Kim Dickens)
whom he meets at the health club one day and is automatically able to
figure out that she's a paramedic since she smells of it.  Although turned
off at first, she begins to be fascinated with him, and soon the two are
discovering more and more about eachother, all the while at least one of
them is lying.
"Zero Effect" was written and directed by Jake Kasdan, the son of famous
directory Lawrence Kasdan, and he gives the film a comic yet dramatic feel.
 There's a real story here about characters that are interesting and
likable, and he allows that to slowly and subtely come to focus while the
mystery plot fades into the background.  If I can say one thing bad against
this film, it's that the mystery itself isn't all that intriguing.  It
uncovers a lot, mysteries where generations are harmed by past generations,
and it allows a couple cool twists, but in all reality, do we really care
about it once the love story has taken precedence?  Why worry about a
secret hit from 30 years ago when you can relish in a touching love story
between two alienated and damaged people?
But, in all reality, that's the strength of this film.  It gradually lets
us forget about the mystery, and we soon become so involved with the
character stories, including the story of Steve and his girlfriend, that we
never even realize that it's taken the foreground. Sure, it's still quirky,
and there's a lot of big laughs here, especially in the opening sequence
which intercuts a meeting Steve has with Gregory and a conversation Steve
has with a friend where he contradicts what he says over and over again. 
But a touching love story and one man's plight into beginning to understand
the emotions of other people is something that I sure wasn't expecting,
what with the opening promising another quirky thriller a la "Grosse Pointe
Blank," but that I was all the more happier to allow happen.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Bill Pullman, Ben Stiller, Ryan O'Neal, Kim Dickens
Ingredients: 
Eccentric private detective, millionaire client, beautiful blackmailer, 
Synopsis: 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote four novels and later five books of short
stories concerning the exploits of fictional super-detective Sherlock
Holmes and his faithful sidekick Dr. Watson. Surprisingly, in the
stories Sherlock Holmes uses both morphine and cocaine, which are both
over-the-counter legal drugs at the time. ZERO EFFECT is based on A
SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA, a short story which can be found in the book THE
ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES.
In A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA, Sherlock Holmes initially belittles the
intelligence of women and abhors romantic attraction:  "all emotions,
and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise, but
admirably balanced mind. He was the most perfect reasoning and observing
machine that the world has ever seen, but as a lover....He never spoke
of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer." 
A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA begins with formerly inseparable pals Holmes and
Watson growing apart due to Watson's recent marriage. Holmes is a
violin-playing druggie, "alternating from week to week between cocaine
and ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his
own keen nature." 
A rich and powerful king named Wilhelm has committed (sexual)
indiscretions, and a beautiful American woman named Irene Adler has the
photographic evidence. Fearing future blackmail, the king launches a
preemptive strike; he hires a bunch of thugs to harass Irene and
burglarize her home. But they fail to locate the incriminating photo,
and the king ends up hiring Holmes to steal the photo from Irene. 
Holmes dons a disguise and Irene takes him in, thinking he is a kind
gentleman. But once she figures out Holmes' identity Irene flees,
informing Holmes by mail that the real thug is King Wilhelm, since he's
the one harassing her in order to wipe out all knowledge and evidence of
his dirty deeds. Humbled and outsmarted by the end of the story, Holmes
adopts a new respect for women. Watson notices, "And whenever he
[Holmes] speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it
is always under the honorable title of the woman."
Similarly, ZERO EFFECT begins with formerly inseparable ace detective
Darryl Zero (Bill Pullman) and his sidekick Arlo (Ben Stiller) growing
apart due to Arlo's fiancee and recent marriage proposal. Darryl Zero is
a guitar-playing thirty-something, strung-out surfer dude detective,
alternating between amphetamines and deductive brilliance. Somewhat of a
writer, Zero writes about his own effect on people: the "Zero" effect is
when Darryl Zero's observations and interventions change the outlook of
a client. 
Their client, a rich and powerful Portland tycoon named Stark (Ryan
O'Neal) , fears blackmail. Stark has committed a crime, and a beautiful
lady paramedic named Gloria (Kim Dickens) has the incriminating
evidence. Frustrated, Stark hires Zero. 
Zero poses as an accountant and Gloria takes him into her home, sparking
a romance which catches the romantically challenged Zero by surprise.
Eventually she figures out he is Darryl Zero and flees. Of course, the
real thug is Stark, since his ultimate plan is to kill her in order to
wipe out all knowledge and evidence of his crime. Wiser at the end of
the story, Zero notes that Gloria did the "Zero Effect" on him. In other
words Gloria's observations and intervention in Darryl's life
permanently changed him.
Opinion:
ZERO EFFECT is the directorial debut of Jake Kasdan, son of Lawrence
Kasdan, a writer-director. It is a solid detective movie with
interesting twists. In the beginning the main characters seem somewhat
stiff and loony. For example, Bill Pullman goes overboard in an early
drugged-out guitar playing scene while Ben Stiller is as stiff and
straight as a DRAGNET cop. But soon - - as the characters begin to take
on life and actions - -  they develop a kind of depth. By the middle of
the film, you have genuinely entertaining stuff, and you are hooked
enough into the plot to go all the way to the end. If you can ignore the
initial weirdo guitar scene, ZERO EFFECT is watchable, unpredictable,
and entertaining. 

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Bill Pullman, Ben Stiller, Kim Dickens, Ryan O'Neal, Angela
Featherstone
Written and Directed by: Jake Kasdan
Running Time: 115 minutes
Zero Effect is a modern day, 1990s style Sherlock Holmes story.  Every
element of a Holmes tale is here, from the eccentric detective to the
loyal assistant to the drug use... its all blatently there.  I'm not a
big Holmes fan, but this update isn't so bad.
Bill Pullman plays the brilliant yet socially disturbed detective
Darryl Zero. He can solve cases merely by sitting and thinking about
them, with the help of course of tuna fish, tomato soup, Tab, and lots
of drugs. He accepts his cases through his faithful assistant, played
by Ben Stiller. In the film, he works a case for businessman Ryan
O'Neal, investigating just who is blackmailing him. And despite the
fact that Zero seems to solve the case right away (the first 15
minutes of the film actually), he keeps investigating. Obviously, Zero
believes there's more to it that what he's uncovered.
Zero Effect is unbelievably slow going, yet somehow remains compelling
enough to make it watchable until the very end. The performances are
all good, particularly Pullman. Also, the film feels like it's a black
comedy, but instead it comes across as merely quirky. A laugh or two
would have been nice.
Zero Effect is the debut from Kasdan, who just so happens to be the son
of writer-director Lawrence Kasdan. [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Michael Dequina
Writer-director Jake Kasdan's Zero Effect gets its title from its main
character, Daryl Zero (Bill Pullman).  Zero is perhaps the world's greatest
private detective, solving many a case without even setting foot outside of
his well-secured penthouse apartment.  And that's the problem--Zero is
unquestionably a head case, a shut-in with no social skills whatsoever,
writing bad love songs, guzzling cans of Tab, and eating tuna straight from
the can when not working on a case.  His only contact with the outside
world comes in the form of his overworked assistant, attorney Steve Arlo
(Ben Stiller).
>From the sounds of it, Zero Effect sounds like one of those painfully
labored and unfunny comedies focusing on a wacky hero who somehow achieves
brilliance through his sheer stupidity and dumb luck.  In reality, though,
the film could not be more different.  While it does have its share of
humorous moments, Zero Effect is an intriguing character study of its
protagonist disguised as a conventional comic mystery.
Not that there isn't a mystery involved, and it is certainly one of Zero
Effect's weakest points.  Zero is hired by wealthy Portland businessman
Gregory Stark (Ryan O'Neal) to recover a set of lost keys.  Naturally, this
simple investigation leads to something more complex, mainly a blackmail
scheme involving Stark and a paramedic named Gloria Sullivan (Kim Dickens).
 How this mechanical mystery plays out is flat, suspenseless, and more than
a little predictable, not helped at all by Kasdan's unnecessarily languid
pacing.
However, with the development of Gloria's relationship with an incognito
Zero the film achieves a surprising poignance.  Zero may be an oddball, but
he's also incredibly intelligent, and that is the root cause of his
reclusiveness.  Throughout the film, Zero describes his investigation
technique in a "how-to" voiceover, and it is here that he explains the key
to his success: "the two 'obs'"--objectivity and observation.  In becoming
the best P.I. in the world, Zero has mastered the art of objectivity,
literally and figuratively detaching himself from the rest of the world.
When the investigation forces him to deal directly with Gloria, Zero is
treated to his first genuine emotional human contact and a glimpse of what
real life is about--direct involvement, not objective observation.  This is
not to say that Zero Effect degenerates into something sappy and
touchy-feely; the power of the relationship and its effects on Zero and
Gloria derives from its subtle execution.
Zero Effect is not a perfect debut for Kasdan (son of Lawrence); in
addition to the by-the-numbers mystery, there is also a weak subplot
revolving around the strain Arlo's work puts on his relationship with his
girlfriend (Angela Featherstone).  But even in its flawed form, Zero Effect
is a lot more accomplished and mature than a lot of work by more
established filmmakers.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Perhaps the best movie on the subject of multiple
personalities is Nunnally Johnson's 1957 classic "The Three
Faces of Eve," featuring Joanne Woodward as the woman
who not only has a life but enjoys three of them.  Multiple
personality disorder of a sort is more common, if less
dramatic, in the population in general.  Perhaps you're a tiger
behind the wheel of a car, honking your way through
bottlenecked traffic, but spineless when seated at the dinner
table in your own home.  Or you're the employee who plays
up to his boss day after day and an absolute ogre with your
kid or dog.  "Zero Effect" deals with such a guy; cool, efficient,
organized and bloodhound-capable when traveling incognito
as a private investigator: an absolute geek on a social level,
agoraphobic, whose steady diet of tuna fish recalls a
dysfunctional teen in Lyle Kessler's play about an off-the-wall
kid, "Orphans."  
   As played by Bill Pullman as the title character, Daryl Zero,
the movie deals largely with the detective's relationship with
two people: his assistant Steve Arlo, (Ben Stiller), wholly
opposite in temperament, accountant-stiff with a dentist's
sense of humor; and the gamin-like Gloria Sullivan (Kim
Dickens), who changes his life in pretty much the degree to
which he alters hers.  While Steve tells Daryl's prospective
clients that all contact with made through him--that no one is
allowed to see the Private Eye himself--he gives the
impression that his boss is above it all, a kind of Emperor
Hirohito upon whom none may lay eyes.  The truth is that
Zero is often holed up in his room, playing songs which he
composed himself, and executing them terribly.
   The story is an intriguing one, filled with twists and
reversals and a surprise ending which will catch you unaware. 
Gregory Stark (Ryan O'Neal), a fabulously wealthy but
desperate tycoon, interviews Arlo begging for help in his
dilemma. He is being blackmailed by a clever scoundrel who
asks for bi-weekly drops of $100,000 cash and puts him
through mazes that would fluster the most brilliant
experimental rat.  As he reports, the cur got his or her hands
on the key to his safe deposit box and is threatening to reveal
its contents to the police if the demands are not met.  Though
Stark refuses to reveal the mysterious subject matter of the
safe even to the man he hires, Zero accepts the case and,
while following the trail of the blackmailer in an assortment of
disguises, he comes upon information that makes this a far
cry from a typical case.
   In a startling demonstration of the powers that have
enabled Zero to be the world's greatest detective, he tells a
woman waiting for turn for a massage appointment that she is
a paramedic.  Startled with this prescience, the woman, Gloria
Sullivan (Kim Dickens) eventually learns that the iodine scent
remaining with her gave the secret away.  The picture is filled
with references like this one, a series of revelations that give
it a good deal of charm.  
  Yet for all its wisecracks and mock-noir ambiance, "The
Zero Effect" comes across as a minor movie, one which does
not utilize the considerable talents of Bill Pullman and a puffy
Ryan O'Neal. The scene in Zero's quarters that features the
detective strumming wildly on his guitar while standing on his
mattress is almost an embarrassment.  For his part, Ben
Stiller comes across as so stiff he is virtually lifeless. You
wonder how this guy, who should have had the name "Zero,"
would be courted heavily by his seductive girl friend Jess
(Angela Featherstone), whom he virtually ignores whenever
his boss calls him away on an assignment however absurd.
   Still, the picture has poignance, as the virginal thirty-year
old detective falls under the Gloria's spell, from the time he
meets her at a Portland, Oregon gymnasium to the obligatory
lovemaking scene in her home.
   "Zero Effect" deserves credit for an original take on the noir
genre and could have profited from a more toned-down
performance from Bill Pullman, a change which first-time
director Jake Kasdan seemed averse to making. Rated R. 
Running Time: 112 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
Berge Garabedian
Jake Kasdan, son of legendary screenwriter/director Lawrence Kasdan,
writes and directs his first picture entitled ZERO EFFECT at the tender
age of 23. 
PLOT:
The world's most "private" detective Daryl Zero is hired by a rich man
named Stark, to find his lost keys to a security box which contains
information that could be used against him, and to figure out the
identity of the person who is also blackmailing him. Zero's faithful
assistant, Arlo, acts as the middleman between the two men, since dick
Zero does not believe in meeting his clients. Let the unraveling begin.
CRITIQUE:
Quirky, original, but ultimately overlong and not so interesting tale
of the self-proclaimed "world's greatest private investigator." Bill
Pullman has never really excited me in any of his works (even my
favourite film of 1997, LOST HIGHWAY (8.5/10)), and continues to do his
humdrum work in this "trying to be hip" crime film, that never really
grabs a hold of anyone or anything. The film's premise is certainly
very cute, with the detective not wanting to meet any of his clients,
and being some sort of an acutely sensitive psycho-analyst who could
tell almost everything about a person after meeting them for only
thirty seconds. 
But ultimately, the film's plot and execution never really generate
enough drama, interest or zing to keep the film enjoyable at any level.
It seemed like a quirky film at times, a crime drama at others, and
ultimately degenerated into some half-assed romantic crime tale, which
didn't seem to know which end was up anymore. There were some original
points in the script, and even some clever moments about the detective,
his methods and motivations, but not enough to constitute anything
close to a successful movie.
Even Ben Stiller seemed wasted in his underplayed role of the assistant
who was torn between his love and his job. On top of everything, the
film packed it in a little under the two-hour mark, without justifying
at least thirty minutes of that lengthy total. In the end, I believe
that your enjoyment of this film will be strongly correlated to your
appreciation of the work of Bill Pullman, your desire to see
experimental films that may quirk your interest, and the unimportance
of the money that you are willing to invest in this video pick. If all
three traffic lights seem green to you, then please go ahead and watch
this movie and try to enjoy your time on board. If your interest is not
peaked by my guidelines, then I suggest you go out and rent the
ultimate hip, quirky, crime film: RESERVOIR DOGS (9/10), by Quentin
Tarantino, and have a blast! 
Little Known Facts: 
Bill Pullman made his big screen debut in the Danny DeVito / Bette
Midler comedy RUTHLESS PEOPLE (7.5/10) in 1986 and followed that with
two lead roles in SPACEBALLS (8/10) and THE SERPENT AND THE RAINBOW.
Pullman has a Master of Arts in theater studies, and while teaching at
Montana State University, one of his students was director John Dahl,
who subsequently gave him a role in his 1994 film THE LAST SEDUCTION
(7.5/10). 
Ryan O'Neal is the father of actress Tatum O'Neal, who was once married
to tennis great John McEnroe.

Author
Matt Williams
Jake Kasdan, son of one of the best screenwriters around, breaks into
filmmaking by writing and directing this hard-to-categorize detective
story: part mystery, part comedy, part character study and part
romance.  For the most part, Kasdan manages to combine the genres
successfully and create a captivating film.
Daryl Zero (Bill Pullman) is a modern day Sherlock Holmes.  The parallel
is present down to his love of music (though Zero plays the guitar
rather than the violin), and his addiction to drugs (amphetamines,
rather than morphine). He even titles his cases with such Sherlockian
epigrams as The Case of the Mismatched Shoelaces, The Case About the Man
Who Lied About His Age, or The Case of the Hired Gun Who Made Way Way
Too Many Mistakes.
However Zero's observance of the fine art of detachment, though it makes
him a brilliant private investigator, makes him somewhat of a
self-imposed outcast in society. He could do nothing without the legwork
of his trusty assistant Dr. Watson, I mean Steve Arlo (Ben Stiller).
Arlo is not happy with his job.  He is thrilled to be around Zero's
brilliance, but his bizarre behavior, and strange requests, are
frustrating to the former lawyer. And they're even more so to his
girlfriend, Jess (Angela Featherstone), who is fed up that her
boyfriend's boss means more to Arlo than her.
This is the situation when a new case comes knocking.  Gregory Stark
(Ryan O'Neill) hires Zero to find his lost keys.  It seems that he kept
a safety deposit box key on the ring, and the box apparently contains
some incriminating evidence. Now, Stark is being blackmailed, and needs
to reclaim his key before the nightmare can end.
To solve this case, Zero reluctantly crawls out of his shell.  However,
this is when he is vulnerable...and this time he falls for charms of a
wily paramedic, Gloria Sullivan (Kim Dickens), who may be involved in
the blackmail scheme.  For the first time, Zero has to question his own
objectivity, as he finds his client less and less sympathetic.
Zero Effect is weakest in its obviously "wacky" scenes depicting Daryl
Zero's odd behavior. Such scenes might be appropriate in an out-and-out
satire, making Zero an Ace Ventura-ish character.  However, there's a
much meatier movie in here...it just takes a while to get out.
That's not to say that there's not a place for humor in this film.  In
fact, some of the best scenes are Ben Stiller's wonderfully underplayed
comic moments of absolute disgust and frustration with his employer.
However, the over-the-top scenes never quite gel with the rest of the
film, and they aren't funny enough to stand on their own.
Once the investigation is underway, however, Zero's brilliance really
begins to shine. His lightning quick inferences are as fascinating as
many of Sherlock's own.  As the mystery begins to unfold, Zero's
deductions lead the plot in interesting directions, but never lose the
viewer.
Zero Effect works well during its romantic scenes as well. Zero's
relationship with Gloria is low-key, but it hits all the right notes.
However, we are always kept distant from Gloria's character.  She's
given plenty of development, but we never understand what she is
thinking.  Perhaps that may be intentional: to place the audience in
Zero's zone of detachment.  But, on the whole, it is frustrating.
Bill Pullman, when he's not spacing out, creates a vibrant character in
Daryl Zero. There's one moment when Zero briefly connects to the world
which he has managed to detach from for many years, and it is shockingly
moving...expressing a seriousness that heretofore was unassociated with
the character, but one which fits in well. And, although it is sometimes
hard to take a detective called "Zero" seriously, it is at this moment
that the viewer understands the meaning behind the name.
Although Zero Effect is a bit awkward in places, it is a strong debut
for Kasdan, and shows great promise.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
