Title
Review for Timecop (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is 1863 and a shipment of gold for the Confederacy is stolen by
a highwayman sporting a laser-guided machine gun.  This is a time
travel crime and that makes it particularly dangerous since even a
small change to the past could completely change the future.  That is
why the government has created the Time Enforcement Commission or TEC.
And one of its chief operatives is Max Walker (Jean-Claude Van Damme).
The TEC is watched over by Senator McComb (Ron Silver).  But McComb has
been seduced by the power time travel gives and is hatching his own
illegal plans to make himself President.  Walker knows his chief enemy
is the Senator who controls his agency.  But his efforts are sabotaged
by widespread corruption in the TEC going back to McComb.  Complicating
things, now he is saddled with an inexperienced partner, Fielding
(played by Gloria Reuben), and he would rather be working alone.  (Gee,
what an original plot complication!)  Walker must go back with Fielding
to 1994, that pivotal year when i) the TEC was founded, ii) mysterious
thugs killed Walker's wife (Mia Sara), and iii) McComb got control ofa
major high-TEC and high-tech corporation.  That 1994 must have been a
pretty exciting year to live!
     Like a lot of current films the look of TIMECOP seems to take
precedence over the acting or plot.  The film is directed by Peter
Hyams who proved in films like OUTLAND that he is much more into the
look of science fiction than the thought behind it.  In fact, he wears
an unusual pairing of hats on this film.  He is not just the director
of the film, he is also the director of photography and some of the
effects are effective.  Hyams uses a nice effect of warping space to
show people's arrival in a new time, though it looks related to the
invisibility effect in PREDATOR.  The rocket sled that launches time
travel is a bit melodramatic and the reason why this acceleration is
needed is never explained, unless it is some sort of tribute to BACK TO
THE FUTURE.  It does contribute to the effect of a film that is
generally fairly slickly mounted.  Not all of the visuals are as good,
however.  One false move is the production design of the 2004 cars,
which apparently have evolved to look almost like DAMNATION ALLEY
armored vehicles by 2004.  Certainly the look of cars is intended to
change more in the next ten years than it did in the last ten.
     Other script touches are about what one could expect.  There was
entirely too many fights for my taste, but after all, this is a Jean-
Claude Van Damme movie.  One could complain about the Bondisms--the
wisecracks after violent fights--but it seems that they have become
inseparable from action films.  There is some reasonable wit in the
film.  There is a nice bit connected with a piece of advice that that
McComb gives his younger self.  But the nicest quip is the choice of
end-title music.
     As an actor Jean-Claude Van Damme has playing an expert Belgian
kick-boxer down very well.  I suppose that is better than him not being
able to play an expert Belgian kick-boxer, but it still does not amount
to breadth.  For once he has co-stars who have previously been in films
that do not feature fighting.  Ron Silver is an actual actor in the
non-exploitation film sense.  He may not have a lot of real acting to
do here other than to seem sinister, but he at least does his villain
with dignified restraint.  Gloria Reuben and Mia Sara are along as co-
stars but neither of them have anything special to do in their roles.
Mia Sara has been around in films at least since FERRIS BEULLER'S DAY
OFF, Reuben is a relative newcomer, and each seems to do what the
script requires and avoids walking into furniture, but neither shows
any real flash.
     This is a film with too little science fictional thought and too
much karate kicking.  But parts are undeniably fun.  I give it a low +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Some of the concepts of TIMECOP should be discussed in an
evaluation of the film and I hope I don't come off like the film
reviewer (I think from the New York Times) whose review of DESTINATION
MOON said that it was absurd and that even the children in the audience
could tell the producers that in space rockets don't work because there
is nothing to push against.  Don't trust a film reviewer's knowledge,
including mine.
     Time enforcement is an old idea in science fiction harkening back
at least to Jack Williamson's LEGION OF TIME and Poul Anderson's TIME
PATROL.  Generally a feature of time travel stories are time paradoxes,
most of which hark from the paradox that a time traveler could go back
in time and kill his parents before they bear him.  Then he would never
have existed, so there would have been nobody to kill his parents.
Also often a feature of time travel stories are extra rules supposedly
fall out of the physics of time travel.  These may or may not bear
close scrutiny.  One that might make sense might be that an equal mass
has to be sent in the opposite direction in time or that you are
limited in the amount of magnetic metal that can go through time.
Rules often make less sense.  THE TERMINATOR assumed only living matter
can be sent.  No other physical phenomenon can detect living from non-
living matter, but I would be willing to give them the benefit of the
doubt if they just followed that rule.  But, of course various parts of
the human body like hair are not really living matter either.  If only
living matter went through time portals, a time traveler would arrive
at best bald.  THE TERMINATOR seemed to miss that detail and did not
shave Michael Biehn.
     TIMECOP shows signs that the authors thought about *having* rules
and paradoxes, but not much about the rules and paradoxes themselves.
The special rules include this concept that "the same object cannot
occupy the same place at the same time."  I think that the principle is
that different objects cannot do that.  But what generally happens
there is that they rebound off each other.  Technically speaking, the
same object ALWAYS occupies the same place at the same time.  Actually
the rule as applied in the film seems to be that is a time traveler
comes in contact with his previous self the two annihilated each other.
But you have very little matter in common with yourself of ten years
ago.  Nearly all (or is it actually all?) of the living matter in your
body from ten years ago has been replaced.  Even if that was not true
and there was some point on the surface that had not changed, you would
have to get those two points to come in contact.  It would not suffice
that your left hand from 1994 and your right shoulder from 2004 came in
contact.  This whole rule of annihilation is more a plot contrivance
than having anything much to do with logic.  It is like having vampires
killed by sunlight.
     Mike Richardson and Mark Verheiden don't actually seem to
understand what makes time paradoxes work.  In the film Fielding@2004
(if I may coin a notation) is killed in 1994.  Back in 2004 there is no
sign that Fielding lived that last decade from 1994 to 2004.  That
would be true if Fielding@1994 had been killed, but there seems not to
make sense as a result of Fielding@2004 being killed.  At the end of
the film Walker has nullified his whole reason to have gone to 1994 and
nobody remembers that he went.  But he obviously is returning from some
place.  Where do people think he is returning from?  And while I am
asking questions, how do you carbon-date gold?  And what does it even
mean to carbon-date gold?

Author
Dragan Antulov
For many people with the scientific background, concept of
time travel seems more suitable to fantasy than to science
fiction genre. It seems that Hollywood filmmakers share that
opinion, because almost always the films dealing with time
travel usually don't bother with such boring problems like
time travellers killing their own parents before their own
conception etc. Sometimes those films touch such problems,
but the time travel is more often than not just a background
for standard adventure or mindless action. TIMECOP, 1994
action film directed by Peter Hyams, falls within that
second category.
Based on the Dark Horse comic books, screenplay by Mike
Richardson and Mark Verheiden demands that the viewer
suspends a lot of disbelief. In 1994, time travel is
discovered and U.S. government sets up TEC - elite secret
unit of superagents, whose only job is to prevent the people
from abusing the technology and changing past for their own
purposes. After his loving wife Melissa (Mia Sara) dies,
Washington D.C. policeman Max Walker (Jean-Claude Van Damme)
would join that force. Ten years later, Max Walker discovers
that powerful and greedy Senator McComb (Ron Silver) already
sends his henchmen into the past to steal money in order to
bring funds for his presidential campaign. Walker goes back
to 1994 in order not only to prevent the conspiracy, but
also to save his own wife.
Apart from big plot holes involving time paradox, scientific
gaffs (carbon dating of gold) or huge implausibilities,
TIMECOP is a rather entertaining film. Peter Hyams, who
directed it, can make his way through SF material (starting
with his 1980 space opera OUTLAND), knows the limitation of
material and does standard action routines, indulging
himself with few experiments with photography. Jean-Claude
Van Damme as protagonist is quite tolerable, although his
acting talent is always comes second to his martial arts
abilities. The real winner in that contest is Ron Silver as
corrupt senator, in role very similar to the one he had
played in LIVE WIRE. This time it is real fun watching him,
especially in the scene when he meets younger version of
himself. However, although TIMECOP has required amount
action scenes, few rather impressive shots, couple of
well-choreographed fights and relatively good looks, it is
still mediocre piece of Hollywood cinema. Those who aren't
easily insulted with cliches and disregard for scientific
facts might still enjoy it, though.

Author
Craig Good
     The destination of tonight's BNO (Boys Night Out) was TIMECOP, the
latest Charles Van Damme vehicle.  I don't believe I have ever seen a
duller action picture in my life.  When I saw Peter Hyams' name on the
credits, I knew that a) the depiction of technology would be incredibly
stupid, b) the politics would be both stupid and Politically Correct,
and c) there would be a terrific chase sequence somewhere in the
movie.  Well, two out of three ain't bad.
     Time-travel movies, as a genre, present many plotting challenges.
One may either face the Grandfather Paradox and turn it into a
brilliant twist, as in BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE, or one may
turn tail and fall tumbling through plot holes the size of the Grand
Canyon.  With Van Damme's leaden acting as ballast, TIMECOP takes the
plunge straight down into mind-numbing boredom.
     A good stupid movie, such as SPEED is said to be enjoyable if you
just "shut down your brain" for a while.  While watching TIMECOP I had
to go way past any higher brain functions and was starting to shut down
the autonomic systems.  It didn't help.  I was down to just respiration
and a heartbeat, and the movie *still* didn't make any sense.  Should
you have the misfortune to actually see this film, don't even *think*
about engaging your brain during the period between the end of the film
and when it vanishes from your memory (a very dangerous five minutes)
because you'll probably strip a gear and need a tow truck for your
head.
     The production design is probably the funniest thing about the
film.  The "futuristic" cars look like old Fords that had been attacked
by a High School art class armed with lots of Tupperware and glue.  The
computer effects might have been impressive had the producers found a
way to transport the film back in time some ten years, but today they
make nearly as dull a thud as Van Damme's acting.  It's not all his
fault, though.  Hyams may not know how to shoot a martial arts
sequence, but at least he can make a gratuitous sex scene look like it
was accidentally cut in from a completely different movie.  And he
never did deliver that chase scene.
     By now, some readers are thinking, or hoping, that this is a
"good" bad movie.  Wrong.  This isn't so-bad-it's-funny.  It's just
lay-there-and-stink bad.  TIMECOP is a time-travel movie which
succeeded only in making my watch stop for a couple of hours.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jean-Claude Van Damme, Ron Silver, Mia Sara.
Screenplay:  Mark Verheiden.
Director:  Peter Hyams.
     A muscular action hero with a thick accent stars in a science
fiction film about traveling into the past to change the future.  No,
I'm not talking about THE TERMINATOR, although I suspect the similarity
is more than coincidental.  Jean-Claude Van Damme has labored through
several virtually indistinguishable testosterone fests without
discovering his breakout hit, so TIMECOP must have seemed like the
perfect opportunity.  And it will probably do what it was intended to
do, expanding Van Damme's audience the way THE TERMINATOR expanded
Arnold Schwarzenegger's.  It's an energetic film that doesn't skimp on
the action, but it suffers from an over-convoluted storyline that
pushes the logic meter *way* into the red zone.
     Van Damme plays Max Walker, a Washington D.C. cop who is assigned
to a unique detail--the Time Enforcement Commission, instituted to
prevent abuses of the newly realized technology of time travel.  In
2004, Walker learns that a series of time travel "thefts" is connected
to the presidential campaign of Aaron McComb (Ron Silver), the U.S.
senator whose committee oversees the T.E.C.  As Walker follows McComb
through time, he finds himself presented with a time-altering
temptation of his own--preventing the death of his wife Melissa (Mia
Sara) in 1994.
     Volumes could be written about the slapdash and ultimately
self-contradictory treatment screenwriter Mark Verheiden (who also
co-created the comic book on which the film is based) gives to time
travel; sometimes it simply seems that he's making things up as he goes
along.  However, those are not the issues which hamper TIMECOP most.
There is more fundamental foolishness, like what exactly the T.E.C. has
been doing for ten years when it soon becomes clear that there is only
one other time machine in existence besides that which they use
themselves.  Either there has been an inordinate number of rogue
Timecops, or there was a spectacular level of stupidity involved in not
destroying the other machine.  Of course, this is a government agency
we are dealing with.  One also wonders why assassins from the future
can't be slightly less obtrusive than extras from THE ROAD WARRIOR.
     TIMECOP also stumbles with the inclusion of a female partner for
Walker, an internal affairs officer named Fielding (Gloria Reuben).
She is treated almost as an afterthought, an obligatory woman to occupy
the space between Mia Sara's scenes.  While Reuben is good working with
sketchy material, the character appears too late and disappears too
soon to leave any kind of impact on the story.  Everything about the
Fielding character feels contrived, sloppy and, worst of all,
completely unnecessary.
     The good news is that TIMECOP tends to work when everyone shuts up
and starts fighting.  Director Peter Hyams went a little nuts in the
editing room, making some of Van Damme's fight scenes look like they
were lit with a strobe, but they are mostly creative and well-
choreographed; only the final showdown drags on a bit.  The special
effects are sharp, and the computer-generated snap-back look to the
characters' movements through time is inventive and well-handled.  The
production values are generally impressive, and action fans will not be
too disappointed.
     The real pleasant surprise of TIMECOP turns out to be the acting
of Jean-Claude Van Damme.  Yes, that's right, I said acting.  Though
still sometimes difficult to understand through his Belgian accent, Van
Damme is an appealing performer who looks comfortable on screen,
something Steven Seagal has yet to accomplish.  TIMECOP isn't exactly a
demanding film for an actor, but Van Damme shows that he can provide
texture, something a bit more substantive than roundhouse kicks.  He
also gets to work off a suitably nasty villain in Ron Silver, who is
perfectly cast, and has a nice chemistry with the too-little-seen Mia
Sara.  It's too bad TIMECOP often feels bloated and preposterous,
because there's a bit of heart lurking beneath the hardware.  It's just
a bit too uneven to take advantage of its strengths.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In the world of Science Fiction. it is "known" that you cannot
witness future events by going ahead in time.  However, it is also
"obvious" that you can go back and witness events that have happened in
the past.  And if you can do that, you can change an event so that what
follows will be changed, too.  If you go back and kill a grandparent of
someone you know in the present, that person will then not be born and
you have changed the course of events.  In that manner, traveling to
the past and altering events would allow for a new kind of criminal.
     Max Walker (Jean-Claude Van Damme) is a timecop in the year 2004
who works for the Time Enforcement Commission that prohibits going back
which by that time had become a reality.  When Senator McComb (Ron
Silver) goes back in time to change events and become rich and enable
him to run for president in the present, It is Walker's mission to
prevent McComb from changing the past.  Going back in time with him is
Sarah Fielding (Gloria Reuben). who also works for the Time Enforcement
Commission.
     When Walker travels to the past, he meets Melissa (Mia Sara) who
in the present was his wife but who was murdered.  Now Walker realizes
he can change the events that led to her murder and they can thus live
happily ever after.  (Still with me?)
     As in all the action films, this one is filled with shootings and
gore.  The only difference is that it has time-travel as its gimmick.
No matter how you slice it, it is still an action film and it is still
Science Fiction.

Author
James Berardinelli
     It's rather interesting--and a little discouraging--that the bulk
of theatrical science fiction is actually far better suited to the
action genre than to anything else.  TIMECOP is a perfect example.  As
a shoot- 'em-up, blast-'em-to-pieces film, it's not half bad.  As a
futuristic time travel movie, however, it has some very serious
problems.
     Nevertheless, as it stands, this is one of Jean-Claude Van Damme's
better motion pictures.  Considering how abysmal some of the entries on
his resume have been, that's not saying much, but everyone has to start
somewhere.  Van Damme isn't much of an actor, but he has advanced
beyond the stagnant stage in which Steven Seagal is mired.  At least
for the moment, he's Arnold Schwarzenegger (unAmerican accent and all)
without the price tag.
     Any film whose premise relies as heavily as TIMECOP's does on time
travel is inherently treading on dangerous ground.  Paradoxes abound in
films like this, and how a script deals with them often determines the
success of the movie.  TIMECOP doesn't attempt to ignore these
problems--in fact, it makes one of them a key ingredient in the
resolution--but the explanations are less-than-thorough and the logic
is porous.
     The plot is actually a little more substantial than that of most
Van Damme movies.  In this case, our hero is TEC (Time Enforcement
Committee) cop Max Walker, one of the select few who are entrusted with
policing time travel technology.  Set in the year 2004, TIMECOP depicts
Walker's attempts to thwart the presidential campaign of Senator McComb
(Ron Silver), a millionaire politician who is making his money by
altering history--both that of the nation and of Walker himself.
     Aside from the improbability of time travel existing in ten years
(in fact, according to the film, it exists today), TIMECOP displays a
view of the near future that is an odd mix of the possible and the
unlikely.  The film's scientific and technological views may be on the
shaky side, but at least it doesn't commit the cardinal sin of
attempting to explain time travel.  Such technobabble-laced expositions
typically sound ludicrous.
     As far as the action sequences are concerned, there are plenty of
them, all of which are competently-executed (even if every one of them
seems to happen in the midst of a downpour).  The tension never comes
close to the level of a SPEED, but TIMECOP is unlikely to put anyone to
sleep.  Sadly, a lackluster music score by Mark Isham does little to
elevate the adrenaline level.
     Ron Silver is suitably nasty as Senator McComb .  While this
villain isn't close to the standards of DIE HARD's Hans Grueber, he's
still pretty easy to dislike.  In a smaller role, Mia Sara is suitably
sympathetic as Walker's doomed wife Melissa.  Bruce McGill turns in a
solid supporting performance as the head of the TEC police force.
     TIMECOP is in the TOTAL RECALL category of storytelling:  take a
popular action film star, throw him into a science fiction setting, add
a few minor plot twists, and let him blast and punch his way out of
trouble.  As far as this formula is concerned, TIMECOP lacks much of
TOTAL RECALL's wit and cleverness.
     Concerning the time travel issues, don't think too deeply,
otherwise you're likely to realize just how poorly-considered the
script's treatment of them is.  Time paradoxes are supposed to be
mind-boggling; TIMECOP has reduced them to a level somewhere between
confusing and dumb.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     You can count the number of decent time travel movies on two hands
and, unfortunately, TIMECOP isn't one of them.  But don't blame the Van
Damme man--director Peter Hyams deserves all the credit for this only
okay trip back to the future.
     Based on the Dark Horse comic series, the story introduces the
Time Enforcement Agency, created in 1994 to police existing (!) time
travel technology.  The agency's stance is simple:  no one goes back to
get rich or get even.  Cut to 2004 and top agent Max Walker (Van Damme)
has just returned from 1929, with his former partner in chains for
trying to make a deal in the Depression.  The verdict is guilt and the
sentence is death--but not before Max learns of a bigger conspiracy
involving a U.S. senator (Silver) who's traveling time to fund his run
for the presidency.
     What sounds confusing is really a gas, courtesy of a smart script
by comics writer Mark Verheiden.  Lay people may have a tough time
navigating the narrative, but the story makes perfect sense to anyone
raised on Marvel Comics and "The Fantastic Four." Verheiden also
includes a double does of humor, ranging from a slam on Van Damme's
accent to a virtual reality gag that's virtually worth the price of
admission.
     Peter Hyams is an old sci-fi hack who directed OUTLAND, 2010, and
O.J.  Simpson in CAPRICORN ONE.  But TIMECOP gets away from him and the
result is a goofy tone with zero realism (nobody can shoot to hit) and
too many (poorly filmed) fight scenes.  In fact, most of the action
sequences are pretty pathetic.  The high low-point is a absurd finale
that has three or four or fifteen characters climbing all over a
rain-swept roof.  At night.
     And what's with those silly looking "future cars?"  Is someone
remaking SLEEPER on a nearby lot?
     Acting abilities are all over the place.  Both Ron Silver and Bruce
McGill (as the TEA head) are in top form.  Van Damme needs work, no
duh, but he's three times better than co-star Mia Sara, who plays his
wife.  Badly.
     TIMECOP wraps with a happy ending you can see a year off.
Missing: a humorous coda explaining just how the happy ending is
supposed to work.

Author
W. Yacco
     Aside from serving principally as a means of connecting between
the fight-scene dots, the TIMECOP plot does nothing but suffer in it's
exposition.  You do come to understand that there's a conspiracy, and
if you're quick, or are already familiar with sci-fi time-travel
plotting, you'll probably pick up on the seemingly unmotivated early
action involving unexplained characters.  No, the problem isn't that
the movement loses the viewer so much as that it never captivates the
viewer or generates any real involvement with either the characters or
the story.
     Can you care about the quest to save a wife you've barely met, and
whose relationship to the hero is barley developed?  It's not likely
under the best circumstances, but the story isn't about such a quest
until the very end.  In fact, only two characters have more than a
single dimension: Van Damme's hero and Ron Silver's arch-villain.  Yet
other than a few sneers, even their interaction starts late in the
film.  What TIMECOP needs is a something at the outset that the
audience can look forward to throughout the film.  But there's
nothing: no mystery, no conflict, no holy grail, nothing but one
almost incidental battle after another.
     If there had only been something to care about, you might even be
willing to suspend your disbelief enough to accept the preposterously
amateur boxes-on-wheels that are supposed to pass for vehicles of the
future.  For that matter, you might also overlook some of the staging.
For example, the time-travel concept, lifted whole cloth from BACK TO
THE FUTURE, has time travelers being propelled into whenever on a
rocket sled.  What makes it particularly ludicrous is that the tracks
are deliberately built up to a wall in an effort to force a sense of
jeopardy.  At least in BACK TO THE FUTURE, when the car ran out of
road, it didn't seem to have been planned in advance.
     Still, TIMECOP is better than a lot of films in either of the
genres it mixes.  It doesn't really go anywhere, but at least it isn't
terribly tedious while it doesn't go there.  And even if Van Damme
can't rival Steven Segal in UNDER SIEGE (okay, so Segal can't rival
Segal in UNDER SIEGE either.  Sue me.), at least he isn't completely
wooden.  And Ron Silver reeks some of his usual evil as well.

