Title
Review for Cotton Mary (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Set along the Malabar Coast in India in 1954, COTTON MARY is by
Merchant-Ivory Productions, a group so famous for costume dramas that
they probably hold several patents on the genre.  COTTON MARY does a
marvelous job of displaying the sights and sounds of the era but a
miserable job of doing much more.
At the center of the drama is a chatty, vain and strange woman called
Cotton Mary.  Mary is played by Madhur Jaffrey as a woman so unlikable
that she becomes an obnoxious, cliché of a villain.  Wearing her
prejudice on her sleeve, Mary hates Indians because she thinks she is
better than them since she is Anglo-Indian.  "These Indian nurses don't
know anything," nurse Mary informs Lily Macintosh (Greta Scacchi), who
is having trouble producing any milk for her newborn baby.  "I'm
half-English!" Mary reassures Lily.  Mary is also a thief and a liar,
among her other despicable traits.
A sickly and depressed woman, Lily is so out of touch with reality that
the story would have us believe that she doesn't even know how her own
baby is being fed.  The baby's nourishment comes from the breasts of
Mary's sister.  In an attempt to get her own milk production going, Lily
keeps going to her doctor, who tells her that it's all in her mind,.
Lily's husband, John (James Wilby), works as a reporter for the BBC
World Service.  When his body makes its infrequent appearances at home,
his mind remains firmly elsewhere.  Even at work, he is just as out to
lunch as his wife.  When interviewing some poor workers, he tells them
he is just like them since his father was a union man.  Living a life of
luxury with servants, a big house and a private club, he is, of course,
nothing at all like them.
After sketching out his characters, writer Alexandra Viets, who based
the script on her play, never gets around to filling them in.  Director
Ismail Merchant stages some lovely scenes of evening festivals but is
never able to make up for the lack of a compelling script.
This is the second film in less than a month about the stilted views of
Ango-Somethings -- the other was THE LAST SEPTEMBER about the
Anglo-Irish.  One wonders if this is another one of those cinematic
trends that studios seem to love.  Are we shortly going to have stories
about the Anglo-Africans, the Anglo-Jamaicans, and who knows who else?
If we do, let's hope the next one in the series finally finds a script
worthy of the subject.
COTTON MARY runs a long 2:03.  It is rated R for a scene of sexuality
and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   There's something pathetic about the yearning of a peoples
who have been freed from their colonialist overlords to
continue identifying with their former rulers.  If you go today
to some developing nations particularly in Africa and parts of
Asia, you'll find that the educated people pride themselves on
speaking the European languages of their previous bosses,
looking down on the majorities who speak merely the
vernacular. Ousmene Sembene captured the servility of the
diplomatic classes in Senegal to the French culture,
particularly to its language and dress, in his masterful film of
government corruption in "Xala."  
   What's perhaps even more wretched is the grandiosity of
those who are low on the totem pole: those who seek to put
themselves a few notches above their countrymen by their
identification with the departed Europeans.  Ismael
Merchant has done a bang-up job in adapting Alexandra
Viets' screenplay, "Cotton Mary," mixing humor, pathos, and
satire in a narrative of a fairly insignificant, middle-aged
Anglo-Indian woman in 1954--seven years after India's
independence from Britain--who refuses to recognize herself
as anything but a representative of British stock.  Her failure
to relate to her birthright as an Indian subject leads to her
rejection not only by the British who stayed on in India after
their government's withdrawal but by her own people and,
even most important, by herself.
   Ismail Merchant, the celebrated director who has long
collaborated with James Ivory to bring us colorful films like
"Shakespeare Wallah" and "A Room With a View," takes us
to a major southern town in the Indian province of Kerala, a
microcosm of the psychological battlefield pitting Indians
against Anglo-Indians, and both against the British who
remain. This is no mere sociological study but a deep-seated
account of one dysfunctional family on the Malabar coast and
their relationships with their servants.  The title character is
portrayed by Madhur Jaffrey, a highly talented woman as
acclaimed for writing a dozen cookbooks that have increased
the popularity of Indian food in the West as she is for acting
in four other Merchant-Ivory productions.  Her character's
deterioration from a person who is already deluding herself
about her status as the daughter of a British regiment officer
to one who has crossed the border into madness is carefully
developed in this 125-minute picture, which conveys the
lovely, exotic ambiance of a town cooled by the breezes of
the Indian Ocean.  Her passive-aggressive relationship with
the British woman who employs her, the confused and
detached Lily Macintosh (Greta Scacchi), styles the entire
film. 
   The story opens on Lily, who has gone into labor while her
BBC-employed husband is in the field and not present at the
birth of her daughter.  The life of the prematurely born baby
is imperiled because her mother's breast is dry.  (Formula did
not exist at the time.)  As the little six-pound girl needs milk,
Lily's nurse, Cotton Mary, agrees to take responsibility for
finding a wet nurse--though Lily seems oddly apathetic and
unconcerned about the process.  Lily, whose remote behavior
might remind moviegoers of a similar demeanor from
Julianne Moore in Todd Haynes's film "Safe," employs Cotton
Mary as nanny and housekeeper, her dependence on this
conniving and repugnant woman so great that she allows her
servant too much responsibility.  After firing her long-time
cook, Abraham (Prayag Raaj) at the behest of this woman,
she feels increasingly lost and, given the regular absence of
her handsome and athletic husband, John (James Wilby), she
becomes increasingly withdrawn.
   Credible and moving that Greta Scacchi's performance is,
Madhur Jaffrey is the real jewel of this Merchant-Ivory work. 
As the central bad-guy in a movie that furnishes us with only
one decent principal (Abraham, the loyal attendant), Jaffrey's
Mary appears to relish the ways she destroys the lives of
those about her.  Though she gives hell to a bunch of racist
British women who are friends of her mistress ("You think
because I'm black you can talk to me like that!"), her real
targets are those of her countrymen who are of unmixed
Indian blood.  "You can't trust those Indians," she regularly
exclaims, "They're dirty and they steal."  Successfully bearing
false witness against her co-servant, Abraham, she
nonetheless considers herself a religious person--though she
is obviously using the accoutrements of worship such as The
Lord's Prayer to further her identity with the Anglican British. 
Not surprisingly, her young friend Rosie, who is pale-skinned
and almost able to pass for British, is taken in by Mary's
exhortations.  She dreams of attaining a job in a posh British
home.   When Blossom, who is Mary's sister and the actual
wet-nurse of Lily's baby, remains baffled that the infant's
mother never visits or acknowledges her efforts, she is
unaware that the malevolent Mary has never told her
mistress the identity of this source of nourishment.  The final
scene--a superb payoff that reminds one of Jean Genet's
uncharitable play "The Maids" (about two servants who take
turns playing the role of their employer)--ties the story
together strikingly in a single dramatic confrontation.
