Title
Review for Va savoir (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
Jacques Rivette's VA SAVOIR, which translates to WHO KNOWS?, would more aptly be
titled WHO CARES?  The minimal story concerns three couples who are barely in
love and who are mildly interested in others.  None of the characters are the
least bit compelling.  
All of the actors (Jeanne Balibar, Sergio Castellitto, Marianne Basler, Jacques
Bonnaffé, Hélčne de Fougerolles and Bruno Todeschini) sleepwalk through their
parts, and the director takes forever -- over two and one half hours -- to say
almost nothing.  Besides the flimsy romantic angle, the story also concerns the
search for an unpublished eighteenth century play.  Finally, there is a play
within the movie that is -- one assumes -- supposed to be almost laughably bad. 
The irony is that the movie itself isn't much better.
"It can't go on like this," Camille (Jeanne Balibar) remarks about a half hour
into the movie.  Sadly, it does.  This much can be said in the movie's defense. 
At least its extremely bland trailer accurately represents the movie itself. 
You can't say that about many films.
VA SAVOIR runs 2:34.  The film is in French and Italian with English subtitles. 
It is rated PG-13 for "brief nudity" and would be acceptable for kids around 11
and up.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 12, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  DRIVE A CROOKED ROAD (director/writer: Richard Quine; screenwriters: from the
book by James Benson Nablo/Blake Edwards; cinematographer: Charles Lawton;
editor: Jerome Thoms; cast: Mickey Rooney (Eddie Shannon), Dianne Foster
(Barbara Mathews), Kevin McCarthy (Steve Norris), Jack Kelly (Harold Baker),
Harry Landers (Ralph), Jerry Paris (Phil), Paul Picerni (Carl), Dick Crockett
(Don), Mort Mills (Garage Foreman), Peggy Maley (Marge); Runtime: 82; Columbia;
1954) 
A rather flat film noir that never gets that interesting. Eddie Shannon (Rooney)
is a lonely grease monkey and amateur racing driver, who is cruelly ribbed by
most of the men he works with and is insecure around women. Suddenly a very
attractive lady, Barbara Mathews (Foster), lures him to be her steady date
because her boyfriend, Steve Norris (Kevin McCarthy), whom he doesn't realize is
her boyfriend, wants her to get him to drive the getaway car during the robbery
of the Palm Springs bank. The gang needs an expert driver to go over a rough
road and get to an exit in a short time so that the robbers will avoid the
police roadblock. 
Eddie only does it because he's afraid of losing Barbara, someone he has come to
love, even though they have no physical contact, in the week he has known her.
She cons him into doing it and he's so naive and hungry for her love that he's
clueless as to what she's up to. Steve's strong-arm partner, the wisecracking
Harold (Kelly), is ordered by the boss to bump off the poor sucker when he
returns to Steve's place after the successful heist and the guilt-ridden Barbara
tells him that he was setup as a chump. 
Warning: spoiler to follow in the next paragraph. 
But Eddie skillfully crashes the car headed for a secluded Santa Monica beach
spot, where Steve is ordering him to go at gunpoint. This kills Harold, but the
injured Eddie returns to Steve's house, where he shoots him when he sees him
beating Barbara for disobeying his orders to not tell Eddie anything. The police
arrive, as Eddie comforts Barbara. 
The film is best at capturing how lonely and isolated Eddie is, and how his
dreams of being a Grand Prix champion rider seem out of the question but are the
only tangible things he has going for him until Foster enters his life. Eddie is
portrayed in a sympathetic light, despite his poor judgment exercised. It's the
simpleness of this tale and lack of any pretensions that makes it convincing but
not necessarily sparkling. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Robin Clifford
French stage star, Camille (Jeanne Balibar), is returning to Paris after
three successful years working in Italy. She left the City of Lights after
breaking up with her pretentious boyfriend, Pierre (Jacques Bonnaffe), and
has since been living with the owner of the theater company, Ugo (Sergio
Castellitto), in which she performs. When he moves his troupe to Paris for
a run of the play "As You Desire Me," Camille's interest in Pierre is
rekindled and she has to make some life-changing decisions in "Va Savoir."
73-year old veteran helmer Jacques Rivette was one of the original
contributors to the legendary French film critique publication, Cahiers du
Cinema, with the likes of Francois Truffaut, Alain Resnais, Jean-Luc Godard
and Claude Chabrol. He, and the rest, began the French New Wave movement
and Rivette was the first of these film icons to make a feature film under
this aesthetic. He is best known for his memorable "Celine and Julie Go
Boating" (1974), establishing his technique of a story-within-a-story.
With "Va Savoir," Rivette utilizes this method once again, this time
leafing in bits of performances of a play while following three women and
three men as they become entangled in each other lives during the play's
run in Paris. Camille has lived, for the past two years, in Italy with Ugo
and starred in his troupe of players. He made plans to take their current
theatrical production on the road to France, but poor advance ticket sales
have the director/actor worried. He is also unaware of his lover's
still-smoldering feelings for Frenchman Pierre, an intellectual working on
a treatise about German philosopher Heidegger.
Once in Paris, Camille is distracted by her memories of Pierre and it shows
in her performance in the play. She forgets her lines, at one point, and
relies on other members of the troupe to help her out. She knows, at this
point, that she must find Pierre and goes to their old apartment, finding
not Pierre but his significant other, Sonia (Marianne Basler). Camille
leaves without telling her name, but fully intends to find her ex and
confront her past.
Though Ugo is worried over the poor ticket sales for his play, he is also
obsessed with searching for an unpublished manuscript by 18th century
Italian dramatist, Carlo Goldoni. While poring through the archives in
Italy, he meets a beautiful young student, Do (Helene de Fougerrolles), who
helps him in his quest. The pretty researcher is very attracted to the
actor and she guides him to a small, private library in Paris that may have
just what he seeks. He meets the proprietor, Madame Desprez (Catherine
Rouvel), only to find out that the lady is Do's mother. While there, he
also meets Do's half-brother Arthur, a shady, possessive guy who, we find
out, uses his seductive powers for his own larcenous gains. Arthur, it
turns out, is bent on seducing Sonia for whatever he can get from her to
fuel his gambling habit.
Rivette (who co wrote the script with Pascal Bonitzer and Christine
Laurent) keeps it light as each player has his/her own agenda of love. This
is the kind of romantic comedy that forgoes a simple triangle of
relationships as Camille seeks to find out if her decision to leave Pierre,
three years ago, was the right one. Complicating this is the fact that she
has also developed an affection for Sonia following a disastrous dinner
where Ugo, knowing about Camille's past with Pierre, is less than civil to
his girlfriend's former lover. Ugo is also distracted by his search for the
missing Goldoni script, "The Destiny of Venice," and by the attentions of
Do, who challenges the Italian with the choice of a Venetian destiny or a
Parisian chance. There may also be something going on between Do and
Arthur, too.
The comedy of "Va Savoir" is not nearly as broad as would be seen in an
American or British sex farce. It is much more subtle and makes you grin at
times but doesn't generate any real laughs. This is part of the
sophisticated French attitude toward sex where infidelity is not overtly
confronted, but accepted as a Francophile way of life. This isn't to say
that the members of the each of the couples in the flick tacitly accept
their other's infidelities, real or imagined. When Ugo joins Camille for
dinner at the home of Pierre and Sonia, his body language - wolfing down
dinner, terse responses to questions and a generally uptight demeanor -
speaks for itself the discomfort he has with the situation.
Jeanne Balibar gives an aloof, almost detached performance as Camille. Her
character, the temperamental actress, sees life only from her viewpoint,
expecting those around her to accept her self indulgence as she decides
which man she will end up with - Pierre or Hugo. There is also a dalliance
with Arthur, but that is for more altruistic reasons that revolve around
Sonia. Sergio Castellitto is terrific as Ugo. He is obviously torn up by
Camille's past and, possibly, future, but is also smitten by the attention
by Do and there is a palpable sexual attraction between the two. His search
for the missing Goldoni is really an aside to the film's romantic comedy
but there is a natural feel to his obsession that fits the film's flow.
Marianne Basler and Helene de Fougerolles are both beautiful and talented
in their portrayals of Sonia and Do, respectively. Jacques Bonnaffe, as
Pierre, is dead on as the intellectual who can be, initially, attractive
but, with his own boring obsession with Heidegger, he soon wears on you. I
wondered why Camille and Sonia would even be attracted to such a twit.
Bonnaffe is good in his performance as the self-possessed Pierre. Bruno
Todeschini is suitably slimy as the conniving, selfish Arthur who, we hope,
will get his deserved comeuppance.
The structure of the film keeps it from being stodgy and stage bound by
interleaving pieces from different parts of different performances of Ugo's
play. By the time the movie is over you build up a pretty fair
understanding of the plot of "As You Desire Me" and it helps to keep the
film moving along even while making it longer than it would be without this
device. Rivette and his co writers do a good job of combining the play
within the movie. Cinematography, by frequent Rivette collaborator William
Lubtchansky, is static, giving the flick the feel of a stage play being
filmed. Other techs are adequate if unremarkable.
"Va Savoir" is the obvious work of a veteran filmmaker who maintains a sure
hand on things, gleaning good performances out of his actors even with the
sparse, conventional material at hand. It lacks the sparkle that an
outstanding romantic comedy should have, but is an entertaining little
farce, still. I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Veteran French filmmaker Jacques Rivette has a reputation for making long
films.
        His masterwork, "Celine and Julie Go Boating" (1974), clocks in at a
little over three hours, but that's but a drop in the bucket compared to
his experimental 16mm films of the early 1970s--the 12-hour 40-minute "Out
1: Noli Me Tangere" and its heavily edited cousin "Out 1: Spectre" (four
hours plus), for example.  Perhaps Rivette is best known to American
audiences for his four-hour art/nude marathon "La Belle Noiseuse," an
experience that some cynics have likened to watching paint dry.
        Which is why, at a mere 150 minutes, his latest film "Va Savoir" ("Who
Knows?") seems positively miniscule in contrast.
        The downside to "Va Savoir"'s scant two-and-a-half hour duration is that
just when you're starting to get to know and appreciate its stellar cast of
characters, the film ends.  Rivette understands the long format better than
anyone, and an extended running time gives the former Cahiers du Cinema
critic-turned-auteur the opportunity to develop his characters more fully.
Since Rivette loves to play around with films (or plays) within his bodies
of work, there's more scope for repetition and cross-referencing, something
the 73-year-old director juggled to perfection in "Celine and Julie..." but
really only has the time to hint at in "Va Savoir."
        Typically a successful French farce or, in this particular case, a
romantic comedy is quickly remade by an American studio for singularly
economic reasons, yet here for perhaps the first time Sony Pictures
Classics is unleashing "Va Savoir" ahead of a very similar-plotted domestic
production (Edward Burns's "Sidewalks of New York").  Both films feature a
sextet of various displaced and disturbed individuals who wind up rubbing
shoulders and elbows over the movie's elaborate and sometimes volatile course.
        "Va Savoir" focuses on three such "couples."  There's Camille (Jeanne
Balibar), a gamine of an actress who has recently (and nervously) returned
to Paris from Italy after a three-year hiatus to perform in a play, "As You
Desire Me," with her co-star/director/lover Ugo (sympathetically played by
Sergio Castellitto).  There's Camille's ex-husband, the pretentious Pierre
(Jacques Bonnaffé), and his wife Sonia (Marianne Basler), whom Camille
insists on meeting.  And then there's a pretty young student, Do (Hélčne de
Fougerolles), who helps Ugo track down a missing manuscript he's been
obsessed with for years.  Do lives with her possessive half-brother Arthur
(Bruno Todeschini) who, in turn, is orchestrating an affair with Sonia.
It's a condensed new wave Parisian redux of "La Ronde," with Rivette and
his screenwriters (Pascal Bonitzer and Christine Laurent) working overtime
in juxtaposing theatricality with reality and reveling in the conflicts it
creates.
        An able--not to mention bilingual--cast are both charming and disarming,
with Balibar particularly radiant.  As with many of his previous films,
Rivette continues to provide fully fleshed-out female roles and while the
sense of improvisation is gone for the most part, the characters are so
well written that it doesn't seem to matter.  My only complaint, again, is
that "Va Savoir" develops a tempo that is abruptly and disappointingly
interrupted by a shorter than average (Rivette-wise) running time.
        Who indeed knows what high drama and/or comic excesses might have ensued
had we been treated to another intriguing hour or two...
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb
