Title
Review for King of the Hill (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jesse Bradford, Jeroen Krabbe, Lisa Eichhorn,
           Spalding Gray, Karen Allen.
Screenplay/Director:  Steven Soderbergh.
     It's called the sophomore slump, and it's a pitfall common to all
contemporary art forms.  A writer has a lifetime to create the
breakthrough debut, and eighteen months to create a follow-up everyone
will expect to be equally good; as just the most recent cinematic
example, witness John Singleton's POETIC JUSTICE.  Writer/director
Steven Soderbergh turned heads with his first feature, 1989's SEX,
LIES AND VIDEOTAPE, then stumbled with the atmospheric but empty
KAFKA.  In such cases, the third try often will tell which was the
exception, and which the rule.  If this is true of Soderbergh, the
evidence that this is one auteur with staying power is KING OF THE
HILL, a beautiful and darkly poetic adaptation of A. E. Hotchner's
memoir of life during the Great Depression.
     Our tour guide through 1933 St. Louis is Aaron Kurlander (Jesse
Bradford), a bright and creative twelve-year-old.  His father (Jeroen
Krabbe) is an unemployed salesman, forcing the family to live in the
gloomy Empire Hotel.  When his younger brother (the adorable Cameron
Boyd) is sent away to live with relatives, Mom (Lisa Eichhorn) gets
sick and Dad gets a traveling salesman job, Aaron is left by himself.
The film follows his encounters and friendships with several fellow
residents of the Empire, including larcenous but good-hearted Lester
(Adrien Brody), well-heeled alcoholic Mr. Mungo (Spalding Gray) and
Ella (Amber Benson), a gawky, sad-eyed young girl with a big crush on
Aaron.  They all try to stay one step ahead of Ben (Joseph Chrest), the
Empire's reptilian bellhop who locks out delinquent guests at a
moment's notice.
     KING OF THE HILL's greatest triumph is one of tone.  As somber as
the subject matter could have been, Soderbergh opts neither for
grittiness nor Spielbergian sentimentality.  None of the Empire's
residents are treated as pathetic or heroic; they're simply decent
people trying to do their best with what they've been given.  There is
as much humor as their is sadness in KING OF THE HILL, perhaps more.
There are some truly charming moments:  Aaron's 8th-grade graduation
ceremony; Aaron and Lester saving the Kurlander's car from
repossession; Aaron improvising an exciting career for his father to a
wealth classmate between swigs of Coca-Cola.  All are lovingly
photographed by Elliot Davis and accented by a giddy Cliff Martinez
score reminiscent of Randy Newman.  To be certain, this isn't an
entirely pleasant film; there are some dark and bittersweet moments.
However, the balance is maintained so that it feels (at the risk of
sounding cliche) like life.
     The splendid ensemble cast only adds to the richness.  Heading the
list is Bradford, perfectly cast as the imaginative Aaron.  He manages
to capture both a savvy born of necessity and pubescent awkwardness
with understated style.  Krabbe is solid as the father unaware of how
his well-intentioned actions are hurting his son; Eichhorn is good but
misused as the fragile mother.  Of the hotel's denizens, I was
particularly taken with Amber Benson as Ella, who conveys a heartfelt
desperation for contact that generates some touching scenes with
Aaron.  Spalding Gray, as he does when he's cast in a film, basically
plays Spalding Gray.  Also worth noting is Karen Allen in an appealing
turn as Aaron's supportive teacher.
     I have no frame of reference for the historical accuracy of KING
OF THE HILL, but I do know that it *felt* real.  The tent cities,
railyard Hoovervilles and slum hotels coexist with mansions in casually
accepted fashion, free of some "issue" of class conflict.  There are
also intriguing character types, particularly the fascistic beat cop
who treats his street like a fiefdom.  In short, KING OF THE HILL feels
like a man's vivid memory of a difficult but enriching boyhood, told
with power and grace.  Soderbergh has a gift for visual narrative, and
it makes for an outstanding film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jesse Bradford, Jeroen Krabbe, Lisa Eichhorn, Adrien Brody,
           Spalding Gray, Elizabeth McGovern, Karen Allen
Director:  Steven Soderbergh
Producers:  Albert Berger, Barbara Maltby, and Ron Yerxa
Screenplay:  Steven Soderbergh based on the memoirs of A. E. Hotchner
Music:  Cliff Martinez
Released by Gramercy Pictures
     In the midst of the Great Depression, in the city of St. Louis,
the family of Aaron Kurlander (Jesse Bradford) is falling apart.  His
little brother has been shipped off to live with an uncle, his sick
mother (Lisa Eichhorn) has been admitted to a sanitarium, and his
father (Jeroen Krabbe) must go on the road to make money.  So Aaron is
left on his own in a fleabag hotel, with no money and few friends.
Life becomes a struggle for the twelve year old--the hotel wants to
evict him and his meager supply of food is running dangerously low--and
it's only through his remarkable resourcefulness that he manages to
survive.
     Rarely has 1933 St. Louis been so real.  Steven Soderbergh (best
known for his debut feature SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE) has taken the
time and effort necessary to bring the period to life with
uncompromising accuracy.  Many period pieces give only token
acknowledgment to the era in which they take place, but KING OF THE
HILL has the Great Depression woven inextricably throughout.  Flawless
detail is an undeniable asset.
     1993 has seen movie after movie featuring boys struggling to reach
maturity while discovering an identity.  AMERICAN HEART, THIS BOY'S
LIFE, and SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER are a few of the better ones, but
none is as impressive as KING OF THE HILL, perhaps because none has
quite as simple a tale to tell.  The film is what it claims to be:  a
series of interrelated reminiscences about the life of an abandoned
child in the midst of one of this nation's most difficult times.
     There is much in KING OF THE HILL to enthrall.  The
characters--even those we don't see much of--are rich, and the
situations are, for the most part, entirely believable (I had a little
trouble with a scene involving a runaway car, but that was the only
sequence that struck a false note).  Soderbergh has carefully developed
this movie to draw out the drama without resorting to tired plot
devices.  The fact is, Aaron's story, no matter how plain it might
initially seem, is powerful in its simplicity.
     Of course, to do justice to the plot, an effective young actor was
needed to play Aaron.  Jesse Bradford's performance is natural and
unforced and we never get the sense that he's doing more than reacting
to circumstances.  The film revolves around Aaron, and Bradford is up
to the task, regardless of the complexity of the emotions he is
expected to show.  Take, for example, the touching, bittersweet
relationship that develops between Aaron and a lonely, epileptic girl
living down the hall.  The resonance of scenes with these two is
remarkable.
     While no one else has nearly as much screen time as Bradford, the
young actor has established actors supporting him.  Foremost are Jeroen
Krabbe and Lisa Eichhorn as Aaron's father and mother, each of whom
does a fine job with their material.  Krabbe comes across as concerned
for his children, but painfully distracted by financial difficulties.
Eichhorn takes pains to bring sympathetic realism to a small role.
     Adrien Brody gives an energetic performance as Lester, Aaron's
best friend and mentor.  Noted monologist Spalding Gray plays an
intelligent, frustrated middle-aged man whose relationship with a
prostitute (Elizabeth McGovern) Aaron has difficulty categorizing.  The
two are obviously intimate, yet they appear to have only contempt for
one another.  McGovern, like Karen Allen as Aaron's teacher, is
underused.
     It's amazing how something so deceptively uncomplicated can be so
effective.  The narrative is relatively straightforward; Soderbergh
doesn't employ any unusual chronologies.  His style is frank, not
quirky, and lends itself to a number of powerful images:  a starving
boy cutting out pictures of food and serving them on a plate, a
homeless man waving hello, a puddle of blood-tainted water seeping from
underneath a closed door.
     As in life, there are a few unanswered questions at the end of
KING OF THE HILL, but most of these deal with peripheral issues and in
no way detract from the satisfaction imparted by the film.  Done with
less mastery, this could have been just another run-of-the-mill coming
of age story.  However, with Soderbergh at the helm (confirming the
ability he showed in SEX, LIES & VIDEOTAPE which some thought might
have been a flash in the pan after the disappointing follow-up of
KAFKA), this becomes a remarkable odyssey about a resilient young hero
who uses both his imagination and his sense of reality to survive.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
