Title
Review for Double Happiness (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
     Mina Shum, in her writer/director's notes on DOUBLE HAPPINESS, makes
her life story sound like a modern-day Book of Job:  She's an
unappreciated Chinese-Canadian twentysomething.  She left home at 18 and
didn't have any furniture.  She worked at McDonald's.  And she made a
movie about all this.
     Well, cry me a river.  DOUBLE HAPPINESS is probably the most
blatantly self-centered film I've seen all year.  After all, when people
say, "Write what you know," they don't mean, "Write about YOU YOU YOU!" 
The idea is to take a personal story and make it accessible to the
masses.  This movie is just one big, running, inside joke.
     The story:  Jade, a Chinese-Canadian twentysomething (Sandra Oh), is
unappreciated at home.  Her father (Stephen Chang) is domineering and
wants her to be "a good Chinese girl."  Mother (Alannah Ong) is no help at
all.  In a fit of hormonal lunacy, Jade picks up Mark (Callum Rennie)--get
this--a white guy she sees vomiting outside a trendy nightclub.  Mom and
Dad do not approve; they keep trying to set Jade up with lawyers and
doctors.  Now, see if you can guess the big ending.
     The sad thing is, it could have been a good movie.  Unfortunately,
bad acting on a general level really hampers the film, especially during
the melodrama of the family struggle, where everything seems almost
farcical.  Also, the movie's supposed to be a comedy/drama (I think), but
a number of opportunities to infuse some much-needed humor are missed. 
Like they say a number of times during the film, Jade looks just like
Connie Chung--and Connie Chung does *not* do comedy.
     Thankfully, Shum's direction is assured, stylish, and innovative, and
the best moments in this film are completely visual.  (And, with music by
Shadowy Men on a Shadowy Planet, the band from "The Kids in the Hall," the
audio isn't bad, either.)  Unfortunately, this is just icing on a poorly
cooked cake.
     The sad bottom line is that DOUBLE HAPPINESS is simply unnecessary
and isn't even uplifting, as it was intended.  Save your money and get the
moral to the story here:  Life sucks, and you better just get used to it.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema 
Running Length: 1:40 
MPAA Classification: Not Rated (Mature themes, sexual situations, 
                     profanity) 
Cast: Sandra Oh, Alannah Ong, Stephen Chang, Frances You, Johnny Mah 
Director: Mina Shum 
Producers: Steve Hegyes and Rose Lam Waddell 
Screenplay: Mina Shum 
Cinematography: Peter Wunstorf 
Music: Shadowy Men on a Shadowy Planet 
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features 
In English and Cantonese with subtitles 
     With a style and tone reminiscent of Ang Lee's two most recent 
films (THE WEDDING BANQUET and EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN), Mina Shum's debut 
feature, DOUBLE HAPPINESS, chronicles the tribulations of one Chinese-
Canadian young woman as she struggles to develop her own identity in a 
family where her parents are bound by traditions she views as outdated 
and short-sighted.   
     The comic tone of DOUBLE HAPPINESS has a unique flavor.  Shum is 
clearly interested in making her points through laughter rather than 
tears.  The film opens by introducing us to the protagonist, an 
unmarried twenty-ish woman named Jade, as she delivers a short monologue 
about what it was like being raised in her family.  "I grew up wondering 
why we couldn't be the Brady Bunch," she confides, later adding that the 
Bradys never needed subtitles.  During the course of the film, Jade 
isn't the only one who speaks directly to the camera.  Among others, her 
grandmother, father, and a fen shwei master (a sort of soothsayer) are 
all given similar opportunities. 
     Jade, as played by actress Sandra Oh, is a wonderful character:  
likable, bubbly, optimistic, funny, and -- most important of all -- 
believable.  She's the kind of person worth building a movie around, and 
that's exactly what has happened here.  There are several subplots going 
on, but this is ultimately Jade's story.  It tells of her growing 
dissatisfaction with her parents' restrictive rules, her desire to date 
non-Chinese men, her attempts to break into acting (a profession scorned 
by her parents), and her reluctance to hurt a mother and father she 
loves dearly.  In the end, these wants become incompatible.   
     Like many of the best comedies, this one is funny because it deals 
with the realities of life and the human condition -- circumstances and 
situations that everyone can relate to, regardless of ethnic heritage.  
DOUBLE HAPPINESS is often as insightful as the most serious motion 
pictures, only it chooses a lighter tone to impart its message.  There 
are moments of silliness here, as well, but they're not so extreme or 
out-of-place that they confuse the movie's primary itent. 
     What Mina Shum has achieved here is impressive for a first-time 
film maker.  DOUBLE HAPPINESS has the look and feel of a seasoned 
director's work.  It uses techniques rarely embraced by novices (such as 
unusual camera angles to advance the narrative), and the script is 
filmed with a delicacy of touch that makes the humor all the more 
effective.  This is truly a wonderful motion picture, and an unexpected 
find. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
