Title
Review for Kundun (1997)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Steve Rhodes
     KUNDUN, Martin Scorsese's excessively earnest story about the
fourteenth Dalai Lama, is as different as can be from the much maligned
SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET, which starred Brad Pitt (not as the Dalai Lama).
Using Hollywood's rule of 2s, the pictures came out within a few months
of each other.  With a paucity of ideas, the studios borrow liberally
from each other, causing similar movies to appear in the same time
frame.
     KUNDUN has two distinct parts -- before and after the Chinese
invasion of peace-loving Tibet.  The first half is as dull as
dishwater.  Were it not for the handsome photography and the beautiful
music, I suspect that many people would walk out.  As I watched the
minutia of the young Dalai Lama's life -- feeding the fish, learning
geography, buying sheep and watching the rats in the palace, I began to
miss THE POSTMAN.  As bad as it was, at least it had a narrative and
some characters.  KUNDUN, in contrast, is satisfied to be little more
than a cinematic tone poem and religious homage.  And for those who
were turned off by Brad Pitt's film, seeing KUNDUN may cause you to
reevaluate SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET.
     Starting in the 1930s, the story shows how they went to a remote
village to discover the little boy they decided was the reincarnation
of the Dalai Lama.  After they bring him to the capital, his poor
family gets a large house and their own servants.  Using all native
actors, the movie looks totally authentic even if Melissa Mathison's
script makes it relatively vacuous.
     Roger Deakins's cinematography for the movie has already won
awards.  Although handsome, the beauty comes as much from the terrain
and the sets as the camera work.  The orchestral score, which
overpowers many of the scenes, is so clearly composed by Philip Glass
that having his name listed in the credits seems superfluous.  The CDs
should sell briskly.
     The first half of the movie, which needs heavy trimming, has all
of the interest of a well intentioned, but lifeless, religious
instructional video.  When the Chinese invade, the story finally begins
to pick up, slowly but perceptibly.  Since it takes persecution of the
Tibetans to breath life into the film, the audience may feel a bout of
guilt along with the relief from boredom.  Rather than feel anxiety,
ask yourself why Scorsese took so long to say so little.
     The older actors playing the Dalai Lama (Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong as
an adult and Gyurme Tethong at age 10) approach their parts with large
doses of sincerity and reverence.  The younger ones (Tulku Jamyang
Kunga Tenzin at age 5 and Tenzin Yeshi Paichang at age 2) are
terminally cute.
     The grown Dalai Lama goes to Peking to negotiate personally with
the smiling but duplicitous Chairman Mao, played as a buffoon by Robert
Lin.  At first the Dalai Lama thinks he has won major concessions from
Mao, but eventually he realizes that Mao's promises are meaningless.
"Religion is poison," Mao lectures him in one of their last meetings.
     We see starkly, but briefly, some of the atrocities inflicted on
the poor Tibetans.  In the most horrific scene, we witness a child
being given a gun and forced to kill his parents.
     After the show ended, the audience at our screening left looking
exhausted.  Did the story of one of this century's key religious
figures have to be so inert?  KUNDUN sketches the outline of a story
and then fills it in with a music video.
     KUNDUN runs too long at 2:08.  It is rated PG-13 for violence and
would be fine for kids twelve and up.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
KUNDUN (director: Martin Scorsese; cast: Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong, Gyurme
Tethong, Tencho Gyalpo, Tsewang Migyur Khangsar, Geshi Yeshi Gyatso,
1997)
One may justifiably ask, as many critics did, what was Scorsese thinking
when he made Kundun? Is he capable of making a film on a subject he has
only a limited knowledge of?
The first question is a snap to answer, he was thinking about the 14th
Dalai Lama and the suffering of his people. Thusly, he would make a
political statement about the Tibetan situation and show the outrages
their culture is going through in the hands of the conquering
oppressors, the Chinese communists. The style of the film is semi -
documentary, allowing nonprofessional actors to dominate the film (they
did a great job).
The film begins with the joy and pride of the 14th Dalai Lama being
chosen at the age of two in 1937 and ends on the sour note of his forced
departure in 1959.
In between, the story is told from the Dalai Lama's point of view, as he
grows up quickly, faced with worldly decisions for his people at the
tender age of 14. His sense of reality is enhanced by his inner
experiences in the form of dreams and meditation. His nonviolence is
steadfast, despite reasons to feel anger at the Chinese for their
killings and barbarous attitude and insulting comments about his
country. What is most brilliant, is the camera work that focuses clearly
on all the chaos and religious nuances, and records them in a way acting
could not duplicate.
The shortcomings of this film may or may not be in the second question
asked: Whether Scorsese is capable of gleaming the truths of Tibetan
Buddhism, since any film about Tibet has to comprehend the influence
religion plays on its people. I think Scorsese wants this film to be
seen not necessarily as a religious experience, but as a spiritual
calling that people of different faiths from all over the world can
share in. This film is noncommercial, thereby it doesn't have to satisfy
the wants of those who demand to see a film in a  prescribed way. That
this film is successful and worth seeing, becomes apparent, especially,
when you compare it with the other recent film that tried to explore the
Tibetan situation, SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET; and it should become obvious
how Scorsese's film towers over that one in perspective and feeling. For
Christ's sake, the other humanitarian film used a Nazi as the hero of
the story, which made it very difficult to feel very trusting of the
film's aims, especially since no one even mentioned a little thing like
a holocaust taking place.
The weakness of Kundun is that since Scorsese wasn't confident or
knowledgable enough about Tibet, he had to use the Dalai Lama as a
source of reference for the film; and this shows, the film might be
authentic in scope, but it lacks the artistic spark a great work of art
must have, instead, this well - meaning presentation gets bogged down in
its own propaganda and the movie gets blandly trapped in its own goody -
two - shoe approach. Now, the exception to this, is that marvelously
original Dalai Lama dream sequence, the one of impending doom for his
country as he dreams of the monks in their red robes all lying dead in
the field. We see a human being who is concerned that maybe he doesn't
know everything.
I, for one, never fully trust those who are held up on a pedestal as
incarnations of what is good. And films that lose their ability to
penetrate all that makes things tick inside their characters, lose a
certain amount of integrity.
Though, Scorsese's film is not a masterpiece, it certainly accomplished
what he wanted it to do, and therefore with that limited objective in
mind, I find it easy to recommend this film (even though I consider
the HORSE THIEF to be the best film on Tibet to date, but I realize that
the subject matter of this film is exceedingly important and should be
seen by a wide range of people. After all, an entire culture is being
wiped out in front of our eyes, and people must be made aware of it. The
media has not done a good job in this regard, and maybe a film such as
this can somehow compensate somewhat for that past neglect.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KUNDUN ** 1/4  Directed by Martin Scorsese. Written by Melissa Mathison,
from the life story of the Dalai Lama. Photography, Roger Deakins. Editing,
Thelma Schoonmaker.  production and costume design, Dante Ferretti. Art
direction, Franco Ceraolo, Massimo Razzi. Set decoration, Francesca Lo
Schiavo. Visual effects, Dream Quest Images.Visual effects supervisor,
Jeffrey Burks. Music, Philip Glass. Cast: Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong (Adult
Dalai Lama), Gyurme Tethong (Dalai Lama, age 12), Tulku Jamyang Kunga
Tenzin (Dalai Lama, age 5), Tenzin Yeshi Paichang (Dalai Lama, age 2),
Tencho Gyalpo (Dalai Lama's mother), Tsewang Migyur Khangsar (Dalai Lama's
father), Robert Lin (Chairman Mao),  et al. A Disney/Touchstone/Buena Vista
release. 128 minutes. PG-13.
With succinctness and cine-savvy, as we left the screening of "Kundun,"  my
friend Nicolae stated: "It's not a movie, it's a state of mind."
The state of mind is Martin Scorsese's and his writer Melissa Mathison's
sincere, admiring reverence for the Dalai Lama, called Kundun (The
Presence) by his people. It is a well-meant,  not too odd subject for
former choir-boy Scorsese who, in ways clear and realistic or subtle and
allusive, has often worked into his films tenets or values of Catholicism.
It was no stretch for the director to expand into Tibetan mysticism --
although he has declared that his main interest in the film was visual.
Scorsese is a Prince of moviemakers and a Prince of cinephiles. I'm sure
that those who write about cinema feel unease, even distress, whenever they
deal with a Scorsese work that is not tops. It's like admitting in public
the weaknesses of a best friend.
"Kundun" is a primarily visual homage to the current, and14th, Dalai Lama,
a tribute to the people of Tibet, and a political protest against the
country's being gobbled up by China in 1950.
The Dalai Lamas are a succession of reincarnations, and the manifestations
of the Bodhisattva (Buddha) of Compassion. The film begins with the search
for the new spiritual/temporal leader. He is to succeed  the 13th Dalai
Lama who passed away in 1935.
The14th Dalai Lama Tenzin Gyatso, was born in 1935 in a small village in
north eastern Tibet to a peasant family. In the search for the new Dalai
Lama he was "recognized" (i.e. identified as the next Dalai Lama) in 1937,
at age two-and-a-half. In 1940 he was enthroned. But in 1959, after the
failed revolt of his people against the Communist Chinese, he fled to exile
in India with about 80,000 followers. Since1960, he has resided in
Dharamsala, India, known as "Little Lhasa," the seat of the Tibetan
Government-in-exile.
"Kundun" was a long-cherished project of Ms.Mathison. Her previous scripts
were for "The Black Stallion," "E.T.," "The Escape Artist"  and "The Indian
in the Cupboard." Over the years, often assisted by her husband Harrison
Ford, she interviewed the Dalai Lama. The latter had a big hand in changes
and additions to the scenario.
The film follows the life of His Holiness (as he is referred to in all
documents) from childhood to the flight to India. There are several
beautiful moments, but the piousness of the production results in
unintended aloofness from the subject and lack of dramatic tension. Its
contemplative mood comes at the expense of story-telling and of orienting
us. The Tibetan-Chinese conflict is shown without big dramatics --save for
some stylized nightmares of HH --which is good. Yet  excessive restraint
overall givies the impression of something one might label "narrative
soft-focus."
It would be fastidious to compare and analyze this work and Jean-Jacques
Annaud's "Seven Years in Tibet," released shortly before "Kundun." Still,
"Kundun"'s Holies vs.Heathens, with its veneer of mysticism, lack the power
of the earlier picture. It is odd that in their Tibetan films, Frenchman
Annaud made a kind of American action movie, while American Scorsese made a
kind of "intellectual" French film.
By concentrating on discreet hagiography, "Kundun" forgets details that
could be fascinating to Western audiences: the inner workings in the
process of the search for a new Dalai Lama, for example (we get mostly
people riding around);  the tests to which the pre-Lama child is subjected
(these are few and simplified); the true nature of the Dalai Lama as he
grows up and attains adulthood.
Nowhere do we get presages of the now world-famous 14th Dalai Lama ,winner
of a Nobel prize and an immense array of important honors;  worldly, witty,
highly cultivated. I remember, some years ago, his French radio broadcasts
on philosophy and other matters. He was wonderfully eloquent, sharp, witty,
more impressive than even star scholars.
"Kundun" was produced and filmed in Morocco, with some second-unit work in
Idaho and British Columbia. The Moroccan adventure was a tour-de-force
involving nature, sets, buildings, costumes, artifacts, jewelry, many
(human) extras. Casting was not easy. The performers, almost exclusively
Tibetans from all corners of the world, had no theatrical experience and
had to speak English.  Several of them are related to the characters they
play.Their suprisingly competent acting ranges from very good to acceptable
to caricatural (Chairman Mao).The flaw, however, is that as written, no
character was given enough development or dimensionality.
All this is impressively photographed and staged, with gorgeous mandalas
punctuating the sights. Yet, try as it can, most of "Kundun" did not look
to me like Tibet. Annaud's movie made an infinitely better, more convincing
choice by opting for the forbiding, snowy Andes as a stand-in for the
Himalayas.
Avant-gardist Philip Glass's score begins nicely as a mix of Tibetan music
and typical Glass repeated lines, but soon enough their merciless
reiteration becomes annoyingly strident and monotonous.
Scorsese seems much more comfortable with mean streets and places. Reaching
for profundity here he is out of his depth. The sum total of the film is
that it seems to have been conceived as a work for the heart but turned out
a work for the eye. Even then, the lack of muscle in "Kundun" rapidly makes
the viewer unable to remember specific sights, as opposed to those
indelible moments in great --even un-great-- movies.
Think, for instance, of Scorsese's "GoodFellas." Your inner eye and ear
jump to many scenes, especially those of Joe Pesci's brutality and warped
humor in the bar. Think of "Kundun," and very few scenes emerge, except
perhaps those of the lively 2-year old future Dalai Lama repeating
triumphantly "mine!"

Author
Omar Odeh
"In this country you have to change quickly, and all the time;
otherwise people say, 'You already did that...Next!'. I want to reply
'Wait, wait...it seems like the same film, but it's not..."
The subject of the much anticipated, new Scorcese film, Kundun, is not
clear. This is not a liability. The most that can be said is that it
is a cinematic description of events surrounding the life of the 14th
Dalai Lama. Unlike, previous films by the director (Taxi Driver, Alice
Doesn't Live Here Anymore), however, anything beyond this description
is mere speculation. I was not sure what to make of Scorcese's last
film Casino (something more than Goodfellas but less than Raging
Bull). Kundun, unlike Casino, whos formal merits are undeniable but
that somehow never leaves the realm of conventional cinema, transcends
previous elements of Scorcese's style by using devices familiar to the
director in wholly new ways. The voiceover is only the most obvious
example which in this film is an accomplished and integrated layer of
the film as opposed to a crutch or support to an overburdened
narrative as it has been elsewhere in Scorcese's films. The director
has offered an unlikely film, to say the least, and one that is a
happy indication that he is not through astonishing us.
    The film has been faulted in various sources for its lack of
dramatic cohesion. That Kundun does not benefit from the deft plotting
and eerie characterization of a film like Taxi Driver is undeniable,
however, to cite this as a fault seems short-sighted. By his own
admission, there was little interest in approaching Kundun, along
classical lines; the dramaturgy of the film is particularly loose,
breaking from the narrative for long periods of time for the Dalai
Lama (the title character) to comtemplate and debate key decisions
with his advisors or for Scorcese to simply present moody montages.
Formally, Scorcese employs a number of motifs including shoes and
ancient art (the sand Mandala) layered with a nearly constant use of
music. The result is not the type of film we have come to expect but a
type of sound-poem instead. A film as concerned about conveying mood,
intention and meaning as it is with generating pace.
    The careful craftsmanship that has produced Kundun is evidenced by
the approach Scorcese took to the film. The very first translations of
the concept came not in the way of a conventional storyboard but
rather as loose sketches or visual ideas. The precise plot thrusts
were left deliberately, vague a the director focussed his preparatory
work on how best to convey mood through the visual construction of the
film as well as the cinematography. DOP Roger Deakins has credited
Scorcese with paying particular attention to how the his lighting
would serve as one of the key players in any scene. (There is an
excellent account of the circumstances surrounding the photography and
production of Kundun in the February issue of Americain
Cinematographer). That all this was achieved on a relatively low
budget is testimony to the team's technical mastery.
    It seems clear that this film is destined for a Western audience:
the actors all speak in english (albeit somewhat awkwardly) and
although, the cinematic merits in and of themselves are reason enough
to see Kundun, there is little, thematically, in the film that an
Eastern audience would not already be aquainted with.  This being the
case Scorcese's strategy seems particularly well chosen. In opposition
to the necessary perversions that come with this territory (not using
the mother tongue, etc..) the style of the film in terms of the
narrative strategy and formal arrangements employed remains true to
the culture being portrayed. The serene beauty and meditative tone of
Kundun are a more responsible treatment of Eastern themes than, for
instance Schindler's List is of Germany during WWII. In other words by
confronting the viewer with a film that falls outside the realm of
conventional cinema Scorcese compenstaes in some ways for other
necessary distortions. The result is both more legitimate and
responsible than a film like Schindler's List that attempts to cloak
its deceptions in more duplicity; the equivocal, lowest comon
denominator, button pushing, that is the Hollywood continuity style.
    As usual, the fact that great films such as this receive only a
pitiful release here in Ottawa must be opined. In fact if I am not
mistaken Kundun's first-run here in the capital lasted 2 weeks and
consisted of one screen at the Capitol Square cinema (one of the
marginally better venues we have). It is both depressing and
surprising that this was the case since it is largely a reflection of
popular tastes. It is a shame that even Scorcese's stature was not
enough to keep the film around.

Author
James Brundage
Withdrawal. It has to be withdrawal. This is now Day 2 of my lovely vacation
and here I am thinking about it. No CNN. No printer. No Internet. And, come
to think of it, no cheesy movies. I suppose, having become accustomed to the
bad for so long, I have accepted them, learned to deal with them, and become
addicted to the destruction of them in a well thought out review. I suppose
its ironic that the film that makes me want to tear a film apart, that
should make me learn that the bad films, the suffering, is a part of my life
as a movie critic, should be one focused on Buddhism. And it's also ironic
that it should stir the violence in my blood.
The film I'm talking about is Martin Scorscese's Kundun, the Dahlia Lama
film of 1997 that was nominated for four academy awards but walked away with
none (sadly). With a cast that no one's heard of it still managed to pull
off what is becoming impossible: make a great film about a religion that is,
for the most part, misunderstood. Make you sympathize with the Tibetans, and
hate the Red Chinese, and, at the same time, illustrate the drama of the
Dahlia Lama's early life.
It wasn't bad. No, in fact, the film itself was relaxing to watch, and a
helluva lot better than Seven Years in Tibet, the other Dahlia Lama film
that came out at about the same time. Not that it wasn't good to watch: no,
sir, I'm left enjoying almost every frame, the beautiful photography of the
film, the exquisite locations and vistas that it offered. It wasn't even the
direction and acting in the film: they were fine, too. Dramatic content,
writing, miscellaneous technical aspects that I don't even know why I
bothered to learn the names of them. None of them have serious flaws. None
of them annoy me in any shape, way, or form. What annoys me is that I have
become used to, no, addicted to, the ripping apart in a film in my review.
And that's what I'm missing. I'm not just missing it; I'm aching for it. If
I keep seeing films this good, all the time, with nary a bad film, then I
will cease to function as a critic, lose my cruelty and my respect for the
great films, like Kundun, and then I'll REALLY be unable to do my job.
I'll be stuck doing nothing, and be bereft of my moviewatching experience. I
suppose it's taught me something, this movie about a religion I hardly know
outside of the cinema: not only is suffering a part of my life: as a critic,
inflicting suffering is a part of my life too.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: 
Tenzin Yeshi Paichang, Tulku Jamyang Kunga Tenzin, Gyurme Tethong,
Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong, Tenzin Trinley, Tencho Gyalpo
Ingredients: 
Tibet, Tibetan music, Tibetan mountains, Tibetan costumes, Tibetan
villagers, Dalai Lama
Synopsis: 
KUNDUN is the pictorial biography of the fourteenth Dalai Lama, who is
still alive today (but exiled and living in India since the Chinese
military takeover of Tibet). The Dalai Lama is the religious leader of
Tibet. Tibetans revere him as the fourteenth reincarnation of a
compassionate holy man. KUNDUN traces the Dalai Lama's life story from
'pampered tot in training' to exiled leader. 
Opinion: 
1. The cinematography in KUNDUN is priceless and extraordinary.
2. The plot is so unnecessary you can turn off the dialogue and replace
it with music.
3. The music says 'Tibet' but is a bit repetitive and is suspenseful in
the wrong places.
4. Tencho Gyalpo does a superb supporting job as the Dalai Lama's
mother.
5. KUNDUN is an unconventional spiritual film with searing
cinematography.
In my hometown there was once a murder (where a dorky middle-aged guy
living with his wife in a cheap house killed her because she found out
he was involved with the mob. Hollywood turned it into a TV movie). They
portrayed the dorky balding guy as confident, muscular, square-jawed and
handsome. And they portrayed his nagging potbellied wife as a sultry,
hot seductive blond babe. The Hollywood-ized version of the story turned
their shabby roadside shack into a sprawling Beverly Hills countryside
mansion. But that's the way Hollywood movies are. They dramatize and
glamorize, trying to offer us better looking versions of ourselves doing
exaggerations of normal life. 
What if movies didn't do this? Then they might turn out like KUNDUN.
KUNDUN takes the opposite approach. Instead of giving us a glitzy,
schlocky 1990s Hollywood version of Tibet, with a slick plot, and
charming Beverly Hills guys and gals, KUNDUN gives us Tibet, in all its
peculiar timelessness. It plunges us into a weird kaleidoscope world of
ice-capped mountains and swirling robes and reincarnation where time
doesn't exist and neither do stories. KUNDUN is like opening a religious
photo album and seeing pictures come to life: individual grains of
falling sand; a holocaust-like dream scene of hundreds of dead monks
clad in red; a young bespectacled man looks wistfully through a car
window. With no big emphasis on plot, we in the audience are left to ask
ourselves what it all means in the grand scheme of things. Which is
probably just what Martin Scorsese, the director of KUNDUN, intended.
Remarkably, the entire film is a metaphor meant to mirror the mentality
of Tibetan Buddhist meditation.
This makes KUNDUN the cinematic equivalent of staring at the Grand
Canyon. There are only two possible outcomes. Either you'll wonder why
you should stare for two hours when the film apparently doesn't move the
way 'normal' films do. Or you'll be awed by the fantastic visuals and
emerge with a deeper sense of spirituality.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
MPAA: Rated PG-13 for violent images.
"I think that  I am a reflection of the moon in the water. When you see me, and I am trying to be a good man, you see yourself". 
- The 14th Dalai Lama, "Kundun" 
The sons of Genghis Khan gave the Dalai Lama his name. It means "Ocean
of Wisdom". In a wartorn Asia, Tibetans have practiced non-violence
for over a thousand years. The Dalai Lama is their ruler. He is the
human manifestation of the Buddha of Compassion.
In 1933 the 13th Dalai Lama died. Four years later, a holy man,
disguised as a servant, found himself in a far corner of Tibet. He was
searching for the 14th Dalai Lama. His search was almost at an end.
Undoubtedly one of the greatest achievements of the year, 'Kundun' is
a rare cinematic experience, that intoxicates you with its majestic
poetry, beauty and spiritual symbolism. It is also the most
unexpected, coming from a director whose style and history makes him
the last possible choice ( with the exception of directors such as
nJames Cameron and Roland Emerich) for a picture such as this. The
director is Martin Scorsese. Yes, the same Martin Scorsese that gave
you 'Raging Bull', 'Taxi Driver' , 'Goodfellas' and 'Casino' . Believe
me, there is nothing in his latest picture that suggests that you're
watching 'A Martin Scorsese Film', with the exception of the
incredible talent that he has with storytelling.
``Kundun'' is structured as the life of the 14th Dalai Lama, but he is
simply a vessel for a larger life or spirit, continuing through
centuries. That is the film's strength, and its curse. It provides a
deep spirituality, but denies the Dalai Lama humanity; he is permitted
certain little human touches, but is essentially an icon, not a
man. His human needs are therefore completely overseen by his advisors
and teachers. The sudden transition from being a child to becoming the
spiritual ruler of Tibet, does have a terrible price. The tragedy is
of course the complete alienation from the world that this little boy
knew, from his parents and friends. The loss of childhood and humanity
comes simultaneously with the demand of the impossible from a child:
wisdom, rightisnous, commitment and purity of soul. The Chinese have
invaded Tibet. Kundun, frightened and confused, asks his advisors in
disappear: ``What can I do? I'm only a boy.'' His advisers say, ``You
have chosen to be born again. You must know what to do.'' Unlike
Scorsese's portrait of Jesus in ``The Last Temptation of Christ,''
this is not a man striving for perfection, but perfection in the shape
of a man. The film is made of episodes, not a plot. It is like
illustrations bound into the book of a life. Most of the actors are
real Tibetan Buddhists, and their serenity in many scenes casts a
spell.
There is a world somewhere that doesn't base itself on war, where
technology does not exist. Where people live in total harmony with
nature that surrounds them. Majestic mountains, that shine like
gigantic diamonds in the sunlight, cast silver sparkles into the
waters that are as clear as the mountain-air. A castle of colors and
light can be seen in the horizon. Indeed the production designer Dante
Feretti ('Dracula', "Interview With The Vampire") has created a world
of mystique and color that is more magical than any fairytale. His set
and costume design proves invaluable, providing the unformed clay that
the cinematographer Roger Deakins ('Fargo') moulds with light and
shade, adding life and emotion to Feretti's mystical structures. It's
exceptionally beautiful, almost hypnotizing -- a swirl of sound and
illumination. Philip Glass' score, composed using native Tibetan
instrumentation, enhances the rarefied atmosphere. Glass's familiar
compositional techniques are wedded on Kundun to a sensitive use of
ethnic instruments and the voices of the Gyuto Monks, adding an aura
of spiritual power missing from most Hollywood fare. The incredible
blend of technical and visual achievements form a collection of
magical images of pure artistic wizardry that will hold you under
Scorsese's spell for these 2 hours .
Scorsese's picture is not a film that debates about the dogmas of
Buddhism, nor does it concentrate on the battle between religion and
politics. But it does clearly depict how the control of the
totalitarian system kills all hope, magic and individuality. It does
also portray the contrast between the ancient world and the
'progressive' society, clearly symbolized by the silent battle between
heavenly colors of light and the void of darkness. Is it possible to
survive without conflicts and war, and uphold the ancient traditions
in our rapidly changing world? Most of all it is a spiritual
journey. Scorsese opens the door to a world beyond our reach and
comprehension. A way of life so different from ours that it gives us
the opportunity to meditate over our western life style and
society. It is simply one of the most magical, rare films that have
entered the silver screen for some time.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Seeing KUNDUN is a lot like reading a good article about the Dalai
Lama and Tibet from the National Geographic.  It has great color
photography and it has a lot of facts.  But it is an appeal more to the
intellect than to the emotions.  And even as an appeal to the intellect
not everything that the viewer sees will be understood.  But neither
what we see, nor what we hear in the dialogue fleshes out the
character.  Director Martin Scorsese would almost have us believe that
there is nothing to the Dalai Lama but a bundle of wise Buddhist
aphorisms.  Like a Magic 8-ball, whenever he is shaken a different wise
response comes floating to the surface.
     The story begins in 1933.  The 13th Dalai Lama is dead and in the
Tibetan tradition scouts have been sent out to find a young boy who is
the new incarnation of the Dalai Lama's soul.  A two-year-old child is
found who seems to be the 14th reincarnation of the Buddha of
Compassion.  The young child's parents are already aware that their son
is special due to favorable omens surrounding the child, but we never
find out what they feel when they have confirmed that their child is,
in fact, a Buddha of Compassion.
     The boy is brought to the magnificent palace embedded in the side
of a mountain, one of the most majestic buildings in all the world.
And to the boy's bewilderment he is immersed in Buddhist wisdom.  Soon
he begins to understand what is going on and begins to speak with the
insight we would expect of the Dalai Lama.  Still, there is much in the
film left intentionally enigmatic for the audience.  In one scene we
have a large hissing dancer performs for the Lama and then slides
across the floor up to the Lama.  The scene ends with no more message
to the viewer than that this obviously means something.  The viewer
begins an outsider at the beginning of the film and remains an outsider
right through to the end.  Then, as if there was not already enough in
the film that is hard to follow, Scorsese adds sequences of his own
visual symbolism. Rather than show us a big unexplained piece of
Tibetan culture, Scorsese would have done better to show us a smaller
sample and explain his understanding of it.  We get a better idea of
who the Dalai Lama is as a person from SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET than we do
from this biography of the Lama.
     As the story progresses, Tibet is invaded by China and the Lama
has to face the implications of the Chinese invasion of his country.
He is brought, a virtual prisoner, to China where he meets with a
surprisingly affable Chairman Mao.  The Chinese leader is apparently a
man who can have a simple peasant charm one moment and order the death
of thousands the next.  Mao politely but firmly threatens the Lama to
cooperate with the Chinese rape of his country.  The Lama appeals to
the world for help, but not surprisingly his pleas are to little avail.
It seems Tibet's natural isolation is a double-edged sword: over the
centuries it has been a natural barrier to invaders, but no military
force in the world will pierce that barrier just for the sake of
altruism.  Eventually the Lama must decide if he will serve his country
best from within or outside its borders.  The film lacks the scope of
history and the human values that the similar GANDHI had.  Gandhi was
made much more a three-dimensional character than the Lama.
     Scorsese tells the story of the Lama with a cast of unknowns, most
of whom are Tibetan amateurs.  They all stand in the right places say
their lines, but there is no passion in the performances.  The
Tibetans' seem as cold and distant as their land.  Melissa Mathison's
screenplay conveys none of the emotion of her writing screenplays for
THE BLACK STALLION and for E.T., THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL.  Roger Deakins
to create a believable Tibet in hues of reds, yellows, and browns.
(The real Tibet being inaccessible, he shot instead in Morocco, British
Columbia, and Idaho.)  Philip Glass provides a score hypnotic in its
repetitious minimalism.  It seems well-suited to the splendor of Tibet
but is perhaps not a rousing as the film needed.
     KUNDUN is like a very sincere tribute to a great man that just
would not come out the way it was intended. The Dalai Lama may well be
a great man, but KUNDUN is not a great film biography.  I rate it a 6
on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong, Gyurme Tethong, Tulku Jamyang Kunga
Tenzin, Tenzin Yeshi Paichang, Tsewang Migyur Khangsar, Tencho Gyalpo,
Sonam Phuntsok, Gyatso Lukhang, Tenzin Trinley, Jigme Tsarong, Robert
Lin
Director: Martin Scorsese
Producer: Barbara De Fina
Screenplay: Melissa Mathison
Cinematography: Roger Deakins
Music: Philip Glass
Australian release date: June 18
Martin Scorsese's Kundun is to Tibetan Buddhist's what Jesus of Nazareth
is to Christians.  Both of them are revelations; religiously inspired -
and not specifically character driven - examinations of myth and
history.  They're more than just motion pictures.  They're visual
journeys through the beliefs of followers across the world.  Make no
mistake: Kundun is a daring, admirable work of art that depicts the life
of one of the greatest religious figures this century - the fourteenth
Dalai Lama.
Scorsese starts us off with the tale of a two-year old named Tenzin
Gyatso.  A Buddhist monk (disguised as a servant) finds him, and
believes he is the fourteenth reincarnation of the Dalai Lama.  Sure
enough, the boy correctly identifies the thirteenth's personal items and
becomes the spiritual ruler of Tibet.  Through the following years,
Tenzin is extensively trained by high-monks on how a Dalai Lama should
look, think and sound.
At only 16 years of age, Tenzin finds himself protecting his country
from the grasping hands of communist China.  Along the way he has to
cope with the death of his father, the tyranny of the Chinese and the
ever-increasing responsibilities of his godly role.
It's a hard to imagine a true story being more compelling, more
fascinating than that of the fourteenth Dalai Lama's.  It's also hard to
imagine a film that can grasp it successfully without the intrusion of
Hollywood influence.  Last years Seven years in Tibet was a potential
masterpiece that ended up looking sheepish and frivolous; a potent story
told incorrectly due to miscasting (Brad Pit as an Austrian mountain
climber?) and misinterpretation from the screenplay.  It may have been
an easy to watch, easy to enjoy flick - but it felt too simplified, too
refined to be taken seriously as a mature picture.
If Kundun had fallen victim to the above faults, it would have surely
been one of the biggest missed opportunities of recent years.  But much
to my astonishment, I found that Scorsese never falters in delivering
bounding, gripping cinema.  His vision and enlightenment into the life
of this remarkable human being is truly engaging as both a look at his
personal life, and his god-like life through the eyes of the people
around him.
Even on an optical level, Kundun never fails to triumph.  The lush
Morocco scenery (of course, the Chinese did not allow Scorsese to film
it in Tibet) is beautifully manipulated by cinematographer Roger Deakins
(The Shawshank Redemption, Rob Roy).  Combined with some flashy camera
techniques, the whole production looks pretty darn classy - so if you
can't appreciate Kundun on an intellectual basis, its amazing eye candy
will no doubt be enough to keep you gawking for more.  And if this isn't
enough pleasure for the senses, Philip Glass' swashbuckling music score
is used to great effect.
What is even more impressive is the film's almost perfectly composed
screenplay.  Reportedly, the Dalai Lama gave his input into the 14 draft
scripts written by Melissa Mathison (whose other screenplay credits
include ET: The Extraterrestrial and The Indian in the Cupboard).  What
eventuated is a balanced combination of historical fact and character
development; emotion and integrity.  One scene, when an Indian soldier
asks the Dalai Lama whether he is the Lord Buddha, his carefully placed
answer is given: "I believe I am a reflection, like the moon on water.
When you see me, and I try to be a good man, you see yourself."  But by
then I guess it really made no difference, as Scorsese already had my
heart totally immersed, my mind almost over powered with emotion and
respect for this character who continued to defy textbook expectations.
Just like the astonishing story of a man saving the lives of Jews in
oppression, which of course later became the motion picture Schindlers
List, the tale of the fourteenth Dalai Lama simply needed to be told.
And more than that, it needed to be told well - with respect not only
for the Tibetan Buddhists, but also for westerners who won't want to sit
through a two hour lecture on how good Buddhism is.
Perhaps that's why Martin Scorsese succeeds with Kundun on so many
levels.  If there were any biases, I couldn't spot them - he approaches
the subject matter with wise admiration for the Dalai Lama; not trying
to convince us of the Tibetan way of life but still presenting it to us
vividly and honestly.
A little man named Steven Spielberg once believed that there are two
different things a cinema might show: a movie, or a film.  If his theory
is correct, Kundun joins other moving historical epics like Schindlers
List, in a collection of true "films."
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Frans Gustafson
        With its unlimited budgets and nearly perfect technological mastery,
the real surprise of Hollywood might be why more films like Kundun don't
get made? (If you had the God-like power to create absolutely anything,
presumably you wouldn't confine yourself to bringing comic books to
life.)
        Kundun is the view from a time machine. If we'd had contemporary
technology faithfully recording the sights and sounds of the young Dalai
Lama's life in remote Tibet 50 years ago, we probably couldn't have
preserved a better record than what Martin Scorsese has created
after-the-fact. Kundun has that feel.
        Scorsese has performed a Hollywood trick, of course. He didn't actually
have a time machine. But, given that, and given that the acting is done
by non-actor Tibetans, and that the story (unlike Amistad, or The
Titanic, or Seven Years in Tibet) is painstakingly (NOT painfully, but
PAINSTAKINGLY) faithful to the historical record, Scorsese's is a much
trickier trick than animating Flubber or keeping Double-Oh-Seven
unscarred. Scorsese has informed this trick with a talent rare enough to
be genius. 
        Kundun is not, by any means, a flawless movie, but it makes you realize
what there is to be grateful for when commerce can bring us these
splendid tricks of light. Wealth and technology are not enough: we have
to be grateful to Hollywood for allowing Scorsese to surface and
succeed; we have to be grateful to Disney for having the corporate
courage to ignore the Chinese government's strong opposition to this
film; and we have to be grateful to Scorsese for his talent.  (And,
perhaps, too, we have to be grateful to the Dalai Lama. This visual
poetry is his life, after all. Or, at least, one of his lives.)

Author
Ryan Davis
        Martin Scorsese is known for his realistic violence and extreme
profanity. He is known for causing controversy with Christians because of his
depiction of Jesus in "The Last Temptation of Christ". But what he isn't known
for is his role in a movie about peace and compassion, until KUNDUN.
        KUNDUN gives us a interesting look into the lives of Tibetan Buddhist,
and depicts the life of the fourteenth Dalai Lama, from the time of his
discovery(Around age 2) until his late teens when he is forced into exile.
>From the beginning of his life he thinks he is important, insisting he sits at
the head of the table, but when he is 5 he is taken from his family to become
the next  Dalai Lama. When he comes of age and is crowned head of Tibet he is
forced to become the religious and political leader of the country.  He's
greeted with an invasion from Communist China, which ends the peace that has
existed for centuries in Tibet.
        There are several touching parts in this film, these few parts give
us a glimpse into a culture which seems strange and extremely foreign to most
American movie-goers. One particular scene that stands out in my mind is when
the 5 year old        Dalai Lama is brought to his castle for the first time. His
family is seated before him and his older brother is smiling at him, until he
is pushed to the ground and made to bow before his younger brother.
Unfortunately, there aren't many more scenes that show the effect on the
family that their brother/son is Buddha's reincarnation.
        The acting is admirable, considering the majority of the cast are real
monks. The script is to unquestioning of the Dalai Lama, and makes him seem
like a perfect individual. In addition the film's pace is way to slow, not a
usual Scorsese complaint. On a better note, the cinematography, costumes and
art direction is great. I would suggest you watch this film just for its look
at the Asian culture, but wait till its out on video.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Jerry Saravia
The life of the fourteenth Dalai Lama (the human manifestation of Buddha) is a
complicated one: a Buddhist monk who sought to protect Tibet from the Chinese
communist forces by employing nonviolence. This is a project that other
directors such as Zhang Yimou ("Shanghai Triad") or Chen Kaige ("Farewell My
Concubine") would have aptly taken on. I never expected Martin Scorsese, the
poet of violent, lowlife characters, to undertake such an overwhelming,
ambitious project. On the other hand, this is the same man who brought us
distinguished achievements such as "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore," "The Last
Waltz," and "The Age of Innocence," not to mention his memorable gangster
trilogy: "Mean Streets," "GoodFellas" and "Casino." "Kundun" is a gorgeous
film: a lavish treatment of the Dalai Lama's life, but it is just that - a
treatment. 
"Kundun" is the secret name of the Dalai Lama, and it is a name only his
family or close members use. Kundun's life is chronicled in linear fashion:
from his days as a young boy screaming "This is mine. This is mine!" as he is
discovered to be the fourteenth incarnation of Buddha, to his days as an
eighteen-year-old bespectacled leader whose best defense against the Chinese
army is to leave the palace in disguise, on a journey to India. Tenzin Thuthob
Tsarong plays the leader as an adult who finally meets the Chinese dictator Mao
Zedong (Robert Lin), and his shiny black shoes, in Beijing as Tibet is being
invaded by the Red Army. Mao's response to the Dalai Lama's pleas for religious
tolerance is "Religion is poison." 
The first half-hour of "Kundun" is at its best when conveying Kundun's
childhood as he is taken from his humble village to the Holy City of Lhasa
where he brings in forbidden treasures such as "Life" magazines, film
projectors where he runs cowboy films and silents, and cars. Despite all these
trappings, Kundun keeps forgetting he's the Dalai Lama and that he has a
country to protect, including the 5,000 soldiers who guard it. "But I am only a
boy," proclaims Kundun. "What can I do?" His spiritual guides convince him that
he is the Dalai Lama and, therefore, must know what course of action to take. 
All of "Kundun" is very subjective: it is all told from his point-of-view.
There are no Western outsiders like Brad Pitt or Peter O'Toole to distract us.
This is a noble, risky achievement, but the movie does not succeed in letting
us inside Kundun's soul or his spiritual beliefs. As written by Melissa
Mathison ("E.T."), the screenplay reduces the Dalai Lama to a statue for us to
look up in wonder; a man representative of peace and nonviolence, but little
else. Didn't Kundun ever have some doubts about his spirituality? Did he ever
question the fact that he was the Dalai Lama? Mostly, we see Kundun weep at the
thought of imminent violence, and we see him being greeted and idolized by
others as he walks in a solemn state with his red robes. The film's best
sequence is Kundun's nightmarish vision of his followers murdered by the Red
Army in a vast landscape of death - we see several corpses surrounding him in
an atypical shot of Scorsese's canon. Beyond that, the film is not very
introspective of Kundun - we see glimpses of his soul but not much more.
 On the plus side, "Kundun" is the most beautiful movie of Scorsese's career -
it is so voluptuously shot by Roger A. Deakins and so beautifully composed that
you are not likely to see a purer example of cinematography for a long time.
There's never a wasted, uninvolving shot making the whole film as captivating
and involving as it can be. It is also elegantly edited by Thelma Schoonmaker,
full of dissolves from minute details of pearls and cuffs to wide shots of the
villages occupying Kundun's existence. The scenes of the Buddhist marches,
ceremonies and rituals are as powerfully executed as you can imagine,
especially the funeral procession of Kundun's father being fed to the vultures.
The film is certainly not boring, and it is rightly meditative and slow-moving,
much like the superior "Why Has Bodhi-Dharma Left for the East?" 
"Kundun" is a major departure for Scorsese - it is possibly his most
spiritual, peaceful film since "The Last Temptation of Christ." The problem is
Scorsese detaches us from Kundun's soul, and is much too respectful of him
(Even Jesus Christ had his flaws). A common criticism of Scorsese's past work
is that he takes an objective view of his characters; what he really does is
create behavioral portraits. I never found myself detached from any of his main
protagonists (except for Jimmy Doyle in "New York, New York"). Travis Bickle,
Jake LaMotta, Newland Archer, Rupert Pupkin, "Ace" Rothstein are but a few
examples of Scorsese's most successful, soulful portraits. Kundun could have
been another example. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Kevin Patterson
Martin Scorsese's KUNDUN, which chronicles roughly the first twenty years
of the life of the currently exiled Dalai Lama, has been criticized for its
lack of narrative structure. Personally, I don't think it needs one: it
works perfectly well as a study of Tibetan Buddhist culture and how
Communist China . Scorsese views the Dalai Lama the way many Tibetans
probably do, as a larger-than-life symbol of Buddhist spirituality and
political leadership: the only glimpses into his head come from several
interesting yet oblique dream sequences, but his portrayal is appropriate
for a film that concentrates on the political and spiritual rather than the
personal. The set design and cinematography are outstanding, and while
Scorsese occasionally seems to get carried away with the spectacle, it
helps to augment the cultural contrast when the Dalai Lama travels to China
to meet Chairman Mao. Political art sometimes succumbs to the temptation to
start shouting slogans, KUNDUN does not: it succeeds in delivering its
message in an artistically interesting way and without being overly
manipulative.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    KUNDUN is Martin Scorsese's return to the somber religious overtones 
of THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST, and a film so unlike everything else 
he has ever done, including the film made preceding KUNDUN, CASINO.  
Using no Western actors whatsoever, Scorsese steps away from the 
boundaries of Western civilization, and instead makes a relatively small 
film about the Dalai Lama, the leader of Tibetan Buddhism, and one of 
the most revered figures in the world.
Leave it to Scorsese to give himself a challenge.  Scorsese was 
faced with the dilemma of making the culture of Tibet, a visual, aural 
treat that is so painstakingly detailed that some would find it boring, 
palatable to Western audiences.  Compounding his dilemma was the 
production of one SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET, a far inferior film starring 
Brad Pitt (though not as the Dalai Lama- that would have been 
interesting.)  Scorsese's film is about as far away from the Pitt movie 
as possible: it is slow-moving, much more visual, and more dependant on 
patience and images than on storyline. 20
The film's storyline is basically simple: it follows the life of the 
14th Dalai Lama from his finding at a young age to his escape into 
India.  His Holiness is played by four different monks, each of whom are 
excellent in their respective roles.  The youngest is probably the 
finest of the group, and he is without a doubt the highlight of the 
first act of the film.  The actors show a tremendous maturation as they 
progress, highlighting the growth of the Dalai Lama as he progressed in 
age.  In the latter part of the film, the Chinese invade Tibet, and 
Kundun, the ancient term for the Dalai Lama, is forced eventually to 
flee.
The script, written by E.T. scribe (and Harrison Ford spouse) 
Melissa Mathison, is not only slow in development, it is also highly 
philosophical and experimental.  There are several "dream sequences" 
which are often difficult to follow, and much of the film's power comes 
from its breathtaking visuals and score.  Scorsese lets the film develop 
without rushing into anything: his cameras are fluid, but not rapid.  
They are instead an hybrid of the NY style used predominantly by the 
famed director with a sort of reverent bathing of the Tibetan culture, 
creating an interesting dichotomy.  The visuals are at once personal and 
extravagant, leaving the viewer an impression not only of the film being 
a portrait of a man, but a portrait of a culture as well.
Several sequences are absolutely stunning.  One in particular 
involves Kundun standing in the middle of hundreds of monks, dead, as 
the camera pans back to reveal those the Dalai Lama could not predict.  
It is a deeply religious, deeply philosophical moment that reveres all 
which is non-violent, and abhores that whcih causes death and 
destruction.  Scorsese is quite passionate about his subject, and his 
dichotomy of spirituality and humanity is far better here than in LAST 
TEMPTATION. 20
The performances of all the players are exquisite.  The score, by 
Phillip Glass, is also outstanding.  The movie is, however, a 
challenging viewing, and the majority of the viewers will describe it as 
boring.  But for the chosen few, KUNDUN is a visual experience like no 
other.  With tremendous artistry, Scorsese is able to transport an 
ancient culture into the rooms of America.  There is so much beauty in 
even the most gruesome of sequences, so much power in the movements of 
its characters.  It is a slow-moving, sometimes tedious chore to listen 
to KUNDUN.  It is a deeply philosophical movie that can be interpreted 
as preachy.  But KUNDUN is truly none of those.  It is instead the 
ultimate acheivement in the mixture of art, beauty, sound, dance, 
culture, and history, not a film triumph as much as a culture triumph.  
KUNDUN may lack a significant plot or buildup, but it exhibits so much 
beauty, grace, and sheer devastation that it is nothing short of a 
triumph.  One of Scorsese's most challenging, most difficult, and 
ultimately, most rewarding films, KUNDUN is a true masterpiece.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong, Gyurme Tethong, Tulku Jamyang Kunga 
      Tenzin, Tenzin Yeshi Paichang, Tsewang Migyur Khangsar, 
      Tencho Gyalpo, Sonam Phuntsok, Gyatso Lukhang, Tenzin Trinley, 
      Jigme Tsarong, Robert Lin
Director: Martin Scorsese
Producer: Barbara De Fina
Screenplay: Melissa Mathison
Cinematography: Roger Deakins
Music: Philip Glass
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     With KUNDUN, director Martin Scorsese has taken a chance.  
Unfortunately, that risk goes no further than the film's casting and 
premise.  What reaches the screen is less a narrative than it is a 
travelogue or a political statement for the re-installation of the Dalai 
Lama in Tibet.  This film is sadly lacking in a number of important 
areas:  passion, energy, and drama, to name a few.  And, while KUNDUN 
boasts impressive cinematography (by Roger Deakins) and an effective 
score (by Philip Glass), the images and music aren't enough to hide the 
picture's essential hollowness.
     Scorsese is best known, of course, for movies about violence and 
corruption.  When his name is mentioned, most viewers immediately recall 
the likes of RAGING BULL, GOODFELLAS, TAXI DRIVER, and CASINO.  KUNDUN 
is not the director's first major departure from this familiar territory 
-- he has previously done period pieces (THE AGE OF INNOCENCE) and 
spiritual dramas (THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST).  But, because KUNDUN 
involves no familiar faces (the actors are all Tibetans with no previous 
professional acting experience) and takes place half a world away, it's 
unlike anything Scorsese has attempted.
     Unfortunately, it doesn't really work, and the reason is evident.  
The director exhibits far too much reverence for the subject of this 
biography.  While there's no debating that the 14th Dalai Lama is a 
fascinating and important twentieth century figure, Scorsese reduces his 
history to a series of lifeless anecdotes.  Because KUNDUN regards its 
subject as an all-knowing font of wisdom, he is presented virtually 
without flaws, and that makes for a thin and uninteresting individual.  
Contrast KUNDUN's main character with the Messiah in LAST TEMPTATION, 
and it's easy to see the difference.  Christ transcended the two-
dimensional screen because he was beset on all sides by doubts and 
temptations.  It's rare for a similar spurt of vitality to awaken KUNDUN 
from its perpetual slumber.
     The film opens in 1937, when a Holy Man roaming Tibet discovers 
that the Dalai Lama, the secular and spiritual leader of the country, 
has entered his 14th incarnation and is presently a two-year old boy.  
The child proves his identity by flawlessly picking "his" possessions 
(those that belonged to the 13th Dalai Lama) out of a jumble of real and 
fake miscellany.  Several years later, the five-year old is brought to 
the city of Lhassa, where he is schooled in the teachings of Buddhism in 
preparation for fulfilling his mission:  to protect his people.  But 
conflict is close at hand.  Once the Communists come into power in 
China, Chairman Mao decides that the time is right for his country to 
absorb Tibet, and, when the Tibetans resist, they are ruthlessly 
slaughtered.  The Dalai Lama then faces a choice:  remain, capitulate, 
and risk his life, or flee to India, perhaps never to return.
     Despite casting all amateurs, Scorsese has assembled a believable 
group of actors.  Of the four to play the lead role -- Tenzin Yeshi 
Paichang (Age 2), Tulku Jamyang Kunga Tenzin (Age 5), Gyurme Tethong 
(Age 10), and Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong (Adult) -- none is less than 
convincing.  Most of the supporting players, including Tsewang Migyur 
Khangsar as the Dalai Lama's father, Tencho Gyalpo as his mother, Sonam 
Phuntsok as Reting Rimpoche, the man who finds him, Gyatso Lukhang as 
the Lord Chamberlain, and Tenzin Trinley as Ling Rimpoche, the Dalai 
Lama's spiritual teacher, are equally credible.  The problems lie not in 
the performances, but in the bland script.
     From time-to-time, KUNDUN manages a memorable moment.  One scene in 
particular stands out.  In it, the Dalai Lama is having a nightmare 
about the growing death toll in Tibet as a result of the Chinese 
invasion.  The camera pulls back to show him standing amidst a sea of 
his dead, red-robed countrymen -- the very people he has promised to 
protect.  It is a powerful, provocative image -- but too little of 
KUNDUN reaches this level of mastery.  Most of the film is dull and 
soporific.  Breathtaking photography without emotional involvement can 
take an audience only so far.
     One of KUNDUN's advantages is that there's no Brad Pitt (of SEVEN 
YEARS IN TIBET).  And, while Scorsese is not in top form, at least he's 
sincere about the project.  Anyone who stays until the last seconds of 
the closing credits will understand why the film is as respectful (and 
nearly worshipful) as it is.  Although Melissa Mathison is credited with 
the screenplay, Scorsese thanks "His Holiness the Dalai Lama" for 
cooperating with and contributing to the production.  That almost 
qualifies KUNDUN as an autobiography, and would anyone expect the 
religious leader to represent himself as less than saintly?
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In 1949 the Communists took over the mainland of China
and by 1950 had solidified their hold on the previously
independent Tibet.  The Dalai Lama, after giving the political
situation much thought, went along with his chief adviser and
fled to India to form a government-in-exile--where he still
resides today.  After you watch Martin Scorsese's film,
"Kundun," however, you may conclude that a different
strategy could have proved far better.  This fourteenth
incarnation of Buddha--played by four actors who portray His
Holiness from the age of two to his eighteenth year--should
have remained in the Tibetan capital where he would have
bored the entire invading Chinese army to death.
   Director Scorsese could hardly have had this subtext in
mind but he has perhaps unwittingly portrayed his Ocean of
Wisdom (as Dalai Lama translates to English) as a young
fella with all the bedside manner of a Dr. Kevorkian and the
charm of a junior accountant working his way through the
exams to become an actuary.  Well, now, nobody says that
everything Scorsese does has to carry the electricity of "Taxi
Driver."  His "Last Temptation of Christ" is probably the film
most like "Kundun" in that it represents one of America's great
directors journeying within.  But when a movie proceeds step
by step as a chronicle with banal dialogue, little action (but
some great visuals, admittedly), you might find yourself
screaming to introduce a rugged Nazi like Brad Pitt's Heinrich
Harrar from "Seven Years in Tibet."  Not a chance.  "Kundun"
is a meditation that would embarrass even some Zen masters
who face a blank wall for eight hours daily.  What sort of
target audience did Scorsese have in mind for this heartfelt
albeit static drama?  Your typical fourteen-year-old would
have little patience for this PG-13 tale and adults will soon tire
of a film which can best recommended for Philip Glass's
super sound track and some dazzling desert scenes filmed in
southern Morocco where hundreds of nonprofessional
Tibetans were transported.  (It is, incidentally, to Morocco's
credit that the almost exclusively Muslim nation welcomed
visitors who followed a religion quite different from their
own.)
   Think back to Jean-Jacques Annaud's "Seven Years in
Tibet" and recall how charming the Dalai Lama was from the
time he was a tyke through his portrayal by the 14-year-old
Bhutanese actor Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk.  As a kid he
was absolutely fascinated by his telescope which he'd peer
through constantly though there was not an apartment window
in sight.  He'd bounce up and down while watching movies on
his home projector and radiate delight in life.  Showing
Buddhist-like compassion for all living things was the easiest
task in the world for him since he shed hundreds of watts of
glee at everything he saw of a pre-Chinese derivation.  By
contrast the two-year-old "discovered" by monks as the
fourteenth incarnation of the spirit of Buddha is little more
than a spoiled, self-centered whelp given to bossing his
parents around and insisting that he was "in charge."  To his
credit, though, he did separate two ferocious looking black
ants battling in the Moroccan sands, setting them far enough
apart to live to fight another day.
   What we have is a chronology that begins in 1933, the year
that Hitler became Germany's chancellor, an event as remote
to Tibetans as the emergence of a full moon on Jupiter would
be to a run-of-the-mill New Yorker.  Tested surreptitiously by
monks, the two year old played by Tenzin Yeshi Paichang (if
you're keeping score) "selects" the right objects laid out
before him on a table, thus proving his near-divinity, but by
the time 1944 rolls around, the Dalai Lama is no longer
giggling.  He watches the bombing of Hiroshima with
astonishment and is ultimately challenged when the new
Communist government in Peking (now Beijing) insists that
Tibet surrender its alleged sovereignty and become part of
China.
   The most absurd vision is a conference between the Dalai
Lama and General Mao Tse-tung, the latter played by Robert
Lin who looks as though he had just emerged from Mme
Tussaud's wax museum.  Mao is a heck of a nice guy at first,
so unlike the dictator who ultimately sends his legions to
Lhasa to massacre non-resisting, colorfully costumed
Tibetans.  Knowing that Tibet is doomed as soon as he
notices Mao's shiny, Western shoes, the Lama is faced with a
decision.  Should he agree to the seventeen demands and
turn his people over to these Communists?  Should he remain
in Lhasa and carry out an active resistance?  Or should he
flee just over the border to India and carry on a government-
in-exile there?  Well, now, anyone who knows the difference
between a Lhasa Apso and a Great Dane already remembers
the answer, and the rest is history.  The enlightened
moviegoer will not learn much that is new, save one valuable
piece of information.  Non-violence, for which practicing
Buddhists are famous, does not necessarily mean pacifism. 
Non-violence, as explained in Melissa Mathison's screenplay,
means: cooperate where cooperation is possible, resist when
it is not.
   What the picture does is provide dazzling visuals,
particularly one from the Dalai Lama's nightmares of hundreds
of Buddhist monks lying bloodied in the streets which, as ace
cameraman Roger Deakins draws his camera up and away
resembles nothing less horrible than the gruesome
discoveries made by liberating armies at Auschwitz in 1945. 
"Kundun" has its heart in the right place but emotionally is
oddly distancing and intellectually ordinary.  We might sum up
the 134 minutes as providing us with a "Hello, Dalai, well
hello Dalai...'twould be nice to have you back where you
belong."  Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 134 minutes.  (C)
1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Michael Redman
Tibet has entered the American consciousness slowly during the past few years
and burst into the forefront recently. The Dalai Lama has made speaking tours,
Tibetan designs and artifacts are showing up in shops, the plight of the
people has captured the imagination of major actors and artists and now there
are two big budget films within as many months.
"Kundun" ("Presence", a name the monks call the young Dalai Lama) opens in
1937 with the search for the 14th incarnation of the Tibetan leader. A group
of monks enters a village and a two-year-old child catches their attention.
The young boy proves himself by identifying possessions of the previous holy
man as "mine". He and his family are then moved to a monastery in Lhassa where
he is to be prepared to take his position as the religious and political
leader of the country.
He is forced into difficult decisions when China invades the country in 1950.
The peaceful and isolated country is ill-equipped to fight off the intruders
and diplomatic attempts over the next years yield no results. Eventually he
must make the painful choice to flee to neighboring India. 
Comparisons to "Seven Years In Tibet" are inevitable. Both films cover much of
the same ground although the earlier movie does so from a westerner's point of
view and features boxoffice draw Brad Pitt. "Kundun" features only native
actors and is more of an insider's story. In some ways, this makes this film a
superior concept, but it lacks the movement and spark that made "Seven Years"
such an audience-pleaser.
The actors contribute to the realistic feel of the movie (filmed in Morocco
for obvious reasons). The only disappointment is Chairman Mao who looks like a
wax dummy and moves as if he were a computer-generated character.
On an intellectual level, it is interesting to see how two different
approaches handle the same facts. Some events are depicted differently and
Pitt's Austrian mountain-climber who was portrayed as a pivotal influence in
the Dalai Lama's life isn't even mentioned here.
Glossed over in "Seven Years", the problems with the Tibetan political system
is hinted at here as the Dalai Lama muses "We were just about to change
things" after the Chinese attack.
The film is magnificently beautiful thanks primarily to the cinematography of
Roger Deakins. His lingering camera shows the exotic Tibetan culture with
luscious detail. Especially striking is an extreme moving close up of a sand
mandala grain by grain. The visual treats more than make up for the movie's
faults creating a poetic meditation for the audience. Walking out of the
theater you feel like you have awakened from a transcendental experience.
Martin Scorsese, known for his dark tales of the underworld ("Goodfellas",
"Taxi Driver", "Casino") has shifted gears. Something of a thematic follow-up
to his "The Last Temptation Of Christ", this is his slowest film yet. Oddly
enough for a director with a history of graphic violence presenting a history
filled with atrocities by the Chinese, most of these events take place off-screen.
His decision to not over-explain rituals is commendable. The stumbling oracle
who spits out his prophecies while in a trance state is much more effective as
a mystery than if we were spoon-fed interpretations.
Philip Glass's score is impressive although at times it is too overwhelming
and distracting.
I talked to a Tibetan I met outside the theater who had just seen the film and
was walking back in to see it again. Hearing his description of how he escaped
from Tibet at the age of seven and how his father was one of the soldiers
accompanying the Dalai Lama during his trip to India, I was struck by what was
missing in the movie. As grand as it looks and as historically accurate as it
is, there is a distance between the audience and the movie. The film is more
concerned with visuals and history and less so with human beings.
With the exception of a few scenes, involvement with the characters is slight.
One of those exceptions is the portrayal of the young Dalai Lama, shown as a
mischievous boy who can't resist being a kid sometimes. An encounter with his
older brother Thubten J. Norbu (a retired Indiana University professor) who
tells the young leader the Chinese have ordered him to persuade him to accept
Communist rule or kill him is an outstanding moment, but there aren't many of these.
Even with its problems, the "Kundun" experience is phenomenal, but one that I
fear most will miss. Many people who saw "Seven Years In Tibet" will have a
"Been there, done that" attitude. It's likely that the film will miss a
wide-spread appeal and public response will be the sound of one hand clapping.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years: 18 years less than
the Dalai Lama has been in exile. Electronic meditations can go to redman@bvoice.com.)
[This appeared in the 1/22/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Martin Scorsese
Writer: Melissa Mathison
Starring: Tenzin Thutob Tsarong, Gyurume Tethong, Tulku Jamyang Kunga
Tenzin, Tenzin Yeshi Paichang, Tencho Gyalpo, Tsewang Migyur Khangsar,
Geshi Yeshi Gyatso, Sonam Phuntsok, Gyatso Lukhang, Robert Lin
The Dalai Lama is one of the most poignant and eclectic characters of all
time, being the compassoinate Buddha in human form.  He's a man who is all
wise, very forgiving, and much against violence.  The emphasis of
Scorsese's new biopic on him (indeed, his most positive biopic of a person
- look at how he looked at Jake LaMotta in "Raging Bull") is to try and
understand the man as who he is by examining how he was chosen to be
Kundun, the other name for the Dalai Lama, from the time when he was a
child.
In his presentation, Kundun is seen as being chosen by fate to become this
great man who is born again and again and again throughout the centuries,
so that when one dies, another one is born.  At the age of 2 (played by
Tenzin Yeshi Paichang), he was found by a wandering group of religious men
who discover who he is by placing several items that belonged to the
previous Dalai Lama and several more that didn't, and seeing which ones the
boy picks.  He picks the right ones, and the boy is named the 14th Dalai
Lama.
Scorsese's view of how this happens shows a boy growing up with a heavy
burden.  Again and again, he is told by his followers that he will "soon
have great responsibilities," and in one scene, shown a cryptic letter the
13th Dalai Lama wrote before he died and asked to decipher it, as he
apparently wrote it in his previous life.  Scorsese's portrayal of the
Dalai Lama sounds faintly like the way he presented the flawed Jesus in
"The Last Temptation of Christ," but instead of a man who is believed to be
perfection, Kundun is perfection.
The film has no real plot, as it takes us into the world of Kundun, showing
us how he became the Dalai Lama, and how he is learning to be him every
day.  Four actors play Kundun in several parts of his life (Tenzin Thutob
Tsarong at his oldest), and in each of them, they show a degree of
ignorance to what they are that decreases throughout the years.  As a young
boy, he is asked a big question, to which he replies "But I'm just a boy." 
By the film's end, he has become the Dalai Lama, a wise man who has had to
make a decision that has alienated himself from his country who needs him.
While the first half is plotless and merely allows us to be an ehtnographer
to what is going on, the second half gains a bit of a plot as the threat of
China trying to retake Tibet (his country, if you didn't already know) and
command its religious, peaceful inhabitants becomes more and more ominous. 
Kundun even journeys to China to meet with their leader, Mao Zedong (played
by lookalike Robert Lin), but to no avail.  The sad ending shows Kundun
leaving his country disguised as a regular soldier, and has never returned.
While "Kundun" is a marvelous history lesson that will probably be shown by
high school teachers once it comes to video, it's also a hypnotic descent
into a world many people don't know about.  I know almost nothing about
Tibet and Buddhism, and the film shows us an unadulterated, authentic look
at the culture and beauty of the country and its religion.  By the film's
end, we see their necessity for religion, and how their beliefs don't allow
them to do any mortal harm to anyone else.
This is also a work of Tibetan and relgious propaganda, never really
getting deep into China's side.  They are shown as being communist
atheists, killing and polluting other peaceful cultures, and trying to
silence the spread of Buddhism (Chairman Mao tells Kundun that "religion is
poison" at one point).  The film never shows the Chinese side, and
therefore seems a bit narrow in its scope of the Tibetan Freedom
controversy.  Alas, this is not the point of the film, as it is really
trying to understand the enigma known as the Dalai Lama.
But even this is not done as perfectly as it should.  The big problem is
that Scorsese and the film's writer Melissa Mathison have too much respect
for Kundun, and are therefore unable to present him in an unbiased light. 
But the film still presents him wonderfully, shown as a man who is perfect,
but gained that throughout the years, not being born that way.  The young
Kundun is not a perfect being, but gains this through experience.  But at
the end, Kundun is still a mystery, which is probably for the better.  To
believe that any man can be perfect takes a leap of faith anyway, and this
film knows that.
Among other things, "Kundun" is the best looking film in a long time. 
Roger Deakins' cinematography (he also did "Fargo," but was snubbed) is
perhaps the most gorgeous since "Lawrence of Arabia," and the entire film
is a hypnotic palate of gorgeous, memorable images and sequences.  Philip
Glass's music is enigmatic, accentuating the already amazing feel of the
film.  A cult favorite who's done certain films as the beautiful
"Koyannisquati," the man may finally get the Oscar he really deserves.  A
large colored mosaic made of dirt is one of the many beautiful things that
abound in this movie, as well as the skilled camerawork and direction by
Scorsese.
What's left over is a deeper knowledge of the Dalai Lama and a film that is
hypnotically engaging.  There is really nothing better than a film that can
transport its viewers to another world and even enlighten them.  While it's
not the greatest film and has its share of flaws, its nonetheless another
amazing film from Scorsese that looks at things in another light that many
other directors wouldn't even dare touch.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
KUNDUN
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Tanzin Thuthob Tsarong, Tsewang Jigme Tsarong, Gyatso Lukhang,
Tencho Gyalpo, Gyurme Tethong, Tulku Jamyang Kunga Tenzin, Tsewang Migyur
Khangsar, Tenzin Yeshi Paichang, Tenzin Trinley.
Screenplay:  Melissa Mathison.
Producer:  Barbara DeFina.
Director:  Martin Scorsese.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  135 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As life goals, serenity and wisdom are noble and admirable.  As
drama, on the other hand, they leave a _lot_ to be desired.  Martin
Scorsese's KUNDUN, advertised as "the amazing story of the fourteenth
Dalai Lama," is a beautifully filmed and extraordinarily reverent bio-pic.
And it's a strong dose of cinematic NyQuil.  Though it's bound to please
those who admire its subject, other viewers are going to wonder why they
should spend over two hours watching a film with only the faintest whisper
of internal conflict.
     KUNDUN opens in 1937, where a group of Tibetan holy men are on a
quest for a very special child:  the 14th Dalai Lama, the reincarnation of
the Buddha of love and compassion.  In a remote village near the Chinese
border, they find him, an inquisitive two-and-a-half-year-old (Tenzin
Yeshi Paichang) who correctly identifies artifacts from the previous Dalai
Lama.  The boy is brought with his family to the city of Lhasa, where his
instruction begins under Ling Rinpoche (Tenzin Trinley).  Unfortunately,
it is a time of conflict between Tibet and China over Tibetan sovereignty,
forcing the teenage Dalai Lama (Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong) to deal with
delicate matters of state.  Faced with impending Chinese aggression, the
Dalai Lama must decide whether to stay with his people or flee into exile.
     The most frustrating thing about KUNDUN is that it's the kind of
story I've chastised Hollywood for not telling.  Unlike the recent SEVEN
YEARS IN TIBET, it is a story set in Tibet which is actually about
Tibetans, featuring a cast composed entirely of non-professional actors.
That gives KUNDUN a greater sense of integrity, but it does nothing for
the dramatic impact of the story.  Scorsese has brought together a group
of people whose goal is to honor the Dalai Lama with snapshots of his life
and his devotion to the welfare of his people.  We watch the Dalai Lama
learn Buddhist doctrine; we watch him eager to face his responsibilities;
we watch him consult with his advisors and make wise, morally sound
decisions.  What we see scarcely a moment of is the Dalai Lama as an
individual.  Though he sometimes sees terrible visions, this
preternaturally serene teen almost never seems shaken or lacking in
confidence.  The resulting film is completely faithful, but it moves like
a tortoise in need of a laxative.  When the Dalai Lama begins looking
through his telescope as an adolescent, I started hoping he'd spot Brad
Pitt so the production could find some energy.
     Eventually there is a bit more interest generated by the Dalai Lama's
interactions with the Chinese.  The final hour becomes a series of fervent
hopes and broken Chinese promises, periodically broken up by an audience
with Chairman Mao.  Though this ideological battle should provide plenty
of chances for strong dramatic sequences, it rarely does.  The Dalai Lama
is shown in a near-constant state of concern over how his decisions will
affect his people, but we get only token glimpses of those people.
KUNDUN's most potent moment finds a Tibetan villager, asked by the Dalai
Lama how she is doing, collapsing in tears as she mouths a Communist
slogan about how "happy and prosperous" she is.  Even a few more such
moments could have given the suffering of the Tibetan people a face and an
emotional connection.  This is a history of a repressed people which
almost never leaves the confines of the world of politicians.
     Martin Scorsese is too talented a director to put together anything
that is a complete waste of time.  There are a couple of clever moments
like the puzzled reaction of the Dalai Lama's older brother when forced to
bow to him; Scorsese's regular team, including production designer Dante
Ferretti, turns Moroccan locations into a splendid backdrop for the Dalai
Lama's life.  It's what happens in front of that backdrop which may cause
you do drop back in your seat and grab a quick nap.  As important a story
as KUNDUN may be, the film rarely does more than trudge through fifteen
years of Tibetan history, always careful to show the utmost respect for
His Holiness.  Perhaps Scorsese saw this as an opportunity to make up for
his previous attempt at the life story of a revered figure, one which
sparked instant outrage.  No chance of controversy this time around --
think of KUNDUN as THE LACK OF TEMPTATION OF THE DALAI LAMA.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Martin Scorsese
Cast: Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong, Gyurme Tethong, Tulku Jamyang Kunga
Tenzin, Tenzin Yeshi Paichang, Tencho Gyalpa, Tsewang Migyur Khangsar,
Geshi Yeshi Gyatso
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Martin Scorsese's Kundun is a visual wonder, striking in every
detail and accentuated by Philip Glass' masterful score. Scorsese tells
the story of the 14th Dalai Lama, beginning in 1939 when the young child
is just two years old. As the film progresses, we see him at ages 5, 10,
and then 16 and beyond; through most of the film, he is portrayed by
Tenzin Thuthob Tsarong. The conflicts later in the film involve the
Chinese government's attempts to get Tibet to be part of China, and the
Dalai Lama is finally forced to leave his people for India.
    A few months ago I was subjected to a film of almost the exact same
subject matter, Seven Years in Tibet. While that film was entertaining
but not very insightful, Kundun lacks substantial entertainment value,
and is only marginally more interesting as a biography of the Dalai
Lama. Entertainment value might seem like a trivial complaint in this
case, but regardless of content, a filmmaker's first goal should be to
capture its audience, and Scorsese has a hard time doing that for me in
Kundun.
    It's not that he flat-out failed, it's just that this subject does
not lend itself to easy audience involvement. The whole time I watched
Kundun, I felt utterly separated from what was happening on screen. The
Tibetans, as portrayed in this film, seem like docile, peace-oriented
separatists. I feel like the real Tibetans wouldn't want me watching
them. They are so set in their ways, so unwilling of change, that the
thought of an audience watching them to interpret their actions seems
ludicrous to me. I felt like they needed no vindication, no audience, no
telling of their story. So, I viewed Kundun almost entirely as a story
that is out of its league as a large-scale American film. Textbooks,
even novels, are more appropriate for this subject.
    I was, however, at least moderately concerned for the Dalai Lama.
Tsarong (with whom I am not familiar) does a pretty good job in the
role, though he lacks conviction and doesn't always seem natural. It
doesn't help that all the characters speak English. Just for realism's
sake, I would have preferred subtitles throughout the film--this might
have proved to distance the audience even further, but in this case I
would have gladly substituted authenticity for personalism.
    I wouldn't say Kundun is boring; in its best moments, it is truly
astonishing in visual power. The landscapes are all filmed in such a way
that orange and brown dirt looks colorful and enticing; there are some
unusual-yet-mesmerizing scenes later in the film that show close-ups of
sand paintings going through creation and destruction. As stated
earlier, Philip Glass' musical score is one of the better scores of
1997, mixing pleasant melodies with sharp, deep tonal shifts.
Atmosphere-wise, the film is virtually flawless.
    But this can't make up for the emotional limbo that Kundun provides
for its audience. I'm not exactly sure what could have cured this--more
insight into the Dalai Lama himself, possibly letting us into his head a
bit more rather than just showing us long shots of his unemotional face.
This being the second film in such a short period of time that has
failed to truly interest me in the Dalai Lama and the Tibetans, it makes
me wonder if we're really supposed to fully understand them. Their
religion and way of life seems off-limits to me, to such an extent that
I almost feel it's inappropriate to watch this film and develop and
opinion about them. But if that's not what I'm supposed to do, then what
is the point?

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) Martin Scorsese's films used to intimidate me. Because of his
reputation, I felt obligated to appreciate them as deep film art rather than
as great flicks. As much as I enjoyed them, I usually felt like I missed
something. 
I learned from Scorsese's CASINO that whatever techniques he uses are merely
there to enhance the story. No mystical interpretation is required to
appreciate his movies. 
For example, in CASINO he uses subtitles when Robert DeNiro and Joe Pesci
are using code words with each other. There was no meaning more exotic than
that subtitles were the most succinct way for him to tell the audience what
was really going on. Or toward the end, when he uses three quick dissolves
to compress a scene of a car backing away from a building. Again, the
simple, mundane explanation is that it helped the pacing. 
I don't mean to say that his techniques are not creative or good-looking.
But he simply uses the best tool for the job. 
It shouldn't have surprised me, then, that KUNDUN, a film about a mystical
religion, actually turned out to be quite straightforward. 
The movie follows the life of the 14th Dalai Lama, the spiritual and
political leader of Tibet. The movie's title is another name for the Dalai
Lama which means "Ocean of Wisdom." His story is told in strict
chronological order and there are only a few cinematic visions to embellish
the literal story. (One of which makes an interesting statement: pay
attention to the film's opening shot and watch where it is repeated.) 
We first glimpse the Dalai Lama when he is two years old. His curiosity and
self-assuredness capture the attention of a monk wandering in search of the
new Lama. 
A test is arranged to see if this boy really is the reincarnation of the 13
Dalai Lamas who have gone before. Several items belonging to the previous
Dalai Lama are laid before the boy alongside some other items. The child is
asked if he recognizes any of the items as his own. The boy picks correctly,
proving that he is the new, and the old, Dalai Lama.  
Scorsese and long-time editor Thelma Schoonmaker were kind enough to allow
the possibility that the child was taking his cues from the monk. Before
selecting an item, he would look at the monk, perhaps for some sort of
confirmation. Sometimes he picked right the first time, and sometimes he
made a second choice. Either way, whether through reincarnation or quick
human perception, the Tibetans were assured of choosing a boy who could be a
wise, perceptive leader. 
>From this point on, the boy is raised as the reincarnation of the Lama's
spirit and the future leader of a nation. It is a great weight to put on the
mind of a child. In the U.S. it might be grounds for a call to Social
Services. But the young Lama accepts his destiny without any apparent
emotional damage. Neither the great power nor the awesome responsibility
keeps him from becoming a genuinely likeable, well-rounded person. 
Certain patterns take shape over the years. For example, the Dalai Lama is
fascinated by technology. Radios, clocks, and telescopes are some of his
favorite toys. When he is old enough to accept his leadership, he makes
plans to modernize isolated Tibet. 
He also has a soft spot for creatures who are suffering or in pain,
including herd animals. It's nearly a running gag that he will buy sheep to
keep them from being herded to slaughter. 
But the most ominous constant throughout his life is the presence and threat
of Tibet's gigantic neighbor, China. Tibet and its leaders prove correct in
fearing China, as, first the propaganda, then the political pressure, and
finally the armies, come across their common border. 
The Chinese invasion is so successful that the Lama's life is in danger if
he stays. The movie ends when, after much agonizing, the Dalai Lama leaves
Tibet for India. 
The story doesn't lead up to a cinematic climax as strongly as most feature
films do. It just doesn't fit that mold. If it were forced into such a shape
it would have been a completely different movie (perhaps more like SEVEN
YEARS IN TIBET, which is good in its own right). 
The pacing of KUNDUN is more calm and level than that. The structure of the
film is  made to fit the characters and events, not vice-versa. Perhaps
because the pace is slower, we have more time to notice the beautiful art,
vestments, and architecture of Tibet. 
A mandala, (Tibetan sand painting) with beautiful, vibrant colors is shown
throughout the movie. The robes and hats of state are bright red and gold.
The bricks are a rich reddish brown, not unlike the skin tone of the
Tibetans. Even the Touchstone pictures logo before the movie (which is
usually light blue) is the red and gold of Tibet. 
Philip Glass composed the music for KUNDUN, and he was the perfect choice.
For those who don't know of Glass, his music is like a Tibetan mandala. His
building blocks are lots of small notes, tiny grains of music, which are
first grouped, then repeated in patterns. These patterns create interesting
textures which are themselves part of a larger composition. 
People won't be flocking to KUNDUN for it's great ending, or talking about
its outstanding plot, but it does have a lot to offer: an interesting
lifetime, exotic sights, rich cinematography, and innovative music. It gives
interesting insight into Tibetan Buddhism and takes a warm look at the Dalai
Lama as a person. 
On top of it all is the cinematic mastery of Martin Scorsese, who gives the
film a strong, beautiful, consistent look.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
