Title
Review for Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex (1972)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Woody Allen
Writer: Woody Allen (from the book by David Reuben)
Starring: Woody Allen, Louise Lasser, Lynn Redgrave, Gene Wilder, Tony
Randall, Burt Reynolds, John Carridine, Regis Philbin, Lou Jacobi
Many people know about the popular book, "Everything You Always Wanted
to Know About Sex (But Were Afraid to Ask)," which was a
straight-forward sex book (obviously), and this is the basis for the
film.  However, this is not some striaght-forward outline of the book
(just picture Woody demonstrating sodomy on some chick like Louise
Lasser or Diane Keaton - sorry for the imagery).  Instead, this is a
collection of short films, very, very, very loosely based on some of the
chapters from the book, each taking a concept from a specific chapter,
and going totally crazy with it.
I will rate each of the little films individually and make some kind of
average for the whole film.  So here we go:
1. "Do Aphrodisiacs Work?" - In this hysterically comical film that gets
funnier by the second, Woody plays a really bad court jester who becomes
obsessed with his queen (Lynn Redgrave), and gets an aphrodisiac so he
can get to know her a little better (nudge nudge).  Things get
complicated, some things don't go as planned (although some do), and we
get a hilarious finale.  Woody's one-liners are perfect here (especially
in the intentionally bad joke-laden beginning, and the spoof of "Hamlet"
- "T.B. or not T.B, that is the conjestion..."), and he's at his
funniest acting, which is not a shock.  The little film moves quickly,
and is paced near perfectly.  So...
2. "What is Sodomy?" - This could have been a one-joke premise, but
thanks to the writing, it only gets funnier.  But it's just not as good
as the first one.  This one stars Gene Wilder (doing some of his manic
funniest as the film goes on) as a family doctor who falls in love with
a sheep.  Hence, sodomy (use your randy imagination).  The film includes
such little jokes as asking for grass at a hotel ("No, real grass"), the
sheep wearing garters, and the brilliantly done ending where Gene weeps
for his long-lost love by drinking Woolite.
3. "Why Do Some Women Have Trouble Reaching Orgasm?" - Done all in
Italian with sub-titles, this one is about a swinger (Woody) who marries
a beautiful woman (Louise Lasser, from "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman" and
his "Bananas"), but finds that she can never achieve an orgasm with
him...until he finds out she has a fetish for public sex.  It's
deifinitely not the funniest film, and doesn't end the perfect way, but
sure knows how to be clever, and, well, it's hilarious.  And the Italian
works.
4. "Are Transvestites Homosexuals?" - Not involving Woody again, this
one centers around a middle-aged couple who go over to their future
in-laws for supper, but the husband of the visiting family (Lou Jacobi)
goes upstairs to the foreign bedroom to indulge in his big fetish:
transvestitism.  But while parading around in women's clothes, he's
almost caught, and has to flee the house, cover up his moustache, talk
in high falsetto, and try to figure out how to get back inside without
being noticed.  It's one of the funniest things I've ever seen, and only
gets funnier as it moves on with good pacing.
5. "What are Sex Perverts?" - Funny skit is probably the only
disappointing one here, even though it's funny.  The film, shot on
purposely bad film, shows an episode of a very liberal game show (in
black and white, no less) called "What's Your Perversion?," feautring
guests who come on and are asked questons by a panel (including Regis
Philbin - not even kidding) who try to come up with the guest's fetish.
It never really goes anywhere, but is still hilarious.
6. "Are the Findings of Doctors and Clinics Who Do Sexual Research and
Experiments Accurate?" (almost longer than the title) - Uneven but
undeniably hysterical little vignette about a sex scholar (guess who?
okay, it's Woody) who goes to the mansion of a famous sexual doctor
(John Carridine) with a journalist to interview him on his various and
contreversial sexual explorations.  Turns out the guy's a mad scientist
who's doing such bizarre things as pumping a woman full of silicone, and
doing the old cliche of switching brains.  Also, he has an Igorian
servent who's hunchbacked only because the doctor gave him a prolonged
orgasm (through an experiment).  But this film switches identity, and
when the doctor's house is burned down by the scholar and the journalist
(long story), what emerges and wreaks havoc on the countryside
is...(eerie music) a gigantic breast.  How they catch it is classic.  So
is the sketch.
7. "What Happens During Ejaculation?" - The hands-down most brilliant
and funniest sketch, ending it on a great note, this little film deals
with the inner-workings of the brain during sex.  Inside all the
specific body parts are little people, working their asses off to help
create sex.  In the brain is "Mission Control," with Tony Randal as the
cheif and Burt Reynolds as a switchboard man (with the classic Reynolds
line "Proceed with erection; all systems go."), and as a sperm is (big
shock) Woody, as the most insecure of them all ("What if he's
masturbating?  I'll end up on the wall!")  It only gets funnier and
funnier and funniet, and is paced beautifully, with little problems
jumping in at just the right time (a saboteur of the mission turns out
to be a little inner priest).  With great acting, great writing, and,
well, some cool sets and special effects (for a 70s comedy), we get a
perfect way to end the movie, and one of Woody's funniest pieces of
work.
So, "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex (But Were Afraid to
Ask)" is a hilarious movie, made just for the twisted neurotic fans of
Mr. Allen AND people who love great sketch comedy that isn't afraid to
insult and outrage.  Yes, it has its peaks and valleys, but overall,
it's a fantastic piece of comedy, and a great film to watch.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Besides being the longest title of a movie I've reviewed 
so far (only because I was indisposed both days Don't Be a 
Menace to South Central While Drinking Your 
Juice in the Hood was in theaters), EVERYTHING YOU 
ALWAYS... is also the only movie in this book based on a sex 
manual. I should know -- from the ages of twelve to fourteen, 
every time I was in the library, I'd sneak up to the 612.6 (by the 
Dewey Decimal System) section of the stacks and grab up Dr. 
David Reuben's sex book, only after I was sure no one was 
looking. It was from that book I turned my warped, misinformed 
view of sex into something even more mangled and twisted.
        So naturally I was interested to see how Woody Allen, 
the world's most talented sex pervert, had adapted hundreds of pages 
of dry, clinical sex talk into a comedy. The answer lies in the fact 
that this is an incredibly loose adaptation of the book. All Woody 
did was take a few of the chapter title questions and turn them into 
separate vignettes. For a sex movie, though, EVERYTHING YOU... 
reaches its climax awfully early, is impotent for about half an hour, 
gives us a tease of foreplay, then goes into two more satisfying 
climaxes before we all have a smoke during the end credits and 
bask in the afterglow of what we've seen.
        Since EVERYTHING... is such an uneven movie, I'm 
rating each segment individually. For those of you who don't 
have calculators, the average rating for each segment was 2.43 
stars, rounded up to two-and-a-half for an overall rating of the 
film.
        "Do Aphrodisiacs Work?" (***1/2) The movie's funniest 
segment, with Woody playing the jester in a Dark Ages court. 
Woody finds himself hot for the queen, who returns his feelings 
after he sneaks past two soldiers and slips her a mickey. (That's 
m-i-c-k-e-y. Why? Because he likes her.) Comedy abounds from 
multiple situations, from Woody trying to unlock the queen's 
chastity belt as fast as he can ("Before you know it, the Renaissance 
will be here and we'll all be painting.") to the scene where he tries to 
entertain the court with some awful jokes. ("TB or not TB? That is 
the congestion.")
        "What is Sodomy?" (*) A video of actual sodomy wouldn't 
be too much less entertaining than what Woody gives us here, a 
sketch about a doctor (Gene Wilder) who falls in love with a sheep 
(yes, a sheep). It's more tasteless than funny, and is actually played 
straight most of the time, with the only mild laughs coming when a 
depressed Wilder drinks Woolite from the bottle and caresses his 
lamb's wool sweater.
        "Why Do Some Women Have Trouble Reaching Orgasm?" 
(**) Woody ignores the obvious answer (Because they're having 
sex with _him_!) and instead plays a harrowed Italian husband 
whose frigid wife (Louise Lasser) can only become aroused by 
having intercourse in public places. The entire segment is in 
subtitles and is mostly unfunny, a frigid piece of comedy.
        "Are Transvestites Homosexuals?" (*1/2) Even more 
one-joke than the last segment, Lou Jacobi gets caught wearing a 
dress outside. That's about it.
        "What Are Sex Perverts?" (**1/2) Instead of just flashing 
his picture onscreen and moving on, Woody recreates a "What's 
My Line?" takeoff entitled "What's My Perversion?" where panelists 
(including Regis Philbin, who himself fantasizes about spanking 
Kathie Lee) must ask questions to discover the contestant's 
perversion. This segment is interesting rather than funny, due to 
Woody's convincing recreation of badly-preserved kinescope 
reels and use of game show host Jack Barry as himself.
        "Are the Findings of Doctors and Clinics Who Do Sexual 
Research and Experiments Accurate?" (***) Woody plays an 
apprentice sex doctor (and author of the book "Advanced Sexual 
Positions: How to Achieve Them Without Laughing") who must stop 
a giant breast ("about 4,000 in an X cup") from destroying life as we 
know it. This one is funny until he crosses the taste line by having 
the breast squirt milk at its victims.
        "What Happens During Ejaculation?" (***1/2) This one 
takes us inside the male body, which is depicted as a giant control 
center where little men in white suits (including Burt Reynolds and 
Tony Randall) control every activity of the body. Here, as the 
erection is cranked up by sweaty manual laborers, nervous sperm 
Woody prepares to be shot out of the body. Creative and funny, a 
good climax to a movie that starts out with a bang, lays limp for 
awhile and regains its momentum toward the end.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
