Title
Review for Before Night Falls (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 BEFORE NIGHT FALLS (director/writer: Julian Schnabel; screenwriters:
 Cunningham O'Keefe/Lazaro Gomez Carriles/based on the autobiography of
 Reinaldo Arenas; cinematographers: Xavier Perez Grobet/ Guillermo
 Rosas; editor: Michael Berenbaum; cast: Javier Bardem (Reinaldo),
 Johnny Depp (Bon Bon and Lieutenant Victor), Andrea Di Stefano (Pepe
 Malas), Olatz Lopez Garmendia (Reinaldo's Mother), Olivier Martinez
 (Lázaro), Sean Penn (Cuco Sánchez), Michael Wincott (Heberto Zorilla
 Ochoa), Vito Maria Schnabel (Reinaldo as a child-he's the director's
 son); Runtime: 125; Fine Line Features; 2000)
Julian Schnabel ("Basquiat"), the artist turned filmmaker, adapted the
1993 posthumously written autobiographical memoir of gay Cuban poet and
novelist Reinaldo Arenas, whose difficult life is painted in quick
glimpses of his desperate but unfulfilled search for happiness and
freedom. It is a biopic that is brutally honest about the exiled writer
as an opponent of Castro's, one that lets us see that liberation to him
was not only a matter of politics but of the freedom to be a homosexual
and an artist, something which the Castro regime couldn't agree with and
came down harshly on both homosexuals and artists, by sending them to
prison camps.
Born in poverty in the lush surroundings of Oriente Province, in 1943,
Arenas' childhood memories are of a carefree one, but of having a mother
who hated her husband and did not live with him during Arenas' formative
childhood years, as he was raised by his single mother and his
grandmother. The only thing the child remembers about his father, is
that when he was five years old he got two pesos from him, as his mother
cursed his father out and threw rocks at him from across a pond. His
happiest moments in childhood seemed to be watching the nude men bathing
and those moments connected with nature, such as his love for the
landscape and the ocean. During Castro's revolutionary fight, he was
caught up in the fever of revolution and ran away from home and joined
the rebels, but did no fighting.
Spanish actor Javier Bardem portrays Arenas (someone he closely
resembles) with great sexuality, perception and feeling, giving a
virtuoso performance. He also does the voiceover in a thick English
accent, as he paints a portrait of a troubled romantic figure who became
disillusioned with communism and was never able to recover from that.
Entering a literary competition, Reinaldo places second, but an
influentual Cuban writer thinks he should have won and works to get his
novel "Singing From the Well" edited and published. This book would be
his only one ever published inside Cuba.
Arenas lived a very active sexually free homosexual life, having said in
his memoir that he had thousands of such encounters before he was 25.
One of his early boyfriends, the bisexual Pepe (Andrea Di Stefano), is
unreliable and who will later betray him.
During the liberating time frame of his young adulthood, Arenas lists
the three things he enjoyed most: his typewriter, the youth of those
days and his love of the sea.
As he grew as a writer after his work was banned in Cuba, he was
published in France, as friends of his smuggled out of the country his
manuscripts, but his hopes for the Castro regime were dashed forever by
their intolerance. After he is arrested on trumped of charges of
violating minors and is locked in a cramped prison, he escapes by
squeezing out of a cell door and jumping into the ocean. Castro will
allow for no artistic freedom or homosexual activity, which he labels
counterrevolutionary. Fed up with the Castro regime, he will try
unsuccessfully to escape Cuba by taking an inner tube out on the ocean.
When captured after hiding in the woods, he is placed in an overcrowded
prison cell with murderers and rapists, but he earns cigarettes by
writing letters for his illiterate fellow prisoners, thereby gaining
their confidence. He also got a transvestite played by Johnny Depp, to
smuggle out of prison his manuscripts. In his most harrowing prison
experience, he is thrown into solitary confinement in a cramped cell,
where he is unable to stand up straight. Depp will also have a dual role
as a prison lieutenant, who cruelly interrogates him and forces him to
make statements disclaiming his writings and lifestyle.
Weary of living in Cuba and being persecuted for his open homosexuality
and for having his manuscripts smuggled out of the country and published
abroad, Arenas takes advantage of Castro's new policy to get rid of the
so-called misfits, as he changes his name on his passport, since he was
on a list of those forbidden to leave, and he sails to the United States
during the 1980 Mariel boatlift. He settled in Miami, but the film does
not cover that unhappy period in his life. Instead it follows him to New
York City, where he had a faithful lover (Olivier Martinez). He earns
money in NYC by writing, teaching and lecturing, but was lonely and
unhappy here, as shown by his saddened face as he stared blankly out at
Central Park and seemed to be wondering what he was doing there.
He contacted AIDS and in 1990 he took an overdose of sleeping pills, put
a plastic I LOVE NEW YORK shopping bag over his head and committed
suicide by suffocation, as his lover read to him a poem about his
childhood that he was proud to have published. He wrote several letters
blaming Castro for all his troubles and his death, sending it to some
respected American newspapers.
Julian Schnabel has created an emotionally penetrating look at a man
living with his alienation in a marginalized existence and using that
bitter experience as a source of energy for his writing. The film paints
a picture of a man fighting tyranny by his will to be free, where his
spirit alone kept him going. This beautifully photographed film, which
looks much like a series of paintings on canvas, might be too bleak for
a general audience, but it paints a more realistic political view of
Castro's Cuba than most of the recent films I have seen about this
subject, and should be of special interests to those of all persuasions
who care about freedom and the arts. The film's title refers to the
daylight he had in which to write while hiding out from the police in
the woods. He started work on "Before Night Falls" while in Cuba and
finished it in New York.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
"We Put the SIN in Cinema"
 ŠCopyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Since when did the holiday season become the time of year to reflect on
tortured artists? If you don't believe me, look at the films released in
New York and Los Angeles between Thanksgiving and Christmas. They're all
there - Marquis de Sade, Jackson Pollock, Francisco Goya and to a lesser
extent, State and Main's Joseph Turner White, Finding Forrester's Jamal
Wallace, and Shadow of the Vampire's F.W. Murnau. It's enough to drive
moviegoers to The Grinch or The Family Man.
Just when you thought Cuban popularity had gone the way of Men at Work
and Crocodile Dundee, Before Night Falls blends the Caribbean "It"
island of the moment with the angst-ridden story of an artist that just
begs for a December release. What's stranger is that Falls is co-written
and directed by a sculptor/painter (Julian Schnabel) whose only other
film experience was helming another film about a tortured artist
(Basquiat).
Luckily, Falls is much, much better than the critically over-praised
Basquiat. The leap in Schnabel's style between the two films is nothing
short of astonishing. Falls is beautifully shot and exceptionally well
put together, with Schnabel using numerous cinematic techniques, usually
to perfection. Parts of the film share the same gritty, washed-out look
of the Mexican portion of Traffic - so much so that you expect to see
Benicio del Toro make an appearance (or maybe it's the fact that he's
in, like, every movie). Schnabel also makes great use of music in lieu
of dialogue in several scenes.
On the negative side of things, the story of Jean Michel Basquiat was
more interesting than that of Falls' Reinaldo Arenas. The film follows
Arenas' life from his infancy in 1943 Cuba to his 1980 death in New York
City. It's tragic and all, but tragedy doesn't always equate with
entertainment (unless Kathie Lee Gifford's plane goes down over the
Rockies). Your potential enjoyment of the film will hinge on whether you
find the Arenas Chronicles to be remarkable or no different than any
other tale of a tortured artist.
We see a young Arenas carving poetry into a tree. We see an older Arenas
get a job at Cuba's National Library and join the rebels that eventually
put Castro into power. But, mostly, we see Arenas write and then die a
slow, painful death. Yeah, it's kind of interesting to see how he had to
share a bed as a child, and how he was persecuted because of his unique
ability as a writer, but we've seen this kind of thing before. Other
than Schnabel's direction, three superstar cameos (one from Sean Penn
and two from Johnny Depp) and a pretty electrifying (but still a bit
over-hyped) performance from Javier Bardem (Almodovar's Live Flesh),
there's just nothing going on here.
Falls was based on Arenas' memoirs, which were turned into a screenplay
by Schnabel and debut scribes Cunningham O'Keefe and Lázaro Gómez
Carriles. The cinematography is pleasant, and Carter Burwell's (O
Brother, Where Art Thou?) effective score is bolstered by help from
Laurie Anderson and Lou Reed.
2:05  R for strong sexual content, some language and brief violence

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BEFORE NIGHT FALLS"
  Spain's most acclaimed young actor, Javier Bardem, makes his
American debut in this cinematic parable and portrait of Reinaldo
Arenas, who was persecuted for literary and sexual transgressions in
Cuba. A writer and homosexual, Arenas was perceived as a threat to
Fidel Castro on both counts. After escaping from the haunting
Kafkaesque nightmare of the notorious El Morro prison, he tried
unsuccessfully to flee Cuba by inner tube before emigrating to the
United States in the 1980 Mariel boatlift of "undesirables." Arenas
settled in New York's Greenwich Village where, suffering from AIDS, he
committed suicide at the age of 47. Julian Schnabel ("Basquiat")
writes and directs this righteously honest, impressionistic biography
with intelligence, delicacy and craftsmanship, beginning with Arenas's
rural childhood that was marked by an idyllic communion with
nature. With cinematographers Xavier Perez Grobet and Guillermo Rosas,
Schnabel utilizes various film stocks and colorations but without the
flashiness of Steven Soderberg's "Traffic." While exploring Arenas's
obsession with indiscriminate sex (he claimed to have had 5,000 lovers
by age 25), the screenplay, however, offers little analysis or
explanation for Arenas's quirks of character. Although Schnabel
originally envisioned Benicio Del Toro as Arenas, it's Bardem's
dynamic, astonishing performance that elevates the dreariness and
depression of the fragmented tale, along with Sean Penn and Johnny
Depp's cameos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Before Night
Falls" is a strong, poetic, imaginative 8, representing freedom of
expression in form and content. His cry, "I'm a citizen of
nowhere...the State Department declared me a citizen of nowhere, so
legally I don't exist," resonates.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
The life and times of Cuban poet/novelist Reinaldo Arenas, during the
revolution, and afterwards, as his homosexuality and art clash with the
government's oppressive regime.
CRITIQUE:
Not my cup o' tea. I was expecting to learn something from this movie. It's
obviously not a film that was made to "entertain", but one which I believed
would hopefully give me some more insight into the plight of Cubans back in
the day, some further insight into the life and times of poet/novelist
Reinaldo Arenas, and an all-out gangbusters performance from lead, Javier
Bardem (nominated for an Oscar for this role). Unfortunately, none of my
expectations were fulfilled. In fact, here's an example of one of the things
which simply didn't work for me in this film. You know how when you read a
poem, you don't really understand its full meaning right away, so you bask,
simmer on it a bit, reflect and then read it again to see where it's all
coming from? Well, this film actually inserts bits of Arenas' poetry
throughout, but the words don't really say much since they're generally
spoken over several shots. I mean, you sit there, one, trying to decipher
exactly what it is that Javier is pronouncing, since his accent is pretty
incomprehensible at times, and two, what exactly those words mean in the
context of what is going on in the movie. Of course, the movie doesn't
really give you much time to reflect upon any of these words, since the
story is moving on, and the moments, well...ultimately fall flat.
The story also wasn't very clear to begin with, and maybe this had to do
with the fact that I knew little about this man or the Cuban revolution
beforehand (although I doubt it), but can someone please explain to me how
Johnny Depp's character can be both a general in their army and a
cross-dressing man who helps some of the inmates out at the same time?
(without anybody noticing!) And how did Reinaldo finally get out of jail?
(another unclear scenario) And why did all of his boyfriends look so
similar? I could hardly tell them apart! And the length of the movie just
added to the general, yes, "boredom" of it all. Over two hours, and not much
new or interesting to say within. In fact, if it wasn't for the directing,
which was top-notch, I wouldn't have anything good to say about this film
(granted, it all looked pretty authentic as well). Bardem's performance?
So-so, but honestly nothing to crow about. In fact, his voice-overs were
particularly hard to understand. And his character's arc, not all that
impressive either. The stuff in Cuba, I pretty much already knew about (Cuba
bad, no likey freedom of expression and such), and the stuff in the States
was just too drawn-out and confusing...again.
Of course, this movie isn't supposed to be appreciated by the "general"
audience anyway. It's got that certain "art-house" feel about it and been
highly praised my many among that group. Personally, it did nothing for me!
In fact, it seemed to exude more energy into its pretenses than the actual
story. So can you tell that I didn't like this movie? Listen, I don't mind a
good artsy-fartsy flick every now and again either, but this one just didn't
offer me much to work with. Very little empathy for its lead character, very
little actual story-telling and lotsa poetry fluttering about like a rose
broken upon the concrete blocks that bear the breasts of the world inside
the cynicism which destroys its flowers upon creation. Yeah, whatever! A
pretty big bore. BTW, can anyone please tell me why Sean Penn shows up for
30 seconds as a Cuban horse-carriage driver, says a few words and leaves?
(other than so that we could point to the screen and say "Hey look, it's
Sean Penn in heavy makeup!"). Pass!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (7/10) - Happiness (3/10) - Man on the Moon
(5/10) - Quills (8/10) - Wonder Boys (8/10) - Your Friends and Neighbors
(5/10)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fine Line Features
 Director: Julian Schnabel
 Writer:  Reinaldo Arenas (book), Cunningham O'Keefe,
Lazaro Gomez Carriles, Julian Schnabel
 Cast: Javier Bardem, Olivier Martinez, Andrea Di Stefano,
Johnny Depp, Sean Penn, Michael Wincott, Olatz Lopez
Garmendia
   "Before Night Falls" is about the plight of one Cuban
national whose childhood dream was to join Castro's rebels
against the U.S.-supported Batista regime but then soured on
the revolutionary government for good reason.  While the film
does not specifically point out the basis of novelist Reinaldo
Arenas' (Javier Bardem) enthusiasm for fighting the
established government while a child, his ardor was not
totally misguided.  For example, a case can be made even
today for the improvements that the Communist government
on that Spanish-speaking island made: 1) the poor, who were
(and still are) a majority of the population, were brought up
from third-grade educations to universal literacy; 2) health
care, nonexistent for the masses before 1959, is now free
and accessible; 3) the poverty of Cuba is shared by most of
the other Caribbean islands, none of which has a Communist
government; 4) the wide gulf between the wealth of the
powerful and the poverty of the masses has been eliminated;
5) Cuba's poverty is largely the result of an ongoing,
unjustified U.S. trade embargo and the drying up of subsidies
from the Russians.
   That said, we must realize that not only has Fidel Castro
installed himself as the chief executive for life (now 41 years
and counting), but had ordered a major campaign of
repression against political dissidents and homosexuals--
sending them into what amounts to concentration camps and
putting those who were most odious to the established order
in "boxes," similar to what American POWs experienced in
the cages of Vietnam.  It was this experience in a "box" and,
generally, in prison and via a program of harassments, that
turned Reinaldo away from any support of the revolutionary
regime, which even today sports an image of Che Guevara
as its national hero.
   Directed by Julian Schnable--who is Jewish, lives in Spain
and New York, and did not grow up with an overly enormous
interest in Cuba--"Before Night Falls" does quite a job of
bringing to life a poet and novelist who at one point
renounced his teachings (like Galileo) rather than continue to
suffer persecution in his jail but who ultimately sent a
message to the world by leaving the island in 1980 when
Castro allowed homosexuals, criminals, and other so-called
vermin to get out.  You may leave the theater with the
impression that quite a few documentaries would profit from
deleting the talking heads in favor of an authentic
dramatization such as Schnable's with stylized photography.
   Schnabel takes us to Reinaldo's childhood, which was an
idyllic one, one which demonstrates the young man's
absolute joy in freedom.  We see the author, whose mother
had been deserted by her husband and moved with Reinaldo
to a small Cuban town, realizing his homosexual bent with a
passion.  (He claimed to have had 5,000 sexual experiences
by the age of 25.)  Narrated throughout by Javier Bardem--
whose performance won him the National Board or Review's
designation as Best Actor for his role--"Before Night Falls"
shows the vise tightening on the man when, for no particular
reason, the Castro government repudiated the sexual
revolution which was part and parcel of the greater struggle
and did an about face, cracking down on homosexuals by
treating them in the same way it treated common criminals. 
During his worst year, Reinaldo was thrown in jail with scores
of rapists and murderers until he agrees to disavow his own
writings--which in one comic situation were smuggled out of
the jail into France where his memoirs won first prize for the
category.  
   Photographed by Xavier Perez Grobet and Guillermo
Rosas with a variety of lenses to evoke a jungle-like area
representing the author's childhood and frequent images of
water (presumably epitomizing both freedom and security),
the movie can't help forcing the audience to think about what
freedom really means.  I couldn't avoid wondering whether
Castro could have set an example for the world by allowing
Cubans to live in the style they wished provided that they did
not hurt others while making sure that the strong-arms used
their powers legitimately for defense and the maintenance of
an orderly, democratic government.  
   "Before Night Falls" is nothing if not a visual movie, as
though a painter like Jackson Pollock had spread a canvas
on the floor and splashed on lines and spots to stand in for
its various episodes.  Whether you agree with the National
Board of Review that Javier Bardem deserved their pick as
the actor of the year (I'm voting so far for Ed Harris in
"Pollock"), you'd have difficulty denying that the gifted
performer IS Reinaldo Arenas, who swings from a joyful
childhood with a beautiful mother to a sexually fulfilling psot-
adolescence, only to be brought down again and again by the
irrationalities of a puritanical system.
Not Rated.  Running time: 133 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS (2000) *** Directed by Julian Schnabel. Written by 
Cunningham O'Keefe, Lazaro Gomez Carriles, Mr. Schnabel, from the 
memoirs by Reinaldo Arenas.
Photography, Xavier Perez Grobet, Guillermo Rosas. Editing, Michael 
Berenbaum. Production design, Salvador Parra. Art direction, Antonio 
Muno-Hierro. Costumes, Maria Estela Fernandez. Music, Carter Burwell. 
Additional music, Laurie Anderson, Lou Reed. Cast: Javier Bardem (as 
Reinaldo Arenas), Oliver Martinez, Andrea Di Stefano, Johnny Depp, 
Sean Penn, Michael Wincott, Olatz Lopez Garmendia, Vito Maria 
Schnabel, Najwa Nimri, Hector Babenco, Jerzy Skolimowski, Sebastian 
Silva, et al. A Fine Line film. 135 minutes. R (sexuality, violence, 
language)
Painter-sculptor Julian Schnabel entered filmmaking with "Basquiat" 
(1996), about the graffiti street artist who briefly rose to fame. 
"Before Night Falls," Schnabel's second feature, centers on Cuban 
writer Reinaldo Arenas who is not a household name in North America. 
To what extent he is or was famous  in Cuba, a small nation with a 
big interest in the arts, is not explicited in the movie. It does not 
matter much, however.
Arenas, born in 1943, was a poor peasant boy with a rich gift for 
poetry.  He must have been 15 when he joined the Castro-led uprisings 
(December 1956 on...) against corrupt dictator (and former sergeant) 
Fulgencio Batista, who had to flee Cuba on  January 1, 1959.
The Revolution at first seemed to be good for Arenas. He received an 
education, found employment, wrote prose and poetry, won a major 
prize for a book, made friends both in and out literary circles. His 
friends were, it would seem, overwhelmingly gay.
Per the movie, by Castro-ite standards, intellectuals and/or artists 
are counter-revolutionary. The mere suspicion of political 
incorrectness may make someone an object of persecution, and almost 
guarantees it when the subject practices homosexuality, which Arenas 
did on a very large scale.
You cannot neatly separate fantasy from fact or near-fact in this 
movie, and this too does not matter. Arenas's first book was the only 
one published in Cuba, and found unacceptable by the authorities for 
reasons unspecified and only hinted at. Arenas, becomes a persona non 
grata, is oppressed, suppressed, persecuted for his life-style and 
associations, even framed. He is arbitrarily and repeatedly jailed 
under abject, near-infernal conditions, thrown into a pile of true 
criminals, and perhaps other railroaded innocents.
He manages to survive and to smuggle to Europe his subsequent works. 
In one such case it is BonBon, a flaming transvestite allowed prison 
visits --for unexplained reasons-- who carries a manuscript in an odd 
part of his anatomy. He is played by Johnny Depp. Depp  makes another 
appearance as a rather elegant Lieutenant who runs a prison and 
applies smoothly sadistic methods to get sexual gratification from 
Arenas. (Much earlier in the movie Sean Penn, unrecognizable, had 
given a ride in his cart to the teenage Reinaldo)
The acting of Javier Bardem (b. 1969) is outstandingly diverse, 
powerful and convincing --you keep your eyes glued on him. It's got 
to be in his genes. He comes from  a family of Spanish thespians-- 
grandparents, parents and siblings-- many of them famous.  Uncle Juan 
Antonio Bardem (b. 1922) was active until recently as director and 
scriptwriter. In the 1950s cinephiles used to sum up Spain's cinema 
as "the three Bs: Bunuel, Berlanga and Bardem."
Javier Bardem has acted in two dozen movies, but in the USA the 
public-at-large has probably seen him only in "High Heels" by 
Almodovar and "Jamon, jamon" by Bigas Luna.
This is neither a "normal" nor an "academic" or a "reportorial" 
biography of Arenas, but a fascinating mix of realism, ultra-realism, 
surrealism, dreams, true as well as invented documentary footage, 
poetry, fantasy, political criticism.
In a striking, memorable apocalyptic sequence, social outcasts live 
among ruins,  feast, copulate, and are fitting a hot-air balloon to 
escape to Florida. There is voice-over recitation and excellent Cuban 
or Cuban-inspired music. The well-filled two-and-a-quarter hours 
capture moods, mores, tragedy, some humor, life, sadness, joyfulness, 
pain, history, within a life under pressure. All this is not amount 
an orderly description of our hero/anti-hero. Though confusing at 
times it is a rich tossed salad whose main ingredient is Arenas.
In 1980, Castro allowed the departure of "undesirables" of all hues, 
including homosexuals and many criminals, by opening the harbor of 
Mariel for several months. 125,000 Cubans thus emigrated to the USA. 
One of them was Arenas. He spent 10 years in New York, then died of 
AIDS.
The film is oddly and arbitrarily bilingual, alternating in Spanish 
(subtitled) and English (with a Spanish accent). As Yul Brynner would 
say "it is a puzzlement." But what is an admirable puzzle is how most 
of the movie was shot in Mexico where it recreated so well the 
sights, sounds, people in their very Cuban-looking racial mixtures, 
streets, crumbling buildings, and all else with a precision that can 
fool even those who know the island. Additionally, what I suspect to 
be New York footage shot on video adds a special grittiness to the 
last part of the film. Ordinary studio sets and special effects pale 
by comparison.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     This is the second feature by the successful painter Julian 
Schnabel (Basquiat).  Both have been biographies of minority artists who 
suffered grievously and died young, both have been visually and 
stylistically bold, both have been self-indulgent, chaotic, and often 
tedious.
     Before Night Falls is based on the autobiography of Reinaldo 
Arenas, the Cuban poet and novelist who was hounded by the Castro 
government for his homosexuality and his writing.  He was surprisingly 
prolific at both.  He boasted of having bedded 5,000 men by the age of 
25 (and after that he was in prison where the opportunities can't have 
slackened much), and despite his years behind bars and the relentless 
censorship he turned out over 20 books before his premature death of 
AIDS in New York at 48. 
     Central to the critical success this picture has enjoyed is the 
Oscar-nominated performance of  Spaniard Javier Bardem (Jamon, Jamon) as 
Arenas.  Bardem does a remarkable job of taking the character from 
exuberant youth to sickly middle age, and he animates him with a cocky, 
jaded innocence.  But as Best Actor material his credentials have as 
much to do with screen time as with interpretation.  The shortfall is to 
a large extent the fault of the movie's structure, which dulls the 
telling with repetitiveness and confusion.
     Some of the confusion comes from the accents.  The movie is spoken 
primarily in a thickly-accented English which is supposed to be Spanish, 
and which is sometimes incomprehensible to the American ear.  Confusing 
matters further are occasional passages spoken in Spanish, the same 
Spanish they're speaking when they're speaking English, if you follow my 
drift.  At least the Spanish Spanish is subtitled, which makes it easier 
to understand. 
     Schnabel begins his tale with the baby Reinaldo, playing 
bare-fannied in the dirt in his little village, as the adult Reinaldo 
fondly recalls in voice-over "a childhood of absolute poverty and 
absolute freedom."  He grows up, discovers his writer's gift and his 
homosexuality, and proceeds to write and fornicate until he's thrown in 
jail on trumped-up charges by the revolutionary regime, whereupon he 
continues to do both anyway.  Eventually he gets out of Cuba when Castro 
empties the country of "undesirables" and ships them to Miami.
     There is an extraordinary cameo by Johnny Depp as a 
manuscript-smuggling transvestite, muddied by another cameo by Johnny 
Depp as a military officer, also well played but confusing -- you wonder 
if it's supposed to be the same guy leading a double life.  Sean Penn 
also contributes a barely recognizable cameo as a gold-toothed wagon 
driver.
     Schnabel and cinematographers Xavier Perez Grobet and Guillermo 
Rosas come up with some stunning visuals, and the film's condemnation of 
the repressiveness of  the Castro revolution is damning and disturbing, 
but the movie churns and spins its wheels in an orgy of stylistic muck, 
and never gets up to the speed the story requires.

Author
Robin Clifford
Winner of the Grand Jury Prize at the 2000 Venice Film Festival, "Before
Night Falls" tells of the life and the writings of Cuban exile Reinaldo
Arenas. The gay author spent years in and out of Cuba's jails for his
inflammatory prose and poetry before escaping to the United States in 1980.
Javier Bardem plays the persecuted writer and co-stars with the likes of
Johnny Depp, Sean Penn and Michael Wincott in a film by Julian Schnabel.
Javier Bardem does a fine job of portraying the intelligent, talented
Arenas as we follow him, first, as a young man showing an interest in the
written word (and men bathing), and, later, as he garners critical
attention for his first novel. He develops such a following and notoriety
that he comes under the scrutiny of Castro's police and their Russian
masters because of his deviant "capitalist" lifestyle. This begins a tale
of persecution and a personal fight for creative freedom that last up until
Arenas leaves his homeland in the Mariel Harbor exodus of 1980, when Castro
evicted all of Cuba's "deviants, homosexuals and mentally ill" to the
shores of the US.
The tone of the story of "Before Night Falls" is more political and social
in nature, showing Arenas' persecution for his homosexuality and his
politically motivated work. The machismo of Cuba is threatened by the
sexual revolution getting under way in the 50's and 60's around the world.
The oppressive totalitarian government actively tries to subdue this other
revolution with arrests of gays, sending them to cut sugarcane as
rehabilitation. Arenas never gave up, getting his written word out of the
country for publication by any means. At one point he even uses a
transvestite inmate's behind to smuggle out the pages of his latest tome.
(Check out who plays the transvestite.)
The depiction of Cuba, by Schnabel and production designer Salvador Parra,
over the years the story unfolds, is generic and doesn't give the feel that
"you are there." The main means used to show the Cuban location is by
having everyone walking around smoking cigars, even some of the women. The
scenes on the streets of Havana have an obvious movie set feel, pulling
attention away from the action
The screenplay, by Schnabel, Lazaro Gomez Carriles and Cunningham O'Keefe,
brings us, point by point, along the way as we follow Arenas through his
life, his incarcerations and escapes. Once he finally is freed, Arena
spends his last days with a disease we can only guess is AIDS - filmmaker
Julian Schnabel fails to tell us about it, so I can only guess. This kind
of omission detracts from the story, as it requires the viewer to
unnecessarily guess what's going on.
"Before Night Falls" is hopeful tragedy that shows the strength of the
human spirit under adversity. The tragedy is that not everyone is as
courageous and talented as Reinaldo Arenas, who, when he finally escapes
the oppression of Castro, realizes that he has lost his Cuba. Javier Bardem
is solid in his portrayal of Arenas, even if the script is weak. I give it
a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit r eelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, based on the memoirs of the same name, tells the 
story of Reinaldo Arenas (Javier Bardem), a gay, Cuban poet.  Perhaps 
"story" is too strong a word.  As directed by painter Julian Schnabel, 
whose only other movie was the also overrated BASQUIAT, BEFORE NIGHT 
FALLS is more a collection of half-formed images than any kind of a 
proper story.  Spanning Reinaldo's entire life, it never creates a 
single fully formed character.  
When the ending credits finally roll, all we know for sure about 
Reinaldo is that he was gay, persecuted and mother-fixated.  There are 
only hints of his literary skills.  The film suffers almost exactly the 
same problem as FINDING FORRESTER, the other recent movie about a 
writer.  Both movies spend enormous effort on side issues, while never 
bothering to give us examples of the writer's work product until the 
very end.  In both cases, all we get is the briefest of excerpts.  
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS spends considerable time convincing us that Reinaldo 
is gay just as FINDING FORRESTER works hard to show us what a dedicated 
basketball player their writer is.
Sean Penn and Johnny Depp lend their names to the picture by turning in 
some nice cameos.  See if you can recognize them.  The rest of the 
supporting cast isn't the least bit memorable.
Schnabel makes some unusual and frequently unsuccessful choices.  The 
movie is mainly in English, but, capriciously and sporadically, the 
characters begin to speak Spanish with English subtitles.  His use of 
grainy archival footage is the most successful as it gives the movie 
more authenticity than any of the acting.  The picture's lead, Javier 
Bardem, keeps the same withdrawn look throughout.  His lack of energy 
and the director's languid pacing make for tedious viewing.
We are reminded of Castro's persecution of anyone deemed 
counter-revolutionary, such as writers or homosexuals, of which Reinaldo 
was both.  One potentially harrowing event is Reinaldo's unsuccessful 
attempt to float to Florida in an inner tube.  Schnabel, however, 
doesn't have a clue as to how to stage this.  One minute Reinaldo is 
leaving, and the next has him back again.  Boy, that was dramatic.  The 
only interesting part is one camera angle taken from the inner tube's 
viewpoint.
The movie is filled with lost opportunities.  One political propaganda 
billboard reads "Duty Begins When Friendship Ends."  Rather than build 
on the indoctrination issue, the story tosses it out and then drops it.  
Similarly, we have a quasi-trial in which one poet is forced to confess 
to his poetry "crimes" against the state.  But after showing it, this 
isn't properly developed either.
What we are left with are some wonderful images and a terrific and 
eclectic score that includes the adagio from Mahler's 5th -- always a 
good choice.  My favorite of the visuals involves an escape effort by 
hot air balloon.  As the balloon rises from the ruins of an abandoned 
and roofless church, we get the aerial view of a would-be political 
refugee fleeing the ravages of communism.  But, like most escapes, it 
fails.  The movie is like that.  Lots of good images surrounding a 
failed attempt at storytelling.  
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS runs a long 2:13.  Part of the film is in Spanish 
with English subtitles.  It is rated R for strong sexual content, some 
language and brief violence and would be acceptable for high school 
seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
'My mother returned to her parents' home with me as proof of her failure.'
So Cuban author Reinaldo Arenas (Javier Bardem, "Jamon, Jamon," "Live
Flesh") describes his earliest memories where he equated complete poverty with
absolute freedom.  Educated by the revolution which put Castro into power
when he was just sixteen, Arenas won a national book award at twenty with
his first novel "Singing From the Well."  From that point on, his homosexuality
made him a pariah in communist Cuba and he was constantly being
hunted or imprisoned until 1980 when he left Cuba in the Mariel Harbor
boatlift.  Artist/director Julian Schabel ("Basquiat") adapts Arenas' final
memoir for the screen in "Before Night Falls."
"Before Night Falls" is an artistic interpretation of a life, shown in an
impressionistic manner.  We're given a mosaic of memories, shards of
recollections and frequently left to fill in the gaps.
Arenas' earliest childhood was spent in a dirt poor and rural area where he
was essentially ignored.  A dark man approaches and gives him two pesoes
while his mother screams and throws rocks.  Reinaldo discovers this
man is his father - the only time he ever sees him.  (This event is evidently
significant enough to be included, yet never given perspective within the 
film, nor is the obviously strong bond with his mother (played by Schnabel's
wife, Olatz Lopez Garmendia) explored in depth.)  Then the family moves to 
Holquin ('a town of 200,000 people and one garbage truck') where he becomes 
acquainted with hookers before being swept up in the romance of the 
revolution, which is presented in what appears to be old news footage and 
home movies.
Arenas is given the first five of the '150 all encompassing works of
literature' by an encouraging professor (Melvile, Robert Louis Stevenson, 
Proust, Flaubert and Kafka), which he accepts like treasures.  A good
author must also be a great reader and Arenas is given a plum job in the
national library.  His homosexuality is first hinted at by the furtive 
looks he exchanges with a young man while at work.  Soon he's hanging 
with the wealthy Thomas and his crowd, who drive about in his white 
convertible.  Not long after, his troubles begin.
"Before Night Falls" was adapted for the screen by the director, Cunningham
O'Keefe and Lazaro Gomez Carriles, Arenas' lifelong friend (played in the
film by Olivier Martinez, "The Horseman on the Roof").  This story about an
author concentrates more on his general biography than his writing (which, I
presume, is conveyed more within the film's visuals).  What caused his books 
to banned in Cuba?  If it was exclusively the author's homosexuality, that 
is never made clear in the film.  In fact, the scattershot approach to telling 
this story, while sometimes effective, is often equally frustrating.  
Characters appear out of nowhere and disappear.  Relationships and locations 
are often unclear.  We only know Arenas was dying of AIDs (he committed 
suicide in New York City in 1990) by deduction.  (On the other hand, Schnabel 
makes sure we get his use of irony in his last scene by prominently featuring 
the 'I 'heart' NY' logo on a plastic bag at least three times.)
Bardem has a great shaggy head, expressive Raul Julia-like eyes and a
Greco-Roman nose, a rugged handsomeness which he combines with a geeky body
language, curving his shoulders inward and allowing his arms to hang limply
at his sides.  While his is a good performance, the alienation of the
character and the disorienting filmmaking kept me at arms length
emotionally.
Johnny Depp has a dual role as Bon Bon, a flamboyant prison transvestite
(with a talent for smuggling impressive amounts in his nether regions) and as
a cruelly seductive prison Lieutenant.  Depp is a fearless actor and comes
across well, even in these showy, brief roles.  Not so lucky is Sean Penn
who appears in the film for 1-2 minutes as an overly made up Cuban peasant.
This bit of stunt casting seems right out of John Huston's 1963 film "The
List of Adrian Messenger" and is more distracting than the star presence
is worth.  (Another distracting moment in the film comes when Arenas
attempts an escape to Florida in an inner tube - Schnabel uses the same
haunting recording Herzog used in "Aguirre, the Wrath of God," which 
immediately yanked me to Peru.)  Michael Wincott ("The Crow," "Basquiat") 
is almost unrecognizable as another oppressed poet.
The film has some great imagery (cinematography by Xavier Perez Grobet and
Guillermo Rosas, production design by Salvador Parra), such as Reinaldo
sitting on the rocks by a sparkling sea, the aftermath of a hedonistic,
bohemian sendoff for a hot air balloon, and Reinaldo and Lazaro lying on
the trunk of a convertible driving through the snow of nighttime New York
City.
Schnabel clearly has great admiration for his subject, but while he
attempts to share the artistry and feeling of Arenas' work, his historical 
account of the man's life is lacking.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
