Title
Review for Vie de Jésus, La (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LIFE OF JESUS (director: Bruno Dumont; cast: Freddy (David Douche),
Marie (Marjorie Cottreel), Kader (Kader Chaatouf), Yvette (Genevičve
Cottreel), Michou (Samuel Boidin), 1997)
In a northern French village (Bailleul), in the region of Flanders,
the roar of a motorbike is heard coming down the deserted town's empty
streets. This is the first film by Bruno Dumont, as it takes us to a
town that is so cheerless we will never want to put it on our tourist
agenda when visiting the beautiful Flemish countryside. Dumont, a
former teacher, uses mostly nonprofessional actors and the problem he
has with that, is that the story is so unnerving and there is no one
around who could add pizzazz to it, to give us a reason for enjoying
it, as we meet the 20-year-old inarticulate, skinhead looking Fred
(Douche), who obediantly kisses his mom, the proprietor of a small
cafe as he gets off his bike and enters her cafe, and we watch him go
to his room and have sex with his pretty blond girlfriend Marie
(Marjorie), who works as a cashier in a grocery store and lives for
these sexual encounters, but shows no real enjoyment over them, and
even complains to him that he hurt her once.
Appearances don't lie, the town is boring, and Fred is an unhappy man,
with fiery glazed eyes and a sullen stare to go along with the
epileptic seizures he often gets, which seem to come upon him when
things are not going right for him.
The first problem I have with this film, is why this title, since
there is not one single thing about this film that pertains to the
myth of Jesus. I understand the title comes curiously enough from a
philologist, Ernest Renan, whose idea of Christianity was the basis of
the script. But this inarticulate film failed to convey any religious
feeling, and therefore it made no sense to keep that misleading
title. The "life of Fred" would have been a more appropriate and less
insulting title.
Dumont shot this film almost like a straight documentary, using lots
of close-ups on the youngsters, with long stretches of nothing much
happening on the screen, cinema verite style, except the annoying
sound of motorbikes racing through town, as it traces the life and
lives of a troubled bunch of youngsters, with nothing to do but ride
their bikes, play chicken with passing cars, hurl racist slurs, and
pay no heed to what is happening in the world, as they cannot fit into
society, and are angry at their state of being. Though it should be
pointed these are not criminal kids, just the regular garden variety
of locals.
It is a film where nothing happens, but boredom is rampant, where a
sentence of dialogue makes us pick up our ears, as if something is
being said that must be heard and we don't want to miss it.  But we
soon learn that nothing that is said is meaningful. These youngsters
are not likable or approachable, even watching them on film is
chilling, as they are so unmoving, that it is easy for the mind to
wander and think what a waste of time this is, what's the point, one
can get gloomy just by watching these misfits hang around doing
nothing.
What saddens this group, is the death by AIDS of one of their member's
brother, which shakes them up, seeing someone in this small-town
die. Fred arranges a day at the beach to console the grieving brother.
This group of 20-year-olds, on welfare and on a dead-end mission in
life, has tuned out of expecting anything good to happen to them. The
only one getting a bit of a bang out of life is Freddy, who says he
loves Marie, and can't get enough of her.
Into the picture enters a handsome Arab, Kader (Kader), who is
insulted by the group's racial slurs directed at him and his family,
as he responds with his own brand of stupidity and macho behavior, by
aggressively showing a sexual interest in Marie. This gives the group
an outlet for their restlessness and violent tendencies. It also
underscores the racial tensions in society, where bigotry is an
accepted fact of life.
But the group first must embarrass their families by a gang
molestation of an obese drum majorette in their marching band, who is
cruelly hurt by this attack, telling her farmer father about it, who
makes arrangements with the boys' families to pay him for the damage
or he will go the police.
Fred messes up the one seemingly good thing in his life, and loses his
girlfriend over that incident. As a result, the racial slurs grow into
violence, as Marie takes an interest in the Arab, and the hatred and
the disappointments in Fred's life get out of control and the
bitterness that has slowly built-up sinks firmly into his skin, as it
culminates in the attack on the Arab, who in all fairness, acted very
stupidly himself, bringing on an unneeded escalation of the conflict
by his own display of testiness.
In the end, there is just a feeling of impotence here, that there is a
major problem out there in society and there does not seem to be one
single answer to solve it. In some respects, these kids reminded me of
the Littleton, Colorado kids, who spouted neo-Nazi slogans and
massacred a number of high school students, as their rage built and no
one could really see what was happening.
This is the kind of film you might see once and you get all that you
possibly can from it, as it is hauntingly told, but there is no point
in seeing it again. It is such an ugly story, and since it would have
been more suited to be a documentary than a feature movie, as it
offered no drama or enjoyment in the viewing of it. It was more fit to
be a primer for the ills of society put under the microscope, and how
aimless a young man can be, and uncommunicative, that he so easily
loses the one person who could have held him in check.
If this film was trying to be told from a Christian perspective, that
what these kids needed was religion and moral values, then it
certainly did not make its case.  There are just no answers here for
what happened that can make sense.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
LA VIE DE JESUS
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 3B Productions
 Director:  Bruno Dumont
 Writer:  Bruno Dumont
 Cast: David Douche, Marjorie Cottreel, Gevieve Cottreel,
Kader Chaatouf, Sebastien Delbaere, Sebastien Bailleul,
Samuel Boidin, Steve Smagghe
   Small towns and suburbs with lots of land may be ideal
places for raising little kids, but teenagers and the sticks do
not mix well.  Just look at Bruno Dumont's slow-paced "La Vie
de Jesus," so named because he considers it a sort of
passion play, about the suffering of a small group of 20-year-
olds in the Flemish town of Baileul in Northern France. 
They're not really bad boys.  When they make racist remarks
in the presence of an Arab family they're just playing, though
they're too immature to realize the extent to which their
razzing is harmful.  But they feel compassion and when they
make mistakes like dissing members of another ethnic group,
well, they feel sorry for it.  This is particularly true of one of
the gang of young people Michou (Samuel Boidin) who has
just lost a brother to AIDS and guards the body of the poor
fellow together with his empathetic pals.  It is likewise
legitimate to feel for the central individual, the unemployed,
poorly educated Freddy (David Douche), who expresses
genuine sympathy for Michou and who, together with the
others, takes the young man out for a day at the beach to
help him to mourn.
   There's quite a difference between the way Hollywood
portrays the boredom of small-town lie and the way the
French do it.  Oliver Stone in "U-Turn" shows the people of
the miserable white-trash burg of Superior, Arizona, to be
thoroughly off-the-wall, from a conniving, weird-looking and
unrecognizable Billy Bob Thornton to the philosophy-spouting
blind Indian played by Jon Voight.  By contrast, Bruno
Dumont's sticks figures are anything but cartoonish: they're
the types of people you'd expect to find anywhere: listless,
jobless, on the dole, looking for kicks, playing around but with
an undercurrent of violence.
   After introducing us to Freddy's mother, Yvette, (Genvieve
Cottreel), who runs a small cafe of the type you'll find
throughout European villages, Dumont takes us to a core
relationship, that of Freddy and his girlfriend Marie (Marjorie
Cottreel), who works as a supermarket checker.  With little to
do during their spare time but ride around the motor scooter
which Freddy's mom bought him, Freddy and Marie spend
much of their energy lovemaking.  Marie even waits for
Freddy in his room, situated next door to Freddy's mom's--
who takes their liaison in a purely matter-of-fact way. 
Complicating the relationship, Freddy is subject to epileptic
fits, which his kind mother helps him to work through as do
his friends when he is assaulted by the disease on the road. 
He is also helped by the local hospital which has
sophisticated equipment for helping him to cope.  The tension
begins when Kader (Kader Chaatouf), a young Arab man, hits
on Freddy's girl, his advances at first repelled by Marie and
later welcomed quite openly.  When the fellas take note of
these developments, the stage is set for violence.
   Director Dumont pulls no punches.  He is what you might
call a Flemish nationalist, in love with the beauty of the
northern French landscape and determined to make the hard
bodies of his characters serve as metaphor for the silent land. 
The lovemaking is shown close-up as would the maker of a
hardcore porn film: his lovers have no time for foreplay but
simply go at it like the simple people they are.  Dumont
appears to want to convey emotion by closeups of the faces
and body language of his people rather than through
dialogue, which is spare--quite unusual for a maker of French
films which are notably talky.  He does not quite succeed in
playing off the soil of the region against the torsos of his lead
characters but he does get authentic acting from the people,
especially from David Douche--not a professional actor but
one chosen by the director from a hundred or so candidates
from the town of the director's birth.  
   For the most part these young people are going nowhere,
get their kicks from games of chicken pitting their motorbikes
against the cars passing through, expressing racist remarks
that they do not really feel.  "Flanders sends shivers up and
down my spine," the director recently reported in an interview,
but while his movie looks like the genuine article, a portrait of
the compassion and hostility of "the boys," "La Vie de Jesus"
makes a case neither as a parable for the sufferings of Jesus
on the cross nor for 96 minutes of audience quivers and
shudders. Not Rated.  Running Time: 96 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten
