Title
Review for Molly Maguires, The (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     Molly Maguire was a peasant girl in 17th century Ireland, who
supposedly led an uprising against rent collectors.  But this film is
set in 1876, where we find Detective James McParlane (Richard Harris)
being sent to a Pennsylvania mining community, largely composed of
Irish immigrants, in order to infiltrate a secret society known as the
Hibernians.  He knows that within the society is an elite band of
activists, who have called themselves the Molly Maguires, intent on
sabotaging the mines in order to force the owners to upgrade their
working and living conditions.
     You'll be nudged one way and pushed the rest throughout much of
this film, as it is difficult to know who to sympathize with.  We never
really "experience" the terrible work conditions or poverty that the
Maguires are fighting against.  The closest we come to this is during
one scene at a wake, where an elderly miner's life looks to have been
wasted after 42 years in the mines.  But by and large, the community
doesn't appear too badly off (although they could do with a decent
football field).  On the other hand, it's difficult to stick up for
Harris' character because of the deceitful maneuvers and outright lying
he does to get the trust of the Maguires' leader.  Furthermore, both
the Maguires and the peelers (the local constabulary) use murder as a
means of getting their point across.  And just to confound things, the
protagonists are played by charismatic actors (Harris and Sean
Connery), which we would like to see both win.  Is there any chance
they will team up by the film's end?
     The most interesting element of the film is probably at what point
viewers will decide which side deserves their sympathy.   The deciding
factor may be that Harris is motivated only for his own ends while
Connery's actions are more political and altruistic.  What unites both
is that their motivations are the same--to find a better way of living
than is offered by the mines.  Story walks an intriguing tightrope.
You'll find yourself hoping that Harris' coolly-played ruse doesn't get
discovered.  But then, everyone else seems to be plotting too--the
community, innocous on the surface, harbors another community that is
literally underground.  Even the building interiors are lit as if they
were mines.  Both Harris and Connery play their roles wonderfully,
though Samantha Eggar, who shares above-title billing with them, seems
included only to provide Harris with an excuse to reveal his thoughts.
Direction by Martin Ritt is effectively unobtrusive, complemented by
Henry Mancini's wistful, folk-influenced score.
