Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
54

Author
Jerry Saravia
              I've only watched a couple of "X-Files" episodes, but I have to
say that I was mesmerized by their haunting power and sense of dread. Scully
and Mulder were deadpan FBI agents rattled around the bleak, conspiratorial
universe created by Chris Carter where aliens exist. Now comes the inevitable
film version and, although it is not as bleak as the show, it is a nicely
crafted, weirdly paradoxical movie that is quite a pleasure to sit through. 
Of course, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) are
still on the lookout for alien conspiracies. This time, it may have something
to do with the explosion of a Texas office building where black-oil virus
victims are supposedly kept. In the meantime, Mulder is repeatedly visited by a
flaky doctor (the superb Martin Landau) who insists that the Texas bombing was
an alien cover-up. Mulder tries to convince Scully that killer bees, a
black-oil virus and some Tunisian cornfields are all part of a conspiracy
involving the Well-Manicured Man, the Cigarette Smoking Man, and some Syndicate
overlords - the idea is that aliens have been around for thousands of years and
have hidden underground oozing some deadly black oil to unintended victims!
Naturally, in a movie like this, the conspiracy theories abound with so much
abandon that it is impossible to follow who or what is responsible for whom.
The joy of "The X-Files" is to watch David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson play
against and with each other; their scenes together, particularly a brief
emotional moment where they almost kiss, are electrifying to watch. Obviously,
they know their characters well enough to make us care about their plight in
murky waters. 
"The X-Files" has a number of terrifying moments. They include a bombing scene
that has such a creepy realism, it would give the "Lethal Weapon" duo
nightmares for months; the moment when an alien devours a child underground;
and the apocalyptic finale (similar to "Smilla's Sense of Snow") where Mulder
tries to rescue Scully from an icy cavernous fortress where numerous alien
catacombs exist. 
"The X-Files" doesn't make much sense and there are more plot holes than one
can count, e.g., just how does Mulder escape an icy wilderness when his
snowmobile is out of gas? It is still strangely compelling, thrilling,
chilling, eerie, and ably acted by Duchovny and Anderson. That's more than you
can expect from any recent sci-fi movies.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen 19 June 1998 with Nicole for $8.75 at the Cineplex Odeon Chelsea
There are two kinds of people in this world. Those who are fans of the TV
series The X Files and those who don't get it. But the truth is now out
there. Either category of person is going to be a bit baffled or
disappointed by the film, albeit for different reasons.
The good news is that it's not a bad movie. As action-adventure goes, it
succeeds and it's definitely a smart one. X Files novice Byron points out
that Special Agent Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) is a very perceptive
detective. The rapport with Special Agent Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson)
is deep. So are the paranoia and the conspiracies. So are the colors. That
brings me to my favorite part of the movie. 
Director Rob Bowman finally gets to bring the same exciting filming we see
on the small screen to the big screen. The filming is clearly inspired by
the big screen and forerunning series like David Lynch's *Twin Peaks*. The
films combines the action aspects with deep colors--illuminated bubble
structures agains a night sky and a velvety green cornfield; lights and
shadows in a prehistoric ice cave; the brilliant whites of Antarctica. The
only time the film looks flat is when they film in modern-day North Texas.
Bowman's lens can be undone, and it is--by drab beiges and tans of the
dust bowl.
But the story: Well, as the tagline reveals, "The truth is revealed," but
not all the answers the devoted viewers are expecting. But, some of the
basics of the dragged-out five-year plot is revealed. There *are* aliens,
and those old white guys *are* involved in some muddled conspiracy with
them. Also problematic are some plot issues, like how do two people
stranded in Antarctica suddenly wind up back in DC safe and sound? But,
there is a lot of suspense and a sufficient amount of gore to keep you
interested and cringing for two hours. The special effects are pretty good
(note the black oil taking over the boy in the beginning), but the set
from the big finale looks like every big space-monster movie set we've
been seeing lately.
A lot of regular cast members appear here in their usual demeanor: The
Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis), Skinner (Mitch Pileggi), The
Well-Manicured Man (John Neville) are all here, but other characters like
Crychek and the Morphing Man (Roy Thinnes) are not here.  There are some
notable additions to the cast--Blythe Danner appears twice as the
investigating Assistant Director Jana Cassidy, Armin Mueller-Stahl is one
of the conspirators, Terry O'Quinn (of Millenium) is an FBI agent, and
Glenn Headly is a barmaid who cuts off Mulder. The most wasted talent here
is probably Martin Landau, as the conspiracy theorist Alvin Kurzweil, who
perfectly good in his limited role of skulking around urine-drenched
alleys talking with Mulder and dropping him some clues.
So, the choice is yours. Fans of the show are likely to be seeing this one
day, if not now, on video. I would advise them to see it on the big
screen. But, don't expect a lot of answers about green gel blood and
Mulder's abducted sister. You won't get them.
Best Moment in the Film: Scully and Mulder are at a desert crossroads,
wondering what to do--go left or right. It is a defining moment that
typifies everything about the show and the two agents and their
relationship. 
Written by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz, cinematography by Ward
Russell, original music by Mark Snow, production design by Christopher
Nowak, film editing by Stephen Mark.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Matt Williams
The X-Files joins the ranks of television shows moving to the big
screen, but (in a rare occurence) it is doing so in the midst of its
popular television run.  Though this might serve to boost its audience,
it only has a detrimental effect on the film, which ranks as an adequate
episode of the series...nothing really worth the trouble of a feature
adaptation.
For those of you unfamiliar with the series, The X-Files are a division
of the F.B.I. which investigates unusual cases (particularly those that
are of a paranormal nature).  The two agents who have been assigned to
the X-Files are Fox Mulder (David Duchovny), the smart-alecky true
believer, and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson), the level-headed skeptic.
The pair had begun to uncover a government conspiracy involving aliens.
However, they came too close, and their office was burned and the
At the opening of the X-Files movie, Mulder and Scully have been
reassigned to an anti-terrorist detail.  But that pesky alien conspiracy
just won't leave them alone.  Even when assigned to a routine detail,
such as evacuating a Dallas federal building after a bomb threat, can
turn mysterious when these two are involved.  And sooner than you can
say "extraterrestrial biological entity", they're hip deep in the
paranormal again.
Most of the standard X-Files supporting players are here.  On the good
guy's side, there's Mulder and Scully's semi-supportive boss, Director
Skinner (Mitch Pileggi), and Mulder's three conspiracy obsessed pals,
The Lone Gunmen (Tom Braidwood, Bruce Harwood, and Dean Haglund).  In
the Syndicate, the evil secret government organization behind the
conspiracy, there's Well-Manicured Man (John Neville) and the ol'
favorite Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis).  And of course, no
around, Martin Landau plays Kurtzweil, a man who passes some critical
information Mulder's way.
The strengths of The X-Files movie are the same as the series. Duchovny
and Anderson are very engaging leads, displaying the same great
chemistry here as they do on the tv show.  Plus, the picture has a
wonderfully paranoid atmosphere, which so enthralls the audience that
they'll willingly follow along even the most ludicrous plot.
However, the film is also hamstrung by the series.  Since the series
will continue next season, there can be no ultimate conclusion to the
film.  Everything must continue status quo for the series to resume.  As
a result, the movie feels more like a two-part episode of the series
rather than a big screen spectacle.
>From a purely narrative point of view, The X-Files movie falls apart.
The entire plot is driven by an unlikely set of coincidences.  Both
sides, the good guys and the bad guys, cast their fates into the wind
and let pure luck decide their outcomes.  The underlying conspiracy is
hopelessly convoluted, with even more loose ends than plot twists. Even
in comparison to the overall series plot, the movie fails  (actually
altering a major component of the series "mythology" to conform with
more cinematic tastes).
For novices to the X-Files, the movie would be very confusing to follow.
The movie assumes a base familiarity with the key characters, and  even
with some of the details of the overall conspiracy (which are
summarized, but too briefly for newcomers).  Devoted fans of the series
will find that they are being treated with utter contempt.  Not only
does the movie fail to answer any relevant questions, but the movie's
bungled mishandling of the Mulder-Scully romantic angle is sure to
displease both 'shippers and anti-'shippers alike.
The X-Files movie might have worked well as a television episode. As a
movie, it generates a good atmosphere and has a pair of good
performances from the leads...and that's about it.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Matthew Brissette
I think the first thing this reviewer should mention is wether or not I
am a fan of The X-Files. First , let me assure you that no prior
experience with the series is required to fully enjoy this movie. The
producers are not stupid , making a movie just for fans of the series is
not profitable. You have to reach for a larger audience. Therefore , the
movie is quite user-friendly. Altough , non-fans will only fail to
understand certain emotions behind the looks many characters exchange.
But fear not , Duchovny and another man later on provide more than
adequate background info on what is going on. You will never feel as if
you just walked in on the third act of some great opera. 
In any case , the answer is no. I am not a fan of The X-Files , I only
watch it when nothing else is on and I prefer Millennium. However ,
since the Fox network as been so kind as to air several key episodes for
several weeks before the movie's opening weekend I took that opportunity
to test the movie. I taped all of these episodes and watched them only
after seing the movie , I am glad to report that I learned nothing new.
Everything you need to know is explained to the viewer by Duchovny and
others. I know I am going maybe a bit too far to make my point but
everybody should get the chance to experience this movie.
Warning: Major Spoilers Follow! Please do not read to fully enjoy this
movie , you must not be able know what is coming , what exactly is over
that hill and what that weird "hummm" sound is all about. You have been
warned.
The X-Files is what a summer should be. Exciting , scary , great special
effects ( unlike other summer movies the effects do not take over the
movie and are only there when it is really necessary ) and good
performances. This is coming from a guy who thinks David Duchovny is the
human equivalent of a wooden plank. From start to finish , this movie
does not let go of you. When I compare it with last summer's movies the
best way to describe it would be : take the excitement and great score
from Face/Off and the deadly use of sound from Event Horizon. 
This flick is scary , not in a B movie kind of way where you always know
where and when the critter will jump at our heroes. In fact , the first
time the critter in this movie makes an apperance it is totally out of
the blue. You might as well bring ear plugs because this thing is
louuuudd! The last time a monster scared me that much was when I first
saw Aliens as a six year old kid. You know , when you are affraid to put
your feet on the floor because the creature might be under the chair ,
or when you keep trying to cover your throat with your shirt? 
So yeah , the X-Files is scary. And guess what? You never even have to
see the monster but your imagination works overtime and it sure beats
having to watch a flawed , computer generated , Babyzilla , it looks
like you could walk right through it not even scarier than your grandma
in undies type of monster. Do not think that The X-Files is a monster
movie. In fact , the creature is there for maybe three minutes total.
No , The X-Files is definately a Mulder episode of the series. Scully is
at his side , of course , but Gillian Anderson gets maybe half the
screen time. She has a couple of good scenes with Duchovny , but she
gets kidnapped during the last half hour of the movie so she does not
get to do much. No , this is Mulder's time in the spotlight. 
By now , you have heard of the scene where Mulder "showers" Independence
Day. If you have not then I will not spoil it for you , let's just say
that due to recent events Mulder should be "showering" Godzilla instead.
To those of you wondering if Mulder discovers that the truth is indeed
out there...who cares!? If he did find it the series would over anyway
so what are you complaining about? 
The dialogue in interesting and the director is marvelous. The camera is
almost always looking over the shoulder of our heroes so we feel as if
we are right there with them when they open a door or climb a hill. The
script is spotless , every thing that happens happens for a purpose. If
you are confused by something , do not worry because it will all become
clear later on but , and I cannot stress this enough , PAY ATTENTION!!!
Unlike most summer movies , the dialogue is twice as important as the
effects. Miss one vital piece of information and , like most people who
talk during movies , you will go home and tell all your friends how this
movie made no sense. Also , to those people who need to go to the
bathroom during movies...DON'T! The person who watched the movie with me
had to go twice and twice she missed an important conversation.
There is no time to take a breather between scenes because , again
unlike most summer movies ( Godzilla anybody? ) The X-Files does not
need to fill scenes between the suspense and the action with useless
subplots , every scene is crucial and serves a purpose. Who needs to see
the blond chiouaoua have a "big emotional scene" between Godzilla
attacks? 
So far this summer I have seen only one movie who ranks higher on my
list of movies I'd recommend and that is the Truman Show but it only
wins by a nose. But The Truman Show is not what I would call a summer
movie , The X-Files is. What more do you ask from a summer movie other
than the chance to be excited? Cool effects? It's got some. Pulse
pounding? Hell yes! 
Strangely enough , I think that fans of the series will hate this movie
while non-fans will have a good time. It does not provide answers to the
show's many questions , the status quo remains nearly the same and , no
, Mulder and Scully do not get together. 
Rating: Four and a half out of Five stars for the best movie yet this
summer , several jump right out of your seat thrills , many "Whoah , I
never saw that one coming!" moments , four "Holy Shit , where the hell
did that come from" and one heck of an ending. 
You may wonder where this movie lost half a star. Well , I swore never
to give a movie the full five stars so I had to find something about The
in his ice truck , the tracks it leaves in the snow behind him go on for
several miles but then they just stop. It's pretty obvious the film's
makers drove the truck for several miles to give the appearance that
Mulder had been driving for a long time , but in the end it looks like
Mulder just dropped from the sky and started driving. 

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner,
William B. Davis, Armin Mueller-Stahl, John Neville, Terry O'Quinn
Director: Rob Bowman
Producers: Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim
Screenplay: Chris Carter
Cinematography: Ward Russell
Australian release date: July 23, 1998
As a devoted X-Files viewer, I am (like millions of others) familiar
with the adventures of FBI special agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully,
government conspirators "The Cigarette Smoking Man" and "The Well
Manicured Man," plus a host of other arcane characters.  But the
question everybody is asking is what separates the film from the
television episodes?  The answer, not surprisingly, is that our two
favorite agents delve further than ever before into a worldwide
conspiracy, discovering that a global Armageddon may not be far away.
In terms of budget, special effects and novelty, the movie is certainly
far bigger than any episode aired on television.  But strangely, it
feels just a little too big - the full-scale plot, the menacing alien
monsters and a semi-ridiculous climax all contribute to make this appear
as simply a pumped up and over-bloated version of the TV show.  But,
like always, creator Chris Carter has taken some bold risks and, also
like always, he manages to pull it off with the precision of a skilled
writer and the subtlety of a bull in a China chop.  After all, what
would the X-Files be without its pumped up and over-bloated themes?
Capping off where the series left finds Mulder and Scully with no
They investigate a terrorist bomb threat in Washington, but only after a
building is blown to smithereens do they begin to realize that
everything is not as simple as it seems.  It appears as if two firemen
and a young boy were intentionally killed in the blast, to cover up a
deadly alien virus that has the potential to wipe the human race out of
existence.  Thus a new conspiracy is discovered, in which we find that
The Cigarette Smoking Man (William B. Davis), The Well-Manicured Man
(John Neville) and a mysterious abettor (Armin Mueller-Stahl, whom you
may remember from Shine) are cleverly orchestrating.  Oh yeah, and The
Truth is Out There.
I guess it goes without saying that watching The X-Files on the big
screen is a dream come true for many devoted followers.  But, it isn't
just a flick made for fans - although the movie thankfully doesn't
re-introduce the characters, anyone who hasn't seen an episode on TV can
easily get the gist of what's been going on for the last few years.
However, the more dedicated fan will probably be disappointed by the
absence of some characters (in particular, the elusive Agent Alex
Krycek), and, most of all, the lack of the show's "leave it to your own
imagination" approach.
Rob Bowman (who has directed multiple episodes of the show, plus
episodes from others series' including Star Trek: Next Generation and
Macgyver) has taken the directors helm and guides the film smartly, if
not instinctively.  He follows the screenplay (written by Chris Carter
and a couple of others) with a dark, twisted grace, much to the help of
cinematographer Ward Russel (Lawnmower Man II, The Last Boy Scout) who
supplies some all-too-real looking visuals.  Along with Mike Oldfield
and Mark Snow's eerie editing to the already eerie title music, The
senses.
For a movie that isn't bolder, better or smarter than many of its
previous episodes on TV (especially the cliff hanger season finale),
it's a wonder it still works.  Perhaps it is because the sexual tension
between Mulder and Scully has stood the test of time, and the full truth
is still not found, even when it is closest to them.  Should there will
be another X-Files movie in the future (and I very much hope there will
be), I would prefer to see Chris Carter direct it.  Maybe then we would
not only have another very good film, but perhaps he could also make
something that tops anything we've seen before - making sure that the
show's pumped up and over-bloated themes are dealt with in exactly the
right hands.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
schirmer@uslink.net
We've already had our share of summer blockbuster fodder that was never
meant to be. Godzilla, the movie that opened in the most theaters EVER
in history, is flopping. Deep Impact, in spite of an attempt at a
touching storyline, falls short of what was expected. I've even heard
negative reviews on the Truman Show -- I find that hard to believe.
Nevertheless, we've had a nice, typical summer so far -- where movies
designed to be big end up being flops. All we need to make it TRULY
summer are about thirty thousand sequels.
Now, I'll admit it -- I'm an avid veiwer of the X-Files television show.
Well, maybe avid isn't the word I'm looking for. Maybe "devoted" is more
like it. Or "obsessive". Heck, I'm so into the show it's almost
unhealthy. Nevertheless, I maintain a remotely active social life and
don't usually let me geekiness shine through. But when the X-Files comes
to the big screen, let me tell you -- I AM THERE.
Decked out in a sloshed Mulder and Scully tee and a baseball cap that
reads "The Truth is Out There", I made it to the first showing of the
film on opening day. And although I kept trying to tell myself that I
had built myself up for another letdown in the summer movie department,
an avid X-Phile is bound to lose himself as soon as the lights dim. I
was ready.
Let me tell you, you come out of this movie dazed, Phile or not.
The $60 million film lives up to every expectation I would have dreamed,
delivering answers to some of the long-posed questions from the series'
run as well as opening up a whole slew of new ones. The special effects
are undeniably fantastic (you will actually believe Mulder and Scully
are trying to escape the collapsing ice trailing them in the arctic) and
the plot is everything you could hope for in a summer movie -- an
unfolding mystery, easily flowing, with TONS of action. I got so into
it, I ended up locking my hands on the chair handles and tensing up,
causing my arms to fall asleep and begin to tingle.
My only small bit of criticism is how they reintroduce the characters
for those who haven't seen the show before (y'know, one of those three
exsisting people). If you aren't a fan of the show, or don't know who
Mulder and Scully are, the creators do their best at trying to let you
know who they are and what their personalities are. It's rather spotty,
though; if you don't know head from tails in the X-Files universe, the
film may be more confusing to you. Still, you'll be able to figure it
out, even if it takes you a while, and you will still enjoy the movie.
Critics have been complaining that the film is basically just an
extended episode of the show. True, true -- a much BIGGER episode with
much BIGGER action, but an episode none the less. But they're forgetting
one thing -- the show is constantly on the Top 10 most viewed shows.
It's an episode, but people LIKE the episodes. Why ruin what already
works?
Fan or not, take a trip to the theater and give The X-Files a try. Who
knows? You, too, may find yourself believing that the truth is out
there.

Author
R. L. Strong
20th Century Fox Film Corporation presents a Ten Thirteen Productions
David Duchovny Gillian Anderson  
"THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE"  
Mitch Pileggi    Blythe Danner William B. Davis    Armin Mueller-Stahl   
John Neville  &  Martin Landau as  Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil
Music by Mark Snow  Special Make-Up Effects by Alec Gillis & Tom Woodruff, Jr.  Co-Producer: Frank Spotnitz
Edited by Stephen Mark   Production Designer Christopher Nowak  Cinematography by Ward Russell
Executive Producer: Lata Ryan   Produced by Chris Carter & Daniel Sackheim
Screenplay by Chris Carter   Story by Chris Carter & Frank Spotnitz   Directed by Rob Bowman
In an era when most Summer Event films combine the most elaborate
special effects with the most insignificant story lines, it is indeed
a slap in the face to the industry when a television series can show
them how it show and can be done. This is no faint praise. "X-Files:
Fight the Future" is so far the best Summer thrill ride.
The plot opens in the prehistoric past as two Neanderthal men run
across the frozen tundra of Texas (!?) hunting down a strange
creature. Finally reaching it's cave, the two Dawn Men search the
caverns. One is attacked and killed by the unseen creature. The second
Neanderthal, manages to kill the beast. But it is here that the
mythology of the 'X-FILES' comes into play. The survivor is infected
by the creatures blood, which swarms like leaches under the ape man's
skin. We flash forward to present day Texas, where four boys are
playing in a field, looking for fossils. One of the boys (Lucas Black
of TV's 'American Gothic') falls into a cave and is, himself infected
by the black blood.
Fox Mulder and Dana Scully are introduced while investigating a bomb
threat at a Federal Building in Houston. Unable to stop the explosion
from accruing, Mulder and Scully escape within a hares breath of
becoming part of the rubble (a marvelously suspenseful scene that
gives the viewer a real feeling of danger). Contact with the enigmatic
Dr.  Alvin Kurtzweil (played marvelously by Martin Landau), leads
Mulder back into his old habits. The difference this time is that
Scully is starting to believe as well.
I don't want to give away anymore of the plot as that would rob you of
one of this summers most enjoyable thrillers. If you are a fan of the
television series, I feel that you may be a little disappointed as the
film answers some of the shows more interesting questions. But it
also, brings up as many new ones. And that is as it should be. The
never been an avid follower of the series, I believe that, that has
changed for me. To say that the concept intrigues me is to be
redundant. This is one of the most well thought out scripts of this
year. Kudos to Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz for such fine writing.
The performances of David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson are top
notch. Gillian proves more than worthy of the Emmy's she has won for
her portrayal of the analytical Dana Scully. David Ducovny is no
slouch either. Mulder develops into a more involved individual in this
film. He is forced to become less of a loner. His self mocking and
indifferent attitude about anything other than the X-Files is given a
serious shock here. The chemistry between Mulder and Scully is, shall
we say reserved romance. These two characters are obviously very fond
of one another. I'm not going to say that Mulder and Scully consummate
their relationship, but I can say that as of this film it is more than
professional.
The supporting cast is equally good with surprising cameos by some
very talented actors. Of course, William B. Davis returns as the
Cigarette Smoking Man (I still prefer the moniker 'Cancer Man'), and
is as sinister as he's ever been.  But the big surprise is John
Neville as The Well-Manicured Man, we get to know a bit more about
this character here. And his change of heart (?) is nothing if not
believable. The cameos by Blythe Danner, Glenne Headly and Terry
O'Quinn are marvelous surprises and their brief appearances are
wonderfully timed presentations.
Rob Bowman reveals himself to be a very strong director. His visual
style is not intrusive, but at the same time carries a marvelous use
of space and shadow. The cinematography by Ward Russel is
sumptuous. You've never seen corn fields look this ominous. The
collaboration between these two individuals has fostered one of the
most enjoyable adaptations of a TV series since 'Star Trek 2: The
Wrath of Khan'. The effects (both visual and physical) are
stunning. It's almost impossible to tell where one takes up. This is
seamless work and kudos go to all involved. A special note of praise
to the make-up effects team of Alec Gillis & Tom Woodruff . They have
done the impossible. They have given us an alien being that we have
never seen before. One that you'll believe to be real.
"X-Files: Fight the Future" is just what we've needed this summer. A
serious genre picture that does not dumb down to the lowest common
denominator. This is as good a conspiracy film as "JFK", but
fortunately not nearly as plausible. Or is it?!
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the express written permission of the author.

Author
Moise17
Cast: David Duchovny; Gillian Anderson; John Nevill; William B. Davis; Martin
Landeu
 Every Sunday night I would be glued to my sofa, watching my favorite
television show from 9-10pm.  It is a show about mystery, atmosphere, science
fiction, horror, conspiracies, and characters so worthy of regocnition, I am
pleased to find out even the Pope knows who Agents Mulder and Scully are (okay,
maybe he doesn't, but who doesn't other than him?).
 Creator Chris Carter made a breakthrough show.  A show unlike any other on the
air today, yesterday, or tomorrow.  Now, he has taken a step further: Moving
this monument onto the silver screen.  The results are a class act.
 (Warning: spoilers ahead!) The film continues the adventures of Mulder and
Scully (if you don't know about their quest for truth, justice, and aliens,
than what are you doing reading this review?) from season five.  That right
there is something I have never seen, a show's season finale written right into
a motion picture.
 The Agents are taken off their X-File cases and assigned to a Dallas bomb
threat. When the bomb goes off (in a frightening, intensely realistic portray),
Mulder and Scully are blamed for misguidence and split apart.  Mulder is later
told by a shadowy figure (Martin Landeu is a brava performance) that the bomb
intentionally exploded to cover-up a conspiracy dealing with the body of a
little boy who was infected with the deadly black-oil.
 This sends our heros back to Dallas to investigate the mishaps, which turns
out to be the key in an on-going conspiracy to hide the evidence of
extraterrestrial life on this planet for millions of years.
 As sci-fi goes, X-Files is a classic movie that deserves to be seen on the
bigscreen (which I am going to do again).  Most people might not understand or
like the film's story and aspect of Mulder and Scully's quest.  Only a certain
amount of fans and serious sci-fi buffs (not the Star Wars type) will
appreciate the movie's intelligence and way it doesn't exploit aliens, as did
Independece Day (1996) did.  X-Files is about secrets and mysterious stories,
and, the film is, also, splashy in the FX department.  But it doesn't show-off
the laborious set pieces too much.  ID4 was too grande in the FX, and not in
the plot.
 The X-Files will likely be the best film this summer, until Saving Private
Ryan (which I hear is getting some great critical acclaime already).  If you
can't understand the film's relentless fascination with the dark side and
life-long goals, too bad for you.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
This is how it is: everyone's favourite FBI agents are once again down 
on their luck, the eponymous files having been closed.  But Mulder 
(David Duchovny) is contacted by an old friend of his father (Martin 
Landau) who explains that he is aware of a high level conspiracy to 
unleash a plague on mankind.  Knowing this will at the very least 
explain the final season of "Space 1999", Mulder cons Scully (Gillian 
Anderson) into donning an awesome pair of heels and rekindling their 
unresolved sexual tension.  Equipped with their trusty torchs, mobile 
phones and clothes in every imaginable shade of black, our 
conspiratorial duo investigate a bomb blast and a mysterious 
excavation site.  It's not long before Scully is conveniently taken 
prisoner and Mulder has to trudge through snow to save her.
There's a lot to admire about "The X Files" as a TV show.  It keyed 
into a previous unmined vein of interest in conspiracy and paranoia, 
paid a long overdue visit to the horror genre, managed to laugh at 
itself while telling some fun and well-directed stories.  It's a very 
likeable show.  This may explain why after seeing the movie there is 
this vague feeling of guilt that you didn't like it more.
The beginning is admirable, drawing you in with a great surtitle for a 
hookline: "North Texas - 35000 BC".  After this creepy opening 
sequence, we see the two discredited agents working a case in Dallas 
that features a great explosion and the movie's sole point of parody 
(which revolves around Mulder's wooden expression).  Things then get 
very busy with secret meetings, internal agency hearings and help 
crawling out of the woodpile at every turn.  To be fair, it's only 
near the end that you realise that you are just watching a two hour 
episode of the TV show.
Is that so bad?  Movie and TV can be very different experiences, if 
only due to length.  "The X Files" shows a few scars gained in the 
move.  The soundtrack blairs stridently in too many scenes.  A 
rollcall of characters parade past the screen and then disappear.  The 
malevolent Cancer Man gets no chance to work his evil and those 
paragons of geekdom, the Lone Gunmen, are on screen for a full 20 
seconds.  But worst of all, over a two hour period the movie is 
sufficiently drawn-out to let you dwell on plot intricacies.  (Plot 
intricacies and Scully's magnificent pumps.  Excuse me.)  At the end 
of the day, the plot makes little sense.  In a conspiracy the viewer 
should be convinced that while motives may be unknown, the action is 
in some light be consistent and plausible.  But "The X Files" slowly 
but surely breaches this barrier.  The unseen conspiracy cannot make 
sense.  The actions of some characters seems to come out of a vacuum.  
And at the end of the movie, we are back to square one - the X Files 
are re-opened and conspirators and whistleblowers are at work again, 
with no ground gained or lost.
Hardcore X-philes will race off to see the movie immediately and 
probably get a decent bang-for-buck out of it.  More casual fans will 
still enjoy it but can proceed more leisurely, maybe waiting for video 
(which I predict will not be long).  Those who have never seen "The X 
Files" will have trouble understanding any of this.  Conversely, the 
hoopla over having to know the last few episodes to understand the 
movie is severely overstated - a nodding acquaintance with the main 
characters and issues is all that is necessary.  [**/ok] and unmarked 
helicopters on the Sid and Nancy scale.
"The X Files"
Released 1998.
Directed by Rob Bowman.
Written by Chris Carter and Frank Spotniz.
Music by Mike Oldfield and Mark Snow.
Starring David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Armin Mueller-Stahl,
        Blythe Danner, William B. Davis, Mitch Pileggi.
--
Paul-Michael Agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au)
Postviews SF/F reviews & mailing-list at www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The X Files (1998)
David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, John Neville,
William B. Davis, Mitch Pileggi, Blythe Danner, Armin Mueller-Stahl, 
Terry O'Quinn. Written by Chris Carter. Produced by Chris Carter and 
Daniel Sackheim. Directed by  Rob Bowman. 115 minutes
PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
A little behind-the-scenes glimpse at the fabulous world of film 
reviewing. Prior to the press screening for "The X Files," the promotion 
representative asked my paper to agree not to print a review prior to the 
film's official release date. I asked why, if Time and Newsweek were 
running advance reviews, anyone would give a rat's ass if an Indianapolis 
newspaper offered an opinion two days early. "It's studio policy," the 
rep informed me in curt tones. "Besides, they don't want to see any early 
reviews popping up on one of those sneak preview web sites." 
"Oh please," I moaned, "I'm a professional journalist. Do you honestly 
think I'm going to take material I'm paid to write and submit it to 
'Ain't It Cool News' under a pseudonym? Writing is not easy and I have no 
interest in seeing my finished work in giant type on a fan page, 
attributed to 'Pudding Whistle' or something." The rep was unimpressed by 
my little tirade and grudgingly, I agreed to their terms. 
The reason I've shared this with you is because there's only so much one 
can say about the actual film without spoiling the fun. A big part of 
enjoying "The X Files" series comes from trying to figure out the secrets 
of the show's labyrinthine conspiratorial story arc and the same holds 
true for the film, so you'll see no spoilers here. 
For those who have never followed the show and may feel intimidated by 
reports of the series' elaborate back-story, you can rest easy. The film, 
while complex, stands alone and is understandable to newcomers. Hard core 
fans who worried that the movie would reveal too much can relax as well. 
While "The X Files" clarifies the series mythology, there are definitely 
plenty of secrets left. 
After an effectively spooky prologue set in 35,000 BC, the film picks up 
where the show's season finale left off, with the X Files closed and Fox 
Mulder and Dana Scully working on an FBI terrorism unit in Dallas. An 
explosion draws the pair back into the thick of the conspiracy, which 
leads them everywhere from the desert to Antarctica. Along the way, we 
meet new shadowy characters, witness a significant moment in the droll 
duo's relationship, and get some dandy scares. Leaving the theater, I 
felt just satisfied enough and found myself looking forward to the fall, 
when we'll see where the series leads from this invigorating turn.
"The X Files" plays like an expanded episode of the TV show and that's a 
good thing. Instead of getting carried away with making an theatrical 
epic, Chris Carter and company wisely remembered the importance of 
maintaining the tone of the series. David Duchovny's laconic Mulder and 
Gillian Anderson's intense Scully are fascinating characters who play as 
well on the big screen as on the tube. 
Continuing the series tradition, the film tosses in humor at unexpected 
moments. Fans will delight in a scene addressing Mulder's chronic deadpan 
expression, while event movie producers Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich 
will wince over a hilarious, very pointed dig at one of their films.
A couple of minor gripes. Mitch Pileggi, one of the series' strongest 
characters, is underused here. And the film's climax, while both scary 
and exciting, is a bit ragged, with a few plot holes and gaps in internal 
logic. 
The better episodes of the "X Files" series play like abbreviated movies 
and, quibbles aside, "The X Files" lives up to the high standards set by 
the show. Is it the best "episode?" No. But it's a good one. "The X 
Files" moves at a fast clip, sets and maintains a creepy tone and answers 
just enough questions. There's still a lot of truth left to be revealed, 
but this entertaining "X Files" does a nice job of whetting our appetites 
for what's to come.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Rob Bowman
Writer: Chris Carter (story by Carter and Frank Spotnitz)
Starring: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, John Neville,
Armin Mueller-Stahl, William B. Davis, Blythe Danner, Terry O'Quinn, Glenne
Headley, Lucas Black, Mitch Pileggi
The entire concept of "The X-Files" is extremely seductive: that we are
being allowed to see things that we're really not supposed to be seeing,
and that the more we know, the more mortal danger we are in.  It's at once
frightening and almost orgasmic to learn things that we're not supposed to
be knowing, and that must be the real draw to the show...at least it that
was the draw of the movie for me.
I have perhaps seen the TV show twice, maybe twice-and-a-half, and one
would think that since this is a film that does not try to pander to those
who don't watch the show (like me), that I would have a bitch of a time
following the complex plot this film lays out.  True, the film does not
insult those who have staked a living watching this show from the start
(there is no formal introduction to anything that goes on, no explanation
of what the "X-Files" really are), but it is able to walk on a tight rope
between never annoying the regular viewers and also not perplexing any
newbies to the area of X-Philedom.
But it won't hurt to do some research, in fact it may really help a lot. 
>From the shows I've watched and the article I read in "Newsweek" last week,
I was able to understand what the X-Files really are, the nature of the two
protagonists' relationship, and also able to point out a couple of the
supporting characters (Look!  There's "Cigarette-Smoking Man!"  Look! 
There's "Well-Manicured Man!"  But who are those three dorks hovering over
David Duchovny and why is everyone in the theatre laughing at them?!).
The film, as I see it, is really an expansion of the TV series, not only
coming off as a two-hour episode with a mighty-big budget and grade-A
special effects, but also as a starting point for some explanations of some
of the bigger secrets the series hides up.  As the show often deals with
the discovery and potential cover-up of extra-terristrials, the film
decides to unearth some of the deeper conspiracies about this subject.  The
film's focus is on the discovery of a certain slimy alien that is first
discovered in 3500 B.C. in Texas during the Ice Age (someone in the
audience ACTUALLY shouted out "There's no snow in Texas!" - true story) and
is then found out by an ill-fated little boy (Lucas Black, the kid from
"Sling Blade").
After an admittingly sloppy-as-hell cover-up (which brings about disturbing
memories of Oklahoma City), our two favorite Special Agents, Fox Mulder and
Dana Scully (David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson), rightly smell something
fishy and discover some alien virus cover-up material...only to find
themselves separated by the big cheeses in the FBI (headed by none other
than Blythe Danner).  Of course, they secretly get back together, and begin
to dig a little deeper.
That's enough description of the plot, in fact it may be too much.  Part of
the fun of watching this film is being able to walk into it with very
little knowledge of what's going to happen, and then being surprised by
every big twist and turn.  But I'm not exactly sure how much is revealed in
this film, because I don't know everything that has gone on in the show,
but the real power of the film is that the film is not so much about what
we learn as it is about the fact that we're actually learning it.  The
direction by series regular Rob Bowman is wonderfully eerie, and the
production design is icy and forboding.  Everywhere they go looks
unwelcome, and it gives off the feel that we just shouldn't be in there but
we can't help ourselves.  The show's power is that we all want to know the
truth, but finding it can easily cost us our lives.
However, the film often becomes a little cheap, and by the end, even the
most ardent fan will not know exactly what has been found out.  I suppose
the fact that the show is still on the air (and there's still the
potentiality of more films in the series) permitted the writers from
revealing everything, and thus wrapping up the film nicely.  And I have to
admit that as the film goes on, it often forgets some of the things it
started, thus confusing the audience a little more.
But for every problem you can discover with it, there's at least two things
to admire.  The two leads nicely convert to the big screen, even Duchovny's
deadpan deliver of almost all of his lines, and especially Anderson's
intensity.  Although we get very little character development, we honestly
don't need any: they're so likable that any real expansion into their
characters would be a distraction from the real points of the concept that
is "The X-Files."  And we also get some interesting performances from the
supporting characters, the best coming from Martin Landau as a man who
knows everything about conspiracies and lurks in the shadows and bars,
trying to find the right person to spill his guts to, and another great
performance coming from John Neville, continuing his role as Well-Manicured
Man from the series, who's incredible amount of wrinkles make him look like
the most eerie person on this earth (also look for a brief Armin
Mueller-Stahl as one of the old creepy guys running the world).
And, of course, the film has a sense of humor, not only in Duchovny's
admittingly droll performance, but also in those little comic moments (my
favorite being the scene where Duchovny and Landau share a piss on an "ID4"
poster - ha ha).  The best thing a film that is as serious as this can have
is a great sense of humor.
The best way to view the film is as a really intelligent popcorn flick. 
There's a lot of big action sequences, which are often extremely tense (a
couple of time, yes, I gripped my arm chair), and are directed with the
right amount of intelligence and intensity.  And you always have to at
least be intrigued by any film where the main intent is to try and discover
exactly what's really out there.  The way I see it, "The X-Files" is
successful in two ways: for regular viewers, it whets their appetites to
continue watching; for rookies, it just makes them want to watch the show
on a regular basis.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE X FILES
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, John Neville,
William B. Davis, Mitch Pileggi, Blythe Danner.
Screenplay:  Chris Carter.
Producers:  Chris Carter and Daniel Sackheim.
Director:  Rob Bowman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Two key questions surrounded the big-screen incarnation of THE X
FILES, one applicable to each of the film's two potential audiences.  For
devoted fans of the television series -- and "devoted" doesn't do justice
to the fervor of X-Philes -- the question was whether the film would
reveal too much of the government/alien conspiracy FBI Special Agents Fox
Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) have battled
for five years, laying bare the "mythology" at the heart of the show.  For
those unfamiliar with the series, the question was whether the uninitiated
could follow a labyrinthine plot even die-hard fans don't entirely
understand.  Chris Carter, the series' guru and the film's
writer/producer, faced a delicate situation:  he stood to alienate
absolutely everybody.
     In retrospect, it's hard to believe the first question was ever a
question at all.  After all, how many revelations could you expect in a
film where even the title was a source of conflicting information -- was
it THE X FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE?  THE X FILES MOVIE?  Just plain THE X
FILES (for the record, the only title that appears on screen)?  Yes, the
story does launch from this year's season finale, placing Mulder and
Scully on a relatively mundane detail after the FBI shut down Mulder's
paranormal-focused project "The X-Files."  Yes, it does reveal the nature
of a mysterious "black cancer" featured in several episodes.  Yes, it does
expand on the involvement of the Well-Manicured Man (John Neville) and the
Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis) in some dark plan involving alien
visitors.  And yes, it does give Mulder and Scully a bit of quality
personal time together.  But does it throw open every door and tie up
every loose end?  Please...you'd be more likely to find the
Cigarette-Smoking Man chomping away on Nicorette gum.
     THE X FILES is not, repeat, _not_ the Place Wherein All Things Shall
Be Made Known Unto Thee.  Essentially it's a two-hour long episode of the
series with amped-up production values, taking our cell-phone wielding
protagonists from North Texas to the Mexican border to Antarctica on a
quest for the truth that is out there.  Yet there's something strange
about moving the show's moody claustrophobia to the big screen.
Cinematographer Ward Russell maintains the high quality which has long
made "The X-Files" one of the best-looking shows on television, but the
problem is less one of style than it is one of scale.  Blown up larger
than life, the conspirators seem less sinister, the situations less
sublimely creepy.  The atmosphere may leave some fans wondering who took
their Mulder and Scully and dropped them into a summer action blockbuster.
     Which brings us to question number two:  how does THE X FILES play if
you've never seen Mulder and Scully before in your life?  Quite simply,
it's an sharp suspense thriller which sets up the characters and
situations with impressive effectiveness and economy.  Director Rob Bowman
complements the necessary exposition with energetic, visually arresting
set pieces, creating a visceral entertainment as satisfying as anything
else you'll find in a multiplex.  Though "X-Files" novices may be left
behind with references to the Lone Gunmen and Mulder's notoriously deadpan
demeanor, it doesn't take familiarity with the series to get a charge out
of the well-paced chases, or a chuckle out of Mulder using a poster from a
certain 1996 blockbuster as an impromptu urinal.
     It's important for those viewers to know that they can have a
perfectly enjoyable time with THE X FILES and still not understand exactly 
what's going on after the film has ended.  In fact, THE X FILES may work
best as a cunning lure, drawing potential new viewers into the fold with a
final shot that might as well have included a "To Be Continued..."
caption.  Regular viewers, on the other hand, have seen better stories
with these characters.  Maybe that should have been the real first
question:  how do you make a unique film event from a series where the
quality already regularly surpasses most theatrical films?  The truth is
only partially out there in THE X FILES, and the truth is that X-Philes
with high expectations may be much harder to please than the average
summer movie-goer.  

Author
Jon Zietz
 Every Sunday night, we have a ritual: at 9:00 p.m.
sharp we hustle the non-believers out of the family room, shut off
the phones, kill the lights, throw the dog a bone, fire up the big
screen and tune in The X Files. So imagine our frustration when we
spent last Friday night at the local cineplex for the premiere of The
X Files Movie. We managed to get the lights killed alright, but the
rest of the experience was conspiratorial at best. There were the pop
corn-eating couples, the talking heads, and even one
cigarette-smoking man. Halfway through the movie, the doors swung
open and we were invaded by hordes of teenage, Can't Hardly Wait,
refugees who took over the first two rows of the theater.  Then the
air conditioning mysteriously shut down. As if orchestrated by some
malignant alien force, the air was being slowly sucked out of the
auditorium, beads of sweat were dripping off me, and the odor of the
unwashed theater denizens hung ominously in the thickening air. So
I'd guess you'd say it was the perfect setting to watch that epic of
paranoia, The X Files Movie, finally hit the big screen.
    The flick walks a shaky tightrope between being the "cult" movie
we X fans wanted and a general audience movie for those who spend
their Sunday nights watching Lawrence Welk reruns, or, god forbid,
actually talking to one another.  Unfortunately, the movie doesn't
quite suceed in either category.  The "regular" movie audience will
be able to follow along, but to them it'll play like a familiar song
sung in a foreign language. As for the X fans, well, like Dana
Scully, we couldn't believe our eyes, and, like Fox Mulder, we
desperately wanted to believe. But this was no Hollywood blockbuster
movie up there on the screen. Instead we got a perfectly servicible
T.V. two-parter. All the bells and whistles were present: bodies
consumed by alien earthworms, mysterious old men plotting
who-the-hell knows what, Mulder drunkenly obscessing on his dark
theories, and Scully disbelieving in spite of herself. All of us
party faithful with an intimate knowledge of the past 5 seasons have
seen it all before. But, you know, that's the whole point of the X
Files. We know it's out there! I mean of course, the dark atmosphere
of conspiracy that Chris Carter creates so well. We didn't go to the
movie to gag on special effects or Oscar-worthy acting. We just
wanted to see Mulder and Scully in those familiar, ominous plot
turns, and that's what we got.
    All things being equal, I'd have been much happier seeing it at
home, where we could at least control some of those conspirators who
tried so hard to mess around with our X Files flick.
For more great reviews check out the Movie Review Archive from Jon's
Ultimate Movie Review Page

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
I'm not sure how many TV series have been moved to the big screen before
the end of its small screen run.  Actually, I'm not sure if there are
that many TV series that are brought to the big screen at all: it seems
to be an 1990s phenomenon, though there was Star Trek all those years go.
Mostly, what we see are nostalgia trips ("Flintstones", "Lost in Space",
the "Avengers") ironic revivals ("The Brady Bunch") or Ideas That Should
Not Have Been Thought ("Dennis the Menace").  But we'll probably never
see (thankfully, actually) a "Friends" movie, though it may feel like
that each and every Jennifer Aniston or David Schwimmer romantic comedy
is an alternative history of the TV show.
So, on Friday, "X-Files" has joined "Beavis and Butthead" and "MST3K"
as the three TV shows I can name off-hand to have made it to the big
screen before their runs have finished.  It should be more successful
than its two predecessors.  While it may not make the American Film
Institute's Top 100 films (not exactly an authoritative list), it isn't
disappointing, like "Beavis and Butthead", or why-bother like "MST3K".
I had hoped "X-Files" would have been more ambitious.  Considering the
series internal mythology and its threads of continuity, my idea of an
"X-Files" movie would have been a movie that could have been dropped into
the existing series as-is.  It would have been a vehicle to carry the myth
arc from the season finale, and leave questions for the season premiere.
The series would have torn down the increasingly tattered curtain between
small and big screens.
Yes, this would have shut out people who don't watch the series, but it's
unclear if it'd be that much of a loss.  I don't think that many non-fans
will see the movie, and there are some 20 million people following the
series.  At $5 a pop, you have a $100 million movie.  Plus repeats,
because people will watch it several times to dig out the myth-arc
clues or the tiniest indicators of the Mulder-Scully relationship.
The strength of the fan base depends in large part on exploring these
mysteries.  Yes, it'd make less than "Godzilla", but Chris Carter et al
wouldn't have staked $200 million in a movie that'll make $150M.
The "X-Files" movie, as it turns out, was made to be more accessible to
general audiences, and this robs it of a lot of punch.  Whether the movie
will be well-referred to next season is open to question.  Certainly,
the elements of the past finale aren't present, beyond an off-hand
reference to the closing down of the X-Files as semi-organized activity.
A recurring character does die, so I suppose they have to say something.
He, however, was not as significant as Deep Throat, Mr. X or the
Cancer Man.
In any case, the centerpiece Conspiracy plays a little like a Monster of
the Week.  The uninitiated have perhaps heard of the Conspiracy, would
expect to see it in the movie, but it feels there more for scares and
chills than for advancing the myth-arc.  Yes, things are revealed about
the nature of the black oil and what the Conspiracy is up to, but not
much more than we know already.  The main datum is that the Conspiracy
itself, in setting up a double-cross, has itself been double-crossed.
Besides this, Scully has to be rescued by Mulder.  At the end, Cancer
Man is talking to someone else, and there's a "curses, foiled again by
Mulder" moment.  General audiences may wonder why they don't just kill
Mulder -- they've offed others.  I suppose, in the space of this movie,
it was too much to go into the Mulder-is-an-unwitting-pawn (i.e., "Luke,
I am your father") thread that was touched on in the past two seasons.
Yes, the speculation was wrong, but there still seems to be something
special about Mulder.
One thing that surprised me was the apocalyptic themes in the film.
While apocalypse and millennium may have lurked in the background of
the "X-Files" (and is the centerpiece of Carter's other series), there
has never been a sense that the Conspiracy would lead towards an almost
Biblical end of the world scenario.  Yet that is what the movie implies,
in no unclear terms.  I think it's an interesting change, though I'm
not sure if it's a good one.
The movie, being a summer movie, isn't the height of originality.  There
are clearly bits and pieces from "Aliens".  Actually, this reduces the
extraterrestrials a fair amount.  Prior to this, the aliens lurked in the
shadows; it wasn't clear if they even existed outside of Mulder's mind.
Now, we see them a bit more clearly: not quite men in rubber suits,
but they've lost the sense of the sinister, the diabolical.
There are also Lovecraftian influences.  "X-Files" has had Lovecraftian
stories before, but mainly having to do with funguses hiding deep in
the ground.  This is similar: underground viruses that have existed for
eons, a trip to Antartica.  Perhaps it's more fitting for the end of the
century: viruses and things that violate internally, rather than Great
Old Ones menacing externally.
Oh, one somewhat cute thing: Mulder and Scully finally lock lips, but
only in a Xena-Gabriel or Xander-Buffy sort of way.  This is actually
unrelated to any Shipper revelation.  As a tease, a bone was tossed to
Shippers earlier.  It's unclear if this bone will lead to anything else
in the upcoming season.  The Scully-Mulder interaction is fairly good
in the movie, a bit looser than it has been for most of this season.
There's a personal-crisis-must-happen-in-movies theme, of Scully being
transfered to Utah.  It, of course, is resolved by re-opening the X-Files
as an investigative unit at the end of the movie, but I thought it'd make
for a nice way to move the series to Los Angeles: Mulder and Scully are
sent out there as a condition of re-establishing the X-Files.
All in all, I liked the movie. I thought it could have been more
ambitious, but I was entertained.  It's nice to see scenes unfolding in
Washington or Texas, instead of South Vancouver or East Vancouver.
"The court determined that Fox TV does not impede free and fair
competition in the teen-angst soap-com genre, therefore Party of Five
need not be broken into five 'Parties of One,' one being distributed to
each of the other networks."
-- 
"The court determined that Fox TV does not impede free and fair
competition in the teen-angst soap-com genre, therefore Party of Five
need not be broken into five 'Parties of One,' one being distributed to
each of the other networks."

Author
Kevin Patterson
Having been an avowed X-Phile for several years, I wasn't sure how best to
approach the task of reviewing this X-FILES feature film. I had thought
that I should try to write the review as objectively as possible and
distance myself from my fandom, but I realized that this would probably be
a dubious endeavor on my part, to say the least. And since most of the
other reviews I've read have been written by those who do not watch the
show, I've decided to throw objectivity to the wind and offer the
perspective of an admitted die-hard fan.
Whether you watch the show or not, you probably know that it involves the
efforts of FBI Agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian
Anderson) to investigate paranormal phenomena. Over the show's five
seasons, this assignment has led them into the increasingly dangerous
depths of an international government conspiracy to conceal the truth about
the existence of alien life. As the film begins, the X-Files have been
closed and Mulder and Scully have been given a routine assignment
investigating a bomb threat. Unfortunately, the assignment doesn't turn out
to be quite so routine: the agents barely escape with their lives as the
bomb levels a building in what appears to be a cover-up of several bizarre
deaths in Northern Texas. Before long, the eccentric Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil
(Martin Landau) contacts Mulder, claiming to have inside information which
indicates that the bomb may have been the doing of the sinister
conspirators that have frustrated Mulder and Scully for so long.
THE X-FILES has been promoted as an action movie, but it's really more of a
hi-tech political thriller with a science fiction backdrop. There are
several big action set pieces, particularly a riveting sequence towards the
end in Antarctica, but like the TV series, this movie is more about
intrigue, paranoia, and searching for the truth than chases and explosions.
It sets up the mystery effectively in the first half hour or so,
alternating back and forth between the two agents' situation and the
efforts of a shady government organization to conceal the existence of a
seemingly alien-originated virus. While Mulder and Scully try to gather
evidence of the mysterious circumstances surrounding the initial bombing,
the conspirators, among them the Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis),
the Well-Manicured Man (John Neville), and a German named Strughold (Armin
Mueller-Stahl), scramble to protect their long-held plans for the future of
the planet.
Since part of the fun of political thrillers in general and of the ongoing
storyline of the "X-Files" TV series is following the plot developments, I
won't give away any more actual story elements. I can say, however, that
the move to the big screen does seem worthwhile: the two agents'
investigations have a much larger scope than they previously have, and the
movie also injects a new dose of horror into the alien conspiracy thread.
The ending, as one might expect, is somewhat open-ended: series creator
Chris Carter, who wrote the screenplay, provides an effective temporary
resolution while leaving the door open for further mysteries in coming TV
episodes. And yes, fellow X-Philes, we do in fact get some of the
long-awaited answers about the elusive conspiracy.
As is the case in the show, the story is given an extra little spark by the
Mulder and Scully characters, who have an interesting believer/skeptic
dynamic (though Scully's skepticism is understandably waning at this point
in the story) and who must have one of the most enigmatic relationships in
Hollywood history. They clearly care for each other very deeply and depend
on one another for support, yet they are almost obsessively dedicated to
their work (particularly Mulder, who believes his sister was abducted by
aliens) and are careful to avoid any overtly romantic gestures. This film
finds them addressing what their quest for the truth means to them and what
they mean to each other more openly than they ever have on the TV show,
while managing to preserve some of the enigma and ultimately revitalizing
the two characters. I especially liked the scenes in which each of them
worries that he or she is somehow weighing down the other, that the quest
has become too personal and their work too marginal to be worthwhile. It's
interesting to see that they're thoughtful enough to consider this, even
though Carter's screenplay rightly posits that their worries are unfounded:
whether they realize it or not, Mulder and Scully are true crusaders for
justice.
The missteps in THE X-FILES are for the most part minor and scattered. The
screenplay gets a little overdramatic at times, such as when a government
agent worries that the "impossible scenario we never had a plan for" is now
developing, or when the two agents shout "Mulder!" and "Scully!" almost a
dozen times during a chase scene. Director Rob Bowman executes most of the
action sequences perfectly, but he cuts from scene to scene extremely
quickly in a few places; in one scene, for example, Mulder thinks he is
being followed and ducks around a corner, and in the very next shot he's
walking in his apartment door. There are also a few plot holes, most
notably the fact that the conspirators don't seem to guard their secrets
too carefully (though the TV series has gotten away with this conceit for a
long time as well).
The screenplay does manage to bring new viewers up to speed pretty quickly
without indulging in overly awkward exposition: it should work as an
entertaining, intelligent thriller even for those who haven't followed the
show. The main disadvantage for non-X-Philes, I think, is that they might
not have quite the same sense of the extent of the conspiracy and the
ordeal that Mulder and Scully have endured in trying to expose it; for
these viewers, a *** rating might be more appropriate. If you really want
an objective analysis, however, I'd have to advise you to go read some
other review. From my own hopelessly biased perspective, I'd say that it's
about as good as I had hoped: it's essential to the "X-Files" storyline,
it's worth seeing on the big screen, the characters make some important
decisions, and yet enough of the mystery is preserved. The truth is still
out there, and it's just as intriguing as ever.

Author
me@alanine.ram.org
/The X Files/, the TV series, reflects a phenomena that points to the
very heart and nature of America: a strong sense of individualism
combined with a deep (and healthy) distrust of authority.  While these
aspects are present only in a minority of the populace, I believe a
large percentage identify with it.  As Chris Carter, the series
creator, said "it goes as far back as the Boston Tea Party in a
sense."  Like in /The Truman Show/, /The X Files/ attempts to show how
most of society are manipulated like puppets by our public servants.
Analysts of the show have said that people relate to it because
conspiracies provide explanations and answers to real world
questions. I personally look at it as warnings about what has happened
or could potentially happen in the real world when you trust authority
(or anyone else---"trust no one" is /The X Files/ watchword) without
questioning it.
While the sinister-paranoid aspect of the TV show is present in the
movie, it is relegated to the background.  Instead what we have is an
intelligent and thought-provoking film with a bit of action.
Intelligent and thought-provoking, I'd add, probably only to fans of
the /The X Files/ show, as it tries mainly to clarify and confirm what
fans have long suspected, and present a coherent picture of The
Conspiracy.
The basic premise for /The X Files: Fight the Future/ is actually the
worst part of the plot: an anonymous caller warns about a bomb in the
FBI building in Dallas.  While FBI agents scour the building, Agent
Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) believes the bomb is in an another
building nearby and, together with Agent Dana Scully (Gillian
Anderson), he investigates and finds the bomb in a vending machine.  As
Scully barks orders to evacuate the building, Special Agent Darius
Michaud (/Millenium's/ Terry O'Quinn) orders Mulder out.  As Mulder
and Scully escape, the building blows up.
An inquiry is held and Mulder and Scully end up being scapegoats for
the loss of property and the five lives instead of being hailed as
heroes for finding the bomb in the first place.  But besides the
presence of agent Michaud, the building was thought to be completely
empty.  This sets a convenient stage for the entrance of Dr. Alvin
Kurtzweil (Martin Laundau), a friend of Mulder's father, who refers to
a conspiracy to hide the truth about the bombing.  He prods Mulder
into investigating the deaths of the other four people.
Mulder and Scully find that the four other people, from North Texas,
were actually killed by an alien virus black ooze that has been
present on the planet since at least 35,000 B.C.  The Elders, powerful
men in various governments across the world, have conspired with this
alien species, and covered up, to remake Earth as a colony for the
aliens, with the humans as the subservient species.  However, when
they learn of the killings in North Texas, they realise that
colonisation is not the goal of the aliens, but rather extermination
of the human species is.
The Elders' hands are tied because they are still in the process of
secretly developing a antidote/vaccine while aiding the aliens in
colonising the earth through the use of bees with virulent stings and
transgenic corn containing the alien DNA (for the first time, a goal
of the Elders/Syndicate is alluded to be a benevolent one).  They also
see Mulder as a threat to them but cannot execute him because that
would make him a martyr.  So they decide to kill someone close to him
and somehow manage to arrange it so Scully is kidnapped after being
stung by one of the bees (which travelled with her all the way from
Texas) carrying the alien virus.
However, the Well-Manicured Man (John Neville), his conscience
bothered by new threat posed by the alien life form to his grand
children, gives a vial of weak antidote/vaccine to Mulder and points
to Scully's location (a vaccine alone would not treat a disease after
it has been acquired).  Mulder travels to Antarctica and finds the
Cigarette Smoking Man (William B. Davis) in charge of an operation
involving a large number of humans infected with the alien virus, one
of whom is Scully. As he administers the antidote/vaccine to Scully,
it contaminates the network of aliens and creates a shutdown of the
process.  Mulder and Scully escape as the aliens awake from their
stasis and the entire "operation", which is really a spaceship, flies
off into the sky.  This is the part of the movie that raises the
biggest question: if the Cigarette Smoking Man is aware of the true
nature of the alien "colonisation", then why does it continue to help
them and why has he not informed the Elders?  If the Elders are
unaware of the existence of the Antarctic space ship, how did the
Well-Manicured Man know?
There are plenty of problems with the plot, many of which can be
rationalised only with the show's /modus operandi/ in mind: Why was
the X Files shut down? (Rationale: all the files were burnt in the
season finale preceding this movie.)  Who called in the bomb threat
and why, if the purpose of the bomb was to destroy the bodies killed
by the alien ooze? (Rationale: Kurtzweil did, since he knew about the
bodies, but his call was deliberately misdirected by Michaud.)  Why
were Scully and Mulder blamed for the bombing when they should have been
thanked for saving lives? (Rationale: the FBI wanted scapegoats and
they received orders from higher up to place the blame on the two
agents so they could be separated.)  How could the child and the
fireman killed by the alien ooze end up in a building allegedly
attacked by terrorists? (Rationale: The Federal Emergency Management
Authority, an arm of the Syndicate with the power to do away with
constitutional rights in the event of a national emergency, took
charge of the bodies by stating that it was the Hanta virus that was
responsible for the deaths.) How could the bee that stung Scully have
chosen that time and place, and how could Mulder's subsequent 911 call
be intercepted knowing that Scully would be stung by a bee?
(Rationale: this indicates the powerful nature of the Syndicate ("who
know Dallas", a reference to the Cigarette Smoking Man's hand in the
killing of John F. Kennedy).)  As Mulder arrives in Antarctica, the
gas gauge in his snowmobile is empty. But yet he makes it back to
civilisation after the alien spaceship takes off; how could this be?
(Rationale: The Lone Gunmen help him out.)  What convinced the FBI to
re-open the X Files in the end? (Rationale: Assistant Director Walter
Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) helped convince the inquiry that it would be
the wisest course of action.)
There are plenty of unanswered issues in relation to series (including
the clones, the aliens with toxic green ooze which change shape, the
chip in the back of Scully's neck responsible for her cancer, Mulder's
sister, the relationship between Cigarette Smoking Man and Mulder, the
enigmatic Krychek, etc.), but I expect time constraints would make it
impossible to address all issues (besides that's what the next seasons
are for). I think a wise choice was made in focusing only on the black
ooze aliens even though it is not entirely consistent with the series
story line.
The main thing the movie provides for fans of the show are constant
references to the show, and the purpose of the Syndicate/the Elders is
finally spelled out explicitly (even though it could've been guessed
from the show).  People who are not fans of /The X Files/ will
probably not consider this movie to be anything spectacular, unless
they have a special interest in science fiction and some tolerance for
unexplained plots.  Such people will not understand the Cigarette
Smoking Man, Skinner's relationship to Mulder and Scully, the Elders,
the Lone Gunmen, and even the significance of the black ooze, the bees
and the transgenic corn. Further the presence of characters like
Michael Kritschgau, a character from past episodes, that even hardcore
fans will have a difficult time rationalising, only obfuscate the
issues for the average viewer.
There is a lot of camp and humour in the movie at least initially
which works well to endear fans and non-fans alike to the movie (a
scene which included the /Independence Day/ poster was a classic). As
the situation gets serious, the humour appropriately disappears, but
it was good to see Scully not looking completely sombre all the time.
The score has its moments.  But yet it is vastly underdeveloped and
under used.  In general, the theme should have been present more
prominently, and variations of the theme should have been used to render
suspense and fill in awkward moments of silence.  The references to
/Star Wars/ and /Alien/ (in the final scenes) I thought were pretty
cool.
I cannot believe I am thinking so much about the show.  I rarely think
much of TV shows, but this is a show that has made me think a lot not
only about philosophical connections to the real world, but also
/about/ the show.  It is true, what some critics have said, that the
movie is just like a long episode, and that there have been better
episodes.  Still, I think /The X Files: Fight the Future/ is /the/
movie of the summer, and is one of the best movies I've seen. I can't
wait to see what they come up with on Season Six.


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Rob Bowman
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner,
Armin Mueller-Stahl, John Neville, Glenne Headly
Screenplay: Chris Carter, Frank Spotnitz
Producers: Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim
Runtime: 120 min.
US Distribution: 20th Century Fox
Rated PG-13: some intense violence, gore
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        I find most of television so intensely boring that I simply never turn
on my set, unless I'm watching a movie.  I don't even have cable, so I
went to Radio Shack to buy an antenna specifically for the purpose of
watching "The X-Files" every Sunday night.  It's the only show that's
worth an hour of my time each week (though, since I don't watch reruns,
I'm glad that I have six months of the year to avoid television
altogether).  I am an avid fan of the show, and have been for about
three years now.  And I love Gillian Anderson.
        The X-Files is the film that continues the story where the season
finale left off.  The film is like a two-hour episode, except that there
are a lot more special effects, the plot is thicker, and the resolution
is more satisfying.  This is a terrific film, both for fans of the
series and for those who have never seen it (I imagine that viewers
unfamiliar with the show will find the film to be solid and riveting
entertainment).  I expected to like it more than any episode I've seen,
and my expectations were met.  Actually, the film takes a few risks in
its story and plot devices, but, thankfully, the makers managed to do it
right.
        When the finale ended, the FBI branch known as the X-Files had been
destroyed, and our heroes, Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully (Gillian
Anderson) were left stripped of five years of hard work.  The film picks
up soon after; and Mulder and Scully have been reduced to field agents
investigating a bomb threat in a Federal building.  But wait, I'm
getting ahead of myself.  The film actually opens in the ice age, about
32,000 years prior, during which a couple of prehistoric guys get
attacked by a vicious alien.  
        The alien's blood infects them (fans of the show will certainly
remember the Black Cancer), and the story jumps into modern times,
during which a young boy is also infected with the cancer.  It turns out
that the bomb was planted to kill the boy, and Mulder and Scully uncover
the cover-up despite the fact that Scully has resigned from her position
in the FBI.  Soon, they find out that the whole thing has to do with
aliens.  As I've written before, it's not easy to write plot summaries
for films like this, because everything needs to be a surprise.
        Fans of the show will know what to expect, and I seriously doubt any of
them being disappointed with the film.  Director Rob Bowman has done a
great job expanding the eerie feeling of the show to the big screen,
making small adjustments and minor changes to utilize the possibilities
that film allows over television.  There are some truly suspenseful and
well-created scenes here (late in the film, when they're in the alien
spacecraft, you'll see one of the better action sequences in recent
cinema).  The special effects are very good, and the production design
by Christopher Nowak is fantastic.
        What I find interesting is that The X-Files is actually a great way for
series neophytes to get into the story.  Our heroes are given subtle
introductions (we're not expected to know them on the outset), and the
film explains enough of the story that prior knowledge of the series
isn't required to understand the film.  There are, of course, little
elements that the makers have included as payoff to the fans, but I'll
keep those as surprises.  It takes a lot of thought and understanding of
the series to create a film using roots as complicated as the ones that
the series provides, and then create a coherent film that anyone can
understand clearly.
        The series is strong for a lot of reasons.  It's original (though it
has many ties to "The Twilight Zone" and owes some homage to Hitchcock),
and impressively eerie for a television show.  What really makes the
series shine, however, are the actors.  Duchovny has so much presence,
and is just a fun guy to watch.  He has that confidence that will
someday make him into a bankable leading man.  Anderson is equally good,
and paralyzingly beautiful; she's also a strong actress.  Both
performers have acted in little more than their series, however, though
I think they'll both get their chances to prove themselves very soon.
        I enthusiastically recommend The X-Files, both for fans and non-fans. 
1998 is a summer filled with disappointing blockbusters, and this film
should satisfy where most of the others leave you completely dry.  It's
an intelligent film, and takes you places that you might not have been
(or, at least, might not have seen so many times that they feel
familiar).  The X-Files is impressive in concept, as well:  fans of the
series are likely to be highly critical, and to take the premise beyond
the series is a risky move.  It's nice to see a risk pay off for a
change.  Actually, it's nice to see a risk at all.

Author
James Brundage
Well, it made it to the big screen just fine. Made it there with a more
simplistic plot, a much bigger budget, a closely-guarded surprise, and a
huge overrating. Perhaps it is only me but in the summer of 98 I see a trend
(with the exception of The Truman Show), towards the bland. Any movie that I
like, upon seeing it again (which I do to actually ENJOY myself), becomes
tasteless and boring, making me want to throw my popcorn at the screen.
Movies that I don't like, like last weeks Six Days, Seven Nights (which by
the way only had four days and four nights in it) just seem to try my
patience. It's a conspiracy. I tell you, man, it's a conspiracy to make me
go mad with the bland, stale taste of popcorn films this summer!
The X-Files, televisions most paranoid show (currently on, UPN's Nowhere Man
was a little further out there), heralded in a new era in sci-fi. It was
cool to believe -- And not in aliens on starships from the 24th century. And
it wasn't enough that the cast and crew could scrounge up enough money
between all of them for a budget HALF the $63 million of the film, and it
wasn't enough that with a cult following of 25 million weekly American
viewers, it would be the biggest cult noir horror since The Rocky Horror
Picture Show, and it wasn't even enough that they got to film on the lot
that old Jim used for Titanic. No. They had to appeal to the mass market.
The so called "You and Me" which doesn't really exist.
This "You and Me" demands cheap one liners, green screens, blue screens,
special F/Xs that no one can stand, this "You and Me" were the people who
had the stupid idea to churn out about fifteen disaster films since
"Twister". The X-Files movie is basically an extension of the series: and
for all the good it did, for all the taking advantage of the ability to
curse and be more violent that film offers over television, it might just
have well have been a two or three part-er. The basic plot of it is the plot
of every X-Files and or alien movie: prove the existence of E.T.s and stop a
deadly virus that controls them from overrunning the planet. I'd go into all
of the complexities of the series of this were a review of the series: so
I'll let you who haven't been watching see the movie for yourself, it works
fine as a mass-market movie, but disappoints as an X-File. You can stop
reading now.
As for those who have been watching: understand this. If you have been
watching with half a brain the show and the trailers for the movie, then it
will come together easy as anything. The villains and heroes of the film, in
order to allow the mass market to understand, have not been painted in
Carter's trademark ambiguous gray, but instead in a stark black and white.
The Syndicate, the infamous group running it all, is purebred evil, while
The Well Manicured man, our British friend, is a brighter, sunnier chap. The
CSM (Cigarette Smoking Man), is still a dark, evil character, but in the
movie it throws away all the heart he had earned in the series with such
episodes as "Memoirs of a Cigarette Smoking Man", in which it paints his
life. No one mentions the possible Mulder-CSM family connection.
The movie's philosophy is "Don't Complicate Things". As in, don't bring into
play the relationship between Scully and God, or Scully's abduction, and
don't bring in the unwillingness to martyr Mulder, or the Mulder-CSM
connection, or, for the most part, Assistant Director Skinner, or, at all,
Agent Spender. Give the fans a Three Stooges (or Lone Gunmen, if you prefer)
cameo, but don't bring in the Frohicky-Scully obsession. Come to think of
it, if you kept reading from two paragraphs above, I may have just given to
you more information on the series than the movie will. AND STILL NOT GIVEN
AWAY ANYTHING.
There are no secrets revealed. There are no complications resolved. There
are no major plot developments. If the truth is out there, it's not there in
this film.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Popular FOX TV series makes its big screen debut helmed by a veteran
director of at least 25 of the small screen episodes, Rob Bowman. The
paranormal vibes. During this year's last episode, the X-Files were
shut down by the FBI. That's pretty much all the intro you need to know
before you see this film.
PLOT:
A bomb blows off a big chunk of a federal building in Dallas, Texas. As
Mulder and Scully step up their investigation into the bombing, they
begin to uncover many zany theories and cover-ups about the puzzling
explosion. While delving further into the case, the defiant duo find
themselves trapped in an international game of intrigue, mystery and
extra-terrestrial politics.
***Understand that my critique comes from a solid streak of experience
with the show. Having said that, an inexperienced viewer can also enjoy
this critique, since you need not have seen one episode of the TV
series, to truly appreciate this well-developed movie***
CRITIQUE:
Mysterious, moody, exciting at parts, this movie succeeds in bringing
the spookiness and interest of the television series to the big screen.
Having said that, the film did at times feel like one big television
episode, with a larger plot line and greater special effects. Also, it
did seem to go on for a tad too long. 
The plot of the film is interesting, the characters are believable, and
the action is exciting and scary at times (The scenes with the aliens
are very cool and exciting). Mulder and Scully have no discernible
problems tackling the big screen, while adding words like "shit" to
their vocabulary. While the suspicions about their possible romantic
entanglement in this film are also answered, they certainly will not be
given away by JoBlo here. Also, there did seem to be a touch more
humour on the big-screen than the show, which helped many long-winded
and jargon-filled scenes move along at an easier pace. The creators of
the film also took the time to "piss" all over the greatest box-office
science-fiction success from 1996, INDEPENDENCE DAY (6.5/10), in a most
interesting and "subtle" way.
Overall, the movie worked for me as a thriller and a science-fiction
fable, but somehow seemed to run a little too long, and lacked the
earth-shattering ending that I was expecting. Having said that, they
have now added many new elements to explore in the TV series, which
will most certainly pick up many new viewers after this slick film.
Warm up your nachos and cuddle up with your love-bunny on this one,
folks...it's gonna be a bumpy ride!
Little Known Facts: 
David Duchovny once played a transvestite detective on the Twin Peaks
television series, and read for the replacing role for Val Kilmer as
Batman in BATMAN AND ROBIN.
David William Duchovny stands 6", was born in NY, New York, and earned
an undergraduate degree from Princeton University and a graduate degree
in English Literature from Yale University. While at Yale, he began
commuting to New York to study acting and was soon appearing in
off-Broadway plays. In 1987 he abandoned his doctoral studies at Yale
to pursue acting full time. Duchovny means 'spiritual' in Russian.
Gillian Anderson stands 5"3, was born in Chicago, Illinois, and has a
daughter named Piper. She was married to husband Clyde Klotz on the
17th hole of a golf course in Hawaii by a Buddhist priest, and claims
her favourite film to be the 1993 English animated comedy THE WRONG
TROUSERS.
Chris Carter worked for 13 years as writer and senior editor for
"Surfing" magazine.

Author
Jason A. Clark
For fans of the hit television series, The X-Files, the new movie The
sometimes even ardent fans have turned this once obscure science
fiction/drama series into a huge hit for Fox television.  No doubt they
will do the same for the film.  Fortunately for everyone else, one
doesn't have to be a fan of the series in order to love this movie.
To tell of the intricacies of the plot would be to reveal more then
anyone should know until they see the film.  I can safely say that the
film begins with agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully
(Gillian Anderson) working together in an anti-terrorist unit.  The
agents have been reassigned to this new unit.  Their reassignment and
the closing of the X-Files themselves do not stop the global
conspiracies involving the invasion of our world by aliens, however.
Thus is the setup for the film which pits the two agents in the almost
impossible task of exposing the conspiracy which could destroy not only
their lives but the lives of everyone on the planet as well.
As a fan of the series, my major fear was that the writers would have to
"talk down" to me and the other fans in order to explain things that the
casual viewer (or moviegoer)  wouldn't know.  Imagine my surprise when I
discovered that the movie was everything the series is and more.  The
film explains many of the complicated plots that have arisen over the
last couple of years, and it does it in such a way as to actually be
entertaining to someone who doesn't know anything about the film.  The
screenplay is brilliant in that it does actually fulfill the impossible
promises of the show's creator, Chris Carter, to appease both ardent fan
and casual moviegoer.  I personally didn't believe it could be done,
but, after talking to several others who have seen the film and who are
not fans of the weekly series, my suspicions were confirmed and this
movie is just plain enjoyable.
I would recommend this film to all fans of the television series as well
as sci-fi fans in general.  I will even go a step further and recommend
this film to anyone who enjoys a good drama or suspense film.  This film
is entirely self contained and can be enjoyed by all.  It is rated
PG-13, presumably for violence, but today's audience (even the younger
ones) aren't likely to notice the violence or the occasional curse
word.  As always, I recommend parents actually watch the film before
allowing younger children to see it (nightmares of alien invasions and
scary black goo invading bodies are a real possibility).

Author
Michael Dequina
The X-Files (PG-13) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
Fox's _The_X-Files_ one of television's most curious phenomenons.  It's
not a question of quality; though it has a dud episode here and there, the
science fiction sensation is a consistently engrossing, well-thought and
-put-together series that deserves all the critical accolades it has
garnered in its five seasons.  What makes the series' hard-fought-for mass
popularity so astonishing is the uncommon demand it places upon the viewing
audience: concentration.  This is especially the case with its trademark
"mythology" episodes, which address a ridiculously convoluted conspiracy
involving the coverup of extraterrestrial life.  Now FBI agents Fox Mulder
and Dana Scully take their quest for the "truth" that lies elusively "out
there" to the big screen, and the result is a most unusual summer
blockbuster: one that delivers the thrilling goods with an uncommon dose of
intelligence and complexity.
As fans of the show (_X_-philes, as they are known) such as myself are
aware, _The_X-Files_ centers on Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully's
(Gillian Anderson) ongoing investigations into paranormal phenomena--cases
called, yes, X-Files.  Of course, Mulder and Scully are mismatched
partners.  Mulder is a true believer in the fantastic after having
witnessed his sister Samantha's abduction by aliens when they were young;
medical doctor Scully is a skeptical woman of science who was paired with
Mulder by FBI superiors to debunk his work.  In a move that, surprisingly
enough, does _not_ alienate any _X_-virgins, the film (unofficially
subtitled _Fight_the_Future_) begins where this past season's cliffhanger
left off, with the X-Files closed and Mulder and Scully reassigned to
standard FBI duty and a seemingly standard case: the investigation of a
terrorist bomb threat in Dallas.
The operative word there is "seemingly," for some suspicious circumstances
surrounding the case thrusts Mulder and Scully neck-deep into the ongoing
conspiracy that has served as the backbone of the series.  Much effort has
been made by Fox and the _X-Files_ cast and crew to keep the plot under
wraps, so I will not divulge any specifics here.  What I will reveal,
however, is that this time around Mulder and Scully find some hard answers
to questions that have long lingered in the series, such as the true nature
of the conspiracy and the "black cancer," the oily alien goo that infects
human hosts.  It should be noted, however, that many of the series' focal
mysteries, such as the identity of the enigmatic conspirator known as the
Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis), remain unanswered when the end
credits roll.
What I just wrote may sound baffling to _X_ newcomers, but series creator
and screenwriter Chris Carter (working from a story he devised with Frank
Spotnitz) accomplishes the impossible--making the knotty story accessible
to new viewers.  Mulder and Scully's backstories are efficiently explained
in succinct passages of dialogue, as is all the background knowledge
required to follow and understand the conspiracy.  A few bones are thrown
to appease the _X_ faithful, such as vague allusions to the harrowing
ordeals Scully has gone through in the series, and a cameo by the Lone
Gunmen, a trio of conspiracy freaks that often assist Mulder and Scully.
But by and large, no one is likely to be lost.  In the lobby following the
screening, I overheard a fan answer a newcomer's questions, and his queries
were about issues that are irrelevant to the general understanding of the
film.
A large part of what makes _Fight_the_Future_ satisfying to all audiences
is the highly suspenseful story Carter and director Rob Bowman tell.  The
plot is as intricately structured and unpredictable as the conspiracy
itself, and while there is a greater emphasis on action and spectacle here,
those sequences are integral to the story and free of gratuitous violent
shocks.  Bowman is a veteran of many _X_ episodes, and as such, he knows
how to milk the maximum amount of tension from Carter's labyrinthian
scripts.  He also handles the film's increased yet still
modest-by-Hollywood-standards budget quite well, employing some imaginative
effects to create some truly scary creatures.  Bowman's huge
miscalculation, however, is one that could have been easily sidestepped:
the virtual absence of Mark Snow's (who also composed the film's score)
memorably eerie theme music.  A single bar of the theme's trademark whistle
accompanies the film's first frame, and an upbeat interpolation is featured
in a sequence where Mulder and Scully drive.  But that unmistakable _X_
theme is featured more in the trailers than the film itself--a fact that is
sure to irk even the most casual of _X_-philes.
For all the scary aliens and other creatures that pop up in _The_X-Files_
week after week, the key to the show and, now, the movie's success is its
leads.  Duchovny and Anderson's natural rapport shines through even
stronger on the big screen, and apparently Carter recognized this, for the
sexual tension between Mulder and Scully reaches unprecedented heights of
palpability in _Fight_the_Future_.  I won't spoil anything, but Carter
comes up with a clever way to have his cake and eat it too, one that will
please all series fans.  The solid work of the other series semi-regulars,
Davis, John Neville (the Well-Manicured Man), and Mitch Pileggi (FBI
Assistant Director Walter Skinner) carries over to the big screen; however,
members of the Pileggi "Estrogen Brigade" are sure to be disappointed with
Skinner's diminished role in the film.  Martin Landau (filling the Deep
Throat/X/Marita Covarrubias "informant" role) and Armin Mueller-Stahl (as a
conspiracy figurehead) join the ensemble, and they appear very much at home
in the _X_ world.
For a big screen, interseason episode of a series that is still running
strong on the small screen, the satisfying _X-Files_ movie is remarkably
self-contained.  Yet it should come as no surprise that, in addition to the
existing unresolved questions, some new ones arise--ensuring plenty of
fodder for many more TV seasons and feature films.  As one character
declares, "One man cannot fight the future."
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
James Brundage
Starring Shannon Marosi, Katie Stevens, Ping Fu, Leann Marosi, and Stephen
Friday.
Seeing as I am not an academic, I refuse to write a paper on the merits of
free-access to a film online. That will not, however, stop me from writing
several reviews on the subject. Once again my target is RigorMortis
productions, creators of the Monty Python-esque short film L'Auto, done
entirely in English. Why? Mostly this is because all of the other films I'm
finding online are not registered with the IMDB, and I am clueless as how to
do so. Anyone reading this review who knows how to do so, please tell me so
that I may report other movies of absolutely no budget.
In the case of Les X-Files, you can't quite say it's enjoyable. You can't
quite say it's good, either. But you can't quite say it's bad. Like all
reviews that are truly subjective and honest, I'll present you with good
points and bad points:
Unlike L'Auto, a movie with a French title done in English, Les X-Files is a
movie with a French title done in French, which basically means that unless
Parle vou France? Means anything special to you, forget understanding this
movie. When I watched it, part of me thought: OK, this is commentary on the
inexplicable and nature of Chris Carter's conspiracy theory cult hit, The
writer had to do for French class. Point down: scratch higher meaning.
The humor is more tongue-in-cheek. Since you can't understand French, it's
left to the physical and musical aspects to understand the film. Anyone who
has seen the Season 5 finale of "The X-Files" will get the plot, so they can
then appreciate the wonderful tongue-in-cheek that is shown when "Mulder"
drives her car to where "Diana" was shot to the theme of "Hawaii Five-O".
Come to think of it, maybe you don't.
Believe it or not, I am actually going to say that the acting was better,
despite the fact that I didn't understand a word. You can actually tell
looking at the faces of the talented and nearly all-Double X-chromosome cast
what they're trying to get across, which various soap opera actors and
actresses, despite "professional" experience, fail to do (in my humble and
wise-ass opinion, they come across looking like they're trying to fart and
not make a sound on "Days of our Lives"). Talking to the head of
RigorMortis, he acknowledged and concurred with my viewpoint.
And, yes, people, I do think Roberto Benigni deserved Best Actor, so can the
women who saw Sleepless in Seattle and think that Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan
should star in every movie and should win all Academy Awards please shut up
about the debate.
Another good point comes in the fact that everyone involved, including the
director, had a sense of humor over the entire thing: the note that he has
at the download page for this film is "Note from the Director:
Please do not e-mail for a translation of the film. It's presented in
French, a language that I don't speak. The only word that I can recognize is
"Une Vache," which means Cow. This film is proof that you don't have to
speak a foreign language to direct a foreign language film."
    Les X-Files makes me hope for the movie industry in general that the
people who run companies like RigorMortis, who act in films such as Les
my girlfriends.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: June 19, 1998
Starring: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, William B.
Davis, Blythe Danner, John Neville, Mitch Pileggi, Armin Mueller-Stahl
Directed by: Rob Bowman
Distributed by: 20th Century Fox Film Corp.
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (intense violence and gore) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/xfiles.htm
For a long time one of the top-ten rated shows on network television,
THE X-FILES has generated a cult following of enviable size. Its jump to
the big screen format, then, is only a natural progression of evolution;
similar, in some ways, to the movement of another staple of twentieth
century pop culture, STAR TREK. Although producers of both television
series are most concerned with box office dollars (requiring the movies
to be watchable by viewers who are not fans of the show), the
writer-director team behind THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE have managed
to integrate some continuity with the TV show and at the same time make
an enjoyable movie independent of its base. This success will surely
garner it money that would otherwise be lost by bad word of mouth. 
The television show focuses on the activities of two federal agents. Fox
Mulder (David Duchovny), the lead, is obsessed with the paranormal and
devoted to a series of cases that can be classified as such. His
partner, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson), is almost the opposite: a
rationalizing doctor of medicine assigned by the FBI to debunk Mulder's
claims. In the movie, Mulder and Scully investigate a bomb threat at a
Federal Building in Dallas, Texas, but when the bomb goes off a
committee is formed to assess blame. Mulder, suspecting the real intent
is to break his partnership up, gets drunk and runs into a shady
character named Dr. Allan Kurtzweil (Martin Landau). Kurtzweil tells him
that the bomb was planted as part of a cover-up; the Federal Emergency
Managment Agency offices in the building had evidence of a deadly virus
that the government was concealing. Kurtzweil also points the inebriated
Mulder toward the American Southwest to investigate further. 
It's in these opening scenes that the characters show both the greatest
moments and their biggest shortcomings. The dialogue is the most
strewn-out here - later on it takes second position to more intense
action - and it offers the actors to show their talents. David Duchovny
gets plenty of chance to show his talent as an actor, and even a line
which makes fun of his own trademarked stoic look. Gillian Anderson, who
mostly plays second fiddle to the leading man, is there to offer a bit
of sexual diversity in a cast almost entirely composed of males. Her
presence, though not outstanding in any particular manner, is rather
welcome. The cast of supporting characters, too, highlights the story's
focus on the paranormal and paranoia which is such a core component of
THE X-FILES' ideology. 
As the story continues, it takes our heroes Mulder and Scully to more
diverse regions, including the wastelands of Antarctica. There are quite
a few memorable special effects sequences, and this is the movie's
stronger point. Although the opening scenes give way to screen time
exposure, what's actually being said is of little value to the
uninformed viewer. Because the movie draws heavily on the
characterization developed through several seasons' worth of network
airing, there's not much to establish the characters in the movie.
Although being a fan of the series isn't necessary, having watched a few
episodes will be a great help, almost an extension of the characters in
the movie. Having an enlightened friend explain it is also preferrable.
Once the viewer is past the slow take-off, though, the tension meter
steadily climbs, and this is what makes THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE a
more enjoyable suspense-adventure film.
FINAL AWARD FOR "THE X-FILES": 3.0 stars - a good movie

Author
David Wilcock
RUNNING TIME: 2 HOURS 1 MINUTE
STARRING DAVID DUCHOVNY AND GILLIAN ANDERSON
DIRECTED BY ROB BOWMAN
(Nearly) everyone's favourite Sci-fi program make's it big screen debut.
Surprisingly, the movie is quite good, and can hold itself onscreen. Agents
Mulder and Scully (Duchovny and Anderson) are back in another case of
strange going on's. This time, it's about a strange black liquid that the
government want to use as a biological weapon. And, they find out about a
sinister alien plot involving aliens who want to take over the earth. Can
they stop both these things? The truth is in the movie...
The X-Files is enjoyable sci-fi hokum, with excellent special effects, good
performances and an intriguing plot. Duchovny and Anderson are fine
on-screen, although they don't attempt to do anything different from what
they're doing on television. The same goes for the whole cast, and the
writing, and the directing. In fact, the entire movie is like watching an
didn't need to be made. It could of easily had been a 45 minute or feature
length episode on television. However, what is done is done is the usual
over-indulgent (the movie starts in 35,000 B.C!) the plot is good. Although
there are a few stupid bits, it's generally O.K, and at least makes sense to
people who don't watch t.v show. (I stopped watching about 2 years ago.)
However, it does help if you have some background knowledge of the
characters, because although Mulder and Scully give background of
themselves, the rest of the characters are a bit faceless (and some are
nameless, such as "Cigarette Smoking Man.")
The direction is actually quite good, and the set-pieces are done stylishly,
and some parts are even quite scary, and heavy in tension. The 'look' of the
film is good aswell, and the music (by Mark Snow, who composes for the T.V
series) helps convey the atmosphere. Also, the special effects are
excellent, even with the movie's relatively low budget.
Overall, The X-Files is both entertaining for X-Files fans and novices.
There's enough references to the show to keep buffs happy, while nothing
closely related to the T.V show happens in the movie that would alienate
and it never really ties up all it's lose ends, and it is overlong, and the
ending is too ambiguous (that's all the gripes!) it is fun. The best summer
movie so far.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
AS A REVIEW OF THIS FILM, I FEEL IT IS IMPORTANT TO GIVE YOU AN
EXPLANATION OF THE SHOW'S PROGRESS IN BETTER UNDERSTANDING THE FILM.
HERE IS A RUN DOWN OF THE SERIES.  ALL FIVE SEASONS ARE ANALYZED.  IF
YOU WATCH THE SHOW RELIGIOUSLY LIKE I DO, SKIP AHEAD TO ANOTHER OPENING
PARAGRAPH LIKE THIS ONE, ALL IN CAPITAL LETTERS, THAT WILL ONLY DISCUSS
THE MOVIE.
Once in a generation, you get a truly great visionary who has a knack
for capturing the desires of the human imagination better than you could
ever believe.  Rod Serling had 'The Twilight Zone', Gene Roddenberry had
'Star Trek', and Chris Carter now has 'The X-Files'.  Inspired by the
early 70's t.v. series 'Kolchak: The Night Stalker' starring Darren
McGavin, Carter has crafted a television series that doesn't only
investigate the paranormal but it provides an examination of the human
condition that borders on being a soap opera but doesn't quite cross the
line because all the shows are not tied directly to each other like a
soap opera usually is.
'The X-Files' chooses to make episodes that are isolated in their own
stories as well as other episodes that are part of the show's overall
mythology that pick up from where they last left off every several
episodes or so that examines the strengths, weaknesses, morals and
intelligent qualities that each character possesses is his or her own
way.  'The X-Files' did not start out as a borderline soap opera.  It
began as a cult show that looked more experimental than progressive in
its first season (1993/94).  In fact, the first episode aired on the FOX
network on September 10, 1993.  The total scope of characters had not
yet come into play as being very interesting except for the two leads,
David Duchovny as FBI Special Agent Fox Mulder and Gillian Anderson as
Special Agent Dana Scully.  Season 2 was more progressive and ended with
its most intense cliffhanger in the show's five years.  It was the first
of a three part series that picked up with the first and second episode
of season 3 that had Mulder and Scully involved in their most explosive
adventure ever to date in the series.  Season 3 is the show's BEST work
to date.  There is more diversity among the show's tone, both humourous
and dramatic as well as its usual mystique.  Season 4 is the show's most
ambitious time as more story developments occur with splendidly
addictive results.  Season 5 is sort of an enigma.  It's right in the
middle.  Better than season 1 and 2 but inferior to season 3 and 4.
Mulder is a true believer in the paranormal and its relative ties.
UFO's, extra-terrestrials, mutants and un-Earthly beings in general are
Mulder's cause in life as a branch of the FBI has a category known as
the x-files, cases where the only explanation (or lack of one) seems to
be tied to the supernatural.  Enter Scully.  She is a skeptic, a medical
doctor with a background in science who believes that the answers for
every unexplained occurrence are there and that one just has to know
where to look.  Cancer, AIDS and many other diseases haven't been cured
as we haven't learned where to look and that is the parallel to Scully's
belief that science can explain everything or so she believes.  Scully
has been assigned to become Mulder's partner and he believes she is to
spy on him for her superiors but as the show would progress, Scully, to
this day, has her same beliefs but is the only person that Mulder ends
up trusting.
The show is basically tied to five important story lines.  The first is
Mulder's quest to find his sister, Samantha, who was abducted from her
home at the age of 8 as Mulder, at age 12, watched as a supposed alien
force took his sister in the same way the little boy was taken from his
mother in 'Close Encounters'.  Secondly is Mulder's quest to clarify his
father's name.  His father was murdered by forces inside a dark network
tied to the government because he could expose too much about a secret
government and military project that the men involved have supposedly
been negotiating with extra-terrestrials for the revolution of a new way
of life on Earth.  His father has been shown in flashbacks from time to
time as being involved in government experiments and the collection of
data during the Cold War.  These factors have included a mysterious
alien entity in the form of a mysterious black oil that can infiltrate
the human body and jump from person to person and is the main focus of a
race between the United States and Russia to find a vaccine for it in
fighting its effects that has been seen in the last three seasons of the
five years the show has been on the air.  Thirdly is the infiltration on
society of a strange specimen of bees that appear to carry small pox, a
disease thought to be almost eradicated by modern medicine but perhaps
it will make a comeback for some sinister purpose.  Fourth, Fox Mulder
and his sister Samantha seem to be the focus of a reoccurring question.
Who is their father?
Fifth is the progression of Scully's health.  She was abducted by a
strange force, some believe by aliens and some believe by the government
and some believe both that later caused her to develop cancer and her
fight against its progression that seems to be arrested for the moment
that occurred at the beginning of season five.  Season five, which just
ended on May 17, 1998 was the most "teasing" season of the series as
many of the regular characters weren't seen as often as they were in the
other four seasons and for good reason.  EVERYONE appears to be in the
movie which is supposed to appeal to die hard fans of the show, such as
myself and people who have never seen it.  The movie is supposed to
answer serious questions raised by the show over the past five seasons
and the movie will be a stop sign at its conclusion that will phase in
season 6 in the fall of 1998.
Mulder has had three secret sources of information that he turns to when
he's stuck on a case.  These people are like the deep throat character
played by Hal Holbrook in 'All the President's Men'.  In fact, Mulder's
first informant, was named Deep Throat (Jerry Hardin), and he was
murdered by conspiring forces at the end of season 1 and at the
beginning of season 4, Mulder's other informant, Mr. X (Steven Williams)
was likewise murdered by what we assume are the same people.  Mulder's
current source of information is from a UN employee named Marita
Covarrubias (Laurie Holden).  She is a woman who is the least
trustworthy of all of Mulder's informants.
Other reoccurring characters on the show are the Lone Gunmen.  They are
Byers (Bruce Harwood), Langly (Dean Haglund) and Frohike (Tom
Braidwood).  These men are often the show's comic relief but are serious
and important enough to help Mulder with his quest for unexplained
scientific and technical explanations he needs in solving a case.  The
Lone Gunmen work out of a lab that also serves as their apartment where
they have computers and other high tech gadgets for analyzing and
explaining certain types of data fed to them.
There is Alex Krycek (Nicholas Lea).  Krycek started off as what looked
like an ally to Mulder but later we learned that Krycek was a double
agent, working for the Cigarette Smoking Man and his consortium as well
as for the Russians although Krycek's birthplace has never been
established.  He is one of the show's most interesting characters who
hasn't been used as much as I would like to have seen.
There was the introduction in season 5 of Special Agent Spender (Chris
Owens).  His character has not yet been utilized enough to really
comment on but more should be explained about him in season 6 and should
involve a relationship between him and the Cigarette Smoking Man.  Or
maybe not.
Last but certainly not least is Mulder and Scully's boss, Assistant
Director of the FBI, Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) who is the most
underplayed character in the series.  Very little has been explained
about Skinner in the four years the show has been on.  Skinner is a
former Marine and Vietnam veteran who seems to hiding a secret pain in
life.  Skinner never smiles and when he tries to, it doesn't last long
and is usually a smile reminding him of a happier time in his life or is
a smile that reminds him of something strange and not something funny.
He is a somewhat sympathetic character that you like, hoping he will
always remain as a good guy but Chris Carter has portrayed him as
uncertain more than any other character.
Mulder and Scully are monitored by the government within the government,
a consortium of men of considerable experience in their work who all
look to be in their 50's and 60's.  There is the 1st Elder (Don S.
Williams), who seems to be the leader, the Well Manicured Man (John
Neville), who appears to be an under boss of authority and the infamous
Cigarette Smoking Man (William B. Davis) who is the most focused upon
character of the three men and the show's chief bad guy and one of the
most intelligently portrayed villains in the history of television or
the movies.  If you are having trouble picturing these men, think of a
dark room or dark outside scenario, where men, dressed in suits, plan
their next move that will affect the lives of millions.  They're the
sort of men believed by many to have killed JFK, RFK and Martin Luther
King, Jr.  In fact, in season 4, an episode called 'Musings of a
Cigarette Smoking Man' is one of the series best episodes as its
alternative presentation of ideas does in fact imply and it shows that
the Cigarette Smoking Man killed JFK and Martin Luther King, Jr.
Throughout the show, Mulder and Scully have each lost a parent and a
sibling.  Scully's father died of a heart attack in season 1 and her
sister was accidentally murdered by assassins who meant to kill Scully,
at the beginning of season 3.  Mulder's father, as mentioned already,
was murdered by conspiring government forces involving the Cigarette
Smoking Man at the end of season 2 and Mulder's sister Samantha has been
missing since before the series began.  These losses have driven them
further in living up to the old adage that for every action there can be
an equally strong reaction and their experiences and bonding with one
another have taken the show to progressive heights virtually unmatched
by any other show.  What keeps 'The X-Files' so interesting is that the
relationship between Mulder and Scully hs always been kept professional
an never personal.  They have never been lovers and despite the desire
of immature teenage female fans who watch the show but aren't really
fans and can't tell you what's going on (I can't tell you how much
people like this bother me), Chris Carter says that he will never do
anything to rock the boat in making their relationship anything but
professional.  I and several of my 'X-Files' friends have vowed to stop
watching the show if it ever becomes personally romantic between Mulder
and Scully.
The last episode of the show before the movie is the end of season 5.
Fox Mulder's work, all of the x-files, were burned in his private office
at the FBI Headquarters by the Cigarette Smoking Man who first removed
Samantha Mulder's file.  The x-files were apparently destroyed because a
link in solving them all had allegedly been found through the mind
reading abilities of a 12 year old boy.  Solving all of the x-files
would be a threat to the consortium's planned project involving
extra-terrestrials and  involving the Cigarette Smoking Man..........
..........HERE IS WHERE THE MOVIE REVIEW BEGINS
WARNING:  This review contains some spoilers which I never do but it is
necessary in this case to appreciate the film.  Fear not.  Not all is
revealed!
'The X-Files' movie begins in what we know in the present day as being
North Texas.  It is 35,000 B.C., and a pair of what can be described
most understandably as cave men, are running along a thick winter like
tundra that resembles the North or South pole, probably the climate of
North Texas in 35,000 B.C. before the evolution of climate change to its
present day climate.  They fall through a weak spot in the snow and
encounter alien entities in an underground cave where the black oil is
exposed to them. Skip forward to the present day.  Again, it is North
Texas.  A group of boys are playing and one of them falls through the
ground.  We are to assume that its the same spot the cave men
encountered as the boy who fell through finds a skull and the boy is
contaminated by the black oil.  There is a quick rush to quarantine the
boy after a call is made by a mysterious man on the scene to the
Cigarette Smoking Man.
The movie is clever in its opening scenes, as Mulder and Scully are not
present right away and work their way into the story later in what would
become another tie to the film's many plot points, all on a collision
course with each other.  When we do see Mulder and Scully, after about
the first twenty minutes into the film, they are at the scene of a
federal building in Dallas, Texas, where a bomb threat has been called
in.  Among their discussion is a phrase that tells the audience that the
x-files have been shut down.  After the bomb situation has resolved
itself, Mulder encounters a doctor (Martin Landau), who was an old
friend of Mulder's father and who knows the real purpose of the bomb
scare scenario in Dallas.  
The consortium introduces us to new character, a man we assume is a
scientist (Armin Mueller-Stahl), who has information about a new virus
related to the uncovering of the black oil in North Texas.  The regular
consortium members are there.  The 1st Elder (Don S. Williams), The Well
Manicured Man (John Neville), and, of course, the Cigarette Smoking Man
(William B. Davis).  We discover that not only has the government been
working in control with some extra-terrestrial forces for the past fifty
years, but we also learn that the consortium is working to prevent in
part, a colonization of the Earth for which they have no control.  This
element is derived from season 5's two part story 'Patient X' and 'The
Red and the Black'.  We learn that the United States and Russia are
working to find a vaccine that will prevent the colonization by extra
terrestrials by spreading the black oil.  The vaccine plays a major part
in the film and progresses up to the film's conclusion where we learn
the fate of the x-files in what will be the start of season 6 in the
fall of 1998.
Mulder and Scully face elements that they've never been up against
before as their exploits take them to the South pole for their most
difficult adventure ever and although the film is an expansion of the
television series, Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) and The Lone Gunmen (Bruce
Harwood, Dean Haglund and Tom Braidwood) are only used briefly.  
I was hoping the movie would create more depth than it ultimately did
and although the creators of the movie say that you don't have to know
anything about the television series to enjoy the movie, this is not
entirely true.  You can enjoy the movie if you've never seen the t.v.
show but only about 75% of the movie will make sense.  Without knowing
anything about the black oil, the bees, and the consortium, audiences
will have to watch repeats of the show to truly appreciate it.  All in
all, a good effort and certainly better than the first 'Star Trek' movie
in 1979 and 'Twilight Zone---The Movie' in 1982 which failed to live up
to the standards of their television pasts.  'The X-Files' movie does
live up to the standards of its television past with a vision of the
future which will keep true fans clued in for more. 
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
UOBared
 I am not going to give away any plot details so this review, won't give
anything away, read on.
This movie strives for what every big TV drama wants.  To become a box-office
hit and still remain a ratings monster on TV.  The X-Files may be the first to
accomplish this.  
Chris Carter wanted to please fans, but also attract new fans to the X-Files. 
He almost succedes.  I am a long time viewer, and I was a little dissapointed,
as they don't reveal some answers to plots I was hoping for.  I won't tell you
which though.  The new fans won't be dissapointed.  Carter introduces each
character perfectly, and it doesn't annoy regular viewers.  
As for content, it doesn't get better.  Compare this Sci Fi movie, to others
and you can see the quality.  Mulder says this in a...interesting way.  This is
one of the best Sc-Fi films out.
Where it does come short is in the fact that it strives to much to be like the
TV show.  This movie is just too long for that.  1 and a half hours through it
I was ready for it to end, but it kept going and going and going.  This is
probably its only problem.
Overall this is a great movie, one which noone should miss.
Rating (scale of 1-5): 4.5
~Bared, Aprentice Tailor, Member of COR, Baja Shard

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson
Written by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz
Let me preface this review by stating up front that I am not a fan of 
THE X FILES. Not that I have anything against the show - it's just 
that I watch so many movies that if I watched TV too, I'd really have 
no life. I am wired into pop culture enough to know the basics: about 
abducted sisters and black ooze and a cigarette-smoking villain who may 
be Mulder's father. I know that the show has grown more popular every 
year it's been on, making it the first serious rival to the 
uber-fandom of STAR TREK that has consumed the lives of so many 
otherwise rational adults. A movie version of this phenomenon was 
perhaps inevitable, but its success was by no means guaranteed. Series 
creator Chris Carter and director Rob Bowman had, really, a daunting 
task before them: to make a feature film that would satisfy their core 
constituents, entertain newbies and make enough money to avoid 
embarrassing themselves. Did they succeed? From this outsider's 
perspective, I'd say they did. THE X FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE is an 
entertaining piece of fiction, and the first truly original release of 
this otherwise lackluster summer movie season.
If you're a fan of the series, you will no doubt have already seen the 
picture by the time you read this review. On the off chance that 
you're reading this from your hospital bed or on a cruise ship, 
however, I'll refrain from spoilers. Suffice it to say that the plot 
stems from events which occurred in the last couple of episodes of the 
series, events which involve a "black oil" which is really the vanguard 
of an extraterrestrial viral invasion of Earth. The film opens in Texas 
in 3500 B.C., in which two primitive travelers stumble upon the virus in 
an icy cave. This is some virus: it mutates rapidly into a deadly 
intelligent humanoid life form which seems to exist solely to disembowel 
unsuspecting humans.
We fast-forward to the present day, when a Texas youth falls into the 
same cave and releases the same virus. This event leads us to Dallas, 
where we find FBI agents Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully (Gillian 
Anderson) relieved of their X-Files duties and reassigned to an 
anti-terrorism unit. The death of the infected boy leads directly to the 
destruction of the Dallas Federal building, which in turn leads Mulder 
and Scully back into the massive alien-invasion cover-up helmed by the 
mysterious Well-Manicured Man (John Neville) and the 
even-more-mysterious Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis). Before 
they know it our two intrepid agents are back in the familiar territory 
of illicit autopsies, nervous informants, unmarked black helicopters, 
secret government installations and sublimated sexual energy. It looked 
to me like you X-philes out there had everything your paranoid hearts 
could desire.
Like the STAR TREK movies, THE X FILES works in a cinematic shorthand of 
sorts, introducing its main characters without the typically-required 
exposition because they already have a long history together. This 
history resulted in a lot of enthusiasm in the friendly audience with 
which I saw the film: they cheered Mulder when he appeared, cheered 
loudly for Scully when she started barking orders at the security guards 
in the Federal Building, and laughed at all the in-jokes. They didn't 
seem to mind that the plot is all a lot of hokum. There are a couple of 
tense and clever set-pieces, including a brilliant one involving a 
monstrous swarm of bees and a field of corn (don't ask). But the 
picture was hurt by the lack of a true villain and the need to keep 
things open-ended enough to avoid interfering with the on-going series. 
Carter and company can't really wrap things up when there's a new 
season's worth of skullduggery to consider.
But the plot is beside the point. What I learned from watching this 
picture is that the alien conspiracy is really just window dressing for 
the true key to THE X FILES' success: the central love story. Mulder 
and Scully are passionately in love with each other. To succumb to their 
feelings would be to destroy their working relationship and thus imperil 
the fate of the Earth; it is therefore our treat to watch them 
physically strain against the chains wrapped around their libidos. These 
two make Sam and Diane look like pikers. Duchovny and Anderson, five 
year series veterans both, are in full command of this knowledge and are 
thus able to inject real emotion into their scenes together. If you 
watch closely, you'll realize that the picture is even structured like 
a traditional love story. It doesn't matter whether your setting is 
the Civil War, the Bolshevik Revolution, a doomed ocean liner or a vast 
government conspiracy - the point is to keep the lovers apart as long 
as possible, because that's where the drama comes from.
So THE X FILES seems to satisfy old fans and create new ones - at least 
on the night I saw it. It offers a refreshing sci-fi vision that stands 
head and shoulders above all the Alien clones and refried INDEPENDENCE 
DAY-style claptrap splattered on the movie screens this decade. It also 
has a future as a franchise, if its creators can maintain this level of 
quality. Not only did it demonstrate exactly what drives the show's 
success, but it made me a believer. I just might have to start 
scheduling time on Sunday nights.
Please visit the FilmGeek website at: http://www.filmgeek.com

Author
Joy Wyse
It's risky to try to bring a popular TV series to the big screen.  Mainly
you're trying to give something special to the loyal viewers who are
overly familiar with the characters and most of the plot twists.  At the
same time, you want to attract and entertain those people who may not have
ever watched the show before.  How can you possibly familiarize these
'new" people without alienating those who can spout off every fact ever
shown?  However it's done, the producers have done it with The X Files.
As the feature begins you are hit with extremely technical dialogue that
makes you wonder if it'll all be like this.  But it isn't.  As different
characters come on the scene, you immediately sense whether or not the
person has an ongoing role.  Obviously, the cigarette smoking man is to be
"watched".    There is a scene where three men come to the aid of Muldar. 
You could tell by the mumbling in the audience that these three have been
seen before.  They don't explain who they are, but you feel that you know
them and that they are "good" guys.
The movie moves along at a good pace.  There is a lot of action: bombs,
chase scenes, and all the usual, but you're never quite sure what's going
on.  But then, neither are Muldar and Scully.  They have made careers of
trying to learn about things that they can't explain.  
This movie really makes you think.  When it's finally over, you're back
where you started.  You don't know what happened but it doesn't matter. 
It just makes you want to see more.  They will probably have a lot more
viewers when the new season begins.
It is a highly entertaining movie with an interesting premise.  I want to
see it again and I will definitely be watching the series.  I give it a B+.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner,
William B. Davis, Armin Mueller-Stahl, John Neville, Terry O'Quinn,
Glenne Headly, Tom Braidwood, Dean Haglund, Bruce Harwood
I have mixed reactions when it comes to The X Files.  I'm a big fan of
the show, so naturally I'd be a fan of the film.  And I did like the
film.  It has all of the elements which makes the television series
enjoyable: aliens, government conspiracies, etc etc.  But overall,
it's TOO much like the show.  In other words it would have made a
great episode, but there's nothing really there to merit me having to
pay for something that I get to see for free every week.
I would think that when you make a feature film out of a television
series that is still in production, there would be some reason to do
so other than money.  Apparently not.  The story being told in the
film should be one that just simply can't be told within the confines
of the small screen.  But aside from the score being a little bit
grander, the screen a little bigger, and a couple of visual effects,
there's no reason for this to be a feature film.  It's hardly even a
sweeps week episode.
And as far as the specifics of the story go, what plot elements
haven't we seen before in the series?  When the film begins, the X
Files division has been shut down (seen that).  The powers that be
then try to split FBI agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana
Scully (Gillian Anderson) apart (seen that).  Scully plans on quitting
the FBI (seen that).  Mulder then asks Scully "How can you say that?
After everything we've seen?"  (seen that).  Shadowy characters seek
out Agent Mulder to tell him secrets (seen that).  Those shadowy
characters are soon killed (seen that).  The other shadowy characters
decide that instead of killing Agent Mulder (which would of course,
solve all their problems) that they will take Agent Scully away from
him and do harm to her (seen that). Mulder will attempt to discover
aliens, but doesn't even bother to bring along a pocket camera to
document his inevitable discovery (seen that).  In the end, Mulder and
Scully have experienced something which makes them want to go on and
pursue their work, even though they have no hard evidence of anything
at all.  Yep, I've seen that too.
Then there are new elements of the story which perplex me.  For
example, usually when the evil powers that be decide to cover
something up, people die.  Here, they buy some kids shiny new bikes in
exchange for their silence.  Ok.  Then, it's revealed that the aliens
that the government had been conspiring with (and which aliens were we
having the conversations with, the black ooze aliens or the snarling
monster aliens?) have double-crossed them.  For some reason, they blow
this off and just continue to go along with the plan as scheduled.
Seems to me that would change some motivations.  Obviously not.
Please don't get me wrong with all of this though, the film did
entertain me.  It also managed to entertain the friend that went with
me who hasn't even seen an episode of the show.  So I guess it did
what it intended to do, which is to get both fans and non-fans of the
show to buy a movie ticket.  I just wish The X Files had been more
feature-film worthy.  [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Brian Takeshita
Apparently not much goes on in Blackwood, Texas, since kids have to
find their kicks by digging around in the undeveloped areas outside of
the small town.  While doing so, four young boys discover an
underground system of caves when one of their number falls through the
ground.  As any little boy would, he finds the whole thing pretty neat
until a mysterious black oil seeps up from beneath his feet and
absorbs itself into his skin.  Soon, the oil has turned the boy's eyes
the color of night and put him in a comatose condition.  Help arrives,
and in a baby-down-the-well scenario, four firemen go down the hole to
bring the boy back, but meet the same fate, attacked by the black oil.
News travels fast as a convoy of unmarked tanker trucks and a
helicopter full of secretive government-types converge on the scene
and take over.  "Remember that situation we never planned for?" the
newly arrived man in charge asks a cellular phone.  "We better come up
with a plan."
Part of the plan is to cover up the victims' cause of death, and when
FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully
(Gillian Anderson) receive a tip that bodies from Blackwood are
planted in the rubble of a "terrorist" bombing in Dallas, they uncover
a trail of conspiracy and deception with implications for the future
of the entire planet.
In case you didn't know, THE X-FILES:  FIGHT THE FUTURE is a movie
version of the hit Fox television series "The X-Files".  For those of
you unfamiliar with "The X-Files", thank you for reading this review.
I realize cave-dwellers don't get much in the way of reading material.
Were you also chosen for the O.J. jury?  I'm sorry, I couldn't resist.
Briefly, the television episodes can be divided into two categories:
Stand-alone, self contained stories, and those which are part of a
continuing melodrama centered around Mulder's quest to find his lost
sister and uncover the conspiracy which he believes is responsible for
her abduction.
The promotional tagline for THE X-FILES:  FIGHT THE FUTURE is "The
Truth is Revealed, Only in Theaters".  I wouldn't be going out on any
limbs if I were to say most people going to see this film are doing so
just to find out some explanations for the numerous unanswered
questions left by the television series.  Indeed, much of the
promotion for this film is centered around the fact that viewers will
get the answers they've been so eagerly awaiting.  In this way, much
of the series has been extremely effective as a marketing gimmick to
get people to shell out their money and buy a ticket.  Likewise, the
"truths" revealed are such that the story of the conspiracy is far
from over, and of course, you'll have to tune in next fall to find out
where it will go from here.  Absolute genius.
The premise of the movie is intriguing enough that it gets you
interested, and the script is competently written so that one event
leads logically to another, and you are rewarded with a climactic
finish that ties everything together.  This film is also well-paced,
with sufficient punctuations of action and suspense that hold the
viewer's attention through the two-hour running time.  Visually,
however, the movie seems to split between presenting the viewer with
fascinating sights and no sights at all.  At times, the images on
screen are breathtaking, while at other times, the film is
photographed in such shadow or darkness that it is unclear exactly
what it is we're supposed to be looking at.
When you make a movie out of a television show, you can't assume your
moviegoing audience is already well acquainted with the characters and
framework.  Unfortunately, this film is guilty of doing exactly that,
as it assumes too much and is definitely lacking in character
development.  For example, Mulder's motivations are only given a
cursory explanation, and an unindoctrinated viewer would therefore
only be able to guess at the deeper background supporting the film's
plot.  Likewise, supporting characters from the television show are
thrown in for what seems to be no other reason than to give the loyal
fans what they want:  To see them on the big screen.  On television,
FBI Assistant Director Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) has a close
relationship to the two agents, but this is not made clear in the
movie.  When he helps Mulder evade surveillance by other agents, one
does not know why.  When Mulder's off-the-record technical consultants
show up for a short scene, the audience isn't given a clue who they
are.  Maybe the tagline should be, "The Truth is Revealed, Only in
Theaters, Only to Fans".
Perhaps most disappointing is the absence of a solid villain.  "The
Cigarette-Smoking Man" (William B. Davis), Mulder and Scully's primary
antagonist in the series, is present in the film, but his involvement
with the story is very low-key, and only fans will appreciate his
participation.  This is a real missed opportunity, as he is presented
very ominously in the beginning of the film and is therefore set up to
play a large role in the plot.  However, rather than being portrayed
as the driving force behind the unfolding plans of the conspiracy, or
the constant foil to Mulder's attempts to uncover the truth, he is
relegated to being the mysterious person who seems to be present
wherever the conspiracy manifests itself, hardly speaking at all.  A
confrontation (violent or otherwise) between The Cigarette-Smoking Man
and Mulder would appear to be requisite, but it never materializes.
Just as there is a disadvantage to being unfamiliar with the series,
however, so is there a problem if you are a follower.  The film has a
slightly upped production value, but not so significant that the movie
doesn't play just like a two-hour episode.  The series is already a
well-produced show, so the filmmakers had a difficult task right from
the start in creating a movie which would not only answer questions,
but impress as well.  As it turns out, the film has a few more special
effects and is more darkly photographed, but that's about it.  I'm
sure some people will wonder why they couldn't have seen this at home
for free.
Fans of the show will not be disappointed in the performances of the
actors, since they are playing the same characters they have played
for several years now.  Duchovny and Anderson have matured with their
on-screen personae, and appear very comfortable in their portrayals of
the two FBI agents, although Duchovny's performance may seem a bit
wooden to those who haven't seen him in the role before.
THE X-FILES:  FIGHT THE FUTURE is not a bad film, but neither is it a
great one.  It is decent entertainment for the time spent, but the
problem lies in trying to please two segments of the audience and not
being totally successful in either endeavor.  In all, fans of the
series will appreciate (and enjoy) this film considerably more than
other people, but with expectations running very high, even they might
be disappointed.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Mitch
Pileggi, William B. Davis
Ingredients: Aliens, conspiracy theories, two FBI agent partners 
Prior to a catastrophic bombing in Dallas, FBI agents Dana Scully
(Gillian Anderson)and Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) are able to evacuate
the building. But when a few bodies are mysteriously found in the
rubble, the partners are placed before an FBI panel investigating them
for professional negligence.
A discredited author named Kurtzweil (Martin Landau) tells Mulder that
the bombing was a coverup: the bodies were actually dead long before the
explosion. The victims died of a peculiar alien virus: once the virus is
implanted into a human host, an alien fetus begins to form which uses
the human tissue for food and breaks out of the corpse as a malevolent,
full-fledged alien humanoid. Kurtzweil also insists that the coverup is
the work of a shadow government, a powerful cartel whose very existence
remains a secret. 
Although it sounds like a hoax, Scully and Mulder check out Kurtzweil's
tale. In order to acquit themselves before the FBI panel, Scully and
Mulder search for proof of the existence of either Aliens or of the
secret government, but as they investigate, sinister anonymous forces
try to stop them. As a result, the two partners begin to question their
dedication to each other, and their commitment to finding the elusive
truth.
Will partners Scully and Mulder continue to support each other? Will
their insistence that "the truth is out there" ever be vindicated by a
glimpse of the actual truth?
Opinion:
Imagine a dangerous fictional world where the truth of a situation is
carefully hidden from the public. For example, suppose an international
totalitarian corporation, selling unrelated products through fake
'front' companies, filled key scenes in Hollywood movies with
conveniently placed products, using product placement to subconsciously
influence movie audiences to buy things. 
An unobservant person living in such a world might imagine he/she lives
in a world devoid of influence, a world of complete free will, laissez
faire capitalism, with diverse products to choose from. Another person,
carefully noticing the product placement in movie scenes, might deduce
that he/she lives in a world of free will, but with substantial
advertisement from competing companies. Finally, the person who digs the
deepest might describe the same world as superficially free, but in
reality controlled by a cartel - - whose main objective is to get people
to part with their economic dollars, political votes, and other forms of
power in order to monopolize power for a sinister oligarchy which
exterminates competition and keeps the truth hidden from ordinary people
through the use of press releases, spin doctors, Hollywood agents, and
an army of lawyers.
THE X-FILES occurs in a similar imaginary world - - a cosmos where truth
is deliberately obscured by powerful groups who keep the truth hidden
behind illusory levels of misinformation. It seems there are three main
power groups: the US government (fairly benign, but always a good
candidate for secret agendas), the shadow government (people in powerful
positions, who for the last 50 years, have had access to advanced
technology and some ability to counter it), and finally Aliens from
outer space. The government, the secret government, and the Aliens all
have their own agenda: each group deliberately obscures the truth, each
group infiltrates the other, and each group may act in collusion with or
defy the other groups when a situation serves its purpose. Finally there
are also rebels and informants in the X-Files world. 
In such a convoluted world deluged with information and misinformation,
heroes are defined as ordinary people capable of honest love and
loyalty, who strive against all odds to perceive the truth - - and
occasionally glimpse a measure of it, despite the antagonism of powers
that be. In other words, heroes are individuals like government workers
Scully and Mulder. 
The main goal in the average summer action movie is for the heroes to
endure lots of chase scenes, and then wrap up by solving all the
problems and defeating a clear-cut villain by the end of the movie. On
the other hand, the main goal for an X-Files hero is to get a glimpse of
the truth in a decidedly untruthful world. As long as that distinction
is kept in mind, THE X-FILES is an enjoyable movie.  
Copyright  1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Jamahl Epsicokhan
This review contains some minor spoilers for the feature film "The
concerning the plot.
Nutshell: Entertaining and efficient. The plot doesn't really add up,
but the movie works nonetheless.
Cast includes: David Duchovny (Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Dana
Scully), Martin Landau (Alvin Kurtzweil), William B. Davis
(Cigarette-Smoking Man), John Neville (Well-Manicured Man), Mitch
Pileggi (Walter Skinner), Blythe Danner (Jana Cassidy), Armin
Mueller-Stahl (Conrad Strughold), Terry O'Quinn (Darius Michaud)
The new feature-length "The X-Files" provides a good example of what
"The X-Files" television series is all about. To that end, I was
simultaneously intrigued, entertained, bemused, and frustrated--a
perfect example of what the TV show tends to invoke in me these days.
If (heavens forbid) you've never seen "The X-Files" on TV, you'll
still get something out of this movie, which provides slick, efficient
summer escapism and doesn't require you to be an "X-Phile" in order to
understand the plot. On the other hand, even if you *are* an "X-Phile"
who knows all the convoluted plot lines, you're not likely to gain
much of an advantage over anyone else. This is a movie where plot
pieces are based on events from episodes that, really, could've meant
nearly anything a writer wanted them to.
For anyone who doesn't know the general outline of the "X-Files"
premise, the X-Files are bizarre, unsolved FBI cases that usually
feature paranormal circumstances. David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson,
who are destined to go down as one of the most famous character pairs
in history, play FBI Special Agents Mulder and Scully, a pair that has
benefited from an intriguing chemistry that isn't defined by a typical
friendship or romance (though the two certainly are close to each
other), but by a need to continue their mission in finding the truth,
whatever that may be.
Like much of "The X-Files" TV series' primary focus, Chris Carter's
story for this film is paranoid, implausible, and without any concrete
answers. And even though the movie tries to address a few questions,
it doesn't actually come to any resolution. Really, anyone expecting
to find believable circumstances or the answers to all their "X-Files"
questions is probably going into this movie with the wrong attitude.
"The X-Files" has proven over and over again that answers are probably
the last thing Mulder and Scully will ever find on their quest. What
they usually find instead are clues that lead only to new questions.
The film brings back a number of elements that have been featured on
the TV series, including pathogen-carrying bees, possible alien
visitation and conspiracy, and bizarre parasites that cause people's
eyes to turn to black.
I must admit that I somewhat wonder why we have been given an
"X-Files" feature at this point. The answer: probably because "The
money. Dramatically, Chris Carter's screenplay covers very little
ground that couldn't be traversed in two or three episodes of the TV
show. The movie, naturally, has better production values and special
effects than any television episode could realistically aspire to
(Gasp!--location shooting on "The X-Files"!), but at the core, this is
a story that could've happened any time on the TV series. It's
interesting: Now TV producers don't even wait for their series to
*end* before launching them into film franchises.
Like a lot of thrillers, this film benefits from the mentality of
cleverly executed set pieces. Scenes like one near the beginning of
the movie where an entire downtown Dallas office building is decimated
by a bomb explosion. Scenes like the one where the discovery of a
mysterious facility somewhere in Texas leads to an attack of the
largest swarm of killer bees I can remember in the movies. Scenes like
the one where a massive underground facility in Antarctica turns out
to be ... ah, but I won't say.
Overall, this movie is a good way to spend a couple hours at the
movies, but one thing that has always annoyed me about "The X-Files,"
and annoyed me in this movie as well, is the ability of a few
all-powerful men to manipulate the story's other characters in ways
that prompt near-complete incredulity and frustration.
Are we, for example, to believe that, when these men decide they want
to take control of Agent Mulder via the extremely roundabout way of
abducting Agent Scully, they have the ability to control or predict a
single bee, which manages to hide in Scully's collar for several hours
so it can sting her at precisely the right time? So much of the
mysterious men's "plan" is determinant on the most spectacular
coincidences that I wondered why they didn't just use their apparently
divine insight to control whatever in the universe they really needed
to take control of.
And who are these men, anyway? They all wear suits and recite vague
dialogue that promises to spell trouble. Trouble for whom, aside from
Mulder and Scully, we're never really sure. These men, of course,
don't have names. (The most important of them are played by William B.
Davis and John Neville, who are known merely as the "Cigarette-Smoking
Man" and the "Well-Manicured Man," respectively). Mulder always talks
about a global conspiracy, but what does that even mean? The
conspiracies of "The X-Files" most often are the conspiracies of comic
books; the stylistics surrounding the actions and dialogue of these
shady men are far more important than what actually happens.
But to that end, I enjoyed the riddles and mysterious dialogue. Martin
Landau turns up in a supporting role as a conspiracy theorist to offer
more mysteries, providing Mulder with ominous warnings of what these
men plan to do. How he knows and what he says I'm not even going to
begin to explain; this is a film that practically defies synopsis.
Yet the plot, surprisingly, is fairly easy to follow, which is a
credit to Carter and director Rob Bowman, who make sure we always know
where we are, what is happening and why. Sure, none of it can possibly
be believed in retrospect, but that's not really the point.
Besides, the questions I have about "The X-Files" are not related to
what various threads this movie will have either tied up or
complicated. Asking such questions is futile; we're not getting the
answers. My questions are a little more practical. Questions like,
just why is it all aliens in the movies are slimy and plastic-looking,
like the aliens in "Alien"? And why is it all aliens feel inclined to
chase people through ventilation ducts and make squealing sounds like
the creatures in "Jurassic Park"? And just how can Mulder and Scully
survive the frigidness of Antarctica without shelter, and who could or
would rescue them? And how did Mulder get to Antarctica in the first
place? Did the FBI fund the trip?
Maybe the plot is a bit ridiculous, but I don't really care. "The
universe, and must be gauged on a different level of realism. "The
the screen, and then wonder if it really makes sense. I urge you not
to spend much time thinking about it, because it's more fun to just go
with the flow.
What I most enjoyed about this film was the relationship between
Mulder and Scully itself. We learn that the X-Files have been recently
closed due to a lack of reasonable progress. Mulder and Scully are
back investigating "normal" matters, like bomb threats. The central
theme of the film is whether or not Scully will choose to leave the
FBI; finding no truth in the X-Files has taken its toll on her.
Naturally, this incredible adventure will convince her to stay, but
the real drama of the film is in the implications of her departure: it
would be tragic, especially for Mulder. These two are symbols of a
hopeless struggle against something--we're not sure exactly whom or
what or whose interests are represented--that lives to perpetuate a
sea of lies. But Mulder simply can't continue the mission alone. The
payoff is in knowing that these two people will continue their
crusades, no matter how insignificant, futile, and painful their
efforts might be.
As a storytelling setting, "The X-Files" is its own paradox. It claims
to have a truth that's supposed to intrigue us, but it probably never
will reveal that truth to its two central characters. The quest itself
is what is supposed to entertain us, not the possibility of solving
the mystery. Some people claim that "The X-Files" takes an infinitely
long attention span to truly understand. I disagree. "The X-Files"
shifts its own perception of the truth so often that it doesn't matter
what is true from one day to the next. What matters is that we have
Mulder and Scully in the middle of it all, trying to make sense of it,
as if they're the sole constant in a twisted universe.
At the same time, it might be nice if, in the event we do get another
"X-Files" movie after the series is over, the filmmakers invest their
time in a complete train of thought that doesn't play like a series of
set pieces for the middle chapter of a story that has no discernible
beginning or end. This "X-Files" film is certainly entertaining, but
not really satisfying on narrative terms.
The taglines for "The X-Files" read, "The truth is revealed." I doubt
it. The truth may still be out there, but a tagline is still a
tagline, and probably, in the most important ways, just a lie.
-----
Copyright (c) 1998 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this article is
prohibited.
Jammer's Movie Reviews - http://www.epsico.com/movies/
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com

Author
Matthew Brissette
I think the first thing this reviewer should mention is wether or not I
am a fan of The X-Files. First , let me assure you that no prior
experience with the series is required to fully enjoy this movie. The
producers are not stupid , making a movie just for fans of the series is
not profitable. You have to reach for a larger audience. Therefore , the
movie is quite user-friendly. Altough , non-fans will only fail to
understand certain emotions behind the looks many characters exchange.
But fear not , Duchovny and another man later on provide more than
adequate background info on what is going on. You will never feel as if
you just walked in on the third act of some great opera. 
In any case , the answer is no. I am not a fan of The X-Files , I only
watch it when nothing else is on and I prefer Millennium. However ,
since the Fox network as been so kind as to air several key episodes for
several weeks before the movie's opening weekend I took that opportunity
to test the movie. I taped all of these episodes and watched them only
after seing the movie , I am glad to report that I learned nothing new.
Everything you need to know is explained to the viewer by Duchovny and
others. I know I am going maybe a bit too far to make my point but
everybody should get the chance to experience this movie.
Warning: Major Spoilers Follow! Please do not read , to fully enjoy this
movie you must not be able know what is coming , what exactly is over
that hill and what that weird "hummm" sound is all about. You have been
warned.
The X-Files is what a summer should be. Exciting , scary , great special
effects ( unlike other summer movies the effects do not take over the
movie and are only there when it is really necessary ) and good
performances. This is coming from a guy who thinks David Duchovny is the
human equivalent of a wooden plank. From start to finish , this movie
does not let go of you. When I compare it with last summer's movies the
best way to describe it would be : take the excitement and great score
from Face/Off and the deadly use of sound from Event Horizon. 
This flick is scary , not in a B movie kind of way where you always know
where and when the critter will jump at our heroes. In fact , the first
time the critter in this movie makes an apperance it is totally out of
the blue. You might as well bring ear plugs because this thing is
louuuudd! The last time a monster scared me that much was when I first
saw Aliens as a six year old kid. You know , when you are affraid to put
you feet on the floor because the creature might be under the chair , or
when you keep trying to cover your throat with your shirt? 
So yeah , the X-Files is scary. And guess what? You never even have to
see the monster but your imagination works overtime and it sure beats
having to watch a flawed , computer generated , Babyzilla , it looks
like you could walk right through it not even scarier than your grandma
in undies type of monster. Do not think that The X-Files is a monster
movie. In fact , the creature is there for maybe three minutes total.
No , The X-Files is definately a Mulder episode of the series. Scully is
at his side , of course , but Gillian Anderson gets maybe half the
screen time. She has a couple of good scenes with Duchovny , but she
gets kidnapped during the last half hour of the movie so she does not
get to do much. No , this is Mulder's time in the spotlight. 
By now , you have heard of the scene where Mulder "showers" Independence
Day. If you have not then I will not spoil it for you , let's just say
that due to recent events Mulder should be "showering" Godzilla instead.
To those of you wondering if Mulder discovers that the truth is indeed
out there...who cares!? If he did find it the series would over anyway
so what are you complaining about? 
The dialogue in interesting and the director is marvelous. The camera is
almost always looking over the shoulder of our heroes so we feel as if
we are right there with them when they open a door or climb a hill. The
script is spotless , every thing that happens happens for a purpose. If
you are confused by something , do not worry because it will all become
clear later on but , and I cannot stress this enough , PAY ATTENTION!!!
Unlike most summer movies , the dialogue is twice as important as the
effects. Miss one vital piece of information and , like most people who
talk during movies , you will go home and tell all your friends how this
movie made no sense. Also , to those people who need to go to the
bathroom during movies...DON'T! The person who watched the movie with me
had to go twice and twice she missed an important conversation.
There is no time to take a breather between scenes because , again
unlike most summer movies ( Godzilla anybody? ) The X-Files does not
need to fill scenes between the suspense and the action with useless
subplots , every scene is crucial and serves a purpose. Who needs to see
the blond chiouaoua have a "big emotional scene" between Godzilla
attacks? 
So far this summer I have seen only one movie who ranks higher on my
list of movies I'd recommend and that is the Truman Show but it only
wins by a nose. But The Truman Show is not what I would call a summer
movie , The X-Files is. What more do you ask from a summer movie other
than the chance to be excited? Cool effects? It's good some. Pulse
pounding? Hell yes! 
Strangely enough , I think that fans of the series will hate this movie
while non-fans will have a good time. It does not provide answers to the
show's many questions , the status quo remains nearly the same and , no
, Mulder and Scully do not get together. 
Rating: Four and a half out of Five stars for the best movie yet this
summer , several jump right out of your seat thrills , many "Whoah , I
never saw that one coming!" moments , four "Holy Shit , where the hell
did that come from" and one heck of an ending. 
You may wonder where this movie lost half a star. Well , I swore never
to give a movie the full five stars so I had to find something about The
in his ice truck , the tracks it leaves in the snow behind him go on for
several miles but then they just stop. It's pretty obvious the film's
makers drove the truck for several miles to give the appearance that
Mulder had been driving for a long time , but in the end it looks like
Mulder just dropped from the sky and started driving. 

Author
Richard Scheib
THE X FILES aka THE X-FILES; THE X FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE
USA. 1998. Director - Rob Bowman, Screenplay - Chris Carter, Story - 
Carter & Frank Spotnitz, Producers - Carter & Daniel Sackheim, 
Photography - Ward Russell, Music - Mark Snow, Visual Effects Supervisor 
- Mat Beck, Visual Effects - Blue Sky/VIFX (Supervisor - John Nash), 
Light Matter Inc/Pixel Envy, Todd-AO/Hollywood Visual Images (Supervisor 
- Pete Kozcera), Federal Building Sequence - Hunter-Gratzner Industries, 
Miniature Effects Supervisor - Scott Schneider, Special Effects 
Supervisor - Paul Lombardi, Makeup Effects -Amalgamated Dynamics 
(Supervisors - Tom Gillis & Alec Woodruff Jr), Prosthetic Makeup Effects 
- Lance Anderson & Craig Reardon, Additional Makeup Effects - Kurtzman, 
Nicotero, Berger EFX Group Inc, Production Design - Christopher Nowak, 
Supervising Art Director - Marc Pischiella. Production Company - Ten 
Thirteen Productions.
David Duchovny (Special Agent Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Special 
Agent Dana Scully), Martin Landau (Dr Alvin Kurtzweil), John Neville 
(Well-Manicured Man), William B. Davis (Cigarette-Smoking Man), Mitch 
Pileggi (Assistant Director Walter Skinner), Blythe Danner (Jane 
Cassidy), Terry O'Quinn (SAC Darius Michaud), Armin Mueller-Stahl 
(Conrad Strughold), Jeffrey DeMunn (Dr Ben Bronschweig), Lucas Black 
(Stevie Richardson), Dean Haglund (Langley), Bruce Harwood (Byers), Tom 
Braidwood (Melvin Frohike)
Plot: FBI agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully of the defunct X Files 
paranormal investigation division are brought before an investigating 
committee, blamed for negligence when a bomb defusal at a Federal 
building in Dallas goes wrong. But then Mulder encounters a conspiracy 
fanatic who provides him with information that leads him to discover 
that the bomb was really detonated to destroy several bodies infected 
with a prehistoric alien virus uncovered in Texas. As they investigate, 
the international cabal working in collaboration with alien invaders to 
unleash the virus, seek to stop Mulder by infecting Scully with the 
virus.
In the same way that we can now look back at the frenetic outpouring of 
alien invasion and atomic monster films of the 1950s with a fascination 
at just how much they reflect the insecurity of the times, future 
historians will no doubt similarly look back at the incredible 
outpouring of paranoia and conspiracy films and tv series at the moment 
as indicative of something deeply upsetting about the 1990s. For if this 
body of films and tv series is any reflection of the way society thinks 
then society is surely rent to the darkest places of the soul by a sense 
of distrust and paranoia; a loss of identity; a recurrent belief that 
the government is covering up the truth; the belief that there is 
something fundamentally rotten at the heart of many respected social 
institutions; and the recurring surety that some golden past has been 
inevitably corrupted and that society is falling towards a moral 
collapse. The widespread prevalence of these sentiments (at least in the 
American media) and the darkness of their presentation is something that 
borders on the positively pathological.
Blame it all on Oliver Stone and 1991's `JFK' which really started the 
whole conspiracy/loss of the American dream thing off. (A substantial 
number of these films and series start the beginning of the corruption 
of American society with the Kennedy assassination). But it was `The X 
Files' in 1993 which tied the conspiracy angle to alien abductions and 
the great conspiracy junkie conviction that something happened in 
Roswell, New Mexico in 1947. As a series `The X Files' has conducted, 
with considerable wit and elegance, a number of fresh and inventive 
takes on traditional and not-so traditional forms of ghost and monster 
stories. And beneath the series is this cool, shadowy conspiratorial 
edginess that touches a bone of 1990s alienation that seems like it just 
could be real - and indeed has made the series into a cult phenomenon. 
What does strike one about `The X Files' and others like `Nowhere Man' 
(1995) and `Dark Skies' (1996) that have sought to imitate it, is the 
novelty of their storytelling - they are the only series where the 
hero/heroine lose each week. Indeed despite the proclamation "The truth 
is out there" over the credits of `The X Files', the format of the 
series is really dependent on the truth never being uncovered.
Now comes `The X Files' (or else `The X-Files' if you read the end 
credits) which attempts to spin the series cult popularity out into a 
cinematic franchise. Whether the movie remains just a one-off experiment 
or whether it becomes the torch-carrier for the series future, remains 
to be seen at this point. The film has met with a relatively 
disappointing box-office performance which has apparently stamped some 
question over future films.
There are an interesting number of comparisons that can be made between 
`The X Files' movie and `Star Trek: Generations' in 1994 - both are 
remarkably similar in the way they were made and the problems they 
contain. Both were construed as the initial attempts to launch a popular 
tv series as a cinematic franchise; both were made very close to the end 
of shooting schedules on the tv series; both were disappointments with 
their intended fan audiences; and both seem uncomfortable with the 
widescreen format, looking more like feature-length tv episodes than 
films that have been designed as big-screen features.
The film seems uneasily caught between trying to offer up the series' 
cultists what they expect of it and trying to reiterate the gist of the 
series all over anew for any audience members that may have wandered in 
not having seen the series - and as a result has really ended up 
pleasing neither crowd. Indeed a good part of its approach and a 
substantial portion of its predicted earnings was gambled on attracting 
new fans in the theatres. But a good reason for the film's lack of 
expected box-office take may well be that its advertizing campaign was 
gambled entirely on selling the film to the fan audience rather than 
seeking to attract new audiences. All the advance that new audiences 
were given was simply a poster which told nothing about the film. 
Details of the plot were kept under a screen of absolute secrecy until 
the film's release. The stills available seemed the dullest imaginable - 
only a variety of shots of Mulder and Scully walking down corridors and 
in bare fields. One suspects that such an approach ended up being 
counter-productive - that it created a film that nobody knew anything 
about except those guaranteed to be drawn by the series brand name. In 
all likelihood the film's lack of real success has been this critical 
miscalculation in its promotional campaign and its failure to draw 
anybody new in.
The story only really seems like a reshuffling of the basic plot 
developments and cliches of the last three seasons of the series. Stop 
me if you have heard this before:- not one but two different people 
involved on the inside of the big conspiracy and/or claiming connection 
to Mulder's father accost him in back alleys to provide cryptic 
information (that points him in the direction the plot needs to go); the 
FBI seek to close down the X Files; the FBI conduct Internal Affairs 
investigations where blame is placed on Mulder and Scully as part of a 
coverup; Mulder and/or Scully are on the verge of giving up altogether 
in the face of the overwhelming attempt to silence them until a fresh 
piece of alien evidence and conspiratorial activity sets them on the 
trail anew; Scully is infected with a disease to which there is no known 
medical cure; Scully is abducted; Mulder must trek all the way to an 
alien base hidden under the polar ice caps; alien DNA is uncovered in 
the remains of cavemen; innocent boys are infected by the Black Oil and 
the incident quickly covered up; the cabal meets in shadowed rooms and 
in cryptic terms plot massive coverups and how to silence Mulder; 
mysterious viral experiments are being conducted on the unwitting 
populace and so on. 
The problem with `The X Files' as a tv series is that it started 
superbly with inventive one-off stories and its spooky, shadowy glimpses 
into the dark places operating behind the government. But while with the 
most recent two seasons the series has been riding at an absolute 
artistic peak and conducting some of the best one-off stories so far 
(`Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man', `Home', `Postmodern Prometheus', 
`Bad Blood' to name but a handful), the series has tended to fall down 
when it comes to its continuing elaboration of its own mythology and 
backstory. Unlike `Babylon 5' which has a similarly complicated and 
elaborate series of unfolding revelations, you get the feeling `The X 
Files' is building a rather rickety structure as it is going along 
rather than adhering to a coherent preplanned grand schema. The 
backstory has now become so complicated it is near impossible to keep 
track of all the subplots involving black oil, alien wars, clones, 
shape-changing assassains, alien abductions and implants, who is who's 
father and sibling, and all the conspiracies within the conspiracies. In 
last season's two-parter `Patient X/The Red and the Black' it became 
impossible to work out whose side which group of aliens were on and who 
the traitor Krycek was really working for.
The same problem spills over here. The film is stuck with a sprawlingly 
complicated plot which tries to encompass everything but more than 
anything ends up showing the increasing cracks in the scenario's 
believability. It seems filled with an absurd number of holes, 
implausibilities and unanswered questions - Why does Terry O'Quinn 
agent-in-charge allow himself to be blown up along with the bomb inside 
the Federal building (one is unable to work out why, even assuming he 
was involved in the conspiracy, it was necessary for him to sacrifice 
his life) ? The cabal's plan to take Scully away from Mulder is built on 
such a series of complicated coincidences as to seem preposterous - that 
Mulder and Scully will find the sealed area hidden under a children's 
playground, that they will manage to choose the correct direction in the 
middle of nowhere to follow a series of departed trucks, that they will 
then discover the domes in the cornfield, will enter and then Scully (as 
opposed to Mulder who is equally unprotected) will be stung by the 
virus-carrying bees, whereupon the cabal will be waiting outside 
Mulder's apartment (as opposed to her own) posing as fake ambulance men, 
having tapped his 911 call in order to abduct her when she collapses. 
And the revelation that what the conspiring cabal has been so ruthlessly 
fighting for all these years is really to sit back so an alien virus can 
enslave the entire human race seems laughable.
The film is disappointingly lacking in many of the things that made the 
series memorable. There is none of the ingenious plotting development or 
explanations of just how the paranormal might exist, and the sense of 
laconic humour between the two characters that drives the series is 
conspicuously lacking for the most part. And the things it seems to 
think the series depended on - the dark, paranoid claustrophobic visual 
look and the tight, constricted plotting - really don't work up on the 
screen. The dark, shadowy look that works so well on the small screen 
seems cramped translated to the big screen. And the tight plotting 
designed for a 50 minute tv hour keeps the film turning so tightly that 
one is too busy following what is meant to be going on to become 
involved. What it really needs to work as a film is to be opened up for 
the big screen - surely the one thing it was hoping to offer that the 
series couldn't - but it never does. Director Rob Bowman, a veteran from 
the series, offers up a few shots of wide open desert, snowy wastes and 
big domes but there seems sadly almost no difference between the look of 
a two million dollar tv episode and a 60 million dollar film. There's an 
impressive special effect of a UFO rising at the climax but visual 
effects supervisor Mat Beck, also a veteran of the series, seems to have 
conducted it as though he were working it for a limited tv budget and 
its appearance seems more cursory than awe-filled. 
The failing of the film is many of the failings of the tv series writ 
large. Like the big issue that circulated the fandom before the film's 
release - would the underlying sexual tension between the two characters 
be fulfilled ? - The Big Kiss here is all tantalizing tease which at the 
last moment deftly ducks away from delivery of anything. What we 
likewise have is a film that gives the appearance of answering all the 
big questions that lie behind the series - that in its advertizing 
campaign "Fight the Future" and the lead up of plot strands from the 
previous season promises the grand concept of an alien war - but equally 
dances away from actually delivering anything. It teases but instead in 
the end all it resorts back to is the series' status quo - the 
conspiracy's current plan is thwarted but all evidence that might be 
used to prove anything is eliminated; Mulder and Scully are reinstated 
but no further ahead in proving anything than they were at the very 
start of the series; and the real truth still remains out there ever 
elusive.
(Amusing piece of trivia:- one wonders if any `Star Wars' fans picked up 
the in-joke aimed at them in the last scene. Featured is the title 
credit `Foum Tatouine, Tunisia'. Tunisia, of course, was the location 
where George Lucas shot all the Tattooine scenes for `Star Wars').


Author
Homer Yen
Intriguing "X-Files" Reveals More Questions than Answers
"The X-Files: Fight the Future" is the first attempt to leverage the
appeal of the popular television series onto the big screen.
Incorporating elaborate sets, a complex yet intriguing tale that weaves
government cover-ups with deadly viruses and aliens, and the familiar
presence of two determined FBI agents, the result is a quick-paced,
conspiracy-laden movie that is somewhat hokey but enjoyably quirky.
After a supposed act of terrorism that results in incredibly horrific
disaster, our two heroes, FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny)
and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) are being pointed at by the finger of
blame.  As an inquiry into their incompetence begins, Mulder is
approached by an eccentric man (Martin Landau) with wild ideas of
conspiracies, cover-ups, and a theory as to why the act of terrorism was
actually an act of our own government.  "The government is secretly
negotiating a planned Armageddon," he urges.  
Skeptical at first but ultimately open to any idea, as wild as they may
be, that would reinforce his personal quest to expose government
cover-ups and to get to the truth,  Mulder begs a tired and defeated
Scully to help him in his pursuit.  Meanwhile, someone has been watching
their every move and is taking steps to make sure that they never find
out the truth. 
As a story about conspiracies, it gives us a nice long list of elements
that keeps the audience involved while allowing the movie to easily
transition from one sequence/location to another.  These include: the
informant with his personal agenda that periodically gives out
questionably reliable information, characters that appear once early on
and then re-appear much later as murky warnings to oncoming danger,
narrow alleyways and clandestine meetings that provide a backdrop where
secrets are learned and business is taken care of, and a smattering of
clues that ultimately guides Mulder and Scully toward the truth.  
Having watched only two or three episodes of the popular tv series, I
can't really comment on whether this is better or worse than the average
episode.  Virtually every person that has appeared in the series does
make a brief appearance.  However, they amount to only cameos and don't
complicate the main focus of the story.  Also, there is a good deal of
exposition on the motivations of our two intrepid agents - for example,
we learn why Mulder has engaged this personal quest of his and why he is
viewed less-than-seriously by his peers.  Meanwhile, we hear why Scully
was assigned as his partner.  These are things that devoted fans already
know, so it is for the benefit of people like me.  Fans will probably
find these sections protracted and boring.
The spirit of the X-Files is geared towards things that are 'not easily
categorized or referenced.'  As such, the story will raise more
questions than reveal answers.  For example, what was the motivation
behind the government perpetuating an obviously self-destructive course
of action?  And, if the conspiracy is global in nature, why are there
only two lone FBI agents trying to solve the whole thing?  Perhaps this
is all part of the mythology of the series.  Regardless of my lack of
viewership and the questions that I had, I thought that overall, the
movie worked in  delivering a witty string of sequences that melded
conspiracy and science-fiction, and I did like the general look and the
atmosphere of secrecy that it projected.

Author
Fox Davidson
  Space.  It is the unforeseen.  The vastness of time.  The whole of life.  It
is mysterious and wonderful.  No wonder such cult classics as Star Trek and V
were so popular when aired on television in the `60s and `80s.  Those shows
revolutionized the way we look at space,  then called 'Outer' space.  People
traveling at great speeds to the stars and distant planets.  Every young boy's
dream.  Of course, in 1977, Star Wars pretty much put the whole space thing
into overdrive.  A black-hole was created around science fiction films.  Every
one was sucked into cliche-ridden, unforgettable trash.  Star Wars and Star
Trek were both played out to the hilt with countless imitations.  Aside from a
few successful entries (Star Trek II, III, IV, VII, VIII, IX, the fantasticly
fun Return of the Jedi, and horrifyingly stylish Event Horizon), sci-fi films
have, well, sucked.  Until now.
  Chris Carter, writter and creater of The X-Files (and the now-classic TV
series) is responsible for the sheer brilliance that engulfs X-Files into a
dark, sexy, underworld of paranoia.  Agent Fox Mulder (David Duchovny), always
looking to the sky for answers unknown to science, and Agent Dana Scully
(Gillian Anderson), always looking to science for the answers while rolling her
eyes at the sky's unlimited possibilities, are two of the smartest characters
to grace the silver screen since Indiana Jones and his father.  These agents
work on mysterious cases known as X-files, dealing with the paranormal
(bigfoot, the Loch Ness monster, aliens).  This time, it is the cover-up of an
alien virus which has been dormant on our planet since the ice age that has
Mulder ticked.  Just why is the government hiding the fact that a little boy
(Lucas Black) was killed by some mysterious oil in North Texas?  Easy.  So
they, along with the aliens, can take over the world.  "These men have been
secretly negotiating a planned armageddon" says the shadowy Dr. Kurtsweil
(Martin Landau).
  When this information, along with the discovery that the bodies found in the
aftermath of the bombing of a Dallas building weren't killed by the explosion,
but by an unknown massive infection, including the intended suicide of a highly
ranked FBI agent (Terry O'Quinn), this sets Mulder and Scully to the truth, if
they can find it.  
  Okay, so X-Files doesn't really deal with space.  The action takes place on
Earth, and there are no ray guns or laser beams.  But, this movie is so smart
and fascinating, I totally forgot about all that nonsense, since the thought of
an unknown virus stalking this planet and everyone on it and the government
behind it is such a nifty idea, and scary.
  Mulder and Scully are likely to find the truth (I won't tell if they do, or
if they will have to wait for the sequel, do out in theathers in summer 2000,
after the show ends, appropriately titled Invasion), but, getting there is half
the fun, for us, the audience, anyways.  We movie lovers are use to the
mindless sci-fi mumbo jumbo I was refering to earlier.  But, with X-Files
aboard, space is finally becoming a clearer frontier, full of great things to
come.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1998, PG-13, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
Starring: David Duchovny (Special Agent Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Special
Agent Dana Scully), Martin Landou (Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil), William B. Davis (The
Cigarette-Smoking Man); written by Chris Carter, Frank Spotnitz; produced by
Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim; directed by Rob Bowman; based on the television
series created by Chris Carter.
Seen June 20, 1998 at 12:00 a.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY),
theater #1, with Chris Wessell using Hoyt's Cinema Cash. [theater rating: ***:
good sound and picture, average seats]
        Most movie versions of TV shows are usually based on old, canceled series,
not on-going ones. Therefore, "The X-Files: Fight The Future" poses a dilemma
since it's not so much inspired by the popular show, as it is an extension of
it. Not being a fan of the show, am I qualified to view the film fairly, since
I have little background on the basic scenario? Yes I am, because as a film
critic I must remain unbiased before viewing anything, and in this case my
unfamiliarity allowed me to see the film completely within its context. What I
saw was a terrific thriller trapped behind a confusing, sloppy script.
        The story is basically self-contained, but many of the details are rooted in
the series, which allows the film to take certain liberties it probably
wouldn't have (or shouldn't have) had it been a completely original concept.
For example, the basic essentials such as characterization of the two leads
are virtually non-existent, nor much of, if any, definition of the "X-Files"
division itself. It's difficult to sympathize for characters we are never
formally introduced to while working for a covert operation we're not given
any background on. FBI special agents Fox Mulder (Duchovny) and Dana Scully
(Anderson), are presented as though we're already familiar with them, and
their initial case involving the bombing of a federal building seems like just
another episode in their continuing adventures.
        But it wouldn't be a movie if something unusual didn't happen to shake things
up. The first two scenes sketch out the  supernatural elements at play. These
scenes depict some kind of alien encounter with earthlings over time,
portrayed in a generic manner. We get slimy, violent creatures jumping out of
shadows, loss of innocent humans, and a subtle establishment of how powerful
the extra-terrestrial is (its virus lives on thousands of years after its
death). The scenes are shot well enough to be suspenseful, but it's really no
different than countless other sci-fi movies, especially the "Alien" series.
        Mulder and Scully manage to safely evacuate a building from a terrorist bomb
(which is discovered in the typical "accidental" manner), but instead of being
rewarded, they are separated because they've learned there's a connection
between the alien's revival and the bombing. Here, the script is crafted in
such a way that we are able to put some of the clues together ourselves,
instead of having the characters figure it out through coincidences and lucky
breaks. It's clear a conspiracy is unfolding, which creates for a good sense
of mystery, and it's not too difficult to follow.... at first.
        More characters and plot elements begin to crop up as the film shifts to the
second act. As is the case with all conspiracy stories, a shady character must
come into play to provide our heroes with insights and tips they wouldn't and
couldn't have gotten anywhere else. Martin Landou co-stars as this film's
rendition of that character - Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil, a man with conspiracy
theories so fantastic he must be either a raving lunatic or a genius.
Kurtzweil is Mulder's "Deep Throat," always providing him with clues in dark,
steamy, wet alleyways, about the alien project and a plot to take over the
world. Kurtzweil's theories and the clues he drops are interesting, but
described in such vague manners the story quickly becomes hard to swallow and
very confusing. The characters can't keep track of who's who and what's what,
so how can we be expected to?
        The great thing about conspiracies is the fact they can be woven with such
intricacy and yet still make sense in the right hands. It is in this aspect
that the film is severely flawed, since there doesn't seem to be any motive
behind it all. We do encounter the people behind the massive plot Mulder and
Scully are trying to break, but the villains just aren't vile enough. They
supposedly wield tremendous global power, but how they got that power and how
they use it is never explained. At times they are afraid of being exposed by
Mulder and Scully, and yet they clue them into the big scheme. None of the
conspirators have genuine emotion, they seem to be simply going through
motions they cannot explain, resist, or justify.
        Surprisingly, as complex as the story is, the film still manages to work at
least as a big-budget popcorn flick. The various sub-plots allow the film to
focus more on individual scenes and conflicts rather than the final payoff.
The result is back-to-back chase scenes, hiding scenes, scenes of miraculous
revelation, and the special effects to tie them all together. On the surface
they suffice simply as of-the-moment thrills, but upon closer inspection they
really aren't anything intelligent. All the time the film spends on having
Mulder and Scully run and hide might have been better used to develop the
story instead of the superficial action.
        And perhaps this is why the film falls just short of greatness. It keeps us
guessing with its complex story, but it still feels the need to dumb itself
down with melodrama. The final act clinches this as it's a life-or-death
situation for both of the characters that involves act after act and feat
after feat of sheer luck and coincidence. The climax doesn't have nearly the
impact it should as it's really just an exaggerated version of the mini-
climaxes that occur throughout the film. And in the end almost nothing seems
to have been resolved, it's as if the entire story existed for the ending. In
fact, when the closing credits began to roll, someone in the audience yelled
out, "That's it?!"
        It's clear "The X-Files: Fight The Future" was made with the right intention,
that is, to be a good movie. The film is full of possibilities, original
ideas, and an overall sense of depth, but why does it feel the need to cop-out
when it comes to executing its resources?


Author
Tim Voon
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner,
William B. Davis, Armin Mueller-Stahl, John Neville, Terry O'Quinn
Director: Rob Bowman
Producers: Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim
Screenplay: Chris Carter
There is no corporate conspiracy between the Uranians and certain
government groups, to re-populate the planet Earth. Nor is there a
mutated alien virus hidden beneath the ice caps of Antartica, ready to
emerge to infect humanity and transform the host into gestation pods for
the creation of a new species. There isn't, nor will there ever be a FBI
agent as paranoid as Fox Mulder or as sexy as Dana Scully. It is also
unlikely that these two uncanny heroes will get close enough to kiss
again, until perhaps, their next feature movie.
After stating all the unlikely-hoods, the likely-hoods are that if you
are not an X-Files fan, which I am not, you may actually enjoy the
movie. So what has made the X-Files such a hugely popular syndicate
series. That is a difficult question and there is no answer, except for
some strange reason, the public enjoys watching aliens possess humans,
kidnap humans, mutilate humans, infect humans, digest humans  which
just about covers every episode of the X-Files. This is purely
observational, from someone who has never watched a full episode, but
the adverts say it all.
So what made me like a movie about subject material, I don't even like
watching on TV? Well I guess that eerie opening tune was catchy and sent
tingles down my spine, and the awkward chemistry between Mulder and
Scully was quite electrifying. Pity a stupid bee had to sting her as the
sexual tension mounted, leaving more than a love bite. The question now
is will I watch the series, because I liked the movie. Probably not, but
I will certainly look out for the next movie.

Author
Alex Fung
THE X-FILES (Fox - 1998)
Starring David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau,
  Armin Mueller-Stahl, Blythe Danner, William B. Davis, John Neville
Screenplay by Chris Carter
Produced by Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim
Directed by Rob Bowman
Running time: 120 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   I feel obliged to begin by clarifying that I'm not exactly an ardent
   follower of THE X-FILES, the acclaimed Fox sci-fi television series
   which began its run five years ago as a bottom-dweller in the Neilsen
   ratings only to steadily gain momentum and evolve from a beloved cult
   fave into a outright mainstream phenomenon and bonafide international
   hit.  I've watched about a dozen episodes of the TV show in full --
   easily less than the typical rabid fan, but sufficient to be familiar
   with the histories and adventures of FBI agents Scully and Mulder.
   (Additionally, one of my current occupational hazards finds me privy
   to amusingly avid, earnest discussion and reverential dissection of
   the storylines for such TV series as THE X-FILES, STAR TREK: VOYAGER,
   and BABYLON 5 -- in short, I couldn't get away from the show if I
   tried.)  In all fairness, Chris Carter's creation is probably one of
   the most imaginative of today's television shows, and has
   demonstrably struck a chord with the highly-coveted 15 - 24
   demographic, making it an optimal candidate for translation to the
   big screen.
   However, as a film THE X-FILES (the FIGHT THE FUTURE subtitle
   featured so prominently in its marketing campaign incidentally
   appears nowhere during the title credits) faces some unique
   challenges.  As with all television series-turned-cinematic events,
   it's required to present sufficient backstory in order for newcomers
   to get up to speed while still remaining palatable to the faithful.
   The situation here, however, is even more of a precarious balancing
   act -- as a rare TV series to make the leap to the silver screen in
   the midst of its ongoing run, it's faced with the obstacle of
   unraveling its intricately-woven storyline to a point where a
   satisfying film conclusion can be achieved, yet is obligated to leave
   enough plot points unanswered in order to keep fans hooked for the
   upcoming television season.
   As such, the film fares about as well as can be expected.  Familiar
   regulars of the series such as The Lone Gunmen (Dean Haglund, Bruce
   Harwood and Tom Braidwood), The Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B.
   Davis), The Well-Manicured Man (John Neville), and assistant FBI
   director Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) are trotted out for their
   obligatory appearances, while the film infuses prodigious veteran
   talents like Martin Landau, Armin Mueller-Stahl and Blythe Danner in
   newly-conceived roles.
   Ultimately, however, the addition of new blood matters little, for
   THE X-FILES is most assuredly a vehicle for the continuing mythos of
   agents Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) and Fox Mulder (David
   Duchovny) as they strive to uncover the truth behind the sinister
   government conspiracy to discredit evidence pertaining to the
   existence of extraterrestrial life here on Earth.  Resuming where the
   '97-'98 TV season cliffhanger left off, the film finds our intrepid
   duo struggling against a powerful faction of master manipulators to
   overcome roadblocks thrown up from every direction as their own
   gravely somber interpersonal chemistry continues to evolve.  (One
   rather disingenuous subplot falls victim to the awkward circumstances
   constraining the film -- while it's always a stretch to envision one
   of the protagonists surrendering the good fight, it's virtually
   impossible to swallow here given that the character threatening to
   quit is the same one we'll see on the tube in September when the
   series resumes.)
   It's perhaps inappropriate to dismiss the film as simply a
   larger-scaled version of one of the TV episodes given the presence of
   strikingly atypical elements which are clearly aimed to broaden its
   mainstream appeal.  Unlike its dour tube counterpart, THE X-FILES is
   notably more jokey, with Scully and Mulder trading the occasional
   tongue-in-cheek quip and droll one-liner.  (The rooftop scene which
   introduces our heroes is particularly self-conscious, calculatingly
   playing riffs almost as if directly out of a buddy movie.)  The sense
   of humour isn't particularly clever and not exactly welcome, although
   I did appreciate the light-hearted jab at Mr. Duchovny's legendary
   expressive qualities.
   Where the film differs the most from the TV series is in its usage of
   extravagant set pieces, including the bombing of a Dallas federal
   office tower (in shades of the infamous 1995 Oklahoma City event), a
   cat-and-mouse helicopter chase through cornfields (an obvious homage
   to NORTH BY NORTHWEST), and even an action finale in the snowy
   reaches of Antarctica.  These showy sequences, competently staged in
   the film, are virtually impossible to pull off under the budgetary
   and time constraints of a TV series but fit quite nicely within the
   scope of a summer event film.  Whether or not they properly coalesce
   with a piece like THE X-FILES, however, is a matter of debate.
   The show has always been at its best as an enigmatic, paranoiac
   meditative with a pervasive atmosphere of mistrust, and consequently
   it seems a bit off-kilter to witness the film as opened-up to such a
   degree.  The small-scaled, low-key approach employed in the TV series
   is most effective in conveying its grim, creepy tone; it's no
   coincidence that the scenes in the film which remain most truthful to
   the spirit of the series -- the shady exchanges between Mulder and
   Dr. Kurtzweil in the darkened alleys -- are the most effective.  With
   THE X-FILES, bigger is not necessarily better.
   It's also a bit disconcerting to witness how gleefully THE X-FILES
   embraces the slam-bam mentality of the typical Hollywood action
   flick.  The novelty of the television series is that it's a show
   propelled by ideas and imagination, and yet in the film we're reduced
   to watching Mulder heroically charging through the snow like a
   scrawnier, dapper Arnold Schwarzenegger clone to come to the rescue
   of imprisoned damsel-in-distress Scully, a perturbing step backward
   from the equal status the partners unquestionably share as TV
   characters.  If joining the Hollywood brethren on the big screen
   implies that THE X-FILES is going to hereinafter *emulate* them at
   the cost of its foreboding signature style, perhaps it's best to stay
   on its home turf.
   Bridging the fifth and sixth seasons of the TV series, the film
   version of THE X-FILES ultimately resolves very little of its
   outstanding mysteries, as it logically must.  As the film concludes,
   in many ways we've traveled shockingly little from where we were as
   the opening credits rolled, and yet it's not a dissatisfactory watch,
   liberally sprinkling adventure, conflict, and verve into its mix of
   aliens, conspiracies, and overcoats.  Given the involved nature of
   its storyline, it likely plays plays best to those who have invested
   much into its characters.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     How thick do you like your intrigue?  How much ambiguity can you
stand?  When you think of conspiratorial government agencies, do you
reject the easy targets like the CIA and focus instead on more sinister
ones like FEMA?  And finally, how successful are you at suspending
disbelief for two solid hours?
     Since reviews of this movie demand that the critic state his or
her relative familiarity with the television series upon which the
movie is based, let me confess up-front that I have seen only one
episode.  In the Museum of Radio and Television in New York - a
must-see attraction - I watched an early episode as a research project
before seeing the movie.  The television show was more cerebral and
less dependent on gore and special effects than the film, but they were
both confusingly complex by design.
     Starting in North Texas, where I was born, the story opens in an
ice age in 35,000 B.C. with two cave men discovering a frozen alien.
The story quickly jumps ahead to the present where FBI agents Fox
Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) have been
reassigned to investigate terrorist bombings since the X-Files
investigation has been closed.
     Duchovny, whose "gift" as an actor is that his face is always a
blank slate, appears at one point to be trying to stare down a large
bomb set to explode.  It eventually goes off so that director Rob
Bowman can make the film into a big budget action picture as required
for a summer release.  And why was the skyscraper completely
demolished?  To get rid of some already dead bodies.  Why these bodies
were not disposed of in a thousand easier ways is one of many illogical
questions that a normal viewer, as opposed to a die-hard fan, might
want to ask.
     "I have a hunch that whatever you find can't be categorized or
easily referenced," Mulder says more than once to his sidekick, Scully.
Actually, the entire story fits under those rubrics.  Although the plot
may be impenetrable for non-fans, the movie from beginning to end is
absolutely fascinating even if not very often interesting.  The
labyrinthine plot got so outlandish at times that our audience started
laughing at it.
     The setup involves a killer virus, an alien civilization, human
conspirators, and an OB/GYN named Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil (Martin Landau),
who has cracked part of the vast mystery.  ("You told me you had the
answers," complains an angry Mulder.  "I don't have them all," replies
Dr. Kurtzweil.  Actually, even the entire Library of Congress couldn't
hold all of them.)
     A typical scene has a dark limo on a black night with an evil man
in a dark suit kidnapping Mulder for obscure reasons.  Periodically,
spooky creatures turn up to spice things up, and the movie becomes
ALIENS-lite.
     Among the many joys of the film is that we are able to deduce that
Hertz must have a rent-a-tractor outlet in Antarctica.  You can check
one out without a reservation and go joy riding alone across the vast
frozen landscape.  And when you get tired of driving, you can try your
hand at spelunking.

Author
Christopher Null
     Little more than an expensive, flashy, and painfully drawn-out season
finale, THE X FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE has little chance to draw any new fans
to the TV show, if this is the best that can be done.
     The movie opens with Agents Mulder (Duchovny) and Scully (Anderson)
finding themselves on a new assignment after the closing of the X-files.  Of
course, through a bizarre coincidence, their very first assignment leads
them to uncover a conspiracy involving the hiding of bodies of some would-be
aliens.  The plot turns alternately confusing and ridiculous after that.
     It's surprising that a TV show which leaves so much to the imagination
does so little for it in feature film version.  At two hours, X FILES is
really pretty boring.  I found myself falling asleep in the especially dull
first half, only to be revived later by one thing after another that *JUST
DIDN'T MAKE ANY SENSE!*
     For example, if the bad guys went to so much trouble to *blow up a
building* in order to hide four bodies, why were the bodies recovered in
perfect condition?  Why does the road the agents follow on gut instinct
alone lead directly to the bad guys?  Why did a bee wait 24 hours in
Scully's coat before stinging her?  Why does the Syndicate want to destroy
the world - and if it has the power (imminently displayed in the film), then
why don't they just do it!?  Then again, if a vaccine to this destruction
exists (again, displayed in the film), then why don't the good guys just
release *that* into the world?
     Well, you won't find any answers to questions like these in the film. 
In fact, the movie goes a long way toward undoing the mysteries that the TV
show has built up over the last five years.  If this is a portent for the
way things are going to go next season, I'm not sure I'm interested.
     Still, I am a fan, and there's enough juice to sustain a fan's interest
for awhile.  It ain't much, but watching Scully and Mulder inch closer
romantically, and seeing some cool special effects is worth the price of
admission.
     (Recommended only for fans of the show; casual viewers needn't bother.)
Director: Rob Bowman
Producer: Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim
Writer: Chris Carter
Starring: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner,
Armin Meuller-Stahl
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I had never seen an episode of the super successful "The
advantage--sort of like the guy who goes to "The Truman
Show" before seeing a trailer or commercial and is as much
in the dark as the title character.  I did, however, zip through
one of the sci-fi novels based on the series, written by
Kevin J. Anderson, "The X-Files: Ground Zero," enough to
know that an X-file is an FBI document which details a
strange incident, one which the FBI does not really want
solved. "Ground Zero" is about a nuclear weapons researcher
who is burned to a cinder when he opens a special delivery
package with a Honolulu postmark and finds a box of
mysterious black powder inside.  How dumb can a brilliant
scientist be to open a box which does not have clearance and
gets through a high-security zone?  The scientists in the
movie "The X-Files: Fight the Future," are not so dumb at all:
in fact they are using the information they have for a global
conspiracy to  gain emergency powers not enjoyed by any
U.S. president since the lesser-known Truman.  In doing so,
however, they become part of a plot that is ever more
complicated than the supernatural--but quite accessible--
"Ground Zero."
   Though "The X-Files" has already enjoyed a five-year run
on TV where it rose to the number one spot in Canada, there
is a place for a yet another version: on the big screen.  Given
the high-tech accoutrements and the exotic, James-Bond-like
locations, the story can exploit its advantages , particularly
since "The X-Files: Fight the Future" hops the globe from
Washington to Bethesda, from England to Antarctica, from
Tunisia to Dallas.  The focus of this and all other X-files
narratives is on two FBI agents, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny)
and his partner, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson).  The two
agents have (pardon the oxymoron) a platonic chemistry,
willing to do anything to continue working together but never
developing an intimate relationship.  At one point, though,
Chris Carter--who created the eminent TV series on
September 10, 1993 and who has written the screenplay--puts
a romantic spark into the team who are about to kiss (to the
disbelieving gasps of the audience) when a busy-bee
schedule prompts them to drop this bit of whimsy.  Regulars
to the series know that the two are distinct opposites in one
way: Mulder, having once witnessed the abduction of his
sisters by extraterrestrials, believes in supernatural answers to
unexplained incidents; Scully, who gave up a medical practice
for the more exciting career of special agent, is a strict
rationalist who subjects every such occurrence to the
demands of science.
   The film opens in northern Texas in 35,000 B.C. as a
couple of fire-bearing aborigines who don't look at all like
Native Americans explore a cave only to find that they have
activated a deadly, long-buried force.  Since the state did not
have capital punishment to threaten criminals at the time, a
couple of murders result.  Cut to the present- day area in the
American southwest and we find a 12-year-old in similar
trouble for letting his curiosity run wild in a crevice near his
home.  When the dead lad mysteriously disappears only to be
found later, a victim this time of a terrorist bomb in a Dallas
federal building, agents Mulder and Scully pursue the case
until they begin messing around with what some
agencies of the U.S. government do not want the public to
know.  Mulder and Scully are caught on the one hand by a
bureau's need to use them as scapegoats and on the other
by a mysterious cabal of cryptic characters.  These individuals
include an OB-GYN physician who knows too much (Martin
Landau); a classy British dude known throughout the series
as The Well-Manicured Man (John Neville); a high-level
government investigator, Cassidy (Blythe Danner); and 
Strughold, (Armin Mueller-Stahl) whose European accent
signals us that he must be one of the bad guys.
   Turning up regularly at the headquarters of the conspirators
gives the agents the opportunity to save each other's lives
from time to time, though we wonder how agent Mulder was
able to arrange transportation from Washington to the
Antarctic given that the FBI wants to stop him.  "The X-Files:
Fight the Future" has a good deal of humor provided by the
conspiracy-fighting partners but does not try to be campy
despite the many opportunities for director Rob Bowman to
steer the narrative in that direction.  The big screen is
well-utilized by the special effects people of Amalgamated
Dynamics, a company in the business of scaring us by
showing the horrific disfigurement that a lowly virus can
cause, the effects of fire on cave walls, and a couple of
stylized scenes involving the violent murder of good citizens
by creatures imprisoned in giant cakes of ice.  
   According to some high-school kids who are groupies of the
five-year-old series, Chris Carter has done everything to keep
his plot under wraps until the picture opens, like a Woody
Allen or a final-show Seinfeld who uses such secrecy to drum
up a larger potential audience.  Carter throws a lot of details
at us during the two-hour sci-fi fantasy, but his need to set us
up for sequels is so strong that nothing is finally resolved.  In
fact, the audience might be hard-put to figure out what's going
on, since editor Stephen Mark's rapid cutting away of Ward
Russell's impressive images ends each scene just at the
point of explanation. Chris Carter has succeeded so well in
keeping the plot under wraps that even after you watch the
imposing imagery, you leave the theater wondering who's
conspiring against whom for what purpose.

Author
Mikel J. Koven
 I think that saying that The X-Files is one of this summer's most
anticipated films is safe.  For five years, "The X-Files" television
show has developed a dedicated fan culture, whose rabid devotion to the
series rivals that of "Star Trek" fans.
 The premise of both the movie and the television series is two FBI
agents who investigate the paranormal; Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) is
the avid believer whose quest to find the truth about extraterrestrial
life borders on the paranoid, and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is the
scientific skeptic trying to find a rational explanation to Mulder's
flights of fancy.
 Outlining the plot of The X-Files movie is virtually impossible, since
to be general would result in confusion, yet to be specific would give
too much away.  Nevertheless, I will try.  "The black ooze," and
extraterrestrial, virus-like substance is threatening Earth.  A "shadow
government" is aware of this, but tries to cover-up the alien
existence.  Mulder and Scully know "the truth is out there," and so try
to expose both the invasion and the cover-up.
 There are three central questions I have heard asked about this movie:
 1.  Will those who don't watch the series be able to understand the
movie?  Yes.  Isolated as an individual text, The X-Files can stand
alone.  They have given enough background for anyone, familiar with the
show or not, to understand the movie.  Although some of the secondary
characters' histories may confuse the uninitiated, those characters are
not essential to the film.  This is a major problem: they trot out token
secondary characters from the series out for an appearance and then
disappear just as quickly.
 Why bring Superintendent Skinner into the picture in the first place,
and then have him sat silently on an FBI internal affairs committee?
Why bring in "The Lone Gunmen," three computer geek conspiracy
theorists, for an even briefer appearance?  These characters are
recurrent on the series, and their appearance in the film was met with
whoops from the audience (suggesting their popularity among fans -
actually most of the audience could pass for "the Lone Gunmen").  Still,
then they vanish just as quickly.
 2.  The television show never gives us any answers.  Will the movie
actually explain some things?  Yes.  In The X-Files we get a fairly
complete history of "the black ooze," what it is and what it wants.  We
finally get some understanding of the motivations behind the "shadow
government."  There are even some subtle tie-ins with contemporary
UFO-ology, including the "greys" and the Roswell Crash of 1947.
 3.  Is the movie any good?  No.  The X-Files is a dreadful movie and
shows some fundamental problems with writer/creator Chris Carter's
talents and the relationship between cinema and television.
 First off, the screenplay by series creator Chris Carter is sloppy and
cliched.  After approximately forty-five minutes (the length of a
television episode minus the commercials), the pace drops to a snail's
crawl.  Not long after that point, when Carter attempts to answer some
questions we have had about the series, we wish he had not.  The
explanations are so trite and ridiculous that one would have preferred
it had Carter not explained quite so much.  I am willing to suspend my
disbelief a fair bit, but the absurdity Carter wants me to swallow was
just too much.  Breaking the suspension of disbelief destroys the movie
- and listening to other fans leave the cinema, maybe the series too.
 The explanations are not only absurd, they are tired and unoriginal.
The extraterrestrials breed and gestate like those from the Alien
series, and their craft looks like a leftover set piece from
Independence Day.  Note that the Alien movies, ID4, and The X-Files are
all from 20thCentury Fox - a studio that is beginning to cannibalize
itself I think.
 The X-Files is noteworthy for being the only movie based on a
television series to be produced while the series was still running.  In
comparing the movie and television series certain aspects of the
respective media emerge.
 The avoidance of the series to answer the questions it raised annoyed
and frustrated many people.  However, I rather liked that about the
series.  Television allows you to impose as much, or as little, meaning
on a show as you want.  It is the proverbial "blank screen" which we
project our minds on.  Meaning on television is open and ambiguous; it
is the nature of the medium.
 Cinema, on the other hand, is the opposite.  It projects onto us the
filmmakers mind.  We can, in some films, fill the textual gaps
ourselves, but that almost never happens in an American film.  Meaning,
in cinema, needs to be self-contained and determined.
 So, when The X-Files made that jump from small to big screen, Carter
needed to take into consideration the differences in the medium as
well.  He did not.  By making explicit, what the television show left
implicit, Carter reveals the limits of his creativity and skill.
 When they say that "fans" make a TV show, it is not far from the
truth.  On television, fan culture must impose its meanings on the text
because there is nothing there.  How true that is when we see the
"explicit" X-Files - there is nothing there.
--------------C6203DBE2EE2D65EFCC41C3B
Movie Review
by Mikel J. Koven

I think that saying that The X-Files is one of this summer's most
anticipated films is safe. For five years, "The X-Files" television
show has developed a dedicated fan culture, whose rabid devotion to the
series rivals that of "Star Trek" fans.
The premise of both the movie and the television series is two
FBI agents who investigate the paranormal; Fox Mulder (David Duchovny)
is the avid believer whose quest to find the truth about extraterrestrial
life borders on the paranoid, and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is the
scientific skeptic trying to find a rational explanation to Mulder's flights
of fancy.
Outlining the plot of The X-Files movie is virtually impossible,
since to be general would result in confusion, yet to be specific would
give too much away. Nevertheless, I will try. "The black ooze,"
and extraterrestrial, virus-like substance is threatening Earth.
A "shadow government" is aware of this, but tries to cover-up the alien
existence. Mulder and Scully know "the truth is out there," and so
try to expose both the invasion and the cover-up.
There are three central questions I have heard asked about this
movie:
1. Will those who don't watch the series be able to understand
the movie? Yes. Isolated as an individual text, The X-Files
can stand alone. They have given enough background for anyone, familiar
with the show or not, to understand the movie. Although some of the
secondary characters' histories may confuse the uninitiated, those characters
are not essential to the film. This is a major problem: they trot
out token secondary characters from the series out for an appearance and
then disappear just as quickly.
Why bring Superintendent Skinner into the picture in the first
place, and then have him sat silently on an FBI internal affairs committee?
Why bring in "The Lone Gunmen," three computer geek conspiracy theorists,
for an even briefer appearance? These characters are recurrent on
the series, and their appearance in the film was met with whoops from the
audience (suggesting their popularity among fans - actually most of the
audience could pass for "the Lone Gunmen"). Still, then they vanish
just as quickly.
2. The television show never gives us any answers.
Will the movie actually explain some things? Yes. In The X-Files
we get a fairly complete history of "the black ooze," what it is and what
it wants. We finally get some understanding of the motivations behind
the "shadow government." There are even some subtle tie-ins with
contemporary UFO-ology, including the "greys" and the Roswell Crash of
1947.
3. Is the movie any good? No. The X-Files is
a dreadful movie and shows some fundamental problems with writer/creator
Chris Carter's talents and the relationship between cinema and television.
First off, the screenplay by series creator Chris Carter is sloppy
and cliched. After approximately forty-five minutes (the length of
a television episode minus the commercials), the pace drops to a snail's
crawl. Not long after that point, when Carter attempts to answer
some questions we have had about the series, we wish he had not.
The explanations are so trite and ridiculous that one would have preferred
it had Carter not explained quite so much. I am willing to suspend
my disbelief a fair bit, but the absurdity Carter wants me to swallow was
just too much. Breaking the suspension of disbelief destroys the
movie - and listening to other fans leave the cinema, maybe the series
too.
The explanations are not only absurd, they are tired and unoriginal.
The extraterrestrials breed and gestate like those from the Alien series,
and their craft looks like a leftover set piece from Independence Day.
Note that the Alien movies, ID4, and The X-Files are all from 20thCentury
Fox - a studio that is beginning to cannibalize itself I think.
The X-Files is noteworthy for being the only movie based on a
television series to be produced while the series was still running.
In comparing the movie and television series certain aspects of the respective
media emerge.
The avoidance of the series to answer the questions it raised
annoyed and frustrated many people. However, I rather liked that
about the series. Television allows you to impose as much, or as
little, meaning on a show as you want. It is the proverbial "blank
screen" which we project our minds on. Meaning on television is open
and ambiguous; it is the nature of the medium.
Cinema, on the other hand, is the opposite. It projects
onto us the filmmakers mind. We can, in some films, fill the textual
gaps ourselves, but that almost never happens in an American film.
Meaning, in cinema, needs to be self-contained and determined.
So, when The X-Files made that jump from small to big screen,
Carter needed to take into consideration the differences in the medium
as well. He did not. By making explicit, what the television
show left implicit, Carter reveals the limits of his creativity and skill.
When they say that "fans" make a TV show, it is not far from
the truth. On television, fan culture must impose its meanings on
the text because there is nothing there. How true that is when we
see the "explicit" X-Files - there is nothing there.
Rating: * (out of four)

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner, 
      William B. Davis, Armin Mueller-Stahl, John Neville, Terry O'Quinn
Director: Rob Bowman
Producers: Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim
Screenplay: Chris Carter
Cinematography: Ward Russell
Music: Mark Snow
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     There are two kinds of viewers for THE X-FILES movie:  those have 
seen at least a few episodes of the TV series and those who have never 
watched it.  I am a member of the latter group, so that's the 
perspective from which this review is written.  As a result, I cannot 
assess how the film will appeal to a die-hard follower of the program.  
But, for the "uneducated" movie-goer, THE X-FILES offers two hours of 
solid entertainment.  (Of course, one unanswered question is how many 
non-X FILES aficionados will exhibit sufficient interest to venture into 
a theater showing this picture.)
     Transferring a television program to the big screen has become a 
routine procedure for a film industry starved for ideas, but this is a 
rare occasion when the movies continue the adventures begun on the small 
screen, with no re-casting involved.  To date, the only TV-to-motion 
picture series to successfully make the transfer is STAR TREK, which 
brought the tales of Captain Kirk and his crew to the theaters, then 
eventually transferred command to Captain Picard after STAR TREK: THE 
NEXT GENERATION went off the air.  Twentieth Century Fox is hoping THE 
wrinkle:  the television series is still going strong.
     In interviews, writer/producer/series creator Chris Carter has 
stated that his goal with THE X-FILES was to make a movie that could 
stand on its own.  There's no question that he has succeeded.  The 
script can be followed by someone with literally no previous knowledge 
of the characters or situations.  FBI special agents Fox Mulder (David 
Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) are introduced as any 
motion protagonists might be, and we're presented with bits and pieces 
of information about their background through cleverly constructed 
dialogue.  (By "cleverly," I mean that these passages don't cry out, 
"Character exposition!")  Although I'm told that the storyline picks up 
where the last season of the TV program left off, there's no sense that 
new viewers are entering in the middle of things.  The only obvious 
concession to the ongoing series is the ending, which includes several 
hooks that can be used to launch stories in the upcoming season.
     As the film opens, the X-Files special unit of the FBI has been 
disbanded.  Mulder and Scully have exchanged their investigations of 
things paranormal and extraterrestrial for more mundane matters such as 
terrorism.  But, when an Oklahoma City-like bomb explosion destroys a 
$45 million building in Dallas, Mulder and Scully appear to be the FBI's 
first choice for fall guys.  Their research to clear their names reveals 
what could be the tip of a massive cover-up of alien activity on Earth.  
And, as their search stretches from Texas to Washington D.C. to 
Antarctica, they come face-to-face with the dark secret that endangers 
the future of the human species.
     Plot-wise, THE X-FILES bears more than a passing resemblance to 
1996's alien invasion/conspiracy movie, THE ARRIVAL.  (In fairness to 
THE X-FILES, the TV program preceded THE ARRIVAL by several years, and 
the latter probably owes more to the former than the other way around.)  
Although things get sloppy near the end, when several story holes are 
ignored or ineffectively plugged, the script as a whole exhibits an 
uncommon intelligence for this type of movie.  In addition, director Rob 
Bowman (who has helmed a number of the TV episodes) maintains a fairly 
high level of tension as the complexities of the multi-layered plot 
mount.  The movie is perhaps a little too long; cutting ten or fifteen 
minutes would have made for a better focused adventure.
     It's not hard to understand the appeal of Mulder and Scully.  Both 
are competent, intelligent, and resourceful, and their different 
approaches to their jobs (he's a believer; she's a skeptic) enable them 
to compliment one another.  It also doesn't hurt that they're both 
likable and neither is hard on the eyes.  Actors David Duchovny (who's 
no stranger to movies; his most recent foray being PLAYING GOD) and 
Gillian Anderson (who is more familiar to viewers of the small screen 
than the large one) are both accomplished and entirely believable in 
these roles.  Of course, we would expect no less of them, since they 
have been inhabiting these fictitious shells for five years.  The 
chemistry between them is palpable, blending camaraderie and respect 
with a little subtle romance.  
     The supporting cast is comprised of faces from the TV show, such as 
William B. Davis' mysterious cigarette-smoking figure and John 
Neville's "Well Manicured Man", and movie actors who are around 
for one-off appearances.  These include Blythe Danner as the by-the-
book FBI assistant director who is looking into the Dallas bombing, 
Martin Landau as a conspiracy theorist who occasionally feeds 
hints to Mulder about what's going on, Armin Mueller-Stahl as the leader 
of the cartel behind the global betrayal, and Terry O'Quinn as Mulder and 
Scully's (temporary) boss.
     Having seen the movie, it's easy for me to comprehend why so many 
people are enamored with the series.  Although a lot of the material 
explored in THE X-FILES isn't new or revolutionary, the style of 
presentation and the quality of the writing set this above most other 
conspiracy theory/alien invasion pictures.  I won't claim that the 
experience of having watched this film will suddenly convert me into a 
weekly viewer of the TV show, but at least now I'm aware of what awaits 
if I choose to catch an episode.  In a summer that has been 
characterized by over-hyped and largely pointless big-budget films, THE 
offerings.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Martin Thomas
    There's this Sci-Fi tv show my roommate and I used to scramble to
watch every weekend and I can't remember the name of it.
The leads were a man and a woman, and I remember that their relationship
was platonic. The woman was a sexy redhead and the guy
was more normal looking than your average lantern-jawed action hero. The
premise of the show was that every week they would go
and investigate a new paranormal phenomenon. Yeah, that was it! And the
name of the show was...uh...uh...
...Aw, damn.
I'm not leaving here until I remember.
   THE X-FILES movie picks up where the highly popular tv show leaves
off with the continuing adventures of FBI agents
Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully (Gillian Anderson). This time they're
on the trail of a conspiracy to cover up the existence of a
prehistoric virus that's connected to aliens. Being that the show is
heavily centered around secrets I won't reveal any more of the plot,
other than to say it asks as many questions as it answers.
   Like the movie STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT, the story is the conclusion
to a season finale. One big concern has been that
non-viewers may get confused, but let assuage that fear right now. You
don't need to be a regular viewer to understand THE X-FILES
movie...you just need to be a regular viewer to enjoy THE X-FILES movie.
    The two movies I would probably most compare it to would be
CONSPIRACY THEORY and THE ARRIVAL, but it wouldn't be a
fair or favorable comparison. Despite how you may feel about either of
those movies, in terms of plot, pacing, dialogue and character
development they are out of THE X-FILES' league.
    The X-FILES is not so much a movie' as it is the latest of the new
genre of Movie/ Current TV Show hybrids (see also BEAVIS
&BUTTHEAD DO AMERICA; STAR TREK: GENERATIONS ). Like the others X- FILES
comes off as more of a two hour episode
with better production values and slower pacing.  While it does have the
look of a real' movie, its inexperience shows.
   The action sequences are shot at such close proximity that all you
can make out are indistinguishable flashes. It's lazy in its
characterizations, relying on the fact that you already know them well
enough from watching the show. Often I knew that phrases or
characters meant something important only by  how long the camera stayed
on them, the  audience's reaction or how dramatic the
music was.
     There's nothing clever or unique about the dialogue and, except for
an action scene near the end that takes place in the arctic, it's
very low on a main ingredient that even the worst summer movies have:
Cool parts!  Even the obligatory appearance of The Lone
Gunmen' is meaningless and gimmicky.
       Originally, I felt that I should exempt myself from reviewing THE
show...and believe me I've tried. I desperately want to like it. So many
of my friends, whose opinions I respect, love the show. I
don't know about you, but to me the only thing better than watching a
good show is talking about it the next day with friends.
   And don't mistake me for one of those people who don't like something
just because it's popular. Please! To me those people are
worse than  bandwagon-hoppers because they live under the delusion that
they're hipper and less manipulated.
    No, I've watched The X-Files about 12 times (how many chances would
you give a show you don't like?) and I've liked only 3
episodes...and from what I hear those episodes were anomalies. I think
that to like the show you maybe have to be open to a few
concepts such as:
David Duchovny as a good or charismatic actor-  With the notable
exceptions of his turns on THE LARRY SANDERS SHOW and
TWIN PEAKS, I've always found David Duchovny to be something of an
Eckerd's brand Richard Gere...and let's face it, even a top
shelf' Richard Gere is not always desirable. On a more personal note:
Duchovny physically reminds me of an ex- boss.  My only
enjoyment from the show used to be watching him get dissed and beat up
by the other agents.
Conspiracies! Conspiracies! Conspiracies!-  I'm probably one of the
least paranoid people you'll ever meet. I do, however, believe
that all professional sports are fixed' to one degree or another. I
also think our government is guilty of every corrupt thing they've
been accused of...EXCEPT covering up the existence of aliens.
Extraterrestrial beings inhabiting the Earth- We all look to the skies
for the answers we can't find here. Some find religion and
some, well...   Without putting you through a session in the Total
Perspective Vortex let me throw a few facts at you:   We are 500
light-seconds from the sun. The next nearest star to earth is 4.3
light-years away- something like 23,000
billion miles away!  Even traveling at one million miles an hour, it
would take more than 2,500 years to get
there. Despite the probability of  intelligent life on other planets,
any signal from any planet in the universe
broadcast in any direction is unlikely to be in the path of another
inhabited planet. Waiting for a signal
might require a wait longer than any life on any planet might last. If
we were to get a signal, the waves
carrying that signal left hundreds or thousands of years earlier and by
the time we tracked its source down,
the sending planet may no longer be habitable or even exist.
   An extraterrestrial would have better odds winning Lotto three times
in a row than finding Earth.
     If you think I don't see the absurdity of religiously watching
XENA: WARRIOR PRINCESS but not buying' THE X-FILES, you're
wrong. But shows like XENA, and even HIGHLANDER, aren't ashamed of their
cheesiness. They cut right to what's adventurous and
fun, and don't exert so much energy trying to convince everyone how
serious' they are.
   Don't tell me about X-FILES being tongue-in-cheek'. I know that some
of them are (like the 3 that I liked) but the majority are not.
After all, we are talking a bout a show that's won awards for Best Drama
as well as Actor(??) & Actress (okay,I admit she's pretty
damn good).
  I didn't say all of this to try to convince you to not like the show.
Being that it is a Sci-Fi genre movie, no critic can accurately
predict how you'll feel about it. THE X-FILES means something different
to each person. My goal was to give you an idea of the filter
you should use on my comments. If it helps to know, the theater I saw it
in was packed with X-fans', and they all seemed to dig it.
     Hey, "The truth is out there"...
    ...I'm just not sure you should pay $7 for what you see every week
for free.
 OH!! I just remembered the name of that tv show I was thinking of! It
was FRI--- What? Who said X-FILES?...No, no, it was
FRIDAY THE 13th: The TV Series!.

Author
John W. Collins
         F.B.I. special agents, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana
Scully (Gillian Anderson), search for that elusive "truth" each week
on the hit television show, "The X-Files."  Week after week, millions
tune- in to see the two delve into the strange and bizarre cases that
the rest of the bureau won't touch. While most of the cases they
investigate deal with unusual, and even sometimes supernatural,
phenomenon, the "guts" of the series deals with Fox Mulder's search
for proof of the existence of aliens, and the mysterious group of men
that will stop at nothing to prevent him, or the rest of the world,
from finding out "the truth." And now, Mulder and Scully's quest for
that "truth" moves to the next level, because...
        Series creator, Chris Carter, director Rob Bowman, and
Twentieth Century Fox, have brought the hugely popular television show
to the big screen with the release of THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE.
It must have been a fairly easy task (although I'm sure they would
disagree with me). They already had developed characters, a
relationship and history between those characters, a recognizable
framework for a story to be woven around, and millions of fans as a
built-in audience base. The only real question was whether or not non
fans could follow the film and enjoy it. The answer to that question
is, "yes" and "no."
         The film can be followed and enjoyed as a work standing on
its own, but, speaking as a fan, it must be like eating a bowl of
banana pudding after all the bananas are gone. You can enjoy the
pudding part, but you are kind of missing the whole point. Carter, who
wrote the screenplay, tries to let the uninitiated in on the fun with
bits of "background information" sprinkled throughout the dialogue,
but that really isn't enough. There are several situations throughout
the film that cannot be fully understood unless you are a fan. The
same is true with a handful of characters that pop up. Unless you have
watched the show, you will not know who they are, or what they are
doing there. 
 It may have been better to have had a script that dealt with a basic
"X-Files" story, instead of the series mythos. That would have pleased
the fans, and allowed X-Files "newbies" to get to know the characters,
and get a "feel" for the show. 
        Instead, the film opens where the season finale left off, to a
certain degree. None of the characters or the situations set up in
that episode remains except for the fact that the Cigarette-Smoking
Man has returned, and that the X-files have been shut down. The movie
starts with Mulder and Scully having been assigned  "normal" duties.
But as it often happens when this pair is involved, the "normal" has a
way of turning into something "paranormal," and soon the two find
themselves pulled into a conspiracy that threatens to wipe out life on
Earth as we know it. What follows is a two-hour television episode
with higher production values, bigger and more expensive special
effects, familiar supporting characters (to the fans anyway), and some
four-letter words that are not allowed on network television. 
        This film has the distinction of being the only movie based on
a prime-time television show  that will still be in production when
the networks start the new television season. But that is also its
greatest flaw. Since we already know that Mulder and Scully will have
new adventures this fall, we are not concerned with their well-being
throughout the movie, thus killing any suspense. In addition, we also
know that circumstances will only allow for just a small bit of that
"truth" that our heroes have been searching for to be revealed, and
that something will happen that will cause the X-files to be reopened.
Paramount may have had the right idea with its "Star Trek" features;
wait until the series finishes its t.v. run so you can have more
freedom with your characters and story lines.
        Another flaw is that the film doesn't play on its strongest
elements. One of the things that draws viewers to the show is its
creepiness. Some of the episodes are very scary. That comes from the
writing and the different, bizarre things that Scully and Mulder look
into. With a "mythos" script, you don't get to go explore those dark,
scary places. All you mainly have to deal with is intrigue. 
        But what really brings viewers back each week are the
characters of Mulder and Scully. Viewers want to see these two
characters react to situations and play off each other; they want to
see them interact, both professionally and personally. Sadly, there is
very little of that in this film. Make no mistake.  This is David
Duchovny's film. He is in nearly every scene, and by the middle of the
movie, Gillian Anderson's part has been reduced to that of
"damsel-in-distress." 
        Basically, THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE is just a reward for
all its loyal fans; a chance to see Mulder and Scully do their stuff
on the big screen. Also, it is a chance to pull in some new fans, and
establish some new characters and situations for the up coming season.
New fans mean a bigger audience base for the next feature. Oh,
yes......
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, William B.
Davis, John Neville, Mitch Pillegi, Blythe Danner, and Armin
Mueller-Stahl.
Rated: PG-13 for violence and some intense situations
I give it ** out of a possible four.

Author
Steve Kong
Don't Miss The X-Files: Fight The Future!
Am I biased? Maybe. I've been an X-Files watcher since episode one and
haven't missed an episode since. I buy anything with the X-Files logo or
name on it: I have stacks of X-Files books, an X-File cup, X-Files posters,
fan.
I guess you can imagine the wait I endured after I heard in June of 1997
that The X-Files movie was starting its shoot. When the teasers hit the big
screen I was ecstatic; my two favourite FBI agents were going to be on the
big screen.
The X-Files: Fight The Future has to do two things: It has to satisfy the
die-hard X-Philes, like myself, and it has to entertain casual viewers.
Does the film do both?
The X-Files starts with three TV-style teaser bits. The first starts us off
in 35,000 BC, in the area of Texas. The second brings us to present time in
the same place. The third is longer, more exciting, and is a fitting
introduction to our favourite heroes.
The third TV-style teaser shows a bomb blowing off the front face of a
building in Texas. Special Agents Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully
(Gillian Anderson) are being blamed for the explosion and the resulting
deaths. Mulder doesn't want to be the scapegoat in such an incident and
coerces Scully into investigating in order to clear their names. The
investigation leads to the duo finding out more than we can imagine.
If I tell you what the investigation turns up, I'll be spoiling the film
for you. But, let me give you some hints to what it turns up: informants in
dark alleys, a Smoking Man, a Well-Manicured Man, a deadly virus, corn
crops, bees, and more questions than answers.
Chris Carter, the creator of The X-Files, during the filming of the movie
bombarded us X-Philes with misinformation, trying to keep the plot a
secret. He did a good job. The last few episodes of The X-Files TV show
builds up the story that leads into the film. But, there is no prerequisite
of having seen the TV show to thoroughly enjoy the film. Carter, who wrote
the screenplay for the movie, does an incredible job of introducing us to
the characters and doing exposition in ways that don't scream "This is a
speech to fill you in on background and characters!" Watch for Mulder in
the bar to see how Carter intelligently hides exposition in a speech that
fits into the story so well. Also look for the scene where Mulder and
Scully come to a fork in the road; this scene so fittingly shows how well
these two work together.
As for the performances of the leads, both Duchovny and Anderson make the
leap from the small screen to the big screen without a hitch. Duchovny
brings his trademark under-acting to the big screen along with his dry
humor. Anderson looks stunning on the big screen. She brings her trademark
stoic acting to the screen along with her now famous scream, "MULDER!"
Kudos to both Duchovny and Anderson for not trying something new for the
big screen version of the show.
Among the supporting cast, Martin Landau and Armin Mueller-Stahl are
standout performances. I was sad not to see Krycek (aka "Ratboy") in the
film and was somewhat disappointed with the small role that the Smoking Man
(William B. Davis) was given. Other X-Files regulars show up also,
including Assistant Director Skinner (Mitch Pileggi), The Lone Gunmen (Dean
Haglund, Bruce Harwood, Tom Braidwood), and The Well Manicured Man (John
Neville).
Worth mentioning are the score by Mark Snow and the wonderful
cinematography by Ward Russell. Snow's score is haunting and rhythmic.
Russell's cinematography is the big screen extension of his work on the
small screen. The film is dark and moody.
A regular director on the TV series, Rob Bowman, directs this big screen
version and keeps the movie clipping along at a good pace. He also keeps
the scares coming.
The X-Files: Fight The Future is a two hour-long big budget episode of the
TV series. It is exciting to see Duchovny and Anderson together on the big
screen. The movie itself serves its purpose well: it satisfies the die-hard
viewers. I do feel that the casual watchers will get more satisfaction out
of the film, though. Carter promised a lot when he promoted the film ("The
truth is revealed") and there are still a lot of remaining questions, but
that doesn't bother me because there's a sixth season of The X-Files right
around the corner. The film serves to reinvigorate the series and to
revitalize the story line. It also serves to introduce new viewers to some
of the intriguing stories that are in The X-Files universe. Thank you,
Chris Carter for putting out a wonderful movie that extends the small
screen X-Files to the big screen. Don't Miss The X-Files!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE X-FILES is, of course, a screen version of the popular
television show.  The first thing that people will want to know is if
they are not fans of the TV series, will the film make sense to them.
Well, I can say only what my experience was.  I would say that I am not
particularly a fan of the X-FILES show.  I probably have seen in the
range of six to ten episodes and have not seen anything that would make
me want to be a more regular viewer.  So not keeping up with the series
was I confused by the film?  I would say only in the right places.  An
feel at a loss to understand what was going on for any lack of
following the television series.  I think that if the viewer only knows
that the series is about two FBI agents who battle government efforts
to cover up paranormal phenomena, he is ready to see this film and, as
far as I know, will not miss a lot of what is going on.  How about the
other side of the coin?  Will regular viewers who miss the movie miss a
lot of the arc of the story line?  Again my guess is that the answer is
no.  In spite of claims in the coming attractions that all will be
revealed; it would be too radical a departure from the X-FILES formula
to tell much of anything helpful. That highly successful formula keeps
the viewer tantalized but never reveals enough to really clear up the
basic mysteries.  The film appears to me to be no more and no less than
a very deluxe version of an episode of THE X-FILES television series,
one with good special effects and a few very respectable character
actors.
     The problem with THE X-FILES is that as political thrillers go it
really does not cut the mustard.  In a really good political thriller,
say SEVEN DAYS IN MAY, the characters do intelligent things and it
makes the film all the more compelling.  It is clear from the script
(written by series creator Chris Carter) that Mulder is supposed to be
a very clever agent of the FBI, and certainly his continued (albeit
limited) success at keeping his investigations going would lead one to
believe that he should be fairly bright.  In the film he never gets to
exercise much intelligence.  The plot is repeatedly moved forward by
people who are privy to secret information dropping Mulder
surreptitious clues as to what is really going on, or by Mulder making
extremely lucky guesses.  Remove his lucky hunches and his Deep-
Throat-ex-machina informants and Mulder really does not do a lot
besides going through the obvious motions.  In fact the only time we
really get to see his professionalism is when he blurts to a barmaid
that the FBI is covering up an alien invasion. Carter would like us to
believe that Mulder is intelligent, but apparently Carter has no idea
how to write Mulder that way.
     Toward the end of the film Mulder's incredible luck becomes almost
laughable.  He has what amounts to a needle-in-a-haystack-within-a-
haystack quest.  Suddenly Mulder falls through a hole, drops a long
way, and lands amazingly uninjured within a few feet of exactly what he
is searching for.  This guy Mulder must have friends in much higher
places than the cloistered rooms of conspirators in which the film
glories.  Mulder must be friends with "the Guy Upstairs"... Chris
Carter, that is.
     But I am getting ahead of myself.  The film opens with the
familiar eerie whistle and almost immediately the plot twists start
coming thick and fast, though this may be "thick" may be in the sense
of "stupid."  We start with a short prolog taking place in a glacier-
bound Texas of 35,000 BC (more or less).  Somewhere deep inside the ice
something scary is happening.  We cannot really see it well, but it is
something with a lot of sudden jumps and loud noises.  When the same
violent thing happens again in present day Texas (minus the glacier, of
course), the government finds itself with some dead bodies.  And it
would want nobody to ask too many questions about them.  In one of
those great government conspiracies it tries to conceal the deaths. And
you should hear the absurd way they try to cover it up!  I discuss some
of the problems with the government plan in the spoiler section below.
Part of the cover-up uses agents Mulder and Scully and sends them
looking for answers to all the most embarrassing questions.  It will
lead them to the edges of a new conspiracy bigger than the ones before,
a conspiracy to change our whole future.
     In addition to series regulars David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox
Mulder and Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully we have some
impressive character lending their talents: Martin Landau, John
Neville, and Armin Mueller-Stahl.  Glenne Headly is present for a
single scene as the barmaid...Long on style and visuals, but short on
story THE X-FILES rates a 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +1 on the -4
to +4 scale. ).
     Incidentally, even in the worst of the Ice Age the glacier did not
extend south to Texas.  Remember that the glacier tore up the ground in
the North, leaving that region good only for industrialization.  It did
not roll over the South, which is why they later could remain
agricultural.  That was a big part of the cause of that ruckus we
Americans had in the 1860s.
     The initial cover-up with the building explosion could not have
worked.  First, I am sure the fire department knew to where the firemen
had been dispatched and it was not where they supposedly died.  The
black-eyed boy's mother also would have known her son was not by chance
in the exploded building.  And it is very unclear why the bomb expert
was willing to commit suicide for the good of the cover-up.  Also given
that they had worked out all those problems, the last people they would
have wanted involved with the cover-up would be their two star
paranormal investigators Scully and Mulder.  It is within minutes of
the start of the film that it starts losing its credibility.

Author
Bob Bloom
 The truth is out there, but you will only learn bits and pieces of it in
The X-Files movie, and that's the fun - and charm - of this big screen
adaptation of the cult television show.
 The X-Files follows the investigations of two FBI agents, Fox Mulder and
Dana Scully. Mulder (David Duchovny) is the paranoid one, seeing
conspiracies, hidden agendas and aliens behind every occurrence.
 Scully (Gillian Anderson) is the rational one who tries - and often fails
- to shed light on the paranormal and explain it as normal.
 Together, these two over the past five TV seasons have investigated the
weird crimes that fall into the bureau's lap.
 Now the show's creator, Chris Carter, has brought the entire mythos to the
big screen. Along with Mulder and Scully come the black helicopter, the
Cigarette-Smoking Man, the Well-Manicured Man, the Lone Gunmen, the oozing
black goop, the autopsies and the convoluted rantings and whispers about
worldwide conspiracies and a planned alien domination of the planet.
 Plus, the  sight of cornfields and bees will now become part of the
ominous lexicon.
 And who is heading up all these black ops. Well, you'd be surprised to
learn that it's those friendly and caring folks at FEMA. Yes, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
 Helping out in disasters is only a front, it seems. The agency's real
agenda is to suspend the Constitution and take over running the country
during a national crisis.
 Those who have never seen The X-Files still can follow the movie. There's
just enough expositional dialogue to get you caught up on who Mulder and
Scully are, what their assignment was (and is), what is the Syndicate and
its members about, and what that nefarious group's ultimate aim is.
 Plus, director Rob Bowman, a veteran of the TV show, also stages enough
action to keep the die-hard X-philers from getting bored.
 The movie, thankfully, does not take itself too seriously. It has a wry
wit and a laconic charm as well as a bit of tongue-in-cheek, as if telling
the audience not to worry that it's only a bedtime fairy tale for adults.
The plot has some holes, which are glossed over, just as in the TV series,
but the real focus is the Mulder-Scully relationship. Before that, all else
in the film pales and seems rather trivial.
 It's really not worth going into the performances of Duchovny and
Anderson. Basically, they act intense, surprised and smart. They've been
under the skin of their characters for a long enough time that making the
transition from small screen to large was no big leap.
 They look good, they look sexy and they do ...
 Well, some things you will have to find out for yourself.
 It's a sad state of affairs when the biggest questions about the movie
doesn't concern the plot, but rather if it contains any shots of Agent
Mulder's derriere or if Mulder and Scully lip-lock.
 No answers will be given here. You'll have to fight the future lines at
the box office to find the answers.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Mark O'Hara
Steve Kong at the Hard Boiled movie page gave me your address.  I'm 
hoping to get reviews indexed through rec. arts. and IMDb.
Could you tell me the requirements (format, etc)?
Don't know if background is necessary, but I teach high school English 
and (as an adjunct) freshman English at Miami of Ohio.  I've been 
publishing stories, poems and essays in lit mags since 1981.  Went to 
Glassboro State College (in NJ) and Miami University.
I'm enclosing a review for your review.  Look forward to hearing from 
you.  Thanks very much for reading!  Hope it's OK I sent this to you at 
two addresses.
Although the first shots of THE X FILES are corny (c'mon, a location 
title that reads "North Texas, 35,000 B.C."?), director Rob Bowman shows 
solid work in most other aspects of the film.  
One likable side of the film is acting.  Perhaps because I have seen 
probably half a season's worth of shows throughout the run of the 
series, I was not used to David Duchovny's deadpan looks.  I enjoyed his 
character's own reference to this stoicism,  and soon got used to Fox 
Mulder's tendency to display emotion through actions rather than facial 
expressions.  Conversely, Gillian Anderson's Dana Scully -- though 
governed by cold logic -- often seems more emotionally reactive.  A 
certain glossiness about her looks in the film bothered me, the gloss 
extending to her eyes, as though she experienced discomfort with 
contacts or with tears of frustration about to spill at any second.  
Applause to the director and make-up people, who give Scully's cheeks 
broken blood vessels late in the film, after an ordeal that surely would 
have caused them.  On the whole, Mulder and Scully exploit well their 
level of comfort, after several years of interacting.
Layers of conspiracy lie at the center of the plot, and the aging white 
males cast as the conspirators turn in believable if humorless 
performances.  Armin Mueller-Stahl, apparently the highest-ranking 
conspirator (operating beyond the ken and control of the FBI), does not 
get a great deal of screen time.  But he is very good at using his scowl 
and his accent to portray a sinister secrecy.  Martin Landau plays Dr. 
Alvin Kurtzweil, who is himself the victim of conspiracies - attempts to 
frame him and, no doubt, discredit his way-out-there writings.  
Kurtzweil has to scramble to convince even Mulder of his credibility.  
To me, the most incredible side of Landau's character is his wandering 
the dark alleys, unarmed, wanted by at least the local police, behind 
the bar in which he meets Mulder.  The "cigarette-smoking man" plays the 
main heavy here -- besides the aliens themselves.  What confuses me 
about his motivation is that, despite countless reasons to rub out 
Mulder, he and his secret agency keep letting the tireless G-man get 
away.
The sets and special effects are grand in THE X FILES.  "Grand" in the 
old meaning of the word -- full of wonder and modesty, like the behavior 
of an honorable person.  I did find the bomb-sheared office building 
tacky -- too close to a re-enactment of Oklahoma City.  But other 
catastrophes, afflictions and icky creatures find their ways seamlessly 
into the narrative.  The implosion of the tundra -given away too much in 
trailers - is a superb computer creation that is edited with both 
patience and skill.  Remarkable illusions are created with the large 
sets and their gruesome inhabitants in subterranean Antarctica.
Mark Snow's music frequently lends suspense at the right places, though 
it seems a red-herring when the notes cut in as Mulder  glances behind a 
soda machine that has cheated him out of his change.   Some fast-paced 
pieces seem too densely New Age, layered as thickly as suspicions in 
viewers' minds.
The script, by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz, nicely sets alarms that 
go off later in the film at crucial times, including a joke from Scully 
just after she is resuscitated by Mulder.  In a way that I don't believe 
would insult  die-hard fans of the series, we are informed about the 
backgrounds, quirks and quests of the main characters.  Just from the 
hype surrounding the movie I learned enough -- Scully's return to faith, 
for instance - to help me chip away at plot twists.  
I would rate THE X FILES as a satisfying and intelligent story, though 
it should not be mistaken for an important film.  A question I have for 
SEQUEL?


Author
Dr. V. B. Daniel
'The Big Leap to X-World'
Dr. Daniel's review of The X-Files: Fight The Future
Starring David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau,
Blythe Danner, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Mitch Pileggi, John
Neville, William B. Davis, Glenne Headly, Bruce Harwood,
Lucas Black, Tom Braidwood. 
Okay, here's the deal. There's a big ol' rush nowadays toward anything
along the lines of "unexplained phenomena," those weird
head-scratchers that just seem to happen for no apparent reason. We
get a lot of that stuff here in Carver Point, too, believe it or not.
There's a man named Herbert Potterman, lived here 63 years, who always
seems to get deathly ill about three days before his wife's people
have their family reunion. He can be perfectly fine one day, then,
Ethel Ann will remind him about her reunion this coming weekend, and
he's in my office the next morning, poor soul. He always gets this
mysterious aching in his back and stomach that we can't figure out,
but I always have to tell Ethel Ann that Herbert'll need to stay home
that weekend 'cause it pains him to travel.
Usually, about Monday of the next week, Herbert's pain fades away, and
he's back to normal. And, even more mysterious than that, on the
Tuesday of that same week, I find a hundred-dollar bill in my mailbox,
taped to a fruit jar full of a clear, slightly oily liquid that has a
strong scent of distilled spirits about it. Oh, the oddities of the
world....
I guess this new-found interest in the unexplainable could be traced
to TV's new darling, the "reality" show, starring aliens and crop
circles and haunted houses. But I believe it goes beyond that. I think
it can be traced to a conspiracy within television, eminating from the
Fox network. These people have secretly hooked a good part of the
country on a show called "The X-Files", a show devoted to every
unexplained mystery you could think of, and a few I bet you never
wanted to think about.  A sleek combo of sci-fi and horror, wrapped in
the guise of almost-documentary style of filming, it plays us all like
violins, pulling on every string we have that loves to be scared, and
puzzled, and scared some more. And I love it. I love it to death.
That's why I've been geared up for the new version of the show, this
time in theatrical form, known as "The X-Files: Fight The Future." If
there ever was a TV show that deserved to be a film, this is it. The
show has pushed the limits of TV, and it was only logical that movies
be the next output. They had the stars, they had the following, they
had the creepy little supporting cast, they had it all. So, when the
movie opened, I was there.  Planted.
The film stars the Dynamic Duo of the Nineties, David Duchovny and
Gillian Anderson as FBI agents Mulder and Scully, and it literally
picks up where the TV show ended its season a few weeks ago, a very
interesting twist on the "cliffhanger" theory of TV season-enders. As
we pick up, the two are investigating a network of power-brokers
(played by John Neville, Martin Landau, and Armin Mueller-Stahl) that
are involved in a project concerned with the colonization of the
planet by means of alien life forms. The movie pulls all of the tricks
it uses on the show, including my favorite semi-villain, the
Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis). We get other quick hits like
the "black oil" aliens and the super-bees. We also get a new,
meaner-than-hay-ull bunch of aliens.
I really don't feel comfortable going any further than that, because
I'd get into divulging secrets, and, as any fan of the show can tell
you, the only thing worse than a secret is a secret revealed.
Let's do this. I liked the movie, and parts of it impressed me, but it
never seemed to reach where it was shooting for. It's good, but it's
nowhere near what I was expecting.  When a show like The X-Files gets
the chance to strut its stuff on a big screen, it ought to absolutely
take it to the moon. The movie never makes that leap. Oh, there's more
gore than we get to see on TV, and there's some profanity stirred in
to spice things up, but, to dump this thing into the middle of a
summer line-up, everybody was geared up for super action and
heart-pounding suspense and some "WHOA!" special effects, and none of
that ever really shows up. The movie is bigger in scope than the show,
but it's not near better.
At the same time, I almost think that this might have been the plan
all along. Build a big hoo-rah for the movie, tease us with talk of a
consummation of the romance between Scully and Mulder, spring some new
villains on us, bait us for everything, and then leave us hanging
until the new TV season starts. If this is the case, that's almost
forgivable. But, if this is the best they can do, somebody might want
to wash off the blackboard and start over. The "coincidences" we've
learned to accept on TV don't play quite as well on a huge screen as
they do on a 22-incher at home with the bulbs out. And, I have to
admit, I was less than thrilled that Scully and Mulder act so
surprised when they discover a conspiracy going on and alien life
involvement. Just what have these folks been doing for five years now,
bending spoons with their heads and walking on fire? They've stepped
into bigger piles of governmental poo-poo on TV and never even
blinked, so why be amazed that it's happening again? Deal with it!
"The X-Files: Fight The Future" has a nice look to it, and, if you
follow it as a glorified two-hour episode of the show, then, yes, it
works fine. But, if the long-range plan is to pull a "Star Trek" with
this, and go full-time cinema, Chris Carter and Crew better tighten
some screws and do the same thing they did to make the TV show so
popular. They're gonna have to quit playing it safe and push the
envelope. Pardon the reference, but they will have to go where no
movie has gone before.
So, all that said, all you "X-ers" out there, relax. It works. Maybe
not as well as you'll want it to, but it works. And, remember, the
first "Star Trek" movie stunk, and they're still going. And there's no
way Shatner's gonna get a chance to ruin any of these. With Carter in
charge of the world, it could only get better, or worse, which always
seems more fun in X-World.
See more great reviews and movie fun at:
See our many other sites at http://www.stairwell.com

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: David Duchovny (Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Dana Scully),
William B. Davis (The Cigarette-Smoking Man), Martin Landau (Dr. Alvin
Kurtzweil), Jeffrey DeMunn (Dr. Ben Bronschweig), John Neville (The
Well-Manicured Man), Mitch Pileggi (Walter Skinner)
Directed by: Rob Bowman, Written by: Chris Carter from a story by Chris
Carter and Frank Spotnitz
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, gore, and profanity
So, um, what's the truth?  Well, if you mean you want the truth about
what the new X-FILES movie is titled, I can't really help you.  The
movie titles only said THE X-FILES.  The advertisements all seem to say
THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE.  Well, take it either way.  I think it's
just THE X-FILES, but, well, I don't really know.
Oh, did you want the truth about the movie?  As in, is it any good? 
Well, I'm not the biggest expert in this area.  You see, I've only seen
maybe 4 episodes of the television series, give or take one or two.  So
I'm not a big X-Phile.  So it's safe to say that it's quite reassuring
that I can say - Yes.  It's good.  It's very good.  It's great, in
fact.  The first true RIDE of the summer is here, and you'll be kicking
yourself if you don't strap in to this one while it's in theaters - some
of the images just won't translate as well onto a TV screen.  If you
haven't seen the film yet, get up and go NOW.
Wait, not now.  You might want to read this review first.  Of course,
that's really up to you, but still, you might want to.  Don't worry, I
won't spoil anything.  I make a point to only talk about maybe five
minutes of the film and then leave the lesser-known details to you.
Okay, citizens.  THE X-FILES opens up with us seeing a freaky beast
attack ancient humans in the B.C. caveman ages.  The beast remains in
shadows so that we're not quite sure what it is.  Cut to the present
day.  We see a mysterious black ooze (I think fans of the tv series will
recognize this, or so I'm told) inhabit a little boy who goes to the
same spot where the cavemen were attacked so long ago.  Is there a
connection?  Does Bea Arthur look hideous naked?  And from there, we cut
to our heroes, FBI Agents Mulder and Scully.  Previously, they worked on
the mysterious X-Files, files found in the darker rooms of the FBI's
hallways, files which detail cases too strange to be explained by
rational thought and logical explanation.  Cases that seem to deal with
the supernatural, or the extraterrestrial... or both.  But that's
ridiculous.  Well, Scully thinks it's ridiculous.  Mulder believes all
of it.  Anyway, the files have since been shut down after Mulder pushed
his beliefs a little too far and annoyed the wrong people.  Now he and
Scully are still a team, but they're a team of ordinary FBI agents,
dealing with less interesting things, like terrorist threats.  Yeah,
that's a big yawn, huh Mulder?
Of course, when something goes wrong in their new line of duty, the FBI
looks for someone to blame for the foul-up, and even though it wasn't
their fault, Mulder and Scully were there, and they're first in line to
have the whole thing put on their heads.  Now they're going to try to
clear their names, and along the way, they're going to learn a lot more
about the mysterious conspiracy that's being run behind the scenes
worldwide, to hide the real truth about just the kinds of things that
Mulder and Scully used to investigate in the X-Files division.  Of
course, they can't learn everything - there's plenty more episodes of
the series to be had, and future movies to be made.
The performances are all acted by people who've handled these roles for
years on the tv show (with the exception of Martin Landau playing a new
character - and he's never bad, so of course that's just another good
point).  And since they've had to time to develop the roles, they make
us feel like we're watching developed, layered characters even if we
don't watch the show much, or at all.  We really care about Mulder and
Scully - they actually have deep personalities, which is truly something
to be appreciated, especially in today's film world.  The action scenes
are infrequent, but tense, and solid.  Really though, this story is
driven by plot and dialogue.  It's a winding plot that you have to pay
attention to, especially if you're not a series afficianado, but trust
me, it's worth it.  Some of the scenes are awe-inspiring, and the scope
of some visuals, particularly towards the end, make you truly appreciate
that this was made into a movie as opposed to just another episode of
the show.  The plot winds around and around but always holds your
interest, thanks in part to great performances and in part to great
writing that takes the time to give us characterizations of the people
we're watching instead of just putting them through the paces.  The
effects, when they show up, are also great.  Seems like this movie works
even for those who don't watch the show, and I also find it very hard to
believe that those who do watch would be let down by this.
If there's a flaw to this, it's that the villians aren't quite clearly
explained enough.  We understand their motives, but how did they come to
reach these motives?  There had to be some kind of communication that we
didn't learn about.  I know, I know, I'm keeping this pretty vague.  But
I can assure you, I'm not digging too deep here, this is actually a
question you need to ask yourself, and in the end, it's never quite
answered.  Maybe series fans know more on this subject.  Though really,
in such an otherwise great movie, why should I gripe about this?
I can't elaborate too much on things that were great because I wouldn't
dare reveal the plot.  You have to go and see it for yourself.  And
you'd better.  The summer has had some letdowns, and some fun, but so
far, this is the best ride out there, and it's a damn good ride that
could hold its own in any summer... or any season of any year, for that
matter.  One wonders if Chris Carter, the show's creator, can continue
to make X-FILES films that can stand alone as their own series and still
make them interesting and relevant to the viewers at home.  But there's
no need to worry about this now.  Now, all you have to do is go see THE

Author
Michael Redman
Is there anyone left who trusts what the government tells them? As we prepare
to exit the 20th Century, we live in a nation of people who believe that there
is a conspiracy behind every door. What has Bill Clinton really done? Where
did AIDS actually come from? Did we fight the last few wars for the oil
industry? Is everything going to collapse on January 1, 2000? And then there's
always that lone gunman thing.
Why do we think that there's a hidden truth behind the public statements? 
Millennium Fever has something to do with it. That we no longer have the
Soviet Union as the Evil Empire to blame everything on and have turned on
ourselves factors into it. Of course the fact that we've found out that our
government makes a habit of lying to us doesn't help matters.
It's no wonder that one of the most popular television series is one that
plays into the belief that we can never know what is going on around us.
Mulder and Scully are stand-ins for us as they attempt to get at the truth
each week. And it's as we fear: the truth is out there but it's unknowable,
wrapped in plots within plots within plots.
At the end of last season, the FBI unit devoted to investigating the
unexplainable had been closed down. Without the X-Files, Fox Mulder (David
Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) are sentenced to solving mundane
crimes. The film picks up shortly afterwards as they fail to prevent an
Oklahoma City-like bombing. In the process of analyzing the situation, they
discover clues that lead them back on the alien invasion conspiracy trail.
It's almost impossible to talk about what happens during the film without
giving away too much. It's safe to say that somewhere between 35,000 BC north
Texas and 1998 Antarctica we do find out whether there are aliens and who's
behind the conspiracy. Unless it's all another red herring.
There are two very different audiences for the film: the 20 million fans who
follow the series and movie-goers who aren't familiar with it. "X-Files" big
daddy Chris Carter (writer, producer, creator) has stated that he wants the
movie to satisfy both. In some ways he has succeeded, however it falls a bit
short for either.
I can't imagine someone who hasn't watched the television show understanding
some of the scenes. The Cigarette-Smoking Man (William Davis) is probably a
mystery to them. (The conspiracies are so deep that many of the characters
don't even have names, but are referred to as the [Something-Something]-Man.)
The three conspiracy buffs have a walk-on that will make fans smile, but
others will be puzzled. Mulder and Scully's relationship makes sense to the
novice, but is much more interesting to those that know their history.
On the other hand, aficionados have to sit through a few scenes that they
already know by heart. Major characters have bit parts because there are too
many of them to explain to the newbies. Others are left out entirely.
So what is this exactly? It's a two-hour between-the-seasons episode with a
big budget. It doesn't tell us everything that we want to know, but there are
some major revelations. It changes the relationship between the two agents.
Not only are there more hints that they may be heading towards more than just
friendship, but now one of them knows that the other was right all along.
If there's a problem with the movie for devotees, it's that there's not
enough amazement. It's a good episode, but not a remarkable one. While it's
fun to watch, you won't leave the theater feeling much differently than you
did on Sundays at 10:00 when the weekly shows were over.
There are many unanswered questions. Why are the members of the conspiracy
involved in what they are doing? What do they have to gain? What do the corn
fields have to do with anything? Why do Texans react complacently when a
biohazard containment operation sets up camp next door?
Although the "X-Files" takes advantage of our national paranoia, I find it
difficult to believe that everything is a conspiracy. In my experience it's
difficult to keep a secret if more than one person knows about it.
(This Michael Redman is the same person who started writing this column 23
years ago. That's his story and he's sticking to it. Send your favorite
conspiracy to redman@bvoice.com. We won't tell anyone.)
[This appeared in the 6/24/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) First, I am not a big fan of the X-Files TV series. I have
nothing against it particularly, I just don't happen to watch it. Having
said that, I can now say that I liked THE X-FILES pretty well. For us
non-fans, there's nothing big going for it, but there are a lot of little
things. 
The movie opens on an ice cave in north Texas in 35,000 B.C. Two
proto-humans enter the cave and find a space alien cocooned inside. The
alien breaks free and kills one man in a struggle while the other is
seemingly captured by the bloody ooze from the alien. The movie jumps to the
same cave today where a boy (Lucas Black, from SLING BLADE) is captured by
the same black ooze. 
We then cut to FBI agents Scully and Mulder (Gillian Anderson and David
Duchovny), who have been pulled off of their previous assignment
(investigations into the paranormal) and put onto the bomb squad detail. A
caller has threatened a federal building in Dallas, Texas. On a hunch,
Mulder checks out the building across the street, and, wouldn't you know it,
he turns out to be right. The FBI finds the bomb in time to evacuate but not
in time to defuse. Five people die in the blast, and when Mulder learns who
the victims were, a light bulb goes on over his head. 
The two agents team up to investigate, against FBI orders, the links Mulder
has made. Their search leads them back to the north Texas cave, all across
the country, and even to Antarctica as they get closer and closer to "the
truth." 
The plot, and "the truth," are uninspired. I got the feeling that what I
learned was supposed to shock and amaze me. It didn't. The possible
existence of aliens on Earth has been explored so many times before in
movies that one could hardly count them. But the point of THE X-FILES is not
what the truth is, but the extent to which it has been hidden. It's a
slightly more interesting angle, but it still raises expectations about that
"truth" too high. 
If this were the whole film, I would say the movie was mediocre, perhaps
even boring. But there are other qualities that make me like this movie well
enough to recommend it. 
The pacing of the film was brisk enough to hold my interest. Before the
audience can get tired of one location, the agents follow a hot tip to
another location, and so on and so forth. The locations are not all
computer-generated sets, either. There are some artificial settings, but the
desert night of Nevada, the edge of suburbia in Texas, and the endless
fields of snow in Antarctica (actually somewhere in North America.) make
this fantastic film feel more real. 
Ward Russell's cinematography is very good. The overall look is dark and
ominous, appropriate to the intended tone of the film's plot. Russell is
able to make something as innocuous as a cornfield look foreboding. When the
movie is set in darkness, the picture quality is still rich and detailed.
Finally, and specifically, there is an incredible shot at night in which the
camera CROSSES the tracks in front of a fast oncoming train. I don't know if
the shot is faked in any way, but it looks dangerous, and it looks great. 
The movie's soundtrack is also used to convey the dark tone of the
film.(SKIP TO THE NEXT PARAGRAPH IF YOU HAVE YET TO SEE THE MOVIE - THERE IS
A SPOILER IN THE FOLLOWING SENTENCES.)During the opening prehistoric
sequence, a howling wind dogs the soundtrack, never giving the characters or
the audience an escape from the lonely terrible sound. In one of the movie's
most effective sequences, metallic doors suddenly slam open to release a
cloud of buzzing bees. The visuals of the scene are good, but what makes it
so surprising and frightening is the sound. 
There was no question as to who the movie's stars would be. Even so,
Duchovny and Anderson are an interesting pair of actors and a good
combination. Both are easy on the eyes and together, they have some good
timing, banter, and energy. There is a hint of chemistry between them, but
it never gets in the way of their professional relationship. They are like a
couple of kids out exploring the empty lot at the end of the street. There
might be some romantic interest, but for now they're more interested in
their environs than they are in each other. 
No single element really makes this movie outstanding - not even the sense
of paranoia that makes the TV show so popular. But enough things were done
right that THE X-FILES is one of the more interesting summer adventures to
come along.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
