Title
Review for Safe Passage (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Susan Sarandon, Sam Shepard, Robert Sean Leonard, Nick Stahl, 
          Jason London, Sean Astin, Marsha Gay Harden, Matt Keeslar 
Director: Robert Allen Ackerman 
Producer: Gale Anne Hurd 
Screenplay: Deena Goldstone based on the novel by Ellyn Bache 
Cinematography: Ralf Bode 
Music: Mark Isham 
Released by New Line Cinema 
     SAFE PASSAGE opens with an eerie sequence of blurred faces,
off-color images, and an inexorable, building darkness.  It then
explains this creative bit of photography as a mother's "premonition
dream" about one of her seven children.  While this may function as an
effective tool to introduce all the characters, it comes across as
unbelievably contrived, and doesn't get proceedings started on a solid
footing.
     When SAFE PASSAGE works, it does so because it dares to be more
honest than most similarly-themed dramas.  When it fails, however,
which it does nearly as often, it's because the story falls back on
cliches and formulas.
     At the core of the picture is yet another cinematic dysfunctional
family.  Mom (Susan Sarandon) and the youngest of her seven sons, Simon
(Nick Stahl), have decided to move away from Dad (Sam Shepard).
They're in the process of packing when news comes of the terrorist
bombing of a U.S. Marine compound in the Middle East where one of the
boys, Percival (Matt Keeslar), is stationed.  The sudden crisis brings
the family together.  In addition to the parents, Simon, and a pair of
twins, there's Alfred (Robert Sean Leonard) and his girlfriend Cynthia
(Marcia Gay Harden); college student Gideon (Jason London); and Izzy
(Sean Astin), who's trying to determine the reason why his father
suffers blind spells.
     For three days and two nights, the Singer clan reminisces, argues,
talks, and hopes, while waiting to hear whether Percival is dead or
alive.  Outside the front door, the media hovers, ready to pounce on
anyone who emerges.  And still there is no definite word....
     As occasionally involving as SAFE PASSAGE is, there's really
nothing special or memorable about either the story or the
performances.  It's not that the actors do bad jobs--they're all quite
competent, in fact--but no one stands out.  There's nothing here that
dozens of others in Hollywood couldn't have done as well.
     One of the strengths of SAFE PASSAGE is its willingness to permit
conversations to go on beyond the expected "motion picture" length.
Not only does this lend an air of verisimilitude to what the characters
are saying, but it sometimes leads to a deeper understanding of
motivations.  This script has no fear of wordy dialogue.
     On the other hand, the plot is littered with worn-out conceits.
One character dozes off while another is making a painful confession.
Home movies are dragged out to rekindle memories and heighten guilt.
And there's the big catharsis scene where the entire family bonds--in
this case, it happens during an impromptu cleaning of the garage.
     The presence of so many characters is probably a mistake, because
no one gets the screen time necessary to be developed beyond the sketch
stage.  While it's always pleasant to see accomplished performers like
Sarandon, Shepard, and Leonard, SAFE PASSAGE doesn't give them much
chance to show us anything new.
     The premise is interesting, and there's a fair amount of promise
in the subject matter, but somehow, the movie never quite meets
expectations.  Not enough pieces are missing to automatically disregard
SAFE PASSAGE.  It may be a fairly mundane film with lapses of
unoriginality weakening its moments of insight, but there's still
something oddly compelling about this group of oddball characters
crammed together in front of the television, watching and waiting.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Susan Sarandon, as Mag, turns in another of her many wonderful
screen portrayals.  Directors and producers cannot go wrong when they
choose Sarandon.  Here, in SAFE PASSAGE, she is the mother of seven
grown sons.  Her husband, Patrick (Sam Shepard) chooses to live at the
office but that is okay; they are still very much in love.  With all
the sons now out of the house, except for fourteen-year-old Simon (Nick
Stahl), Mag is thinking of being free at last of household duties.
     Just as Mag wants to pursue her dreams of mingling in the working
world outside of home, word comes that Percival (Matt Keeslar), who had
joined the Marines to get away from family pressures, may have been
among those blown up in a surprise attack of a barracks in the Middle
East.
     Now the family begins to come together to sweat out the vigil.
There is the scientist, Izzy (Sean Astin), Alfred and his girlfriend
Cynthia (Robert Sean Leonard and Marcia Gay Harden), athlete Gideon,
(Jason London), twins Merle and Darren (Philip and Steve Ross) ... and,
of course, the dad, Patrick.  Although each has his own life, this is a
time when they have to get together and listen to skimpy news.
>From official reports they get nothing concrete.
     News reports could mean Percival was among the dead or missing.
And they talk.  They talk about old times and about things they never
before had revealed to each other and they talk about how their parents
raised them and how the sons affected the parents as well.  And all the
time the tension escalates.
     The acting by all the sons is faultless.  The plight of the family
gets you in its grip.  And, again, Susan Sarandon, (much as in
LORENZO'S OIL) is a mother fighting.  A great performance.  Let us not
overlook Sam Shepard's role as the father.  Fine acting all around.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Susan Sarandon, Sam Shepard, Robert Sean Leonard, Nick
Stahl, Sean Astin, Marcia Gay Harden, Jason London.
Screenplay:  Deena Goldstone.
Director:  Robert Allan Ackerman.
     Films like SAFE PASSAGE have been a television staple for
years.  They're about families in crisis facing pent-up resentments,
steely matriarchs and ineffectual (or absent) patriarchs, and lots
and *lots* of crying.  Every once in a while, one will sneak its way
onto the big screen, usually on the cachet of a big-name star or
director (a la ORDINARY PEOPLE), and occasionally a great
performance (like Kathy Bates in 1993's A HOME OF OUR OWN) can turn
tired material into something special.  Susan Sarandon is a big name
who turns in a great performance in SAFE PASSAGE, but even she can't
save this mess.  There are simply too many interchangeably troubled
characters wandering around shouting at each other.
     Sarandon stars as Mag Singer, a middle-aged mother of seven
sons separated from her husband Patrick (Sam Shepard).  Mag has a
premonition that one of her sons is in danger, a premonition that
may come true when an explosion destroys a Middle Eastern Marine
barracks where son Percival is stationed.  As she awaits word on
whether or not Percival is among the casualties, Mag is joined by
the rest of her family, including oldest son Alfred (Robert Sean
Leonard) and his divorced girlfriend (Marcia Gay Harden), son Izzy
(Sean Astin) and Patrick, who is experiencing periodic attacks of
blindness.  The waiting leads to conflict, as Mag and Philip re-hash
old differences, and Mag ponders all the mistakes she made raising
her sons.
     You might begin to realize what is wrong with SAFE PASSAGE if
you note that the preceding summary only names three of the seven
sons.  And except for the remarkably well-adjusted twins, every one
of them is working through some sort of neurosis or involved in the
storyline in some way.  Alfred is too rigid and uptight; Gideon
(Jason London) is a track star convinced that beating Percival in a
race led to Percival enlisting; youngest son Simon (Nick Stahl, from
THE MAN WITHOUT A FACE) is a twitchy kid with Jello-stiffened
dreadlocks.  There are simply too many characters bouncing around in
SAFE PASSAGE, and director Robert Allan Ackerman often seems like
one of the reporters who appears at the singer house running after a
quote.  With writer Deena Goldstone, he has created characters who
are little more than sound bites, and none of their problems seem to
matter all that much.
     With this lack of focus comes the sense that no one making this
movie really knew what it was supposed to be about.  Is it about
Mag's lack of fulfillment which leads to her separation, and her
attempt to become a social worker?  Is it about her relationships
with her sons and her guilt over her failings?  Is it about any of
the individual sons' resentment over Patrick's insistence on them
pushing themselves?  It's about all of these things, and it's about
none of them.  SAFE PASSAGE is filled with little snippets of
development which run into infuriating dead ends, but there isn't
really a point.  Mag seems to be developing a friendship with
Alfred's shy girlfriend, one which might establish a kind of
parallel to her parenting, but it's only a footnote.  Patrick's
vision problems seem to exist only to give Sean Astin's Izzy
something to worry about, and Simon is confused, but no more
confused than I was as I tried to figure out exactly why he even
needed to be part of the story.  SAFE PASSAGE simply needed about
four fewer sons and a real identity for those that were included.
     It does have Susan Sarandon, though, and she makes up for a
multitude of failings.  She has the guts to take Mag just to the
edge of being crazy, showing us how easy it is to become crazy
raising seven sons and living with an immature husband.  She has a
couple of wonderful scenes in which her near-obsessive concern for
her sons' well-being goes a bit too far, including a very funny
flashback in which she carries Percival off the field after he is
injured in a youth football game.  But as good as she is, she isn't
given a handle on who Mag is, at least not one which can carry the
film past its scattershot characterizations.  A movie like SAFE
PASSAGE, in which nothing really happens, depends on the development
of strong characters to carry it through.  SAFE PASSAGE is simply a
collection of Character McNuggets.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     SAFE PASSAGE has Susan Sarandon once more portraying an
over-protective mother (as in LORENZO'S OIL and, in effect, THE
CLIENT.)  This time she has seven boys to worry about, and Sam Shepard
as an estranged husband whose eyesight keeps flickering on and off like
a worn-out fluorescent light.  She has a lot to worry about too,
because one of her sons is in the Sinai, one of a group of Marines who
have just been bombed while sleeping.  The movie setting is the family
house, while they all wait for the portentous news.
     I thought the movie was well acted and directed, but the
screenplay stunk.  There are too many incidents in this film that are
unmotivated (such as the encounter of the youngest son with Daisy, or
the father's blindness), obvious (the role of the Marine son in the
family is a cliche) or unexplained (what happened to that sickness the
running son came home with; how was the obvious depression of the
youngest son early in the film resolved?)
     Older actresses like Sarandon have a tough time in Hollywood.
Unlike older actors, who achieve greatness and go on to command
fortunes for small roles (Brando, DeNiro, Nicholson), they seem to take
on bigger roles and get less and less for them (Meryl Streep in THE
RIVER WILD is another example.)  I think part of the reason (besides
Hollywood's obvious chauvinism) is that they don't seem to realize that
their best work is behind them.  When Nicholson puts on heavy makeup
for The Joker or The Wolfman he's doing something people really want to
see: an actor with a great history demeaning himself, and having fun
with a role.  A role where he tries to teach us about what it is like
to grow older and give us some compelling insights into the nature of
middle age in a more straightforward way, as Sarandon does here, simply
would not be as successful, regardless of how well it would be received
critically. (Though I must admit I have no idea if people would go to
see, say, Streep in a John Waters film.)
     Many of the actors here seem wasted; they could have made just as
much of a movie with many fewer sons.  Robert Sean Leonard, a fine
young actor, seems frozen by the constraints of his role.  Sam Shepard
spends most of his time moping around; he does nothing to suggest his
role in this family was anything more than perfunctory. On the other
hand, the woman who plys the psychologist girlfriend of Leonard has a
striking presence.
     The direction, on the other hand, seemed right on.  I particularly
liked the little touches in the interaction between Sarandon and the
other characters, especially including Shepard.  Shepard's falling
asleep when he did is a cliche, as is the scene where Shepard and
Sarandon end up on the floor, but they don't seem so; a feeling of much
greater complexity in their relationship comes through than what the
screenplay itself conveys.
