Title
Review for C'era una volta il West (1969)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Once Upon a Time in the West" was the last of
director Sergio Leone's four 'spaghetti westerns'
from the 1960s.  The formula of the first three
films is repeated: excellent cinematography, with
frequent lingering close-ups.  There is much
violence, a notable score by Ennio Morricone,
and the pace is excruciatingly slow.  The major
characters are famous actors from America, but
otherwise the cast and crew are Italian.
The story has crippled magnate Morton (Gabriele
Ferzetti) building a railroad across the West.
Standing in his path is stubborn, hot-headed McBain
(Frank Wolff) who has built land needed by the
railroad.  Morton sends brutal killer Frank
(Henry Fonda) to take care of McBain, but his widow
(Claudia Cardinale) inherits the property.  She
is protected by two other killers; reflective
outlaw Cheyenne (Jason Robards) and mysterious
loner Harmonica (Charles Bronson).
Leone's first three big budget westerns featured
Clint Eastwood.  There was a role for him in
"Once Upon a Time in the West" as well, but he
turned it down.  The role went to Bronson, who
is as tough as Eastwood but not as cool.  Fonda's
murderous character came as a shock to those
used to seeing him in benevolent "Mister Roberts"
roles (supposedly John Wayne had turned down the
part).
This is not, as many claim, Leone's best film.
"The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly" is certainly
better, and better still is "Once Upon a Time
in America".  One can blame the slow pace, but
the other films were slow as well.  Perhaps the
problem is that Fonda's and Bronson's characters
don't seem quite human.
The story is deliberately muddled as well, with
actions taking place long before they are adequately
explained.  I'm still wondering whether Morton dies;
perhaps he was shot by Cheyenne, or perhaps he
crawled out of the train to avoid being shot by
Frank.  Also, if Cheyenne was stopped from reaching
Yuma by his men (the only plausible explanation),
how would they have known to intercept him?
Still, "Once Upon a Time in the West" is a very
good western. It was undeservedly ignored by
the Academy Awards, who should have at least
nominated the film for the sets and cinematography.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Sergio Leone
Writers: Segio Donati and Mickey Knox (from a story by Sergio Leone,
Bernardo Bertolucci, and Dario Argento)
Starring: Claudia Cardinale, Henry Fonda, Charles Bronson, Jason
Robards, Keenan Wynn
Following the international sucess of such spag westerns as "Fistful of
Dollars," "For a Few Dollars More," and "The Good, the Bad, and the
Ugly" (all starring Clint Eastwood), Italian director Sergio Leone made
a rather Hollywood film in what would seem to be a typical Hollywood
western.  I mean, it stars Henry Fonda.  But, being the cool-ass guy
that he was, he went and made a brilliant anti-Western Hollywood style,
most notably shown in his at first questionable casting of Fonda
as...the villain.
"Once Upon a Time in the West" has pretty much nothing to do with the
previous "Man With No Name Trilogy," except that it takes place in the
west and has a man with no name, this time playing a harmonica and
played by Charles Bronson instead of Eastwood.  Also, the lead character
in this film is not the man with the harmonica, but rather a woman
(Claudia Cardinale, who was in Fellini's "8 1/2" and the first and last
"Pink Panther" movies), although she's a whore who was giving up her
profession for a nice little marriage to a farmer in the west.
The film starts off with one of Leone's classic drawn-out scenes,
involving a 10 minute wait while the credits appear in interesting forms
and a group of killers wait for their victim to arrive on a train.  It's
Bronson who easily gets rid of his killers.  Cut to the farmer in the
west who's preparing a feast for his family and his new wife, who his
son is going to pick up at the train station.  But Fonda, a crook
working for a train entrepeneur, comes in with his bandits and kills the
whole family, save the little boy, who Fonda personally shoots (I can't
believe Henry would kill a kid).
The wife (Cardinale) arrives with no one to pick her up, discovers her
family is dead, and one by one runs into Bronson, Fonda, and eventually
a very hairy escaped con played by Jason Robards.  What will occur is a
kind of war between these three over her property, even though Robards
and Bronson form a partnership sometime into the film, while Fonda needs
to help his boss get rid of Cardinale so he can build train tracks
through her property (doesn't this sound a bit like the premise of
"Blazing Saddles?")
As in all of Leone's films, the plot twists over and over again, and
there are original gunfights (one involving bandits hidden all over a
town, all aiming for one guy, while another shooter decides to help the
lone target.  This film is fueled by hidden pasts, and
characterization.  We never know who Bronson really is until the end, in
a dazzling duel between he and Fonda.  And we also get the classic
drawn-out plot, sometimes not having any dialogue.
The acting is actually very good.  Cardinale, who's a good actress but
who's looks sometimes seemed to overpower her performance (i.e. "8
1/2"), gives a strong performance in a role that would usually be weak. 
Yes, she was a whore, but she's gotten past that point and finds herself
all alone at one point in the film.  Fonda, who had NEVER played a bad
guy in a film before, is surprisingly awesome in the villain role.  He's
creepy as hell in some scenes, especially where he shoots the kid (and
where he nearly has sex with Cardinale, but for other reasons - he's
like 50 or so in this).  And Bronson and Robards are awesome, as they
always are (okay, I think Bronson rocks).
"Once Upon a Time in the West" is a classic which has been kind of
underrated (I never even knew it existed until I started disecting the
career of Leone).  Evn so, it's still not as cool as Leone's previous
films, but is an all-around better film than all of them except "The
Good, the Bad, and the Ugly."  And, of course, it's a kick-ass flick.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
