Title
Review for Quick Change (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Dowling
Quick Change (1990) ***** out of ***** - Cast: Bill Murray, Geena Davis,
Randy Quaid, Jason Robards, Bob Elliott, Phil Hartman, Tony Shalhoub,
Stanley Tucci, Victor Argo, Philip Bosco, Kurtwood Smith. Written by: Howard
Franklin. Based on the book by: Jay Cronley. Directed by: Howard Franklin
and Bill Murray. Running Time: 89 minutes.
Bill Murray (who also co-produced and co-directed) stars as Grimm, a
disgruntled New York city official who, with the help of his girlfriend
Phyllis (Geena Davis) and his lifelong dim-witted friend Loomis (Randy
Quaid), manage to pull off a brilliant bank robbery. Their only problem is
now, with the police in pursuit, they can't manage to get out of the city.
"Quick Change" is a very funny film, right up there with "Ghostbusters" as
one of Murray's best. The three get into one unexpected situation after
another, each one leaving you thinking "Ok, NOW what are they supposed to
do?" There are plenty of laughs, and the level of comedy stays consistant
throughout. Murray and Quaid are hilarious, and Davis is actually watchable,
unlike the roles she takes now. The supporting cast is also fine, with Tony
Shalhoub (TV's "Wings") a standout as a cab driver who doesn't know a single
word of english.
For some reason the studio abandoned this film, as they released it without
hardly any promotion whatsoever. That makes it one of the best comedies of
all time that no one ever saw. That's a shame, it's fantastic entertainment.
[R]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Randy Parker
     Actors and directors will often tell you that it's a lot harder to
make a successful comedy than it is to make an effective drama--that it's
easier to draw a tear than to earn a laugh.  But I'm beginning to wonder
whether this is really true.  In movies which try to combine drama and
comedy, usually it's the comedy which carries the film and the drama which
drags it down.  The latest offender is Bill Murray's new film QUICK CHANGE,
an engaging, fast-moving comedy which comes to a grinding halt whenever it
attempts to stir up some dramatic substance.
     Often, movies like this have snappy characters stuck in a dumb
plot.  QUICK CHANGE has the opposite problem: its clever plot is riddled
with lousy characters.  The movie is set in New York and involves an
elaborate bank robbery, masterminded by Bill Murray with the help of Geena
Davis and Randy Quaid.  The gimmick is: all they have to do is get to the
airport and they're home free, but the entire city seems to be conspiring
against them.  Their obstacles include a foreign cab driver, a slow
shopping line, an anal retentive bus driver, confusing road signs and
homicidal mobsters--not to mention the cops who are hot on their trail.
The movie offers a cynical and satirical depiction of New York City as a
crumbling metropolis.
     The film's biggest crime is that it squanders Davis' comic talents.
Davis is one of Hollywood's funniest comediennes, and she excels at
playing goofy eccentrics, like the dog trainer in THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST.
But QUICK CHANGE short changes Davis by giving her a disappointingly
pedestrian character.
     Quaid gets the movie's biggest laughs as a world-class dunce, a
large, burly guy who deep down is nothing more than a big, blubbering cry
baby.  The character is a kick in the pants, but the film never explains
why Murray and Davis would put up with Quaid's sheer stupidity and costly
blunders.
     Fortunately, for Murray fans, QUICK CHANGE is an improvement over
his last two pictures, SCROOGED and GHOSTBUSTERS 2.  Murray's role in QUICK
CHANGE reminds me of Eddie Murphy's character in BEVERLY HILLS COP.  Like
COP, QUICK CHANGE repeatedly puts its protagonist into touchy situations
that require him to negotiate his way out of trouble.  Murray's sardonic
demeanor electrifies the comic scenes, but sadly, he isn't the least bit
convincing during the serious moments.
     The odd thing about QUICK CHANGE is that despite its inadequacies,
it's surprisingly entertaining, thanks to the plot's imaginative twists and
turns.  The episodic story line is really just a series of vignettes which
rely on Murphy's Law, or in this case Murray's law: everything that can go
wrong will go wrong, as the crooks painfully learn on their way to the
airport.  Murray, who co-directed the film, smoothly orchestrates a
symphony of mayhem and misfortune that's hard to resist.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  The clever heist story fades into a
     Murphy's Law sort of getaway.  Three thieves find out just
     how unfriendly New York City can be.  There are several
     well-defined characters created, but unfortunately the three
     main characters are not them.  Rating: +1.
     There are really two stories to QUICK CHANGE.  The first story is about
twenty minutes long and is the story of "The Bank Robbery."  The second
story is the story of "The Getaway."  The idea behind the robbery is clever.
It is done in a way that has not been done in heist films before it.  I
figured the gimmick out in advance, but I am told that puts me in a
minority.  Word-of-mouth indicates that many viewers are taken by surprise
by the gimmick of the robbery.  The Getaway is also well done but in a very
different vein.  All the clockwork planning falls apart as three partners in
crime try to get from a New York bank to JFK airport.  Here no new ground is
broken.  Several films have been made about what a hostile and frustrating
place New York City is.  Notable examples are THE OUT-OF-TOWNERS and AFTER
HOURS.  QUICK CHANGE is slightly lower key and more believable than those
films, but it too is a compendium of the irritating frustrations and rude
people in New York City, woven together by a connecting story.  The attempts
to get to the airport become more frantic as more and more obstacles fall
into the intrepid gang's way.
     Bill Murray co-produced, co-directed, and co-starred.  Howard Franklin
co-directed as well as wrote the screenplay based on a book by Jay Cronley.
Murray plays the absurdly laid-back Grimm.  Murray sacrifices much of the
absurd gamut of frustrations by maintaining an even keel throughout.  As a
counterpoint, Randy Quaid plays Loomis, who constantly walks the narrow line
between panic and hysteria.  Of the three thieves, the only character who
has any depth is Geena Davis's Phyllis, who is re-evaluating her future
while they fights their way to the airport, pursued by the slightly too
intuitive Chief Rotzinger (played by Jason Robards, Jr.).
     QUICK CHANGE does have a few belly laughs, but it is not trying
constantly to be uproarious as so many current comedies are.  More often it
contents itself with being whimsical and sly.  This approach would normally
require a much better definition of the three main characters than  Franklin
was able to provide, but ironically it is not the main characters he
develops.  Instead he develops the minor characters and then lets them
upstage the stars, We better understand a bank guard (played by Bob Elliot
of the Bob and Ray team) than we do either if the two male leads.  The
audience has less sympathy and interest invested in them than in a cabbie
who speaks and understands no recognizable language.  An officious bus
driver (played by Philip Bosco) is as well developed as Randy Quaid's
character with far less screen time.  By blurring the foreground characters
and focusing on the background, New York City becomes the real main
character of the film until the script falters near the end and Murray once
again reclaims the audience's attention.  I rate the film a +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
