Title
Review for Night on Earth (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
thomasl@silver.ucs.indiana.edu (thomasl)
     Jim Jarmusch's newest film, NIGHT ON EARTH, is an example of what
an independent talent can do with a budget.  In this film, we get great
production values, and accessibility, but a lot more.  The look is
superb; the stories are entertaining, thoughtful and moving.  Although
this film is staged in five locations throughout the world, it's pure
Hollywood at it's best.  Jarmusch joins the big leagues with this movie
as he tackles the heavy themes.  In this complex smorgasbord of life,
he makes the bittersweet completely palatable.
     The movie is a series of five vignettes, each of which takes place
in a different city in the world, simultaneously.  The stories, like
the lives of people in different places, have nothing to with one
another, although there are some lovely lose connections
(sister-in-laws, for example).  The encounters all involve a cab driver
picking up a fare.
     The opening credits, over a globe beautifully, set the theme, and
the music, by Tom Waits and Kathleen Brennan, is perfect for this
whistle-stop sideshow tour of the human carnival.  That familiar
Hollywood device (one of my faves, along with the calendar with the
pages drifting to the floor, showing passage of time), the newsroom 
clocks which show simultaneous times for various cities, cues us in to
time and place.  They run backwards to reset, between cities.  The
establishing sequence in each city gives us the flavor of the city
through the buildings and streets the cabbies intimately know.  We
always see a clock in the sequence.
     We travel east, and the earliest sequence in the film, L.A., is the
slowest.  As the Hollywood story set on its ear, it sets the tone with
its commentary about reality, movies and the chances of life.  It is the
stagiest.  
     As always, it's the quirky and individualistic characters, the
mundane yet strangely striking situations, that distinctively mark the
Jarmusch pictures (as well as the soundtrack, this time beautifully
restrained and so more effective than usual).  The characters in this
picture are Everymen and women, but the short stories are some of the
most compelling seen in recent memory.  The New York story and the
Helsinki story are both humorous and beautifully emotional.  Rome, about
living lustily, has a wonderful character driving.  Each location really
captures the flavor of the people and the place.  Notable performances
include the fares in New York and Helsinki,and the cabbie in Rome,
although they are all excellent.
     Jim Jarmusch has a keen, sweet eye, and through it we lightly
caress what he sees, as he winks.  What a night, what a movie, what a
world!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Jim Jarmusch's films are an acquired taste.  In some ways they are just
too realistic to be really enthralling.  Particularly in his first film,
STRANGER THAN PARADISE, his characters always think for five or ten seconds
before speaking a single sentence.  This made listening to the conversations
just a bit frustrating, which I suppose was the point.  After his DOWN BY
LAW, his most recent film was MYSTERY TRAIN, three interconnected stories
taking place the same day and night in Memphis, Tennessee.
     NIGHT ON EARTH is five stories involving taxi cab rides taking place at
the same instant.  The stories are less connected than those of MYSTERY
TRAIN.  Each takes place in a different city: Los Angeles, New York, Paris,
Rome, and Helsinki.
     In Los Angeles, a rather butch tomboy cab driver (played by Winona
Ryder) drives a casting agent (played by Gena Rowlands).  Each is
discouraged by the way things are going on her job and the other may be able
to help.  In New York, a black man (played by Giancarlo Esposito) hails a
cab and finds his driver (played by Armin Mueller-Stahl), a recent East
German emigre', knows nothing about New York or driving a cab.  Esposito's
frustration gives way to friendship as the German is pulled into his life,
but then the German ends up worse than when he started.  In Paris, a black
cab driver (played by Isaach De Bakole') first is the butt of racist remarks
from two drunk black passengers.  He throws them out of his cab and picks up
instead a blind woman who is non-discriminatory--she has a nasty attitude
toward everyone.
     Rome is the site of the fourth story where a  very funny and inventive
cab driver (played by Roberto Begnini) confesses his sins hilariously to a
priest in his cab.  It may or may not be a joke, but it has serious
consequences.  The final sequence takes place in Helsinki.  This time the
driver is played by Matti Pellonpaa (who played the manager in the worth-
looking-for LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA).  He picks up three drunk
passengers who tell him a sad story that he matches with one of his own.
     Any of these segments might add needed texture to somebody's film about
a cab driver but it overall is a film that had the viewer asking at the end
of each segment, "Yeah?  So?"  Perhaps the idea, like in MY DINNER WITH
ANDRE, is just to let you hear the conversation, but since the characters
are so contrived there is little feel that these are real conversations.
And lulls in the conversation tend only to stretch out a film already too
long for many audiences.
     NIGHT ON EARTH is a just-okay entry in Jarmusch's filmography.  I give
it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.  It is intriguing to compare Jarmusch's films
to LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA.  Aki Kaurismaki recognizably borrows from
Jarmusch's style, an observation I made before I had realized that Jarmusch
also acts in THE LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA.  So the two directors have
some cross-fertilization.  Yet of the two, Kaurismaki seems the better
director.  Kaurismaki totally avoids the "so what?" response that so often
comes with Jarmusch's work.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
128 min., R, Comedy, 1992
Director: Jim Jarmusch
Cast: Winona Ryder, Gena Rowlands, Giancarlo Esposito,
      Armin Mueller-Stahl, Rosie Perez, Isaach de Bankole,
      Beatrice Dalle, Roberto Benigni, Paolo Bonacelli,
      Matti Pellonpaa, Kari Vaananen, Sakari Kuosmahen,
      Tomi Salnela, Lisanne Falk
     The film takes a look at five cab drivers, in five cities (Los
Angeles, New York, Paris, Rome, and Helinski), in one night.  The first
city, Los Angeles, has cab driver Winona Ryder taking Gena Rowlands from
the airport to her house in Beverly Hills.  The second city, New York,
has cab driver Armin Mueller-Stahl, who has just come to the U.S. from
East Germany, who can't drive a cab, and who doesn't know New York, pick
up black Giancarlo Esposito, who takes over as the driver so he can
reach his destination.  The third city, Paris, has black cab driver
Isaach de Bankole, who picks up blind Beatrice Dalle, who complains
about everything.  The fourth city, Rome, has cab driver Roberto
Benigni, who picks up priest Paolo Bonacelli, and starts confessing to
him in the cab.  The fifth city, Helinski, has Matti Pellonpaa, who
picks up three drunks, Kari Vaananen, Sakari Kuosmahen, and Tomi
Salnela, and tells them a sad story.
     For the most part, NIGHT ON EARTH is a very funny comedy.  The
cities of Los Angeles, New York, and Rome are great.  Unfortunately,
the cities of Paris and Helinski are rather boring.  Thankfully, the
funny cities make up for the two boring ones making this film definitely
worth seeing.  On a scale of zero to five, I give this film a four.  It
would have gotten a five, if it hadn't been for Paris and Helinski.  If
this film was trying to be a drama, I guess Paris and Helinski would
have fit in to the film, but then the rest would not fit.  In my area at
least, the film was advertised as a comedy, and I really don't see how
Paris and Helinski fit into a comedy, unless they are some really black
segments that I didn't get.  Anyway, I highly suggest that if NIGHT ON
EARTH comes to a theater in your general area, and you like comedies,
that this film is worth full ticket price.  NIGHT ON EARTH is rated R
for explicit language and adult situations.
     I think that this film is completely original; at least I can't
remember any others like this one.  I also think that it was a great
idea.  I think that all the actors/actresses were well picked, except
for the blind girl, Beatrice Dalle, who was in the Paris segment.  The
rest of them do a great job.  Even though I didn't like the Paris
segment, I think that Isaach de Bankole did the best job in this film.
Winona Ryder had an interesting role as the tomboy taxi driver.
     Even though you didn't know any of the people's history when each
segment started, the characters were well enough written, for the most
part, that you became interested in them, and for some, like Armin
Mueller-Stahl's character, I found myself wanting to see some more of
their adventures.  Unfortunately, others, like Kari Vaananen, Sakari
Kuosmahen, Tomi Salnela, Matti Pellonpaa, Isaach de Bankole, and
Beatrice Dalle's characters I found to be so dry, boring, and sometimes
self centered (especially Dalle's) that I didn't care at all about them.
The drunks I especially hated, I really can't say why, but for some
reason I really disliked them (the cab driver too!).  Oh well, it was
still a good film.
