Title
Review for Cadillac Man (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Randy Parker
        CADILLAC MAN is not the first movie to revolve around a hostage
situation, and it certainly won't be the last.  Screenwriter Ken Friedman,
however, has constructed a hostage crisis which transcends the usual
Hollywood formulas and cliches.  CADILLAC MAN puts a new spin on an old
wheel by being the first hostage movie I can think of to feature a confused
terrorist who doesn't know what he wants--a terrorist whose only demand is
that the police "go away."  The movie also adds the new twist of having its
hero, Robin Williams, try to TALK his way out of the crisis rather than
SHOOT his way out.
        CADILLAC MAN has an overly long set-up, but once the movie kicks
into gear, it gets a lot of mileage out of an intriguing premise.  Williams
plays a car salesman whose personal life is in shambles.  He has serious
female trouble with not only his girlfriend (Lori Petty) but also his
ex-wife (Pamela Reed) and his money-draining mistress, splendidly played by
Fran Drescher.  At first, the movie seems kind of forced, especially
Williams' voice-over narration, which is meant to establish his character.
But just when you start to get impatient and begin wondering what the point
is, Tim Robbins literally comes crashing into the movie, and the story
quickly comes into focus.
        How does Robbins fit into the picture?  His wife (Annabella
Sciorra) and Robin Williams work at the same auto show-room.  Robbins is
crazed with the idea that she is having an affair with any or all of the
salesmen so he gets an AK-47, drives his motorcycle through the show-room
window and takes the entire dealership hostage, including Williams and all
of the customers.
        Williams gives a fascinating performance as the fast talking
salesman who must use all of his wheeling and dealing skills to gain
Robbins' trust and talk him into releasing the hostages.  A true team
player, Williams never tries to steal the spotlight from the other actors,
all of whom give zesty performances.  Tim Robbins, in particular, is
dazzling as the manic terrorist who isn't playing with a full deck.
Williams and Robbins reportedly improvised many of their scenes, and it's
exhilarating to see them flying by the seats of their pants as they play
off one another.
        CADILLAC MAN is impossible to pigeon-hole: it's not exactly a drama
and not exactly a comedy.  The movie lies in that grey area somewhere in
between, gracefully mixing humor and drama.  Director Roger Donaldson
extracts ample comic relief from a Chinese restaurant close to the hostage
site, where a rude waitress, deliciously played by Lauren Tom, abuses
customers by telling them what and how much to order.
        Unfortunately, CADILLAC MAN sometimes stalls and breaks down; it
could use a major tune up in the editing room.  The movie takes much too
long to get to the hostage crisis, and, even worse, Lori Petty's role as
Williams' fashion conscious girlfriend is virtually irrelevant to the story
line.  Her scenes are unforgivably awkward and unnecessary; they should
have been left on the cutting room floor.
        "The Salesman, The Terrorist, His Wife, and Her Lover" earns extra
brownie points, however, for not being a sequel and for not being a buddy,
police, ghost, or mind-switching movie.  Originality is a rare commodity in
Hollywood; thankfully, CADILLAC MAN has a full tank.

Author
Elisabeth Riba
     CADILLAC MAN opens with shots of a cemetery.  An unlikely place to
begin a movie about cars ... until we focus on the procession stalled
by a broken hearse.  Not only does Robin Williams, the consummate
salesman, pitch the undertaker, he also hits on the widow.
     Despite this sell-at-all-costs attitude (or perhaps because of it)
Williams doesn't move the cars as fast as he once did.  His problems
pile on quickly.  He can't resist the ladies, juggling three of them as
the film starts.  To help meet his expenses, he owes massive debts to
some not-so-savory sources.  And then he receives an ultimatum.
Williams will lose his job unless he can sell twelve cars in two days.
     That sets up a tidy plot--Robin Williams does DEATH OF A SALESMAN.
But just as you think you've got the movie straightened out, it throws
you a curve.  Tim Robbins (BULL DURHAM) takes the dealership hostage.
You see, his wife is having an affair with someone in the office, and he
wants to know who.  Only Williams' practiced patter can free them.
     I found this movie the funniest I've seen all year.  It doesn't
reflect as sharp a vision as other black comedies, but it also isn't as
cruel.
     Generally, the minor characters portrayed broad stereotypes.
However, strong acting took them past the familiar territory.  Both of
Williams' girlfriends had strong personalities, although his ex-wife
seemed rather bland.  Likewise, the other salesmen seemed to blend
together, although the customers all sharply define themselves.
     Tim Robbins basically reprises his role of befuddled innocent from
BULL DURHAM.  All he wants to know was "Who did Donna?"  As his plot
falls apart, his frustration is evident.  He honestly never expected
police to show up.  When they request his demands, he only wants them to
go away.  Despite the situation, you soon sympathize with him.
     Robin Williams is quite credible as the sleazy salesman.  He knows
the reputation and lives up to it.  Williams narrates the bridges and
slower scenes, the camera an invisible passenger in his car.  I found
this technique distracting at times, although his points were often
valid.
     Robin Williams has definitely graduated from the pack of Seventies'
comics.  While much of the SNL/SCTV crowd has stagnated, he takes us
from laughs to near tears in seconds.  If future movies continue in the
vein of CADILLAC MAN and DEAD POETS' SOCIETY, I can see Robin Williams
winning an Oscar within the next decade.
     The language seemed unnecessarily strong, but didn't detract too
much from the story.  Otherwise, it was a marvelous film.  The
soundtrack consisted of older tunes.  In some ways, this added to the
image of Robin Williams as a dying breed.
     Although I enjoy most movies, I'm offering unequivocal praise here.
See this film and do so soon.  I'm afraid that the summer blockbusters
will roll CADILLAC MAN right out of the theaters.  But that's a shame,
because this definitely deserves a test drive.

Author
Robert Dorsett
     CADILLAC MAN stars Robin Williams as Joey O'Brien, a car salesman
in New  York.  The first third of the film documents his various
personal problems: he's juggling relationships with four women, owes a
mobster $20,000, and will lose his job the next day, unless he sells
twelve new cars.  He is eventually put in a situation in which he'll
have to reverse his losing streak, or he'll lose his life.
     The movie sounds trite, and it is, to a degree.  It's essentially
yet another platform for Williams to strut his stuff (and is vaguely
reminiscent of GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM).  The principal gag is that Joey
can argue himself out of anything, but life is conspiring to make it all
an up-hill battle.  The production quality, however, raises it out of
the gutter: it has a good supporting cast, and isn't *quite* as
clear-cut as the advertisements make out.
     There are a number of good gags, both subtle and overt.  It won't
have people rolling in the aisles, but it has its moments.  I'd give it
a 6/10, or three stars.  It's a "feel-good," Christmassy sort of flick.
It won't be the blockbuster of the summer, but then again, films
released in mid-May rarely are.
