Title
Review for Mr. Saturday Night (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MR. SATURDAY NIGHT (1992)  *** 1/2 Directed by Billy Crystal. Written by
Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz, Babaloo Mandel. Editing, Ken Beyda. Music, Marc
Shaiman. Production Design, Albert Brenner. Produced by Billy Crystal and
Peter Schindler. Cast : Billy Crystal, David Paymer, Julie Warner, Helen
Hunt, Mary Mara, Jerry Orbach, Ron Silver, Sage Allen, Michael Weiner,
Jerry Lewis, et al. A Columbia Release. 110 min. Rated R (language).
Language is constantly inventing or reviving expressions. Two current ones
are illustrated by comedian Billy Crystal playing comedian Buddy Young, Jr.
and dedicating his life to in-your-face jokes that keep pushing the
envelope.
Created by Crystal in 1984 for HBO and repeated on "Saturday Night Live,"
Buddy now gets full, favorite-comic treatment in Crystal's excellent
directorial start.  The character is fine honed, assuming you can say this
about someone whose humor is not exactly Wildeian or Shavian.
"Mr. Saturday Night" is the biography of now-aged Buddy and his brother
Stan, told in alternating flashbacks and flashforwards, with nearly equal
time given to the present.
The two Yankelman boys are broad, in-house comics who keep their family in
stitches. At their first public appearance on Amateur Nite (sic), Stan, 18,
gets cold feet, but remains in the wings, encouraging Abie, 16, who, at the
last second, has taken on the name of Buddy Young, Jr.
Nice, quiet, sensitive Stan, stays on with the raucous Buddy as the latter
serves his apprenticeship and reaches specialized fame in the Borscht
Belt's circuit, culminating at Grossinger's in 1950.
While Buddy convulses his audiences, Stan, in the background, is a perfect
definition of "factotum." He is Figaro to Buddy's Count Almaviva, his
manager, gofer,soundboard, as well as the butt of his brother's whims and
ego. Occasionally too becomes an unwilling, resentful  pimp, as when he
brings to Buddy an admirer, Elaine (Julie Warner). Stan is attracted to her
but it is Buddy who marries the charming young woman.
Buddy rises to becoming  an increasingly important Las Vegas performer,
though always billed below the headliners. In a clever bit, his appearance
on the Ed Sullivan show is a catastrophe, since he follows the Beatles
before a frenzied, hysterical  audience of youths. Still, he does get TV
celebrity as "Mr. Saturday Night," though never attaining superstardom.
Actors never stop acting in real life, but this isn't always evident.  Most
comics are non-stop performers too, but the nature of their trade is such
that their off-stage jokes are always obvious.
Buddy, if not the ultimate, is the archetypical New York Jewish comedian,
conceived, written and played with great inside-track knowledge and much
affection, colossal warts and all. He is a monomaniacally compulsive
jokester 24 hours a day, to the point that only one-liners and gags count
for him.
Being so set in his tunnel-vision ways, he becomes self-destructive, flubs
his chances, loses sponsors and exploits even those who love him (brother,
wife, daughter), through neglect and jokes at their expense. Anything for a
laugh, any time.
Buddy's compulsive, incessant joking does not spare events such as his
wedding,  the birth of his child, his being at his dying mother's side,
even her funeral too. Yet on those occasions the film manages sometimes to
transcend the tacky and the crude, and can introduce bittersweet moments of
true pathos.
The movie is a two-hour homage to generations of ethnic jokemeisters and
their shticks.  It would take a computer to analyze all the ingredients,
the name comics who enter this amalgam. Yet, Crystal's Buddy is both a
composite and a comic in his own right.
But he is no human being by common norms. Like many one-track-mind
professionals, he is self-centered, has no personal dimensions, or, for
that matter, a meaningful private life. In vague terms which place much of
the onus on Buddy, we learn that his daughter's life has been a failure.
His wife, the lovely Elaine, was introduced in 1950 as the perfect mate:
witty, gutsy, lively with repartee... Later though, when we meet her
repeatedly, she has receded into the background. Her personality has
disappeared.
Whilst all those around Buddy fade into stooges or supporting characters,
the movie makes an exception by sketching with deft irony and much
affection Buddy's mother, thus salvaging some family values. Mostly though,
it shows with sharp realism the perpetual insecurity of showbiz people,
even at the height of their reputation.
Above all, the movie works in, as its second major, as well as most
original element, the Buddy-Stan relationship, ambiguous yet clear, built
on  narcissism and monstrous insensitivity on one side, antagonism,
devotion and frustration on the other, and a weird kind of love under the
surface.
As Stan, David Paymer quietly steals every scene he appears in.  When,
"tired of shlepwork," he retires, the film almost acquires a tragic tinge.
It is an Osca-caliber performance. Billy Crystal's supercharged acting is
striking too, as a monochord, more obvious tour-de-force.
The excellent playing extends to the supporting actors: young agent Helen
Hunt who tries, against the comic's own self-defeating nature, to give the
aged Buddy a second chance; Jerry Orbach as her boss ; or Ron Silver as a
big-time film director who used to idolize Buddy.
The gallery of characters is also reinforced by the precise physical
casting of two youngsters as the teen-age brothers, and by the  make-up of
Stan as an old man. Parchment-faced Buddy however, in spite of the
much-advertised, lengthy cosmetic sessions, made me uncomfortable. It felt
as though the eyes were peering from behind a plastic mask
The story's structure tends to be a bit systematically repetitious. It
hammers its points, especially the swinging pendulum between rapport and
alienation in the two brothers. In the last act you sense that the writers
are desperately seeking a wrap-up. And since movies cannot let go of the
odd notion that performers, whether young or old, deserve more pathos and
sympathy than anyone else, "Mr. Saturday Night" too oversentimentalizes the
actors and the showbiz profession.
As they should, the jokes run realistically from crude to indifferent, with
occasional fresh gems. Equally true-to-life is Buddy's repertory, strong on
insults but cautious on political issues.
A hilarious, lightning-fast scene with bread rolls would have made Charlie
Chaplin proud of Crystal. But there is much more than rib-tickling to this
suprisingly complex and ultimately affecting view of a lifetime in schlock.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Mark Shneyder
     I attended the press screening (courtesy of a friend who works for
a local radio station) for MR. SATURDAY NIGHT last night.
     First of all, don't go by the zillion of ads on TV that boast
quotes from all the different movie critics proclaiming this picture as
a guaranteed Oscar biggie.  It's not an Oscar movie but Billy Crystal
does deserve a lot of recognition for telling the story of thousands of
stand-up comics, unlike Billy Crystal himself, who never make it big or
who never make it period.  It is also a story about what a cruel thing
show business could be and how a person can be consumed by it and forget
about a thing called life.
     Buddy Young, Jr. (played by Crystal) is shown through four decades
as a very bitter, selfish, career-driven comic who forgets about the
people that are closest to him--his wife, his kids, and his brother
who manages him for some fifty years.  You really wonder why his wife
never left him because there is just nothing affectionate or warm about
the guy, and why his brother never walked out on him after being Buddy's
constant target of sarcastic abuse filled with meanness for all these
years.
     Second, Billy Crystal is not able to carry this movie.  I'm the
biggest Crystal fan but this wasn't an Oscar performance by any means.
There are only two scenes that were really powerful--Buddy visiting his
91-year-old mom at a nursing home and his eulogy at her memorial
service.  Otherwise, after a hilarious opening scene in a family living
room, the movie just drags (I looked at my watch 3 times :-)).
     This is a not a happy funny movie.  This is a movie about an
unhappy guy who tried to be funny.  There are few good funny bits such
as when Buddy meets a Hollywood producer (played by Ron Silver) to get a
part in a movie.  (The imitation of a reporter in a basketball locker
room was a riot!)  But overall, no belly-ache laughs and not a single
joke that made people laugh for too long....
