Title
Review for Beverly Hills Ninja (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Chuck Dowling
Beverly Hills Ninja (1997) ** out of ***** - Cast:Chris Farley, Nicollette
Sheridan, Chris Rock. Writers:Mark Feldberg and Mitch Klebanoff. Director:
Dennis Dugan.
Director Dugan's previous film "Happy Gilmore" was basically a one-joke film,
but with bite to it thanks to Adam Sandler and the on-the-edge character
that he played. "Beverly Hills Ninja" is also a one-joke film, but the joke
is presented in the first minute of the film and then is beaten to death for
another 90 minutes.
Chris Farley ("Tommy Boy") again plays a big klutz, thankfully he knows his
range and won't try to stretch beyond his abilities. This time out he's an
orphan who was discovered by a group of ninjas who take him into their care
and raise him according to their ways. They believe him to be "The Great
White Ninja", an ancient legend of the ninja. One day, all the ninjas go out
on a mission and leave him behind, because he's so inept. While causing mass
destruction just hanging around at his home, a damsel in distress (Sheridan)
comes to hire a ninja. (Boy, this really seems ridiculous as I write it, and
you know they didn't pitch any of the actual story to the studio. I'm sure
all they said was "It's Chris Farley as a clumsy ninja! Huh? How about that?
100 million easy!").
Well, Sheridan's appearance causes Farley to follow her to Beverly Hills,
California (Get it? Beverly Hills Ninja? It's funny!). Once there, it's
another "fish-out-of-water" story of sorts, as Farley gets to discover all
the wonders of America (basically just hotels and strip clubs). He meets up
with a bellboy (Rock, in an annoying performance) and they search for
whatever it is that is supposed to be going on at this point. All I can tell
you is that Chris Farley gets hurt a lot, and that's supposed to be funny.
"Beverly Hills Ninja" (along with last year's "Black Sheep") proves why
"Tommy Boy" worked as a comedy. "Tommy Boy" was funny because Farley is doing
his schtick, but someone is there to make fun of it. That's what's funny,
making fun of the idiot. Here, Farley does his schtick, and that's it.
Farley's antics, by themselves, are just not funny. His character is nothing
but yet another rip-off of Peter Sellers' Inspector Clouseau character, but
without one ounce of intelligence.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Walter Frith

What do you get when you cross repetitive slapstick and wooden
direction?  Enough to fill a five minute skit.  Unfortunately 'Beverly
Hills Ninja' runs an excruciating eighty eight minutes and its bad
qualities and juvenile antics are visible in the first few minutes
which dominate the entire film.  Chris Farley stars as a ninja wannabe
who becomes involved with a sexy girl and a counterfeiting plot and
ends up on a journey from his Asian home to Beverly Hills, California
where he travels to follow up on a job he's performed for the beautiful
Nicolette Sheridan who plays the girlfriend of the movie's bad guy
who's really out to set him up as revenge for the death of her sister.
Chris Farley has appeared in supporting roles in 'Coneheads' and
'Wayne's World 2' (both 1993) and has since had leading roles
co-starring with fellow SNL comedian David Spade in 'Tommy Boy' (1995)
and 'Black Sheep' (1996).  'Beverly Hills Ninja' will be remembered as
one of the worst films of 1997 and perhaps of all time as Farley
projects a fake wisdom of the ninja culture in his dialogue while
coming off as phony and unfunny.  He just doesn't have it as a
slapstick comic and the entire movie runs like a single handedly played
out Three Stooges skit.  The plot holes and unresolved conclusion will
satisy anyone under the age of 12 and that's fine but is that the
extend of Farley's reach as a comedian?  The repetitive and
outrageously insulting so called gags in 'Beverly Hills Ninja' will not
do much for the career of director Dennis Dugan who made 'Problem
Child' (1990) and the people who will cheer for this movie will be
those who felt that 'Tommy Boy' and 'Black Sheep' were stiffed at the
Academy Awards.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Chris Farley, Robin Shou, Nicollette Sheridan, Chris Rock, Soon
Tek-Oh, Nathaniel Parker Director: Dennis Dugan Producers: Brad Krevoy,
Steve Stabler, Bran Jenkel Screenplay: Mark Feldberg & Mitch Klebanoff
Fat is not necessarily funny, and this movie carries ill proportions of
both. Chris Farley, a relative unknown quantity in films, carries the
weight of his medium like a naive virgin. He is "The Great White Hope",
the fulfilment of an ancient prophecy - a white child will be found
adrift the shores of Japan, and he will become the greatest ninja of his
generation. Myth becomes farce, as babe becomes man. This is perhaps
where the prophecy should end, before the "Great White Ninja" makes a
"Big Fat Fool" of himself.
Wherever Farley treads, disaster follows. Almost every scene is awash
with disaster being caused by Farley, or being heaped on Farley. There's
something sickly and amusing about watching this accident-prone babe in
arms look ridiculously clumsy on screen. His earnest and sincere
actions, make his attempts at humour grow along the accidental sort.
Sabotage and stealth are his tools, and chaos is both a friend and foe.
Unfortunately, the end result of this single dimensional joke is
watching Humpty Dumpty fall down, over and over again. Although certain
scenes are idiosyncratically hilarious, it becomes difficult to sustain
an entire movie on such lean humour. Not everybody will appreciate this
comedy of excessive clumsiness when lame only becomes lamer. "The Great
White Ninja" will not win the hearts of an audience, by simply twirling
a couple of num-chukas about and hoping it will somehow crack a skull or
two.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chris Farley, Robin Shou, Nicollette Sheridan, Chris Rock, 
      Soon Tek-Oh, Nathaniel Parker 
Director: Dennis Dugan 
Producers: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, Bran Jenkel  
Screenplay: Mark Feldberg & Mitch Klebanoff 
Cinematography: Arthur Albert 
Music: George S. Clinton 
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures 
     Early publicity for BEVERLY HILLS NINJA offered reasons for 
optimism.  Print ads released last summer trumpeted the starring duo of 
Chris Farley, the heir apparent to John Candy's brand of "big man" 
humor, and Jackie Chan, the human pretzel.  Somewhere along the way, 
however, Chan bowed out -- probably as soon as he read the script 
(credited to Mark Feldberg and Mitch Klebanoff).  I don't know the exact 
reason for the action superstar's defection, but, given the final 
product (and it doesn't take a great deal of imagination to guess what 
his role would have been), it was probably a wise career move.  Chan's 
latest effort to hit U.S. shores, FIRST STRIKE, may not be the best 
movie released this month, but it's a significant improvement over this 
lame comedy. 
     BEVERLY HILLS NINJA is essentially a one-joke film.  That joke has 
to do with Chris Farley (TOMMY BOY, BLACK SHEEP), who plays one of the 
clumsiest men on Earth, crashing into objects or having things fall on 
his head. There's a reason why cartoons, which often rely on similar 
tactics, are only a few minutes long. The first few times Farley gets 
hammered, there is some amusement value, but, soon after, it grows 
repetitious, then tedious. The movie can't seem to find anything more 
entertaining or original to do than having its star walk into lamp 
posts, crash through glass windows, or smack his head on tree branches.  
Is this what American movie-goers really want to see?  Or is it just 
what Hollywood, which is known for underestimating viewers' 
intelligence, thinks they're looking for? 
     As a baby, Haru (Farley) is found by a Ninja clan and raised as one 
of their own.  Initially, they hope he is the "Great White Ninja" whose 
coming is foretold by prophecy, but disappointment arrives when it 
becomes apparent that he can't master the most basic skills necessary to 
be a warrior.  Haru's brother, Gobei (Robin Shou), puts it bluntly:  
"He's fat, he's a fool, and he's an embarrassment to Ninjas everywhere."  
Determined to prove himself, Haru agrees to help Alison Page (Nicollette 
Sheridan), a blond damsel in distress who comes to the Ninjas seeking 
aid.  Mistaking Haru for a master, she asks him to spy on her good-for-
nothing boyfriend (Nathaniel Parker).  Shortly thereafter, she 
disappears, and Haru fears for her safety.  After finding a match book 
that says "Beverly Hills", he decides to go after her, in case she needs 
rescuing.  His adopted father, the venerable Ninja master, Sensei (Soon 
Tek-Oh), sends Gobei to the States as Haru's "shadow."  Once in 
California, Haru makes all the usual "fish out of water" mistakes, none 
of which lead to anything close to the level of humor attained by better 
films with similar ideas, such as CROCODILE DUNDEE. 
     It's rather amazing to see how agile Farley is in certain 
situations (he performed some of his own stunts), but his unexpected 
athleticism doesn't make up for the film's lack of entertaining 
material.  BEVERLY HILLS NINJA is even less ambitious than director 
Dennis Dugan's last feature, HAPPY GILMORE.  At least that movie has an 
edge; this one doesn't have anything.  Farley might want to be like John 
Candy, but, while Candy knew how to make an audience laugh, Farley keeps 
missing the mark.  His brand of humor, which doesn't vary significantly 
from film-to-film, isn't just juvenile, it's lackluster and unfunny.  
And, because BEVERLY HILLS NINJA relies so heavily on the comic's 
limited talent, the movie sinks like a rock.  No one, not even Jackie 
Chan with all of his enthralling derring-do, could have saved BEVERLY 
HILLS NINJA from its ignominious fate.   
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
