Title
Review for I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
The slasher movie was reborn last year with the success of  
Scream, a clever self aware thriller written by Kevin       
Williamson. Scream was notable for it's characters          
commenting on the very cliches that they found   
themselves placed in. But I think the reason it was so good 
and so successful was that it didn't insult the intelligence
of it's audience. When the slasher movie began to die out in
the late 80's (remember Jason Takes Manhattan?), it was     
because they had hit rock bottom in terms of acting,        
writing, and production values  Kevin Williamson understands
that his audience is smarter than that. His follow up to    
Scream is a smart and terrifying horror movie that works on 
nearly every level.                                         
Suddenly it's one year later, and Julie (Hewitt) has come   
home from college. One of the things that makes this movie  
work is that it creates actual characters and gives them a  
few scenes of development. It's alot scarier when a         
character you care about is in danger. Most of this occurs  
here, as the movie depicts how the characters have grown    
apart and never recovered from the incident. Anyways, when  
she arrives home, Julie gets a note that says you know what.
Suddenly, they are all being stalked by an unknown man in a 
fisherman outfit. The lighting and camera work, which hide  
his face, are extremely effective in making this figure very
frightening. The screenplay throws in numerous suspects,    
trying to fool the viewer as to the identity of the killer. 
But this is not a whodunit. It's a slaher flick, and it is  
the best possible example of that genre.                    
The acting is top notch across the board. Jennifer Love     
Hewitt (Scott Wolf is awaiting the next Williamson script)  
is just as good as her Party of 5 co-star Neve Campbell was 
in Scream. Sarah Michelle Gellar, from TV's highly          
entertaining Buffy the Vampire Slayer, has a terrific screen
presence and is a star in the making. And Anne Heche has a  
creepy cameo as the demented sister of the accident victim. 
First time director Jim Gillespie seems like a pro the way  
he creates a spooky atmosphere and hits the viewer with one 
scare after another.                                        
In the old days of slasher movies, they hired actors based  
on who could scream the loudest and who had the biggest     
breasts. During this rebirth, they find talented actresses  
from quality tv shows and seem to actually be auditioning   
for the supporting characters. This movie is told pretty    
straight, and makes no excuses for being a slasher movie.   
This is a good thing, because I am a fan of this genre and  
it's about time talented people started to work in it again.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt; Sarah Michelle Gellar; Ryan Phillippe &
Freddie Prinze Jr.
I Know What You Did Last Summer comes from the same screenwriter who brought
us last year's Scream. Jennifer Love Hewitt; Sarah Michelle Gellar; Ryan
Phillippe and Freddie Prinze Jr. play two couples who are out celebrating
the Fourth of July, and the beauty pageant win of Helen Shivers (Gellar).
After a night of partying, they drive home along a deserted mountain road.
On the way down the road, they hit a man. They decide their only way out is
to dispose of the body. Although disposing of the body turns out to be more
difficult than they had expected. When it is accomplished they swear never
to speak of it again.
At the end of the summer they all go their separate ways Julie Janes
(Hewitt) is off to university and Helen is off to fame and fortune in New
York. Over the course of the next year the two couples break up and the four
friends loose touch with one another. That is, until Julie comes home from
her first year of university and finds a hand written note waiting for her,
stating simply -- I know what you did last summer. None of the four, whom
have all returned home, have any idea who wrote the letter. Quite quickly
all become convinced that they have a real problem.
The note's author goes about terrorizing the four, as well as leaving the
usual mounting body count in his/her wake. Like Scream, the writing is
sharp, and most of the plot twists work well. As with Scream, screenwriter
Kevin Williamson seems to be taking shots at the horror movie genre. With
blatant scenes like the female victim running up the stairs to get away from
the killer when she should be running out the door. This brings me to the
last 20 minutes of the movie.
The audience that I screened the movie with laughed at many of the so-called
scarier scenes at the end of the movie when the lead characters were in dire
peril. This isn't a knock against the movie by any means. Nor am I
suggesting that the movie is so bad that it is funny. The audience was
laughing with the movie, and not at it. One gets the impression that the
makers of I Know What You did Last Summer wanted the final 20 minutes of the
movie to be a very clever send-up of horror flicks. If that was their
intent, then they succeeded.
My only complaint with the movie was the killer. When the killer's identity
is finally revealed I was left asking -- huh? This could also be said
concerning many of my fellow audience members. You actually have to think
about it for a minute to figure it out, not normally a plus for a slasher
film. Which is not to say that you will leave the theater confused, just
having used your brain a little.
The four main cast members were excellent, and as for Hewitt and Gellar, if
their first major starring film roles are any indication, they should both
have bright careers on the big screen ahead of them. Especially Sarah
Michelle Gellar, who will appear in Scream 2 at the end of 1997.

Author
Homer Yen
 The camera zooms in incredibly close .  It focuses on the closed eyes
 of a person presumed dead.  All of a sudden, with a thunderous sound
 effect and an eerie sounding musical pulse, his eyelids open.  The
 camera zooms in incredibly close.  It focuses on one of the characters
 desperately running for her life.  Then, with a thunderous sound
 effect and an eerie sounding musical pulse, she bumps into the killer.
 The camera zooms in incredibly close.  It focuses on a door from where
 seemingly strange sounds emanate.  All of a sudden, with a thunderous
 sound effect and an eerie sounding musical pulse, the doors swing open
 to reveal what's inside.
 Close-up thrill-shots such as these seemed to elicit more laughter
 from the audience rather than genuine fear, which is a pretty good
 sign that you're not watching the thriller that the director had
 originally envisioned.  Rather, you adopt the opinion that the
 characters are so goofy and so unaware of the trouble that they're in,
 that you stop caring about who lives, who dies and where the story
 goes.  Instead, you become more interested in how the characters get
 killed off.   
 The four young teenagers who are the potential sacrificial lambs for
 this movie are  Helen and Barry and Julie and Ray - two couples and
 dear friends to one another.  During the summer just after high school
 graduation, they take a fateful drive down a dark mountain highway.
 Suddenly, without warning, their car hits someone whom the teens
 presume was killed as a result of that collision.  Fearing jail time
 and possible manslaughter charges if they confess, they instead decide
 to dump the body into the ocean and make a pact never to discuss the
 episode again.  A year goes by and things among the four friends begin
 to change.  Relationships fizzle, future dreams crumble, and attitudes
 change.  But, they can not forget what they did.  And apparently,
 neither can someone else.  Someone begins to send letters to all four
 of the teens with the frightening message: "I know what you did last
 summer."  The letter-writer (a figure in a rubber slicker wielding a
 large metal hook) soon makes his presence known and begins to hunt
 down the four teens.  It's now up to the four of them to try to figure
 out who the killer is before it's too late.  
 While this movie has some nice visually eerie effects, too much of
 it's impact had to be generated with extreme close-ups, while the
 level of suspense was choppy at best.  There is so much more that this
 movie could have been, but decided to give us nothing but cheap
 thrills.  It could have been a clever whodunit, but discovering who
 ultimately was the killer made me just shrug my shoulders.  It could
 have explored the changed friendships after a year of adulthood, but
 seemed to only include that aspect to add 15 more minutes to the film.
 It could have given us smarter characters who knew that anytime you're
 alone and you see shadowy figures moving about, you don't walk towards
 them yelling "hello".  Once you yell "hello", you can expect an
 extreme close-up, a thunderous sound effect and an eerie sounding
 musical pulse.  It's difficult to be in suspense when you know what's
 about to happen.  The only redeeming aspect of the movie is that I now
 have a neat idea for a Halloween costume, but I'm not sure if the
 local costume store sells rubber slickers and hooks.  The horror that
 I experienced from this film is realizing that I actually went to see
 it.

Author
Rob Reser
Before you jump on me too harshly for 'liking' this movie let me just
explain a few things. I have seen them all. Every major (and almost
every minor) schlock horror movie you can think of. I have seen; all of
the Kruegers, all of the Jasons, every holiday killer out there, every
scary fable come to life (I am especially waiting for a sequel to
RUMPLESTILTSKIN). I love cheese. The cheesier the better.  Cheesy,
pulpy, schlocky, and, most of all, bloody horror movies are extremely
entertaining to me. Mostly because I can make fun of the characters,
their stupidity, the unlikliness of their situations, the poor judgement
of the victims, the insane way the killer wastes the stupid students,
and, above all, the unwillingness of the killer to expire at the end.
Its FUN! I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER falls right in the middle of
this genre. This movie fits under the sub heading of 'Killer with a
grudge takes out everyone who had anything to do with original incident'
(PROM NIGHT, TERROR TRAIN, MY BLOODY VALENTINE). I give extra marks to
this film for finding a holiday that hadn't previously been chosen (to
the best of my knowledge) - The Fourth of July. Do I really need to tell
you what this movie is about? I don't think so. It is formula to the
end. But is also a lot of fun. It takes place in a small fishing village
fraught with plenty of sharp hooks and gutting instruments. Need I say
more? I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER isn't innovative like SCREAM but
it is fun for anyone who misses the days of the summer camp killers. 2 ˝
spots (out of 4)
Favorite Line: Helens boyfriend: "You know I'm terrified of your
superior I.Q."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe,
Freddie Prinze Jr., Anne Heche, Muse Watson Director: Jim Gillespie
Screenplay: Kevin Williamson based on the novel by Lois Duncan
>From a psychopathic serial killer point of view, why is it more fun to
murder blondes? This post-teen slasher-hacker, man-with-hook gore fest
consist of two blondes and two brunettes. It becomes cliche if I told
you the blondes are a bitchy bimbo beauty queen and a wealthy boozing
boastful bastard, whilst the brunettes carry brains and better
disposition. So who lives and who dies actually becomes a little
dependant on hair colour and the associated characteristics that go
along with it. Nobody wants to see likeable characters become victims of
a butchering heaven, so unleash the wrath of the monster on those who
deserve it the most - the blonde bitch and her bitchier sister, the
bastard boyfriend with blonde hair and the uptight brunette who should
have been a blonde.
If fair was fair and not dependant on the colour of your hair, everybody
should have died by the end of this movie. This is the tale of a murder
within a murder. Four high school grads make the imprudent mistake of
concealing a crime that will haunt them forever. Their actions cannot be
justified by the fact that the person they ran over deserved to die.
What were they thinking? Run a dog over and hope that it won't bite
again? Personally I thought they did a good job. With speeds estimated
at 110 kms/hr it is unlikely the average human being could have survived
such a collision. However, we are referring to the average monster
tormentor from hell and these have a tendency to live forever. So run
the beast down with a car and he'll keep coming after you. Drown him in
the murky depths of a lagoon and he'll open his eyes and wink at you.
Cut of his hand and fling him into the sea and he'll rise again for more
fun.
So I did scream aloud once in this movie, and embarrassingly so. It was
just a loud noise but then again, I'm the jumpy sort and finger shadows
on the wall could scare the daylights out of me. However, I didn't find
this movie as terrifying as "Scream" - purely because there was twice as
much blood curdling screams, multiple mutilating stab wounds and
entrails galore in the latter. But still there is enough blood spilt in
this movie to keep a vampire happy in it's grave this summer. So I did
like this movie's quaint perspective on butchering the blonde and the
beautiful, but I disliked the ordinariness of the villain made out to be
as frightening as my Uncle Ted gone fishing. If you gave me a hook, a
hood and hat, I'd probably think you were going on a holiday.
So last summer was rather forgettable despite the fact we ran a man over
with a car, dumped his body in the sea and tried to lead normal lives
after. Perhaps next summer we should resurrect the two young lovers
separated by an accident and death. That way the monster with the hook
will be motivated to write uplifting notes like:
"I'm sorry I tried to kill you last summer. Let's kiss and make up."
"Forgive and Forget. Let's get together for a BBQ."
"Peace. I only use my hook for the laundry now."
There's nothing better than a peaceful solution to what happened last
summer.

Author
Alex Fung
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER (Columbia - 1997)
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe,
  Freddie Prinze Jr., Muse Wats, Anne Heche, Bridgette Wilson
Screenplay by Kevin Williamson, based on the novel by Lois Duncan
Produced by Neil H. Moritz, Erik Feig, Stokely Chaffin
Directed by Jim Gillespie
Running time: 101 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   You knew it was bound to happen.  With the completely unanticipated
   degree of success enjoyed by Wes Craven's SCREAM from December 1996,
   it was just a matter of time before the revitalized teen slasher
   genre revved back into gear, and I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
   manages to be among the first to capitalize on the trend. As of this
   writing, it's an unqualified hit -- consider that it topped the
   domestic weekend tallies for its first three weeks; only
   megablockbusters MEN IN BLACK, LIAR LIAR, and STAR WARS: SPECIAL
   EDITION have done likewise in 1997 -- and it's sure to give
   credibility to the cost-effective strategy of raiding television
   shows for pretty young starlets in order to assemble an ensemble cast
   which will draw the youth demographic.  Putting aside the lawsuit
   from Miramax over I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER's advertising
   campaign (which touted the film as being from the creator of
   Dimension Films' SCREAM -- in this case, hot screenwriter Kevin
   Williamson penned both), Sony executives have to be grinning from
   ear to ear over the success of their horror entry.
   I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is fairly generic in scope -- it has
   the standard setup of a group of teens stalked by a homicidal madman
   -- and uses familiar scare tactics, but it's sort of fun in an
   offhanded way.  There are too many standard fright devices employed
   in the film (eyes suddenly opening with a startle, the presumed-dead
   lurching back to life, attackers popping out from the darkness -- any
   of this sound familiar?) to take it seriously; it's simple popcorn
   fun.  I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER obviously isn't as
   self-consciously knowing as SCREAM, but it's not aspiring to be as
   similarly clever.
   The film focuses on four teenagers reaching a pivotal moment in their
   young lives -- high school graduation, and the promise of bright
   futures ahead -- but it's really only interested in its female
   characters, best friends Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt from PARTY
   OF FIVE) and newly-crowned local beauty pageant queen Helen Shivers
   (Sarah Michelle Gellar, from the television series BUFFY THE VAMPIRE
   SLAYER).  As is often the case in modern slasher films, Julie and
   Helen serve both as the chief protagonists which drive the plot
   forward, and as the requisite lust objects; a profuse number of
   scenes in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER find its heroines either
   in swimsuits or scurrying about in revealing attire, and there's an
   abundance of tittilative cleavage shots (it's actually bemusing to
   observe how director Jim Gillespie strategically frames his shots).
   In fact, given the film's preponderance for ogling its pretty
   starlets, it's somewhat amusing that Bridgette Wilson, who plays
   Helen's older sister Elsa, is cast against type as a brainy,
   no-nonsense department store manager (fully clothed throughout, yet).
   After a cozy July 4th evening on the beach, complete with wistful
   introspection and boozing, Julie and Helen, and their respective
   beaus Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.) and Barry Cox (Ryan
   Phillippe), pile into Barry's car and head home.  While driving back,
   Ray is distracted by Barry's drunken antics and plows into something
   in the road.  They all begin to panic when they realise that they've
   just run over someone, and after much frantic bickering, Barry
   convinces the group to dispose of the incriminating evidence by
   dumping the body into water.
   Jump forward to a year later.  The formerly tight-knit group has
   splintered apart after the incident, friendship giving way to guilt,
   bitterness, and resentment, and their once-promising futures have
   since dissipated: Helen's acting aspirations in New York flopped,
   and the beauty queen is reduced to manning the cosmetic counter at
   her family's department store; Ray toils as a fisherman. seemingly
   resigned to his lot in life; Barry staggers about on his family's
   estate in a haze; former scholar Julie crashed and burned in her
   freshman year at her prestigious Ivy League college.  Suitably gaunt
   and haunted, Julie returns back home to the North Carolina fishing
   community where a mysterious note awaits, predictably reading "I
   know what you did last summer!" (as opposed, I guess, to "You may
   have already won ten million dollars!")  In the wake of this ominous
   message, Julie reunites the reluctant clique in order to determine
   who's behind it.  And the killing begins...
   The costumed killer in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is decked out
   in full fisherman's garb, complete with slicker and hat, and wields
   a razor-sharp hook as his preferred instrument of death.  The film
   makes a point of obscuring the madman's face and coyly drops clues
   throughout in order to play up the mystery of his alter-ego, but
   ultimately I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER doesn't really play fair
   in terms of revealing the identity of the killer.  When The
   Fisherman is finally unmasked, one can sense a collective sentiment
   of Who Cares? erupting from the audience.
   For awhile, it appears as if I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is
   going to veer towards a more psychological approach to the plot --
   the depiction of the characters' lives irrevocably shattered by their
   murderous deed is effective, and they all seem to walk around as
   empty shells of their former selves.  Julie, who was the most adamant
   against dumping the body after the hit-and-run, appears the most
   tormented and harrowed of the group after the fact, and after
   one-third of the film, I almost expected a resolution involving a
   schizophrenic Julie to be behind it all, although shots of a
   weathered male hand grasping the Fisherman's hook sort of ruined that
   misguided notion.
   I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, then, is fairly conventional in
   terms of the handling its slasher elements, and Mr. Gillespie's
   feature debut is a competent if uneventful piece of work.  Although
   it can be difficult to generate real tension from such familiar
   scenarios -- I've honestly always wondered how a maniac, walking as
   if on a leisurely stroll, can *still* always seem to gain on the
   frantic, fleeing heroine --  his traditional handling of various
   sequences in the film doesn't help matters.  After a character
   endures a harrowing ordeal, when the film cross-cuts between the
   character finally within the reach of safety and the look of relief
   on the character's face, it's a telltale sign that something
   unfortunate might befall the character, and any opportunity for a
   shock or a surprise is consequently destroyed.
   The sequence which is the most effective in the film is the critical
   hit-and-run scene; the mounting tension and escalating sense of
   panic as the situation begins spiraling out of control is palpable,
   and as played by the lead actors, wholly credible and convincing.  I
   particularly enjoyed the touch of having the Barry character exclaim
   "My car!" in the aftermath of the collision, which is both darkly
   humourous and frankly authentic.
   In general, the performances from the ensemble cast of I KNOW WHAT
   YOU DID LAST SUMMER aren't outstanding, but generally appealing and
   perky.  While the leads are fine, the striking performance in the
   film is that of Anne Heche, who in a small role is disquietly creepy
   as Melissa Egan, the sister of the dead man fished from the water.
   After some nondescript performances earlier this year, it's a relief
   to see her return to form -- I was beginning to worry.
   As in SCREAM, Mr. Williamson includes some knowing references in his
   screenplay for I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER (which he incidentally
   wrote during the SCREAM shoot) which are amusing.  There's a cute
   reference to Jodie Foster's Clarice in THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS by
   the heroines as they nervously approach Melissa Egan's out-of-the-way
   house.  While he's an interesting writer and a particularly good
   scenarist, I still find much of Mr. Williamson's attempts at snappy
   teen dialogue to be particularly awkward.  Who wasn't wincing during
   SCREAM when Neve Campbell and Skeet Ulrich were exchanging clumsy
   dialogue about their is-it-an-R-or-is-it-a-PG-13 relationship?
   Along the same lines, in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, "You feel
   my pain" just doesn't cut it.
   I don't think it spoils much to reveal that after the film has
   culminated, there's a final coda in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
   which is all too generic -- a standard last "Boo!" to leave the
   audience nervously tittering as they exit the theatres (much along
   the same vein as Julie Delpy's remarkably hairy chest in the
   oft-run trailer for the upcoming AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS).
   This coda teases at a sequel, which is par for the genre, but in this
   case, due to the film's surprisingly potent success, a sequel is
   indeed in the works.  As Mr. Williamson himself wrote, "Let's face it
   -- these days, you gotta have a sequel."
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"I was reminded for some reason of something Fred Kareman, my acting
 teacher, had once said: 'Most people in this business should be selling
 zippers on 7th Avenue.'" - Tom DiCillo

Author
Berge Garabedian
Another chilling slasher flic from the mind of the horror-meister
himself, Kevin Williamson (writer of SCREAM (8/10) and SCREAM 2). Hip
cast, hip soundtrack, hip movie.
PLOT:
Four high-school friends accidentally run over someone with their car
and kill him. They decide to dump the body into the water, and not tell
anybody their "incident of the summer". One year later, someone in
their town mysteriously begins to taunt them about what they "did last
summer". And that's when the haunting and scaring begins... 
CRITIQUE:
Engaging horror thriller that was very reminiscent of SCREAM, and packs
a lot of thrills and chills, within its slick MTV-ized packaged
product. And even though the first hour is more mystery than anything,
don't be fooled into believing that the last half of the film doesn't
contain the many gruesome bloody murders to which we have become
accustomed. Because plenty of them do transpire (although many less
than in SCREAM). 
I was never bored by this story, since it unfolded as it went, and
allowed the viewer to continually keep guessing on the perpetrator's
identity. That puzzle was fun, as was the costume in which the murderer
exterminated his victims (fisherman's outfit, complete with
hook...always seemed kind of eerie to me). The young, hip cast was
adequate, with Hewitt doing her best Alyssa Milano impression, and
Heche pulling off an excellent hick from the boonies. I must say that I
was surprised to find no blatant T&A shots present in this movie,
although the two female stars did sport enough tight shirts to cut the
circulation in any movie-watcher's system.
The down side was that much like in SCREAM, the murderer did just seem
to be around when the main cast was present, and always seemed to
disappear (a bit too conveniently at times) when anyone else appeared.
That aside, the movie intensified as it went on, charged through a
quick 90 minutes, and left enough room for one and all to look forward
to another hip, young sequel in the future, tentatively entitled I
STILL KNOW. Warm those nachos...here I come !!!
Little Known Facts: 
Sarah Michelle Gellar studied Tae Kwon Do for five years, and now she's
taking kickboxing, boxing, street fighting and gymnastics.
Kevin Williamson was born to a fisherman and a story-telling mother in
New Bern, North Carolina. He set the film in a town close to his
boyhood home, Southport, because it seemed like the "ideal place for
the setting" (based on the book by Lois Duncan). The movie was actually
filmed there as well.
Williamson's dedication to writing is revealed in his daily habits.
Reportedly, he only gets four hours of sleep on a "very uncomfortable
couch, so I won't sleep too much," and then wakes at 4 am to begin
writing.


Author
Jamie Peck
Columbia / 1:40 / 1997 / R (language, violence, gore, terror)
Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt; Sarah Michelle Gellar; Freddie Prinze, Jr.; Ryan Phillippe; 
Anne Heche; Muse Watson; Bridgette Wilson; Johnny Galecki 
Director: Jim Gillespie 
Screenplay: Kevin Williamson 
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" is just the kind of horror movie
that last December's hit slasher satire "Scream" poked fun at. It's an
ironic connection, seeing as how screenwriter-of-the-moment Kevin
Williamson penned both of them, adapting the former from Lois Duncan's
popular young adult novel and creating the latter from scratch. But
while "Summer" boasts a much more solemn tone than "Scream" (and bears
more flaws), it certainly proves Williamson's staying power -- simply
put that whether the guy's milking or laughing at the genre, he's
quite solid at doing it.
The movie tells the story of four friends -- there's prim, sensible
Julie ("Party of Five"'s Jennifer Love Hewitt), beauty queen Helen
(Sarah Michelle Gellar of TV's "Buffy the Vampire Slayer"), boozy jock
Barry ("White Squall"'s Ryan Phillippe) and low-key outcast Ray
(Freddie Prinze, Jr. of "The House of Yes"). The summer before the
quartet of friends venture off to college to pursue their respective
dreams, they're out celebrating the July 4th holiday on the
beach. Barry becomes too intoxicated to drive his new BMW back to
their Southport, North Carolina fishing village hometown, so Ray takes
over for him. But along the way, Barry's drunken rantings distract the
rest of the party, and they accidentally hit a passer-by while quickly
cruising up a windy mountain road. Their semi-reluctant decision to
dump the body off a nearby pier leads to an impulsive crime of passion
of which the less divulged, the more terrifying the sequence is.
Fast forward a year later and the gang are all husks of their former
promising selves, driven to personal failure by remorse. As if 12
months of guilt weren't enough, it also appears that someone knows
their secret after Julie receives an ominous note bearing the titular
sentence and the group begins being stalked by a psycho clad in
Gorton's Fisherman getup -- a rain slicker and hat that mask his
identity. Is it the creepy class nerd (Johnny Galecki) who possibly
witnessed the initial mishap? The victim's backwoods sister (very good
Anne Heche)? One of the four overcome with grief? Or someone different
altogether?
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" generates a strong undercurrent of
tension from this setup, but its problem area is its anti-climactic
boat chase finale. After doing so well on so many levels, it turns
into a "Scooby-Doo" episode without the hippie and the talking dog --
once unmasked, you half expect the killer to cry, "And I would have
gotten away with it too if it weren't for you meddling kids!" The
actual identity of the villain and how it is revealed is another flaw
-- a character who's remained an enigma for 85 minutes starts rattling
off one-liners ("Welcome aboard!") like he's Bruce Willis or
something. And the movie's concluding scene is illogical; it seems
tacked-on to generate one last scare, but only in that sense does it
succeed.
It's a sad send-off, because there's much to appreciate about the
build-up. Williamson's strong point is in creating interesting
protagonists, even if these kids aren't as educated in slasher cinema
as the "Scream" gang. The four leads have charisma to spare,
especially Prinze as the loner whose actions cast most of the
suspicion his way. Hewitt, who is probably supposed to be the main
character (she gets the most screen time), has an appealing, low-key
presence, even though I found myself wishing she'd do something with
her hair. All of them holler with gusto, and maybe that's what matters
most. Williamson is also inventive with death scenes; when the
Fisherman meat hooks one person in the jugular and yanks them across a
stove that's boiling crabs, you'll never look at seafood in quite the
same way again.
The movie looks beautifully downbeat, shot in somber hues of blue and
gray that fast establish a notably grim tone. I don't know if horror
flicks are Oscar fodder, but it'd be nice if director of photography
Denis Crossan got a nod. Then again, all of the technical credits are
first-rate -- production-wise, this movie excels. "I Know What You Did
Last Summer"'s undoings restrain it from attaining the level of
"Scream," but, that icky conclusion aside, it's still pretty much a
scream.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Boyd Petrie
I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
Rated R for strong, graphic violence, terror, and language.
---------  Out of 4 stars: *** (3 Stars)
Starring: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Freddie Prinze Jr., Anne Heche, and
Johnny Galecki.
Some movies are meant for entertainment purposes only.  These are the
films which you almost want to laugh at because the writing is bad, or
the acting sucks.  I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is one of these
films.  The acting is quite good for a film of this genre, but the
writing is very mediocre, bordering on hideous.  Based on Lois
Duncan's revered novel, I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER's story is
changed dramatically on the transition from novel to screen.  Instead
of being a psychologically probing teenage story, LAST SUMMER ends up
as a horror film, with some psychological moments in the first hour.
In fact, the first hour is very well done, with characters you get to
know and like, and some you don't like, and that is when screenwriter
Kevin Williamson shifts the mood to horror.
I have no objections to the alteration, but I will say that much of
his writing is rather cheesy at times.  This is quite unusual coming
from the writer of the highest-grossing horror film SCREAM.  What made
that film such a success though, was the smart, ironic take on the
teen slasher genre.  LAST SUMMER doesn't exactly make fun of motion
pictures as SCREAM did (I think the closest example was when a
character commented, "Jodie Foster did this in a movie..."), and
sometimes it uses the cliches talked about in Williamson's previous
film.  But what makes LAST SUMMER work isn't exactly the writing.  The
plot is the high point of the script, with the dialogue being the
lowest, but the cast makes up for a lot of the plot holes left (and
there are quite a few).  However, actors can never cover up every
single plot hole, no matter how good they are.  Thankfully, the
direction by Jim Gillespie is usually well done, creating a lot of
suspense and terror.
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER begins with a very impressive shot
which zooms in onto a lone character, sitting on the edge of a cliff.
His solitude creates tension on the screen from the start, as we begin
to dread the fate of this character.  However, it doesn't turn out as
you might think, as fireworks break the silence.  The annual Croaker
Festival is occuring, and the highlight of the evening is the Croaker
Queen Pageant, as a few high school students perform and answer
questions in their swimming suits (a crack at the Miss America
Pageant?).  One of these students is Helen Shivers (Sarah Michelle
Gellar), whose answer to her question is a very funny spoof of beauty
pageants.  Helen wins, obviously, and becomes the year's Croaker Queen
(a very nice foreshadowing effect, I might add).  Her three friends
best friends, Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt), Barry Cox (Ryan
Phillippe), and Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.), all sit in the
balcony and cheer.
After the crowning and party, the four jump in a car and race to the
beach to tell stories about killers with hooks (the foreshadowing is
almost overwhelming).  They all have sex, and then drive home.
Turning a curve, Ray is distracted by Barry and doesn't see the
shadowy figure whom they mow down with the car.  After dumping the
nearly dead body into the ocean, the four have to struggle with their
consciences, changing their lives forever.  Julie takes it the
hardest, and she becomes the central character of the film.  A year
passes, and Julie is nearly flunking out of college.  Her roommate
suggests that she go home to take a break from college and "get a
tan."  At home, she receives a mysterious letter, with "I Know What
You Did Last Summer" printed on it.  She contacts all of her friends
again, and they begin a search of who could know.  The most obvious
would be Max (Johnny Galecki) who drove by the scene of the accident.
Very quickly, bodies start piling up, and Julie and her friends begin
a race of survival and mystery.  Who is the killer?  Could it be the
dead victim himself?  All these questions are answered, rather
insufficiently because we, the audience, are never given a chance to
figure out for ourselves who is doing it (something SCREAM did very
well).  However, the mystery is not really an essential part of the
film.  The purpose of LAST SUMMER is to gross audiences out and scare
us while doing it.  The film succeeds at this basic premise quite
well, and so I am giving the movie a recommendation.  I will admit
that what LAST SUMMER did to make me like it was put good characters
into the situations.  Many critics claim that the characters are
unoriginal and uninspired, but I assume that that is exactly what
Williamson's intentions were.  Unfortunately, there is really only one
interesting male figure in the film, Max, the friendly fisherman, but
he is left in the shadow of the four stars.
Kevin Williamson's screenplay manages many scary moments, along with a
truly suspenseful highlight, which lasts around ten minutes.  After
watching LAST SUMMER, I realized that true suspense isn't watching
someone being chased around by a mysterious killer (although that
extended sequence is the highlight aforementioned).  True suspense is
expecting something to happen and then waiting for it to occur.  You
know someone is going to jump out of the shadows, but who will it be,
and when will it happen?  Sometimes, it doesn't occur at all, and the
suspense lingers as we continue to expect it.  Director Jim Gillespie
is no Wes Craven, but he does manage to create some genuine suspense,
along with several of those "jump" moments that we all know and love.
Unfortunately, many scenes create unintentional humor because the
writing requires one thing, while Gillespie does another.  Williamson
does write a very intelligent first half, which deals with the guilty
consciences of the friends.  This setup gives the audience an
emotional connection with the characters, making us care for them as
they are stalked.
The cast is one of the best parts of the film.  Jennifer Love Hewitt
is obviously the main character here, although one might think
director Gillespie was trying to give Sarah Michelle Gellar the
starring credit.  Hewitt's presence is very reminiscient of Neve
Campbell's role in SCREAM, but Hewitt's reaction to every situation
seems appropriate and accurate.  I liked her character, and Hewitt
added a lot to it.  Gellar nearly steals the film with a cheesy spoof
of beauty queens, obsessed with their hair.  Gellar, from TV's "Buffy,
the Vampire Slayer," seems like a perfect choice for this role, and
she adds more depth to the shallow character than required.  I'm not
sure if we were supposed to care for the character, but with Gellar in
the role, I dreaded the entire chase sequence involving her and the
killer.  Freddie Prinze Jr. gives no depth to his character, and his
performance is probably the worst in the film.  Ryan Phillippe is good
as his cliched character, but we never are very clear on what his
intentions are.  Anne Heche gives a very good performance, although
listening to her talk, I began to realize that none of the other
characters had Southern accents.  Heche is given a small shred of a
role, but she does a lot with it.  Johnny Galecki portrays the only
male figure that I liked in the movie.  Galecki has a very unclear
role, and this uncertainty gives us yet another character to add to
the list of possible killers.
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is rated R for strong, graphic horror
violence, terror, and language.  Because the film is based on a novel,
I forgave the killer's choice of weapon.  I kept expecting one of the
characters to remark on how similar this is to CANDYMAN, the
frightening 1992 horror film.  Normally I don't like humor in a
slasher film like this (I didn't really appreciate the over-the-top
performance in SCREAM), but this film certainly could have used some.
LAST SUMMER isn't scary enough to make you scream, and as a result,
should have added humor to make it more entertaining.  For what it is
though, this film certainly is fun to watch.
Reviewed by Respect - respect@aros.net
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Also known as, I KNOW WHAT MOVIE I SHOULDN'T HAVE SEEN LAST NIGHT. 
Kevin Williamson got the world on a platter when the horror comedy 
he wrote, SCREAM, grossed more than $100 million with its 
willingness to flip the bird to horror cliches while at the same time 
embracing them. Now comes Williamson's follow-up, I KNOW WHAT 
YOU DID LAST SUMMER, which skips the ironic humor and just 
sticks with the cliches instead. I can hardly wait for SCREAM 2.
        Williamson gives us four main characters straight from the 
horror mold. There's brooding Julie (Jennifer Love Hewitt, filling the 
Williamson quota of one beautiful "Party of Five" girl in every movie 
he writes -- now that I know Neve Campbell and Hewitt are both on 
the same show I might have to make it a party of six every week), the 
smart, responsible one. On the opposite end is Helen (Sarah Michelle 
Gellar, TV's vampire slayer Buffy), the town beauty queen, in the 
movie to scream and show off cleavage. Her boyfriend is Barry (Ryan 
Phillipe), football quarterback and all-around stud. Rounding out the 
group is Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr.), Hewitt's boyfriend and the artistic, 
freakish type.
        We meet these four on the fourth of July, during their South 
Carolina fishing town's big celebration. They all drink, party and 
make out like all horror movie teens do, and are on their way home 
when disaster strikes. A man runs into the path of their car and gets 
creamed. Chaos ensues, with Ray not wanting to go to prison, Billy 
drunk and revealing psychotic tendencies and Hewitt trying to talk 
some reason into them. The decision is made to dump the body in the 
river, and they consent, promising they'll take the secret to their 
graves.
        But, and this should come as absolutely no surprise, 
someone knows what they did last summer. Julie gets a note with 
nothing but the movie's title written on it (talk about shameless self-
promotion!) when she comes home from college next year. As the 
guilty party, she rounds up the other three, who are still languishing 
around town, and they try to figure out what's going on. Here's what's 
going on -- there's a slasher killer on the loose, someone who dresses 
up in a fisherman's slicker and kills people with a meat hook. This is 
the person who knows what they did last summer, and you'd think 
these kids would just send him a note back saying, "I know what 
you're doing right now." I mean, the guy's a freakin' murderer.
        Like SCREAM, Williamson tries to make I KNOW WHAT YOU 
DID LAST SUMMER into a murder mystery. There are three main 
suspects -- David from "Roseanne," who has a killer crush on Julie 
(get in line, there, buddy), Helen's jealous older sister (Bridgette 
Wilson, who isn't convincing because she's actually prettier than her 
sister) and the dead guy's sister (Ellen's better half, Anne Heche, who 
is even more butch and white trash than usual here). None of this is 
the least bit well constructed and is resolved in an even more 
disappointing fashion.
        There's not a whole lot to like in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST 
SUMMER, but I tried my hardest. Aside from some very nice Hewitt 
wardrobing (I never wanted so much to be a shirt two sizes too small) 
and a few clever kill scenes, this movie has none of the original 
dialogue, charm or humor of SCREAM. And very little suspense. Its 
clone characters, lame murder mystery and constantly-pulsing "hip" 
soundtrack make this the very kind of movie SCREAM so mercilessly 
satired. And the door is left wide open for a sequel. I know what 
they're doing _next_ summer...
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
starring: Jennifer Love Hewitt (Julie), Sarah Michelle Gellar (Helen), Ryan
Phillippe (Barry), Freddie Prinze Jr. (Ray); written by Kevin Williamson;
produced by Stokely Chaffin, Erik Feig, Neal H. Moritz; directed by Jim
Gillespie; based on the novel by Lois Duncan.
Seen Monday, November 3, 1997 at 9:20 p.m.Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas,
(Oneida, NY), theater #7 (theater rating: **1/2 - low volume, small screen,
slightly uncomfortable seats, theater not dark enough), by myself for free
(free press pass).
The horror genre, or more specifically, the slasher genre, is attempting at
a comeback whether we want it to or not. What's interesting this time around
is that, unlike the completely brain dead flicks of the 1970s and 80s, horror
films of today are written and presented with complete logic, which is
somewhat commendable. "I Know What You Did Last Summer" is a perfect example
of this as it's relatively plausible, but all the logic in the world can't
make up for using every cliche in the book.
The story starts off like any horror movie as we meet our main characters -
four GenXers living in a small fishing town on the North Carolina coast (none
of them have Southern accents though). The first 15 - 20 minutes rushes to
define the one-dimensional characters and establish some kind of back story. 
First there's Julie (Hewitt), the generic
strong-willed-girl-in-a-horror-movie. Then there's her friend Helen (Gellar),
the blonde bimbo, and her boyfriend Barry (Phillippe), the short-tempered
jock. There's also Julie's boyfriend Ray (Prinze Jr.), the quiet, sensitive
guy. Let's not forget Max (Johnny Galecki), the jealous outsider who will
become the first suspect once things get rolling. 
It's the fourth of July and after Helen wins a beauty contest, the four
drive out to the beach, drink a little, fool around, tell the urban legend of
"The Man With The Hook," and on the way back accidentally run over a man.
They realize if they go to the police they could be charged with
manslaughter, so they decide to throw the body into the ocean even though he
doesn't seem to be entirely dead (my first clue was when he opened his eyes
and tried to strangle them). Everything that had happened up to this point
had been believable and entertaining, but then you really have to wonder why
they believe their plan will work.
We then flashforward to one year later as Julie returns home from college
and receives an anonymous letter (hence the title). The four get together and
try to figure out who could have sent it. They're convinced it's Max, but the
most obvious suspect is always the first to die. 
The mid-section of the film showed promise. The gang does some detective
work which is quite interesting and realistic in the way they go about it
(using the Internet), and it seems like the killer (someone in a slicker and
rain hat with a hook but no face) might be a relative of the person they ran
over. But this is a horror film, not a mystery, and soon we're back to scenes
of the killer turning corners before the kids see him and hiding in shadows
and closets. The killer messes with their heads, often hurting them
physically, but doesn't always kill them. 
Much like he did with his screenplay to "Scream," writer Kevin Williamson
makes it seem like almost anyone could be the killer. Unfortunately, once we
realize this the cliches start kicking in full throttle, such as the killer
standing behind someone and killing them with hundreds of people around. Or
the chase scene where the killer walks, but the victim runs and never seems
to be able to get away. Then there's stuff that's idiotic such as when
regular people are killed, or the victim who tries to get into and out of a
building with locks on the inside!
The ending is the worst of the cliches - a supposedly suspense finale on a
fishing boat with lots of places to hide but nowhere to run. There's a fist
fight, a heroic rescue, and a revelation of the killer and their motives. In
the end justice is served.... or so it seems.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" ultimately fails because it tries to have
the best of both worlds - as both a plausible horror film and a horrific
plausible film. But as they old saying goes, you can't have your cake and eat
it too.


Author
Seth Bookey
*I Know What You Did Last Summer* comes to us from writer Kevin
Williamson, who brought us *Scream*, and of course, *Scream 2*. He has
also been busy with other projects, like *Killing Mrs. Tingle*, *Texas
Blood Money*, and *Halloween 7*. A new era in scary movies is upon us. One
that is witty, suspenseful, and shows a love of the movies. So far, it has
been very enjoyable, with half the splattering of the horror movies of the
1980s. 
*I Know What You Did Last Summer* has a simple premise. On July 4th, just
after graduating, four teens hit a man on a desolate cliffside road.
Thinking he's dead, using horror movie logic, they decide to dump his body
into the ocean. They swear never to tell anyone about what they have done. 
The following year, looking very pale and nervous, the four have stopped
talking to each other, and Julie (*Party of Five's* Jennifer Love Hewitt) 
looks particularly cadaverous. It's the eve of another holiday weekend,
and strange things start happening, including an anonymous note that
simply states, "I know what you did last summer."
Without giving too much more of the story away, let's just say that people
disappear, get stalked, and have a lot of strange things happen to them,
okay. As in *Scream*, the suspense is constant. Knowing the psychology of
horror movies, Williamson and director Jim Gillespie frustrate you by not
delivering the expected thumps, and blindsiding you when they do. 
Another element that adds to the movie is the seaside setting in North
Carolina.  Crashing waves and rocky cliffsides are featured prominently in
the opening credits. Also, the lower-middle class setting is a nice
departure from the usual settings for these stalker/splatter films. 
The actors do a good job--nothing sensational, but not lacking either. 
Sarah Michelle Gellar (a/k/a Buffy the Vampire Slayer) plays Helen the
local beauty to the hilt. Freddie Prinze Jr. is the erstwhile boyfriend of
Julie, and Ryan Phillippe, the snotty rich kid, has made a 180 degree turn
from his stint as *One Life to Live*'s Billy, the sensitive gay teenager.
Anne Heche is particularly good in the limited role of Missy Egan, the
nervous wierdo who lives alone in the woods.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Kong
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUSMMER (1997)
First it was the return of the disaster movies and now it's the return of
the slasher movies. I Know What You Did Last Summer (from here on known as
Last Summer) is the second slasher movie from writer Kevin Williamson. His
last was the wildly popular and entertaining Scream. What classifies a
movie as a slasher movie? 1) The killer has to wear some sort of a mask --
this time around the killer is dressed as The Gorton's Fisherman. 2) The
ditsy female leads who have ample cleavage. And 3) The cast of
one-dimensional characters that serve as slasher fodder. I'm happy to say
that Last Summer dutifully fulfills all the requirements as a slasher movie.
During their last summer together, two teen couples go to the beach and
have a party. One of them gets raging drunk. His friends, being the good
friends that they are, don't let him drive. But, while driving back a
series of events happen that causes the driver to hit a man on some pretty
curvy roads. In a panic the teens dump the dead guy into the sea and swear
to each other that they won't tell anyone what they did.
A year after the accident the teens are torn apart avoiding each other like
the plague. But, the terror starts with a small note to one of the teens,
Julie (Jennifer Love Hewitt of the TV show "Party of Five"). After
receiving the note the town is terrorized by the Gorton's Fisherman who
kills with a mighty right hook. The killer, whose identity is unknown, also
summons the three other teens --Helen (Sarah Michelle Gellar of the TV show
"Buffy the Vampire Slayer", Barry (Ryan Phillippe), and Ray (Freddie Prinze
Jr.).
It's sad to say that Last Summer is not as enjoyable as Scream. It does not
even come close to being as scary as Scream. The problem that I see with
Last Summer is that it IS the movie that the characters in Scream poked fun
at. In Last Summer the characters do all the wrong things, which were all
readily pointed out by the characters in Scream. Keep in mind that
Williamson wrote both films. At least in Scream the characters knew that
they were in a slasher movie and the script took courage in poking fun at
its own genre. Not so with Last Summer, Last Summer takes itself seriously
and that is just no fun.
None of the performances were great, but what do you expect from a slasher
movie? The two male leads were obviously picked because the look good. And
the two female leads were picked, again, obviously because of their
cleavage, which is used often during the film. Director Jim Gillespie is no
Wes Craven (who directed Scream) and it shows. The scares in Last Summer
are mostly the shock type; bursts of loud sounds and
turn-around-to-see-the-killer type shocks. Nothing really frightening.
The ending of the film, though predictable, was very cool. I wanted to like
I Know What You Did Last Summer, but there isn't much to like in this film.
It's just not as fun as Scream was and at points it's just not fun at all.
I know that I Know What You Did Last Summer will inevitably have a big draw
because of the heavy promotion of it being from the writer of Scream, but
if you want to see this film, I would suggest that you do it during a
matinee showing or on video. I did learn something from this movie though,
if you happen to kill someone while driving don't dump them out to sea. But
if you do decide to dump them out to sea, do check that they are dead
before dumping them out to sea. You could avoid the ghastly death by fishhook.

Author
Jerry Saravia
I know what has happened to the slasher film genre - it has become limited and
uninspiring offering little in the way of novelty or surprise. True, the
"Scream" movies revived the dusty genre only because they poked fun at it, and
brought a self-reflective gaze upon it. But this genre has nothing to offer
unless a talented filmmaker can reinvent it and bring some level of humanity.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" is not that film, and it is as idiotic and
mind-numbingly awful as you can imagine. 
The premise centers on four teenagers who kill a pedestrian on the road at
night during a July 4th celebration. They contemplate their dilemna and
unconvincingly draw up reasons why they can't tell the police - to protect
their futures beyond high school. They dump the body by the docks (though the
supposed corpse never seems to be truly dead). A year later passes, and the
main teen of the cast (a frail-looking Jennifer Love-Hewitt) arrives home from
college to find a note in the mail indicating the film's title. Someone knows,
but who? Could it be her ring of friends that night who swore never to tell
anyone? Could it be the kid who drove by during that night making inquiries?
Could it be the backwoods woman (Anne Heche) whose brother committed suicide
that same night? 
This is a mildly intriguing premise for a slasher film, but all sense of
mystery and horror is thrown out the window once the killings and
implausibilities set in. We have a body in a trunk full of crabs that
conveniently disappears, a killer in a slicker outfit during a hot summer (how
conspicuous), a girl's blonde hair chopped off while she's asleep (!), and more
and more ridiculous scenarios that will shock you into laughter and boredom. 
The actors are bland and forgettable (save for the cute-as-a-button Hewitt),
the scares are predictable, the dialogue is sheer rubbish, and of course, there
is a door left open for a sequel. Most of these movies ("Halloween: H20,"
"Urban Legend") are mediocre and thrill-less to being with offering little
imagination or raison d'etre. Writer Kevin Williamson of "Scream" fame should
have known better. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns, or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Freddie Prinze Jr., 
Ryan Philippe. Directed by Jim Gillespie from Kevin Williamson's script.
Review and article by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
With teen scary movies, the most relevant consideration is the Jump 
Factor. Plot, style and character-development are all well and good, but 
audiences go to these kind of films for the same reason they visit 
haunted houses; to have someone spring out of nowhere and shout "Boo!" "I 
Know What You Did Last Summer," the latest offering from "Scream" writer 
Kevin Williamson, delivers the scares on a regular basis, including one 
"Boo!" that rates a full 10 on the Jump Scale. 
Williamson and director Jim Gillespie were determined to make "I Know 
What You Did Last Summer" more than just another slasher film. Working 
from Lois Duncans novel, they create an effective creepy mood, as four 
teens, returning home from a night of partying, hit a man with their car 
on a desolate stretch of road. Faced with possible manslaughter charges, 
they decide to dump the body into the sea and keep the tragedy a secret. 
Guilt from that night destroys their bond, and the kids stay far away 
from each other until a year later, when one of them receives a letter 
stating "I know what you did last summer." 
Set in a Carolina fishing village, "Last Summer" establishes a 
distinctive atmosphere and boasts characters better defined and far 
smarter than most in this genre. Jennifer Love Hewitt ("Party Of Five"), 
Sarah Michelle Gellar (TV's "Buffy The Vampire Slayer"), Freddie Prinze 
Jr. (outstanding in "The House Of Yes"), and Ryan Philippe ("White 
Squall") are effective in the lead roles, but the most memorable 
performance comes from Anne Heche as a loved one of the victim. With an 
odd gait and even odder mannerisms, Heches disturbing character is like 
the sister of that kid with the banjo from "Deliverance." Shes a creepy 
hoot.
After a number of well-stage scenes, particularly the initial accident 
and a riotous teen beauty pageant, "Last Summer" stumbles towards the end,
 falling into far too ordinary genre clichis. Still, the film is a fun 
diversion, and never fails to shout "Boo!" at just the right moment.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer is a departure from Scream, said 
Kevin Williamson, who wrote the screenplay for both films. "Scream was 
sort of a comedy horror film, set outside of a genre that it poked fun at 
and paid tribute to, all at the same time. This film is the movie 
Scream was parodying, it sits right inside of the genre. In the wake of 
Scream, I wanted to see if a straightforward horror story could be done 
again, if a level of wit and sophistication could be brought to it and if 
we could make a really good scary movie that didnt rely on the gimmick 
of self-aware, self-reflexive pop culture references."
In "I Know What You Did Last Summer", based on Lois Duncans novel, 
tragedy strikes when four young people are driving home from a night of 
drinking on the Carolina coast. While speeding down a winding stretch of 
road, their car slams into a man. Standing over the body of the stranger, 
the youths consider the ramifications of the accident and make a fateful 
decision to dump the body into the sea and keep the nightmare a secret. 
Cut to one year later, when one of the now-scattered group receives a 
letter saying "I know what you did last summer." The situation forces the 
estranged teens to reunite, as they try to discover who is stalking them.
The film stars four hot young actors, Jennifer Love Hewitt ("Party Of 
Five"), Sarah Michelle Gellar (TVs "Buffy The Vampire Slayer"), Freddie 
Prinze Jr. ("The House Of Yes") and Ryan Phillippe ("White Squall"), but 
most of the attention at a recent press gathering in L.A. focused on 
writer Kevin Williamson. His clever script for the smash hit "Scream", 
the first horror film to break the $100 million mark domestically, 
revived the moribund genre. 
"When Scream hit we said Oh brother, everyones going to expect a 
comedy here and this film is serious. Last Summer is a morality tale 
about four kids who make a decision they think will preserve their future 
that actually destroys it. It talks about how deadly secrets are, that 
secrets can kill you. This is not a comedy."
Director Jim Gillespie agreed, adding "Its not a slasher film, really. 
Its a throwback to the Hitchcock type of thriller. I wanted to do things 
in a more subtle fashion, to let the audience use their imagination a 
little bit more. Its also a character study. Thats what draws the 
audience into the film, getting to know the kids. Everything hinges on 
the accident. Its a five minute scene and the acting is critical. If 
that scene didnt work, then nothing else would. Thankfully, I had a 
great script and four extremely talented young actors to work with."
Williamson is proud of the scripts character development, saying "I 
tried to infuse it with savvy, to keep it smart, not to give it the stick 
characters we see walking through the Friday the 13th movies."
Despite the emphasis on character development, both men recognize that 
the scare factor is crucial. Gillespie explained, "Because the film is 
character, rather than plot driven, it requires a certain number of 
scares every few minutes, otherwise you lose the attention of your 
audience. Younger audiences expect you to keep the scares coming fast.
"Its funny, with this kind of film theres always one moment that you 
think is a medium level scare and that turns out to be the biggest scare 
of all. You jump and then you resent it because its complete manipulation.
 But that manipulation is part of the fun."
Williamson is still amazed at the level of "Screams" success. "I sat 
down and said All right Kevin, stop being an artist, youre unemployed 
and starving, be a businessman. I looked around to see what was missing, 
whats wasnt happening in the film market, and decided to take a shot at 
scary movies. I wrote Scream to draw attention to itself. I thought if 
people saw it they might think I had a voice for something else. Then it 
sold. Who could have dreamed all of this would happen."
"Scream 2 opens in December and Im very proud of it. I saw the 
finished film the other day and its scarier than the first one, it rocks.
 I just hope audiences will appreciate what weve done with I Know What 
You Did Last Summer. The approach may be more traditional, but I 
guarantee this film will make you jump!"
review and article copyright 1997, Ed Johnson-Ott

Author
Harvey S. Karten
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures/Mandalay Entertainment
 Director:  Jim Gillespie
 Writer:  Kevin Williamson
 Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan
Phillippe, Freddie Prinze, Jr., Muse Wats, Anne Heche,
Bridgette Wilson, Johnny Galekci, Anne Hache
   At a recent media celebration of the work of Boris Karloff, a
name virtually synonymous with the genre of horror, a
speaker noted that Karloff would not like today's slasher
movies. Karloff was more interested in psychological depth,
leaving the gore and carnage to the viewers' imaginations. 
He made sure that the evils perpetrated by his Frankenstein
monster were the result of the creature's loneliness and
rejection by society.  This emphasis in no way detracted from
the horror of what he did: we feel for the young woman who
is slain despite the monster's cognizance of her beauty.
   Now, "I Know What You Did Last Summer" treads pretty
lightly on psychological depth.  Still, director Jim Gillespie,
using a screenplay by Kevin "Scream" Williamson, can't help
showing how the four adolescents who are at first "eternally
committed" to one another and to their future goals but
become in a year's time more realistic and mature human
beings.  The accent, though, is on creating terror for the
audience, and judging by the screeches of the mostly high-
school crowd at a test screening, it succeeds admirably. 
Following the usual route of the genre, "I Know What You
Did" highlights false alarms (that sudden tap on your shoulder
is just a concerned Mom, not The Beast); scenes of savage
butchery (executed with a large fish knife, as though the
usual, human-size prosthetic arm were not scary enough);
and a bigger-than-life looney tunes dude on the loose and
madly seeking revenge.
   What elevates this movie above the usual for the category
is a quartet of charming performers in the role of ditzy youth
at a important crossroad in their lives.  The four inseparable
buddies have just graduated from their Southport, North
Carolina high school, about to go their separate ways, and
celebrating their last night of true togetherness in a liquor-
soaked drive down a desolate road.  When Ray (Freddie
Prinze Jr.), distracted by his drunken pal Barry (Ryan
Phillippe), accidentally plows into a man who is unexpectedly
walking across the road, they panic.  Call the cops?  That
could threaten their plans.  After all Julie (Jennifer Love
Hewitt) is about to go to an Ivy League college; Helen (Sarah
Michelle Gellar), who has just been named beauty queen, is
to go to New York to study acting; Barry, a jock, has his heart
set on playing football in Boston where Julie will study law. 
They dump the body in the ocean and make a pact to seal
their lips.  The body, inauspiciously, does not remain dead for
long.  Stalking the foursome and intent on vengeance, the
accident victim plots a gruesome strategy to toy with the
young people and to murder them.
   As with other movies of this type, the body count is kept
low during the first half, though false alarms are plentiful. 
When the murders take place, they are not clean
affairs...bodies are slashed unmercifully and dragged
unceremoniously to be dumped in car trunks and other
intimidating points.  The need to evoke shrieks and howls
from the audience takes a front seat, pretty much leaving wit
and credibility behind. For example, why should the first victim
be a guy who is not only innocent of any role in the accident,
but who feels nothing but contempt and envy for the
perpetrators?  As for repartee, we get sound bites likes that
uttered by Julie's freshman roommate at the end of the first
college years, "Get some sun on that tasty pale tail o yours,"
and from Barry to the girls, "You look like s*** run over twice."
   Anne Hache does a standout job in a small role as the
sister of a man who allegedly committed suicide.  Her tics and
hesitant manner handily display her vulnerability.  Freddie
Prinze Jr. and Julie James are well cast as a troubled girl on
the verge of flunking out of college because of her guilt
feelings and a boy who realizes his culpability and tries to
come to terms with his conscience.
   "I Know What You Did Last Summer" features a coda
which, rather than form a peaceful unravelling of the tension,
produces a frightening scene which virtually says, "Next Year:
Sequel."  Rated R.  Running Time: 101 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
James Sanford
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMERDirected by Jim Gillespie
  Hearing that "I Know What You Did Last Summer" comes from the
word-processor of Kevin Williamson, writer of last year's surprisingly
smart "Scream," could entice you to take a look at this teens-in-peril
thriller. Alas, the sophomore jinx has struck hard: Though "Summer"
eventually runs through most of the cliches of its genre, it's
noticeably lacking in the witty spins "Scream" put on such material.
Call it a case of tired blood.
 "Summer" begins with a beach party gone wrong. High school grads Julie
(Jennifer Love Hewitt), Helen (Sarah Michelle Gellar), Barry (Ryan
Phillippe) and Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr.) spend the night of July 4th
whooping it up, but they have little to celebrate when they accidentally
run down a man on their way home. Terrified of being held on murder
charges, the four decide to dump the body in the ocean, only to find
their crime resurfacing a year later, as a mysterious stalker begins
terrorizing them and sending ominous notes that seem to warn of impending
doom.
 From this point on, you can probably play it by ear, since Williamson's
script has no major surprises lurking in it. The resolution of the story
falls flat, partially because it's completely unbelievable and partially
because the killer turns out to be the most obvious suspect. And while
any cod in the audience will undoubtedly shiver at the sight of a
murderer in fisherman's garb, it looks pretty silly to us land-lubbers.
 Throughout, Hewitt and Gellar scream with conviction, Phillippe preens
and Prinze basically does a lot of blank-eyed staring (he's much better
in "The House of Yes," in which he actually has a character
to play). The only interesting performance comes from Anne Heche,
playing the inscrutable near-albino sister of a murder victim. What
she's doing in this trifle is anyone's guess, but she brings some
much-needed spookiness to what's essentially an "Afterschool Special"
with a body count.
James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Julie James is home for the summer.  Looking pale and withdrawn,
her mother suspects the worst -- she's on drugs.  Actually, that isn't
even close to the worst.  The reality is much more horrific.
     It was the previous summer that her troubles begin.  Julie, played
by Jennifer Love Hewitt, spent the last Independence Day at the beach
on a double date.  Hers is the only performance in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID
LAST SUMMER with any depth.
     Around the campfire that ill-fated night with Julie were her
boyfriend and soon to be fisherman Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.),
her girlfriend and just crowned beauty queen Helen Shivers (Sarah
Michelle Gellar), and Helen's boyfriend and cocky jock Barry Cox (Ryan
Philippe).  In a scene lifted straight out of SCREAM -- they share the
same screenwriter, Kevin Williamson -- the kids try to out-scare each
other with diabolical stories.  To their credit, their story telling
has more intensity that the movie itself.  It is in this sequence that
the four actors come most alive.  In the rest of the film their parts
are relegated to caricature.
     With Barry soused, Ray drives his car back that fatal night.  On
the road, they run over someone and then have the bad sense to push his
not quite dead body into the ocean.  Max (Johnny Galecki), whom they
had snubbed earlier, drives by soon after the accident and may or may
not have seen anything.
     The show then advances to the following summer, when someone
dressed in a fisherman's slicker begins sending the four teenagers "I
Know What You Did Last Summer" notes and begins injuring and killing
people.
     The story alternates between a traditional slasher film and a
whodunit.  The suspects include one of the teenagers themselves, their
friends, and Max as well as a creepy Anne Heche as the victim's sister.
Any of them, or someone out of the blue, could be the murderer.
     John Debney's heavy music overwhelms every scene with reminders to
be frightened.  The writer, seeming to lack confidence in his material,
prefaces every attack by the mysterious mad slicker with ample
notification of his arrival on the scene.  A few more surprises would
have been welcome in this putative horror show.
     The very last scene of the film, although the most predictable,
manages to be the scariest.  The only other frightening sequence in the
story involves a person tapping on a car window and thereby startling
the car's occupants and the audience.  Although a handsome film, thanks
to Denis Crossan's cinematography, I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is a
goose-bumps-free horror show with little fresh material and nothing to
recommend its viewing.
     I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER runs 1:40.  It is rated R for
profanity and gory violence including people being gutted with a hook.
The show would be fine for teenagers used to such horror pictures.  I
give this one thumbs down and * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
(Columbia)
Starring:  Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Freddie Prinze
Jr., Ryan Phillippe, Johnny Galecki, Anne Heche.
Screenplay:  Kevin Williamson, based on the novel by Lois Duncan.
Producers:  Neal H. Moritz, Erik Feig, Stokely Chaffin.
Director:  Jim Gillespie.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Screenwriter Kevin Williamson helped make Dimension Films a mint on
last year's smash hit SCREAM by demonstrating that he understood the
"rules" of horror film plots.  You know the ones:  never have pre-marital
sex, never say "I'll be right back," never let the killer chase you up the
stairs.  Williamson's self-aware slasher film tickled the funny bones of
genre buffs, but SCREAM didn't work only as a satire.  It was an effective
horror film in its own right because director Wes Craven understood that,
even more important than the rules for being a character in a horror film,
you've got to know the rules for _making_ a horror film.
     I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER was also penned by Williamson (from a
popular novel by Lois Duncan), but its success is more scattershot than
SCREAM's.  At times, it's a potent and effective chiller; at other times,
it's fairly uninspired.  In short, someone wasn't always following the
rules.  When the rules are firmly in place, I KNOW WHAT YOU DID stays
mostly on track.  To wit:
    1) ESTABLISH A FUNDAMENTALLY SOUND PREMISE.  Unlike most horror films,
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID doesn't just send a psycho on a random killing spree.
His targets are very specific:  four teenagers (Jennifer Love Hewitt,
Sarah Michelle Gellar, Freddie Prinze Jr. and Ryan Phillippe) involved in
a July 4th hit-and-run accident who try to hide their crime, then discover
a year later that, well, someone knows what they did last summer.  That
set-up requires a bit of mystery and a bit of creativity, and Williamson
does a decent job of providing them.  Which doesn't mean that he should
have made the film a mystery, because...
     2) WHODUNNIT DON'T MATTER.  A horror film is under no obligation to
tease the audience as to the killer's identity; Freddy Krueger and Michael
Myers did plenty of damage with the audience on a first-name basis.  I
KNOW WHAT YOU DID goes to great lengths to make that question important --
all the characters are preoccupied with it, suspects pop up at regular
intervals, and the finale seems built around an eventual unmasking, all
of which makes it perplexing that the script never gives you a chance to
guess who the killer is.  It's also disappointing to find the menacing
slicker-clad maniac -- you may never trust the Gorton's fisherman in the
same way again -- turn into just some person with a grudge and an ice hook
for the final reel.  Williamson could have done better than a Scooby-Doo
resolution to a scary film.  Which points why it's important to...
     3) FIND A TONE AND GO WITH IT.  Much of the exposition in I KNOW WHAT
YOU DID -- and there's a bit too much of it -- frames the story as a
psychological mystery, with plenty of guilty confessions and attempts to
investigate who wants to do in our protagonists.  Then, a few minutes will
pass and someone will end up with an ice hook inconveniently lodged in his
or her carotid artery.  Williamson and Gillespie often seem to be
scrambling for an R rating, when they could have made just as effective a
film with a PG-13.  I KNOW WHAT YOU DID didn't have to be a horror film to
be scary, as long as the makers understood rule #4...
     4) THERE'S A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A SHOCK AND A SCARE.  Any hack with a
mixing board can freak out an audience with a burst of loud music.  It
takes considerably more style to build up an audience for a scare, then
scare them anyway.  Director Jim Gillespie stages a few exceptionally
creepy set pieces, building suspense which lasts a lot longer than the two
seconds it takes for someone to leap into frame.  One ten-minute sequence
in particular, in which Gellar tries to escape her assailant, is an
exhausting (if somewhat anti-climactic) ride.  And speaking of
anti-climaxes...
     5) TRY TO FINISH WITH YOUR BEST STUFF.  The ship-board finale is a
solid piece of film-making, but the unmasked villain doesn't quite cut an
imposing figure.  Once again I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER appears to
suffer from an identity crisis; much of the last reel could have come from
any of a dozen crime thrillers.  Perhaps that's why Gillespie and
Williamson have so much trouble following the rules of horror film-making.
It's only every so often that they seem convinced they're actually making
a horror film.

Author
Michael Rich
        I think of I Know What You Did Last Summer as the movie that
Scream and Scream 2 could
have been. Mind you, though, I mean this in the worst possible way. I
Know What You Did Last Summer
is a typical slasher flic without the smarts of the Scream's. As a
result, it's even worse than some of your
better campy horror pictures (see Nightmare on Elm Street) because it
thinks it's about thirty times
smarter than it is.
        Based on a teen book of the same name and, disappointingly,
adapted by Scream scribe Kevin
Williamson, I Know What You Did Last Summer begins with appropriately
angsty modern rock music
combined with some startling cinematography of a cliff along the ocean
and an angsty sort sitting at the
top. The appropriate mood being set (this is angst-horror for the 90's),
we cut over to the July 4th parade
in a small North Carolina town. From there, we see the blond, female
protagonist, Helen Shivers
(woodenly played by Sarah Michelle Geller), getting crowned Croaker
Queen as the blond male "hero,"
Barry Cox (woodenly played by Ryan Phillipe), and matched brunette pair
of protagonists, Julie James and
Ray Bronson (woodenly played by Party of Five's Jennifer Love Hewitt and
Freddie Prinze Jr.,
respectively) cheer her on.
        After getting drunk at a party, going to a beach to wittily
discuss urban legend and indulge in
some foreshadowing, and having some meaningful sex (if you believe what
the characters say), the four
run down some guy crossing the windy cliff road at night. His face is
mangled so they can't tell who it is,
and they come to the decision to dump him in the ocean so as to not ruin
any of their future chances for
success in the world.
        Cut to one year later. The lives of our protagonists have gone
from annoying to bad. Main
brunette female, the bright one of the bunch, has been plagued with
guilt and almost failed out of college.
Blond female has forfeited her dreams of starring on Guiding Light, and
now works at the family store in
town. Brunette male is a fisherman, living off the land. Blond male has
become a complete jerk and
quarterback on some college football team. Then, predictably, their past
comes back to haunt them.
        It all begins with an irrational murder, followed by some
taunting of protagonists by the
mysterious killer, bad acting by a good actress (Anne Heche), an
improbable plot, bad acting by the main
bad actors, some more killing, concluding in a climactic scene, mostly
climactic in the relief at the end of
the movie. All the while, the actors and actresses spout off bad lines,
and main brunette male does his best
Keanu Reeves imitation.
        Not that the movie was without pleasure. Count the illogical
plot twists and bad lines for some
fun. Mostly, though, note the costumes of main females and how trendily
unattractive they make the
otherwise eye-catching pair look.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed Jim Gillespie.
Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, 
Freddie Prinze Jr., Bridgette Wilson, Anne Heche, Johnny Galecki, Muse 
Watson.
1997 - 100 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, and profanity).
Reviewed November 12, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"I Know What You Did Last Summer," the first high-profile slasher 
thriller to be released after 1996's "Scream," and written by the same 
screenwriter, Kevin Williamson, is a stylish, effective horror film that 
became 1997's biggest hit of the Fall season. While "Scream" was a more 
knowing film about the genre, "I Know What You Did Last Summer" is more 
reminiscent of a straight-forward slasher flick, but it is far more 
intelligent than such bottom-of-the-barrel guilty pleasures as all nine 
of the "Friday the 13th" films (well, okay, "Jason Goes to Hell" was
 pure hell to sit through).
The film starts off with four talented, aspiring teenage friends who 
have just graduated from high school in their small boating town of 
Southport, N.C. It is the 4th of July, and they will soon be heading 
their separate ways. Kind-hearted Julie (Jennifer Love Hewitt), and 
outsider Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr.) will be headed off to college, while 
Helen (Sarah Michelle Gellar), who has just been honored Croaker Queen 
in the town, and her ignorant jock boyfriend, Barry (Ryan Phillippe), 
are going to New York to become an actress and football player. When the 
four of them travel to a nearby mountain-side beach for the evening, 
they are dismayed after hitting a man in the road on their way home. 
Distraught and confused, they decide they can't go to the police because 
they will be charged with manslaughter, so they devise a plan to throw 
the apparently dead victim off a peer into the ocean, in hopes no one 
will find him. Julie is apprehensive about it, but is forced into it by 
Barry. Switch to exactly a year later, Julie, still unable to come to 
terms with what she did, reluctantly returns home from college to find 
that all three of her old friends are still in the town because their 
career plans did not work out. Almost immediately, Julie recieves an 
ominous letter that simply reads, "I know what you did last summer," and 
that is the start of their problems as they find themselves being 
terrorized by a mysterious figure dressed in fisherman gear and yielding 
a giant hook.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer," is a successful horror film for a 
number of reasons. The cinematography by Denis Crossan could very well 
be described as Hitchcockian, as it put shadows, fog, steam, and other 
clever devices to add atmosphere to the proceedings. The characters, 
particularly Julie and Helen, are realistically written, and the film 
amazingly deals with their broken relationship in a few scenes, which is 
largely uncharacteristic in films of this sort. And last, the film 
creates a few dazzling and scary set-pieces that are some of the most 
memorable I've seen in a horror movie, particularly the suspenseful, 
superbly shot sequence involving Helen at her family's store with the 
killer inside with her.
Perhaps the best character is that of Missy Egan (Anne Heche), a lonely 
backwoods woman whose brother was the one Julie thinks they hit. Heche's 
performance is a standout, as she is able to create a full character in 
only about ten minutes of screen time.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer," could have been a great horror movie 
if not for a few problems. Prinze Jr. gives a performance to be desired 
here, and much of his dialogue sounds wooden coming out of his mouth. 
Also, the climax of the film almost completely loses its frightening 
grip after it unveils the mystery killer, who is a decidedly bad actor 
and should not have been given any lines. Luckily, the penultimate scene 
saves the disappointing finale, which includes an expertly crafted 
"jump-in-your-seat" scare.
In the main roles, Hewitt and Gellar are highly talented, and Hewitt, 
especially, is one of the best screamers I've ever heard. She honestly 
could give Jamie Lee Curtis a little competition for the best "scream 
queen." And Gellar is touching as a young woman who, in the course of 
one year, finds her dream of being an actress ultimately shattered.
Although not up to the level of either "Scream" movies, or the more 
recent, "Urban Legend," "I Know What You Did last Summer" is a 
respectable, smartly-scripted slasher film that firmly proved good
 horror movies were once again being made.

Author
John Beachem
If there is one universal rule in Hollywood, it is that all successful movies
will have a horde of clones following close behind. Such is the case with "I
Know What You Did Last Summer". A cheap, predictable, pathetic excuse for a
slasher movie, it tries to follow in the footsteps of Wes Craven's highly
entertaining "Scream" with disasterous results.
Four teenagers celebrate their graduation from high school in typical teen age
fashion. They drive to the beach, get drunk, and head back only to hit someone
on the road. They then choose to dump the body in the sea, make a pact never to
mention it again, and go on with their happy little lives. A year later, they
begin receiving threats and are eventually attacked by someone who claims to
know what they did the previous year.
I'm going to keep the rest of this review very short, because I don't want to
go off on a two hour rant about how awful this movie was. First, let me point
out how completely devoid of anything resembling a scare this film was. Second,
if there is one thing I simply cannot stand it is long chase scenes which drag
on for at least twenty minutes only to end in the exact way we knew they were
going to before they started. Third, and final, I'm not going to reveal who the
killer is, but if I were to tell you, it would hardly be classified as a
spoiler since the character is only introduced at that point.
The only reason I gave this piece of garbage an extra half star is because of
the performances of the two female leads. They both try valiantly to add
something to this pitiful excuse for a horror movie, and I commend them for
their effort. Do yourself a favor and steer clear of this one. I give it a
measly star and a half.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Author
DeWyNGaLe
I Know What You Did Last Summer was a mystery written by Lois Duncan in the
seventies.  It was about four kids who hit a boy in the middle of the street
and now someone knows and comes to make sure they have paid for what they have
done.  The movie adaption is pretty much the same, only it is a grown man in
the middle of the street and the plot is a little more complicated.  They are
spoilers though, so I won't reveal them.
Helen Shivers (Sarah Michelle Gellar) is competing for the beauty pageant at
the 4th of July parade in Southport, South Carolina.  Her friends, Julie James
(Jennifer Love Hewitt), Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.), and Barry Cox (Ryan
Phillippe).  She wins, of course, and then the four of them go to celebrate on
Dawson's Beach.  On the way back, Ray runs into something.  The four of them
get out of the car and look down the road, revealing a dead body.  They take
him to a fishing place, where they can put his body in the water and no one
will find out about what happened that summer.  They make a pact to never tell
anyone what went on that year.  No one every did, either.  Then how come
someone knows?
In the past year, Julie James's life has been terrible.  She feels awful for
what she has done and doesn't want to tell anyone, in fear.  Her grades have
slipped, her relationship with her mother has vanished, and she is losing
friends.  One year after the incident on the road, she gets a letter.  In bold
black print it reads Julie James, followed by her address.  She opens the
letter to a small slip of paper reading I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.  Julie
is terrified.  They were so careful, weren't they?  Who could know?
She takes the letter to Ray, Helen, and Barry to show them what has gone on. 
Now, the terror is happening to all four of them.  Barry gets run over.  Julie
gets a body in a truck.  Helen gets her hair chopped off.  Ray gets another
letter.  Pretty freaky, huh?  Now, they are seeing the killer.  He wears a
fisherman's coat, with a hat so you cannot see his/her face.  They go to David
Egan's (the man they ran over) house in hopes they could find out some
information.  All they find is the suspicious Missy Egan. (played terrifically
by Anne Heche)  They suspect it is someone named Billy Blue, a man that Missy
named stopped by the house shortly after David died.  After some more twists
and sightings, the climax comes when the fisherman is ready to kill all four of
them with his long, sharp fishing hook.
I Know What You Did Last Summer was written by Kevin Williamson, and if it
weren't for him, this movie probably wouldn't have been as good.  Jennifer Love
Hewitt proves herself to be a good actress, as well as the rest of the cast. 
Sarah Michelle Gellar shows us she can do more than be a mean daughter on a
soap opera.  Ryan Phillippe shows us that he can act great.  Overall, the movie
is wonderful, although a few elements are difficult to understand.  This movie
and the second Scream are sitting on top of the world.  For now, anyway. 
Perhaps another great movie will come and bump this one off.  But, considering
how eerie and scary it is, it is almost impossible.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, 
      Freddie Prinze Jr., Anne Heche, Muse Watson 
Director: Jim Gillespie
Producers: Neal H. Moritz, Erik Feig, Stokely Chaffin
Screenplay: Kevin Williamson based on the novel by Lois Duncan
Cinematography: Dennis Crossan
Music: John Debney
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     I feel like I've just taken a time trip back to the '80s.  Remember 
when slasher films were all the rage, and each year brought forth the 
dreaded specter of another FRIDAY THE 13TH, HALLOWEEN, and/or A 
NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET (not to mention such other, notable titles as 
PROM NIGHT and SILENT NIGHT, DEADLY NIGHT)?  Well, they're back again, 
and stronger than ever.  SCREAM started this recent wave, and its $100+ 
million box office gross has ensured a host of sequels and inferior 
copycats.  THE WISHMASTER was arguably the first.  I KNOW WHAT YOU DID 
LAST SUMMER, brought to the screen by neophyte director Jim Gillespie, 
is the second, and there are many more to come.
     I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER bears almost all the hallmarks of a 
classic slasher movie.  The large-breasted female protagonist does some 
incredibly dumb things.  Most of her friends get killed before the final 
reel.  Every character is strictly one-dimensional -- there's no desire 
or attempt to form anything resembling a full-fledged personality out of 
any of these cardboard stereotypes.  There's plenty of blood and gore 
(although, to be fair, one could argue that it's restrained here).  The 
only thing that's missing are flashes of female flesh.  Gratuitous 
nudity was always big in the '80s films.  Apparently, that's no longer 
the case.
     Of course, the killer has to be dressed in some kind of costume -- 
that's a slasher movie requisite.  In HALLOWEEN, Michael Myers donned 
the featureless Captain Kirk mask.  In FRIDAY THE 13TH, we had the 
hockey goalie motif.  In SCREAM, it was the Grim Reaper.  So what face 
of terror do we have in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER?  The Gorton's 
Fisherman.  That's right -- rain slicker, hat, and all.  I kept 
expecting to hear the theme song playing in the background.
     The screenwriter of I SAW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is Kevin 
Williamson, who made a name for himself by penning SCREAM.  Those two 
movies give him a unique distinction.  With I SAW WHAT YOU DID LAST 
SUMMER, he has now written a film of the very type that his other script 
parodied.  SCREAM had a lot of fun playing with ideas, conventions, and 
approaches that I SAW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER takes very seriously.  
And the genuine scares of SCREAM have mostly been replaced by silly, 
repetitive shock tactics (one exception:  a creepy cat-and-mouse game in 
a department store).  This points out the main weakness of I SAW WHAT 
YOU DID LAST SUMMER.  The characters aren't interesting enough for us to 
be scared for them.  Who cares if they live or die?  They just add to 
the body count, and everyone knows that the really good slasher movies 
have inordinately high death rates.
     The story sounds more interesting that it is.  Four friends just 
out of high school -- Julie (Jennifer Love Hewitt), Helen (Sarah 
Michelle Gellar), Barry (Ryan Phillippe), and Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr.) -
- are out celebrating late one July 4 night when they have a little 
accident.  On a dark, twisting stretch of highway, with Ray at the 
wheel, their car slams into a man and kills him.  Panic-stricken, they 
elect to dump him in the sea rather than report the accident.  They 
apparently get away with it, but one year later, someone begins stalking 
them, and they have to wonder whether an unseen observer saw what they 
did or whether their victim was really dead after all.  Regardless of 
the truth, whoever is after them now is in deadly earnest, and, for 
Julie, it's a race against time to learn the killer's identity before he 
uses his fish hook on her.
     I wasn't dazzled by any of the acting in this film, but it's rare 
that a slasher movie is characterized by Oscar-caliber performances.  
The male actors, Ryan Phillippe and Freddie Prinze Jr., were likely 
chosen because they represent two different types of hunks.  The women, 
Jennifer Love Hewitt (of PARTY OF FIVE) and Sarah Michelle Gellar (TV's 
BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER), appear to have been selected because they 
share two crucial assets:  impressive cleavage and an even more 
impressive set of pipes.  Boy, can they scream! (And they're given 
endless opportunities to prove it.)
     There is one minor aspect of the plot that elevates I SAW WHAT YOU 
DID LAST SUMMER above the level of a typical '80s slasher flick -- it 
has an interesting subtext.  I'm referring to the way the lives and 
friendships of these four individuals crumble in the wake of their 
accident.  Guilt, confusion, and doubt build in them until they can no 
longer stand to be with each other or look at themselves in the mirror.  
Sadly, this potentially-fascinating element of the movie is dismissed 
quickly to facilitate a higher body count.  And, as I said before, a few 
extra deaths can only make a slasher movie better, right?  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Michael Dequina
I Know What You Did Last Summer (R) *** (out of ****)
After resurrecting and reinventing the teen slasher film for the '90s with
the blockbuster Scream, screenwriter Kevin Williamson keeps the genre alive
with I Know What You Did Last Summer, an effective "scary movie" directed
by Jim Gillespie.
This adaptation of the novel by Lois Duncan begins with a violent accident
that changes the lives of four teenage friends: sensible Julie (Jennifer
Love Hewitt), beauty queen Helen (Sarah Michelle Gellar), bad boy jock
Barry (Ryan Philippe), and nice guy Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr.) unwittingly
run over and kill a man crossing a mountain road on the night of July 4.
Instead of facing possible vehicular manslaughter charges--the car seats
are doused with alcohol, thanks to hard-drinking Barry's clumsiness--the
group decide to dump the body and keep that terrible night a secret for the
rest of their lives.  The foursome never see each other again until exactly
one year later, after Julie receives an ominous note which gives the film
its title.
I Know... is a more conventional thriller than Scream, which mined a
mother lode of satire with its lampooning of horror cliches.  Yet while it
does follow a formulaic pattern, Williamson's script does not indulge in
the typical "I'll be right back" norms.  Certain characters are smarter
than others, but most of the time everyone's frontal lobes are in working
order.  Thankfully, though, Williamson does not play everything completely
straight; some arch bits of dialogue provide some good laughs, and Helen's
beauty pageant scenes are hilarious in their dead-on cheesiness.
Williamson does fall short, however, in creating four memorable
characters.  Unlike Scream, which had a number of interesting, distinctive
people on the canvas, here there are only two: blowhard Barry and
especially the narcissistic, hair-obsessed Helen.  Unfortunately, these two
and the boring Ray take a backseat to the dull-as-dishwater Julie, played
with little spark by Hewitt, a pallid stand-in for Neve Campbell.  I
suppose Gillespie wanted to play up the Scream connection by casting
another Party of Five co-star in the lead, but he would have had a better
leading lady in the gifted Gellar, whom I have admired since her pre-Buffy
'93-'95 stint as hellion Kendall Hart on All My Children (which won her a
Daytime Emmy).  Granted, Helen is a flashier role than Julie, but the
seamless manner in which Gellar slides from comical self-absorption to
gut-wrenching fear hints at how much more life and conviction she would
have brought to the lead.
But scares, not acting, is what draws audiences to horror films, and the
Scottish Gillespie, making his American debut, offers heaps of shrieks.  He
delivers a few chilling sequences, in particular the creepy body-dumping
scene and a tense chase-and-evasion set piece involving Helen.  Mind you,
he is no Wes Craven--the climax, set aboard a boat, leaves a lot to be
desired in the suspensewise, but he recovers from that with a killer (yes,
bad pun) ending.  Many films claim to leave the audience screaming; once I
Know What You Did Last Summer makes its final fade out, you may just find
yourself doing so.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in you heart."
--Michael Jordan
