Title
Review for Setouchi munraito serenade (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
 MOONLIGHT SERENADE, is one of those films that just could not be made in
America.
 Japan, suffered with the advent of the bomb, and its position in the World
War II, but if anything, its artists and writers have never let the world
forget what this change really meant. For many, it was a good riddance of an
old system that had out lived its usefulness anyway. But for a handful, who
had been a part of the system, it now has created a catharses, that they
have to go through... what to do, and how to live, and how to respond to it.
 And the film does a couple of things that are truly magnificent directing
ideas, and make this a special outing for the few viewers that get to see
it. In America, we have no idea how a generation felt, and lived, really,
since it has all been buried behind a Walt Disney like story, and denial
that anything happened. It is good to look to the future, but is it wise to
ignore the past and what people went through.... maybe living in a situation
that you are better off not knowing what happened, is not such a blessing
after all. The Hollywood controlled "fantasy" took away from people
admitting to themselves that they were unhappy, and could not deal with
their unhappiness, unless they were drunk, or took on a fantasy film that
meant nothing but escape. As close as one comes to realities of war, seemed
to be films like Casablanca, which, on their own, were also escapist, in
that while these people were victims of war, they really didn't care if they
were or not, because of their personal agendas.
 The film starts out with the Kobe earthquake accident in 1995, as a trigger
for past connection. All of a sudden we see the past, during the end of the
WW II, and his family's trip to Kyushu, to bury his older brother's ashes,
who had died in combat. And many of the children friends of his, joked that
the family was going to commit suicide, since it had been the honorable
thing to do at the time, for many government officials, and their
subordinates. He undertakes to go visit his family burial site, just like
his father had done when he took the whole family on this journey 50 years
ago.
 And the misadventures begin. They have to take various methods of
transportation to get to the location they intend to visit. The longest of
which is a ferry ride overnight, amidst a bunch of people that they
obviously are not exactly used to be around. All of a sudden, what had been
a slight upper class family, is reduced to being next to all the others. The
father, a policeman, is now reduced to being a man, like all the others. He
has to refrain from doing "his" duties, and although he speaks at times in
favor of the ideals of his duties, by the time he speaks in the ship, it is
obvious that he is waking up to the fact that this is another world, and
that he will have to change. But there are a few adventures in the voyage.
He meets an odd cast of characters, a couple of black marketers, one of whom
has a few movies in his bag, and he makes a few monies by showing these
things for a fee. Or a drug addict appears, and one never really understands
what he is running from, or for, but as they leave the ship it appears that
this man had been wanted as a criminal. The film, in one sequence, shows an
old black and white film, and it appears that the actor is this man, now on
drugs, with little respect, or cares about much of anything. In any case, he
seems to be a criminal of some sort, just as he was in the previous snipet
of film that we saw.
 The story itself has a lot of topsy turvy turns, that at times make it
difficult to follow, but it has a couple of nice moments... the man, now
older and wiser, turns in a tunnel and watches a family walk by... it is his
family some 50 years before. This side bit of a psychic nature, is the only
one ever used, but it does not detract from the nature of the film, and the
possibility that 50 years later, Keita himself, has never really left that
past world that he had a glimpse of through a few films. But it is a nice
touch, amounting to a very strong suggestion as to what all the people in
Japan went through at the end of the War... they were all cleansed of the
past, old films dealing with ancient samurai traditions were forbidden, and
most films that were shown were American, and of a completely different
nature at the time, showing a much more westernized society that Japan had
not seen at all. We know that these things do not disappear over night.
Fifty years later, it appears that he is still thinking of that past world
some, even if for him it is a film image of sorts, rather than a reality.
 The one thing that this film won't let go of, which makes it enjoyable, is
the young one's innocence. Keyta, now a writer, never lets go of the moments
that made his life enjoyable. His younger sister's innocence, and his older
brother's desire to follow a young girl he met. These things, at the time,
may have been funny to him, but now appear a bit larger than life, and the
impetus for a story, that has enough moments for us to be able to really
enjoy it, without getting side tracked by understanding. His father had a
terrible time with his changes. The wife was resisting, probably much more
than he cared to accept or admit, his older brother is tired of the stern
father, and wants to leave, and his young sister who believes that they are
all going to commit suicide, which the first time the father hears, is not
funny. But by the time he hears it on the train, towards the end of the
film, it is clear that it is now a joke. And it is here, that things start
taking a turn. The jar of the eldest son that Keita has to guard until it is
in the family's burial ground, accidentally falls on a moment when Keita
actually did something heroic. In the hurry, the jar falls, and breaks in
the train tracks. To everyone's surprise, there are no ashes in it,
something that the young girl had joked about one time when she shook it.
And all we find was inside the urn, was a tooth brush. Keita's ashes had not
been recovered, so his mother made do, with a toothbrush. It is funny, but
really signals the end of a tradition. It almost seems like the family trip
ends there, like they do not have anywhere to go from this point on, or that
the whole thing is pointless..... an excellent time to make a statement
about the cultural changes.... things are different now, and the father
Kokichi now knows it.
 The special part of this film is the filming of all old stuff in a yellow
filter, giving it a bit of the sepia toned color style, reminiscent of
photographs, something the film starts with fifty years before. And it only
has a few moments of pure color, when Keita remembers things, or is on his
way to Kyushu.
 A very nice film, well directed, with some very nice touches. It really
shows a culture in disarray and change, not knowing how to deal with itself,
in its very new roles. The film deals with it magnificently. It is well
thought out and touching in many places. The performances are very nice and
the children are excellent all the way through it.

Author
Pedro Sena
Seen at the Portland 21st International Film Festival
MOONLIGHT SERENADE, is one of those films that just could not be made in
America.
    Japan, suffered with the advent of the bomb, and its position in
the World War II, but if anything, its artists and writers have never
let the world forget what this change really meant. For many, it was a
good riddance of an old system that had out lived its usefulness
anyway. But for a handful, who had been a part of the system, it now
has created a catharses, that they have to go through... what to do,
and how to live, and how to respond to it.
    And the film does a couple of things that are truly magnificent
directing ideas, and make this a special outing for the few viewers
that get to see it. In America, we have no idea how a generation felt,
and lived, really, since it has all been buried behind a Walt Disney
like story, and denial that anything happened. It is good to look to
the future, but is it wise to ignore the past and what people went
through.... maybe living in a situation that you are better off not
knowing what happened, is not such a blessing after all. The Hollywood
controlled "fantasy" took away from people admitting to themselves
that they were unhappy, and could not deal with their unhappiness,
unless they were drunk, or took on a fantasy film that meant nothing
but escape. As close as one comes to realities of war, seemed to be
films like Casablanca, which, on their own, were also escapist, in
that while these people were victims of war, they really didn't care
if they were or not, because of their personal agendas.
    The film starts out with the Kobe earthquake accident in 1995, as
a trigger for past connection. All of a sudden we see the past, during
the end of the WW II, and his family's trip to Kyushu, to bury his
older brother's ashes, who had died in combat. And many of the
children friends of his, joked that the family was going to commit
suicide, since it had been the honorable thing to do at the time, for
many government officials, and their subordinates. He undertakes to go
visit his family burial site, just like his father had done when he
took the whole family on this journey 50 years ago.
    And the misadventures begin. They have to take various methods of
transportation to get to the location they intend to visit. The
longest of which is a ferry ride overnight, amidst a bunch of people
that they obviously are not exactly used to be around. All of a
sudden, what had been a slight upper class family, is reduced to being
next to all the others.  The father, a policeman, is now reduced to
being a man, like all the others. He has to refrain from doing "his"
duties, and although he speaks at times in favor of the ideals of his
duties, by the time he speaks in the ship, it is obvious that he is
waking up to the fact that this is another world, and that he will
have to change. But there are a few adventures in the voyage.  He
meets an odd cast of characters, a couple of black marketers, one of
whom has a few movies in his bag, and he makes a few monies by showing
these things for a fee. Or a drug addict appears, and one never really
understands what he is running from, or for, but as they leave the
ship it appears that this man had been wanted as a criminal. The film,
in one sequence, shows an old black and white film, and it appears
that the actor is this man, now on drugs, with little respect, or
cares about much of anything. In any case, he seems to be a criminal
of some sort, just as he was in the previous snippet of film that we
saw.
    The story itself has a lot of topsy turvy turns, that at times
make it difficult to follow, but it has a couple of nice
moments... the man, now older and wiser, turns in a tunnel and watches
a family walk by... it is his family some 50 years before. This bit of
a psychic nature, is the only one ever used, but it does not detract
from the nature of the film, and the possibility that 50 years later,
Keita himself, has never really left that past world that he had a
glimpse of through a few films. But it is a nice touch, amounting to a
very strong suggestion as to what all the people in Japan went through
at the end of the War... they were all cleansed of the past, old films
dealing with ancient samurai traditions were forbidden, and most films
that were shown were American, and of a completely different nature at
the time, showing a much more westernized society that Japan had not
seen at all. We know that these things do not disappear over night.
Fifty years later, it appears that he is still thinking of that past
world some, even if for him it is a film image of sorts, rather than a
reality.
    The one thing that this film won't let go of, which makes it
enjoyable, is the young one's innocence. Keyta, now a writer, never
lets go of the moments that made his life enjoyable. His younger
sister's innocence, and his older brother's desire to follow a young
girl he met. These things, at the time, may have been funny to him,
but now appear a bit larger than life, and the impetus for a story,
that has enough moments for us to be able to really enjoy it, without
getting side tracked by understanding. His father had a terrible time
with his changes. The wife was resisting, probably much more than he
cared to accept or admit, his older brother is tired of the stern
father, and wants to leave, and his young sister who believes that
they are all going to commit suicide, which the first time the father
hears, is not funny. But by the time he hears it on the train, towards
the end of the film, it is clear that it is now a joke. And it is
here, that things start taking a turn. The jar of the eldest son that
Keita has to guard until it is in the family's burial ground,
accidentaly falls on a moment when Keita actually did something
heroic. In the hurry, the jar falls, and breaks in the train
tracks. To everyone's surprise, there are no ashes in it, something
that the young girl had joked about one time when she shook it.  And
all we find was inside the urn, was a tooth brush. Keita's ashes had
not been recovered, so his mother made do, with a toothbrush. It is
funny, but really signals the end of a tradition. It almost seems like
the family trip ends there, like they do not have anywhere to go from
this point on, or that the whole thing is pointless..... an excellent
time to make a statement about the cultural changes.... things are
different now, and the father Kokichi now knows it.
     The special part of this film is the filming of all old stuff in
a yelloow filter, giving it a bit of the sepia toned color style,
reminiscent of photographs, something the film starts with fifty years
before. And it only has a few moments of pure color, when Keita
remembers things, or is on his way to Kyushu.  A very nice film, well
directed, with some very nice touches. It really shows a culture in
disarray and change, not knowing how to deal with itself, in its very
new roles. The film deals with it magnificently. It is well thought
out and touching in many places. The performances are very nice and
the children are excellent all the way through it.
