Title
Review for Death and the Maiden (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Roman Polanski
Starring- Sigourney Weaver, Ben Kingsley, and Stuart Wilson
Based on the play by Ariel Dorfman
     The title immediately alerts one that they are possibly in for a
heavy handed modern allegorical polemic, with an actor standing each
for each of the title characters.  Actually there are three
characters.  The characters are a victim, a judge, and an accused
fascist; all stranded in an isolated cabin.  The setting is an Unnamed
South American Country.  The subject at hand is the aftermath of
totalitarianism.  It sounds like Sartre's "No Exit" or Jean Genet's
"The Balcony," existential dramas that were brilliant nearly half a
century ago, but old hat to anybody who has read a book recently.
     And it probably would be except for the fact that it is directed
by Roman Polanski.  All of Polanski's best films deal with a small
group of characters trapped together, with one character trapped even
further, trapped in their own mind.  KNIFE IN THE WATER and BITTER MOON
trap the people on boats; REPULSION,  THE TENANT and ROSEMARY'S BABY
trap people in their urban apartments.  CUL DE SAC, and his new film
DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, trap people in the false complacency of suburban
life.
     Nobody but Polanski could create so much tension in the throw away
opening scene.  Sigourney Weaver is preparing dinner, but in a tank top
and boxer shorts.  The audience is put in an uncomfortable voyeuristic
position, wanting to leave and wanting to watch.  We have collectively
intruded on a private moment, and continue intruding.  Something subtle
about the camera movement makes this different from other opening
scenes.  Her unawareness of our watching makes it almost as if we were
stalking her in her own home.  Just as this gets to be a little creepy,
the radio announces that hearings by the new government will look into
the death squad killings of a previous regime.  Sigourney Weaver
listens with particular interest, and a storm knocks out the
electricity and the phone.
     Here is where the casting is truly perfect.  One might expect the
actress in the darkened isolated house to succumb to any number of weak
female cliches, but all the audience knows that Sigourney Weaver, in
similar attire, single handedly defeated the Alien on several
occasions.  Whatever the deposed dictatorship can put up against her is
going to be in for quite a fight.
     What turns up in the middle of the storm is Ben Kingsley, best
known as Ghandi.  In our minds a saintly man, Kingsley denies that he
was in the country at all during the death-squad era.  Torture victim
Weaver has a different opinion.  Subconsciously one still roots for
their previous characters.  We hope Weaver destroys the Alien, and
Kingsley rises above repression.  One of the most claustrophobic and
tense ninety minutes of cinema follows.  Nobody but Polanski could use
the simple tricks that create the emotional roller-coaster ride and
have it not seem corny.  The storm knocking out the power routine was
old when movies first learned to talk.  The film is so riveting that
one forgets how much of a cliche it is.
     The dimly lit naturalistic set and particularly grainy film lend a
home-movie reality to the story.  It is a sense of reality that works
well.  The horror film cliche set-up gives way to the horror of
Twentieth Century life: tortures and disappearances, followed by
cover-ups and silence.
     The play is full of purple prose, and the inevitable 'what makes
us different from them?' speeches.  Polanski races past all of that
quickly.  Much more time is spent on dribbling out the details of what
supposedly happened fifteen years ago, and what Weaver intends to do
about it now.  As Weaver reveals details of her torture, we are again
put in the uncomfortable position of eavesdropper.  Our listening
intrudes on her innermost privacy, and forces us to identify, uneasily,
with Kingsley, the accused arch-intruder of her life.
     While much attention paid to details throughout the tense dimly
lit cabin scenes, the few studio made exterior scenes are very crude.
Less than sophisticated matte shots unconvincingly place the characters
outside the cabin.  While perhaps unintentional, it does frame these
more pointed scenes as staged existentialism, separate from the drama
of the cabin.  Even the scenes on the porch, with the
forced-perspective prop lighthouse blinking in the "distance," seem
distinctly removed from the real life horror of the interior
situation.  The subtle staginess diffuses the awkward unnaturalness of
some of the Ariel Dorfman's more political dialogue.
     A couple of years Polanski turned down Speilberg's invitation to
direct SCHINDLER'S LIST.  He felt the subject matter, which intersected
with his own life, was too personal for him to direct.  This film deals
with the same fascist themes on a microcosmic scale.  DEATH AND THE
MAIDEN is the work of a world class film maker at the peak of his
form.  With two top notch films in one year, at least according to the
US distribution dates, this marks a major comeback.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     There are three main characters in this extraordinary film that is
based on the play by Ariel Dorfman.  Far more important than the story
that unfolds is a universal theme that the film explores so very well.
     Unlike most films where bits and pieces that take place in one
location are shot and later spliced to make the movie flow, Roman
Polanski opted to film DEATH AND THE MAIDEN chronologically.   Taking
advantage of the fact that most of the movie takes place in one room,
Polanski shot the film as the story would have really unfolded.
     "Somewhere" in Latin America, at a lonely beach house, the
gripping adventure begins on a stormy, dark night.  Paulina Escobar
(Sigorney Weaver), is at home when her husband, Gerardo (Stuart
Wilson) is dropped off at their home.   With them is a stranger, a
Dr. Roberto Miranda, who has given her husband a lift when Gerardo's
car broke down.  He is invited into their home, thanked and given a
drink to help him warm himself and dry up.
     This unspecified Latin American country, long a dictatorship, had
just recently been overthrown.  Paulina's husband, an attorney, has
been appointed to head a commission to find those who had worked on
death squads for the dictatorship, and now to bring them to justice.
As Dr. Miranda is exchanging small talk with the host and hostess,
Paulina suddenly becomes aware that the doctor is the one who 15 years
ago had raped her in jail, had applied live electrodes to various
sensitive parts of her body as well as to other women prisoners.
     Paulina gets Gerardo aside and tells him who Dr. Miranda is.  He
tells her it happened fifteen years ago and she cannot be sure.  As the
one appointed by the new government to find the culprits, he certainly
does now want to engage in the same flimsy tactics the old regime used
to inflict on their prisoners.
     The cast is superb.  Wilson as the very reasonable lawyer-husband
who tries to reason but not help his wife without absolute proof; Ben
Kingsley as the apparently shocked and bewildered man now bound hand
and foot to a chair, is helpless.  He says that at the time of the
incidents described by Paulina, he was in Scotland studying at a
university and nowhere near Latin America.   Paulina, for her part, is
ready to shoot him.  She recognizes his features full well.  She
remembers the taste of the skin on his neck when she tried to bite him
off ... but she cannot at this point convince her husband to help
her.
     The film is a nail-biter.  The ending is even better.  You will
not want to miss this one. Polanski has proven once again, if proof
were needed,  that he can make a movie with the best of them.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released: 1/27/95 (wide) 
Running Length: 1:43 
Rated:  R (Language, violence, mature themes, brief nudity) 
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Ben Kingsley, Stuart Wilson 
Director: Roman Polanski 
Producers: Thom Mount and Josh Kramer 
Screenplay: Rafael Yglesias and Ariel Dorfman based on the play by 
            Ariel Dorfman 
Cinematography: Torino Delli Colli 
Music: Wojciech Kilar 
Released by Fine Line Features 
     It's a windy, stormy night somewhere in "a country in South
America after the fall of the dictatorship."  Lightning flickers,
thunder rumbles, and rain comes down in sheets.  This atmosphere, so
carefully constructed by director Roman Polanski and cinematographer
Torino Delli Colli, is by far DEATH AND THE MAIDEN's most notable
feature.  In fact, a fair impression is that too much effort went into
this aspect of the production, leaving little remaining for such minor
details as plotting and acting.
     The premise, which also formed the backdrop for the Ariel Dorfman
play upon which this film is based, is a solid one, brimming with
potential for a great dramatic thriller--potential that is never
realized in the film.  The story revolves around Paulina Escobar
(Sigourney Weaver) and her husband Gerardo (Stuart Wilson), a couple
living in a secluded house on an unidentified South American country's
coastline.  Both are former revolutionaries for democracy--he was the
editor of an underground newspaper; she was a courier who was raped and
tortured for protecting his identity.
     Now, fifteen years later, Gerardo is rescued from a car breakdown
on a lonely stretch of road by a Dr. Roberto Miranda (Ben Kingsley).
When the good doctor stops off at the Escobar house for a quick drink,
Paulina hears his voice and laugh, and recognizes in them echoes of the
man once in charge of her torture.  Right or wrong about his identity,
she takes steps to ensure that Miranda doesn't leave until her revenge
is complete.
     There are several problems with DEATH AND THE MAIDEN.  The
storyline is littered with contrivances.  Individually, each is
acceptable, but combined, they give the film a bloated, overplotted
feel.  Any degree of tension cultivated by Polanski is frequently
undermined by Rafael Yglesias and Ariel Dorfman's sputtering script.
     The central mystery is whether or not Miranda is the vicious
animal of Paulina's memories.  Unfortunately, this question is answered
far too early.  Supposedly, this is to allow the drama to swirl around
the trio of characters--but there's a flaw in the approach.  Due in
large part to lackluster acting, none of these people ever captures the
audience's sympathy.  We simply don't care one way or another about
them.  The house could explode and it wouldn't be worth more than a
shrug.
     Sigourney Weaver is the worst of the small cast.  Her performance
careens wildly from stilted to over-the-top with little transition in
between.  Several of her most dramatic moments are unintentionally
hilarious.  At her best, the actress is marginal; here, she's out of
her depth.  Stuart Wilson, playing her husband, isn't much better.  His
character is supposed to be relatively impotent, but Wilson plays the
part almost mechanically.  Even the reliable Ben Kingsley isn't in top
form (although he's eminently more watchable than his co-stars).
     As was the case with BITTER MOON, Polanski abandons all attempts
at subtlety.  Justice stands by uncertainly while the victim and
victimizer trade places.  The message, clear from the beginning, gets
hammered home relentlessly.  The resulting production ends up far too
heavy-handed to be considered powerful drama.  Perhaps the best lesson
viewers of this movie will come away with is how dangerous it can be to
pick up stranded motorists.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sigourney Weaver, Ben Kingsley, Stuart Wilson.
Screenplay:  Rafael Yglesias and Ariel Dorfman.
Director:  Roman Polanski.
     One of 1994's most unintentionally hilarious films was the
adaptation of Isabel Allende's THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, a bloated
epic in which Jeremy Irons, Meryl Streep, Glenn Close and Winona
Ryder were supposed to be playing Latin Americans.  It baffled me
that such casting could take place in an age where an Anglo playing
any other race would incite riots, and the casting of SPIRITS was
ultimately much of its undoing.  Roman Polanski has made the same
choice with DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, and again it was a very bad one.
While as a concept DEATH AND THE MAIDEN is strong and intriguing
enough to maintain interest, it is sabotaged by actors who often
appear not to have the faintest idea what to do with the material.
     Sigourney Weaver stars as Paulina Escobar, a woman still
suffering profound psychological side effects after being tortured
as a political prisoner fifteen years earlier in an unnamed South
American country.  The fascist government is recently fallen as the
film opens, and Paulina's husband Gerardo (Stuart Wilson) is
preparing to investigate the human rights violations of the old
regime.  One stormy evening, Gerardo's car gets a flat near their
seaside home, and he is given a ride home by Dr. Roberto Miranda
(Ben Kingsley).  When she hear's Miranda's voice, Paulina becomes
convinced that he is the man who repeatedly raped her during the
torture sessions, and she takes him hostage.  Although Miranda
protests that he is not the man, and Gerardo believes Paulina is
crazy, Paulina insists that Miranda make a full and sincere
confession of his crimes, or she will kill him.
     The psychological underpinnings of DEATH AND THE MAIDEN are a
complex set of relationships and interactions which make for an
extremely promising story.  At its heart is Paulina's conviction in
Miranda's guilt, a conviction which we should always doubt because
of her paranoia and unreliability.  Unfortunately, as it plays out,
the performances and direction make our choice far too easy for us.
Sigourney Weaver is part of the problem, playing Paulina not just
over the top (which is probably where the role should be) but so far
over the top that she falls off the top.  Weaver as a personality
simply seems too strong to be so close to complete breakdown, so she
makes up for it by contorting her face and snarling.  But a more
serious problem is the performance of Ben Kingsley, who is
approaching a land speed record for most different races and
nationalities played in a career.  He plays Miranda as such a little
weasel that if he's not guilty of this particular crime, we figure
he must be guilty of _something_.  The part requires more ambiguity,
and the very talented Kingsley just doesn't deliver in this case.
     Perhaps even more disappointing is the relationship between
Paulina and Gerardo, which is remarkably intricate.  Paulina's
torture was the result of refusing to give Gerardo's name as the
publisher of an opposition newspaper during the dictatorship, but
she is repaid by betrayals both real (an affair Gerardo had while
she was in prison) and perceived (his acceptance of the position
with what Paulina believes is a shadow court to slap torturers on
the wrist).  Her feelings for Gerardo range from hatred that she
sacrificed herself for him to a love more necessary for self-
preservation than real; Gerardo, meanwhile, never feels quite worthy
of what she did for him.  All this is in the text, but somehow
director Roman Polanski doesn't let it out.  Paulina never seems to
love Gerardo, while Gerardo is mostly befuddled.  The moments when
they do reveal themselves, all in very stagy speeches, ring hollow
because the same truths should have been evident in the
performances.
     Once upon a time, Roman Polanski was a master at building
suspense (CHINATOWN, ROSEMARY'S BABY, REPULSION), but he rarely gets
the tone of DEATH AND THE MAIDEN right.  One scene shows what might
have been, late in the film when Kingsley makes a confession.
Polanski holds a very long take on Kingsley, refusing to cut to
Weaver's reaction, and at that moment you genuinely wonder whether
this is a guilty man spilling his guts or an innocent man giving the
performance of a lifetime to save his skin.  But moments later,
Polanski cops out with a too-obvious resolution.  The performances
in DEATH AND THE MAIDEN should have created a mystery.  Instead, the
mystery is why they couldn't make the material work.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DEATH AND THE MAIDEN is Roman Polanski's latest film and it
clearly has his stamp on it.  I find Polanski's movies always to be
smartly written and directed.  He assumes that he has an audience who
goes to the movies with their thinking caps on, and his movies always
surprise you.  Sometimes the surprises come as unexpected twists in the
plot (as in CHINATOWN or FRANTIC) and at other time in how harsh and
intense the way the characters are drawn (as in BITTER MOON).  Finally,
his movies can be so heavy that they are hard to watch.  If you are
prone to nightmares, his movies provide fertile ground.  DEATH AND THE
MAIDEN is all of the above.
     The movie is set in a South American country, assumed to be Chile,
where a democratic regime has taken over from a brutal dictatorship.
The new Minister of Justice is played by Stuart Wilson.  His wife,
played by Sigourney Weaver, was brutally and repeated tortured and
raped by the old regime when she was a student activist.  The other
actor in this three-person play is Ben Kingsley.  He is a doctor, and
he may or may not have been Weaver's chief torturer.  The movie, made
from a play, is about the mystery of whether Kingsley was the torturer
or not.
     The title DEATH AND THE MAIDEN comes from the name of a Schubert
Quartet, and it plays a central thread that runs through the entire
show.  The opening scene is in a concert hall where this quartet is
being performed.  The camera cuts from the tension of the violin
strings to the tension in Weaver's face and hands.  From there we skip
to the isolated house on a peninsula where Weaver and her husband live
and where 99% of this claustrophobic movie takes place.
     Kingsley brings Wilson home in a huge storm where they have lost
power and phone.  Soon Weaver becoming increasingly agitated decides
that Kingsley was her torturer.  (Having recently spent over two days
at home in the mountains with no power or phone, with the only road out
blocked and with several huge holes blown in our roof, I can speak from
some authority in the isolation and irritation a situation like this
can cause.)
     For the rest of the movie you are not sure if she is going to kill
him, torture him or what, but rest assured that it is a long night of
terror for the three leads and for the audience.  The well-written
script by Rafeal Yglesuas and Ariel Dorfman takes many twists.  Have
yourself some fun and try to guess the ending.  You will find there are
many possibilities from which to choose.
     Weaver is an incredible actor who can play intense roles as in
ALIENS and comedic roles as in WORKING GIRL.  She is excellent here as
one of the angriest and bitterest women you will ever meet.  She is
angry at life and everyone in it including her husband.  You wonder
early on in the show why he would stay with someone so angry and mean,
but as the plot develops you find out the reasons he puts up with this
miserable marriage.
     Kingsley has the ambiguous and hence harder part.  Sometimes you
think he is a victim and other times you are convinced he is an animal.
A fascinating piece of acting.  Wilson on the other hand is weak and
gives a pedestrian performance.  He was rarely believable.
     Within the confines of the plot, Polanski did all that was
possible, and I do recommend the film for an excellent script and for
some top-notch acting.  On the other hand, I only gave it ** 1/2
because it was a tad too intense for me.  It runs 1:47 and is correctly
rated R for violence plus a little profanity and nudity.  I do not
think this movie is appropriate for kids, but it might be acceptable
for non-sensitive older teenagers.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 18, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Fifteen years ago, in an unnamed South American country, Paulina
Escobar (played by Sigourney Weaver) survived arrest, interrogation,
and inhuman torture at the hands of her country's former fascist
dictatorship.  But her body and her mind remain horribly scarred and
her life is a waking nightmare.  Now she lives for the justice that she
hopes to get by the efforts of her husband, a leftist lawyer just named
to the President's commission on human rights.
     Fifteen years after her ordeal she still lives in fear and hatred
for the doctor whom she never saw but who tortured and raped her
repeatedly.  Her husband Geraldo Escobar (Stuart Wilson) is brought
home one night by a man who gave him road assistance.  Pauline hears
his voice and is convinced he is the man who has haunted her
nightmares.  When given the chance she traps Dr. Miranda (Ben Kingsley)
in the house, ties him to a chair, and holds a sort of impromptu trial
to determine if she should kill him or not.  Geraldo as the moderating
force must take the role of defense attorney but cannot fight too
fiercely for Miranda for fear of himself becoming the victim of
Paulina's rage.
     DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, a play by Ariel Dorfman adapted to the
screen by Rafael Yglesias and Dorfman, is one of those simple and
enigmatic stories that you can take at face value or in which you can
see a multitude of meanings and issues raised.  Among the issues one
might see in this film are: Can people avoid letting the magnitude ofa
crime affect their impartiality in the decision of guilt or innocence?
Where is the line between avenging past wrongs under tyranny and
becoming another tyranny?  What is the nature of evidence and how much
circumstantial evidence constitutes a convincing demonstration of
guilt?  Do we have a natural bias to believe one sex over the other and
if so, which way?
     Roman Polanski has been criticized for setting this film in a
South American country, yet not giving appropriate accents to the
characters.  This is an unfair criticism of this film.  In fact, if he
were going for total realism he should have had the film spoken in
Spanish and used subtitles.  However, even accents would remind the
viewer that the film is set in another country.  Polanski may well have
wanted to avoid the distancing effect that accents would give him.
Where he does leave himself open to criticism is ironically in the
makeup.  His film has been accused of using gratuitous nudity.  In fact
the scenes are intended to show us the scars of Paulina's torture.  But
this is before the plot lets us know she has been tortured and, at
least in the print I saw, the scars were not obvious and could have
been missed by a viewer not expecting to see them.  The screenplay's
descriptions of torture are at once too muted to be realistic, but
sufficiently graphic to bother some audiences.
     Sigourney Weaver and Ben Kingsley both give tight, riveting
performances.  Weaver gives the erratic feel of a wounded and
irrational animal.  One is never sure what she will do.  Kingsley gives
a tightly-wound performance of controlled desperation.  Stuart Wilson's
performance is less memorable but entirely convincing.
     As with PULP FICTION, one hesitates to recommend this film to
anyone sensitive to violence in movies.  But DEATH AND THE MAIDEN is
powerful, intelligent, and suspenseful for those willing to try it.  I
rate it a high +2  on the -4 to +4 scale.
