Title
Review for Fourth Protocol, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Frederick Forsyth writes good suspense stories about political
intrigue.  He is best known for THE DAY OF THE JACKAL and THE ODESSA FILE.
They are clearly written and tense thrillers, though if the truth be known,
there is a certain sameness about them.  While there are major consequences
to what is happening, his stories really come down to a sort of chessgame
between two men, one good and one evil.  Nobody else is really important in
the story.  Just about everyone else is a prop.  THE FOURTH PROTOCOL is a
new film based on a novel of the same name by Frederick Forsyth.
     THE DAY OF THE JACKAL dealt with a lone assassin in the pay of
political extremists whose mission is to kill Charles DeGaulle.  We see how
the assassin works and thinks.  We also see a police investigator, one who
is not altogether popular with his superiors, and we see how he is able to
discover an amazing amount of information about the assassin.  And that
information, together with a modicum of dumb luck, are sufficient to avert
the assassination.  With minor substitutions, we have the same story here.
Instead of a political extremist group, we have a rogue general in Soviet
intelligence.  The general sends a sort of assassin, Petrofsky (played by
Pierce Brosnan), to head up an operation in Britain.  Trying to uncover the
operation is John Preston, played by an aging Michael Caine.  Preston takes
his orders these days from an officious supervisor played by Julian Glover,
who seems to make a career of playing unlikeable officials (including Breen
in FIVE MILLION YEARS TO EARTH).  Only this time, the assassin's mission is
not to kill a single man.
     THE FOURTH PROTOCOL is solidly acted with Caine a likeable if
independent-minded agent.  Pierce Brosnan is not very good at showing
emotion, but as emotionless killers he is just fine.  There are a host of
other familiar faces including, I think (and someone can correct me if I am
wrong), the same actor who plays Max Headroom, in this film playing an
obnoxious American.  As suspense films go, THE FOURTH PROTOCOL is not the
most cerebral, but it is several cuts about American suspense films like
BEVERLY HILLS COP.  Give it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Mark Brader
     Frederick Forsyth has written several thrillers, and several of them have
been adapted into movies, starting with his first, the excellent THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL.  THE FOURTH PROTOCOL marks the first time that Forsyth also did the
screenplay adaptation.
     Pierce Brosnan, who wanted to play James Bond, is now on the other side:
he plays a top Russian agent who is sent to England to do a very dirty piece of
work against the NATO alliance.  (It will violate "the fourth protocol" of a
certain treaty, hence the title.)  Michael Caine, who has starred in spy movies
from THE IPCRESS FILE up to the current THE WHISTLE BLOWER, plays the man who
is trying to stop him.  Caine's world in this movie is not far removed from
that of THE IPCRESS FILE, though perhaps a bit less grotty.
     Caine and Brosnan, and the supporting cast also, turn in decent
performances; the direction was unspectacular but the story kept moving along.
On the whole I found the movie entirely satisfactory -- except for the most
important thing, the script.  (Some types of movies can stand large-to-middling
implausibilities in the script: I loved THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS, rate it $7.50
(Cdn), and recommend it just for fun even to other non-fans of James Bond.  But
a serious thriller such as THE FOURTH PROTOCOL must meet higher standards.)
     I'll be vague about details to avoid any spoilers.  But to give you an
idea: The premise of the Russian plot made sense, but their implementation did
not; it allowed too many chances for the discovery of one piece to tip NATO off
to the whole thing.  (Just as well, otherwise there would have been no movie,
but still...)  One piece of tactics is used so many times that by the last time
it has become predictable; that scene also contains a silly mistake (I was
thinking, "Ah, he's doing it that way so as to avoid that cliche error giving
away his plans", and one minute later, the cliche was shown as having occurred
anyway.)  Also, the ending seemed abrupt, with an explicit unanswered question;
I wondered if a sequel is contemplated.
