Title
Review for Mitt liv som hund (1985)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is one of those statements that get me into trouble, but I think
that Bergman has given a sort of image to Swedish film that Swedish film
might be better off without.  When people think of Swedish film what comes
to mind is dry intellectual exercises, with a lot of symbolism, that if you
could understand would only give you a multitude of reasons why the
characters are depressed.  This may not be fair in general--even of just
Bergman films--but it is the impression much of the public has gotten.
Friends of mine have to be coerced to go see even a subtitled film.  Well,
MY LIFE AS A DOG is subtitled, but it is worth the effort to see, and then
some.
     The main character, a young boy, is not having a very good childhood.
He is fatherless, his mother is dying of tuberculosis, and he gets into a
lot of trouble, mostly due to the coercion of other children.  But everybody
knows he is a bad boy.  He doesn't fit in with other children or his family.
Finally he gets packed off to live with an uncle.  Suddenly everything
clicks into place.  His uncle's family loves life and accepts people for
what they are.  They are eccentric, but likably so.  The eccentricity is
done believably, not exaggerated as the family was in Capra's YOU CAN'T TAKE
IT WITH YOU.
     MY LIFE AS A DOG is not just a fine portrait of childhood and how
children react to life's problems; it is a comparison of philosophies of
life.  The main character's mother wants to change him to make him a more
convenient child to deal with.  The closer he is to the ideal of being seen
and not heard, the better.  The uncle's family accepts him as a human
instead of a machine-tooled component.  They revel in human diversity.
Under their influence he blooms as a human being rather than dwelling on
morbid thoughts.  As a portrait of the world from a child's eyes, a sort of
child's testament, MY LIFE AS A DOG is a better film than Bergman's FANNY
AND ALEXANDER, but is a cut below Boorman's HOPE AND GLORY.  Rate it a low
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Pedro Sena
Growing up is not easy.... of fun, for Ingmar and his older brother.  The
mother is sick and won't make it for very long so he is shuffled off to his
uncle's.... where his mis-adventures continue.
And the only friend he has made in during these tough years for him are
another young girl he has met while at his uncle's. Their way of meeting is
with a pair of gloves and a little boxing.  It seems to be the rage at the
time in the fifties, when these kids are growing up.
The children are having a hard time with their mother, whose sickness the
family is trying to hide.  And the fact that for some reason, the older
children are always picking on the young Ingmar, and their noise and
emotional brouhaha's are something that the ill mother can no longer deal
with, or survive.  She needs the quiet space.
And the young Ingmar is forced to come to grips with the other kids around
him.  He is always considered a failure and is picked on by his elders.  He
seems to crave a little respect and care, if not understanding.  And he
finds it, in another young girl that also has a similar chip on her
shoulder.  She also has a mean pair of fists.  But their fights, while they
seem to be the fiercest of them all, seem to always end up in each other's
arms, hugging and appreciating each other.
Ahhh, pre-teen days look better for Ingmar.  The young girl has become his
best friend, and she is someone he can hug, and lay his head down on, since
his mother is now almost dead, and he has finally accepted it.
A loving film, that very much displays a lifestyle that appears to be sad
and hopeless for many children, boxing gives this film an inch of freedom,
and a way to make friends, in a life style that has the makings for a
boring, no meaning lifestyle at all.  It is a kid's film, in the sense that
it is all about Ingmar's plight and story, but by doing so, it also adds a
larger picture.... in an isolated country place, there is almost nothing for
these children to get inspired by, except in this case, a pair of gloves,
for which one famous night a Swedish boxers broke through and showed the
world that dreams can come true.

Author
Jeff Meyer
Seen at the Seattle Film Festival:
MY LIFE AS A DOG (Sweden, 1985)
Director: Lasse Hallstrom
Screenwriters: Lasse Hallstrom, Brasse Brannstrom, Pelle Berglund,
               Reidar Jonsson, from the novel by Jonnson
Cast:  Anton Glanzelius, Anki Liden, Tomas von Bromssen, 
Melinda Kinnaman
Sub-titled
     Several years ago, I saw FANNY AND ALEXANDER, Ingmar Bergmen's
(supposedly) last picture, which was being hailed everywhere for its beauty and
the lightness of tone it contained (especially when compared with much of the
directors other work).  While I found the film satisfying, I still thought it
fairly stuffy and certainly overlong.  Its imagery promoted a romantic air, but
the ethereal script left little to support it.  I came away feeling vaguely let
down.
     MY LIFE AS A DOG is everything I expected FANNY AND ALEXANDER to be.
While it contains little of the cinematographic skill of Bergmen, its settings,
its characters, and especially its script, have made it one of the best "life as
seen through children's eyes" films I've ever seen.  This is up there with TO
KILL A MOCKINGBIRD and MY BODYGUARD (better than the latter, I think).  The
story centers on a young boy, something of an eccentric, who lives in a city
apartment with his older brother and his invalid mother.  His experiences are
related as flashbacks between his staring into the stars.  As his mother
worsens, he is sent to his uncle and aunt's place in the country, a town built
around a glass factory, and made up a variety of wonderful eccentrics.  It is
that kind of place that Dickens or Capra could create, and so many have tried
to imitate; here, it is done successfully.  Gene Siskel used to give his
highest ratings to films that contained places he'd like to visit, people that
he would like to talk to.  MY LIFE AS A DOG has that in spades--you want to
see it another time for the same reason you look through a photo album.
     I'm not sure I could talk about the acting here; each person seems to have
disappeared into their role with such abandon that it is difficult to think of
them as having a life outside their character--which, I guess, is the point.
How this boy comes to grip with the course his life takes is bittersweet, but
never depressing; joyful, but never saccharine.  His friends, his relatives...
all are done with a wonderful, ordinary sense of joy.  Let me tell you that the
audience was laughing throughout this film, but not harshly; and I noticed that
they were also smiling constantly, which is a sign I value even more.   The
director, who appeared afterwards, received a three-minute standing ovation; it
was, I think, deserved.  It is interesting to note that, according to the
director, it was not planned for foreign release; however, he says the same
reactions we displayed during the film seem to be universal in audiences of
other countries.
     The best film of the festival so far.  A+.  5.00+ value.  I urge you very
strongly to see this if it plays in your town.  It has an American distributor,
and hopefully will be making the rounds soon.  I really cannot see you being
disappointed; from all accounts, no one here (and this a Friday Night
audience) was.

Author
Kevin Romano
     This film has several good metaphors to sustain its thesis that our
children don't let us down, but that we adults let them down.  The story is
told from the point of view of Ingemar, a young boy whose mother is ill.  She
never really wants to have much to do with him anyway.  He lives in a squalid
flat with her, his older brother and his favorite friend--his pet dog--a
mongrel named Sickan.
     Ingemar wonders several times throughout the film in voice-over
meditation, while we see the stars in the sky, just why the Russians had to
shoot Laika, the space dog, into outer space and, eventually, let her starve to
death as she circled the earth.  This, in actuality, is what is happening in
young Ingemar's life.  He is starving to death for understanding, affection
etc.  This metaphor develops throughout the film as Ingemar reflects on
different aspects of Laika's fate.  It is a powerful metaphor.
     However, the film is in no way morbid, for, when the mother gets too ill,
the boys are split up and sent away.  Ingemar is sent to an uncle's house which
is in a village built around a local glass-blowing industry.  Here his life
picks up and there are several quite eccentric characters in the village.  His
main relationship is with a young girl his own age who shows him how to box,
plays soccer on his team and yet must hide the fact that she's a girl.  Ingemar
relaxes more in the village, but, wherever he is, he is always portrayed as
just what he is--a young boy--nothing more, nothing less.
     Eventually, he is taken back home, but his mother is even less solicitous
now.  She has a relapse and he is packed off again to the village.  He is
happier there anyway, even though he must spend his nights now in the house of
an older woman whose husband has recently died.  All through these events the
metaphor of Laika's fate is interwoven.  His own dog, Sickan, has been put to
sleep, but the film does not dwell on such morbidity.
     Another theme which reveals itself in the film is the relaxed Swedish
attitude toward sex and Ingemar's basically healthy but equal lack of interest
in the subject.  In related sequences, a buxom young woman of about twenty has
him accompany her to the workshop of a local sculptor who has been commissioned
to do a statue of mother and child.  She poses naked on the floor while Ingemar
waits in a side room.  Ingemar's uncle has the hots for this young lady and
later asks him what she's like--piqueing Ingemar's interest and leading to a
funny situation as he falls through the skylight while trying to see her.
     The film is set somewhere in the late 1950's or early 1960's about the
time when Ingemar Johannson knocked out Floyd Patterson to win the heavyweight
championship of the world.  In the final scene the people are ecstatic over the
win and spill into the street shouting, "Ingemar didn't let us down.  He won
for Sweden!"  This metaphor's connection to young Ingemar's life is obvious,
and this is, in the last analysis, one of the weaknesses of the film.  It is
just a little too obvious.  It is such nuances of shading, I feel, that can
lift a movie from being good to being great.  The eccentric characters in the
village are also a bit much, but, even with these weaknesses, the film is most
certainly worth seeing.
     Some interesting things to watch for if you get to see this movie are: the
drabness of the cinematography which is in keeping with the main theme of the
story, the developing metaphor of Laika as it parallels Ingemar's own
existence, the Swedish attitude toward sex which differs profoundly from our
own, Ingemar's voice-overs when talking about Laika.  This last one deserves
some comment.
     The voice-overs don't hit you over the head as, say, Woody Allen's do in
the film HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  There Woody Allen talks about death as though
no one in the audience has ever had similar thoughts.  Such heavy-handedness is
a fault in the arts--another example might be Picasso's painting entitled
GUERNICA.  I don't know about you, but I resent it when the artist assumes that
his audience is too dull-witted to make any necessary connections so he,
himself, must hit them over the head.  MY LIFE AS A DOG perches precariously
all the way through on this invisible line.  Whether it succumbs in the very
end is debatable, but the fun times it offers along the way make it very
worthwhile.  The metaphor of Laika in Ingemar's voice-overs is very profound -
and moving.
     For myself it was a treat to see such a good Swedish film.  Even though
the Swedish is common colloquial speech, it was good to hear it again.  As a
young man I became infatuated with the Swedish language.  I guess I always will
be.  In this regard let me add one final artistic note.  When little Ingemar
goes to his uncle's village he is greeted by his uncle with "Welcome to
Smaland".  Smaland is a Swedish province; its name means small land, but, in
Swedish, the reference is to little Ingemar now being in his own land where
even the adults can act like children--a beautiful touch!  Let's hope that
there will be more such fine films coming to our shores soon from these
interesting people--the Swedes.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MY LIFE AS A DOG (Mitt Liv Som Hund)(director/writer: Lasse Hallström;
screenwriter: Per Berglund/Brasse Brannstrom/Reidar Jonsson;
cinematographer: Jörgen Persson; editor: Christer Furubrand/Susanne
Linnman; cast: Anton Glavelius (Ingemar), Tomas Von Bromssen (Uncle
Gunnar), Anki Liden (Ingemar's Mother), Melinda Kinnaman (Saga), Kicki
Rundgren (Aunt Ulla), Manfred Serner (Erik, Brother), Melinda Kinnaman
(Saga), Didrik Gustavsson (Mr. Arvidsson), Vivi Johansson (Mrs.
Arvidsson), Magnus Rask (Fransson), Ing-Marie Carlsson (Berit, The
Artist's Model), 1985-Sweden)
My Life as a Dog is an endearing kidpic from Sweden about a 12-year-old,
Ingemar (Anton Glavelius), who cutely grows on you with his devilish
antics, whether flashing his curiously innocent eyes at a would-be
girlfriend or dressed to the nines in a bow tie and white shirt or
getting a bottle unstuck from his private parts in a failed lesson on
sex education he was participating in. This is a coming-of-age film,
that plays as bittersweet melodramatics. It is enlivened by how lovable
Ingemar is, as he learns about life by evaluating the big events in the
world and then comparing it with his own life. He is much concerned
about the Soviet dog Laika being sent up in space to die for a mission
the dog had no choice in undertaking and compares that event with his
own pet dog who is taken from him when he is uprooted to live in the
country. It's a pleasant little film, with its small aims hitting its
target repeatedly, quietly reflecting the joys and sorrows the youngster
must go through in order to grow up, and how the bland 1950s and its
omens of the future in space travel, new pop-up toasters, and a TV in
every house, influence the youngster's life.
The picture follows this intelligent child around to see the world that
he sees, as he is growing up in a single-parent home. His father is not
heard from, being somewhere in the tropics working on a banana boat, his
mother is very sick and dying from TB, and his older brother Erik is
always fighting with him. Together they get on their mother's nerves,
until she can't bear it anymore. Finally their mother gets so sick that
she can't look after them and they are both sent away for the summer to
live with different relatives in the country. The biggest disappointment
for Ingemar is that he can't take his dog with him, it supposedly was
brought to a shelter but he will never see it again. The title of the
film is derived from his comparison of the fates of the Soviet dog with
his dog, whereby both their lives are sacrificed without their consent.
His guardians are Uncle Gunnar (Tomas von Bromssen) and Aunt Ulla (Kicki
Rundgren), who are simple country bumpkins, unable to talk about
anything worldly but love to make small talk about the weather. He soon
warms up to them and gets accepted into their small town, where the
uncle works in the glass factory and is fanatical about soccer, being a
player himself on the local team and the coach of the boys' school
soccer team. The uncle also likes to observe the coconuts on the young
ladies in town. By being very easy to talk to, with no pretenses, he
thereby develops a warm and natural relationship with the youngster and
makes his summer experience a joyous one.
One of Ingemar's duties, is to go to the apartment downstairs to see if
the elderly Mr. Arvidsson (Didrik Gustavsson), who is infirmed to his
bed, is doing okay.The old man gets his jollies from having Ingemar read
aloud to him the women' underwear catalogues, which he keeps hidden
under his bed from his wife.
Ingemar's summer tales involve meeting a tomboy called Saga (Melinda
Kinnaman), who boxes with him, dresses like a boy to play soccer on
their team, gets him to tape her growing breasts so that they won't be
noticeable, and she also yearns to have him as a boyfriend. He makes
friends with a youngster who has green-colored hair and whose father
builds a spacecraft that the children ride in until it crashes; he acts
as a bodyguard for a well-endowed glassworker, who is posing nude for a
statue of the Virgin Mother. He falls comically through the skylight of
the roof as he tries to get a better view of her; he meets some of the
other odd characters in town, such as the trapeze artist who can
remember all the U.S. presidents, even after he falls. He really has fun
as he sits in the fun house his uncle is building, talking about life
with his surrogate-father role model, as he is being initiated, as the
poet Robert Bly says is necessary to do, into the male world.
Happy to be back home at the end of the summer and wanting to tell his
mother everything he did, until he sadly finds that she has to be
hospitalized. She soon dies before he can tell her what he did during
the summer and give her his birthday gift, a pop-up toaster. He is then
forced to return during the winter to live with his uncle again. But
things are little different now. He learns again about death, as Mr.
Arvidsson died. He also must now sleep in Mrs. Arvidsson new apartment
because his uncle tells him there is not enough space in theirs and that
it would be good for him to keep her company. But he finds much needed
affection from Saga, who is behaving more like a young girl smitten by
love and less like a tomboy.
Director Halstrom has a nice touch in working with the youngster, whose
relationship with his uncle is priceless. The film is charming, it is
sad, it is true-to-life, and never maudlin or sugary. It's a good
nostalgia film for all those yearning to look back at their childhood,
even if it be only vicariously through Ingemar. I fell for the film
without being swept off my feet by it. The message underlying Ingemar's
experience, is that life holds so much suffering in it, that one might
as well get a few laughs out of it while one can.
The scenes of the snow on the TV screen while all the neighbors are
brought in to watch a movie, the radio broadcast of the Swedish boxer
Ingemar Johansson landing a lucky punch and knocking out the American
champ Floyd Patterson, and the challenging games kids play to compete
against each other, all brought back to me bittersweet memories of the
1950s.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
(MITT LIV SOM HUND)
(Sweden, 1985)
*** 3/4
Directed by Lasse Hallstrom.
Written by Hallstrom, Brasse Brannstrom, Pelle Berglund, Reidar Jonsson.
Based on Jonsson's novel.
Photography, Jorgen Persson, Rolf Lindstrom.
Production design, Lasse Westfelt.
Editing, Suzanne Linnman, Christer Furubrand.
Music, Bjorn Isfalt.
Cast: Anton Glanzelius, Anki Kiden, Tomas von Bromssen, Manfred Serner,
      Melinda Kinnaman, Ing-Marie Carlsson, Kicki Rundren, Lennart Hjulstrom,
      Leif Ericson, Christina Carlwind, et al.
A Svensk Filmindustri Film, distributed by Skouras Films.
In Swedish with subtitles.
100 minutes. 
Rated PG.
     Movies about children can be made in four basic ways.  The first
is one of unabashed fantasy, without any pretensions to realism.  It
can yield very pleasing results, as in the Shirley Temple movies.
     The second way is that of the adults who exploit the kids' image,
and with premeditation try to con the public into believing that this
is how it really is.  Such films are false, but their lowest common
denominator formulas often work well with the mass public, including
the youthful public.  There are many such movies.
     The third approach is better intentioned, as the filmmakers kid
themselves that their depiction is genuine.  The fourth way is to make
the film as close and as faithful as possible to the kids' point of
view.  Theoretically, there could be a fifth method: films made
strictly, entirely, by kids and from their own viewpoint.  This is an
impossibility, a cinematic oxymoron.  One would have to implant
recording devices into a child's eye and brain, as in some
science-fiction pictures.
     So, the very best we can hope for is approach number Four.  This
is the attitude that gave us classics like Jean Vigo's ZERO FOR CONDUCT
or Francois Truffaut's 400 BLOWS and a few more films.  You now can add
to this tiny group the Swedish MY LIFE AS A DOG.
     Director Lasse  Hallstrom made his first movie at age ten, (with
his father's Super 8), the 3-minute "The Ghost Thief."  He went on
filming in high school, sold "Mascots" (about a music group) to TV
before graduating, became a freelance TV maker of short, funny
sketches.
     In the1970s, under contract to television, he made four rather
autobiographical series, including "Shall We Go Home to my Place or
your Place or Each One of Us to Our Own Place?"  The head of production
at the Swedish Film Institute found it funny, suggested that Hallstrom
make a film feature on the theme of "boy meets girl."
     That was A LOVER AND HIS LASS, followed by other features, all
described by a Swedish critic as "tranquil comedies."  In 1985, with
his fifth feature, the different MY LIFE AS A DOG, which is tranquil
and not so tranquil, a comedy as well as a drama with elements of
tragedy, Hallstrom stepped onto a broader scene.  The movie was voted
Film of the Year in Sweden, and its young star, Best Actor.  It has
since become a major international success, receiving prizes in
several festivals and getting excellent attendance.  Recent statistics
in the U.S.A. have it high on the box-office list, ahead of any other
current foreign film.
     MY LIFE AS A DOG, loosely adapted from a 1983 novel, treats in a
series of well-connected, smoothly flowing episodes, a period of about
a year in the life of a twelve-year old boy.  It is 1959, the year when
Swedish boxer Ingemar Johansson defeated world champion Floyd
Patterson.  The boy is also called Ingemar Johansson, and he too will
have to fight his way into growth.  His absentee father is out at sea,
somewhere in the Equator.  We never see him.  Ingemar is a private
boy, secret though not secretive.  He does not pass judgment on his
father or discuss him--or anyone or anything else for that matter--in
the orderly, narrative, cause-to-effect fashion of adults.  When asked,
he replies that father is loading bananas, and if he left, who would
load them?
     Ingemar lives with his older brother and his mother, a book-lover
terminally ill with tuberculosis.  The relationship among the three is
warm, understanding and attractive, in spite of some downs.  The boys
do their childish best to help with the chores, often with comically
catastrophic results.  Sibling rivalry, Ingemar's sub-teen high spirits
and awkwardness result in mischief and accidents that frequently
involve the elements, from water (Ingemar wets his bed) to fire (he
starts one by the beach).  There is an echo here of Truffaut movies
(THE 400 BLOWS, SMALL CHANGE) both in the details and in the way
the mishaps are treated matter-of-factly, humorously, elliptically,
without elaboration.
     The sick mother now and then goes into understandable fits of
rage.  When her condition worsens, the brothers are sent away to
different places for the summer.  Ingemar, separated from his dog, goes
to his uncle's house, in a small, provincial, unpaved nowheretown where
time seems to have stood still for decades.  The uncle, a married,
peasantish, kindly bon vivant, treats the boy like a pal, becomes a
bit--but not entirely--a surrogate father to him.
     Uncle works in a glassworks where old-fashioned methods are still
used.  Through him Ingemar meets a collection of oddballs and
eccentrics that could easily have become too picturesque or corny, were
it not for the film's ability to stop in time and to avoid
heavy-handedness.  He meets Saga, the best player in the soccer team
and the best boxer around.  Saga turns out to be a pretty tomboy who
despairs at her burgeoning breasts that will interfere with
athletics.  At the same time, attraction for Ingemar burgeons too.
     There is old, bedridden Mr.Sandberg, whose end is near but who
hides the equivalent of a Sears catalogue and almost swoons when he has
Ingemar read him the text that describes women's underwear.  There is
glassblower Berit, a sweet woman who looks like a younger Ellen Burstyn
and whose voluptuous figure is desired by all.  She brings out more
troubled, nascent sexuality in Ingemar when she has him accompany her
to a sculptor's where Ingemar must wait and not peek while she poses in
the nude.  On the whole, it is a good summer for Ingemar.
     After the boy's return home, his mother dies.  He is sent back to
the small town for good.  Following a short, painful period of
adjustment, he takes the step into adulthood, just as his namesake
triumphs in the boxing ring.
     We forget how marvelous it can be for a youngster to discover
that the most ordinary days can be filled with revelations and
discoveries.  In every episode, Ingemar lives the growing pains,
confusions and joys of coming of age.  He is a sober kid of few words.
He makes up for this with introspection.  His stream of
consciousness punctuates the film.  Whenever Ingemar is particularly
confused or sorrowful, the movie cuts to a star-studded sky and we hear
the boy's thoughts.
     Ingemar is a collector of odd facts, mostly about accidents
through which he ponders the mysteries of life and fate.  He thinks of
a train and bus collision that left five dead and fourteen wounded; of
an Evel Knievel-type daredevil motorcyclist who perished as he was
trying to jump over 31 barrels (" if there had been only 30, he would
have cleared them"); of an athlete in a stadium who was transfixed by
another's javelin throw.
     Ingemar talks to himself the way characters in the films of Godard
tell each other trivia and anecdotes, seemingly irrelevant but in
reality meaningful.  The meaning for Ingemar is that, after all, his
tribulations are minor: in relative terms he's not so badly off.
     Throughout, his constant, his leitmotif, is the story of Laika,
the dog that the Soviets sent into space and left to die among the
stars.  The boy identifies with Laika as well as with his own, absent
dog.  When particularly perplexed or annoyed, he gets down on all fours
and barks.
     Among the charms of MY LIFE AS A DOG is that it is sensitive
without being distancing, outlandish and cute (His Life) ; or familiar
to most viewers and maudlin (Our Life); or full of manufactured
surprises (This is Your Life).
     The cast is perfect.  Anton Glanzelius (Ingemar), is a homely
child with the kind of face that at first glance seems more appropriate
for The Dead End Kids or Our Gang.  Yet he gets to you within minutes
as his deep-set eyes prove what Ingmar Bergman said, that the eyes are
the mirror of the soul.  Glanzelius can convey an amazing range of
feelings through tiny changes of expression and body language.  His is
an Oscar-worthy performance.
     Script and direction introduce superb little details, visual and
behavioral (Ingemar takes out his alienation by chasing a potato around
his plate) or aural (the transition of sound from a vacuum cleaner to a
car engine).  Director Hallstrom's techniques--indirect, lovingly
ironical, elliptically humorous, based on razor-sharp observation--are
good enough to make you wish to see his other films.  Hallstrom's
approach is the closest thing to the methods of master filmmakers like
the Czech (now American) Milos Forman ("The Firemen's Ball"), that
other Czech Jiri Menzel ("My Sweet Little Village") or those of the
better, bittersweet Yugoslav movies.
Written febr 8 1988 Polished up late Nov. 1995 
