Title
Review for Bound by Honor (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Damian Chapa, Jesse Borrego, Benjamin Castillo, 
           Victor Rivers
Director:  Taylor Hackford
Producers:  Taylor Hackford and Jerry Gershwin
Screenplay:  Jimmy Santiago Baca, Jeremy Iacone, and Floyd Mutrux
Music:  Bill Conti
Released by Hollywood Pictures
     Miklo (Damian Chapa), Paco (Benjamin Castillo), and Cruz (Jesse
Borrego) are three Latino friends living in the midst of a 1972 East
Los Angeles torn apart by gang violence.  When this violence strikes
close to home, its irrevocable effects ripple through the destinies of
each of the three men.  Cruz, an artist, suffers a crippling injury,
and the pain from this leads him into drug addiction.  Paco, after
being arrested as an accessory to murder, is forced to enter the
military to avoid jail.  This eventually leads to a place in the LAPD.
Miklo, the shooter in the killing, is sent to jail where he
slowly-but-surely insinuates himself into the ranks of La Onda, the San
Quentin Latino Latino gang.
     This film was originally called and advertised as BLOOD IN, BLOOD
OUT.  Whether or not the last-minute name change will lead to any
confusion is unclear, but apparently the marketing people didn't like
the original title.  Given the events of the film, however, BLOOD IN,
BLOOD OUT is a better, if less noble-sounding, choice.
     One of the difficulties of three-hour movies is keeping the
audience's interest and attention for the full running time.  Despite
atrocious trailers that seem to predict a boring film, BOUND BY HONOR
is mostly successful in this regard.  Its pacing is such that there are
only a few dull moments, and none of those last more than a couple of
minutes.
     The story isn't exactly original, but there are enough wrinkles
that, coupled with strong character definition, lead to an
often-engrossing product.  Actually, there are three separate stories
that occasionally cross and intermingle but which, after the first
thirty minutes, can stand on their own.  The one involving
Cruz--concentrating on drug addiction and its consequences--is dull
and heavy-handed.  BOUND BY HONOR probably would have been more
effective--not to mention better focused, without it.  Paco's tale is
scripted with greater intelligence than Cruz's, but is still spotty.
Events surrounding Miklo, which get by far the most screen time, are
easily the most engrossing elements of the film.
     The chronicle of Miklo's rise to power within the prison gang
system is reminiscent of Edward James Olmos' powerful 1992 film
AMERICAN ME.  There are parallels in both plot and character, and there
are times when Miklo is eerily similar to Olmos' personae.  BOUND BY
HONOR's prison story isn't as complex or gritty as that of AMERICAN ME,
and its resolution is less satisfactory, but it still packs quite a
punch.  It's engrossing and sometimes surprising to watch the violent
politics that lead to the top rung of a prison clique.
     The weakest part of this movie is its ending.  The last scene is
so silly that it almost undermines much of what was good in the
previous one-hundred sixty minutes.  It's an ill-conceived attempt to
force the movie to have a happy ending when one is not warranted.  This
is the only part of BOUND BY HONOR that rings false.
     The acting by the three principals, as well as that of numerous
supporting performers, is solid.  They play characters that, while
occasionally sketchy and cliched, are at least believable.  There are
no standouts for either good or bad performances.
     It has been said that this is the Latino GODFATHER.  While there
are many laudable elements in BOUND BY HONOR, it is nowhere close to
the quality or scope of Francis Ford Coppola's saga.  Instead, this
film is a solid story of the forces that work within East LA's Latino
community.  BOUND BY HONOR has its problems but, on the whole, it
provides an entertaining three hours, and that's more than many movies
of comparable length can claim.
Note:  In response to some requests, all movie reviews written by me may
       be reprinted provided that they carry the following notification:
       "Copyright 1993 by James Berardinelli".
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
