Title
Review for Tango Lesson, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a telling moment in THE TANGO LESSON.  The spectacular
dancer known as Pablo Veron, played with charisma by the extremely
handsome, real life tango dancer of the same name, performs something
akin to a solo whirlwind.  He stops his spinning and admires himself in
the floor-to-ceiling mirrors.  After fixing a single strand of
rebellious hair in his mustache, he stares into the mirror and blows a
kiss to his true love, himself.
     In a movie that mixes reality and fiction with a movie within a
movie and with characters playing quasi-autobiographical parts, Sally
Potter plays the lead named, you guessed it, Sally.  Sally Potter,
normally known as a writer and director, her last picture was ORLANDO,
takes on both of these roles again in addition to starring in THE TANGO
LESSON.
     Late 40-ish Sally, with her pencil thin lips, her curly hair, and
her attractive, svelte figure, makes an interesting contrast to Pablo
and the male professional dancers in the film.  Pablo especially is a
younger hunk with rippling muscles, gobs of hair and a close cropped
beard.  Sally clearly enjoys every minute of it.  Here the ambiguity is
intentional for it is never clear where the fictional Sally ends and
the real Sally begins.
     So what exactly is a tango?  Forget the concept of the tango as a
part of the ballroom dance cannon for it shares little with the fox
trot or the waltz.  The tango is a dance in which two dancers become
one from the knees up, but it is below the knees where the action lies.
The feet fly around as if in constant but highly controlled spasms.
The result is an energetic and highly visual endeavor.  Would that the
movie, THE TANGO LESSON, possessed more of that fire.  When the dancers
are on center stage the film certainly hums, but the rest of the film
relies on a story that is so thin that it quickly loses its audience.
     The story concerns an obsessive Sally, who finds a flaw in the
flooring of her Parisian apartment.  To fix it the contractor must tear
up her apartment, so he asks her if she has some place to go for a few
weeks.  Boy, does she.  Off to Buenos Aires, she signs up with a couple
of instructors who teach tango via dance immersion.  When she goes back
to Paris to see her old instructor (Pablo), he is amazed at the
transformation in his once awkward pupil.
     Tango becomes the sexual subtext of the picture.  To underscore
this, Pablo greets Sally with a deep-voiced, "It's been a long time."
With a twinkling smile, she responds, "It certainly has."  To
consummate their reunion they immediately "have tango" together.
     Another subtheme concerns religion -- Sally and Pablo are both of
Jewish ancestry.  The passion of the tango has become their religion.
"How did you choose the tango?" Sally asks Pablo.  "I didn't; the tango
chose me," he replies as if he had had a religious calling.
     The movie contains little spoken dialog.  The dialog is more
danced than spoken.  When the overly long film is in dance mode, the
black-and-white images (only a small part of the film is in color) come
alive.  The surreal subplot of her pitching a movie to Hollywood and
the remainder of the non-dancing parts are disappointing.
     Sally does enjoy poking fun at Hollywood, especially the producer
who wants to know why he should write her a check for $20,000,000 for
her proposed film.  The producer doesn't like it being in French and
starring a legless fashion designer.  That this film would almost
certainly be a poor investment at twenty mil is ignored as Sally, the
writer, ridicules Hollywood.
     THE TANGO LESSON, even in the many slow parts, is a hard film not
to like.  You have to respect a director, writer and actor so in
control of her life.  "It doesn't suit me to follow," she tells Pablo.
"It suits me to lead, and you can't deal with that."
     THE TANGO LESSON runs 1:41.  It is partially in French and Spanish
with English subtitles, but it is mainly in the languages of English
and dance.  It is rated PG for adult themes.  The picture would be fine
for kids around ten and up.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TANGO LESSON, THE (director/writer: Sally Potter; cinematographer: Robby
Müller; editor: Herve Schneid; cast: Sally Potter (Sally), Pablo Veron
(Pablo), Gustavo Naveira (Gustavo), Fabian Salas (Fabian), David Toole
(Fashion Designer), Peter Eyre (English Tango Fan), Olga Besio (Olga),
Carlos Copello (Carlos), Carolina Iotti (Pablo's Partner); Runtime: 102;
Sony Classics; 1997-France /Argentina / UK)
Somehow this quirky, egocentric, fantasy black-and-white film about a
British filmmaker learning to dance the tango from a master, works in an
obscure way by getting us hooked on what's going on. It is set in Paris,
London, and Buenos Aires, and it might or might not be autobiographical
of director-writer-songwriter-actress Sally Potter ("Orlando"). It works
so well because the dancing was so natural and magnificently performed,
even if the wistful romantic story never caught my imagination and the
philosophizing about her being a Jew seemed more diverting than
engrossing (in real-life she's not Jewish but an avowed atheist who was
only influenced by her Jewish neighbors and their culture).
Potter was trained as a dancer and choreographer in London in the 1970s
and in this film composes her original song compositions, which are
quite good.
The 48-year-old Sally Potter (she plays herself), while filming in Paris
a Technicolor thriller (it seemed like dreck and is probably some kind
of personal statement Potter is making about Hollywood films) about a
legless fashion designer in a wheelchair murdering models dressed in
brightly colored costumes. She will take a break from filming and attend
a theatrical dance exhibition by the great Argentine tango master Pablo
Veron (he plays himself) and afterwards she decides to get tango lessons
from him. "I've always wanted to be in films," says the thirtysomething
Pablo. She counters, "I've always wanted to be a dancer." It sounds like
a trade-off in self-indulgences, and all I can say, is why not! When
Sally dances the tango in the film, that's really her and not a double.
And if she can dance the part, why not play the part!
For whatever arcane reason (or most likely no reason at all), the story
has twelve dance lessons which come to divide the film into chapters.
The lessons are not necessarily lessons, but show her as she becomes
obsessed with the dance, with the subtleties of the music, and with her
teacher. She returns to Paris after being disappointed that her
Hollywood backers complained that it would be better for the box office
if the film was to be in English instead of French and that she should
cast a different villain because it would be difficult to cast a legless
person. She decides to abandon her film project and make a film instead
about the tango. She takes further lessons in Buenos Aires from friends
of Pablo's and becomes good enough to perform on stage with him when she
returns to Paris.
Their romance and friendship becomes a battle of wills, which mirrors
the way they dance. After they appear at a Paris theater, he critiques
her dancing by stating that he wants her to follow, to completely
surrender to him, complaining that she impedes his freedom. She shoots
back, "You danced as a soloist -- like a stranger -- and I lost you."
Somehow I couldn't be convinced of their romance, in fact, I never cared
about it. It seemed empty, and to the bargain she's no beauty. But...ah!
those dancing scenes were tremendous, along with the penetrating
cinematography of the great Robby Müller, giving the film such a
stunning look. The film managed to look good and even though Pablo and
Sally are no great shakes as actors, and their stiff romance was more
pitiful than meaningful, the film had a bizarre strain to it, of this
very uptight Sally learning how to loosen up and the sly Pablo jumping
around like a fox at a hunt. It seemed to be a mix of reality and
script, but hard to tell which was which.
When they weren't dancing or figuring out what kind of arrangement they
were going to have, such as if their dancing partnership would include
any funny business, they discussed what it is like being a Jew. He has
never been comfortable with his Jewish roots and considers himself just
a dancer. In his spare time, he is seen reading a biography on Marlon
Brando (get it--he was in "The Last Tango in Paris"). She is seen
reading Martin Buber's 1923 philosophy book "I and Thou," which she
believes unlocks the spiritual meanings of the tango, as Buber's
scholarly work delves into relationships: "The soul is not really united
unless all the bodily energies, all the limbs of the body, are united."
The film tries to make some connection between love and art and who is
to be the follower and who the artist. It asks the spurious question,
can two artists collaborate on any work, if they both must lead. I
couldn't quite warm up to this debate about art.
The film is short on plot, short on acting, short on getting me involved
in the romance, but most of the film had Potter and Veron dancing and
that had me jumping with joy, even believing that there was something
spiritual to the tango, a dance which is a mixture of Cuban and European
styles, created by the lower-classes and elevated to the status of the
ballroom, a dance created in this century, that maybe is even akin to
the rapturous Eastern European klezmer music.
This is an inspiring dance film that covers some ground in exploring
what the tango is and how that dance reflect's one's life and suffering,
and to understand that is to begin to understand what the tango is about
and what this film was trying to get at.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
     Sally Potter's THE TANGO LESSON is a cold, antiseptic romance, a 
love story without a heart or soul.  Thanks to Robby Muller's striking 
black-and-white cinematography (occasionally interrupted by spectacular 
bursts of color), the movie looks great, but, on an emotional level, 
it's as stiff and unyielding as a slab of granite.  For a film that's 
supposed to be about one of the most passionate dances known to the 
world, THE TANGO LESSON comes across as flat and lifeless.  
     Watching this movie, I was reminded of a couple of other recent 
pictures that use pairs dancing (as opposed to the FLASHDANCE variety) 
as an integral aspect of the story.  The first, STRICTLY BALLROOM, is a 
glib parody of the romantic comedy/sports genre, and the second, SHALL 
WE DANCE?, isn't a conventional romance at all, but an examination of 
the path to personal freedom.  And, while it's unfair to compare the 
intentions or plot of THE TANGO LESSON to those of either film, it's 
worth noting the differences in the way the dance numbers are presented.  
In both STRICTLY BALLROOM and SHALL WE DANCE?, they are genuine 
celebrations of life -- energetic, vibrant, and engaging.  In THE TANGO 
LESSON, they're nicely-choreographed, but cool and clinical.  Only one 
dance sequence (a number near the end, featuring four participants) 
works on a level other than the intellectual one.
     Potter's story, although rather thin for a 100-minute motion 
picture, contains some clever elements.  It's a fiction based on fact 
that uses real people, real locations, and real situations to spin off a 
narrative.  Sally Potter appears as herself, an independent director 
trying to decide on her next project during a trip to Paris.  While 
there, she sees an on-stage tango performance by the legendary 
Argentinean dancer, Pablo Veron (playing himself) and his partner.  
Inspired, Potter asks Veron for a lesson, and, when he learns that she's 
in the movie business, he agrees.  Over the next several months, as 
their lessons continue, they become romantically linked.  Then comes the 
deal:  Potter will put Veron in her next movie if he makes her into a 
dancer.  The apparent result of this pact, a canny mix of fact and 
fiction, is THE TANGO LESSON -- a film about tango that features Veron.
     One of Potter's most egregious errors is casting herself as the 
lead.  This is her acting debut, and it shows -- not only is she 
ineffective, but she has no screen presence whatsoever.  I'm sure that 
taking the top role in THE TANGO LESSON appealed to her vanity, but it's 
a huge misstep.  Behind the camera, with features such as the art-house 
hit, ORLANDO, the British film maker is a creative force; in front of 
it, she leaves little impression.  Pablo Veron, her co-star (also making 
his feature debut) is more lively but not more accomplished.
     THE TANGO LESSON is at its best not when the characters are 
dancing, but when it's exploring the creative process.  The last half 
hour, as Potter endures the difficulty of bringing her new film to life, 
is intriguing for the insight it offers into the difficulties of 
producing art, especially when it involves collaboration.  Some of the 
most inspired scenes are throw-aways, such as Potter's poolside meeting 
with a group of Hollywood executives who are debating whether or not to 
fund her latest project.  Sadly, there's not enough of that material to 
sustain the film, and sitting through the entire running length can, at 
times, be tedious.  THE TANGO LESSON doesn't make you want to get up and 
dance; it makes you want to go to sleep.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   You don't have to be Argentinian to be quite proficient in
the tango.  Nor do you have to concentrate on the dance to
the exclusion of all other skills.  Ask Sally Potter, hardly a
household name, known to many movie buffs exclusively for
her direction of the remarkable arthouse fare, "Orlando."  Her
choice of subject there--a woman who lived four hundred
years first as a man and later as a woman--indicates that Ms.
Potter is no champion of bland, commercial films.  Who would
have known, though, that Sally Potter is not only a gifted
director but a consummate dancer, a composer of song, and
a performer who can swap a confident countenance for the
gaze of a possessive lover?  
   "The Tango Lesson," which stars first-class dancer Pablo
Veron as Pablo and Sally Potter as Sally--the use of real
names manifests an autobiographical base--is both an
occasional for an open-mouthed appreciation of spectacular
hoofing and a sentimental romance about two middle-aged
people who discover that they are soul mates despite their
outward differences.  Though Sally is a Londoner and Pablo
an expatriate Argentinian living in Paris, they both speak
fluent French and English and learn, surprisngly, that they
share an affinity for Judaism. As Sally says, exchanging a
sentimental tear with her partner, "I suppose I'm an atheist but
I feel like a Jew."
   The film begins as Sally considers an assignment to write
an original screenplay, her walls as white as the blank paper
which confronts her.  Our insight into her wild imagination is
bumped as the camera shifts to glorious color, displaying
three fashion models, one of whom is chased by wheelchair-
bound, legless man who fires a shot, apparently killing her. 
We find out later that her film is to be about a designer who
becomes envious of the attention which the media focus on
the models.  Wandering into a Paris concert featuring a tango
performance of Pablo and his long-term partner played by
Carolina Iotti, she is mesmerized and cuts a deal with Pablo. 
If he will teach her the tango, she will feature him in her next
movie.  From there, "The Tango Lesson" is divided into
vignettes called "the second lesson," "the third lesson," etc.
blending exhibits of the dance with a personal story, as Pablo
and Sally become romantically involved with each other. 
Attempting to sell her idea to a couple of Hollywood
producers, she is told by them--amid a stereotypically comical
background of a large, Hollywood swimming pool presided
over by a couple of movie sharks--that she should use stars
rather than unknowns, situate the film in New York, and forget
about using French because with a foreign language "you'll
lose 75% of the audience, minimum."  
   The tension apparently comes from Sally's insistence on
leading Pablo while they are on the dance floor just as she is
accustomed to doing when directing her movies.  The tension
in her shoulders about which Pablo complains is interpreted
by him as a desire to dominate the relationship, but while this
aspect is meant to be at the core of "The Tango Lesson," it
simply does not come across.  When the two perform on
stage, ostensibly after she has had only twelve lessons, they
look spectacular and garner a rousing tribute from the
audience.  Pablo's motivations are obscure.  Is he really
annoyed at her dominance or does he seek an excuse to end
their relationship?  Potter's use of black-and-white for the bulk
of the picture seems pretentious rather than effective.  
   "The Tango Lesson" succeeds more as a semi-
documentary on that remarkable dance than as a romance,
though any amour between middle-aged people should be
welcomed in a youth-obsessed cinema.  You come away with
the knowledge that tango, like flamenco, can be performed in
both its a traditional and authentic variety on a crowded dance
floor and as a sexy bit of footwork meant for the stage
featuring coded, suggestive steps.  You also come away
appreciating Sally Potter's talent as not only the director of
"Orlando," a story about a Renaissance woman, but as a
Renaissance woman herself.  Rated PG.  Running Time: 101
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Scott Renshaw
     "I've always wanted to be in films," says dancer/choreographer Pablo
Veron at one point in THE TANGO LESSON, to which writer/director Sally
Potter replies "I've always wanted to be a dancer."  Well, both get their
chance in a grating feature-length self-indulgence disguised as a fanciful
romance.  Potter plays a film-maker named Sally, visiting Paris after
difficulties getting financing for her latest project (which is thoroughly
unbelievable, since the project in question involves the pure box office
gold of models dressed in primary colors pursued by a legless fashion
designer).  There she meets Veron, and convinces the dancer to teach her
the tango.  Along the way they sort of fall in love, dance, sort of break
up, dance some more, sort of get back together again, and dance a whole
lot more.
     Somewhere buried in this collection of dance sequences are a few
meditations on one's calling in life, the need to surrender control and
the connections between various art forms.  More power to you if you
manage to exhume them.  THE TANGO LESSON carries no emotional pull, since
both lead performers have the seasoned acting chops of...well, a director
and a dancer.  Some of the dance sequences are impressive, particularly
Veron's solo tap number in a kitchen, but the portentous and pretentious
flow of the narrative robs them of all joy -- imagine Gene Kelly directed
by Fellini, and you'll understand why THE TANGO LESSON is such a bizarre
experience.  Robby Muller's typically impressive black-and-white
cinematography only emphasizes that the film is an empty visual
exercise, a project so personal it can only leave the audience wondering
why in the world it should care.  Potter's spin on Fellini's 8-1/2 is
merely a moderately depressing record of the film-maker's mid-life crisis,
in which she attempts to assure the world that she could too be a
ballerina if she really wanted to.

Author
Ben Hoffman
While the story is an integral part of the film, the real joy is in
the exquisite dancing,   Sally Potter, best known for her film,
ORLANDO, the writer and director, wanted to combine her life
experiences with a tinge of unreality.  A film maker since she was
a teenager,  as well as a professional dancer, she fell under the
spell of the tango . . . as will you when you see this film.
Realizing that she must have authenticity to bring off the film she
decided to ask the renowned Argentinean tango dancer, Pablo Veron,
for dancing lessons. In return she promised to put him in a film,
his first leading role.  They shortly became dancing partners and
eventually he and she starred in the film with exciting
choreography by Veron.
Sleek, slick and sexy, the tango is a delight to behold when in the
hands of dancers who know and understand the subtleties of that
dance; the closeness of the dancers, the sexy kicks between the
partner's legs, and the smooth moves to the driving rhythm are a
joy both to the dancer and the audience.   While not all of the
tango's origins are known, it is a fact that it first showed up in
the barrios of Buenos Aires, as well as the bars and brothels. And
that it is definitely ethnic with overtones of African dancing and
footwork.
Both Potter and Vernon dance up a storm and, in the end, that is
what is best about the film.   Watching them go through their steps
is worth the price of admission, story or not. Provocative and
entrancing, the dance will grip you in its fascinating twists and
turns.

Author
Jonathan Williams
Review: The Tango Lesson (star) (star) (star)
Sally Potter (herself) and Pablo Veron (himself)
Near the beginning of The Tango Lesson, Sally Potter asks tango master
Pablo Veron why he chose to dance the tango: łI didnšt choose the tango;
the tango chose me.˛ Of course it did, Pablo. During that split-second
pause after his first sentence I knew what his second phrase would be,
about being chosen, and I knew that this film would not surprise me, but
it would be pleasing. The Tango Lesson is a delightful film, but mostly
because it is filled with beauty, beautiful dances, beautiful moments, and
beautiful people, especially Pablo and his first partner (unfortunately
NOT Sally). But a profound revelation The Tango Lesson is not. Some of the
moments, like the one above, contained predictable dialogue, and I found
myself marvelling at things I donšt think I was supposed to marvel at.
Like what a magnificent dancer Sally Potter is, she does all her own
dancing, and how everyone who lives in Paris seems to be able to speak at
least three languages. I left the movie, less enthralled by the
romantic/man/woman story than by the magical lifestyle that Parisians,
especially independent movie makers, seem to lead. I kept wondering if
someone like Pablo Veron really can make a living putting on stage shows
where the entire show is a series of couples soloing a tango number
onstage. Only in Paris, I thought. Remember, for those of you who are
provincial American suburbanites like myself, France is a country where
they rate intellectuals like Americans rate college football teams. They
really are different than us. 
I think I was supposed to be captivated by the intrigue of the story--film
director meets and learns from tango dancer who later must follow her
direction in making a film--but I wasnšt. I think I was supposed to be
captivated by the love story that wasnšt a love story, but I wasnšt. I
wasnšt bored, but, as I said before, I kept being awed at some of the
wrong things. I was awed, and rightfully so, by the dancing. Pablo Veron
shines, and Ms. Potter is not far behind for someone whose profession is
film directing. And even though I still donšt want to learn the tango, I
marvelled at how beautiful dance is. There is a sort of religious, not
capital łR˛ religious, but cultural religious undertone to the film. Both
of the main characters are Jewish and it becomes a connecting point for
them. Again, I ended up marvelling less at their connection and more at
the cultural stereotype my mind kept trying to draw about Jews truly being
the chosen people. Everything the main characters did in the movie, aside
from a few awkward moments where Pablo remembered he was acting in a film,
seemed effortless, seamless, flawless, like a smooth tango. 
To be blunt, one of the reasons the filmšs emotional story line didnšt
hook me is because the story seemed contrived, less a reflection of what
happened between Sally and Pablo in real life and more a reflection of
what she wishes had happened (or didnšt happen). As a couple they danced
well together, but they lacked chemistry. Sally Potter just looked so much
older than he, and, Išm afraid, so much plainer. Her thin, drawn, elfin
face just didnšt make me think tango, even though I knew she was supposed
to be a film director first. Call me conventional, but I have to see some
obvious physical beauty and energy in a woman onscreen for me to think
that another man could fall in love with her. Even though this might have
been based on reality, I still had trouble believing he would be attracted
to her. 
As an aside, I just want to say that there are a couple of humorous
moments in the film. At an early point in the film she makes a trip to LA
to promote a bizarre script idea that she is seen working on in the filmšs
opening. The overdone poolside conversation is cliche but no doubt
reminiscent of some real life experiences the director herself must have
had trying to pitch aesthetic ideas to people who donšt even know what the
word means. 
See the film. Not because youšre going to appreciate the similarities
between filmmaking and tango dancing or the almost love story or the
needlessly weighty things Sally seems to be saying about the
creative/artistic process, but see the film because it is not like
anything youšre going to see in America for a good long while. And enjoy
the dancing. I did, and I caught myself smiling as I watched. A film
hasnšt done that to me in a long time. 
